The First and Second Part OF GANGRAENA: OR A Catalogue and Discovery of many
of the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies and pernicious Practices of the Sectaries
of this time, vented and acted in England in these four last years.

Also a particular Narration of diverse Stories, Remarkable Passages, Letters;
an Extract of many Letters, all concerning the present Sects; together with
some Observations upon, and Corollaries from all the forenamed Premises.

By THOMAS EDWARDS Minister of the Gospel.

The third EDITION, corrected and much Enlarged.

2 TIMOTHY 3.8, 9. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith.

But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest to all
men, as theirs also was.

2 PET. 2.1, 2. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresis, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of.

JUDE verse. 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
spirit.

Lutherus in Epist. ad Galat. Maledicta sit charitas, qua servatur cum jactura
doctrinae fidei, cui omnia cedere debent, Charitas, Apostolus, Angelus e coelo.

Lutheri Epist. ad Staupitium. Non hic tempus timendi, sed clamandi, ubi
Dominus noster Jesus Christus damnatur, exuitur and blasphematur: mi pater
grandius est periculum quam credant multi. Inveniar sane superbus, avarus,
adulter, homicidia, antipapa, and omnium vitiorum reus, modo impii filentii non
arguar, dum Dominus patitur.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible
in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. M.DC.XLVI.

Reader,
THat thou may discern the mischief of Ecclesiastical Anarchy, the
monstrousness of the much affected Toleration, and be warned to be wise to
sobriety, and fear and suspect the pretended New Lights, I approve that this
Treatise, discovering the Gangrene of so many strange Opinions, should be
imprinted.

JAMES CRAN^OR.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable and Noble Senators,
I Here present you with a Catalogue or Black Bill of the Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, and Practices of the Sectaries of this time, broached and acted
within these four last years in England, and that in your Quarters, and in
places under your Government and Power, for which I tremble to think lest the
whole Kingdom should be in Gods Black Bill: I much fear lest the subject matter
of this Catalogue may prove unto England (unless some speedy and effectual
course be taken to prevent it) like the Bill of Divorce given to Israel; Jer.
3.8. like the Roll of the Book commanded from God to be written by Jeremiah
against Israel and Judah, Jer. 36.2. like the Roll of a Book sent by a hand to
Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 2.9, 10. wherein was written, lamentations, mourning and woe; or
like the handwriting upon the wall against Belshaz. Dan. 5.5. and the flying
Roll in Zech. c. 5. v. 1, 2. a curse going over the face of the whole land. And
unto whom, Right Honorable, should I present and make known these things, but
unto You, who are the supreme Iudicatory of this Kingdom, having that
sufficiency of Power, which only is able to remedy and redress them, who are
our great Physician's, and have been wont to cure the worst maladies and
diseases of our Church and State, who are by God himself styled Gods, and
therefore should above others lay to heart and be sensible of the injuries and
dishonours done to God and his name. And I humbly pray your Honors to bear
with me in my addresses this way, as having no other means but this, of
acquainting You with the sad state of things in our Church: And yet it is
necessary You should hear of these things, for as it is said in the Prophet
Jeremiah, concerning the making of that Roll, It may be the house of Judah will
hear all the evil which I purpose to do to them, that they may turn every one
from his evil way, it may be they will present their supplications before the
Lord, that he may forgive their iniquity and their sin; so it may be some good
may come of this Book, to cause an humiliation for, and a suppression of
heresies and schimes, as being a more free and f^ll discovery of our times then
ever yet was made, and therefore I send it abroad in this way, whereby it may
be read by all Judah: and I doubt not but some faithful Baruchs, who are not
shut up, but do preach before You on Fast days, will cause You to hear the
words of this Book in the Lords house, by applying them to your consciences,
and making them a Catalogue of sins for matter of humiliation to you on those
days, showing how far they may become yours in suffering without punishment
and censure too many of them. And now, Noble and worthy Senators, be
graciously pleased to pardon the boldness I shall take in dealing plainly with
you in this present Epistle, and not to impute it to any malignity and
disaffection to your service, or to peremptory sauciness, and disrespect of
You, (for besides that some worthy Members of Parliament to whom I am known can
testify the contrary, all my Actions from the beginning of Your sitting, my
Sermons, Prayers, Praises, Discourses, Actings for You speak otherwise: I am
one who out of choice and judgment have embarked my self with Wife, Children,
Estate, and all that is dear to me in the same ship with You, to sink and
perish, or to come safe to land with You, and that in the most doubtful and
difficult times, not only early in the first beginning of the war and troubles,
in a malignant place among Courtiers, and those who were servants and had
relations to the King, Queen and their Children, pleading Your Cause,
justifying Your wars, satisfying many that scrupled: but when Your affairs were
at lowest, and the chance of war against You, and some of the Grandees and
favorites of these times were packing up, and ready to be gone, I was then
highest and most zealous for You, preaching, praying, stirring up the people to
stand for you by going out in person, lending of money, in the later going
before them by example; And as I have been your Honors most devoted servant so
am I still yours, and you cannot easily lose me; and I do humbly (...) self*
and Book at the feet of your wisdom and piety submitting both to your
ple^s^re but to the matter and contents of this Book, and to the present state
of things. I am bound and stirred in spirit, to see the people so given to
error and schism, and the zeal of Gods house and glory constrains me, and I
can no longer forbear speaking my whole heart to you. The evils of this kind
are grown to such a height as there is the more time for silence, or for being
afraid, but of crying out and speaking plainly. And I am confident when your
Honors have read over my Book (which I humbly desire you in the fear of God,
and for the glory of Christ to do, as Luther bespeaks the reading of an Epistle
of his) that will be a just Apology with you for my freeness and boldness. O
the evil of ^hese times would put zeal into the heart of any man, who has any
l^ve to the glory of God, his truth, and the souls of people, and make the
stammering tongue to speak (...) to speak and cry out. Croesus son who was born
dum^be, when he saw one going to kill his Father, spoke and cried out, O kill
not Croesus. And now when our Father, our Savior and blessed Spirit are
wounded by damnable heresies and blasphemies, and many precious souls
destroyed, can we be silent! O cursed be the silence and flattery that is in
such a time as this: For now things are grown to a strange pass, (though
nothing is now strange,) and every day they grow worse and worse, and you can
hardly conceive and imagine them so bad as they are; no kind of blasphemy,
heresy, disorder, confusion, but either is found among us, or a coming in upon
us; for we in stead of a Reformation, are grown from one extreme to another,
fallen from Scylla to Charibdis, from Popish Innovations, Superstitions, and
Prelaticall Tyranny, to damnable Heresies, horrid Blasphemies, Libertinisme,
and fearful Anarchy; our evils are not removed and cured, but only changed;
one disease and Devil has left us, and another as bad is come in the room;
yea, this last extremity in which we are fallen, is far more high, violent and
dangerous in many respects; all which in an Epistle cannot be contained, but
are laid down in the following Book in many places, specially in the eleventh
Corollary. Luther in an Epistle to Spalatinus, calls want of freedom in a
Minister, irremissible peccatum, an unpardonable sin; and silence in the
neglecting of truth, a wicked silence; and in an Epistle to Staupitius says,
Let me be found any thing, a proud man, an adulterer, murderer, and guilty of
all wickedness, so as I be not convicted of wicked silence whilst the Lord
suffers. The consideration of which, makes me well contented to run the venture
of being accounted proud, saucy, peremptory, and of incurring the hazard of
your displeasure by speaking freely (though I hope better things) then to let
the glory and honor of Christ and his truth suffer any longer by my silence;
for I call the most High GOD to witness, that (so far as I know my own heart)
what freedom I here use, in laying open the state of things before you, is not
out of any sinister respect, or any pleasure I take in this liberty (for I have
had many carnal reasonings and conflicts in my spirit against it) but only out
of the great necessity of the times, moved thereunto out of love and zeal to
the glory of God and his truth my faithfulness to your Honors, compassion to
the souls of those for whom Christ dyed, and the delivering of my own soul in
the discharge of my conscience. Great Persons, as Princes, Nobles and
Counselors, through their high places, Tantis and tam eximijs vir^utis
ornamentis enituit, tum Episcopus, tum Imperator: U^rumque enim admitor,
alterum propter ingenua Ioque^di libertatem, alterum propter facilem
obedientiam. And Theodosius speaking of Ambrose, says; Aegre tandem reperi
veritatis magisu^m: Nam solum Ambiosium novi Episcopum diguum eo nomine, Tantum
com^odi re^p^ebensio a viro virtu^e praestanti ad hibira secum apportate solet.
Theo. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 16*17.
multitude of affairs, flatteries, are subject to great failings and
infirmities, as both Scriptures, and all Histories show: but this has been the
praise and honor of some of them, that upon being minded by faithful Ministers
of their faults, they have laid it to heart. Theodosius that Noble Emperor had
many infirmities, as that cruel fact of his against the inhabitants of
Thessalonica, as his being angry out of measure against the people of
Antiochia, as his lenity toward Arians, whom he permitted to keep Conventions
in chief Cities; but in all his faults this is observed and admired by the
Ecclesiastical Historians who writ of him, that he ever gave place to wholesome
admonitions, and amended upon being dealt with, as by Flavianus Bishop of
Antiochia, Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, Ambrose Bishop of Millain; and he
took Ambroses liberty of speaking to him so well, that he did not only give him
thanks, but said of him to his praise, I have at length found a master of
truth, for I have known Ambrose only a Bishop worthy of that name. It was one
of the sins of the Prelates and Court Chaplains (for which among others God
has cast them out) to flatter, and the sin of the Court, that the Ministers
that preached there, must sing placentia, speak smooth things. Now far be it
from such a High Court of Parliament as you, (who above other Parliaments are
in solemn Covenant with God for Reformation, National, Dom^sticall,
Personal, and have professed to engage your hearts for God and his work*) and
from the Ministers who stand up for you, and adhere to you, to be faulty in the
same kind: Be pleased therefore in the midst of your many great affairs which
even swallow you up, and by reason of which you have not time to hear and know
all things concerning the State of Religion, to suffer one of your daily
Remembrancers to God, to be Gods Remembrancer to you. You have, most Noble
Senators, done Worthily against Papists, Prelates and scandalous Ministers, in
casting dowe Images, Altars, Crucifixes, throwing out Ceremonies, etc. but what
have You done against other kinds of growing evils, Heresy, Schism,
Disorder, against Seekers, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Brownists, Libertines and
other Sects? You have destroyed Baal and his Priests; but have you been zealous
against golden Calves, and the Priests of the lowest of the people? are not
these grown up, and daily increase under you? are any effectual means used
against them? You have made a Reformation, and blessed be God who put it into
your hearts to do such things; but with the Reformation have we not a
Deformation, and worse things come in upon us then ever we had before? were any
of those monsters heard of heretofore, which are now common among us? as
denying the Scriptures, pleading for a Toleration of all Religions and
worships, Book intit. Toleration Justified, page, 7.8. printed in this last
January.
yea for blasphemy and denying there is a God. You have put down the Book of
Common Prayer: and there are many among us have put down the Scriptures,
slighting, yea blaspheming them. You have broken down Images of the Trinity,
Christ, Virgin Mary, Apostles: and we have those who overthrow the Doctrine of
the Trinity, oppose the Divinity of Christ, speak evil of the Virgin Mary,
slight the Apostles. You have cast out the Bishops and their Officers: and we
have many that cast down to the ground all Ministers in all the Reformed
Churches. You have cast out Ceremonies in the Sacraments, as the Cross,
kneeling at the Lords Supper: and we have many cast out the Sacraments,
Baptism and the Lords Supper. You have put down Saints days: and we have many
make nothing at all of the Lords days, and Fast days. You have taken away the
superfluous excessive maintenance of the Bishops, Deanes: and we have many take
away and cry down the necessary maintenance of the Ministers. In the Bishops
days we had singing of Psalms taken away in some places, conceived prayer,
preaching, and in their room, Anthems, stinted forms and reading brought in;
and now we have singing of Psalms spoken against and cast out of some Churches,
yea all public prayer questioned, and all ministerial preaching denied. In
the Bishops times Popish Innovations* were introduced, as bowing at Altars,
etc. and now we have anointing the sick with Oil; then we had Bishopping of
children, now we have Bishopping of men and women, by strange laying on of
hands, as is related in this following Book. In the Bishops days we had many
unlearned Ministers, and have we not now a company of Jereboams Priests? In the
Bishops days we had the fourth Commandment taken away, but now we have all
ten Commandments at once by the Antinomians; yea all faith and the Gospel
denied, as by the Seekers. The worst of the Prelates, in the midst of many
Popish, Arminian tenets, and Popish Innovations, held many sound doctrines, and
had many commendable practices; yea the very Calvini Instructio Ad^ersus
Libertinos, cap. 4. page 104.
Papists hold and keep to many Articles of faith and truths of God, have some
order among them, encourage learning, have certain fixed principles of truth,
with practices of devotion and good works; but many of the Sects and Sectaries
in our days, deny all principles of Religion, are enemies to all holy Duties,
Order, Learning, overthrowing all, being vertiginosi spiritus, whirlegigg
spirits; and the great opinion of an universal Toleration, tends to the laying
of all waste, and dissolution of all Religion and good manners. Now are not
these Errors, Heresies and Schisms, spots and blots in our Reformation? do
they not blemish and cast a dark shadow upon all the light part? are they not
the dead flies in the Apothecaries ointment, sending forth a stinking savor?
are they not the reproach and rejoycings of the common enemy? the scandal of
the weak, the blasing star of the times? and are not Sectaries strangely
suffered, connived at, keeping open meetings in the heart of the City? yea
printing with M Salimarsh Smoke In the Temple, in which are some desperate
errors. Book about Baptism, and calling maintenance by Tithes Jewish and
Popish undeniably.
License their erroneous opinions, and daring to give into some of your hands
such Books as it is a shame to speak of? being let so alone, that they are grown
up to many thousands both in City and Country. Christ in Revel. 2.19. highly
commends the Angel of the Church of Thyatira for his works service, faith,
patience, etc. but yet reproves and threatens him for suffering without
punishment false doctrines to be taught, and disorders to be practiced in the
Church: But I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman
Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
servants: And be pleased to observe what truth that Scripture holds out,
namely, that a connivence and suffering without punishment false Doctrines and
Disorders, Persons to preach whom God has not called, and to preach Errors,
Heresies, blemishes and dashes the most glorious works, and provokes God to
send judgments; a Toleration does eclipse and darken the glory of the most
excellent Reformation. God accounts all those errors, heresies, schisms, etc.
committed in a land, but let alone, and suffered without punishment by those
who have authority and power, to be the sins of those who have power, and he
will proceed against them as if they were the authors of them. A man comes to
be pertaker of other men's sins, by countenancing, consenting and suffering
withou punishment, as well as by formally committing them. Ames. Animad. in
Remonstr. Synodal. Script. super Artic. 5 de Persev. sanctorum, cap. 7. de
Solomone. Certum est Solomonem non introduxisse ^ut admisisse idola in demum
Dei, neque adegisse popul^m ut vel ^ei verum cultum desererent, vel colerent
idola; neque probari potest ^um in sua propria persona coluisse idola. Hoc
tantum cercum est de ejus idololatria, quod infatuatus a mulieribus
idololatricis permiserit eas construere. Aquinas in Ephesians. 5.12. Istis ergo
nolite communica^e imitando, coadjuvando, conlentiendo Sed certe hoc non*
sufficit, nisi etiam eos reprehendatis.
Solomon in 1. King. 11. from ver. 1. to 15. is counted by God to be guilty of
all the Idolatry committed by his wives and their followers, and accordingly
God is angry with him and threatens him, because being a King, he had power in
his hands to hinder it, not that Solomon did bring into the house of God Idols,
or ever commanded the people to forsake the worship of God and to worship
Idols, or that he did in his own persont worship Idols; This only is certain,
that he suffered them to build Altars, and sacrifice to strange gods. Ephesians.
5.12. it is the command of God, to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, that is, not by consenting, helping, imitating and suffering them
without reproof; Now a Magistrates reproving, is by using coercive power to
punish and suppress evils, as is evident in the example of old Eli to his
sons, who though he did reprove by words, yet because he punished them not, he
was partaker of their sins, and was severely punished by God for it, 1. Sam.
2.23, 242, 5. chap. 3.13.14. Now, Right Honorable, though You hold none of
these Opinions, practice not these ways, neither command any of these things,
but have put out Declarations, wherein there are some passages against
Anabaptists, Brownists and other Sects, and made Orders and Ordinances for the
preventing and remedying of many of these evils; as that Order of Febr. 16.
1643. That Ministers suffer none to preach in the places where they have
charge, but such as they will be answerable for; as the Ordinance against the
preaching of Persons not ordained in this or some other Reformed Church; as the
Ordinance of not printing without License; yea upon complaint have questioned
and troubled some Sectaries for their Errors and pernicious Practices; yet
notwithstanding there is a strange unheard of suffering and bearing with them,
and such a one, as I believe all things considered, never was there the like
under any Orthodox Christian Magistrate and State. How do sects and schisms
increase and grow daily, Sectaries doing even what they will, committing
insolences and outrages, not only against the truth of God and the peace of
the Church, but the Civil state also, going up and down Countries, causing
riots, yea tumults and disturbances in the public Assemblies! how do persons
cast out of other Countries for their Errors, not only live here, but gather
Churches, preach publicly their Opinions! what swarms are there of all sorts
of illiterate mechanic Preachers, yea of Women and Boy Preachers! Vide ^etit.
of the Lord Maier Aldermen, and Com^^n^ of the City of London presented to the
House of Peers, Jan. 16.
what a number of meetings of Sectaries in this Citiy, eleven at least in one
Parish! what liberty of preaching, printing of all Errors, or for a Toleration
of all, and against the Directory, Covenant, monthly Fast, Presbyteriall
Government, and all Ordinances of Parliament in reference to Religion, and most
of these persons either never questioned at all, or if questioned, abusing
those in a high manner who question them, coming off one way or other, and
afterward going on in spreading their errors more then before, or if
committed by some below, whereby they are hindered from preaching and dipping,
then brought off and released by some above (of which they bragg and boast) yea
many Sectaries countenanced, employed and preferred to special places both of
profit, honor and trust, and that which is saddest of all (and yet too true)
Orthodox worthy persons, who being in places of Power, for preventing mischiefs
and evils questioning some Sectaries for their unlawful meetings and false
Doctrines, have been looked upon ever after with an evil eye, and opportunities
watched to molest and displace them. In a word there has not been to this day
any exemplary restraint of the Sectaries (as ever I heard) by virtue of any of
your Ordinances, but they are slighted and scorned, and as it was formerly
with the Kings Proclamations against the Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and
forbidding to go to Mass, there were the more Priests in the Kingdom, and more
went to Mass; (the Proclamations being never looked after, and when any
zealous Protestants in place did go to execute them, they had little thanks for
their pains, and those they questioned were to hard for them, getting off;) so
preaching of laymen was never more in request then since your Ordinance
against it; Presbyteriall Government never more preached, printed against, then
since your Votes, Orders and Ordinances for it; never more dangerous unlicensed
Books printed, then since the Ordinance against unlicensed printing; and when
men have been complained of for the breach of Ordinances, as that of lay
preaching etc. how are they dismissed, and preach still, infect still? look
what ways were taken heretofore by the Popish party and Prelates who pretended
to be Protestants, in favor of the Papists, Arminians, and discountenancing
zealous Protestants; the same will be found to be now in use in behalf of the
Sectaries against Presbyterians; and if you be but pleased to review your own
Remonstrances, either in former, or in this present Parliament, or remember the
maxims and grounds you proceeded upon in questioning many, and by what rules
you judged of intentions to overthrow the Protestant Religion, and to advance
Popery, Armianisme, and then look upon the Proceedings of some, you will find
the same steps trod in now, and the same course taken in favor of the sects:
(But an Epistle is too narrow a compass to particularize all things of this
kind, and a word is enough to the wise) And yet I do not say Your Honors have
done these things; for there are matters of this nature you hear not of, and
upon complaints of things that have come immediately to Your Houses, there has
been some redress; yet such things are done by Committees, or Persons under
Your Power and Government, and no effectual ways taken to prevent, discover
or remedy these things. Now I humbly submit to Your deep judgment, whether God
account not men guilty of that which is committed by others under them, they
having power to hinder it; as also, whether it will not be interpreted by men,
that there is certainly great countenance and favor above, or else persons
below dare not do as they do. And be pleased to suffer me, as a Minister of
Christ, to bring to your remembrance (which I do in all humility,) these
following Scriptures. Levit. 26.25, 1 Samuel 2.29, 30, 31, 32. cap. 3.12.13, 14.
1 King. 12. cap. 31.13. cap. 33.34. 2 King. 10. from 19. to 33. Jerems. 30.31.
Dan. 5.5.2.2, 23.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Amos 2.9, 13.14. Hag. 1.2, 4, 5. Gal. 6.7.
Revel. 2.13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20. Which texts of Scripture, with the
examples laid down in them, I name not as if I would compare your Honors with
Jeroboam, Belshazzar, etc. or charge on you their facts in kind, or that I
wish such evils should come to You; no, let the interpretation of these
Scriptures be to your enemies, and the fulfilling of them to them that hate
You; but because whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our
learning, and all the things which were threatened and happened to Eli, Jeroboam,
Jehu, Belshazzar, etc. were for examples, and written for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the world are come; therefore I mind You of these Scriptures,
that you may fear to fall into any such kind of sins, or to suffer such to be
done when it is in Your power to hinder.

The sects have been growing upon us ever since the first year of Your sitting,
and have every year increased more and more; things have been bad a great
while, but this last year they are grown intolerable; and if Schism, Herosie,
etc. be let alone and rise proportionably for one year longer, we shall need no
Cavaliers nor enemies from without to destroy us. Certainly God looks for other
manner of fruit from you; the great Deliverances, Victories, Successes, the
solemn Covenant, Protestations, Remonstrances, Declarations made to God, this
Kingdom, the Kingdom of Scotland, and all the Reformed Churches, call and
speak for other kinds of things. The Reformed Churches abroad wonder at these
things, and say, Why may not the King as lawfully tolerate Papists, one false
Religion, as the Parliament suffer all sects to grow? Besides their love, zeal
and prayers for you begins to languish and grow faint. Our dear Brethren of
Scotland stand amazed and astonished, and had they not seen these things, could
not have believed them. The Orthodox, godly considerable party, both Ministers
and people in City and Country, by whose means under God, you are now so strong
and lifted up above your enemies, are grieved, offended, and much discouraged;
the common enemy scorns, blasphemes, and reproaches the Reformation, looking
upon us as given up to a spirit of giddiness and error. The Malignants every
where turn Sectaries and Independents, siding with them and pleading their
cause; and they do wisely, there being no such way as that to save their
purses, live quietly, and to undermine you and effect the enemies work. And
what can think you will be issue of these things? It is high time therefore for
your Honors to awake and be doing, to suffer no longer these Sects and
Schisms, these disorders and confusions that are in the midst of us, but to
fall upon some effectual ways, as you in your great wisdoms shall find out,
and to do something worthy a Parliament in this kind also. Do this and God is
on your right hand to help you, and you shall not be removed for ever, the
Kingdom of Scotland, the Reformed Churches, this great City with the Ministers
to stand by you and to honor you: Do it not, but let things still run on thus,
and all kind of errors, confusions, etc. increase, and know God is a
righteous God, and will require it at your hands, visit and be avenged for
these things. And let no man flatter you with your great prosperity and
success, that your mountain is now so strong that you shall never be moved;
but remember that God is a God changing the times and seasons, that removes
Kings and sets up Kings, Dan. 2.21. that can quickly bring down that part of
the wheel below which was highest, that made a sudden change to Belshazzar in
an hour, Dan. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. That God who is said to scatter Kings, can scatter
you: Psalm. 68.14. Look upon the Court party, the great Counselors of state,
and Prelates, whose height was like the height of the Cedars, and were strong
as the Oaks, yet the Lord destroyed their fruit from above, and their root from
beneath; and cannot he do so to you? I beseech you fear, considering the great
dishonor of God and his name, and the sad estate of things under your
Government, lest God bring some great afterclap upon you, and have an after
reckoning, either giving you up at last to the hands of those that are now in
arms against you, or sending an evil spirit of division among your selves and
the two Nations, or making use of the Sects (that party when grown stronger,
who have been so much suffered to grow under you,) to become thorns in your
sides, and pricks in your eyes, to cast You out, and to teach you new Law and
new Divinity, as they have done already in many of their Books (as Englands
Birthright, A Letter from an Utter Barrester, A Letter called Englands
lamentable slavery, Lilburns Letters to Mr Prynn, to a Friend, Innocence and
truth justified, cum multis alijs,) or by sending some other judgment, as the
Pestilence, etc. (all which I earnestly pray God to prevent.) And truly when I
think of things by my self, and behold to what a height Errors, Heresies, etc.
are come, and withal reflect upon the great things God has done for you, the
many powerful Sermons you have had preached before you about the National
Covenant, and against the Sects, the many Petitions representing the evil and
danger of these things, and yet how little is done, our evils of this kind
rising higher and higher, in the increase of false doctrines, and a greater
multiplication of schisms every day then other; I tremble for fear, lest for
the want of zeal in suffering so many dishonours of God, and his House to lie
so long waste, the word be gone out of his mouth already which he spoke against
Eli; I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy Father should walk
before me for ever: but now the Lord says; Be it far from me, for them that
honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
But to draw toward a conclusion, there is no other way to prevent all this
wrath, but to be zealous and repent, to do something speedily and effectually
against the Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Blasphemies and confusions of these
times.

Ob. But if any shall object, It cannot be done now, it will discontent and
disingage the Sectaries who are a considerable party, and so may prove
dangerous to the Parliament in this juncture of time, by causing many to fall
off their Service.

Ans. Are we afraid of discontenting, disingaging and losing a few men, and not
discontenting and losing God! shall God be displeased to please men! shall we
fear the want of man's help whose breath is in his nostrils, and not fear God!
O that we would once cease from man, for wherein is he to be accounted of?

Secondly, I Answer, This objection is taking counsel, but not of God; a
covering, but not of Gods spirit; Isa. 30.1. this carnal policy of suffering
corruptions in Religion for fear of losing a party, and strengthening Kingdoms,
has proved the ruin of families and Kingdoms; be pleased to remember Jeroboam,
Jehu, etc. who out of policy for fear of losing a party and strengthening the
other side, set up and suffered the golden Calves and Priests of the lowest of
people, and this very thing became a snare, and the loss of the Kingdom to
them; and I might show out of Ecclesiastical Histories many examples of sad
things befalling Princes, who out of policies or any carnal respects, have
suffered all sorts of Sects and Heresies; but I will only instance in one out
of Ex quo etiam sonte manavit, ut idem Valentinianus senior sineret in
Occidente inter Christianos quam quis vellet fidem amplecti atque pro arbitrio
haereses consectari. At quam consulte exitus declaravit, ambo enim factione ac
proditione Gentilium necati sunt, Gratinnus a Maximo Valentinianus junior or
laqueo strangulatus. Baron tom. 4. Ann. 1376. number. 2.
Baronius, of Valentinianus senior, who suffered in the West the Christians to
embrace what faith every one of them would, and to follow what Heresies they
pleased, but how well and safely the end of it declared; for both his sons were
slain by the faction and treachery of the Gentiles, Gratian by Maximus,
Valentinian junior was strangled in a halter: And yet afterward the same
Emperor by edict commanded the houses and places where the Maniches met to be
confiscate. it is storied of Amaziah, that he had hired a hundred thousand
mighty men of valor for a hundred talents of silver, but a man of God came to
him to dismiss his Army, namely that part of it the children of Ephraim, and
told him in answer to his carnal objections, that God had power to help and to
cast down; and for his hundred talents, the Lord was able to give him much more
then this: 2 Chronicles. 25.7, 8, 9. so say I, whoever or what numbers soever shall
desert the Parliaments Army and Service for their suppressing the Sects, and
putting in execution their own Ordinances, God has power to help, and cast
down, and is able to cause many more then these, to adhere to them; and no
question, besides Gods help and blessing which uses to accompany settling true
Religion, and destroying false; the hands of the Kingdom of Scotland would be
the more strengthened, the City of London, the Ministers, and all who love
truth, peace and order, would adhere more firmly, and the Parliament would be
both stronger, and make themselves famous both at home and abroad to all
generations. Thirdly, supposing the Sectaries to be as potent as is falsely
surmised by themselves, yet I humbly conceive it stands not with the Honor,
Power, Wisdom nor Piety of a Parliament, for fear of losing a party, to be
afraid of maintaining their own Ordinances, and punishing those things that
they know are bad; In such a case fiat justitia, ruet coelum. Fourthly, the
sons of Zeruiah are not now too hard for you, God has made you stornger then
ever, Vide more of this in M. Pryns Epist. Dedicat. to the High Court of
Parliament, in his Book imis. A fresh Discovery of New lights.
by giving you many victories, battle upon battle, and one strong hold after
another; so that if any will fall off from you for doing your duties, you need
not care; and who knows but that all these victories are sent to take away all
excuse, to answer this objection, and to encourage you to this work? God
inforces upon turning the days of fasting into feasts, therefore to love the
truth and peace; and from deliverances to pay our vows, and make good our
Covenants, as in Zech. 8.19. Nahum. 1.15.16. Psalm. 16.14, 17, 18, 19. And thus
having in some poor measure discharged my conscience toward God, your Honors
and this Kingdom, in the Discovery made in this Book of many sects and
Sectaries, I leave the issue and success to God, humbly taking my leave, as Dr
Holland that learned man and Doctor of the Chair in Oxford was wont to do of
his College upon going journies, Vita. Holland. Commendo vos Dilectioni Dei
and odio Papa^u^.
saying, I commend you to the love of God and hatred of Popery; so do I commend
both Houses of Parliament to the love of God and his truth, and the hating of
all Sects and Schisms, earnestly praying to God, that none of the things which
You and we have cause to fear may come upon You and the Kingdom, but that God
would mercyfully pardon that too great suffering, countenancing, spreading and
prevailing of Errors, Heresies and Schisms which has been in this Kingdom
these four last years, and would fill you with such a love and zeal to his truth
and house, that you might throrowly purge out all things that offend, and cause
the false Prophets and the unclean spirits to pass out of the land, speedily
and effectually lay the top-stone upon the building, the foundation whereof you
have laid long ago, fully settle this Church and the Government of it, Whereby
we may be brought into one, and become terrible as an Army with banners, and
like a strong and fenced City, both against schisms that may arise from
within, and the assaults of enemies without.

Your Honors humble and most devoted servant. THOMAS EDWARD'S.

The Preface.
IN the last week of June or the first of July, 1644 (in one of those two weeks
I am certain) came forth my Answer (entitled Antapologia) to the
Apolog^ticall Narration: Ever since which time I have forborne the Press, out
of an expectation of a Reply (which was with great confidence by many of the
Independent party at several times given out I should have) with much patience
passing by the many reproachful scornful speeches and railings both in
public Sermons and printed Certain brief Observations and Antiquaeries on M.
Prins 12. Quest. The Falsehood of William Prins Truth triumphing. Woodwards
Answer to a Letter. Woodwards Inquiry into the Causes of our misery.
Arraignment of Persecution. Brief Exhort. to Repent. Vindiciae veritatis, or
Burtons Answer to D. Bastwick. Calumny Arraigned and Cast: With diverse other
Pamphlets.
Pamphlets, and many other ways cast upon me and my Antapologie: I was not
willing to be provoked, or to trouble my self at the barking of every dog
(who according to kind, did bark at the Moon (that's all) but not hurt it:
could scoff and jeer at the Antapologie, but knew not which way to go about to
answer it) but rather resolved to reserve my time and strength, for some
learned and solid Reply from the Apologists, or any other for them, to which I
might have given a Rejoinder. But now eighteen Months being almost expired
since the Antapologie came abroad into the world (time sufficient for five such
eminent persons, or some other to have retu^ned an Answer in, if ever they
intended it) and now being without all hopes of any Reply from them (there
being none in the Press, as I can learn) but rather it is given out by the
Apologists themselves, and their nearest friends, that for peace ^ake they
forbear it (which let them believe it that will, I do not) I shall wait no
longer, but am re^olved to appear again in public against the errors of the
time, and to set forth Tractares and Discourses upon such Subjects and Points,
as I conceive may make most for the glory of God, the peace of this Church, and
be most seasonable for the present necessity, be opus dies in die suo. I have
all this while, out of choice and upon serious deliberation, declined the
setting forth any Tractate of the Controversies of the time (although I have
been by Learned men often called upon, yea, earnestly follicited thereunto) left
the Apologists, or some other for them, should have taken occasion by answering
that, to have some cloak and excuse for not replying to my A^tapologie: but
having given all this time, and finding by experience all their great words and
threats of an Answer (both in print by Calumny Arraigned and Cast, Or, An
Answer to M. Prins Truth Triumphing over Falsehood, page 45 But for any such
unanswerablenesse as M. Prin intends, the one part of it will not endure that
such a thing should be spoken of the other, there being enough in the Discourse
it self, to answer whatsoever is to be found in it of any material
consideration against the Congregationall way, o^ will in time convenient be
made manifest in the sight of the Sun, God not preventing it by more then an
ordinary, or at least expected hand. And in page 46. If M. Prin knew and
conside^ed, who it was that had sindred the Independents, and that once and
again from answering it (...) yet, viz. he that sometimes hindered Pau^s coming
to the Thessalonians, he had little or no cause to glory in that previledge.
But quod de^e^tur non auferrut. This Book of M. Goodwins was printed at least 9
months ago.
Mr John Goodwin, yea the Apologists themselves in the Assembly, and many of
their Overton an Independent Book seller, who boasted the Answer was in the
Press Eaton an Independent Milliner. Some of Joh. Goodw. Church reported that
some of his Church members preached for him, because ^e was answering the
Antapol.
disciples (to be but mere flourishes and great swelling words of vanity) on
purpose to feed their deluded Proselytes for the present (who called upon them
for an Answer) I shall now find them more work, and add many other Treatises
to the former. And however upon the Reason before specified, I have been thus
long silent, and discontinued the Press; yet for hereafter, I do give it under
my hand, that I will make amends, and redeem the time because the days are
evil; promising (the grace of God enabling me, and sparing me life, health and
liberty) that for this next year, or longer, as the troubles of the Church may
continue, to be often setting forth one Tractate or other. I aim at, and shall
endeavor to be like that tree spoken of in the Revelation, to yield fruit
every month, and that the leaves of the tree may be for the healing of these
Nations. Now to give some account to the Reader, of the nature of this
following Discourse, and of my scope therein; This present Treatise is not so
much against any one error and sect, as against all I have heard of, a
Discovery of, and Directions against that many headed monstrous Hydra of
sectarisme sprung up in these times in E^gland: a work and undertaking, which
I well know and expect, will cause me all the hatred, envy and danger, which
the cunning, malice, power or blind zeal of all the sectaries in England can
procure. Paul speaks in his Epistles to the Corinthians (among other troubles)
of his fighting with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of m^n, 1. Cor. 15.32.
and of a messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, 2. Cor. cap. 12. which were
none of the least dangers and sufferings he met withal, as will appear both by
looking into the texts themselves, and consulting some learned Divines upon
those Scriptures. Now in this present work, and some other following Tractates,
something like to these I have to conflict with, namely, wild beasts, grievous
wolves, as the Scripture calls heretics and false Prophets, Mat. 7.15. Acts
20.29. and with messengers of Satan, false Apostles, transforming themselves
into the Apostles of Christ, 2. Cor. 12.13. and it is never the less hazardous
nor difficult, that they are wolves in sheeps clothing, and Satan transformed
into an Angel of light. Now for me, a poor weak sinful man, who have no arms
of flesh to back me, none of those relations to the great, Noble and mighty of
the times, which many have, (in an age and time when truth is fallen, but
heresy and error prevails in all places, (cried up as new light, and as new
truth,) ye^, sectarisme is set up in places of honor and profit, and sectaries
are delivered,) to appear in open field against, and to contend with them, is a
hard and dangerous service. But I know whom I serve, and he who is with me* is
stronger then they who are against me: and in this cause of God, his truth, and
all the reformed Churches, I fear not what man can do unto me. I well
understand that I put my hand into a Hornets nest, and shall raise up against
me all the spirit of separation, schism and error thorowout the Kingdom,
from the highest Seeker to the lowest Independent* but I value it not, jacta
est alea (as Luther spoke upon a like occasion,) I can comfort my self with
that of David, Psalm. 118.12. The fire of thorns is both kindled and soon
quenched. Ainsworth inlocum.
They compassed not about like Bees, they are quenched as the fire of thorns,
but in the Name of the Lord I will cut them off. That God which delivered Paul
from beasts at Ephesus, and from the messenger of Satan, that encouraged and
enabled little David to fight with a Bear and a Lion and to pull a Lamb out
the Lions mouth yea to kill both the Lion and the Bear, has does, and will
preserve me till I have finished my testimony. Only my earnest desire is to the
Orthodox and Pious Reader, that for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
love of the Spirit, they would strive in prayer to God for me, that I might be
delivered from unreasonable even, and from them that are disobedient; and that
my service and labors in this kind may be a^cepted of the Saints, and that I
may be so strengthened with might by his Spirit, that in zeal and
faithfulness, and yet in love, humility and wisdom* I may speak as I ought
to speak in all my following Treatises. There are two things, amongst many,
that I have often thought upon, and observed both from the Scriptures and the
works of holy men, both ancient and modern, which in this cause against the
Sectaries, makes me not to be troubled at reproaches, evil reports, etc.
First, that those Ministers, who out of zeal to the glory of God, love of his
truth, compassion to poor souls, have appeared and acted vigorously, by
preaching and writing against the errors of the times and places they lived
in, have still met with a great deal of malignity, hatred, reproaches, and
speaking all manner of evil against them falsely, as also many
misconstructions neglects and unkind dealings from friends. Secondly,
Notwithstanding all this, they have gone on in their work and way, with
constancy and heroic resolution, triumphing and rejoicing in their
sufferings, rather rising higher, and growing more bold, then being moved or
discouraged: of both these I will give some instances: Christ the chief
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, for speaking against the Sectaries of the
time, namely the Pharisees, Sadduces and Herodians, was maligned, reproached,
laid in wait for; as also his own Disciples, and John's, were sometimes offended
at him, as Ioh. 6.60.61, 66. Matthew. 9.14.15, 16, 17. and yet Christ endured
contradiction of sinners, and bare witness to the truth. Paul for opposing
false teachers, and the errors which had crept into the Church of Corinth and
Galatia, met with great reproaches, bad reports, not only from the false
Apostles, but from many of the people, insomuch as they counted Paul an enemy,
passed judgment on him, and spoke contemptibly of him, Gal. 4.16.17. 2, Cor.
10.10, 11. 1 Cor. 4.3.8, 9, 10 13.14. And yet Paul counted it a small thing to
be judged, and could take pleasure in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, 2. Cor. 12.10. and none of these
things moved him, so he might finish his course with joy, and the Ministry
which he received, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God, Acts 20.24.
Nazianz. Orat. in laudem Athan.
Athanasius for opposing the Arians and detecting their ways, was conspired
against, accused and pursued with an unsupportable hatred; and yet he went on
with great zeal and courage against the whole world, which at one time was made
Arian, so that he was resembled by the Fathers to an Adamant, for his enduring
all things. Augustine and Hierom, both of them, for preaching and writing
against heretics and schismatics, especially Donatifts, suffered many
reproaches, and yet rejoiced, counting their sufferings a sign of their
greater glory; as August. Epist. 25 Hieronymus Augustino, gratulans, illi quod
haereticorum omnium meruit odium, quod quidem gaudet sibi cum illo esse
commune. De Donatistis potissimum. sentit. Et quod signum majoris gloriae est
omnes haereti^i detestantur, and me pari prosequuntur odio, ut quos gladiis
nequeunt, voto interfic^ant.
Hierome writing to Augustine, congratulates Augustine for deserving the hatred
of all heretics, which he rejoiced was common to himself with him, and that
which is an argument of the greater glory, all heretics do detest you, and
persecute me also with the like hatred, that whom they cannot kill with swords,
they do with wishes. Yea C^eanit lo^cem. de vitibus humanis, de libero arbitri^
P^it a^tem Pelagius ^onachus, and mo^^ ^^ot tant severa disciplina gubernabet,
ut in magna esset apud omnes anctoritate, ita ut Augustinus (...) eltores
Ips^us refutivit. Nec tam le^e ^uit certamen: Illi qui Pelagij parts
defenden^es susurperunt, non ^^erunt obscuri vi^i (...) in adolescen^ i^ jam
scriptis darus The^ae. (...) Episcopus Catupani^ opinione (...) habebatur, and
tempore farnis (...) erroganit in pupones, un^e plurisnos ^^ mobiles; and
deligio fos sibi, adju^^it. Et sulpitius Se^en^^ mag^^ (...) dagio sed^^^ in
et^ Exflane. Epistolae Prosperi etc Hilarli ad Aug^^tinhen ^in quibus (...)
quod multi qui primo sacerdotiihonore supereminebant, Augusti^^m (...), quasi
^^ne ca^sa nimis essec veheness, and causon turnis acriter age^^. I (...) ipsos
etiam Augustini ^^ditores, no a (...) doctri^^^ ejas de hoc loco (...) and
destre accipiebant. Vide ^iplan
Augustine in opposing Pelagius errors, ( Pelagius being a man of a strict
life, and of great authority among all, having many famous men that adhered to
him, as Caelestius, Iulianus Episcopus, Sulpitius Severus, and others,) was
censured by some of his friends, to be too sharp and bitter, and his writings
had many misconstructions: There were Epistles by Prosper and Hilarie sent to
Austin, wherein they express, that many, who were most eminent in the honor
of Priesthood, did repre^end Augustine, as if without a cause he had been too
vehement, and had too sharply managed the controversy against Pelagius; yea,
among the auditors of Augustine, all did not truly and with a^^ right hand
receive it.

Luther, as his name was hateful to the Papists, so also to the Sectaries of
that age: Melch. Adam. vita Luth. p. 128.
Thomas Muncer, one of the first preachers and ringleaders of the Anabaptists
( Luther having had some conflicts with him and others of that Sect) put forth
some writings, wherein he did pour out his rage and fury against Luther,
reproaching Luther, that he wanted a spirit of Revelation, and savoured only
carnal outward things; and after Freder. Spanhemil Diarribe Hist. de orig.
progres. Sectis and ^nomin. Anabaptistarum.
Luther had reproved Muncer for his opinion of liberty, and the ways he went
in, he set himself against Luther, thundering out railing speeches, saying that
Luther did equally offend as the Pope of Rome, yea that Luther was worse then
the Pope himself, promulgating only a carnal Gospel: but Luther all his days,
both against the Papists and Sectaries, Swenckfeldians, Antinomians,
Anabaptists, notwithstanding all reproaches, went on with courage and
rejoicing. Luther esteemed evil speakings as Blasphemiae sunt cibus and sagin^
mihi: major est mihi and tir^or in laudibus, gaudium vero in maledictis and
blasphem^is.
meat fatning him; Luther was afraid of praises, but rejoiced in reproaches and
blasphemies. Mihi ^atis est^si Christo Domino meo and suis sanctis placuero:
Diabolo and suis squamis invisum me esse ex animo laetor, and gratias ago Deo
meo; Luth.
It Is enough to me, says Luther, if I please Christ my Lord and his saints: I
do from my heart rejoice and give thanks to my God, that I am hateful to the
Devil and all his scales. I am certain (says Luther) that the truth of God
cannot be rightly handled and maintained without envy and danger; and this is
the only sign that it has been rightly handled, if it offend; I do daily
more and more please my self, Inc^es magis mihi placeo, and superbus fio quod
video nomen pessimu^ mihi crescere. Luth.
and am proud that I see a bad name increases to me. Zuinglius that great
leader of the Reformation in Helvetia, for disputing and writing against the
Anabaptists, was by Balthazar Hubmerus Pacimontanus (though Zuinglius had done
him many offices of love) loadded with so great reproaches, Tantis enim
convinis virum been de se merlitum one rare neb^lo non dubitavit, ut Apologia
satisfacere fratribus habuerit necesse, Melch. Adam, vit. Zuingli^, p. 30.
that he was necessitated to make an Apology for himself to satisfy the
brethren. Calvin that faithful Pastor of Geneva, as his labors and zeal
against Popish heresies are known to all, so did he write and act against all
other kind of errors that sprung up, against the Anabaptists, Libertines,
Servetus, Valentinus Gentilis, Stancanus; (as his works witness) and for his
pains and zeal, being as a Christian Hercules overcoming so many monsters,
Melch. Adam. vita Calvini, p. 95.109, 150. Bezae Apologia pro Calvino
convitiatore. ^og^ moderatissimos istos homfries, quibus nimis, in calesceres
tid^^tur quicu^que (...) no^^ ^igent, ut pro quo, and in quem dicatur, prelo
acie^^tius expendant, neque hero^^c sistes spirieps o^ iugenio ^^o meti^mur.
he was called Heretic, Ambitious, affecting a new Papacy, one that studied
to heap up riches, a Railer; so that Beza writ an Apology for him; yea, some
neighbor Pastors reproached him as if he made God the author of sin, because
he excluded nothing from Gods external providence: in a word, being so
contagious a defender of sound doctrine, he was at home and abroad vehemently
opposed; and yet for all these he went on in his work, like another Paul and
Athanasius, with undaunted resolutions and pains: Noc de^retum quum esset
Calvi^^ (...), Cere^, inquir si hominibus servivissem, mala mihi acrees per
^olveretur, ^ed b^n^ est qu^od ^^ inservi^i; qui nunquam non (...), suis
rependit quod semel pro^isit. (...) est quod Ch^is^o ^ino and notio, qui^suis
lucrum est in (...) and orte.
upon occasion he spoke thus of his hard usage and ill requital, Certainly, if
I had served men, I had made a bad bargain; but it is well that I have served
him who always pays his servants that which he once promised them: And it is
enough that I live and die to Christ, who is gain to his in life and death.

Coloi^a^ is ex she (...) o^ all quisus c^n^bus Galvini nomen imponer^^t; alii
Calvinum in Carn^o^^ transformatent; non pau^l islios oc^o abstinere se a Coena
Domini testabantur. Vita Calvini a Beza.
Calvin was so hateful, that some named their dogs Calvin; others changed
Calvin into Cain; many out of hatred of him, did profess they kept away from
the Lords Supper. Now for the first of these, namely reproaches, scorns, etc. I
do certainly expect and prepare; for the disciple is not above his Master, nor
the servant above his Lord: it is enough for the disciple that he be as his
Master, Matthew. 10.24, 25. And what am I better then those learned Fathers,
Augustine, Athanasius, and those first Reformers, Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin?
It Is honor enough for me to be somewhat like to them in sufferings. I have had
some experience of the Sectaries malice, hatred, rage upon my former Books and
Sermons that I have preached, and therefore know that this and other Tractates
will inflame them. I am in my conscience fully persuaded, that this Tractate is
at this time both seasonable and useful in many respects, 'yea necessary, and
that for all sorts of men, Magistrates, Ministers, people, both those that
stand, and those that are fallen, yea the very Sectaries themselves, and in
justice and all reason I might expect thanks and kind acceptance of my labor
and pains. But I look that the Sectaries of all sorts will storm, and cast out
of their mouths floads of calumnies, reproaches, both against my self and
book, besides all other ways do me all the mischief they can and dare; yea,
I fear, that too many Brethren, partly through their relations to many
Sectaries, and through that lukewarm tempe^ (in reference to errors of mind)
that has long possessed them, who think every one too-hot that appears against
the Sects, will not so cordially approve this work. I can truly say, that in
my former Books and Lectures I have been too much deserted, and not received
those encouragements which many have done from Brethren upon like occasions:
but none of these things move me; not the loss of good name, not the unkind
deserting of friends, neither count I my life dear to my self, so I may finish
my course, and the ministry which I have received, to testify the Gospel and
the truth of God against the errors of the time. And as I know persecutions
and afflictions abide me in this way; so it shall be my prayer and endeavor
to follow the example of Christ, and those servants of his before named; and
had I not long since set down, and counted my cost, giving up my name to God to
take care of it, and my face to the smiters, I should not have thus appeared in
writing and preaching: but I have, through the grace of Christ, learned to
account it an honor to suffer for truth, and opposing errors, as well from
Sectaries, as from Popish spirits: in this matter of opposing the present
errors, I slight all the power, malice and policy of all the Sectaries in the
Kingdom. And I am resolved, by the grace of Christ, which has enabled me
hitherto, to go on in a constant, cheerful opposing and writing against the
errors. Luth. Epist. ad Spalatin. Quanto illi insu^gunt poten^i^^, tanto a nic
videntur securi^s: Sta^utum est apud me nolle quicquam in hac re timere, sed
omnia contemnere.
I have determined with my self to fear nothing in this cause, but to contemn
all things; yea, the higher the errors arise, and the more mighty they grow,
the more to rise up against them: I value not my name, nor my life, if compared
to the truth of Christ; but shall take pleasure in reproaches, necessities,
sufferings in such a time as this, when few are valiant for the truth; no gold
shall bribe me, nor preferments take me off; no lack of supplies shall
dishearten me. I shall maintain this warfare at mine own charges, and this
good cause cannot be starved for want of fees. And whatever can happen to me
in this cause, I shall rejoice, yea and will rejoice, as remembering those
speeches of Christ, Ioh. 18. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth. Matthew. 5.12. Rejoice
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

A Catalogue of many of the ERRORS, BLASPHEMIES and PRACTICES of the SECTARIES
of the time, with some OBSERVATIONS upon them.
NOw for this Treatise, I refer it to three heads.

1. I shall premise some particulars for the better understanding of the
subject matter of this Book, and right apprehending of what follows. 2. I shall
lay down a Catalogue of the Errors, Blasphemies, Practices of the Sectaries,
together with a particular Narration of sundry remarkable passages, and some
Letters concerning them. 3. Give some Observations upon, and draw some
Corallaries from the whole matter.
In the first head I shall do two things; First, Lay down eight particulars for
better satisfaction and direction about the errors, etc. Secondly, Answer two
Objections which may be as stones to stumble at in the entrance to the matter,
and cause a prejudice against the work.


The first thing I premise, which I would have the Reader to take notice of,
is, that this Catalogue of Errors, Blasphemies, Practices, Letters, is not of
old Errors, Opinions, Practices, of a former age, dead and buried many years
ago, and now revived by this Discourse; but a Catalogue of Errors now in
being, alive in these present times, all of them vented and broached within
these four years last past, yea most of them within these two last years, and
less. It should have been long enough, before I would have raked up old
Errors from the dead and hell; I had much rather send them back from whence
they came; and that is my intent in their Discovery. Ames. Med. Theol. lib. 1.
cap. 35.
I approve well of that rule of Discipline in the French Churches, that the
Ministers should not in Sermons meddle with confuting of old Errors; and of
that of Amesius to Ministers, That all Error is not every where to be refuted.
For old Heresies that are buried; are not to be dug up that they may be
refuted; but seeing these walk up and down in City and Country, I may give
warning of them. Secondly, This following Discovery is not only of present
Errors, which maybe now in (...) ^hen I would not have troubled the (...) in
this Kingdom, as will appear more fully in this Discourse. Thirdly, More
specially in these places of England, as London and the Counties adjacent, in
the Parliaments Quarters, in their Armies and Garrison Towns not maintained by
persons at Oxford, etc. for then it had not been so much to us: but as the
Prophet Ezekiel speaks of Jerusalem, Exik 22.7.9, 10, 11, In thee, in thee, in
thee (often repeated) are such and such things; So in thee London, in the
Associated Counties, in the Armies, and that after a solemn Covenant to
extirpate He^esies and Schisms, are found such and such Errors Blasphemous
Opinions, strange Practices; so that the Reader must remember, that all the
following Errors, Blasphemies, Practices, Letters, be of persons in this time,
and in this Kingdom, (...) who live and dwell among us.

Secondly, I do not undertake nor profess in this Catalogue and Discovery, to
give a full Catalogue and perfect enumeration of all the erroneous Opinions,
Blasphemies and Practices of the Sectaries within these four last years, so as
no more can be added to them; I make no doubt, but many a Reader may say, this
Catalogue wants such an opinion that he knows of, and such an opinion, but only
speaks of many of them, and of some principal; and therefore in the Title of
this Discourse, I call it a Catalogue of many Errors, (I do not say of all:)
It cannot rationally be imagined, that one man residing constantly in one
place, not traveling to the Armies, nor up and down from Country to Country,
having his hands full of preaching, and writing Controversies, can come to the
knowledge of all Errors broached in all places, or can have time to read over
exactly all the Sectaries, to extr^ct all their Opinions: It may rather be thus
argued, what a world of strange Errors, etc. are there held in all parts of
this Kingdom, when one man hears of so much* if all the ministers in the
Kingdom would bring in what they know, or but a considerable number of
Ministers, as a Committee from several parts of the Kingdom, would join
together to read all the Books to take notes of the Sermons in public, to have
some observe and watch meetings in private, and draw into one all the ways of
the Sectaries, within these four last years, a great volume would not contain
the Errors, prodigious: Opinions, and strange practices of these times* There Is
no question but there are many monsters conceived by some in this
Intermysticall season, which are not yet brought forth, and others that are
brought forth, yet like to bastard or misshapen children, are concealed from the
public view, made known only to a very few, being the hidden works of
darkness, the time not being yet come to publish them openly: waighting only
for the Midwife and nursing mother of a Toleration, to bring them fourth and
nourish them: But though this be not a perfect Catalogue, yet I believe it will
be found the fullest that has yet been made of these times, and give a further
Discovery then yet we have had. I have seen several Books written within these
four last years and less, that give us a particular Relation of some Errors
and blasphemous opinions, as learned Gods eye on his Israel.
Master Gat^kers, but that's only of the Antinomian Errors; Disswasive from the
Errors of the time.
Master B^ily, one of the learned and Reverend Commissioners of the Church of
Scotland, but that is only of the Independents, Brownists and Chiliasts.
Heresiography.
Master Pagets, who relates more then any late Authors, but many of them are of
the old Anabaptists, and old Sectaries of other Countries rather then of the
new, and of this Kingdom. Rise, Reign, and Downfall of the Familists.
Mr. Well, but his relation is chiefly of the Familists and Antinomians in
New England many years ago. The Dippers dipped, Doctor Faeatly.
But this work as it speaks only of the Errors and Opinions in present being
and in England, A brief Discovery of Familisme.
so it discovers more then any one Book has, of the Errors held and
maintained among us; yea then all the Tractates extant have discovered, many
great Errors being in this present Treatise laid down, which are not mentioned
at all, neither by the forenamed Authors, nor any other, so that this present
Discourse will be a further improvement of our knowledge of the Errors and
ways of the Sectaries of our times.

Thirdly, My intent in this work, is not to make a formal confutation of these
Errors and Opinions; I designed not that when I first resolved the thing (that
would be a long and great work, and not make good my present ends,) I hope the
naming of them will be a sufficient confutation, especially with the
Animadversions, Observations, and Corallaries hereunto adjoined: I have been a
faithful gatherer together and storer up, Remembrancer and Treasurer of these
Errors and Practices for the good of the public, that I might in a fit season
bring out of my treasure these things, and discover these monsters and rocks,
that so they might be of some use to godly people, to make them afraid of
forsaking the public Assemblies, and joining to separated Churches where these
monsters daily breed.

Fourthly, I here give the Reader a Synopsis of Sectarisme, and have drawn as
is were into one Table, and do present at one view, the Errors and strange
opinions scattered up and down, and vented in many Books, Manuscripts, Sermons,
conferences, etc. and have disposed them under certain heads, and put them into
their proper places, in a methodicall way for memories sake, that the Reader
may the more easily find them. The Reader cannot imagine I found them thus
methodized and laid together, but confused and divided, lying far asunder, one
or two in one book, some in another; others in this manuscript, others in that;
this error vented at such a private meeting, that error in such a Sermon,
this opinion at such a conference: For many of these opinions, the very same
opinions and errors are maintained and held over and over in several books
and manuscripts, so that to have given them the Reader as I found them, would
have been to have brought the Reader into a wilderness, and to have presented
to public view a rude and undigested Chaos, with an heap of Tautologies, all
which are carefully declined in this following discourse, by joining in one
things divided and scattered; by relating but once one and the same error and
practice, and by forbearing to lead the Reader through woods, and over the
mountains; and in stead of that, carrying him directly and presently to the
bird in the nest.

Fifthly, I lay down the opinions and errors in terminis, and in their own
words and phrases syllabically, as near as possible can be, or I can remember
them; and that as themselves have expressed them in books, manuscripts,
sermons, conferences, which either are extant of their own setting forth, or
set forth by other learned godly men in print, or as I have received them from
credible sufficient witnesses. I do not in this Catalogue and Discovery alter
the phrases and words of the Sectaries, giving you their sense in other
expressions; nor set down a Relation of their opinions by consequences and
deductions, imputing that to them which by consequences may be drawn (for I
hold that an unjust way of dealing with men, though in errors); Sentent.
Quorund^m Past. Eccles. in Gallia, de pace Eccles. inter Evang* pro^uranda. Nos
in hac causa etiam a^que etiam cavendum existimamus: nempe ne iis qui the* sin
aliquam ^uentur, ea omnia tribuamus, quae nobis ex ea consequi v^derentur,
secundum, rectam disserendi rationem. Fit e^im saepenuraero, ut qui principium
tenet ex quo aliquid concluditur, idem tamen id nesciat quod ex eo colligitur.
yea, many men may hold opinions, who yet see not the consequences, nay abhor
those consequences which yet follow upon such premises; and therefore though
in a way of argument they may be pressed upon them to draw them off their
errors, yet they may not be charged upon them: and therefore though in the
setting down of the errors and the things thereto annexed, as Letters, some
phrases and words may not be so proper, nor so good English; yet the Reader
must not be offended, because I would relate things in their own words to take
away all cavil.

Sixthly, For the proof and manifestation of the truth and reality of the
errors, blasphemies and practices contained in this present Tractate, that the
Reader may not rest upon my bare assertion and relation of them, but may have
other grounds of satisfaction for their belief, and so be more affected with
them, I propound these following particulars as grounds of proof.

1. That for diverse of the opinions, errors and practices related, there is
such a notoriety of them, being so notoriously known to thousands, and
maintained by thousands, every day and every place witnessing the truth of
them; that to quote books written and sermons preached for them, or persons
holding them, is to lose time; and when all is alleged that can be, it is far
beneath the evidences that the mentioning of the things themselves give.

2. Many errors and blasphemies contained in this following Catalogue have
been complained of, and particulars given in by sufficient persons to the
Parliament, Committees of Parliament, Assembly of Divines, and others in
authority, of which errors I have had either perfect copies given me from
Ministers both of the Assembly and City, or relations from their mouths who
have known particularly the story and truth of them, which copies I keep by me
to produce if need be, and out of which (amongst many other papers and books) I
made up this Catalogue.

3. Some of the errors, blasphemies and practices are proved and made manifest
in the narration of the Stories and Letters following the Catalogue: wherein
the naming of some persons, places, occasions of writing, the persons writ
unto, their writing in a public way, and not in a private manner, the
willingness to have them published, with many other concurrent circumstances,
do declare they are not feigned nor counterfeited, but real and certain.

4. Of some of these errors and practices here related, I my self, and other
persons of good note and quality, have at the same time together been
ear-witnesses and eyewitnesses upon the places.

5. Other of these errors and opinions are in diverse printed books, either of
the Sectaries themselves, or of persons of note and worth for learning and
piety, who either after conferences with them, or hearing them preach, upon
certain knowledge have printed and attested them to the world; diverse of which
printed books, especially those made by the Sectaries, I quote upon the margent
by the errors.

6. For any of the errors, blasphemies put in this following Catalogue, which
have come to my knowledge by none of the former five ways above specified
(which yet are not many) I have had the relation of them from godly Ministers,
and understanding conscientious Christians, with many circumstances of names,
places, conditions, time, and confident asseverations of the certainty of them,
the relations coming to me by providence, and occasionally spoken of in the
hearing of others as well as my self, and so delivered as there can be no
reason in the world to think they should be false, but much every way to
believe them true. And that the Reader may the more build upon the truth of all
things delivered in this Book; besides that account I have given him already in
these six particulars, I shall acquaint the Reader with the course and way I
have taken to come to the truth of things, and not to go upon hearsay. When any
things of this nature have been related to me, though by persons of worth and
conscience, I have used to enquire of them, whether they were ear-witnesses or
no; if not ear-witnesses, who they had the reports from, and how they came to
know them, and where, and by whom, and upon what occasion these points were
delivered? if they said they were ear and eye witnesses, yet if there were but
one single witness, I have used to question, who else was present? and to
enquire after circumstances and occasions, and accordingly have gone to other
persons named, from one to another, to find out the bottom and truth both of
Opinions held, and practices used; where I could with wisdom and probability
go to find out and know the truth, I have done it myself; and where my
appearing might hinder the discovery, and cause persons to be shie and more
reserved, I have set others to enquire, and directed them the way, and
entreated them to ask such and such questions, and after particular enquiry,
according to concurrence of circumstances and witnesses, I have entertained
such things for truth, or else received them as false, or suspended them as
doubtful, not to be asserted: and that I might be the more faithful Relator
of the opinions and ways of the Sectaries of this time, and know when and
where to put more or less weight or credit upon informations and relations, I
have a long time used to write down daily the same day, yea the same hour (when
I could get opportunty of privacie) the occurrences both of opinions and
practices that concern our Sectaries, and that in such manner and way, that
looking upon my papers a year after, I can judge of what authority the
relations are: and accordingly I have forborne to put into this Catalogue of
Errors, some strange Opinions I have heard of from good hands (though they may
be true) because I have not had the opportunity to meet with, and further to
enquire of some persons concerning their truth; and because some whom I have
enquired of, could give me no further satisfaction. I have taken this way, to
satisfy the Reader, rather then all along in the several Errors, Blasphemies
and Practices to lay down the particular proofs; which I think the better way
upon these following reasons. 1. Because in many of the Errors, even contained
under one and the same head, the proofs to be given of the truth of the thing
does arise many ways, from printed Books, from Manuscripts, from Sermons, from
preaching in private houses, from Articles given in by witnesses, and from
others relations; now to quote all these, with all particular circumstances of
time, place, etc. whereby to make out a full proof, would be an endless work,
and be so long and tedious, that it would cross one of my ends in this work,
which is to have this Discourse but short, a Manual that might be for every
ones reading. 2. Because some of these Errors and Opinions can be proved only
from Manuscripts, and relations of honest persons, who were ear witnesses,
which Manuscripts are but in the hands of a few, unknown to most of the
Readers; and to make references to them, by quoting them in the margent, the
Reader were never the nearer, and then every man is not willing to be named in
Print, neither may I lawfully do it without their knowledge and leave; besides,
that were the way for the future, to deprive my self of the knowledge of many
opinions and practices, if I should print the names of every one that has
imparted intelligence to me. 3. In this Catalogue of Errors, under one and the
same Error (which for number I make but one, that I might not seem needlessly
to multiply Errors, and that I might contract things) yet under that one
Error, teere are more branches, it may be two or three; now though one part or
branch of such an Error as the former part is expressly set down in Books that
are in many hands, yet other branches are not, but only have been expressed by
word of mouth: Now in such a case to quote Books, speaking but to one part and
not to the whole, might question my faithfulness in all other particulars:
unto these I could add more, but these may suffice.

7. Yet further to satisfy the Reader of the truth of things contained in this
present Treatise, and to stop the mouths of Sectaries, who will be ready to put
off all, by giving out, that this Book is full of lies and fables, I do here
offer (upon condition that some exemplary punishment may pass upon some of the
prime Seducers and heads of these Sects, and some effectual course taken for
the future, to remedy and suppress these Errors) to make a legal proof by
witnesses, and other concurrent circumstances of the most notorious and
grossest matters (which may of all others seem most questionable) whether
Errors, Blasphemies or Practices set down in this following Catalogue.

Seventhly, I premise this for the Christian Reader to remember, and for
preventing mistakes in this work, that though I set down and join together all
the following opinions in one Catalogue, because they all agree in uno tertio
in that common notion of Error, yea all agree in Independency, and in
forsaking the communion of the Reformed Churches: yet I am far from thinking
them all alike. A Scholar that makes a Catalogue of Books, writes down Decimo
sextos as well as Folios in it, because they be all Books, and yet puts a great
deal of difference between the one and the other; so do I notwithstanding I put
them together. All the Errors reckoned up are not of the first magnitude, nor
in the highest form; some are fundamental Errors, overthrowing the foundation
directly, many by consequence and deduction; others are superstructures,
building upon the foundation hay, straw and stubble: I put a wide difference
between a simple pure Independent, yea a simple Anabaptist, who only holds that
opinion of denying Poedobaptisme, and between an Arian, Antitrinitarian,
Antiscripturist, Perfectist: Again, I put a difference between erroneous
persons that err out of ignorance, weakness, and are seduced, following those
opinions in simplicity of heart (as some people did Absalom) and are peaceable
keeping their opinions also to themselves and such persons as are wilful
seducers, the heads and leaders of Faction, who make it their work to disturb
the peace of the Church, and to subvert souls. In all this discourse I desire
to think of Jude 22.23. And of some have compassion, making a difference; and
others save with fear, pulling them, etc.

Eighthly, I desire to forewarn the Christian Reader, and do earnestly beseech
him for his own good, that he be not offended, nor hindered from believing the
truth, and laying to heart the particulars laid down in this ensuing Treatise,
no not by all the clamours, reproaches that may be cast upon my Book and
person: It cannot be expected, but that Satan and the Sectaries will make it
their work, by all ways possible to blast this Book, to keep from reading and
believing it, as they used all ways to reproach my last Book, and to keep
Christians all they could from reading it: Blind and erroneous zeal is violent
and what it wants in arguments, it will make up in clamours, lies, and speaking
all manner of evil falsely of them that discover and lay it open, as Mundus non
potest far ut sua damuentur: Igitur ex omni part odia, insidiae, calumniae,
maledicta congeruntur ad opprimendam hanc doctrioam and edoctores hos.
Luther speaks; the world cannot bear that the things of it should be
condemned, therefore from every part hatreds, treacheries, calumnies, evil
speakings are heaped to oppress that Doctrine, and those Teachers who oppose
it: And therefore let them speak evil as long as they will, and give out it is
a railing lying piece; yet let me speak to the Reader, as the Apostle does, 1
These. 3.3, 4. That no man should be moved by these afflictions, for we told you
before, that we should suffer tribulation, even as its come to pass, and ye
know: so now I tell you before, that when you hear of all kind of reproaches,
ye may not be offended, John 16.1.

Now the second particular under this first general head, is to remove two
stumbling blocks out of the way, to give an answer to two objections that may
be made against this present work.

1. Object. It may be some will object and say; It is not seasonable nor
convenient to discover our nakedness and weakness so far to the common enemy,
it were better concealed, the enemy will make an advantage of it: Tell it not
in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. 2. Sam.
1.20.

Ans. The prevailing of Heresies and Sects among us, is not now to be
discovered and published to the world: It has not been all this time kept
within our own walls, and known only to our selves, but has been a long time
known abroad, and at home, and has been declared by diverse others, both in
writing and preaching before now: so that I shall not divulge any secret to the
common enemy: all that I do is but to draw them into one, that we may see them
as it were at once: our Errors and Schisms are spoken of far and near by
enemies and friends. How many Sermons have been preached before the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, and in other public places speaking of the Errors of
the time, which have been also printed long since by command of Authority, and
exposed to the view of all? Many Learned men have given a Catalogue of several
Errors, as Mr. Gataker of many Antinomian Errors, Mr Baily one of the
Commissioners of Scotland of other Errors, and Dr Featly, Mr Paget, with some
others: In Books upon all occasions, it is confessed by men of M. Colemans
Brotherly examination Re-examined, page 10 grants, That in our present times
monsters of Errors do arise, and Opinions that the world never heard of before.
several judgemens, and denied by none, that we have many great Errors
amongst us: many Errors have been complained of to the Houses of Parliament,
Committees, Assembly, and examined, spoken of in the presence of many; besides
that some Errors are vented, even of the grossest sort in Print, as in
Pilgrimage of Saints, Bloody Tenet, Mortality of the soul, Man of sin
discovered, cum multis aliis: Yea, some of the Sectaries have in their writings
published and acknowledged, there are many sorts of Opinions among us, hence
taking occasion to write for a Toleration of all, as Anabaptists, Antinomians,
etc. and the great Historian and Chronicler of the Sectaries (the Moderate
Intelligencer, Number. 36. who writes their lives and deaths, and trumpets forth
their victories and praises so immoderatly as if they did all: and has
published to the world, some weeks ago, that there are twenty several opinions
in the Army; and has pleaded more then once for liberty of conscience for them
all; so that I by writing in this kind of the Errors of the time, cannot be
guilty of discovering our nakedness, the enemy having known so much before.
But why stand I to prove that our Heresies and Schisms are openly known in
England, when as their sound is gone into all Lands, into Holland, Zealand,
France, yea to New England? The Walachrian Classis, in their Letter to the
London Synod complain much of Heresies, Schisms, Errors, confusions in
Religion spreading in the City, which by such an express, holy and sacred oath
is bound to God to cast out all Errors, Heresies, Scisms out of the house of
God. Considerat. Quarund. Controvers. A Guliel. Apoll. vide Epist. ad Synod.
Land. Iudicent conscientia vestrae, quomedo omne haeresium genus inultum
permitti, multifaria schismatum semina impune spargi, and profans errorum
dogmata passim in vulgus proferri p^ssint in illa civitate, quae tam expresso,
sancto and sacro sa^ram, lose coram deo devinxit ad omnes errores, haereses,
schismata ^ d^^o dei ejiciendos. Vide ibi plura.
Many Letters have been written over into Enland out of Holland, from Ministers
and Professors of schools (men zealously affected to the cause of the
Parliament) complaining of the Errors, Sects and Schisms amongst us, which
have been communicated to some prime members of the Assembly and others.
New England speaks much of the Heresies, Errors, and all sorts of Sects
amongst us, New England at such a distance knows not so well the nature of the
Asembly, and therefore speaks so of it, out of zeal against our errors.
wondering that the Assembly suffers them, and that they do not stir up the
Parliament to supresse them. New Englands Lamentation, for Old Englands present
errors. A printed Letter of M. Shepards.
Mr Shepards Letter written from thence, shows their knowledge of the heresies,
errors and sects amongst us, so that our errors and schisms so publicly
known to the world, cannot be concealed from Oxford. Seeing then there are so
many errors and monsters of opinions spoken of in all places, I cannot be
taxed for the discovery of that which was before concealed, but in this work am
only a gatherer together of those errors that were scattered, which by Gods
blessing may be a means to keep many from falling into schism seeing such
monsters in that way, and to cause many to return, when they find that they
never dreamt of nor intended.

Secondly supposing our errors to be known, which is fully proved in any first
Answer, I then secondly say, it is so far from being unseasonable and
inconvenient, that it is most necessary, that some Ministers, who are friends to
the Reformation, and zealots for the Parliament, should lay them open to the
full, by testifying against them and disclaiming them, that so our enemies may
not say, we favor and countenance them; and one of my great ends in this
Tractate, is to take away occasion from the common enemy to blaspheme the
Reformation, and speak ill of the Parliament, by our not owning them, but
speaking as much against heresy, schism and all errors as any of them can.

Thirdly, I answer, we should be so far from being afraid to give the common
enemy advantage, by speaking against heresies and errors, that on the contrary
I may say, we have no such enemies, as those persons, that broach and spread
their heresies and damnable opinions: these are our enemies which we have
cause to fear more then all the Cavaliers, these are the Achans, the accursed
persons, and things which are most likely to undo us; and if ever the
Parliament and their party be ruined (which God prevent) it will not be so much
by the Cavaliers, they could not have done it, but the heresies, blasphemies
and schimes of some among our selves will cause it; and therefore the finding
of these out, and laboring to have these removed, is a work of great
importance to the saving of the Kingdom, and of great prejudice to the common
enemy, whose hopes and confidence are much more placed in our heresies,
prodigious opinions and schisms, then in their own strength.

2. Ob. As this book will give occasion to open the mouths of enemies, so it
may cause distractions and divisions among our selves, weaken the hands of many
who are cordial to the Parliament, apprehending themselves to be written
against; besides this may offend many good persons that are not sectaries,
especially that Independents should be put into this Catalogue, and ranked with
all sorts of heretics and schismatics.

1. I answer to this, as Luther did in an Epistle of his to Spalatinus upon a
like occasion; Spalatinus would not have had Luther at such a time to have writ
against the Papists, for fear of disturbing the public peace: to whom Luther
thus replies, That's excellent indeed, that thou think it not fit to have the
public peace disturbed, and yet judge it fit to have the external peace of
God disquieted; not so, O Spalatine. Shall the grievous wolves come freely to
the flock, not sparing them; and if the dogs bark to give warning of them,
shall they be said to disturb the peace, and cause distractions? Brethren,
things are come to a good pass, that heretics and sectaries must do what they
please, and if any course be taken by preaching, writing, petitioning, to
remedy it, it is given out by Sectaries, it is a plot to make division,
discourage the Army, disturb the peace. I say no more, if this be to preserve
union and peace, and to be cordial to the Parliament, to let heretics and
sectaries do what they list, preach, writ, spread their errors, destroy many
souls, and no man must say, what do they? cursed be that union, peace and
affection to the Parliament. Lutherus in epist. ad G^lat. Maledicta sit
charitas quae servatur cum jactura doctrinae fidei, cui omnia cedere debent,
Charitas, Apostolus, Angelus e Caelo.
It Is a golden saying of Luther, and worthy to be thought of in these times;
Cursed be that charity which is kept with the loss of the doctrine of faith,
to which all things ought to give place, Charity, an Apostle, an Angel from
Heaven, This present Parliament having often declared in their Declarations,
their resolutions to hazard all for the safety of the Reformed Religion and
doctrine of faith.
yea, and I will add, Parliaments.

Answ. 2. If in such a time as this, and such a case, when by many persons all
the things of God are laid waste and made null, Church, Minister, Sacraments,
Scriptures, and what not? men will be offended for speaking, let them, it is
better they should be offended, then the glory of Christ should suffer; it is an
offense taken, and not given; Christ cared not in that case that the Pharisees
were offended, Mat. 15.12.13.14. I wonder they are not offended at the heresies
and errors daily broached, and yet should be offended at the discovering and
speaking against them. I have more cause to be offended at this objection of
theirs, and their lukewarmenesse: woe be unto them that broach these errors,
and to those that countenance them, for every plant which my heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be rooted up.

Answ. 3. I name not these things to provoke and exasperate any, especially
none of those who in simplicity of heart, and under pretenses of greater
holiness and new light, are taken in these ways; (for as I have writ before,
so I say again, I put a great difference between Independency strictly and
properly so called, and many other sectaries, and between those who are
turbulent Sectaries, and merely seduced) but I write this Tractate to preserve
many tender consciences from falling, by giving warning to them beforehand, as
Christ did in Mat. 24.23.24.25.26. that they may fear, and tremble, and look to
themselves, as also that I might brand errors and false doctrine too well
thought of, and too kindly dealt with in these times.

Ans. 4. I may justify the ranking and joining of Independents with other
sectaries, not only because all the sectaries though never so vild, are
Independents, agreeing in that opinion of Independencie; as also all the
sectaries, the worst of them (even those who deny the Scriptures, the Divinity
of Christ, etc.) do separate from the Church of England, refusing communion
with her in the Sacraments and other Ordinances as the Independents do, but
because the Independents do join themselves with the other sectaries adhering
to them, and to this day have never stood as a divided party from them, but
upon all occasions have and do make one common body with them, to hold together
against the Orthodox and Presbyterians: I am able to give many instances of
many of the Independents, both Ministers and people, pleading for the
Anabaptists, Antinomians and other sectaries, that they might be tolerated as
well as themselves; and upon all occasions of complaints against several
sects, siding with them to bring them off; yea, their joining together in
choice of Burgesses for Parliament, and in diverse other matters against the
Presbyterians; as also in closing together in Church Fellowship, Independent
Churches admitting of and continuing Anabaptists, Antinomians to be members;
besides not censuring vild sectaries (as Seekers) who have fallen from their
Churches: so that I do the Independents no wrong to put them in the same
Catalogue with other sectaries, themselves having in so many particulars gone
hand in hand with them: but that which is the fullest demonstration of all
other, is this, The sectaries being now hot upon the getting of a Toleration,
there were some meetings lately in the City, wherein some persons of the
several sects, some Seekers, some Anabaptists, some Antinomians, some
Brownists, some Independents met; some Presbyterians also met with them, upon
their desire the better to understand what they would have; the intent of which
meeting was, to consider how all these might have the liberty to their way and
practice in this Kingdom, and to persuade the Presbyterians to be willing to
it, and to help to effect it for them: now the result of these meetings was,
that all these several sects were agreed and held together for pretended
liberty of conscience, the Independents as well as the others holding together
with the rest of the sects, as buckle and thong; some professing at one of the
meetings, it was the sin of this Kingdom that the Jews were not allowed the
open profession and exercise of their religion amongst us; only the
Presbyterians dissented and opposed it. And much about the same time that this
meeting was in London, in another place some of the best of the Independents,
were not ashamed to move for a Toleration, not only for themselves, but all
other of the sects that agreed in fundamentals against Popery.

THe second part of this Tractate, and indeed the principal (to the better
understanding whereof the first part tended, and upon which also the third and
last is grounded) sets down the Catalogue it self, containing many Errors,
Blasphemies and Practices of the sectaries of this time, together with a
Narrative of some remarkable Passages and stories; as also, some Letters, and
an extract of Letters concerning the present Sects. Now the Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies in this Catalogue particularized, may be referred to sixteen heads
or sorts of Sectaries, as namely, 1. Independents. 2. Brownists. 3. Chiliasts,
or Millenaries. 4. Antinomians. 5. Anabaptists. 6. Manifestarians or Arminians.
7. Libertines. 8. Familists. 9. Enthusiasts. 10. Seekers and Waiters. 11.
Perfectists. 12. Socinians. 13. Arians. 14. Antitrinitarians. 15.
Antiscripturists. 16. Scepticks and Questionists, who question every thing in
matters of Religion; namely, all the Articles of Faith, and first Principles of
Christian Religion, holding nothing positively nor certainly, saving the
doctrine of pretended liberty of conscience for all, and liberty of
Prophesying. And in one or other of these sixteen forms, may all the Errors
and Blasphemies reckoned up in the following Catalogue be well placed, and unto
one of these heads easily reduced; yea, for many of these errors, the very
same are held not only by one sort of the forenamed sects, but by diverse of
them. And I desire to commend to the Readers serious and sad consideration,
three particulars concerning the errors and sects of this time; and the
rather, because they were not so common to the sects in the ages before, at
least not the two first. 1. That among all these sorts of sects and sectaries,
there are hardly now to be found in England (for to this Kingdom, and to these
four last years do I confine my self all along in this discourse) any sect
that's simple and pure, and not mixed and compounded, that is, any sect among
them all) which holds only the opinions and principles of its own way, without
enterfering and mingling with the errors of other sects; as for example, where
can a man find a Church of simple Anabaptists, or simple Antinomians, or
simple pure Independents, each of them keeping to their own principles, as
Anabaptists to Anabaptisme, Independents to Independencie, and holding no
other? but rather do we not see by experience, that both the several kinds of
sects, and most persons of each kind, are compounded of many, yea, some of
all: One and the same society of persons in our times, being both
Anabaptisticall, Antinomian, Manifestarian, Libertine, Socinian, Millenary,
Independent, Enthusiasticall? yea, among the Independents (who are of all the
rest accounted best) where can any man show me an Independent Church strictly
so called, or a man of them hardly, who symbolizes not with the other sects,
holding beside Independency, neither the opinions of the Chiliasts, nor of the
Libertines, nor other strange opinions! The Army that is so much spoken of upon
all occasions in the news Books, Pulpits, Conferences, to be Independent
(though I conceive upon good information, that upon a true muster of the whole,
Commanders and common soldiers, there would not be found above one in ^ix of
that way) yet of that Army, called by the sectaries, Independent, and of that
part of it which truly is so, I do not think there are 50. pure Independents,
but higher flown, more Seraphicall (as a Chaplain, who knows well the state of
that Army, expressed it) made up and compounded of Anabaptisme, Antinomianisme,
Enthusiasme, Arminianisme, Familisme, all these errors and more too sometimes
meeting in the same persons, strange monsters, having their heads of
Enthusiasme, their bodies of Antinomianisme, their thighs of Familisme, their
legs and feet of Anabaptisme, their hands of Arminianisme, and Libertinisme as
the great vein going through the whole; in one word, the great Religion of that
sort of men in the Army, is liberty of conscience, and liberty of preaching.
But heretofore, both in times more ancient and latter, and in other Countries,
several sects kept themselves more to their own proper tenets, without that
general con^usion of each running into all, as the Arians, Novatians and
others, in the first six hundred years, and the Antinomians in Luthers time.
Secondly, That all these sorts of sects, how different soever, yea and contrary
to one another in many principles and opinions, yet all agree in these times in
separating from our Church, refusing comunion in our public Assemblies, and in
disallowing the authoritative power of Classes and Synods; all the sects, yea
the worst of them, as the Antiscripturists, Arians, Antitrinitarians,
Perfectists, being Independents and Separatists (though all Independents and
Separatists be not Arians, Antinomians, etc.) which deserves the more to be
thought on, because in the Primitive times, some heriticks and sectaries would
have been glad of communion in warship with the Orthodox; ( Theodoret. Haeret.
Fabul. lib. 4. cap. de Ario.
Arius desired to be received into the Church of Alexandria again, and made
such friends to Constantine, that upon his pretending repentance, he commanded
Alexander the Bishop of Alexandria, to give him the hand of fellowship and to
admit him) as also they approved of the power of Synods and Councels, coming
unto them. The Arians, Donatists and other Sectaries held many Councels, as
that of Tyrus, Antiochia, the first Council of Carthage in Constantines days;
of these and many more we read of in Ecclesiastical Histories. I never read of
any Independent Minister in all the Primitive Churches (no not amongst the
Sectaries) for the first six hundred years, save only in the days of Aurelius
Bishop of Carthage, who living in the fifth Century, in an African Synod and
Council held at Carthage declares; Codex Canonum Eccles. African^. 53. Can. a
Christoph. Justello. Sunt enim plerique conspirantes cum plebibus propriis,
quas decipiunt, ut dictu^ est, earum scalpante^ aures, blandi ad seducendum
viriosae vita homines, vel corte in flati, and ab hoc consortio separati, qui
putant propriae plebi incubandum, and nonnunquam converti ad Concilium venire
detractant: sua forte ne prodaneur flagitia metuentes. The words in the Greek
are (...), are mere significant, (...), properly signifying absurdities and
unusual novelties.
There are many who conspiring with their own proper people who they do
deceive, scratching their itching ears, and with fair speeches seducing, men
of a loose life, or rather puffed up, separating themselves from this society,
who think they must attend to their own proper people, and being often called
to the Council, refuse to come along, left their absurdities and novelties
should be discovered and made manifest; against whom Aurelius moved, that they
might be deprived of all authority over their proper people, as rebellious and
disorderly, which was consented to and voted by the whole Synod, saying placet,
placet. Thirdly, That for the errors and opinions laid down in this Catalogue,
some are contrary and contradictory to others of them, so that many of these
errors fight among themselves; this indeed is one great difference between
truth and error, Bonum non est contrarium bono, sed tantum malo, at malem
contrariatur and bono and malo. Verum est unum, mendacium vero multiplex.
that truth though it be contrary to error, yet one truth is never contrary to
another, truth is one and uniforme; but many errors are not only contrary to
truth, but to errors also; yea some of these errors are most contrary to what
ever could have been expected; many of the persons who hold these opinions
being fallen into some of the errors of Popery, Arminianism, Libertinisme and
those of the grossest sort, (as the Reader in the Errors hereafter named may
more easily perceive) which they spoke so much against heretofore, and for fear
of which coming in upon us, they first began to forsake this Church, so that
they have wheeled and wheeled about so long on the right hand, that they are
perfectly come round to the left.

The Catalogue of the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, is as follows.
1. THat the Scriptures cannot be said to be the word of God; Of the
Scriptures, Vide the third printed Letter, or also a copy of ^ Articles in a
MS.
there is no Word but Christ, the Scripures are a dead letter, and no more to
be credited then the writtings of men, not divine, but humane invention. 2.
That the Scripture, Pamphlet entitled Pilgrim. of Saints, by. Lawr. Clarckson.
whether a true manuscript or no, whether Hebrew, Greek or English, is but
humane, and so not able to discover a divine God. Then where is your command to
make that your Rule or Discipline, that cannot reveal you God, nor give you
power to walk with God? so that Christ letting out himself as he is in
himself, ought to be a Christians Rule in obedience to himself. 3. That the
Scriptures are unsufficient and uncertain, there is no certainty to build any
Doctrine upon them, they are not an infallible foundation of faith. 4. As the
condition of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, etc. was, that they did walk with God
by the teaching of God, so is ours: that is not to limit Christ to Adam, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, David, John and the Disciples. As they were not to tie God to
any things before them recorded, but each of them had a new record; so are not
we to limit God in the general records of those paths, but wait upon him in
the enlargement of the Gospel what he will record you; and far be it from me
to conclude either in Doctrine or practice; that half of his glory is revealed
as yet: As that I should enclose Christ in such a small compass as we have
recorded: Pilgrim. of Saints.
though I rejoice to understand it in the searching thereof, yet pressing
toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God, waiting what he will
record in my heart, and in that measure worship him in spirit and truth from
the teaching of the Spirit. 5. That the holy writings and sayings of Moses and
the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, and the proper Names, Persons and
things contained therein are Allegories, and these Allegories are the mystery
and spiritual meaning of them. 6. That the Penmen of Scripture, every one of
them, writ as themselves conceived, they were the actions of their own spirit;
and for what is said they were moved by the holy Ghost, that was no other
Spirit then that which moved them to writ and speak other things, for in him we
live and move and have our being. 7. That the Scriptures of the old Testament,
do not concern nor bind Christians now under the new Testament: so that when
places of Scripture are brought out of the old Testament to prove Points, many
Sectaries make slight of them, and say, Give us a text out of the new, we are
ignorant of the old; and hereupon some of them do not bind the old Testament
with the new, nor read it. 8. That right Reason is the rule of Faith, and that
we are to believe the Scriptures, and the Doctrine of the Trinity, Incarnation,
Resurrection, so far as we see them agreeable to reason, and no farther. 9.
That the new Testament, nor no place of Scripture in it, binds any further then
the Spirit for present reveals to us that such a place is the Word of God. 10.
To read Scripture in English to a mixed Congregation without present expounding
it, is dangerous, and worse then to read it in Latin; for in Latin, as it
does no good, so it does no harm. Of GOD. Vide Book intit. Comfort for
Believers. pig. 36. Vide A short Declaration of the Assembly of Divines against
it.
11. That God has a hand in, and is the Author of the sinfullnesse of his
people; that he is the Author not of those Actions alone, in and with which
sin is, but of the very Pravity, Ataxy, Anomy, Irregularity and sinfullnesse it
self which is in them. 12. That all Lies come forth out of the mouth of God.
13. The first branch of this Error is verbatim in Bloody Tenet. in the Preface.
It Is the will and command of God, that since the coming of his Son the Lord
Jesus, a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian
consciences and worship be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries: and
they are only to be fought against with the sword of Gods Spirit, the word of
God; and for the Parliament to use any civil coercive means to compel men of
different judgment, is one of the greatest sins that can be named, it is
committing a greater rape, then if they had forced or ravished the bodies of
all the women in the world. Last part has been spoken by some eminent
Sectaries.
Yea, if it be men's consciences, the Magistrate may not punish for blasphemies,
nor for denying the Scriptures, nor for denying there is a God. 14. That no man
was cast into hell for any sin, but only because God would have it so. 15. That
a man had life before God breathed into him, and that which God breathed into
him was part of the divine Essence, and shall return unto God again. 16. That
we should think of our selves no better then was meet, for God loves the
creatures that creep upon the ground as well as the best Saints; and there is
no distance between the flesh of a Man, and the flesh of a Toad. 17. That the
Prince of the air that rules in the children of disobedience is God; and that
there is no other spirit but one, which Spirit is God. 18. That God has not
decreed all the actions of men, because men doing what God decreed, do not ^in.
19. That God was never angry nor displeased with man; for if he were ever
displeased and pleased again, then there is a changeableness in God. 20. That
God loved not one man more then another before the world, neither is there an
absolute particular election, but only general and conditional upon
perseverance; and the Scripture no where speaks of Reprobates or Reprobation.
21. That the soul dies with the body, and all things shall have an end, but God
only shall remain for ever. 22. Every creature in the first creation was God,
and every creature is God, every creature that has life and breath being an
efflux from God, and shall return into God again, be swallowed up in him as a
drop is in the ocean. 23. That to a saving knowledge of God, D. Stewait second
part of Depl. to M.S. page 128. M. Bail. Diswasion from Errors of the time.
it suffices not to know him in the book of nature; nor secondly as revealed
in the holy Scriptures; but that we must know him as abstract from his mercies
and all his attributes. 24. That in the Unity of the Godhead there is not a
Trinity of Persons, but the Doctrine of the Trinity believed and professed in
the Church of God, is a Popish tradition and a Doctrine of Rome. 25. There are
not three distinct Persons in the Divine Essence, but only three Offices; the
Father, Son and holy Ghost are not three Persons, but Offices. Vide proof of
this in the first Letter. Of CHRIST.
26. That there is but one Person in the Divine nature. 27. That Jesus Christ is
not very God, not God essentially, but nominally, Vide full proof of this, in
the Narration of stories.
not the eternal Son of God by eternal generation, no otherwise may he be
called the Son of God but as he was man. 28. That Christ's humane nature is
defiled with original sin as well as ours, Christ had from the birth to his
death the same original corruption as ours, he took our sin into his nature as
well as our flesh upon him: Vide proof of this in the first Letter, and in the
fourth Letter, and in another, M.S.
Christ is not of a holier nature then we; but in this appears Gods love to
us, that he will take one of us in the same conditition, to convince us of what
he is to us, and has made us to be in him: me thinks the beholding of Christ
to be holy in the flesh is a dishonor to God, in that we should conceive
holiness out of God, and again a discomfort to the Saints, that he should be
of a more holy nature then they, as being no ground for them to come near with
boldness to God. 29. That we did look for great matters from one crucified at
Jerusalem 16 hundred years ago, Proof of this is, in Articles given in against
on Thomas Webb, and in the third printed Letter.
but that does us no good, it must be a Christ formed in us, the deity united
to our humanity, Christ came into the world to live thirty two years, and to do
nothing else that he knew, and blessed God he never trusted in a crusified
Christ. 30. Christ was true man when he created us: yea from eternity, and
though he had not flesh, yet was he very man without flesh. 31. That Christ
died for all men alike, for the reprobate as well as for the elect, and that
not only sufficiently, but effectually, for Judas as well as Peter, for the
damned in hell as well as the Saints in Heaven. 32. That by Christ's death, all
the sins of all the men in the world, Turks, Pagans, as well as Christians
committed against the moral Law and first Covenant, are actually pardoned and
forgiven, and this is the everlasting Gospel. 33. That Christ did only satisfy
for the sins against the first Covenant, but not for the sins against the
second Covenant, as unbelief, he died not for the unbelief of any. 34. Christ
died only for sins past, i. e. before the Gospel is revealed to the sinner, and
the sins of men committed after conversion Christ died not for, but they are
pardoned by his being a continual sacrifice. 35. Every man satisfies for
himself for the sins against the second Covenant, namely unbelief: because he
that believes not, the wrath of God abides upon him; so that for a years
unbelief a man bears a years wrath, and this is all the satisfaction God
requires. Vide first printed Letter for proof.
36. That no man shall perish or go to hell for any sin but unbeleef only. 37.
That the Heathen who never heard of Christ by the Word, have the Gospel; for
every creature, as the Sun, Moon and Stars preach the Gospel to men, and in
them is revealed the knowledge of Christ crucified, and sin pardoned, if they
had eyes to see it. 38. Those Heathen that perish, do perish only for not
believing according to the Gospel they enjoy. Paul Hobso^ Sermon. Christ the
effect, ^ot the cause of the love of God, p. 47. Vide Animad on the 4 Letter
which will satisfy the Reader, how Christ is both the fruit and the cause of
Gods love; and these errors in such ignorant mechanics as Hobs^n, arise from
not being able to distinguish the causes of c^^ Iusti^^cation and Salvation.
The first and supreme cause, is the undeserved grace and favor of God; the
moving and meritorious cause, is redemption and reconciliation purchased by
Christ; the isntrumental cause whereby the same it imputed, is the blood of
Christ; the final, is the glory of God in the declaration of his
ri^hteousnesse and faithfulness.
39. Christ did not by his death purchase life and salvation for all, no nor for
the elect* For it was not the end of God in the coming of Christ to purchase
love and life; but Christ himself was purchased by love, that he might make
out love and purchase us to love. Vide fourth Letter proof.
40. Christ Jesus came into the world to witness and declare the love of God to
us, not to procure it for us, or to satisfy God (as some say,) Christ was a
most glorious publisher of the Gospel, he was sent to preach the Gospel, to
heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives: in all that
Christ says to be the end of his coming is not a word mentioned of any thing
done by him in way of satisfying God. Christ's coming was more like a conqueror
to destroy the enemy in our nature, and so to convince us of the love of God to
us by destroying in our nature that which we thought stood between God and us.
P^ul Hobs^^s Sermon ic^it. Christ the effect, not the cause of the love of God.
page 13.
41. That the unction which the Saints are said to receive from the holy one, 1
John 2.20. is one with the Christ hood of Christ. 42. That Christ was a legal
Preacher, for till after his Ascension the Gospel was not preached; Christ
lived in a dark time and so he preached the Law, but afterward then the Gospel
came to be preached. 43. That Christ shall come and live again upon the earth,
and for a thousand years reign visibly as an earthly Monarch over all the
world, in outward glory and pomp, putting down all Monarchy and Empires. 44.
That when Christ in his own person has subdued the disobedient Nations, then
the Church of the Jews and Gentiles shall live without any disturbance, from
within or without it: all Christians shall live without sin, without the Word,
Sacraments, or any Ordinance, they shall pass those thousand years in worldly
delights, begetting many children, eating and drinking, and enjoying all
lawful pleasures which all the creatures then redeemed from their ancient
slavery can afford. 45. That men may be saved without Christ, and the very
Heathens are saved, if they serve God according to the knowledge God has given
them, though they never heard of Christ. 46. That the least Truth is of more
worth then Jesus Christ himself. 47. Christ by his death freed all men from a
temporal death which Adams sin only deserved, by purchasing them a
resurrection, and has opened them* a way to come to the Father if they will:
thus far he died for all, no farther for any. Of the Spirit of God, and of
Sanctification.
48. The Spirit of God dwells not, nor works in any: it is but our conceits and
mistakes to think so, it is no spirit that works but our own. 49. That the same
spirit which works in the children of disobedience, is that spirit which
sanctifies the hearts of the elect. Into this op^io^ some of the Anabaptists
are fallen, and have separated from their Churches upon it.
50. That there is a perfect way in this life, not by Word, Sacraments, Prayer
and other Ordinances, but by the experience of the spirit in a man's self. 51.
That a man baptized with the holy Ghost, knows all things even as God knows all
things, which point is a deep mystery and great ocean, where there is no
casting anchor, no^ sounding the bottom. 52. That if a man by the spirit knew
himself to be in the state of grace, though he did commit murder or
drunkenness, God did see no sin in him. 53. That sanctification is not an
evidence of Justification, and all notes and signs of a Christians estate are
legal and unlawful. 54. Believers have no inherent sanctification, nor
spiritual habits of grace infused into their hearts, but all their
sanctification is that which is inherent in Christ, and they for this and no
other cause, are said in Scripture phrase to be sanctified, but because of
Christ's sanctification and inherent holiness. Of Adam and Mankind. This was
preached in a house, and the Preacher said, this was a mystery (...) all the
Gospel was.
55. Though Adam had continued in his estate of innocence, and not fallen, yet
he had died a natural death, for death now is not a fruit of sin to believers.
56. Gods Image on man, is only our face and countenance; and every wicked man
has therefore Gods Image as well as good men. 57. That Adam, and so mankind
in him, lost not the Image of God by his fall, only incurred a temporal or
corporal death, which was suspended for a time upon the promise of a Savior.
58. There is no original sin in us, only Adams first sin was original sin.
59. That the guilt of Adams sin is imputed to no man, no man is punished for
Adams sin. 60. That one man is no more spiritual then another nor is there any
such inward difference between man and man; but all the spiritualnesse and
difference lies without us in the Word, which guides some men, and not others.
61. That all men who have the Gospel preached to them and so manifested to
their understandings, are immediately without any more ado able of themselves to
believe and receive Christ 62. There is no free will in man either to good or
evil, either in his natural estate or glorified estate. 63. That there is a
power in man to resist grace, and that the grace which would convert one man,
would not convert another. 64. Natural men may do such things as whereunto God
has by way of promise annexed grace and acceptance, and that if men improve
their natural abilities to the utmost in seeking grace, Book intit. A
vindicati^n of Freegrace, against M* John Goodwin.
they shall find it. 65. That regenerate men who have true grace, may fall
totally and finally away from the state of grace. 66. That the moral law is of
no use at all to believers, that it is no rule for believers to walk by, Of the
Moral Law, Justification, Faith, Repentance, good work^, M. Gatak. Gods eye on
Isr. pref.
nor to examine their lives by, and that Christians are freed from the
mandatory power of the law. 67. Persons justified, are not justified by faith,
but are justified from all eternity. 68. Neither faith, nor repentance, nor
humiliation, nor self-denial, nor use of Ordinances, nor doing as one would be
done to, are duties required of Christians, or such things as they must
exercise themselves in, or they can have no part in Christ. 69. True faith is
without all doubts of salvation, and if any man have doubts of his salvation,
his faith is to be noted with a black mark. 70. That To credere; faith in a
proper sense is imputed to justification, and not Christ's righteousness
imputed to justification. 71. That the doctrine of repentance is a
soul-destroying doctrine. 72. In the old Covenant (that is before Christ came
in the flesh) in the Prophets days, repentance is declared as a means to
obtain remission, and neither remission nor the knowledge of remission to go
before, but to follow contrition; but this is not the Gospel which is
established upon better promises. 73. That it is as impossible for Christ
himself to sin, M. Gataker Gods eye on Israel. pref.
as for a child of God to sin. 74. Th^^ there ought to be no fasting days
under the Gospel, and that men ought not to afflict their souls, no not in a
day of humiliation. 75. That God does not chastise any of his children for sin;
and let believers sin as fast as they can, there is a fountain open for them
to wash in; and that not for the sins of Gods people, but for swearers and
drunkards the land is punished. Gatak. ibid.
76. That believers have nothing to do to take care, or to look to themselves
to keep from sin, God must look to them, if he will. 77. God loves his children
as well sinning, as praying, hearing and doing the holiest duties; he accounts
of them never the better for their good works, nor never the worse for their
ill works. Gatak. Gods eye on his Israel, Preface to the Reader. Article 12.
Septem. 1. 1643.
78. That Gods children are not at all to be humbled, troubled or grieved for
sin after conversion, and what Peter did in this kind after his foul fact of
denying his Master, issued from the weakness of his faith. 79. That Gods
children are not to ask the pardon and forgiveness of their sins, they need
not, they ought not, and it is no less then blasphemy, for a child of God to
ask pardon of sins, it is infidelity to ask pardon of sins, and David's asking
forgiveness of sin was his weakness. Gatak. Gods eye on Israel, Preface to
the Reader.
80. That when Abraham denied his wife, and in outward appearance seemed to lie
in his distrust, lying, dissembling and equivocating that his wife was his
sister, even then truly all his thoughts, words and deeds were perfectly holy
and righteous from all spot of sin in the fight of God freely. Denn. Man of sin
discovered, page 12
81. The called of God have sin in the flesh, they have sin in the conversation,
but they have no sin, neither can they have any in the conscience; for the true
faith of Gods elect, and sin in the conscience, can no more stand together then
light and darkness; and this reconciles those two Scriptures, If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and He that is borne of God does not commi^
sin, neither can he, because he is borne of God. 82. The great Antichrist is
that mystical body of iniquity which opposes Jesus Christ, and not the Pope
of Rome, or any particular succession of men, only he is a part of Antichrist.
Denn, makes the opposition of Antinomian errors to be the man of sin and the
great Antichrist, as is to be seen in several pages of his Man of sin
discovered. And Sectaries make them who deny Christ's dying for all, to be
Antichrist: others make Antichristianisme to consist in the coercive power of
the Magistrate in matters of Religion. Of Man after this life; of the S^ul;
Resurrection from the dead, Heaven and hell.
83. That the soul of man is mortal as the soul of a beast, and dies with the
body. 84. That the souls of the faithful after death, do sleep til the day of
judgment, and are not in a capacity of acting any thing for God, but it is with
them as it is with a man that is in some pleasing dream. 85. That the bodies of
the faithful shall not rise again at the resurrection, (namely the same that
died) but their souls shall have other bodies made fit for them, either by
creation or faction from some preexisting matter, and though the bodies be new,
yet the men are the same, because the same souls remain still. 86. Infants
rise not again, because they are not capable of knowing God and therefore not
of enjoying him. 87. That the perfection and resurrection spoken of by Paul, 1.
Cor. 15.51.52.53.54.55.56.57. the hope set before us, the eternal inheritance,
a City having foundations, whose builder and maker is God, are to be attained
in the fulness and perfection of them now in this present time, before the
common death of the body. 88. That none of the souls of the Saints go to
Heaven where Christ is, but Heaven is, empty of the Saints till the
resurrection of the dead. 89. There is no resurrection at all of the bodies of
men after this life, nor no Heaven nor hell after this life, nor no devils. 90.
There shall be in the last day a resurrection from the dead of all the bruit
creatures, all beasts and birds that ever lived upon the earth, every
individual of every kind of them that died shall rise again, as well as of
men, and all these creatures shall live for ever upon the earth. 91 There is no
hell but in this life, and that is the legal terrors and fears which men have
in their consciences. 92. That there is no Church of Christ upon the earth, Of
the Church, Gospel, Ministry and Sacraments.
no true Ministry, no Sacraments, no Gospel, no faith, because there are no
visible nor infallible gifts. 93. No man is damned but for rejecting the
Gospel, and none can reject the Gospel, but those who have it tendered unto
them, as they had in the Apostles days being confirmed by miracles. 94. That
the pure preaching of the Word, and righ administration of the Saments, are no
notes nor signs of a true visible Church. 95. It Is the will of God that
miracles should attend the Ministry, the Apostles make a marriage of doctrine
and miracles, so that they who preach the Gospel, must be so gifted as to
confirm it by signs and wonders. 96. That many Christians in these days have
more knowledge then the Apostles, and when the time is come that there shall be
true Churches and Ministry erected, they shall have greater gifts, and do
greater miracles then the Apostles ever did, because the Christian Church was
but then in its infancy. 97. That there ought to be in these times no making or
building of Churches, nor use of Church-ordinances, as ministering of the Word,
Sacraments, but waiting for a Church, being in a readiness upon all occasions
to take knowledge of any passenger, Pilgrimage of Sa^nts, and MS.
of any opinion or tenet whatsover; the Saints as pilgrims do wander as in a
Temple of smoke, not able to find Religion, and therefore should not plant it
by gathering or building a pretended supposed House, but should wait for the
coming of the Spirit, as the Apostles did. 98. There is a salvation that shall
be revealed in the last times, which was not known to the Apostles themselves.
99. That within a while God will raise up Apostles, men extraordinarily endowed
with visible and infallible gifts to preach the Gospel, and that shall precede
the fall of Rome. But the Apostle Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 2.19, 20, ^1. We have a
more sure word o^ pro^hecie, whereunto ye do well that ye take ^^ed, etc.
Spiritus sanctus non est sceptic^^* nec dabia aut opi^iones in cordibus nostri
scrips^t, sed assertiones, ipsa vita, and omni experien^is certiores ac
firmiores, Luther^s.
100. That in points of Religion, even in the Articles of faith, and principles
of Religion, there is nothing certainly to be believed and built on, only that
all men ought to have liberty of conscience, and liberty of prophesying. 101.
That the Scriptures no where speak of Sacraments, name or thing. 102. That the
Covenant, whereof Circumcision was the seal, was only of temporal promises,
as Ex. G. of the land of Canaan; that the Covenant God made with Abraham had
nothing spiritual in it; and that Circumcision was a seal of the
righteousness of faith to no other but to Abraham alone quatenus a father, and
not to his children. 103. That Baptism is not a seal nor sign of the Covenant
of grace. 104. That Poedobaptisme is unlawful and Antichristian, and that it is
as lawful to baptize a Cat, or a Dog, or a Chicken, as to baptize the Infants
of believers. 105. It Is as lawful to break any of the ten Commandments, as to
baptize an Infant: yea, it is as lawful to commit adultery and murder, as to
baptize a child. Confess* of Faith of Anabapt. Arc^^.
106. That baptizing belongs not to Ministers only, all gifted brethren and
preaching Disciples (though no Ministers) may baptize. Pilgrimage of the Saints.
107. Baptizednesse is not essential to the Baptizer, nor essential to
preaching; so that persons not only not in office, but not so much as
baptized, may both baptize and preach. 108. Miracles are essential to the
administration holden forth in the commission of Baptism, Pilgrimage of Saints.
Matt. 28.19. 109. That none are to be admitted to the Lords Supper, though
believers and Saints, nor their children to be baptized, but only they who are
members in a Church Way. 110. There is no Scripture against a man's being often
baptized; neither is it more unlawful to be baptized often, then to receive
the Lords Supper often. 111. That Christ's words in the Institution of his
Supper, This is my body, and This is my blood, are to be understood literally.
112. That Christians in receiving the Lords Supper should receive with their
hats on, with their heads covered; but the Ministers should administer it with
their hats off, uncovered. 113. That it is as necessary to be joined in
Church Fellowship, Vide Door of truth opened, in answer to Truth shut out of
doors, page 10. This is as false as any Doctrine that is preached in Rome.
as with Christ the Head; and there is such a necessity of entering into a
Church Way, as there is no expectation of salvation without it. 114. That the
Church of England and the Ministry thereof is Antichristian, yea of the
Devil, and that it is absolutely sinful and unlawful to hear any of their
Ministers preach in their Assembl^es. 115. That the Church of Rome was once a
true Church, but so was the Church of England never, therefore it is likelier
the Church of Rome should be in the right in the Doctrines of Free Will,
universal Redemption, Original sin, etc. then the Church of England. 116.
That the calling and making of Ministers of the Word and Sacraments are not
jure Divino, Compass Santarit^ page 24, 25.
but a Minister comes to be so; as a Me^chant, Bookseller, Tailor, and such
like. 117. That all settled certain maintenance for Ministers of the Gospel,
especially that which is called Tyths, is unlawful, Jewish and Antichristian.
118. That Ministers of the Gospel in these days ought to work with their
hands, and to follow some calling, that they may not be chargeable to the
Church. 119 That there ought to be no distinct order of Ministers, nor no such
calling of some persons distinct and separated from the people; but that all
men who have gifts are in their turns and courses; by the appointment of the
rest of the company, to preach, pray, baptize, and they are for that turn in
stead of Ministers, and as Ministers. Of Preaching and Hearing, of Praying,
singing of Psalms, of the Christian Sabbath, or Lord^-day.
120. That all days are a like to Christians under the new Testament, and they
are bound no more to the observation of the Lords day, or first day of the week
then to any other. 121. That the Jewish Sabbath or Saturday is still to be kept
by Christians for their Sabbath. 122. That Christians are not bound to meet one
day in seven constantly, according to the manner of the Nations, nor to pray
and preach thus long, and in this manner two or three hours, according to the
custom of the Nations. 123. No man has more to do to preach the Gospel then
another, but every man may preach the Gospel, as well as any. 124. That it is
lawful for women to preach, and why should they not, having gifts as well as
men? and some of them do actually preach, having great resort to them. 125.
It Is a part of Christian liberty of Christians, not to hear their own
Ministers, but to go and hear where they will, and whom they think they may
profit most by. 126. That it is unlawful to worship God in places consecrated,
and in places where Superstition and Idolatry have been practiced, as in our
Churches. 127. That men ought to preach and exercise their gifts without study
and premeditation, and not to think of what they are to say till they speak,
because it shall be given them in that hour, and the Spirit shall teach them.
128. That there is no need of humane learning, nor of reading Authors for
Preachers, but all books and learning must go down, it comes from the want of
the Spirit, that men writ such great volumes, and make such ado of learning.
129. There are some women, ten or eleven in one Town or vicinity, who hold it
unlawful to hear any man preach, either publicly or privately, because they
must not be like those women in Timothy, ever learning, and never coming to
the knowledge of the truth, 2. Tim. 3.6.7. 130. That it is unlawful to preach at
all, sent or not sent out (as in a Church State) but only thus, a man may
preach as a waiting Disciple, that is, Christians may not preach in a way of
positive asserting and declaring things, but all they may do, is to confer,
reason together, and dispute out things. 131. That it is unlawful for the Saints
to join in receiving the Lords supper, where any wicked men are present, and
that such mixed Communion does pollute and defile them. 132 It Is unlawful for
the Saints to join in prayer where wicked men are, or to pray with any of the
wicked. 133. That it is unlawful for Christians to pray so much as privately
with those (though godly) that are not members of a true Church, but are
members of the Church of England, and the Assemblies thereof. 134 That however
conference and discourse may be had with all, yet it is not lawful to join in
prayer or giving of thanks, no not before meat, with those (though otherwise
acknowledged Saints and godly, and are members of Churches in the Church Way)
that a^e not of the same judgment and way. 135. This opinion begins to spread
much, as a godly Minister told me of his own k^owledge, know^ng them who vented
it, many refusing to join with him in prayer^, in a public Assembly, where
h^e came to preach, upon this ground, and requiring Scripture of him to prove
it. And some begin already in the public Churches to leave off all praying,
only speak and discourse to the people.
That it is not lawful for Christians to pray at all with any others, (either as
being the mouth in prayer, or as joining in prayer) though never so godly, and
of their own judgments, either in the public Assemblies, or in their
Families, unless such persons who prayed had an infallible spirit, as the
Apostles. 136. That Christians are not bound to pray constantly every day at
set times, as morning and evening, but only at such times as the Spirit moves
them to it, and if they find not themselves so moved in many days and weeks
together, they ought not to pray. 137. That wicked and unregenerate men ought
not to pray unto God at all. 138. That all singing of Psalms, as David's, or
any other holy songs of Scripture, is unlawful, and not to be joined with.
139. That the singing which Christians should use, is that of Hymns and
spiritual songs, framed by themselves, composed by their own gifts, and that
upon special occasions, as deliverances, etc. sung in the Congreation by one
of the Assembly, all the rest being silent. 140. This has been lately
practiced in* London among some of the Sectaries.
That love feasts, or feasts of love (with which the Lords Supper is to be
administered also) is a perpetual ordinance of Christ, at which only
Church Members are to be present, and to partake. 141. That there is no
distinction concerning Government of Ecclesiastical and civil, Of Church
Government. Compass. Samarit. page 21.22.
for all that Government which concerns the Church, ought to be civil, but
the maintaining of that distinction is for maintaining the interests of
Churchmen. 142. That a few private Christians, as six or seven gathering
themselves into a Covenant and Church Fellowship, have an absolute entire power
of the Keys, and all Government within themselves, and are not under any
authoritative power of any Classes, Synods, or general Councels, whatsoever
they do, or what ways soever they take. 143. Revel. 16.19 The great City was
divided into three parts and states and branches of it, begin with P. in 1.
Popery 2. Prelacy. 3. Paul H^^sons Discovery of Truth, page 63.
That the Presbytery and Presbyteriall Government, are the false Prophet, and
the Beast spoken of in the Revelations: Presbytery is a third part of the City
of Rome, yea that Beast, in Revel. 11. that ascends, and shall kill the two
Witnesses, namely the Independents. 144. That there are Revelations and Visions
in these times, yea to some they are more ordinary, and shall be to the people
of God, generally within a while. Of Revelations and Miracles.
145. That the gift of miracles is not ceased in these times, but that some of
the Sectaries have wrought miracles, and miracles have accompanied them in
their Baptism, etc. and the people of God shall have power of miracles
shortly. 146. That anointing the sick with oil by the Elders praying over them,
with laying on of hands, is a Church-ordinance for Church Members that are
sick, for their recovery. 147. It Is ordinary for Christians now in these days,
with Paul to be rapt up to the third Heavens, and to hear words unutterable,
and they cannot well have assurance of being Christians, that have not found and
had experience of this. Of the Civil Magistrate.
848. That Christian Magistrates have no power at all to meddle in matters of
Queries of highest consideration in Epist. to the Parliament. An^nym. Ans. to
M. Prins. 12. Queries, p. 8. As the Grounds of Independent Government attribute
nothing to the Magistrate in Church affairs, further then the Magistrate is a
member of their Churches and Assemblies: so no people under heaven ascribe more
unto Magistrates then the Independents in civil matters.
Religion, or things ecclesiastical, but in civil only concerning the bodies
and goods of men. 149. Door of Truth opened p. 5.
That for a people to wait upon man for a form to worship God by, was Idolatry:
Nay, for a people to wait upon Parliament or Assembly for a form to worship God
by, was worse then corporal Idolatry. 150. M. Borroughs, Heart divis. p. 65.
Animadversion upon this error. This is an error destructive to the power of
civil Magistrates and safety of Commonwealths in diverse cases, and in many
instances that may be given; to give one for the present, a Church may not
according to M. Buroughs principles excommunicate a member, who out of
conscience is not satisfied of subjects taking up arms against Armies, raised
by a Prince, nor of the lawfulness of such a war, and therefore declines and
refuses both bearing arms, all maintenance to such armies, and all assistance
to them, dissuading others also, and that out of conscience only ((...) ^e
prosesses) and yet the Parliament I think has sequestered many upon such
occasions, taken their estates; and many Independents of Mr. Buroughs
judgment have been forward sequestrators, selling and buying their goods, and
holding their lands at reasonable rates* but in the Tra^^ate I intend not so
much a formal refutation, as a recitation and discovery: but of this false
principle, and others in M. Burr. book, I shall speak more upon occasion of
answering the gro^^d^ brought for pretented liberty of conscience, whereas
this, so others of M. Buroughs principles and rules about Toleration will be
found both unsound and weak, fit to take women and weak people with, but not to
satisfy any Scholar^.
Whatsoever errors or miscarriages in Religion, the Church should bear withal
in men, continuing still in communion with them, as brethren, these the
Magistrates should bear with in men, continuing them in the Kingdom or
Commonwealth in the enjoyment of the liberty of Subjects. 151. Vide Englands
bir^hright, p 33 Letters printed upon Li^burns imprisonment, Englands
Lamentation. ^la. p. 7. Vide three Letters printed.
That the Parliament having their power from, and being entrusted by the
people, the people may call them to an account for their actions, and set them
right and straight: and seeing this present Parliam. does ingrosse law-making,
and all law-executing into their own hands, contrary both to reason, and the
true meaning of the Law, the Freemen of England ought not only to choose new
members where they are wanting once every year, but also to renew and enquire
once a year after the behavior and carriage of those they have chosen. And if
they find they never did any good, or are groundedly suspected to be
unserviceable, that then those that choose and sent them may have liberty to
choose more faithful, able, and better men in their places. 152. If God command
such a thing to be done in his Word, and the Magistrate now come and command
the same to be done, though a Christan ought to have, and would have done it,
because of Gods command, yet now he ought not to do it, because the Magistrate
commands it. 153. All the earth is the Saints, and there ought to be a
community of goods, and the Saints should share in the Lands and Estates of
Gentlemen, and rich men. 154. Vide Miltons Doctrine of Divorce.
That it is lawful for a man to put away his wife upon indisposition, Of
Marriage and of Parents and children.
unfitness, or contrarie^y of mind arising from a cause in nature
unchangeable; and and for disproportion and deadness of spirit, or something
distasteful and averse in the immutable bent of nature; and man in regard of
the freedom and eminency of his creation, is a law to himself in this matter,
being head of the other sex, which was made for him, neither need he hear any
Judge therein above himself. 155. It Is lawful for one man to have two wives at
once. 156. That children are not bound to obey their Parents at all, if they be
ungodly. 157. That Parents are not to catechize their little children, nor to
set them to read the Scripture, or to teach them to pray, but must let them
alone for God to teach them. 158. It Is unlawful for Christians to defend
Religion with the Sword, or to fight for it when men come with the Sword to
take it away; Religion will defend it self. 159. It Is unlawful for Christians
to fight, and take up arms for their laws and civil liberties. 160. It Is
unlawful to fight at all, or to kill any man, yea to kill any of the creatures
for our use, Of War, and of fighting and killing.
as a chicken, or on any other occasion. 161. That using of set forms of prayer
prescribed is Idolatry. 162. David's saying, I am a worm, and no man, must be
understood literally: yea, he was both a man, and no man in the same literal
sense. 163. That the Scripture speaks but of one kind of faith. 164. Some of
the Sectaries in London do hold, That in Suff^lk there is a Prophet raised up
to come and preach the everlasting Gospel to them, and he stays but for a
vocal call from Heaven to send him, which is expected daily, and that this man
is the Prophet spoken of in the Scripture, 1 John 25. That Prophet in that
Scripture, distinguished from Christ and Elias, is this man raised up in
Suffolk. 165. That it could not stand with the goodness of God, to damn his
own creatures eternally. 166. That God the Father did reign under the Law, God
the Son under the Gospel, and now God the Father and God the Son are making
over the Kingdom to God the holy Ghost, and he shall reign and be poured out
upon all flesh. 167. That there shall be a general restoration, wherein all
men shall be reconciled to God and saved, only those who now believe and are
Saints before this restoration shall be in a higher condition then those that
do not believe. 168. That it is not lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate,
but upon turning Christian he should lay down his Magistracy; neither do we
read after Cornelius was baptized (though he were a Centurion before, and a man
in command and authority) that ever he meddled any more with his band called the
Italian band. 169. Man lost no more by the fall, then all the rest of the whole
Creation fell into with Adam, all the world being condemned to death and
desolation, yea the heavens and the earth also: so that you may as safely
conclude that all the whole Creation lost life and salvation to glorification
by Adams transgression, as to conclude that man lost salvation by Adams
transgression. 170. Man has not by Christ brought unto him eternal life and
salvation, but only such a life as all the whole Creation has together with
him, for the second Adam has not purchased eternal life to glorification for
man. These three last Errors vented in a Book called, A true Vindication of
the general Redemption of the second. Adam, made by one ^atte, printed 1645.
171. All the creatures shall assuredly partake of the Gospel of peace, and that
our Lord the great Prophet spoke something to this purpose, when he says, Go
preach the Gospel to every creature, though they cannot hear to life and
glorification; and Christ is the great Prophet of his Father, to declare his
Fathers counsel to the whole creation, and he is the great High Priest, which
offers up himself a sacrifice of full satisfaction, not for all men only, but
for all that by man was lost, even the whole creation of God. 172. That a
Directory, or order to help in the way of worship, Book intit. A Heavenly
Conference for Sions Saints, by John Turner, printed in the year, 1645.
is a breach of the second Commandment, and there is no word of God to warrant
the making of that Directory book, more then Jeroboam had for the making of
Calves of gold, which he set upon two high places, one at Dan, the other at
Bet^el, to the confusion of himself and his posterity. 173. No man is yet in
hell, Book intit. The fullness of Gods love, printed 1643, page 25.
neither shall any be there until the judgment; for God does not hang first,
and judge after. 174. Men say that Faith is supernatural, Fullness of Gods
love manifested. page 39.
but how can it be above nature to believe that which we see sufficient ground
to believe? and to believe any thing of which we have no plain ground and
reason, is so far from being above nature, that it is below it, and proper to
fools and not to reasonable men. 175. The Law does not pronounce eternal death
in hell fire on those that obey it not, Fullness of Gods love manifested, page
58* 93.
nor were men to have perished in hell fire, in relation to the Law or Adams
sin; but the Gospel pronounces eternal death in hell fire on those that obey
it not; and if we had been to suffer hell in relation to Adam or the Law, then
Christ also should have suffered in hell for us, to have redeemed us from
thence, which he did not. 176. It is not suitable to God, Fulness of Gods love
manifested. page 1.59.
to pick and choose amongst men in showing mercy; if the love of God be
manifested to a few, it is far from being infinite, if God show not mercy to
all: to ascribe it to his will or pleasure, is to blaspheme his excellent name
and nature.
Now unto these many more might be added that I know of, and are commonly known
to others, which have been preached and printed within these four last years in
England (as the necessity of dipping and burying under water all persons to be
baptized, as the necessity of a Church Covenant, as that Ministers may not
lawfully baptize, or administer the Lords Supper out of their own particular
Congregations, neither preach Ministerially, but as gifted brethren, out of
their own Church; with many such errors of the Church Way) but because they
are but light in comparison, I will not name them.

I could relate also to you other errors, that have been reported to me and
others by honest understanding men, to have been vented (and it is likely enough
they may be true) as that it is lawful for wives to give without their husbands
consents, something out of their husbands estates, for the maintenance of the
Church and Ministers whereunto they belong: as that the Lords Prayer, called
and cried up by many to be so, it could not be the Lords Prayer, in regard
there was a petition for pardon of sins, which Christ would not have taught, or
words to that purpose; as also that if a man were strongly moved by the spirit
to kill, to commit adultery, etc. and upon praying against it again and again
it continued, and yet was still strongly pressed, he should then do it; but
because I have not these upon so good grounds, nor such a concurrence of
circumstances, or further confirmation upon enquiry, I therefore forbear to put
them down particularly in the Catalogue of Errors, or to assert them with that
authority. I might here also annex to all these Errors many Expositions of
Scripture given by the Sectaries in their Sermons and private meetings; but I
will only give two; 1. That of Romans 8.2. The law of the Spirit of life, has
freed me from the law of sin and death; that is, (as was expounded) from the
moral Law. 2. That of Ioh. 5 39. Sea^ch the Scriptures, for in them ye think
ye have eternal life; you think to have, that was their thought and mistake,
not that Christ approved it, that eternal life was to be had in the Scriptures.

A Catalogue of the Blasphemies of the Sectaries.
NOw besides these Errors and Heresies laid down, many of them being
Blasphemies (as the Reader cannot but have observed in perusing their
Catalogue) there have been many blasphemies and blasphemous speeches vented by
Sectaries several ways, both by writing, preaching, conference and
discoursing, and some so horrid and abominable, in such a dispitefull,
scoffing, fearful way, that I tremble to think of them, and shall forbear to
name them: And indeed within these four last years in England there have been
blasphemies uttered of the Scriptures, the Trinity, each person of the Trinity,
both of Father, Son and holy Ghost, of Gods eternal election, of the Virgin
Mary, the Apostles and holy Penmen of Scripture, of Baptism, Prayer, the
ministry of the Word, and the Ministers of all the Reformed Churches, of the
Government of the Church, and of the Christian Magistrates: In some books
printed and dispersed up and down, there are fearful blasphemies; as in the
Arraignment of persecution, The Sacred Synodycall Decretall, Martins Echo etc.
profaning and abusing the holy and dreadful Name of God in a most fearful
manner, scoffing at the holy Ghost, Arreignment of Persecu^ion, page 93.
sent in a Cloak-bagg from Scotland, making a most blasphemous Prayer, wherein
the Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ are in a scoffing way
alluded unto, with many others which I will not foul paper with transcribing.
In some Manuscripts of one Paul Best, there are most horrid blasphemies of the
Trinity, This Best with his Manuscripts were sent up last summer, and is by the
Parliament committed to the Gate House.
of Christ, and of the holy Ghost, calling the Doctrine of the Trinity, a
mystery of iniquity, the three headed Cerberus, a fiction, a Tradition of Rome,
Monstr^m biforme, triforme, with other horrid expressions borrowed from hell,
not fit to be mentioned. There was a fearful blasphemous scoffing speech of
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, spoken by one Clarke (as I remember the
name) given in to a Committee of Parliament, in way of complaint in writing,
with a hand subscribed, and one witnessed it before* the Committee,
Heresiography or Descr^t. of Heret. and Sectaries.
but I forbear to relate it. Mr Paget in his Heresiography, Epistle Dedicatory,
speaks of one committed for mocking at Christ's Incarnation, the particulars
whereof, though I have been told from Master Paget, yet I judge it best to
conceal. There have been many blaspheming speeches, in a way of derision of the
holy Ghost, calling it flabile numen, and asking what kind of bird it was?
whether -- but I dare not speak it. The holy Scriptures are by many in these
times slighted and scoffed at (that grows and spreades much) called the
golden Calfe, that there are many contradictions and lies in them, that they
are no better then a Ballad, that they can make as good Scriptures; that place
in Genesis, 6.6. where it is said, God repented that be made man was untrue; so
other places of Scripture. The Doctrine of Gods Eternal Election and
Praedestination has been called a damnable Error. The Virgin Mary has been
called a -- the Apostles have been called -- and they could write as good
Scriptures as the Apostles; upon occasion of quoting that Scripture in Romans 7.
of Paul's complaining of ^inne, it has been answered, Paul was a novice, and
that was his weakness, and that Paul understood not Christ in the promise; and
that he for his part understood the mystery of God in Christ better then Saint
Paul. When that Scripture in Gal. 5.12. was objected to one that pleaded for
liberty of conscience, the answer was, he thought the Apostle was in a great
passion. A Minister in Hartfordshire bringing a place of Scripture against an
Anabaptist, to confute him in some opinion he held, the Anabaptist confessed he
could not answer it, but said, it was the weakness of the Apostle, and there
he wanted the spirit.

Another Sectary denying the Resurrection of the dead, and some of of the
Church coming to admonish him of that Error, and bringing Scripture to prove
it, he answered, This is Scripture to you* but not to me. Poedobaptisme has
been blasphemed by many reproachful speeeches: the Lords Prayer has been
sl^ighted and scornfully spoken of: the whole Ministry of all the Reformed
Churches, with their Ordination, work of preaching, etc. scorned and abused in
several Pamphlets: The Presbyteriall and Synodicall Government, reproached in
all v^lde and scoffing language, called devilish, Antichristian, and all to
naught, resembled to the Beast in the Revelation: the Civil Government and
Magistrates have been blasphemed, with their Ordinances, Orders and supreme
Court of Judicature, the Parliament called Antichristian, and the Committee of
Examinations jeared, by way of comparing it to the Court of Inquisition, and to
the High Commission: the solemn, sacred and National Covenant of the Kingdoms,
derided, blasphemed in many Pamphlets, that many pages would not contain them.
But I will not trouble the Reader to name any more of them: Mr. Pryn in his
fresh Discovery of New Lights, has extracted many passages of this kind out
of the Pamphlets of the Sectaries, and in a libellous book entitled Englands
Birtbright, there is more stuff of the same kind.

Now having presented the Reader with the Errors and Blasphemies; before I
come to the Practices of the Sectaries, I will relate some few Passages in the
Prayers of the Sectaries, which were vented either in public Assemblies and
Churches, or in their private Church-meetings, all within the compass of a
twelve-moneth, or thereabouts.

Some Passages in the Prayers of the Sectaries.
ANd though we are discountenanced by the Civil Magistrate (which is a great
thing) after they have had our estates, and our blood, yet Lord etc. When the
blind man was thrust out of the Synagogue by the Pharisees, An Independent
Minister in a Church here in London, prayed these words following.
Jesus Christ met him; so though we are thrust out of the Common Assemblies
and men's affections who formerly loved us, etc. Let the Spirit teach us, we
may look four, five years from an Assembly of men before they teach us, etc.
Though they may withold the truth in Policy, yet thy Spirit can teach us if,
all the Ministers in the world hold their peace, etc. Thou have triumphed
gloriously by a despised Army, not only by our enemies, but our seeming
friends, who indeed were our real enemies, vilifying those men whom thou have
been pleased to honor, etc. Another Independent Minister in his prayer prayed,
that the Presbyteri^ might be removed, that Christ's Kingdom might be set up.
Another Independent Minister, about the end of September last, gave God thanks
for breaking the neck of that wretched It was the first Position of many
vvell-affected Citisens, for settling the government, subscribed by many hands,
but not presented. In September. last.
petition of the Citizens. August last the tenth day, being presently upon
Lilburns committing to Newgate, at Knowles Church in St. Hellens on a Lords
day, Mr. Knowles prayed these words, or to this effect; Lord, bring thy servant
Lilburn out of prison, and honor him Lord, for he has honored thee. This
last month in December, one of the Independent Ministers in his prayers at a
Lecture, two or three several Lectures, prayed to God that the Parliament
might give liberty to tender consciences. One of the Independent Ministers at
his Church-meeting in a house, gave thanks unto God for the liberty of
conscience granted in America, and said, Why, Lord not in England as well as in
America? or words to that purpose. Another Independent Minister in his prayer
put up this petition, O Lord make the Parliament friends to the Saints. This
prayer was the next Lecture after Mr. John Goodwin was put by Coleman-street.
May 25. 1645. An Independent Minister praying for the Parliament, prayed that
God would keep the Parliament from greeving the Saints, or doing any acts that
might make them sad; that they for whom so many prayers and praises had been
put up by the Saints, might not now grieve them. April 24 the same Independent
Minister in his prayer after Sermon, prayed, That now God had delivered us both
(namely, the Presbyterian and Independent) from such bondage and oppression, we
might not be guilty of bringing our brethren into bondage, left the Lord
carry us back again into Egypt for it. The same prayed on August 1, joining
Parliament and Assembly together, That they might do nothing but what the
Saints should rejoice in, and be glad of. About the beginning of September
last, a Reverend Minister of the Assembly who was an ear-witnesse related it,
and said he would acquaint the Commissioners of Scotland with it; that an
Independent Minister, either in his prayer or Sermon, used words to his effect
of the Scots, It was upon the great prevailing of Montrosse.
That it was just with God to bring this overthrow upon Scotland, because of
their beating their fellow servants; and that they could not be content with
suffering their brethren to enjoy their liberty, but must have a domination.

Having given the Reader an account of many errors and blasphemies of the
Sectaries, Practices of the Sectaries.
with some passages in their prayers; I come now to relate many of their
practices. But the Reader must not conceive I can set down all, or that any one
man (although of far greater abilities and leisure, having also fairer
opportunities of conversing among them, with less suspicion observing their
ways, than my self) is able to do it. They have many depths, wiles and
methods which I know not, nor cannot find out; there are many windings and
turnings of the Se^p^nt, crooked goings in and out, off and on, here and there,
which I cannot trace, The way of the serpent upon a rock is too wonderful for
me, and which I know not, Prove. 30 18, 19. They, Proteus-like, turn themselves
into all shapes and forms, and according to several occasions and times, have
different humors and tempers, sometimes complying so, that one would think all
diff^^ence would quickly be at an end, and they were ours, sometimes so far off
and b^ck again, as causes wonder and amazement in the beholders. I have been
told from godly and wise men, who have had much to do with some of them, and
have professed to set themselves to study, and to observe them (men who are
moderate enough, and have a special love to some of them) that they know not
what to make of them, they are strange men, nor cannot fadom their depths, and
therefore it is not to be expected from me, a plain open-harted man (who hate
tricks, playing under-boord, reserves and designs, whose motto is that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 25.21. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait
on thee, and never studied Machiavel, nor am not versed in the Jesuits
Politics) that I should discover all their practices and ways: Neither was it
my intention or scope in writing of this book, to speak all I know of their
practices and ways, (for I took a resolution in the entrance of this work, not
to be too large) that so the more might both buy and read it, and my purpose is
hereafter (God sparing me life, health and liberty) for the benefit both of the
present and succeding generations, to write an Historical narration of all the
Proceedings and ways of the English Sectaries, both in England and beyond the
Seas, from the first year of the Parliaments sitting, till the time of the
setting forth that History, and have already laid in many materials, and kept
an exact account of the most remarkable passages tending that way; and my
earnest desire is to all the godly O^^hodox Readers, into whose hands this book
shall come, who are enemies to sects and schisms, and lovers of truth, peace,
and order, whether Gentlemen of Committees in the several Counties, or
Soldiers in the Armies, or Ministers in the several parts of the Kingdom, or
other godly Christians, that they would be pleased within this three or four
months next following, to communicate to me all the certain intelligence they
have, of the Opinions, ways and Proceedings of the Sectaries; and I promise
faithfully, that whatever agreement or condition be made by any who imparts
any matters to me (as namely for concealing of their names, or f^^bearing the
relation of such and such particulars, as place, etc. whatever they be) I will
(...) observe, and they shall find me both secret and true to them (for I
fear God, and dare not violate my promise) only for the present I shall g^ve
the world a (...) and trial of the Practices of the Sectaries, for upon some
of the heads of their Practices and ways which I in this present Discourse
name, I could write upon each of them a book, in giving instances and examples
for a proof and confirmation of their truth.

Now I might in the first place make a Parallel between the practices and ways
of out Sect^ries, and the Sectaries of old in the Primitive times (especially
the Don^tist*) as also between them and the Jesuits, them and the Arminians, of
the Netherlands, them and the Prelates, and their Court-party, them and the
present Malignants; yea, them and some of the bad Emp^rours, as Julian, and
could show such an agreement in their practices and ways, treading so just in
their paths and steps, as if none of them were dead or put down in England,
only now acted among us under new names, and under other habits and forms, but
still the souls and spirits of the Donatists, Jesuits, Arminians, Prelates,
and Court-party were alive, and transformed into many of the Sectaries: And
indeed to do this fully would deserve a Tractate by it self, which I shall
leave to be done by some other more able hand; or else if no other take up such
a fruitful Argument, I may find some opportunity hereafter to treat upon it;
only before I name the particular Practices of the Sectaries, as I have done
their Errors, I will ^i^^ some of the more special Parllels between the
Sectaries, and the Donatists, Jesuits etc.

First for the Donatists, and some other Sectaries of the Primitive times, 1.
Our Sectaries and they agree in their complaints of Persecution of their
schism: the Donatists would always be complaining of th^^, as Aug^st. lib. 1.
contra Parmen. l. ^. de baptismo contra Donatistas, lib. 2. contra Petil.
Augustine shows it in many places of his learned works against them; and our
Sectaries in their Sermons, Prayers, Pamphlets, Discourses, Petitions, all
crying out of Persecution, and accusing the Orthodox Presbyterians of
Persecution; yea, when for their seditious, tumultuous, libellous sc^ffing,
wicked lying, scandalous reports, books and practices, they have been
q^^stioned, there is nothing in their mou^hs but persecution, and unheard of
prosecution of the godly. I am of the mind if any of them should come to be
imprisoned, and hanged, for stealing, killing a godly Presbyterian, plotting
against the Parliament and City, in seizing upon their Forts, or some
Parliament Men, one or other of them would cry out of perse^ution. 2. They
agree in their furious outrages and violences against all that oppose their
way: Learned men know what Circumcelliones there were among the Donatists, and
to what a height they came as August. contra Parmen, contra literas Petillian.
Augustine relates; and among the Sectaries, there are outrageous furious men,
and such that in the Churches have committed many insolences, assaulted and
abused some Ministers in their own houses, and in other places where they have
met them: but I must not enlarge. 3. They agree in their high flatteries of
themselves and their party, extolling them and crying them up to the Heavens;
the Donatists did ^leo adorationum impinguere capita, as August. contra
Petilian.
Augustine speaks; and the Sectaries of our times are incomparable flatterers
and admirers of their own party, have written and spoken such praises and
flatteries of their side, as have come almost to blasphemy; these phrases are
ordinary, as precious men as any upon earth, men of a most precious anointing,
none since the Apostles times like them for gifts and abilities; ye^, some have
not sticked to say, they were beyond the Apostles, and if Jesus Christ himself
were on earth he could hardly preach better, that they lead as holy lives as
Saints and Angels in Heaven. 4. In their great partiality, practi^ing that
themselves which they condemn in others. August. lib. 1. contra Parmen.
Augustine shows this in many places of the Donatists: I could give many
instances, of our Sectaries in this kind, crying out of preaching and printing
by the Orthodox against them, and yet preaching and printing all kind of things
against them; speaking against petitioning the Parliament, or interposing in
any thing before them by way of Petition, or having me^tings for that end, (as
you may find in some of the News books the pensioners of the Sectaries,) and
yet themselves in a disorderly tumultuous way, being but private particular
persons (neither bodies, nor societies representative, nor real) have had many
strange meetings, and drawn up Petitions with clauses and passages meddling with
the affairs of Parliament, in a kind charging them, and taking cognizance of
things of a high nature done in Parliament, before the time they ought, with
many such like: August. contra Parmen
but I take off my hand. 5. August. contra literas Petil.
In their appealing from Ecclesiastical Judges to the temporal: So the
Sectaries, from Classes and Synods to the Parliament, or some temporal Judges
appointed by them. 6. In their unwillingnesse to have their actions or writings
examined by any judicious learned men, but keeping things in the dark.
Epiphanius resembles Sectaries to a Moule, a feeble creature that does much
hurt by keeping under ground, but it once above ground, then it is contemptible
and easily taken: Some of the Sectaries have been provoked enough to set down
what they would have, both by earnest entreaties from beyond seas, and at home,
by commands in a kind, by upbraidings for not doing it, and yet to this day
they cannot be brought to it; Vide Lit. Guil. Apoll. and Respons.
and I judge it is for these Reasons: 1. Because they cannot well agree among
themselves of any system or body. 2. Because they know not how long they shall
be of this mind, nor how much further yet they may go. 3. Because what they set
down may offend many of their own party, and loosen all the rest of the
sects from them. 4. Because some Grandees, and Persons of note (who are gone
further,) will not be well pleased at it. 5 Because when once given under their
hands, and that after so long expectation, it will be judged by all rational
men their utmost strength (which if it should have answer upon answer, as no
doubt it will) and the weakness of it discovered and laid bare, they are lost
among many, and will suffer exceedingly in the esteem of all intelligent
unprejudiced men, whereas now by being silent, they bare the world in hand, as
if they had some great matter of strength; many before they speak and utter
themselves are thought to be wise, and to have much in them, who when they
have once spoken, are easily seen through. 7. In their quoting Authors for
them, who are acknowledged for the main to be professedly against them; and in
their quoting pieces of Authors, and not the whole, leaving the latter part
which would explain their meaning; thus the Donatists did Lib. 1. de Bapt.
contra Donat. lib. 2. de baptist.
Cyprian, and yet he was much against them as he professes; and so Augustine
complains of the Donatists, integrus non allegarunt Scripturas; thus the Author
of Sions Prerogative Royal, quotes many Presbyrians for several things, who
professedly were of another way; and one Mr. E. (as the Reader may observe in
an Extract of one of the printed Letters) quotes the Churches of France,
Scotland, etc. for the Independent way, who are known to be professedly
against it: and so Book inti^. The ancient bounds or lib. of Consc.
the Author of The bounds of liberty of Consc. quotes the Leydenses Title page.
Profess. for him, who professedly speak against it, and in Synopsis purior.
Theolog. disput. de Magist. 50. Sect. 59, 60.
one sentence he leaves out some three times words all of them belonging to
one sentence, which would show the sense of those learned men to be against him
(as notorious a falsification as I think is to be found in any Papist) and so
Mr. John Goodwin in his point of Justification quotes Calvin, Bucer, and
others, who are known ex professo, Vide M. Rob. answ. to M. Good. Doct. of
^ustif. cleared, page 75, p. 110.
to be of another judgment; and he quotes Vide M. Prynns Truth triumph^ng
over falsehood, page 111. The se^st you (...) is M. Edward's, wh^ maintai^s
(...) bla^^k against you thorou^out (...) Treatisse.
my Antapologie with other Authors, to justify his opinion, when as I have
professedly at large spoken against what he maintains; and among other places
which he pe^verts, I shall name one, where he cites the former part of the
senten^e, leaving out the latter, which had he but name^, would have been an
evident con^u^ation o^ him, (...) just with me as the Devil did by Christ Good
Innocencies triumph. Out of my Antapol. 169. The tovver of the Mag^strate, by
which he punishes sin, does not subserve to the kingdom of Christ the
Mediator; He leaves; (...) that which follows in the same sentence, there
being no fullpo^t, that he may apply efficaciously to the elect, (...) of the
P^ophe^icall and Priestly office of Christ; he does not affect the inward man
and conscience with spiritual punishment, etc.
, Psalm. 916. leaving out the last part, to keep thee in all thy ways. 2 ^he
Sectaries and the Jesuits agree in many things. 1 As the Jesuits are ramous
for sending out Em^^laries into several Countries to corrupt, not conten^ing
themselves to do mischief at home; ^o do our Sectaries send forth their
members into all Counties and places of this Kingdom, they lay hand, upon
them, and send them as a Church act to preach such and such errors, to
rebaptize, etc. 2 The Jesuits have their piae ^^^udes, holy deceits for the
propagating of their cause, fictions, made things to deceive the people; so
have our Sectaries many for the spreading of their party. 3 ^he Jesuits
insinuating themselves, get into (...) houses and acquaintance, into great
Ladies and Ge^^lewomens, and into Princes Courts and Houses, and follow State
matters, meet to contrive and consult, not preac^ing too much, nor following
their studies too hard; so do many of our Sectaries g^t into acquaintance and
favor with great Noblemen, Parliament Men, ^ell^cite, follow them, work by the
great Ladies and Gentlewomen, consult and de^ate of matters Civil, etc. 4 The
Jesuits are full of equivocations, (...) reservations, say one thing, but
mean another, speak things in a sense of their own, d^fferent from what it is
in the common accep^ion, so are our S^ctaries. 5 The Jesuits have always one
plot or other, never give out, are working active men, if crossed in one, then
are trying in another, and have many (...) in the fire at once, that if one do
not take, another may, nothing discourages them, but on they go; so it is with
the Sectaries of our ti^e, active nimble men, restless spirits, never without
plots and ^i^e designs, with (...) of many at once, that if some mis-carrie,
yet others may bring forth. 6 The Jesuits will work and act where they are not
thought to be, by others, and by instruments unsuspected, not appearing
themselves, but bringing about their ends in such a manner, as a man would
never dream of; so our Sectaries will not appear themselves in many things,
when yet the hand of Ioab is all along, but get their work done by others, who
also draw others to them. 7 The Jesuits make all things give place to their
designs, to advance the Catholic cause, and so they may compass them, they
are not mannerly to stand upon terms, but will take any person out of the way
who stands to hinder them, use several indirect means to effect what they have
plotted, run great ventures and hazards but they will go through: so the
S^ctaries of our times are daring men, will attempt t^I^gs (a wis^ man would
think) they should be afr^id of, will try to break any man or work him out that
stands between them and home, and do things (though otherwise against their
principles)

The Sect^ies and the Netherland Arminians agree; 1 The Arminians at first
flatter^d the M^g^st^ate^, declyning Synods and Ecclesiastical Ass^mblies all
they could, Vo^^ select, disput penes quos sit potestas Ecclessiastica. 1 These.
4 These. 5. These. Vide^lius de Episcopat. Constant. magni, page, ^, 4, ^, 6.
and still appealing to the Civil Magistrate* crying up the power of the
Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiasticalls, ascribing to the Magistrate the ultimate
and highest Jurisdiction and power of giving judgment in matters purely
Ecclesi^^ticall, reasoning, that to the Magistrate alone immediately under
Christ did belong the judgment, where controv^rsies of faith did arise in the
Church, and they aspensed the Orthodox Ministers for not giving so much: of
this the Reader may find enough in Voetius and Vedelius; so do our Sectaries,
all of them are against Synods, declyning them, many of them say, they will in
all matters of Religion give account to the Parliament, or so any Committee
appointed by them; and say, they give more to the Magistrate then the
Presbyterians, and in that kind have odious insinuations to reflect upon
Presbyterians. 2. The Arminians at first broached but small and few errors in
comparison, but in some years time, came to vent all kind of errors almost,
Socinian errors, and what not? so our Sectaries at first were more modest, but
within these four years, especially these two last, how they have grown, and
what they are fallen into, the fore named Catalogue is sufficient proof. 3.
The Ar^inians professed reserves, became Scepticks, were against certainty of
faith, they came to have (as our Divines have expressed,) a monthly faith, nay
an hour^ly; this they now held, but they know not what they might hold to
morrow or the next hour; this principle of uncertainty in matters of Religion
the Remonstrants did hold forth, in those times of the troubles of the Churches
in the Netherlands, that so they might overturn all forms and harmonies; that
was one of the scepticall rules of the Arminians, Dies diem docet; so our
Sectaries are all for new light and reserves, and multitudes of them are become
mere Scepticks and Questionists, and will tell you, this they hold for the
present, but know not yet what they may see, etc. 4. The Arminians could not be
brought to speak out a long while, nor to give what they would have, but hid
themselves in doubtful phrases, and were feared monstri aliquid alere: when
they stood for and desired a Toleration upon conferences and meetings they were
put to it, to give in what they held, and all they held, they were proffered at
the conference holden at Delph favor and Toleration, if they would give
assurance they desired only forbearance in the five Points, but they could not
be got to it; so our Sectaries have forborne to this day, notwithstanding all
means used, to set down this we hold, this we will stick to. 5. The Arminians
in those times in the Low Countries, in some Cities and Towns where they had
power, persecuted the Orthodox, troubled them much; so do our Sectaries in
Towns or places where they have power, persecute godly Orthodox men, especially
if zealous against the Sects: O how have some Sectaries vexed, plagued and
troubled many godly Ministers and people several ways! of which more under
their particular policies, and factious practices. 6. The Arminians, had well
nigh undone the Netherlands, and brought all to confusion, and had not the old
Prince of Orange been stout and wise, even doing something beyond the ordinary
way of his power; and upon the Synod of Dort determining the Magistrate added
the civil sanction, and used coercive power, that Country had been lost; so
Sectaries have by their errors, divisions and factions they have made among
us, hazarded all, and if God do not wonderfully put in, and be merciful to us,
their ways and courses will undo us all. 7. The Netherland Arminians would be
Remonstrants, did write against, complain of the Synod of Dort, that they
could not have their liberty, were not well dealt with, could not have so fair
a hearing; how many books were written, how many aspersions were cast upon the
Synod? And have not, and do not our Sectaries write against the Assembly?
complain by word of mouth? are not their mouths full of such speeches? They
cannot be heard, They have not had liberty to bring in their Questions, etc. Is
it not remarkable, that the Pamphlet, or rather Libell against the Assembly,
put forth by stealth, is entitled, A Remonstrance of the Dissenting Brethren?
so that they are the English Remonstrants. 8 The Netherland Arminians when once
the Magistrate did effectually set to back the Synod of Dort, and were against
them, then they writ books in a far other style, and that power which before
they so liberally measured out to them, they did not a little limit and
contract, denying the Magistrate had any power over private meetings; so our
Sectaries, if once the Magistrates come to suppress their errors and false
Doctrines, Vide Voet. These. 2. de Potest. Eccles. and Vedel. de Episcop. Constable.
magni.
and their private meetings, we shall see how they will change their style;
nay, have we not too much experience, Post habitam Synodum Dordraicam etiam
libelli long aliorum stilo scripti sunt, quin^ and potestatem hanc non parum
limitant ac contrahunt, quam tamen tam liberaliter ante hac admensi erant.
how but upon votes for Government, and but upon the preparative Orders for
settling Church Government, upon the overtures of it this l^st summer, when the
Order came of casting this City into Classes and a Province, and an Order for
choosing tryers of Elders, what passages had we in Sermons, Prayers of some of
the Sectaries; as among many to give two only, on the day of Thanksgiving for
taking Sherborne castle, a Sectary preached this, That the Parliament was
making of Laws against the Saints, and that he was not afraid to speak,
because he was not afraid to suffer. And others preached of the great
persecution that was coming; and how the Bishops tyranny would be nothing to
the Presbyterians, their finger would be heavier then the Bishops loins, or
words to that purpose. The Sectaries and the Bishops, with that Court party
agree: 1. The Bishops and the Court party would bring off one way or other, by
Letters written from great friends at Court, by appearing for them, by removing
to some other place the business by finding out one device or another,
deluding the parties who prosecuted and troubled them, all those of their party
that were active and able; who by virtue of the Laws, conscience, and courage,
some men in place were questioned and endangered, for preaching some Doctrines
of Popery and Arminiansme, etc. or for some practices not legal, of which
many examples were in the former time, fetching them out of the hands of
Orthodox men who had power; sending Warrants for discharge of Priests,
Jesuits, etc. and now all England over generally, the Sectaries for any of
their party that are questioned, either for preaching false doctrines, or for
speaking unjustifiable words, or for other misdemeanors, do use all ways to
bring them off; they will use means to remove them from one Committee to
another, where they are stronger, they will get Letters writ on their behalf,
they will work things so, as by delays one way or another the Sectaries shall
escape, as much as ever the Jesuits, Priests, Arminians, Innovators did
heretofore. 2. The Bishops and Court party would prefer none but their party,
kept out all men from all places in Church and Commonwealth, though never so
deserving, especially if zealous, or had any great parts to stand for the
truth, and they would prefer their own party though never so unworthy, though
little to commend them; and so the Sectaries, in all places where they have
power, bring in Sectaries though otherwise unfit, into offices and places,
though dishonest and scandalous, and set themselves with all the industry and
cunning that may be to keep out godly conscientious men that are against the
Sects, though the, public suffer never so much for the want of them. 3. The
Bishops and Court-party did set themselves to worm out (that being the
Archbishops phrase) all godly, zealous, able men out of places, and would by
one means or device watching them, cast them out quite, or so hamper and vex
them, that they were weary of their lives and places; so do our Sectaries make
it their study, to remove, worm by degrees out of places upon one pretense or
other, when they cannot do it otherwise active Presbyterians, of which we have
too many instances, and set themselves to vex them, by over-rating in Towns
where they have place, by bringing them into Haberdashers H^ll, by putting in
Articles against them which they cannot prove, and so putting them to
chargeable journeyes and expenses, with abundance of such. 4. The Bishops and
the Court-party to bring about their ends, would bring matters to such a
condition, and such a necessity, and then would make those necessities, that
condition of affairs, as a ground of such and such following actions, pleading
the necessities and the condition of the times as their warrant; so our
Sectaries do in many cases, they have by their policies and ways hindered the
settling of Church Government all this while, and they plead the long delay of
settling it, as a ground to justify their gathering Churches, saying, how many
years would you have us to stay? when as in the Assembly, City, in all
places, by all means where they have any interest, they retard the work; and
so if means be used by Petitioning the Parliament to settle Church Government,
and to suppress the great errors, then some of the Sectaries say and give
out, The Army will be offended, when as many of the Sectaries have used all
means, and do still, to bring things to that pass, that we might have an
Army under the commands, and in the hands of the Sectaries, though (blessed be
God) we have a Noble General free from sectarisme and not above one in six in
the Army that way tainted. 4. The Prelaticall faction and that Court-partie
were great Innovatours, given to change, running from one opinion to another,
being Arminians as well as Popish, yea some of them Soci^inians, and
countenancing such, These things I speak not of all the bishops that were, nor
of all men that were of that judgment, there being some Orthodox, learned,
painful, pious men, that approved not those ways, but of the Faction.
and were every day inventing some new matter in worship, adding this
ceremony and the other, putting down some part of worships, and altering them
by substituting other; as in putting down singing of Psalms in some Churches,
and having Hymns; in putting down all conceived Prayer, and commanding
bidding of Prayer, with a multitude of such like: so our Sectaries are great
Innovatours as changeable as the Moon, bringing into their Churches new
opinions daily, new practices, taking away the old used in all Reformed
Churches, and substituting new; taking away of singing of Psalms, and pleading
for hymns of their own making; bringing in anointing with oil, bringing in
their laying on of hands to give the Holy Ghost, with several other strange
ways and practices, which the Reader shall find in this following discourse,
among the narrations of passages and stories. 5 The Prelaticall faction and
that Court-Clergie were daring bold men, that durst venture almost upon any
thing, upon counselling to prorogue and break up Parliaments in times of danger
and distraction, upon putting men out of offices and places that were not for
their turn, and to bring in others calculated for their Meridian, upon
corrupting Religion and Laws at once, breaking in both upon the Truth and the
liberty of the Subject at the same time, upon any thing or person that stood
in their way: So our Sectaries, many of them are daring men, have attempted and
been upon high businesses, about counselling and drawing up Petitions for
adjourning (as they call it) the Assembly, in a time when the distractions of
this Church are so infinite, and things so unsettled; as also have inserted
strange passages into other Petitions, which yet have not been presented,
others of the company opposing them; with several other particulars, which
would be too large now to relate; in one word, there is almost nothing which
they have not and dare not venture on, that stands in their light, and in the
way of their designs; and I may say of many of the Sectaries (for I do not
mean all, as I have said before, so I say again, there are some good souls
merely seduced, who are not of the Faction) they have overpassed the deeds of
the wicked, not only walked after their ways, nor done after their
abominations, but have corrupted themselves more than they; justified the
Bishops and their Faction, by falling into those opinions, and doing those
actions in an high, bold, and open way, which that Faction never durst do for
fear of the people. Next, the present Malignants and the Sectaries agree in
the general thus, that thorowout the Kingdom, it is now notorious, that the
greatest Malignants and Sectaries hold together, and vote together against the
Presbyterians and the Reformation, in all places and upon all businesses, of
which there are many examples in the choice of Burgesses for Parliament, in the
Petition presented in London, at the choice of the new Common Council, the
grandest Malignants and the Independents joined together to oppose; and in some
Committees, where men of both these sorts are, it is observed also: but to come
to some particulars; The parallel between the present Malignants and our grand
Sectaries, stands in these; 1 The Malignants have opposed the proceedings of
Parliament, by preaching and writing books against them, reviling the Houses,
especially the House of Commons, and many particular worthy Members by name,
speaking against their Ordinances, constitutions, as Covenant, Directorie,
Ordination, against their Power and Privileges; we know what Aulicus that
grand Malignant has done, and how many books both from Oxford and here at
London has been by the malignant party printed and vented: so also have many
Sectaries, and here it would fill a great book, to bring into one all the
speeches, with the passages in Petitions, Sermons, Prayers, printed books, that
have been vented against the Parliament, and particular Worthy Members of both
Houses, their Power and Power and Privileges, with their Ordinances and
Orders, in reference to matters of Religion, as the National Covenant,
Directorie, Ordinance against men's preaching out of Office, the Monthly Fast,
the Ordinance for Tithes, the Orders and Directions about Classes, and choosing
Elders; in which Sermons, printed Books, Discourses, Petitions, and other
carriages of the Sectaries, there have been more things vented distructive to
the very power and nature of Parliaments, undermining the very root and
foundation, and all their proceedings in reference to matters of Religion, yea
of justice and civil matters, then ever have been by all the Malignants in
England as ever I could hear of; witness Lilburnes book, with that lately
come forth, called Innocence and Truth justified, all the printed Letters and
Papers that were printed upon occasion of his imprisonment; Englands
Birthright, the Ordinance of Tithes Dismounted, the Arraignment of Persecution,
and all his fellows, as Martins Echo, etc. Turners Heavenly con^erence for
Sions Saints, resembling the Directory to the golden Calves of Jeroboam, and
affirming there are untruths, contradictions to the Canonical Scriptures,
errors, etc. And here I dare be bold to say, that here have been greater
insolences and affronts offered to this Parliament by many of the Sectaries,
then ever was to Parliament in England by any men who lived within their power:
as for instance, when Lilburne was committed to prison, and such a Letter was
come forth in his name against the Parliament, in such an open vile manner, and
at such a time, being prisoner, many of the Sectaries of Southwark met
together, and propounded to choose Lilburne Burgess for Parliament; and that
Lilburne after so great favor and mercy shown him by the House of Commons,
after so high an abuse of the honorable Speaker, the honorable Committee of
Examinations, yea and of the whole House, as discharging him of his
imprisonment, without either acknowledging the justice, or petitioning for the
mercy of the House of Commons (a favor that I never heard or read of granted
to any man before, and that I thought had been a thing impossible, 'even
against the fundamental Orders of the House, for a man committed by the House
upon far less offenses, without petitioning to be set free) should yet set
forth a Lilb. Innocence and Truth justified, page 37. I conceive I may justly
say, without breach of their Privileges, That I have unjustly dealt with in my
late imprisonment, to be imprisoned so contrary to the known and declared
Laws, I have been without either cause shown, or a legal Trial. Vide page
71. p. 75. But you will say, the House of Commons is not at leisure, by reason
of the public: I answer, less then an hours time will serve my turn in this
particular, and it is very strange, in five years space, so much time cannot
be found from the public to transmit my business; sure I am they can find
time enough to settle great and rich places upon some of themselves, and to
enjoy them, notwithstanding their own Ordinance to the contrary: yea and I know
some of them at this day, has plurality of places, and I say the thing I
desire of them, is more justly my due then any of their great places are
theirs, and therefore I hope they have not had cause to be angry with me for
craving justice at their hands, being it was the end wherefore they were chosen
and trusted, and that which they are sworn to do. Vide page 71. speaking of
some passages in a Parliam. Declarat. not easily to be forgotten by those that
made them, if there be any sparks of honesty in their hearts. Page, 21. which
Warrant and Commitment (though made by a Committee of the House of Common*) it
as illegal at all the rest, and in my apprehension against the very tenor and
the true intent and meaning of the Petition of Right, and expressly against the
words of the Statute of the 41 of Ed. 3. Again page 37. But I have several
times been imprisoned both by the Committees and by the Vote of the House of
Commons it self, contrary to a known Law made this present Parliament by
themselves, against which there is at present no Ordinance published and
declared by them and the Peers for the cognizance of: Ergo, I say they are
tied in justice, according to the tenor of this Law, to give me reparation
against those persons that were chief instruments, either in Committees, or in
the House of Commons it self, to vote and take away my liberty from me,
contrary to this Law: and for my own part I do expect my reparation for my
late causeless molestations and imprisonments. Page 69 I shall freely declare
the maine reason which makes me in being true to my liberty and freedom, that
in point of honesty I cannot submit to that Oath, in that I conceive all Laws
and Ordinances in such cases as this is, ought to be universal to bind all,
and not so restrictive as the additionall Ordinance of Accounts is, which
exempt^ Peers, Members of the House of Commons; for my part I judge my self
as free a man (though otherwise I desire not to make comparis^ns) as any of
them, and I conceive I ought not to be in bondage to any Law or Ordinance that
they themselves will not stand to.
book to all the world, justifying himself in his former ways, and point blank
charge the House with being unjustly dealt with in his late imprisonment,
imprisoning him contrary to the known and declared Laws; yea further, in
several places of his book, after a bold and audacious manner abusing and
bringing in dangerous insinuations reflecting upon them.

O what unheard of Malignancies are these I And so Mr. John Goodwin in a Sermon
has uttered that against the Parliament and the power of it, as opens a gap to
all sleighting of their authority and power; and I believe never was there any
such speech from any before himself. 2 The Sectaries and Malignants agree in
being bitter enemies of our brethren of Scotland, and of their Armies; the
Malignants we know look upon them with an evil eye, as the first cause of all
their misery, and cannot give them a good word; and all the world sees how the
Sectaries hate the Scots, raise and spread evil reports upon them, are as
thorns in their sides, heavy enemies, obstructing them in all places where they
have power, devising always to be rid of them, and studying what in them lies
to make a breach; I could tell the Reader many speeches, stories of the
Sectaries in this kind in reference to our Brethren of Scotland, but it needs
not, for they that run may read it. 3. They agree in this, rather to have
Episcopal Government and a Toleration, then a strict Presbyteriall and through
Reformation; we all know this would please Aulicus and his fellows, and I
think I can prove from good hands (and if I should name them, the Sectaries
would say so to) that some of the prime Ministers in the way of the Sects have
said, That Episcopal Government and a Toleration of their way would give them
content. The Malignants and Sectaries agree in Independency, the Malignants now
turn Independents, and profess they are for Independency, and for this I could
quote several speeches, and name some malignant Ministers, and others of note
who are for Independency against Presbytery; but this is now so commonly known,
that Britanicus a man who has done them many good offices, and cried up
several of them, confesses in one of his Pamphlets about a fortnight since,
that the Malignants are turned Independents; hardly a Malignant Priest about
town, but is for Independency against Presbytery. Lastly, The Sectaries agree
with Julian the Apostata and some other enemies of Christians in these four
things. 1. Julian was a great scoffer at the Scriptures, Christ and Christian
Religion, as Eccles. stories mention; and many of the Sectaries of our time,
are fearful scoffers and mockers at all things that are good, Scriptures,
Trinity, Christ, Ministry, Ordinances, what not? there was never a greater
generation of scoffers at Religion then many of the Sectaries of our times,
witness many printed books, as Arraignment of Persecution, and his fellows,
the Ordinance of Tithes Dismounted, besides many scoffing books against the
Presbyteriall Government, as the two Brethrens MS. with others of that kind.
2. Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 7. Iulianus primum vetuit, ne Galil^i
(sic enim fidei Se^vatoris nostri consecratos nuncapabat) Poeticam, Rhetoricam,
aut Philosophicam disce^ent. Nam nostris ipsorum, in^^it, penni^, ut est in
proverbio, percellima^: siquidem nostrer^^ scriptorum praefid^^, muniti, contra
nos bellum suscipiunt. Postea etiam aliam tulit legem, qua mandavit, ut omnes
Galilaei, id est, Christiani, e militia pelle^entur.
Julian was a great enemy to the learning of Christians, used all means to
overthrow learning; so do many Sectaries in our time. 3. He attempted to get
the Militia out of the hands of the Orthodox Christians, as Theodoret in his
Eccles. History relates: and the Sectaries have and do use all means within
their power to get the Militia out of the hands of the Orthodox into their
hands solely, of which I could tell tales. 4 Julian the Apostata therefore
granted a Toleratis on of the liberty of perdition (as Austin call^ it) because
he did hope by that means to destroy Christian Religion, August Epist. 166.
Iulianus, inquit, desertor Christi, and inimicus, haereticis libe^tate^
perditionis permisit, et tunc Basilica^ haeretics ^ed sidi^, quando templa
Demoniis: eo nodo ^^tans Christianum nomen posse perite (...) verita^e
Ecclesiae de qua laps^^ ^ut^a^ invide et, et sacrilegas dissersiones libetas
esse (...) pe^m eteret Pr^teol 1. Elench Haeretic. page 247. Iulianu^ Areti^^
^^thoren et ducem haeresis (...) et ^onstan^i sententia damnatum, et in ^tlium
actum, pe^^uam benignis literis revocavit, et publica vectura reduxit:
Episcopo: sub Constantio exilio mulctatos rerocavit, et in urbes suas redire
permisit. Atque id ille non miserico^dia fecit, sicut colligere est, sed ut
Epis opos inter se committens ad intestinu^ armaret bellum, et suis ipsa
dissidiis Ecclesia labefacta^c^ur.
Julian was the great patron of Toleration for all Sects, Donatists, Arians,
Eunomians, he was the great man for libertas perditionis (as Augustine calls
it) the Donatists fled to him, he gave them public liberty of Churches, he
called back from banishment Aetius the great leader of the Eunomian heresy,
The Emperor Valens did grant freedom of Religion to all heretick^, yea and
Heathens, but was a great enemy to the Orthodox Theodore^. Hist. Eccles lib. 4
cap. 22. Valens impunitatem conce^^it: Gentilibus, ^udaeis, et aliis quibus que
^ui nomen Christianum sibi assumenses doctr^^am Evangelio repugnantem
praedicabant: Sol^ autem Apostolicae doctrinae propugnatoribus ty^annus iste se
h^stem praebuit.
and whether all the sects are not agreed with him in that, as also with Valens
another wicked Emperor, who was for Toleration of all but the Orthodox, I
leave to their own consciences to determine.

And as I have made a Parallel between the Sectaries of our time, and the
Donati^ts, Jesuits, etc. so I might now at large show in all the forenamed
particulars an Antithesis and Dissimilitude between the godly Orthodox
Presbyterians, and the Donatists, Jesuits, Arminians, Prelates, etc. but I dare
not enter into it for fear my book be too voluminous, having already exceeded
that proportion which I at first intended when I began it; all I shall do then
in point of parallel, is but to hint a few things (which I desire the Reader
well to observe) of the difference in the carriage and behavior these four
years last past all along of the Presbyterians both to the Honorable Houses,
and the Sectaries; and of the Sectaries to the Parliament and the
Presbyterians; and for the truth of what I say, I dare appeal to all the world,
yea and to the consciences of many sectaries themselves. Though the
Presbyterian party from the beginning of the differences between the King and
Parliament, among those who profess to stand for Reformation and for the
Parliament has been, and still is (without all compare) the greater part of
both Kingdoms, the body of both Assemblies and Ministers, the body of the
people in Cities and Countries (especially of persons eminent in place and
quality) yea, and the Parliaments too, (of the Parliament of Scotland there is no
question;) the Parliament of England also, after advice had with the Assembly,
has declared for Presbytery, having voted and formed into Orders, Directions,
and Ordinances, several parts and pieces of Presbyteriall Government; yet for
all this have not the Presbyterians taken upon them to set up the Government in
that manner and way as they conceive and judge to be most agreeable to the
word, drawing in the people with them, but have waited upon the Parliament all
this while for the settling of the Church, addressing themselves in most humble
manner, by way o^ petitioning, and that both Assembly, Court of Common
Council, Ministers, people; and when sometimes their hopes have been deferred
beyond all expectation, and have met with some disappointments and
discour^gements in their Petitions, about settling the Church, as by a vote
passed against one Petition before it was presented, as small thanks given for
another, and little respect showed to a third; besides the Sectaries insulting
over them and their Petitions, branding them in Pulpits, in the weekly
News-books, and in their daily discourses, notwithstanding what ever they might
conceive of neglects and hard usage on the one hand, and of great abuse of them
by the S^ct^ries on the other hand, yet they have taken all patiently, waiting
still, petitioning still in all humble and thankful manner, fo^bearing to
print what was presented (though there was no O^der nor command against it) out
of their tender respect of giving any offense, or displeasing the Parli^ment
(though in the mean time they suffered much by mis-reports of their
proceedings, both for matter and manner:) The Presbyterian party (though the
Assembly of Divines, the representative body of the City, the Court of
Common Council, the Ministry of the Kingdom, thousands and ten thousands of
godly well aff^cted persons, the Kingdom of Scotland, yes all the Reformed
Churches own that way,) has not upon the forenamed things and others (as the
not giving leave upon a Petition to print an Answer to the Remonstrance of the
Independents, in which the Assembly is extremely wronged) broken ^t either
against the Parliament, saying they will fight no longer, etc. speaking their
pleasure of them, drawing up all their grievances to a head, and setting them
forth in print; or against particular Members, falling upon them by name,
making them to be known to the world, whom they conceive and have been
informed of, to be the great hinderers of their desires, and sticklers against
them; but even as becomes Christians have taken all patiently, waiting upon God
and the Parliament. And as the carriage of the Presbyterian has been thus in
all humble duty and high respect to the Houses of Parliament, and every
Member in their places (for I have not yet heard of any Presbyterian that has
singled out any one Member by name, to abuse him in print, as some Sectaries
have done, both particular Members, and the whole House of Commons) so has it
been with all love, brotherly kindness, tenderness, respect and forbearance
to the Sectaries; and considering that the Presbyterians were, as I have showed
before, both of the Ministers and people standing for Reformation, the body of
both Kingdoms, having the command and power of the pulpits, so great an
interest in the people, etc. their love and forbearance to the Sectaries has
been admirable; when the Independents were but few, and other Sectaries a small
number, in the first and second year of this Parliament, some half a score or
dozen Ministers, three or four hundred people, the Presbyterians gave them the
right hand of fellowship, admitted them to their meetings, opened their pulpit
doors, unto them, showed all brotherly respect of love and kindness to them,
even more then to most of their own way condescending to such a motion, as to
forbear preaching and printing against their opinions and way, making them
(who were so small and inconsiderable a party) as it were an equal party,
putting them into the balance with themselves; they appeared not to hinder
their being chosen to be general Lecturers, for this City in several great
Churches: and as at first, so all along they have been tender and respectfull
of them in Assembly, City, and in all cases, suffering them to grow up to
thousands; and notwithstanding breach of agreements, drawing away their people,
preaching against them in their own Pulpits, many high and strange carriages,
yet still using all fairness and love, hoping by brotherly kindness,
forbearance and a through Reformation in the Church, (wherein they have been
willing upon all occasions to gratify and have respect to their consciences)
at last to have gained them. O the faithfulness, dutifulness, patience,
long-suffering, forbearance of the Presbyterians; their dutifulness, and
patience in waiting upon the Parliament; their faithfulness in not abating in
their zeal and respects to them; O their love, kindness and tenderness to
the Independents, yea to other Secta^ies also who have had something of Christ
and grace in them, and have not fallen into errors and blasphemies, razing the
foundation. But now on the other hand the Sectaries (though a contemptible
number, and not to be named at the same time with the Presbyterians) have not
waited upon the Parliament and Assembly for the Reformation, but preached
against it, and stirred up the people to imbody themselves, and to join in
Church fellowship, gathering Churches, setting up Independent Government,
reb^ptizing and dipping many hundreds; and upon any thing that has been voted
by the Assembly, Parliament, that has crossed them (though alas, few Orders or
Ordinances which have reference to the Sectarries, or are against their minds,
have little life in them, or are put into execution; witness that Ordinance
against men's preaching who are not ordained Ministers, witness that Ordinance
about Printing, cum multis aliis, Laymen never preaching so much, no^ so
openly as since the Ordinance, and all kind of erroneous wicked books printed,
dispersed as much as before, they have put forth books against the Parliament,
Assembly, preached against them, and their proceedings, the Directorie,
Ordinance against preaching of persons not Ordained, etc. talked their
pleasure, that they would lay down Arms, that the King would give them a
Toleration, that these proceedings would discourage the Army, and such like;
they have not forborne prin^ing of Answers to books, Petitions, passages in
Letters, or other things which might make for their cause, because the
Parliament did not like them, or had forbid them, there is nothing that may make
for the furthering of their way, but they do it, Parliament, Assembly, City,
Kingdom say what they will to the contrary. And as their carriage has been
thus to the Parliament, so they have and do all kind of ways within their
power, wrong and abuse the godly Orthodox Ministers and people, vilifying,
sleighting, and scorning them, raising up all kinds of evil reports, and
casting reproaches on them, requiting them for all their love and kindness,
with preaching against them in their own pulpits, stealing away their people
from them, laboring by all means, in places where they have any power or
interest, to keep good Ministers out of such Churches, and Presbyterians out of
all offices and employments; yea, in many places where they have power, they
study and watch to throw out by one wile or other, godly Ministers who are
against their way, detaining their dues, vexing of them, and making their lives
bitter unto them, domineering and abusing the godly Orthodox party, yea, using
all policy and industry to get themselves into all chief places of power and
command, that so they may trample upon and crush them. O had the Sectaries been
in the place of the Presbyterians, and the Presbyterians in theirs, and they so
dealt with by the Presbyterians, as the Presbyterians have been by them, I know
what they must have expected from them: I dare appeal to every ordinary
common understanding, yea, to the conscience of the Sectaries themselves,
whether if they had had the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, the Assemblies and
Ministers, the Churches and Pulpits, the representative body of this City; and
the people and we had been as few as they were in the three first years of
the Parliament, would they have suffered us to preach in their own Churches
against them and their way, to have from time to time confuted their Doctrine,
to have preached up another Government and way, against what the Parliament had
voted and was a settling, to have enjoyed special Lectures in principal
places, to promote a way contrary to theirs, to have drawn away their people
and maintenance from them, to have fallen upon the practice of setting up
Prebyteriall Churches and Government, Classical, Synodicall, in City,
Country, to have printed freely against their way, and used all means to have
rendered them odious among the people, would they have sat still, and gone
without places and offices of honor, power, profit, and suffered the
Presbyterians a small party, to get into Court, Armies, Committees, etc. to
increase to such a number, such a strength and head, as to possess most places
of command in the field, and in the strongest Garrisons and Forts? as also
Civil offices both of power and profit, yea, to have a pluralit^e of places
and offices? Would the Sectaries, if they had been two The Sectaries, though
they make but a fifth or sixth part of the Army, and the noble General who
commands all, free from any touch of Sectarisi^e, yet we see how insolent some
of them have been of late, bearing themselves upon the army, talking of that
upon all occasions of settling Church government, what would they do if they had
an army wholly of their own way, and a Commander in chief according to their
own hearts?
powerful Armies, consisting of Commanders and Soldiers for their way, under
Generals after their own heart, have born those things at the hands of
Presbyterians, which Presbyterians have done from them? O no, they would never
have endured the hundredth part of those wrongs, discouragements, injuries; had
the Assembly consisted of Independents, excepting a matter of eight or nine
Presbyterians, would they have endured that, and put up that from the
Presbyterian party, as the Assembly has done from the Independent? suffered
them to spin out time so long, to speak those things in the Assembly some of
them have; and in stead of bringing in (according to Order) the whole frame of
their judgments concerning Church Government in a body, with their grounds and
reasons, to bring in a Remonstrance, casting dirt upon them and their
proceedings? Would they in New England endure one or more Presbyterians to live
among them, and to go up and down their Country, and in chief Towns and
places to preach against, cry down their Churches and Church Government, and
to extol and cry up a contrary way, as Mr. Peter's and others do here? For
mine own part I am confidently persuaded, and so I believe are all wise men
that have observed the ways of the Sectaries, that if they had been in the
place of the Presbyterians, having had their power, number, authority, and the
Presbyterians had been a small number as they were, and should have offered to
have done but the twentieth part of that in preaching, writing, etc. against
them, which the Sectaries have done against the Presbyterians, they would have
trod them down as mire in the street, casting them out with scorn before this
time of day, not have suffered a Presbyterian to preach among us, or to have
been in any place or office, military or civil, but all would have been shut
up in prisons, banished, or else hiding themselves in holes and corners: many
godly persons in some places having much ado now to hold up their heads, to
live by them, to preach quietly, to go safely in the streets, and to be quiet
in their houses. And for conclusion of the differerence in the carriage and
behavior of the Presbyterians and the Sectaries, the righteous Lord judge
between them, and recompense to the Presbyterians according to their kindness,
love, peaceablenesse, forbearance and righteousness; and the Lord forgive the
Sectaries, and turn their hearts, and cause their folly, insolences,
unrighteousness, and unjust dealings with their brethren, to be so manifest to
themselves and all men, as they may proceed no further.

Now for the particular practices of the Sectaries they are many, and it would
require a Tractate by it self to set them down; indeed I hardly know any
strange practice that has reference to their ways, but some or other of them
are guilty in one kind or another. Most of their practices and ways may be
referred to these ten heads; 1 To loosnesse and liberty in life and
conversation. 2 To covetousness, ambition, and self-seeking. 3 To policies and
subtlety. 4 To activenesse, sedulitie and numblenesse in the prosecution of
their way. 5 To tumultuousnesse, disorder and confusion. 6 To the disturbance
and overthrow of oeconomicall, ecclesiastical, and pol^ticall relations and
government. 7 To insolences, pride, and arrogancy. 8 To acts of immodesty and
incivilitie. 9 To power and will, carrying all before them, and throwing down
all that stands in their way. 10 To hypocrisy under pretenses of piety and
holiness.

Now for the particular practices of the Sectaries, I had drawn up many, to
the number of seventie, and provided for every practice instances for proof,
and upon some of them I could write a large discourse, even a book upon
several of them; as of their behavior and carriage toward the Parliament,
the Kingdom of Scotland, the Assembly of Divines, the City of London, the
Ministry of England, yea of all the Reformed Churches, as of their seeking
and getting into all sorts of offices and places they are any way capable of
(being Sequestratours, Collectours, Receiv^rs, Surveyours, Excisers, Customers,
Secretaries, Clerks, etc. getting places in Court, great Towns, dwelling in
sequestered houses freely, procuring Arreares, etc. not a man almost of late
coming into any place or office, but an Independent, or Independentish, there
being no kind or sort of preferment, employment, place, but some or other of
that way enjoy) as of their plotting and laboring from the first year of the
wars, to get into their hands the sword and power of Arms, by having a
considerable Army, which they might look upon more particularly, as theirs, and
of their way, by attempting to remove and heave at many gallant Commanders, to
get the command of the strongest Garrisons and places, yea to make Towns of
consequence that were no Garrisons to have been Garrisons, as Yarmouth; but I
am necessitated for diverse reasons, to pass by wholly for the present many of
their practices, and others to name only, desiring the Reader as he goes
along, to supply the defect, by calling to mind all particulars he knows and
has heard of upon the several heads.

1. Practice. They use to ascribe and attribute all the success of things, all
that is done in field, at Leaguers, all victories, brave actions, to their
party, crying them up in Pulpits, News-books, conferences, calling them the
saviors of the Kingdoms; and for this purpose they have certain men that are
Criers and Trumpetters between the Army, City, and Country, who trumpet
forth their praises, giving them the titles of Terrible, etc. a large book
would not contain the relation of all the victories, glorious actions,
exploits having been given to the Army called Independent.

2. Practice. They give out and boast their party to be more and greater than
they are; some of them will speak in all places, as if all were theirs, all for
them; they have given out, as if Parliament, Armies, City of London, Country,
all the godly, wise, judicious understanding men, were theirs, and will be
theirs: yea, that the Assembly, the French Churches, the Commissioners of the
Church of Scotland thought well of their way; and so of particular persons that
are prime men, they have given out, as if they were, or are coming over to
them. Some of them have bragged that Sir Thomas Fairfax, that v^liant
victorious Commander in chief of the Parliament Forces began to have some
glimmering of new light; and I can prove Letters have been written over to some
of their party in Holland, that Mr. Marshall was turned Independent; A person
of worth, who was present at the opening of the Letters, and named to me the
Gentleman to whom such news was writ told it me.
they use to boast of their friends in the House of Commons, and they will
acquaint their friends in the House of Commons; and they brag of a Toleration,
giving out their friends in the House of Commons, have said they shall have a
Toleratio^; and they boast thus to awe persons, and to make men afraid to speak
against them, or to oppose them; but rather to adhere to them who are so
powerful, and have so many on their side.

3. Practice. They appropriate to themselves the name of the godly and
well-affected party, the title of Saints, calling themselves the Saints, that
they only preach Jesus Christ, and though they be Anabaptists, Seekers, etc.
yet they are the Saints: this is common in printed Books, Petitions, Sermons,
Discourses; what, speak against the Saints? be against a Toleration for the
Saints? meaning themselves only.

4. Practice. They pretend one thing, when they intend quite another, and it is
usual for them to pretend the public good, the benefit of the State, when it
is evident they intend their own interest, and strengthen of their party;
they pretend peace, love, forbearing of all names of difference, to make the
Presbyterians secure, negligent, and to forbear all means of settling things,
and yet at the same time go quite contrary, using all means and ways for
promoting their own party, as they did after the loss of Leicester.

5. Practice. What themselves are most faulty in, that they will charge upon
others, the Presbyterian Mi^isters and people, as making d^visions, and wanting
love, as breaking the peace, and causing mis-rules, tumults as be guilty of
persecution, when as it is evident to all the world, they are most faulty in
these particulars, and in many more, and for the proof of it I Iould
demonstrate it in a hundred instances.

6. Practice. They do on purpose (having got Churches void) keep many
Churches without Ministers, seek out for none, stop (all they can) Orthodox
Ministers from coming in, which they do for two reasons, 1. That so they may
pay no Tithes: 2. That so they may have the liberty of the Pulpits for all
kind of Sectaries, and mechanic preachers, who come from London, the Armies,
and other places to preach in and corrupt the people, and that the people being
as sheep without a shepherd, may be more easily now drawn away to error and
schism; and of this practice there are many sad examples in Hartfordshire,
Bucking, Essex, and that in some great market-townes, as Chesham, where
thousands of souls are.

7. Practice. They have labored and do by all ways to have no
Church Government at all settled in this Kingdom, but to keep it out. Or
secondly, if there must be any, yet to have a defective, imperfect loose
Government and Reformation, that may not be able to do the work, that so
others may fall off to their way the more; and for proof of this, they have
refused to join for a pure full Reformation in points according to their own
principles, that so one good might not hinder a greater good (as was expressed)
and have opposed to the utmost a through Presbyteriall Reformation. 3. They have
labored to get a Toleration granted before the Government be settled, to get an
exception before the rule was made, and if once they had gotten that, let the
Presbyterians get the Government then when they could, and this they stirred
in, and sought to effect last winter. 4. Seeing they could not do this, but
this policy was espied, they labor for a Toleration together with a
Reformation, that the Church Government and a Toleration might be borne and
brought forth together as twins in one day, and so go hand in hand, and this
they are laboring for now, the monster of Toleration conceived in the womb of
the Sectaries long ago, they having grown big with it ever since, are now in
travel to bring it forth, and till they could be ready and get things fitted
for a Toleration, they bestirred themselves so against the London Petitions,
that of September, those of November, lest Government should be settled before a
Toleration, and therefore one of them said to some Citizens, why should you be
so h^sty for Government, cannot you stay awhile? how long said they? To spring,
said this Sectarie, hoping their toleration business would be ready by that.

8. Practice. In some Parish-Churches where the Sectaries are put in, they have
put down all si^ging of Ps^lms, as at Elsly in Cambr. s^. Alberie in
Hartford-shire, and will not suffer the Parishes to enjoy any singing of
Psalms; and in other places, they begin to put down all Prayer in the public
Assemblies, and to say there must be only discoursing and preaching; and in
places where they cannot prevail to shut out singing of Psalms, they in a
contemptuous manner clap on their hats, in the time of singing of Psalms, and
having been pulled off, put them on again; yea in prayer also many of them keep
on hats.

9. Practice. They send forth into several Counties of this Kingdom, from
their Churches in London, as Church-acts, several Emissaries members of their
Churches, to preach and spread their errors, to dip, to gather and settle
Churches; they are not content with their own meetings on Lords-daies,
week-daies, keeping constant Lectures in set places, for all to come to that
will, thereby poisoning many in the City, but they endeavor the leavening of
all the Counties, as I might give instances of Lam, Kiffin, with many others
sent abroad, yea, of some sent into the North as far as York.

10. They have appointed and kept Disputations from town to town in the
Country, giving out the time, places and questions they will dispute of, as of
Poedob^ptisme, the Ministry of the Church of England, etc. and agree among
themselves that some of them shall seem to be for Poedob^ptisme, and in the
disputation it is maintained at first eagerly by some of their party against
others of them who oppose it; but then after long and great disputation at last
they confess they are by the evidence of truth convinced, and before all the
people, give glory to God that now they see the truth; whereby the people
seeing them who pleaded for Poedobaptisme confessing their error and yielding,
(they knowing nothing of this precontract and deceit) they also stumble,
question and fall; yea, and to spread their errors the more in some great
town where some of the Sectaries being soldiers have been quartered, they
have desired the use of several houses of persons well-affected, that in the
afternoon some Christians might meet to confer together of some points, not
contenting themselves to reason in the house where quartered, or in any one
house that might be larger to hold many, but to get a new house every day, the
more to infect and possess the people with their ways and Tenets.

11. All things that have fallen out and do in the Kingdoms, of Victories,
Losses, O^dinances, Petitions, Actions, Death of particular persons, of all
matter in Church, State, Parliament, Assembly, City, they make use of it one
way or other to further their design, and turn it for the furthering of their
way, and against the Presbyteriall Government, as the business of Dennington
Castle, as the loss of Leic^ster, upon that framing a Petition to adj^urne the
Assembly, with other particulars which I cannot now mention.

12. Some of the Sect^ri^s plead miracles, revelations, visions, for their way,
and to confirm their doctrine, as some Anabaptists at York for their
rebaptization, that being baptized in the winter in the river Ouse the water
was as hot as if it had been in the midst of summer; as healing the sick with
the anointing of oil; as giving out, Christ appeared to an Anab^ptist, and
forbade her to baptize her child, of which the Reader may read more in the
second Letter.

13. They are wont upon the coming forth of books against their way, which they
see take with wise men, and for which both their opinions and themselves
suffer, to give out they shall be answered, and are answering of them, to keep
the people in heart till they be forgotten, and the speech of the book over,
of which I could give many instances; and so upon the new Model (when in stead
of bringing that in to the Assembly, they brought in pretended reasons why not)
they suffered much in the esteem of all unprejudiced men, speaking they durst
bring in none because of the weakness of their way; then several Sectaries
gave it out in many places and to many (as I can prove it, and name persons
too) that the Model was a printing, it was certainly in the press, and all
the world should see it.

14. They have done and practiced many strange things in reference to baptism
of children, dressing up a Cat like a child for to be baptized, inviting many
people both men and women as to baptizing of a child, and then when neighbors
were come, having one to preach against baptizing of children; they have
baptized many weakly ancient women naked in rivers in winter, whereupon some
have sickned and died; they have baptized young maids, Citizens daughters,
about one and two a clock in the morning, tempting them out of their fathers
houses at midnight to be baptized* the parents being asleep and knowing nothing.

15. They use to give great and glorious names, swelling Titles, to their books
they set forth, as, Innocence and Truth Triumphing together, as, Truth
gloriously appearing, etc. as also to their erroneous Doctrines l^id down in
their books, casting upon Truths of God odious names, as The ^^orming of
Antichrist, Discovery of the man of sin, etc. their books being just like the
Egyptian Temples, whose outsides were beautiful and glorious, having the
inscription of a Deity upon them, but within nothing but a Crocodile, an Ape,
an Onion, or some such vile mean creature.

16. They are extremely full of partiality in all their ways, not allowing
that to others (though far more considerable for quality, dignity) which
themselves ordinarily do, speaking against that in others which they daily
practice, of which I will give a few instances; they have cried out in Pulpits,
Pamphlets, discourses, of the Citizens, Common Council, Ministers, for
petitioning to settle Government, or humbly representing their desires: O it is
an interposing, meddling, anticipating, and I know not what! when as a few
Sectaries, Lilburne and his fellows, can appoint meetings, and give notice to
many to come to them at such times and places, and draw up Petitions, and that
strange ones too, meddling with many things before the Houses, and in debate
not determined, and against the known Privileges of the Houses, of which I
might give many instances; as after the loss of Leicester, in the meetings of
the Sectaries, this was one of the clauses of their Petitions, to name such and
such members of the House of Commons to be a Comittee for the raising of the
Countie^, and appointing Commanders, but opposed by some godly Orthodox
Citizens (who saw their d^ift, and observed well whom they named) as being
against the Privileges of Parliament, for them a few private persons to
nominate a Committee of the members of Parliament, as also that the Assembly
might be adjourned; thus one of the Pamphlets tell us among his News, Moderate
Intellig. Numb. 44. from 1 Ian. to the 8.
that inferior R^presentatives (which no man of understanding can interpret of
any but the Common Council of London) must be wary of meddling or interposing
by Petitions, or gathering together, but leave all to the Parliament; but now
the Sectaries four or five hundred of them they may meet together, interpose,
rep^esent, may speak their pleasures of and arraign the Parliament, Committee
of Examinations, M. Speaker, and other Members of the House, as they did after
Lilburns committing, and the Intelligencer will not di^c^pline them. Again,
they may print, preach, speak against Assembly, Ministry, for Independency,
against Presbytery, and what not? and yet if any of them be questioned, or book
stopped at press, it is persecution, and they cannot be heard, no^ have liberty
to speak for their way; whereas the same men use all means and ways against
Presbyterians, preaching, printing, yea laboring to hinder their putting forth
of Answers and calling in Answers made; yea endeavoring to trouble those who
License books against their ways: as for instance, the Assembly being falsely
and scandalously dealt with in a Pamphlet intit. A Copy of a Remonstrance
lately delivered in to the Assembly; the Sectaries have used all their friends
to hinder the printing of the Assemblies Answer: so many of the Sectaries at
their meetings drew up a Petition to the House of Commons, to have Mr. Prynns
and Dr. Bastwicks books called in, and that House to declare their sense
against them, and that no such books might be writ against the godly well
aff^cted party, under the name of Anabaptists, Brownists, Independents, and a
large schedule was annexed to the Petition, of offensive passages that were in
M. Prynns and D. Bastwicks book (I think ere long they will dare to petition,
that no man shall preach against an Anabaptist, or name a Sectarie, or speak a
word for Presbytery, but themselves may preach, print, and say what they
list:) And so in the case of the Letter of the City Ministers to the Assembly
against Toleration, and in other books; yea, and in Sermons that have been
against the sects, they have threatened and endeavored to trouble and question
the Licensers and Preachers.

17. They are full of plots and projects for their way, and increasing their
party, they have always designs on foot, they do nothing, nor propound
nothing but there is some design or other in it, they are big with many at once,
that if one take not another may, if one miss they presently start another, of
which I could give many instances, and show how the hand of Ioah has been and
is where it is little thought; they use other men upon other interests and ends
to do their work, they have waie^ collaterelly and indirectly to effect their
work, when it would be marred if they went in recta linea: they can and
ordinarily do go about to destroy businesses they seem to plead for, by
propounding and putting upon ways to effect it which they know are not feasible.

18. They have and do when put upon present exigents, yield to and forbear
things for the present, and sometimes in appearance will seem to go far with
you, and are content to lose the fore-game, that they may play the aftergame
better and recover all; they will sometimes appear to be yours fully till they
have served their turn, giving place for a time, but still waiting
opportunities, and working in the mean time all they may, and when they have
counterworkt, they will fetch all about again another way, and make void all
they seemed to grant you; and of this there are too many examples among the
Sectaries, many of them taking the National Covenant for that instant
necessity, that they might work so as in time to destroy the end and intent of
it, and yielding some arguments and debates for the present, to effect their
own ends afterward.

19. They have been and are Polupragmaticall, indefatigably active, stirring,
restless night and day, in City, Country, in all places having their agents
to do their work and promote their ca^se: their eyes are intent upon every
thing that may make for them or against them, and they have a hand in every
thing, they are men of a hundred eyes and hands, out-acting, and out-working
all the Presbyterians, they deal with this man to take him off, and work with
another to qualify him; they have got most of the weekly writers of News to
plead their cause, commend their persons, cry up their actions; they have sent
Emissaries to s^verall Countries, to preach, carry Letters, deal with persons
for choosing of Burgesses in Parliament for their way, as M. Peter's and others;
they observe all men's tempers, humors, and accordingly deal with them all,
some with offices and places, some by holding out principles suiting their
lusts.

20. They desperately censure and judge all men, both their estates and
actions, who are not for them, they presently unsaint them, and men fall from
grace ipso facto by preaching or writing books against their errors, as M.
Prynne, making him worse then the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and so one M.
E. for writing against them; they use this phrase (sometimes accounted a godly
man) and of M. Ash, they have not only in England labored to blast him by
their censures and reports, but writ over into Holland, that since he appeared
against them, God had evidently blasted him, and taken away his gifts; and
lately upon reports (raised by them no doubt) that I was dead (though there was
not the least color for it, not being sick at all,) they gave it out, it was
Gods just judgment upon me to cut me off, for preaching and writing against
the Independents; and at the same time they gave out, that M. Calamy had broken
his arm, and D. Twisse a dying; O says one of their Doctors of Divinity, you
may see the just hand of God against the Presbyterians, M. Edwards dead, M.
Calamies arm broke, and D. Twisse a dying, so that if these things had been
thus, we may see how they would have judged it; and if such things had fallen
to some of us, which have to many of the sectaries (which I name not to upbraid
them with, but to show them their own folly,) as that by the plague of
pestilence our children two at a time had been taken away, as M. Goodwins was
upon the making his house a meeting for the Sectaries, and some of our eyes put
out by a Pike in the street, as one of Lilburns was, immediately upon his
Letter coming forth against M. Prynne and the Assembly; and our wives stark
mad, as M. Peter's wife, we might have expected as bad books written of us, as
were written by the Papists of Luther and Calvin.

21. They take upon them more places then they can or do discharge, and bear
the names of some places which they seldom officiate, and have labored to add
more places to those they have already, and that both in City and Country, so
that some of them besides their places in the Assembly, which they seldom
attend (especially this last year) and their private gathered Churches, have
diverse Lectures and places, besides their hanging upon great men, to preach
before them to ingratiate themselves, and getting to preach at White Hall, S.
James, Westminster, and other eminent places, where the great ones, Earls,
Lords, and the Grandees of the time resort; they do not, as we Ministers sit
still expecting a call to places, but they are forward men, bestirring
themselves to attain this place and that, getting such great men's Letters in
their behalf, using such Ministers of note, and other persons of quality and
power in Parishes to make way for them to come in, pretending to preach for
nothing, etc. and still in all these Lectures and preachings, they have an eye
to Churches in places most convenient for their ends, as so situated, so
capacious, and to times when few or no Lectures else are, as on the Lords day
in the morning between six and seven a clock, all those Lectures at that time
of the day from Stepney to Westminster, they either have possession of, or have
strongly labored for them; yea, and to have set up others on the Lords days
in the morning, at Ludgat^, Aldersgate, etc. if by themselves or all the
friends they made, they could have effected it; and so the Lord, day in the
evening, when other Sermons are done, they have gotten that Lecture at the
Three Cranes; and so the Lecture on Monday night, when there is no Lecture else,
besides the Exposition Lectures on week days in the several parts and
quarters of this City, and new Lectures in other eminent places of the City,
which they have endeavored to set up, if they could have obtained the
Ministers consents; and in their places they have an eye to good pay, a hundred
pound a year for preaching once a week in one place, and seventy pound per
annum, for preaching once a fortnight at another, and a piece for a Sermon as
soon as they have done, and a good supper for another, and yet they will have
a care to take no more pains then needs must, as M. B. having a hundred pound
per annum for preaching at Cripplegate on the Lords day in the afternoon,
could never be got to give the Parish a Sermon now and then on a Fast day, or a
day of Thanksgiving, as a great friend of his in that Parish, who knows, told
me; besides I could name others, who will do nothing on the Fast days. They
take upon them the names of such Lectures and Churches, as being chosen and
nominated to them, but others of their own party supply them, sometimes one,
and sometimes another, they have one Sprig or another, one Emissary or other
from the Army, one House-bird or other to serve the places: It would make a
book by it self to relate all particulars in this kind. One man of their way,
besides being a member of the Assembly and his a private Church, has places in
Norwich, Yarmouth, Fishstreethill in London. A second, besides the Assembly,
has places at Acton four Lectures at Westminster, besides his interest and
share in some Lectures in London. A third has a place at Stepney, Cripplegate,
Cornhill, besides part of another Lecture, and all reserves for this Parliament
man and the other to ingratiate himself with them. A fourth, besides the
Assembly, which he seldom comes to, and his particular private Church, has
Lectures in London, which all the last summer he seldom preached at, not
preaching at one of them in the space of three quarters of a year together. And
they do not only neglect their Lectures in our Churches, but they take to
themselves more members in their own Churches then they can preach or look
too, for they admit members who live constantly many miles from them, here one
ten miles off, there another five miles, another sixteen miles off, some at
Norwich, some at Yarmouth, another forty miles off; every one of their
particular Churches is not a Parish Church, but a Bishops Diocese, nay some of
them are Archbishopricks and Provinces, far larger then the Presbyterian
Provinces, reaching from London to Dover, as D. Holms, who has several
members there, going twice or thrice a year thither to visit; and in one of
his visitation Sermons, preaching to his members, prayed God to bless, and
remember them who had but a bit once in a quarter or half a year. And as this
is the practice of the Clergy, so the Laity among the Sectaries have plurality
of offices and places, some have both military and civil, others two or three
civil offices, and I could name one, who has some five or six, besid^^ his
being a Committee-man: In a word, our Sectaries are become Pluralists,
Non-residents, and some of them Vbiquitaries, and are well paid for it, as M.
Peter's.

22. They generally walk loosely and at large, over what they did before they
turned S^ctaries, and in comparison of the godly Presbyterians; they do many
things under pretense of Christian liberty, which professors heretofore were
not wont to do, nor do not, neither durst they have done, of which I could give
many instances both in persons and things; I do not know, nor hear of a Sectary
in England, that is so strict and exact in his life, as he was before, and as
thousands of Presbyterians are; and this is not my observation alone, but a
general observation: many of them play at Cards and Tables, are very loose on
the Sabbath days, go to Bowls and other sports on days of public
Thanksgiving, as M. John Goodwine and several of his Church, they wear strange
long hair, go in such fine fashionable apparel beyond their places as it is a
shame; they will feast, ride journeyes, do servile businesses on the Fast
days, and give their Parish Churches no Sermons, no Prayers at all on those
days; they make little conscience of family duties, they will sit and tipple,
be joviall and merry together. I could tell true and certain stories of many
Sectaries who were exceeding precise and strict before they fell into those
ways, but are abominable loose now; and let but a man turn Sectarie now
adays, and within one half year he is so metamorphosed in apparel, hair, etc.
as a man hardly knows him.

23. In all matters and businesses which succeed not according to their mind,
but cross their ways and designs as if a choice of persons they like not be
made to places, or if such a thing pass and be done that pleases them not,
they will try all ways possible, and cast about to find some fl^ws or other,
pretend this thing and the other to question the election and make it null, or
to obstruct it; they will put in Articles against men chosen, though they
cannot prove them; they will pretend something or other, was omitted, and such a
passage was illegal, and all to bring to a new election, and then they will
work all kind of ways to ef^ect their designs.

24. They have spoken strange and high speeches against the settling of
Presbyteriall Government and the Presbyterians, as one Anabaptist of late, That
he hoped to see Heaven and Earth on fire before Presbytery should be settled;
another Sectarie, That it was one of the Articles of his belief, that within
seven years there would not so much as the name of Presbytery be heard in
England; a third, That he hoped to see the Presbytery as much ^rod under foot
as the Bishops were; a fourth, That if the Saints were thus persecuted, and
could not have the liberty of their conscience, it would come to -- A
Gentleman told me, he had heard many Soldiers of a Regiment of Horse (which I
forbear naming) say, That when the Army of Cavaliers was overcome, there would
be another Army to overcome, intimating the Presbyterians; and I could relate
strange speeches told me by faithful ear-witnesses, no slight persons, spoken
against our brethren of Scotland by some Sectaries.

25. After they have set their hands to papers, as upon agreements in such and
such points of difference; as upon the receipts of money, as upon giving in
what they desire, when they think such things may make against some of them,
have used means to get those papers back again into their hands, and have come
to those that kept them some days after, pretending they desired to see them,
and look upon them for some reasons, and then have desired to borrow them for a
few days, to compare these papers with theirs, or for some other use, and
being lent them by Presbyterians (who are plain honest men, and not acquainted
with policies) they keep them, and cannot be entreated to return them ag^ine,
but being asked for them, pretend some excuse or other; of which I could give
instances, naming the persons and things at large, but I spare them.

26. They practice and endeavor to get Sectaries, and those that way affected,
to attend on and be about cordial Presbyterians that are of quality, place
and power, both to observe and watch them, and to qualify them, and do some
good offices for the Sectaries; of which I could give notable instances, but I
must only hint it, and leave Presbyterians to their own observation.

27. About the time of moulding the new Army, some of the Sectaries gave out
where ever they came, and went from one to another, both to Ministers, people,
that such and such (call them what you will) are the men that will fight
cordially for you, overcome the Cavaliers, and when they have done, they will
either submit to the Government established, or else leave the Land, you need
not fear them; and this they labored to possess all men with, that so
without muttering or speaking against, there might the more Sectaries get
places in the Army; and yet we see now by experience, that upon all motions and
petitions for settling the Government, or against Toleration, the Army is spoken
of: And will you discourage those that fight so bravely, and that God has made
so isntrumental to you? and that if they may not have liberty of conscience,
and liberty to preach, the Army will be discouraged, and if they may not
preach they will not fight; and after victories we have been minded by Letters
from the Army of liberty of conscience, and expecting no compulsion in matters
of the mind.

28. They upbraid in printed books and speeches many Presbyterians,
particularly of the Assembly, with their former conformity, yea they brand and
asperse them, that they have been great time-servers, Innovators; and this they
do to make the people believe, that what they do now is not out of conscience,
but to serve the times, and that such men are not likely to have the truth
revealed to them, nor fit to have a hand in the Reformation, who have so
polluted themselves with corruptions in worship, and the inventions of men; and
among many, good Mr. Calamy has been abominably belied in this kind,
especially in that late railing Pamphlet of Mr. Burtons, called Truth still
Truth, though shut out of doors, whereas many of the great Sectaries
themselves, and principal Ringleaders in each Sect, as Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Independents, etc. were not only Conformists in the way of old
conformity, but great Innovators and forward Episcopal men, the innovations
of Altars, bowing at the name of Jesus, reading the book of Sports, causing the
people to come and kneel at the Rail, threatening and bringing their tender
conscienced people into the spiritual Courts, yea into the High Commission
being practiced by some of them: and I challenge the Sectaries to name so many
of the Presbyterian party, who appear for that Government by writing, or
other ways, to be so faulty for Innovations, and serving the Bishops, as I
can name amongst them. The full Relation of the time-serving and Innovations of
Denn, Cox, Ellis of Colchester, Dr. Holms, Saltmarsh, Cummins, Wale of Norfolk,
cum multis aliis, would make a new book; and the best of the Independents will
be found upon search, yea them of the Assembly, not only for many years to
have been Conformists, but to have gone further in conformity to the Bishops
than some of us. As for example, Mr. Buroughs in the times of the Bishops
pressing Innovations, was wont to ride up and down the Country in a
Canonical Coat, and I ask him Mr. Bridge and Mr. Greenhill, whether they
besides Subscription, took not the oath of Canonical obedience, and gave not
some moneys to the repair of Paul's Church in London? whereas I, as great a
Conformist (as some of the Sectaries would make me to have been) never had a
Canonical Coat, never gave a penny to the building of Paul's, took not the
Canonical Oath, declined Subscription for many years before the Parliament
(though I practiced the old Conformity) would not give ne obulum quidem to the
contributions against the Scots, but dissuaded other Ministers; much less did
I yield to bow to the Altar, and at the name of Jesus, or administer the Lords
Supper at a Table turned Altar-wise, or bring the people up to Rails, or read
the book of Sports I never justified that wicked oath Ex officio, as Mr.
Burton. Mr. Calam. Just. and necess Apology, against an ujust lnvective of Mr.
Burtons, page 5, 8.
, or highly flatter the Archbishop in an Epistle Dedicatorie to him D. Holms:
I write not this to commend or prefer my self before others, but because many
Sectaries to blast my preaching and writing from doing good, have given out
falsely to many, that I was a great time-server, and a great man for the bishops
and their ways, using that as an argument not to heed what I write or preach:
I therefore thought it necessary to say thus much for the undeceiving of many
who know me not. And had I ever learned the Art of time-serving, I should not
have writ such a bo^k as this, nor preach as I do, but would rather turn
Sectarie, ^or at least comply with them, and so I might be a Creature and a
darling of these times.
, or put Articles into the High Commission Court against any, but was my self
put into the High Commission Court, and Pursevants with Letters missive, and an
Attachment sent out to apprehend me, for preaching a Sermon at Mercers
Chapel, on a Fast day in July, 1640. against the Bishops and their Faction,
such a free Sermon as I believe never a Sectarie in England durst have preached
in such a place, and at such a time.

To conclude for this time the practices of the Sectaries, it is apparent they
make the propagation and advancement of their way and party, in opposition to
the Presbyteriall Government their supreme Law; for the eff^cting of which they
have and do use all means, though dishonest and unlawful; they say and unsay,
affirm and deny, make promises and break them, go backward and forward, and in
one word, have dispensed with their most sacred principles of
Church Fellowship, so as such things may make for the increase and advancement
of their party, of which I could give a world of instances. Ob. But it may be
it will be said, What are the practices of some men, and matters of fact, to a
way, it is arguments must convince men, not practices? Answ. Much every way in
this, because both in printed books, Pulpits and Discourses, the practices of
the Sectaries are brought to persuade people to forsake our Churches, and to
come to them; as the great holiness, sanctity, self-denial, humility,
innocence of that party, with their painful preaching without great livings,
or expecting Tithes; and on the other hand, the Presbyterians are branded as
men of no great piety, holiness, charity, and if it were not for livings of
two or three hundred pounds a year, they would turn Independents: and many
people are drawn more by these things, than by all their Arguments. Now
therefore the discovering to the people nakedly and truly their practices, may
undeceive them, and be as good a means to bring them back to the Communion of
the Reformed Church, as ever the false representation of them was to mis-lead
them.

Here follows a Copy of some Letters, with a Narration of Stories and
remarkable passages concerning the Sectaries.

The Second Part OF GANGRAENA: OR A fresh and further Discovery of the Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies, and dangerous Proceedings of the SECTARIES of this time.

As also a Particular Narration of diverse Stories, special Passages, Letters,
an Extract of some Letters, all concerning the present SECTS: Together with
some COROLLARIES from all the forenamed premises.

A REPLY to the most material exceptions made by Mr, Saltmarsh, Mr. Walwyn,
and Cretensis, against Mr. Edwards late Book entitled GANGRAENA.

As also brief Animadversions upon some late Pamphlets; one of Mr. Bacons,
another of Thomas Webs, a third of a Picture made in disgrace of the
PRESBYTERIANS.

A Relation of a Monster lately born at Colchester, of Parents who are
Sectaries.

The Copy of an HYMN sung by some Sectaries in stead of DAVID'S Psalms.

By THOMAS EDWARD'S Minister of the Gospel.

Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves, ye shall know them by their fruits.

Matthew. 7. v. 15, 16. But shun profane and vain bablings, for they will
increase to more ungodliness. And their word will eat as does a Gangrene, of
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus.

2 Timothy 1.16, 17 But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived

2 Timothy 3.13. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the sign
of the Bible in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1646.

Reader,
THou art presented with the Second Part of Gangraena, declaring some other
(not infirmities of the Saints, as some men speak, but) abominations of men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, and a vindication of those few
particulars of the former Treatise, which were excepted against; The Author
has proceeded in this Labor, not to please himself (what pleasure can it be
to rake in a Dunghill?) but to preserve thee; The discovery of Errors is, (by
the blessing of God) the prevention of them, in which regard the Labors of
Adversus ^aereses.
Epiphanius, Ad quod vult Deum.
Augustine, De haeresibus.
Philastrius, H^reticarum Fabularum.
Theodoret, of old, of Contra libertinos Anabaptistas, Servetum.
Calvin, De Haeresibus.
Danus, and others of late, published for this end, have been, and are of great
esteem in the Church of God; And I make no question but these Labors of this
Author, as they now find acceptance with judicious and godly Christians, so
also in future times will outlive the calumnies by Sectaries cast upon them,
and our posterity will admire, what is by us undervalued; Let not clamours of
men, who call light darkness, and darkness light, discourage thee from
reading, it does not me from approving that this Treatise be imprinted.

Imprimatur

JAMES CRANFORD.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Good Reader,
It Is my lot (so divine Providence is pleased to order it) that in my conflicts
for Truth, and against Error, I should not enter the field and fight single
combats, but encounter with many: My Antapologia was an Answer unto five men,
esteemed Giants by many of these times; who though they were five to one, yet
by the good hand of God that was with me in that work, I keep the field till
this day, neither they nor any for them (notwithstanding all the great threats
given out) having yet engaged against me in that cause. Now in this present
book, consisting partly of a Reply, I have to do with Three, a three-headed
Cerberus, the three-bodied monster Geryon: The Apologists were fair smooth men
in comparison of these, their voice was the voice of Jacob; but these are
hairy, rough, wild red men, especially, Cretensis: These are grown higher, are
gone farther, and are more daring then the former; and yet I doubt not but he
that then brought me off with safety and honor too, will also now stand by
me, and having delivered me from the lion and the bear, these uncircumcised
Philistims, especially Goliath Goodwin shall be as one of them. Whilst I was
making this Reply, had even finished it, striking off this three-headed
Cerberus, new heads of that monstrous Hydra of Sectarism sprung up, which the
Reader shall also find have their deaths wound too in this present Book; and
yet after all these heads cut off, I expect a great red Dragon having seven
heads, and seven horn, and seven crowns upon his heads; but let as many
Sectaries come forth as will, I shall sing with David, Psalm. 27.3. Though an
Host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: And besides my Reply to
the Answers made against my Book entitled Gangraena, the Reader shall find in
this Book more work for the Sectaries, the Second Part of Gangraena, a
Discovery of more Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and Proceedings of the
Sectaries, wherein I have not only laid down many Errors, Heresies, and
Proceedings of the Sectaries not touched before, but some greater, stranger,
higher Heresies and Blasphemies, and some that are more against the second
Table, and destructive to the civil Laws and peace of Kingdoms, which
Sectaries in their pleading for Tolerations seem to exempt out of the number of
Errors to be tolerated; yea, I desire the Reader to take notice there are some
things spoken of in this present Book, some Blasphemies, etc. done by
Sectaries, that the like or worse are not to he found in any age since the
coming of Christ, nay I think not since the Creation of the world, as that
Blasphemy of one Page 162, 163. of this present Book; and that, page 8.
John Boggis. Now that the Reader may the more profit by this work, and not
stumble in the Entrance, I shall premise three things whereby to remove a few
prejudices that may be in the minds of some men, both against the matter and
manner of this Book.

1 It Is objected, The bringing upon the stage matters of fact, and the practices
of some men against a way, is not a right course to convince a way to be
naught, nor the followers of it of their errors: Arguments and Reasons are the
way to satisfy men. Answ. I have spoken to this objection in the first part of
Gangraena, page 76. and the Reader may find more said to it in this second
part, page 79, 80. And therefore that which I shall say here is this. Such
discoveries as these, are a more sensible practical way of confutation of the
Sectaries to the body of the people of the Kingdom, then so many syllogismes
and arguments; they can understand these when they cannot perceive an argument;
and Christ himself, in speaking against false prophets, says, By their fruits
you shall know them: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? etc.
And the Apostles in their speaking against the Heretics and heresies of their
times, confuted them thus by their practices and ways: Whosoeverdoes but
observe the passages in the Epistles of Peter, Jude, Paul, shall find this
true.

And whereas it is said by some of them, if they would do so by the
Presbyterians, they could show as many Errors held by some Presbyterians, and
as bad practices, etc. and so recriminate. I answer, suppose they could, 1. Yet
there is not the same reason in diverse respects; but I will only give one
instance, namely this difference: The Anabaptists, Independents, etc. have
their Church way and government up, they are in the practice and possession of
it, they may use it, and do to the utmost, to suppress Errors, Scandals, in
the power of censures, in admitting of none but whom the body allows, etc. and
yet in the free practice of it, and under it, all these Errors grow, and men
fall from one thing to another, as all men see; but now those who are in their
judgment for Presbyterian Government in this Kingdom, they enjoy it not, have
not the benefit of it to censure scandalous persons, suppress any Errors, or
to do any Acts of Government at all, but all lies waste. 2. I deny that the
Sectaries can show men who are Presbyterians (though they want the benefit of
the Government) that fall into those Errors, Blasphemies, Practices which the
Sectaries do, it is a mere flourish, they can show no such thing; nay, I am
confident that among all the Presbyterian Ministers and chief members who have
appeared and acted for that way, since Presbyterians, the Sectaries cannot
instance in one man like to hundreds and thousands of their Sectaries, either
for Errors in judgment, or looseness in life.

2. It Is objected it is an unchristian way to bring men's names upon the stage, it is
to much to speak against a way from the Practices of some of that way, but to
name men in print, and publikly to brand them, this is worse. Ans. I could give
many Answers to justify this, and show the examples both of Fathers and the
holiest, judiciousest modern Writers who practiced this, as Calvin in his
Tractate against Libertines, naming Quintinus, etc. and giving reasons there by
way of Answer to this very objection of naming men, but I cannot now insist
upon it: all I will say is this, for my own part it is much against my genius and
temper to do it, for naturally I do not love to offend any, or to contend with
any man, but to comply and please all; besides, I am sensible of the hatred,
reproaches, dangers I am liable to for doing it, but a necessity is laid upon
me to preserve the people, and to give them warning to beware of wolves in
sheeps clothing; and as I hold my self bound in conscience to write Books to
discover the errors and opinions of such ways, so to name the persons of
prime notorious Sectaries who are sticklers, (not of all men who are misled,
or in some lesser matters mistaken) and that from the example of the Apostle
Paul, who does not only name the errors, ways, but the men themselves, as
Hymeneus, Philetus, Alexander, Phygellus, Hermogenes, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy
2.17. 2 Timothy 1.14, 15. and 4.14, 15.

3. Let no godly person be offended at my Book, if the style of it be quick and
smart, and if I speak sometimes a little sharply to Cretensis; but rather let
them consider how unworthily (not only unbecoming a Christian, but a man) he
has dealt with me and all Presbyterians in his Answer, discovering such
unsufferable pride, arrogancy, scornfulnesse of spirit toward all
Presbyterians who fall not down to the golden calves of his opinions of
Imputation of faith, Independency, etc. as that there seems no way left to
recover him but to deal a little roundly with him, and lay open his folly;
besides, the Apostle Paul speaking of the Cretians, who are always liars,
says, Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith. In
one word, Cretensis in all his Answers is too like those spoken of in 2 Samuel
23.6. that must be thrust away as thorns, because they cannot be taken with
hands: the man that must touch him had need be fenced with iron and the staff
of a spear: Cretensis is a man so foul-mouthed in all kind of filthy language,
that his maid had need seowr his mouth always with a wisp when he goes to
write any Book. But to hold the good Reader no longer in the porch, let we
earnestly entreat thy prayers to God for his gracious assistance, protection,
supporting of him who is resolved to spend and be spent, and to run all
hazzards for the truth of God and his Churches^ against the errors of the
times; yea, and if he be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith, he joys, and will rejoice.

Thine in Christ, THOMAS EDWARDS.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
ALthough there be already at the Press a full Reply to the pretended Answers
made by Mr. Saltmarsh, Mr. Walwyn, and Mr. John Goodwin, against my late Book
entitled Gangraena; yea, and some part thereof printed; yet considering not
only the three bodied Monster Geryon, and the three headed Cerberus, which for
present I have to grapple and conflict withal, but that Hydra also, ready to
rise up in their place, therefore that I may both mortally wound the heads of
these Dragons, and cut off others as they are springing, and strike once for
all in defense of Gangrena: my Reply cannot but be somewhat large, and so of
necessity must take up more time for the perfecting and publishing of it
(especially considering my employments in frequent constant preaching, besides
all other occasions) then at this time I am contented to be kept from coming
abroad in Print.

And therefore for preventing the Sectaries glorying, and triumphing too much in
their Answers, and their possessing many people against my Book, as if it were
a Book of lies, and that I could not make proof of, or give a good account to
the world of what I have written; as also from interpreting my silence (though
but during a time simply necessary to give a full Answer) a repenting of
writing my late Book and a retreating from that cause wherein I have so much
appeared (as Master A word more to Mr. Edwards page 1. Sir, until I perceive
the contrary, I cannot but hope that I have prevailed something with you
toward a change of your mind, and that you have begun to repent you of the
evil you have done by publishing your Book entitled the Gangraena.
Walwyn seems to do) I have thought it necessary in the Interim, till my larger
Reply can come forth, to set forth a few sheets to declare my mind to all the
world, and to take away all just occasion from men of speaking against my late
Book: Now this Book being of the same nature and kind with Gangraena, besides a
brief Answer to some main Objections made against it, is not only an Addition
of more Errors to the former Catalogue, a higher Discovery of the ways and
Practices of the Sectaries, a further confirmation of the truth of things
contained in Gangraena, but an assurance to the Reader of my Resolution and
Constancy, by the grace of God, in opposing Errors and Sects maugre all the
malice, wrath and power of Hell; as also a satisfaction in part to the most
material things objected by Master Saltmarsh, Mr. Walwyn, Mr. Goodwin, against
my Book; and as I am persuaded this Discourse will not be without its use for
the present, so I question not when my full Reply to these three Pamphlets
shall come abroad (of which this Book is the forerunner, and prepares the way)
not only all rational and unprejudiced men, who shall read and consider, will
be satisfied by it; but my Antagonists will be laid so open and bare, as their
folly and shame shall be manifested to al men, and themselves and their friends
for them will wish a hundred times they had been asleep in their beds when they
meddled with Gangraena; yea Gangraena, and this defense of it will prove so
incurable a Gangren to them, that they shall never be cured of it by all the
Mountebanck quacksalving drugs and tricks of all the Sectaries of this time;
and though for a short time confident lying may please and take with many, yet
as Solomon speaks, the lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a lying
tongue is but for a moment; and as Hierom. Mendacia ad modicum placent, sed diu
non durant.

A Fresh and further DISCOVERY OF THE ERRORS and Pernicious Practices of the
SECTARIES in ENGLAND.
HAving laid down in my Book entitled Gangraena, 180. Errors vented in these
times, besides an Addition of some Errors mentioned in the Appendix, and not
enumerated in the former Catalogue. I do here further present the Reader with a
Catalogue of more Errors not before named, neither, in the first, nor second
Edition of my Book: As also a Relation of more Stories and Practices, together
with some new Letters concerning them; by all which it will appear that the
plague of Sectarisme rages more and more, putting forth Symptoms presaging
death and destruction both to Church and State, if not timely prevented.

Additionall ERRORS to the former Catalogue of ERRORS, HERESIES, etc.
1 THat no Opinion is so dangerous or Heretical as that of compulsion in
things of Religion.

2. That Kingly government among Nations and Commonwealths is unlawful, and
that for Kings it cannot be said to what use they serve, or that there is any
use of them, except to debauch and vex a people.

3. It is unlawful for Christians to eat any Swines flesh in regard the Devils
once entered into the herd of Swine.

4. It Is unlawful to eat any manner of blood in any kind of thing whatsoever,
and that Black-puddings are unhallowed meat, and that the eating of
Black-puddings is a barbarous custom.

5. That the Devils never sinned, nor have any sin.

Saltmarsh flowing of Christ's blood. page 14.
6. That Judas, Cain, and all the damned, yea all the Devils shall be saved at
last; and that there are no hell torments to eternity.

7. Christ has repented perfectly, he has sorrowed for sin perfectly, and he
has repented for us.

8. Faith is not to be the guide of Reason, but Reason the guide of Faith, nor
is a man to believe any thing in Scripture, further then he sees Reason to
induce him

9. That children of believers have more then a faederall holiness, an inward
real holiness.

10. Christ's presence in Heaven, or that Christ is present in Heaven, cannot be
proved by the Scriptures.

11. Some of the Sectaries do affirm and hold they have not only had
Revelations, but they have seen Visions also.

12. The means of God revealing himself and his mind and will to his servants
in reference to their salvation, is immediately by himself, without Scripture,
without Ordinances, Ministers, or any other means.

13. That it is unlawful to give thanks to God after meat received, though it
be lawful to do it before eating of meat.

14. That singing of David's Psalms is blasphemy, and telling of lies.

15. That there is no Justification by Faith, but Faith is only a manifestation
of our Justification.

16. That Repentance is a work of the Law, and so not to be performed by
Christians; and that Christians have nothing to do at all, but only to sit
still, hear and believe.

17. Some Sectaries hold they cannot sin, but if they sin, Christ sins in them,
he does all, they are acted by him in all.

18. All set times of private prayers as morning and evening, etc. are not only
unlawful and superstitious, but they are not to pray at all, nor give thanks,
nor confess sin, but admire only the Grace of God, that is all they must do.

19. That hellfire never had been, if Jesus Christ had not come.

20. That Jesus Christ delivered never a soul from Hellfire.

21. That all appointed set meetings of many Christians to pray, hear, confer,
or perform any holy service, whether in a Church way, or out of a Church way,
are unwarrantable, and unlawful, only occasionally if Christians meet in a
street, or at a house going to visit friends in civility, they may discourse
and talk one with another in points of Religion as they do of other matters.

22. That in the first Conversion of a sinner there ought to be no sorrow nor
repentance for sin, God requires none at all.

23. That some Believers are as perfect here, as ever they shall be in Heaven,
only they do not see the Lord here with their bodily eyes.

And for a conclusion of this matter, namely for the enumeration of Additionall
Errors, I shall add only this which I received from the mouth of a godly
Minister, who ha^ing conversed with some Sectaries that are Soldiers and
Troopers, gave me this answer, March 13. upon a question propounded by me what
strange opinions do they hold. They hold (says he) all opinions whatsoever
that are against the power of godliness, and the honor of Christ.

An Extract of a Letter lately sent me from a learned and godly Minister in
Essex.
Good M. Edwards,
I Thank you for your Book: Oats whom you mention in your Book, has been
sowing his Tares, Boolimong, and wild Oats in these parts these five weeks
without any control, has seduced hundreds, and dipped many in Booking River
and when that's done he has a The new Converts (as it seems by the Relation
here) make a Feast for the Church, and the Dipper upon their entrance into is
by dipping, and are then admitted to that they call the Lords Supper.
Feast in the night, and at the end of that the Lords Supper. All opera
tenebrarum. No Magistrate in the Country dare meddle with him, for they say
they have hunted these out of the country into their Dens in London, and
imprisoned some, and they are released, and sent like decoy Ducks into the
country to fetch in more; so that they go on in diverse parts of Essex with the
greatest confidence and insolency that can be imagined. M. Archer of Halsted
preaches boldly against Parliament, Assembly, Directory, Ministry and all: I
pray you let me hear whether there be any hope of light shining out of
darkness, Ellis an Antinomian, brother to Ellis of Colchester the Independent,
married a widow, got two hundred pounds of hers, made her believe he would
carry her to his friends in the North, but left her by the way, and ran away
with the two hundred pounds. That miscreant seduced many. Your book does much
good: I shall pray God to speed your Plough, who am

Your assured friend

An Extract of a Letter written to me last week from a learned and godly
Minister in Colchester, together with a Relation of a Monster lately born there
of Parents who are Sectaries.
SIr, I have sent you in this enclosed, the true Story of the monstrous birth
in our Town. I thank you for your Book: The Sectaries rage at it, but it is a
sign it does the more good. Thus beseeching the great God to continue your
courage and resolution for his name to the utmost, I rest.

Your affectionate Brother in the Lord.


Memorandum, that upon the 18. day of Febr. 1645. one Goodwife Cosens of Peter
Parish in Colchester brought forth two children both dead, the one a perfect
child the other was born without a head, having upon the breast some characters
of a face, nose, and eyes, wanting one arm and the other arm being rather the
stump of an arm, ended in a crotch of two fingers, with something like a thumb
coming out of one side of it: Downward one of the feet was perfect, the other
foot wanted a heel, and had only two toes which grew forward, and another toe
growing out of one side of it. The Father of this Monster is a Separatist,
frequenting their congregations an enemy to the baptising of his own chi^dren;
the Mother a hearer in the separated congregations likewise, who resolved
heretofore, that if ever she had any more children, they should never be
baptized. This Relation is affirmed by those of trust and understanding, that
saw this Monster, and know the parties.

An Extract of a Letter sent me from a This Commander is not in the service of
the West, belonging to any of the Regiments of that Army, under the command of
Sir Thomas Fairfax, but his command is in another part of the Kingdom.
Commander now in the Parliament service, dated December. 29. 1645.
SIR,

THe constant practice of many Officers and soldiers with them, was to
exclaim against their Ministers wheresoever we marched, pressing them and
their adherents more then any other; they did dscourage the people, generally
affirming that the best of our Preachers were Popish, and that it was unlawful
to hear them, but did hope to see them all We see the liberty of conscience
Sectaries will give, if they had power.
pact to Rome, and their superstitious Steeple Houses pulled down to the ground;
great variety of opinion was amongst our Officers and Soldiers, some affirming
that they had had Revelations and seen Visions, al of them at liberty to argue
and hold what fantastical opinion they pleased, those were the men most
countenanced, and soonest raised to preferment; some of them would take upon
them to prophecy, saying, they should live to see all lording power laid aside
in this Kingdom. In my distress when the enemy was upon me, I sent to most
parts adjacent for assistance, but could have none, only from one place came to
me forty Volunteers, with some two or three Officers, professing thenselves all
Independents, and they told me they hoped to find me so, and if I should
continue still in my opinion for Presbytery, they thought their labor ill
spent; they staid with me all night, and the next day there came to them a
Leiutenant, a most dangerous fellow, maintaining most horrid opinions, as you
may see by the information which is truth; The Relation follows after attested
by the hands of witnesses.
this Lieutenant was to preach to them in a private house, which I had notice
of, and did prevent him, which they took very ill of me, and immediately they
left me, and marched away with Lieutenant -- Since, one of the chiefest of them
sent me word by our Quartermaster, that I should have little or no pay, so
long as I staid in -- if I did not agree and side with -- I find the m^^sage
too true, for I find little pay or none. Sir, I could say much more of their
practices against me and others, but I should be too tedious; but this more I
shall add, I never marched where I heard more talk of godliness, and less
practice of it in my observation, for they are cruel without mercy, covetous
without measure, professing self-denial, yet leave no stone un-turned to
advance there estates and honors. The Lord prevent their wicked designs, and
keep this Kingdom from being ruined by such a wicked people, Sir, I rest.

Your servant

A Relation of some passages of a great Sectarie, a Lieutenant about the
beginning of June last. 1645.
HAving had much arguing with him and his adherents in opposition to the
Antinomian way, in the morning wherein they seemed to glory much in the
victory, though I know no cause for it at all: The Lieutenant came courteously
toward even in to my house (as he said) to take his leave of me; which some of
his party perceiving, followed him; and others taking notice of their resort,
followed also: The subject of our discourse was about the means of God
revealing himself, and his mind and will to his servants in reference to their
salvation; He affirmed and maintained violently that God did it immediately by
himself without Scripture, without Ordinances, Ministers, or any other means;
He being asked about the third Person in the Trinity, denied there was any such
thing as a Trinity of persons, but affirmed them to be three Offices; and being
demanded what he thought of Christ, whether the Godhead and manhood were united
in one Person in Heaven: He answered only to the last word, and denied that it
could be proved by the Scriptures Christ's presence in Heaven; and when some
Scriptures were produced, which had reference to his Resurrection and
Ascension, he replied, that it was a great question, whether there was a
Resurrection or not; he said he did not deny it absolutely, but that he made a
great question of it: At the parting, before him I replied to the bystanders,
Gentlemen, if I should have come and a told you that this Gentleman had denied
the Trinity of persons, and Christ's presence in Heaven* and that he called in
question the Resurrection, you would not have believed me, had not your own
ears heard the same.

This is attested and subscribed by the hand of a godly Minister in whose
persence all this was ^pken, together with a Relation of the names of the other
^^^nesses, persons of quality and worth, who were all present at this
Discourse, and I have the Original in my power to porduce upon any occasion.

A Relation of some Stories, and remarkable Passages concerning the Sectaries.
THere is one Lawrence Clarkson, a Seeker, spoken of in my Gangraena, page 104,
and 105. who put forth a Pamphlet called The Pilgrimage of Saints, wherein are
many passages highly derogatory to the Scriptures, denying them to be the rule
of a Christian, or that in Doctrine or Practice half of Gods glory was revealed
as yet; this man a Tailor and a Blasphemer preached on the Lords day, March
eight, at Bow-Church in Cheapside, in the afternoon: He began his prayer to
God, with Right Honorable Lord God, and in his Prayer he prayed that God would
bless the Kings Army, and bless the Saints both in the Parliaments Army and
the Kings, his Sermon was a Rapsody of nonsense. This was not done in a corner,
but in a great and full Audience; there was present at this Sermon one Member
of the House of Commons, if not more, besides diverse other persons of quality;
and though this Clarkson was in London some time after this, and may be still
for ought that I know, yet was he never questioned, nor called to any account
for this, or for his Pilgrimage of Saints, as ever I could learn.

Saturday, March ^he seventh, a Minister who preached at Martins near
White Hall, told me, that lately since my Book came forth, he preaching in a
Sermon against sin and the Devil, a woman on the morrow came to him (a
Nurse-keeper dwelling in Clare street) and questioned with him about his
Sermon, asking him his grounds for speaking of sin and the Devil, the Minister
brought some places of Scripture, she slighted the Scriptures, and denied
there was any such thing as sin, or Hell, or the Devil, or temptation, or the
holy Ghost, or Scriptures; she said, all the Hell that was, was the darkness
of the night; she denied that to kill a man, to commit adultery, or steal a
man's goods was sin; and the Minister asking her, what do you make your self,
she answered two several times, I am that I am; All this, and a great deal
more, was related to me by the Minister, who (as he said) had acqainted an
Earl with it and many others; and I spoke with one Citizen who heard this
Relation from him, and he promised to give it me at large in writing under his
hand.

Tuesday March 17. on the day that a Committee of Lords and Commons came down
to Guild Hall to the Common Council concerning their late Petition; many
Sectaries from all parts of the City and Suburbs, came to Guild Hall, where,
from about four a clock, till about nine, the Sectaries in several companies
and knots in the Hall, 30.40. and more in some companies, vented boldly, and
pleaded for all sorts of opinions, the Antinomian opinions, the Anabaptisticall
opinions, etc. pleading for a general Toleration of all Sects, yea, some
maintained that no immortal spirit could sin, or be capable of sin; and it
being objected, what say you to the Devils? they denied the Devils ever sinned
or could sin: many other horrid opinions were maintained at the same time, so
that it is believed, that never since Guild Hall was built, there was so much
wickedness and error broacht and maintained openly in it as at that time.
Among many godly orthodox Christians, who were at that time in Guild Hall, and
opposed the Sectaries in their pleading thus for all Errors, and a general
Tolleration; there was one godly Citizen who told me this story of himsef, that
he reasoning with several of the Sectaries against their opinions, and against
a Toleration, the next day being the eighteenth of March, an Independent Woollen
Draper to whom he had workt almost twenty years, took away his work from him,
and said he should have no more work of his, because the night before this
Citizen had argued against Independency, saying it was a Schism; whereupon
this Citizen dealt plainly with this Wollen-Draper, and told him, Sir, will you
put me by my work, which is my living, for my conscience? is not this
Persecution? will you have your consciences, and shall not we enjoy ours? would
you be tolerated, and will not you tolerate us?

On the ninteenth of March a Pamphlet called The last warning to all the
Inbitants of the City of London, came abroad in Print, which Pamphlet speaks
against all Kingly government, receiving the King in again, and against all
established Ecclesiastical government, besides many other dangerous passages
in it: Now this Book was spread abroad and dispersed up and down by Sectaries,
as for instance, one Samuel Fulcher an Egge-man, rebaptized by one Crab, a
Feltmaker, was the 21. day of March examined before a Justice of Peace for
spreading this Book called the last warning to London, and confessed he had
sold six or seven of them All kind of unlicenced Books, that make any ways for
the Sects, and against Presbyterians, are sold at his shop, and it is given out
the man^^els them, but not the Master.
One Overton an Independent Bookseller and a member of Mr. John Goodwins
Church, or his man for him, sold many of them to several persons as I can
prove: One Calvert a Sectary and a Bookseller on Ludgate Hill sold and
dispersed many of these Books; and so one Barber an Anabaptist boasted two
days after the Book came forth, naming this Pamphlet, that there was a Book
come forth had cut the legs of the Presbyterian government, and asked a Citizen
if he had not seen it.

In N^rthampton-shire a great Sectary, and a chief servant to a Knight of that
Country, would not keep the day of Thanksgiving for the Victory at Naseby, but
was so far from keeping it himself, that he would not suffer the Knights
tenants to keep it, or to go to Church but made them carry dung all day, as I
have been informed from one who knows it certainly; but what do I relating one
instance, when as it is notorious that many of the Sectaries, (Mr. Goodwins and
Mr. Saltmarshes Saints) keep not at all, neither days of public
Thanksgivings, nor of public Fasts, but do all kind of s^rvile work and
worldly businesses on those days, yea on the public Fast days, feast and are
eating of roast meat and good cheer, when Gods Saints and servants are humbling
and afflicting their souls?

There is an Independent Minister who lives in London (as I have it from two
sufficient witnesses that heard it) said that the Scots coming into England
would hinder the Reformation of Religion here, and that if he had been in
England at that time when the Scots came first in, he would have preached to
have stird up the people against them, either not to have suffered them to come
in, or being come in, to have beat them out. The same Minister discoursing and
reasoning about the Church way, it was answered to him by a Citizen, that if it
were set up in London, the Independents could not expect above a twentieth part
should be for it, and what should become of all other people? this Independent
Minister replied, it was no matter what became of them, though they turned
Mahumetans, so the Church of Christ might prosper.

A godly Minister who came out of Essex, related to me not long since, that An
Anabaptisticall Emissary
Oats was now preaching in that Country, and had been there about six weeks,
sometimes keeping his Randevouze at one Town, sometimes at another, sometimes
at Tarling, sometimes at Bocking, sometimes at Braintry, and other places, and
that many loose persons of the Country follow him, he preaching besides his
Anabaptisticall opinions, the Arminian points; and this Minister spoke it upon
his knowledge* that notorious Whoremongers and Drunkards follow him, such as
have been convicted by witnesses, and taken notice of by the Country, and are
such still, yet go after him where he preaches from place to place.

There are two Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, civil and well disposed men, who
out of novelty went to hear the women preach, and after Mistress Attaway the
Lace-woman had finished her exercise, these two Gentlemen had some discourse
with her, and among other passages she spoke to them of Master Milton^ Doctrine
of Divorce, and asked them what they thought of it, saying, it was a point to
be considered of; and that she for her part would look more into it, for she
had an unsanctified husband, that did not walk in the way of Sion, nor speak
the language of Canaan; and how accordingly she has practiced it in running
away with another woman's husband, is now sufficiently known to Mr. Goodwin and
Mr. Saltmarsh, and is one of the lies like all the rest in Mr. Edwards
Gangr^ena; This wretched woman one of Mr. Goodwins and Mr. Saltm^rshes Saints
(as they make all without any distinction, whom I speak of in Gangraena) among
other new truths and glorious lights, preached, that all the Devils should be
saved, alleging that place in Zachary, sending forth thy prisoners out of the
pit wherein there is no water, against which Doctrine one of the company
objected, and said, sister, what say you to that of Matthew. 25. Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels? unto
which Mistress Attaway replied, that by everlasting in that place was meant
while day and night lasted, but not eternal after day and night were ended.

March 13. Two honest Citizens coming to me about some Sermons an Independent
Minister had preached in London, one of them told me he lately had a man and
maidservant who were Anabaptists, and that when he was abed they would set up
and juncket together, making Sack-possets and such like provision of his purse,
and in sum, this male Anabaptist got the female Anabaptist with child, and
after married her: The Master speaking to him of breach of Covenant, how he had
covenanted not to marry in the time of his Apprentiship till his years were
expired, he said it was a divelish Covenant, and so would not keep it.

On the sixteenth of March, a Member of the Assembly of Divines related this
following story for a certain truth, which he knew to be so, only would not
name the persons; that a Sectary, (one of Master Goodwins and Master
Saltmarshes Saints and believers) a Seeker by Sect, sought to gain the good
will of a Virgin to be his wife, and when she consented and was contented to
it, he propounded that they might lie together at nigh^, at which motion she
startled, saying, not till we are married, to which answer this Seeker replied,
that marriage was but an idle Ceremony, they were now man and wife before God,
having promised one another, whereupon they went to bed together, and next
morning after the Seeker had satisfied his lust, he ran quite away, and left
his bride, and instead of one Seeker there were two, the daughter thus
forsaken, and her mother (who was widow) to seek after him.

In a Book lately printed, called the Ordinance for Tyths Dismounted, (which
book also was given into the hands of one Parliament man (as I can prove) by a
great Sectary who may justly be thought the Author of it) there are such
passages of reproach against the Parliament as are not to be paralled in any
writings, except some of the Sectaries: In page 6.7, 8.40. this Sectarie
speaking of a passage in the Ordinance of Tyths made by the Lords and Commons,
has these following words, Had not such a passage gone under the Title of the
Lords and Commons who are chosen for the weal of the people, I should not have
judged it an act of humanity, but rather the result of an Hell-bred conspiracy
by the Devil and his Angels to confound us with their unreasonable malice,
etc. and this was the first stone these Master Builders laid in their blessed
Reformation.

And in another place of the Book, speaking by way of scorn, calling it that
most religious and spiritual Ordinance for the supper, as absolute Ordinances,
as unalterable at the Directory, these words are brought in, For indeed at the
first on set it was not policy to rush such a diabolical and villainous
invention point blanck upon us, with an It is decreed and ordained by the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament. But after a more mysterious manner of
ordination, slily intrude it upon us unawares in the godly and specious vizor
of Rules and Directions, as if our Parliament men had such a spiritual and
holy ear over us, to give us such wholesome and pious Directions, while indeed
under this innocent Apparition in the shape of Lambs they ar^ no other then
ravening Wolves, rending and tearing us in pieces; and again, speaking of
Parliament men in that Ordinance for Tyths Dismounted there are these words,
But what they are, let all the people judge, let them consider whether there
can be the least dram of honesty or Religion in them, or respect to the liberty
of the freeborn Nation therein, seeing they lay upon us a heavier yoke then
ever was laid upon us in the days of the Bishop^. And again, this Sectary, the
Author of the Ordinance for Tyths Dismounted, speaks thus of the Parliaments
Ordinance concerning suspending scandalous persons from the Lords Supper. It
will be the greatest thraldom and bondage that ever the Kingdom was involved
into, and by this Ordinance of the Supper, I am afraid we shall all go
supperlesse to bed: and speaking of the Classes Synods, calling them High
Commissions, he adds, if we can find no justice there, we may appeal
(forsooth) Observe here both blasphemy and scoffing of the Parliament in a high
manner.
to our Gods themselves, the Parliament (life everlasting, world without end)
of whom, how may we expect mercy or justice then, that thus before hand whip us
with the stings of Scorpions, and grind us between the devouring jaws of such
develish tyrannical Courts which will even crush our bones in pieces, and
squeese out our very marrow and juice, and suck out our very hearts blood like
so many greedy Cannibals? Vid. plur. ibid.

The Sectaries generally cannot endure any man who speaks against, or complains
to Authority of any who b^oach Errors (though never so great) as for example,
a godly understanding Christian told me within these three days, that because
he complained of a man who denies both the Son and the holy Ghost to be God,
therefore the Independents and all the Sectaries among whom he lives deadly
hate and revile him; and since the time that the weekly news Books have
mentioned a Vote to be passed in the House of Commons for drawing up an
Ordinance against Paul Best that Anti^rinitarian and Blasphemer, some of the
Sectaries have spoken boldly and bitterly against it, and saying they would be
loath to be any of them that should give a voice, or have a hand in the
proceedings against him, with other words to that effect.

There is an Independent of Mr. Carters Church, who speaking against our
public Assemblies, often quotes that Scripture in Rev. 17.5. Babylon the
great, the mother of Harlot^, interpreting it thus, Rome is the mother Church,
and all the Parish Congregations of England are the daughters, which are
Harlots* and this having been objected against this Interpretation, that the
Apologists acknowledge many of our Congregations to be true Churches, he and
diverse other Independents say, they are not of the Apologists minds.

The Sect of Seekers grows very much, and all sorts of Sectaries turn Seekers;
many leave the Congregations of Independents, Anabaptists, and fall to be
Seekers, and not only people, but Ministers also; and whosoever lives but few
years (if the Sects be suffered to go on) will see that all the other Sects of
Independents, Brownists, Antinomians, Anabaptists, will be swallowed up in the
Seekers, alias Libertines, many are gone already, and multitudes are going that
way, and the issue of these Sects and Schisms will be, that all will end in a
looseness and licentiousness of living.

A HYMN which some of the Antinomians do sing at their meetings instead of
DAVID'S Psalms.
THe news is good, Christ shed, his blood,
our peace is made in Heaven;
And now he is gone up to his Throne,
all power to him is given.
2
Our glory is great, we are complete
in Gods great love we stand,
We are on high exalted by
Christ's victorious hand.
3
We once near lost, to hell did post,
but God in mercy found us,
And now he has taught us his path,
and with his mercy crowned us.
4
Shall sin or hell Gods people quell,
or ever keep them under?
No, Christ has died, sin purifide
and hell bands rent in sunder.
5
The blood of Christ our great High Priest,
which once for us was shed,
Has purged the blot, and cleans'd the spot
wherewith we were besmeared.
6
A glorious thing, a wonder strong
that sin should not defile,
And those are all to Christ more dear
that once did seem so vile.
7
All sin we find is out of mind,
the Saints are made divine
First in the love of God above
in glory they do shine.
8
None are so dear, nor yet so near,
with God they are made one,
Who now does see them sure to be
as is his only Son.
9
Christ is our guide, we cannot slide,
nor never fall away;
Our state is sure, and must endure
though all things else decay.
10
Then let us be bold, our heads uphold,
the time is drawing nigh
When we shall reign, and eke remain
with God eternally.
11
Let all base fears, and needless cares
out of our souls remove,
With speed let us fly to God on high
and dwell with him above. Amen, Amen.
And it is remarkable, that now for present the best Independent Churches and
Congregations are mixed Assemblies and medlies, consisting of persons whereof
some are Anabaptists, some Antinomians, some Libertines, others hold Arminian
and Socinian Tenets; those who for mixtures in manners, and because of some
persons not so holy in their lives, made a Schism in the Church, have worse
mixtures among themselves in Doctrine, a linsey wolsey compounded Religion; I
do not think there is any one Independent Church of three years standing, and
that has attained to the number of between 30. and 40. members, but had, or
has in it some Anabaptists, Antinomians, Seekers, or else persons holding one
or other odd and strange opinion. Mr. Symonds Independent Church at Roterdam
is overgrown with Anabaptisme, and he has written into England that he is so
pestered with Anabaptists, that he knew not what to do; Mr. Sympsons Church
has bred diverse Seekers, Mr. L^ckiers Antinomians, Master John Goodwins
company is an unclean Conventicle, where the spirit of Error and pride
prevails in most, the unclean spirit being entered there into himself and his
people with seven evil spirits, Socinian, Arminian, Popish, Anabaptisticall,
Libertine Tenets being held by himself and many of his people. And what shall I
say more, it will be too long to tell of what I have heard of some members in
Mr. Carters, Mr. Cradock^, Mr. Brisco, Mr. Barlets Churches concerning opinions
they hold.

March 21. I was informed for certain, that a young maiden buying in the Sirand
of a Goldsmith a gold Ring, the young man in the shop who was selling it her,
asked her whether she was to be married (for the Ring was much of the size of a
marriage Ring) she answered no, nor did not know whether ever she should be
married; he questioned further with her, what use she bought if for; after some
discourse together, she told him she bought it to give to the Minister of the
Church into which she was to be admitted a member; and the young man further
conferring with her, she told him she was to be of the Congregationall way, and
of a Church where the Minister was a man of precious gifts. It has been
related to me also from good hands, and if there be any mistake in the
Relation, I desire the Independent Ministers to clear wherein, namely, that in
some of their Congregations, maidservants out of their wages, do allow so much
yearly as five or six shillings to their Ministers, that some poor godly
persons who have expressed great desire to be of their Church way, and gone to
some Independent Ministers to be admitted to Church Fellowship, could not
because of their poverty; that persons of great rank and quality, as some
Ladies are admitted to their Churches, in a more favorable way, and not after
the ordinary manner; and that one Lady at least (though no member of any
Independent Church but of a Presbyteriall) has been admitted to the Lords
Supper among them, and her child was to have been baptized by an Independent
Minister, but that it died the very day appointed for the baptizing of it; that
in one of the Independent Churches here in London, a rich widow who was there a
member, refused to give her consent to one in way of marriage (whom otherwise
she liked and entertained) till he yielded to settle twenty pounds a year upon
her Independent Minister during his life; and lastly, that some of the
Independent Ministers have from some one of their members, 20.30. li. or better
per annum; and a Minister is named who has fifty five pounds yearly from three
members of his Church, forty pounds from two, and fifteen pounds from a third.

A Disputation held at the Spitle about the Immortality of the soul by some
Anabaptists, as Lam, Battee, and others on the day of public Thanksgiving for
Dartmouths being given up into the hands of the Parliament.
MY Lord Major hearing of a great concourse of people that were to meet upon
such a business, having a respect to the peace and good government of this
City, sent two of the Marshals men to Lam to the Spitle, where they were met to
dispute, but had not yet begun, who told Lam that may Lord Major had sent them
to him to forbid him or them to dispute as upon this day; Lam answered the
Officers he would go up and acquaint the brethren, which he did, standing in a
place like a desk above the people at one end of the room, and Battee at the
other: The first thing that Lam spoke of, was, that my Lord Major had sent to
forbid their meeting, or rather to desire them not to dispute as upon this day;
Battee stood up and said that Mr. Major was a limb of Antichrist, and that he
was a persecutor of the brethren, and that he did question what power or
authority he had to forbid them; he was sure the Parliament gave him no such
power, but gave them liberty to use their consciences, and for his part he
durst undertake to make it good to Master Major (calling my Lord Major in a
most base and scornful manner Master Major.) One Overton that was to be the
Moderatour on Battees side, stood up and said, Brother Lam, had Paul done well
if he had desisted from preaching in the name of Jesus if he had been commanded
by the Highpriests to forbear, had he done well or not? Lam answered no;
whereupon Overton replied in a most scornful proud manner, nor ought we to
obey Master Major; and thus did these men argue the power of my Lord Major for
an hours space; but at the last they came to state the question, and fall to
their dispute; the question was, That God made man, and every part of man of
the dust of the earth; and therefore man, and every part of man must return to
the dust again, which Battee could not prove, nor could Lam well tell how to
answer, but both of them ran off from Scripture to Scripture, never clearing
any one thing to the people; and when they had rambled a long time, that they
could neither of them tell what to say, then one or other stood up, and said,
Brother Lam, or Brother Battee, leave this point to the consideration of the
Brethren, and take up some other; after these two had spent four or five
hours in this confusion, they sat down and rested, and then stands up one
Mellish a Cobbler, and Lawson a Schoolmaster, both Anabaptists, and to work they
went as their Brethren before: Lawson calls to Mellish, and says to him,
Brother Mellish, speak either Categorically or Hypothetically; Mellish answered
Lawson, that he spoke now to him in an unknown tongue, and prayed him to
explain himself; Lawson told Mellish that he was nor fit to dispute if he knew
not the meaning of these words; Mellish replied that if he should stand up and
tell the people that the Moon was made of green Cheese, he did not question but
some would be of his mind.

This Relation was given me under the hand of a godly honest Citizen, who was
an ear and eye witness of all the said passages, who also named to me other
persons that were present, and he delivered me this Relation in writing before
two sufficient witnesses, and declared himself ready to make proof of this
before Authority when ever he should be called.

This following Relation was sent to a godly and able Minister of this City,
(one who has a Pastoral charge in London) and this Minister delivered me the
Original writing, which to a tittle There set down.

Reverend, and much respected,
I Desire you pardon my boldness in imparting to you that which has lately
befaln me: I was in the company of some Antinomians that were very importunate
with me to forsake your teaching, and come among them and harken to their
Preachers, and they prevailed with me so far, that I gave them my promise to
hear their Preachers; but the night following, I had such a terrible dream
which made me break my promise with them; for I dreamed that the Devil would
have pulled me out of the bed, and carried me away with him; then I cried out
in my sleep so loud, that I waked them that were in the Chamber, Lord Jesus
help me, Lord Jesus help me; then me thought the power of God came on my right
hand, and rescued me from Satan: This I take for a warning from God to avoid
their society; and for which I desire that thanks be rendered to God in this
Congregation which I use to frequent.

There is one M^ster Mills a Common Council man, the City Brickler, who has
related it to many, as a thing most certain, that an old acquaintance and
friend of his, an old Papist knowing well all Papists, said to Master Mills,
that now there were but two Sects or sides in England, the Presbyterians and
the Independents; unto which Master Mills objected, how can that be? seeing
there are many Papists; this Papist replied, that to his knowledge all the
Papists in England were Independents; and this Papist further added, that this
Liberty of Conscience and Toleration for all men to enjoy their Religion, was a
blessed thing, and the happiest thing that ever was found out, or words to that
purpose.

There is a Sectary living near the Spitle, a great follower of Master Randall,
who did offer to sell his Bible, and being asked why he would sell it, and what
he would do for a Bible, answered, he could make as good a Book himself. Some
Sectaries do commonly affirm they are not to believe the Scriptures further
then their own Reason does persuade them of the truth of them, and that the
Scriptures are no more the Word of God then the words any man speaks are;
because he could not speak those words but by a power from God.

It has been told me from good hands, that there are a company of persons
about London, who meet weekly to reason and object against the Scriptures;
their meetings were about the Spitle, and since in Hounsditch, and now they
shift places for fear they should be discovered, and surprised; it were good
that Authority would look into it, to find them out; I shall be ready to name
the men from whom I have had such information.

I have been informed lately by diverse honest men, that in Northamptonshire
some of the Soldiers who are Sectaries, and are of that part of the Army which
came out of the West, and belong to that Army in the West, have come into the
Parish Churches, and put by the godly Ministers who should preach, and by force
against the will of the Ministers and people, have set up Captains, and others
of the Soldiers to preach in their Pulpits, and to vent their Fancles and
Errors.


The true Copy of a Letter written to me from a worthy and godly Minister in
Suffolk, in the name, and by the consent and agreement of other Ministers of
the County at a meeting of theirs, and sent up by the hands of a godly Minister
in those parts, who delivered it to me.
Worthy Sir,
YOur Brethren in these parts desire to praise God for you, and for that
courage he has given you to encounter, and publicly to oppose the Sectaries
of these days. God make you as Augustine, Malleum Haereticorum. Sir, this
Bearer, a Minister, an honest neighbor of mine will make a true Relation to
you of some of the late pranks of some Sectaries on both sides of u^. One is of
Oats the Anabaptist (whom your Gangraena takes notice of) that after one of
his private Exercises amongst the weaker vessels, one Wades wise of Stisted in
Essex, seemed to be so affected with him, that she said she would never hear
Minister again: and it may be God intends to make her as good as her word; for
upon this she was taken mad, and remains in a sad distracted condition; and
her husband sent to Master Blackaby, and Master Faircloth (our godly
neighbors) to pray for her. This, one Redgwell an honest man making report of,
was asked if he were not at Oats his Exercise; he answered no; then it was
demanded, was not your wife there? He answered, if he should deny that, he
should sin against God, and tell a lie, for she (he said) was there, but was
never well since. This Bearer can likewise tell you somewhat of Master Archer
of Halsted. Also of one Lancester of Bury a Peddler, and of his opening the
whole Book of Ezra at a private meeting, instead of opening his pack, and of
the prayer that followed his Exercise, etc. Of Master Erbury also, etc. It
would be lost labor for me to make a further Relation by writing of these
things, seeing you shall receive the truth more fully by word of mouth, and by
a faithful Relator: I have no more to say at this time, but that I heartily
pray for you, that God preserve, direct and guide you, and make you more and
more serviceable to him and his Church, in your generation, and to let you know
that I am

Your faithful friend and Brother
From Clare in Suffolk March 30* 1646.

Upon conference with the Minister who brought up this Letter, he related these
following passages to me, and I writ them presently as he spoke them.

Master Erbury (one of those Sectaries spoken of at large in Gangraena, page
109. and 110.) coming lately to Bury in Suffolk, and there exercising in
private, he delivered diverse erroneous things, and at last went so high, as to
deny that Jesus Christ was God, and that he was as much God as ever Jesus
Christ was, or should be.

One Lancester in a private meeting at Bury, condemned all the Ministers of
England for the Sanba^^ats and Tobiahs of this time, that hindered the building
of the Temple, resembling himself, and the Sectaries to those who would build
the Temple, but it was withstood by the Ministers, who hindered it: At that
meeting there was a plain godly man, a solid old Christian of Master Faircloths
congregation who opposed him, and God was so mightily with him, that it turned
to the shame and reproach of this Lancester, and those who adhered to him.

Master Archer of H^lsteed, an Independent, a man who has preached much
against our Ministers and Tyths; at the same time, or thereabouts, when he
preached so against Tyths, used means to procure to himself a great Living in
Essex, of two hundred pounds per annum, and came to some Gentlemen of the
Country for their hands to further the getting of that Living.

An Extract of a Letter sent me from a worthy and godly Minister out of the
Country.
Friend,
YOur last together with the Book, I received. I must confess when I first saw
your Title, I said it was none of those Aulus Gellius calls Illecebra^ ad
ligendum, etc. For what is a Gangraene but an abundance of corrupted blood
inflamed, etc. and yet for your sake I not run but read over the text, and
found it every way answerable: And that you were indeed the Master of that Art,
which (appointing the cure according to the cause) wisely prescribes cutting
and flashing, scarifications, washings, not only with mulsum or water, but
Vinegar and Salt, unguentum E^yptiacum, burning Trochiskes, Ars^nicon
sublimatum, and much more then you have yet applied, considering not only the
creeping of this Canker, but that danger the whole body is in of no less then
that Sphacelus of Atheism, which not only good and godly Master Greenham, but
old Bishop Lake himself long since prophesied would most probably over-runne
this Realm, rather then Papisme; And why then should any speak of a Toleration,
except a tollendo potius quam tolerando. Obsta principiis, etc. is one of the
best Aphorisms of all the sons both of Hippocrates and Galen that I know. It Is
sad, very sad to see our Anglia (as Spalatensis complains of his Rome) turned
into Africa, new monsters every day, such horrid blasphemies, intolerable
wickednesses, etc. Shall Vipers still be suffered to eat up the very bowels of
their mother? I could tell you many a sad story of some that preach, pray, and
prate, what not? Independents all, yea and Scholars, nay Ministers, yet not by
Ordination. The people they say make Ministers, quoting Ezekiel. 33. v. 2. The
Scriptures say they are obscure, no Assemblies, Synods, nor general Counsels
more likely to teach the truth then the Sanctuary a particular Congregation,
etc. These words were used praying for England. O blessed God, we have often
already prayed in thy Sons name; now let us pray unto thee for thy Son --
clothe thus all his enemies with shame, but, etc. An usual strain in their
prayers, is as follows, That God would pardon the Reformed Churches their
great profanation of the Lords day; and why is this used but to make them
odious? Another strain, Who has gained? Who has given you so many victories,
but the Independents? Liberty of Conscience Lord, etc. and all in our own
Kingdom. The Millenary conceit is the common subject of Sermons, and a Church
on earth without so much as an Hypocrite. Public thanks was given to God, for
that the London Petition for settling etc. took no better. A thousand such, and
other passages of no small note, you may hear if you please but to visit your
friends in these parts, whose very souls are so vexed, that I for my part am
resolved (if it may be) to bury my self at my study, and stir as little as I
can to hear or see such, or the like abominations. And where now is Sodom, as
some of their Brethren called old- England when they went off our shore to sea
using that expression, farewell, farewell Sodom, etc. And what are they but
Babell-Builders, whose tongues are so divided, that I doubt not of the downfall
of their Babylon, which by interpretation says Origin, signifies that
confusion Christians should out of. Courage friend, let Devils that must be
disposest, cry out, we torment them before their time. If ever the Jesuit will
be at the hight, I suppose he is very near now; who say no more but security if
any thing will slay us, which God forbid. Thus with best salutes I rest, though
in haste yet heartily

Yours
March 30 1646*
A Justification and Vindication of the truth of the most material Passages
related in the Book entitled Gangraena, from those exceptions made against
them in three late Pamphlets entitled, Groans for liberty, A Whisper in the
Ear, Cretensis, alias Master Goodwin.
I Shall take them in order, and begin with Mr Saltmarsh, who first apeared in
Print: As for Master Saltmarsh he does not so much as offer to disprove any one
piece of matter of fact throughout my whole Book, excepting that only of a
woman Preacher at Brasteed in Kent, of which he affirms that it is known to all
in that place to be a mere untruth Vid. M. S^lt. p. 26. Now for the present, I
Reply as follows (reserving the greatest part I have to say till my full and
particular Reply to Mr Saltmarsh and his fellows shall come forth) that as it is
a strange bold assertion to affirm not only for himself, but for all the
Parish, that they know it is a mere untruth (which implies thus much, that Mr
Saltmarsh does not only assuredly know all things that all the women in the
Parish do, but all what ever the whole Town of Brasteed knows; for else how
can he say so of all the women, and all the inhabitants of that place) so it is
an untrue assertion? for some who live at Brasteed do not know it to be an
untruth, but believe it to be a truth; for one Mr. Wheatly a godly able
Minister who lives at Brasteed in a Gentleman's house, and has lived there this
two years, told me very confidently this Relation of a woman in the presence of
two Ministers; besides two other Inhabitants of the Town who have lived longer
in Brasteed then Master Saltmarsh, affirm the same; and three godly Ministers
living near to Brasteed, have told me also there is such a woman, of whom this
is commonly spoken; and a Citizen in London an honest man having some relation
to Brasteed, and knowing the place, tells me there is such a woman, as is
reported by many of Brasteed to be a preaching woman; and he coming lately out
of Kent, told me that upon the way meeting with a Gentleman of the Committee,
who discoursing of Mr Saltmarshes denying there was any such woman in Brasteed,
and was speaking against my Book, this Citizen replied, he believed it to be
true, and offered to lay a twenty shilling piece that there was such a woman,
but the Gentleman durst not; and besides all this the Minister who first told
me, having lately been written unto about it, in a Letter by way of answer
stands to that Relation which is laid down in Gangraena. But of this in my full
and particular Of the name of the woman, her meetings, with other particulars
^^ent this matter.
Reply the Reader shall receive more large satisfaction; only for present from
what I have now said (though there be much more behind) I leave to the
consideration of any judicious and unprejudiced Reader whether I had not ground
enough to writ as I did, and whether there be not more reason to believe so
many affirmative witnesses then one negative, who may not know all that's done
in Brasteed; (for such a thing may be, and he never the wiser) besides Master
Saltmarsh being a Sectary is a party, and his testimony is by me proved to be
false, in affirming all in that place know it to be a mere untruth, whereas the
contrary is the truth, diverse living in that Town relating the story of a woman
Preacher there.

All that Master Walwyn the Merchant either in his Pamphlets entitled A
whisper in the Ear of Master Thomas Edwards, or a word more to Master Thomas
Edwards, labors to disprove in matter of fact contained in my Book entitled
Gangraena, is, that I have wronged him, and falsified in saying Mr Walwyn a
Seeker and a dangerous man, a strong head; as also in my Relation of Mr
Lilburn, the informations given unto me of both of them being such as if they
had been made a purpose to shame me to all the world.

Now by way of Reply, first concerning Mr Walwyn himself, I am confident that
every judicious Reader, who has but read Mr Walwyns Pamphlets, out of them
will acquit me, that I have said nothing of him but truth, he being out of his
own mouth and writings condemned for a dangerous man, a Seeker, and a strong
head, as many who knew him not before, from reading his Pamphlets, have told
me, that he has justified to the world what I have said of him; but I shall at
large make good this against the man in my full Reply to him and his fellows,
following him from place to place, from person to person with whom he has
conversed, and from one thing to another that he has had his hand in; wherein
I shall lay him open to the world, and prove him to be a dangerous man, yea a
desperate dangerous man, a Seeker and Libertine, a man of al Religions,
pleading for all; and yet what Religion he is of no man can tell; A man of an
equivocating Jesuitical spirit, being full of mental reservations, and
equivications as appears by the sense he has put upon the A word more to
Master Edwards.
National Covenant; there being hardly any Jesuit could have put a more
equiv^call interpretation upon the Covenant, then himself: And I desire the
Reader to observe what I now say of M. Walwyn: Since his first Book came forth
against me, I have enquired and spoken with many honest godly men about M.
Walwyn, who know him well; and all of them with one consent and voice (though I
have enquired of them apart, concerning him, and the men know not one another)
yet all agree that Mr Walwyn is a dangerous man, and a desperate man. For
present I will only allege two Testimonies (reserving others till my full
Reply) which I believe will be full and speak home, and the parties who
witness, will be ready before any Committee, or Court of England, if called,
to restifie as much: The first was given me in writing, March 30. 1646.
subscribed by the hand of him who brought it to me, and delivered to me in the
presence of two godly Citizens as his hand, and that which he would maintain to
be truth, and produce other witnesses for the proof of it, when he should be
called by Authority; and it is as follows.

Inprimis, That Mr Walwyn did say it was a sin to pray for the King* and that
it would lie as a sin upon the Priests so to delude the people; and that he did
admire at our Priests that they should stand bauling and praying for the King,
that God would turn his heart, and say of him that he was the anointed of God.
And he said they were glad to do it (namely the Ministers) because if the King
maintain them in their way, they would cry him up to the people: And M. Walwyn
being asked how we should perform the Covenant we had taken to maintain the
Kings honor, he said he remembered no such clause in the Covenant: And further
he said, that he did much admire at the simplicity that was in the hearts of
the people, that they should suffer themselves to be Governed by a King, and
that under such a government the Kingdom could not be safe: He being asked
what he thought of Mr Marshall, M. Calamy, M. Sedgwick, and other godly
Ministers; he answered and said they were a company of Mountebancks, and that
they kept the people in ignorance and blindness, and that they preached
nothing but what we know already, and that he knew no Scriptures for them to be
Preachers more then other men, as he named Shoemakers, Cobblers, Weavers, or
Sopeboylers, and the like; absolutely speaking against all Congregations and
Ministers, and that if their Tyths were taken from them, they would soon leave
their trade; and said that the Apostles were tradesmen, and were not chargeable
to the brethren; He further said that our Ministers might go and preach the
Gospel to the Turks and Heathens, and not to stand prating here, for as he said
before, we knew enough already. I asked him who should preach to the people,
and how they should be maintained, if they would have them have nothing? he
answered he knew no Ministers that ought to be maintained, but that every man
that had gifts might be a Minister, and use the liberty of his Conscience; and
he spoke in the behalf of Paul Best for his Blasphemy; saying, that if we could
not convince his Conscience, we ought not to punish his body. Touching the
Rebellion in Ireland, Observe to what this pretended liberty of Conscience
brings men, namely, to plead for Treason, Rebellion, and all kind of
wickedness.
M. Walwyn said, the Irish did no more but what we would have done our selves,
if it had been our case; and said, What had the English to do in their
Kingdom? and that they were a better natured people then we, and said, why
should not they enjoy the liberty of their Consciences? I told him that it was
a sad thing to see how we are divided, some women would not pray with their
husbands, and some not sit at table when they gave thanks for the creatures;
and servants would not join in prayers with their Masters, nor hear them
repeat the Sermons, and that many of them have cast off all duties in their
families; he justified them all in what they did, and said, they could give a
Reason for it, and that it was their Conscience that led them to it, and
therefore they ought not to be blamed.

All this I do aver to be truth, and will maintain it, and can bring others
to witness the same, and have set to my hand.

T. C.

The second was told me March 29. by a Common-Councell-man of the City of
London, a godly understanding and active man, who related to me both the place
where it was spoken, and the names of some other Citizens, who were present,
and heard it as well as himself, and the Relation is as follows.

There being a meeting at a Tavern of some well-affected Citizens to consider of
some things in reference to the public, as they were sitting by the fire
(before they began to fall on the business they met for) M. Walwyn spoke of
the Trinity in such a strange manner, and so slightly, that all the company was
troubled at it, and they brake off and departed without doing any thing of that
they came for.

Now M. Walwyn, I dare appeal to any indifferent Reader, whether I have injured
you in giving barely a brief note or touch upon you, saying, M. Walwyn, a
dangerous man and a Seeker; or rather whether I did not much befriend you to
say so little of you, when as you deserved I should have made a long relation
of you and your ways, as well as of Hich, Web, Clarkson, Wrighter, and many
others. But what may be the true reason that M. Walwyn was so touchie upon the
Gangraena, page 12^.
naming of him in a word or two, as to make a Book, and bring himself upon the
Stage? I suppose that beside his pride, and the showing of his parts, it was to
engratiate and endear himself to all the Sectaries, by appearing and writing
against a man so hateful to them as M. Edwards is, and specially at this time,
writing That Is the main subject of both his Pamphlets: A Whisper in the ear,
and, A word more to Mr. Edwards.
once and again for the cause of Liberty of Conscience, that so being taken
notice of for a strong head, and true to the general liberty of all Sects;
some or other of the Independents might get him a Burgess place, and bring him
in to be a Member of the House of Commons: I am of the opinion he aimed at
that, knowing that Cornwell was clearing, and many places there wanted
Burgesses; and do believe, if a man could see the List of those who are pricked
for Cornwell by the Independent party, he would find M. Walwyns name in; and I
am of the mind, if M. Peter's were asked, and would tell truly, it would be
found M. Walwyn and Lieut. Col. Lilburn are committed to his care for
Cornwwell, and that he must preach at their election; and besides all other
reasons I have to think so, this is one, that both M. Walwyn and M. Lilburn
were by some named, and voices labored to be made for them to have had them
Burgesses of Southwark; I have spoken with two godly men of the Burrow, who
were once or twice at a meeting about the business of M. Walwyns being
propounded for a Burgess in Southwarke, who then opposed it, as hearing from
many hands, that he was a dangerous man, and a Seeker, yea worse. As for M.
Walwyn saying my informations of M. Lilburn to his knowledge are such as if
they had been made of purpose to shame me to all the world: I reply, had he
instanced in any one particular, I would have given a particular satistactory
answer: But it may be M. Walwyn means that which Cretensis particularizes in
page 48. of playing at Cards, that it is false that M. Lilburn is a player at
Cards, and that he protests he never played a game at Cards since his coming
to London; Now I desire to ask Cretensis, M. Walwyn, M. Lilburn, what they mean
by since his coming to London, whether the first time of his coming to London
when he came a youth to be here an Apprentice (as many may take the words)? or
since his last coming to London out of the Army about twelve months ago? or
coming to London after some journey two or three months ago? or which of the
times he means since his coming to London: Now if he speak and mean of the
first, that he has not played at Cards never since his coming to London when
he was a youth, I can prove that is false by good witnesses, and I know M.
Lilburn will confess he has played at Cards since these wars: I can for a
need tell him where, and when, and produce witnesses, but that needs not; Mr.
Lilburn (on the 17. day of March last) confessed to a Citizen, though he had
not played at Cards since his coming to London (keeping himself under that
equivocation) yet he played at Cards several times in When he was prisoner
there, being taken by the Cavaliers when they came to Branford.
Oxford: But if he mean since his last coming to London, which may be few
months, or a few weeks ago, (neither do I know how often M. Lilburn may make
journeyes, and return again to London*) that no whit infringes the truth of my
Relation concerning him; for I did not say he played at Cards this month or two;
but if he have often played at Cards since he was a great Sectary, and a
stickler against the Presbyterians and the Reformed Churches within this year,
two, or three of the contestation against the Presbyterian Government, that
makes good what I have said of him; and in common acception that man may be
truly said, and is so called to be one who is a player at Cards, that yet
plays not every week nor month (not having opportunities, nor his many
occasions at some times permitting him) but only once a year, at the ordinary
time of playing at Cards, and when he is at leisure, and meets with company for
it: Now if Lieutenant Col. Lilburn would play often at Cards when he was
prisoner in Oxford in his affliction, and among the Cavaliers, the enemies of
Reformation, (both which are great aggravations of the fact; for, if a man be
afflicted, says Saint James, let him pray, not play at Cards; and a man among
enemies, and those who hate Reformation and strictness, had need walk more
circumspectly, and be more exact because of the reproach of the enemy, and who
no question from thence took occas^on both to strengthen themselves in their
loose walking, and to speak evil of the ways of God) I know no reason but a
man may without breach of charity judge he will play at Cards now he is at
liberty, and among his brethren the Sectaries. And so much for the present by
way of Reply to M. Walwyn.

Reply to Cretensis.
As for Cretensis the Cretian, alias Mr. Goodwin, he is a man who expresses so
much pride, arrogancy, malice, wrath, jearing, and scoffing not only at me and
my Books, and some few fa^ithfull Ministers and servants of God, but against
all Presbyterians Assembled or not Assembled in England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, coming forth just like Goliath, Cretensis page 11.
railing and defying the armies of the living God, that I have much ado to keep
my self from answering him according to his folly, and beating him with his
own weapon, Difficile est S^tyram^on scribere, and my indignation to see the
unworthiness and insolency of the man much provokes me. But I consider what
becomes me as a Minister of the Gospel to do in such a case, rather then what
he has deserved, and therefore shall pass by his railings, and scoff^, not
rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing,
knowing that I am thereunto called: And instead of railing and vilifying Master
Goodwin, I will a little expostulate with him; M. Goodwin, will you never leave
your scoffing and scorning, your reviling and reproaching of all men, stuffing
your pages with great swelling words, and filling whole leaves with nothing but
jeers and multitude of six footed words instead of Reasons and Arguments? will
you by all your writings and preachings make good that Title which by way of
reproach was first given to you, namely, The great Red Dragon of
Coleman-street? will you still speak as a Dragon, and Dragon like fly fiercely
in the faces of all, spitting your poison and venom against all, casting
firebrarnds every where? will you always use your mouth to speak great things
and blasphemies, and open your mouth in blasphemy against God, his name and his
Tabernacle, as you have done in your Books of Controversy? will you never
learn to be meek and lowly, to deny your passion, speak as a Lamb, and repent
of your deeds? let me tell you, that if you belong to God, this spirit of
yours, and the way of managing things in your Books of M.S. Theomachia, Answers
to Mr Prynne, Cretensis will cost you dear, and you will be saved as by fire.
For my part instead of reproaching and scoffing you (though not for want of
matter, Cretensis being a very fruitful subject for a man to exercise his wit
upon) all I will do either in this brief, or in my full and large Reply shall
be to draw to one head all the Errors and strange ways Cretensis holds and
has walked in, by which if (God will) he may be ashamed and truly humbled, and
his spirit saved in the day of Christ, or however, that godly weak Christians
may know him as a dangerous erroneous man, and avoid him: All I will say now
(reserving particulars, and the proofs of them till my full Reply) shall be
this, that Cretensis has an heretical wit, and holds many wicked opinions,
being an Hermorphradite and a compound of an Arminian, So^inian, Libertine,
Anabaptist, etc. and in regard of some strange opinions he has held many
years, and others that in time he might fall unto (which in the Presbyterian
way he could never enjoy with quiet, nor have liberty to propagate them)
therefore he took sanctuary in Independency, falling from our Church, and the
Presbyteriall Government (which a little before the first sittting of the
Assembly, he held to be most agreeable to the Word of God) unto the Independent
way, as that wherein he might with more safty enjoy the opinions; and left
Cretensis should score up this fo^a^ lie, as he has done many truths; which
before I have done with him, I shall make apparent to all, I do here give the
Reader a true Copy of a Narrative sent me from a godly humble learned Minister
subscribed with his own hand, which fully proves the matter I have now spoken
of.

A Narrative of certain words uttered by Mr. John Goodwin Minister of
Coleman-street, not long before the Assembly sat.
THe said Mr Goodwins judgment being consulted as concerning the point of
Church Government: His Answer was to this effect, that in his judgment he
approved of the Presbyterian government as being most agreeable to the Word of
God, yet in fine added that he thought, that the way of Inpendency would better
suit and fit him in regard of some private and singular Tenants that he held*

This Minister subscribes his name at length under these foregoing lines, and
writes as follows.

Master Edwards let me request you not to bring my name upon the Stage in Print
to attest this business for diverse reasons best known to my self: I say no
more, Verbum sat sapienti.

Yours in all offices of love.

And therefore though in this, as in any other particulars, I set not down the
names in Print, yet am I far from forgery or lying, or those Ministers from
being afraid to justify their Letters, as Cretensis would insinuate to the
Reader; page 6.7. But I conceive the Reasons why this Minister and many others,
though they are willing to witness truth, and to communicate their
Intelligence about the Sectaries, yet for the present do desire to have their
names concealed. 1. Because they live among many Sectaries and Independents,
some whereof being in place both in Towns and Countries may do them no good
offices, but may much molest and trouble them; and therefore unless some great
good might come by witnessing publicly, which might countervaile their hazard,
as suppressing the Conventicles of the Sectaries, the spreading of erroneous
opininons, and punishing some of the Rabbis and Ringleaders, they are
unwilling to venture themselves by being brought upon the Stage in Print. 2.
Because some live in places where part of our Armies lie, or may come: Now many
soldiers being Sectaries, and violent for their opinions, if they should meet
with any Ministers named in print, giving me intelligence, it were as much as
the spoiling of them and their families; and where are they that do or will
secure them from such violence? there are too many examples of Ministers being
in danger, as M. Andrews was; and therefore I deal plainly, I have been spoken
to by word of mouth, and sent unto from some Ministers in the Country not to
name them in my Books, because, if the Army, or some parts of it come that way,
they shall be undone, which is a satisfying answer to all rational men, for my
concealing their names, especially to all those who understand the state of
things, and observe how powerful the faction of the Sectaries is.

Now before I come to give a particular Answer to the most material Objections
made against my Book, I shall premise these sixteen Observations upon
Cretensis, Or a brief Answer, etc. which to every judicious and unprejudiced
Reader will (I make no question) give a great deal of satisfaction, and serve
for a precious Antidote against the venom and rancor of the Cretian.

Obs. 1. I desire the Reader to observe the hand of God in leaving M. Goodwin
so to himself in writing this Pamphlet as to suffer his own pride, passion,
rage and malice so far to blind him, as to name his own Book (and therein
himself Cretensis) giving himself the name of Liar, as is manifested by the
Title of the Book Cretensis, Or a brief Answer to an ulcerous Treatise etc. so
that The brief Answer to an ulcerous Treatise is Cretensis, not the Treatise
published by Master Edwards, which is made by Master Goodwin contradistinct to
Cretensis, so that if M Goodwin understands plain English, common sense, and
knows how to range his Parts of Speech in a Sentence, etc. let him in his
Rejoinder to my Reply deny it if he can, and truly it is admirable (and I cannot
but admire the wisdom and goodness of God wherein men deal proudly to be
above them) that this great Rabbi, Cretensis Vide page 10. page 24.
and Seraphicall Doctor, who comes forth like Goliath, challenging all the
Presbyterians Assembled or not Assembled, carrying himself with that disdain
and scorn toward me, just as Goliath to little David, filling up some of his
pages with scornings of me, as that I cannot writ true English, put the
Nominative Case and Verb together, speak common sense, nor give the English
sense of a Latin sentence, should himself in the very first words he writes
prove himself such an Ignoramus both in the Latin and English, as to give
himself the title of Notorious Liar, namely, Tit. 1.12. The Cre^ans are always
Liars.
Cretensis, Or a brief Answer; etc. And as the man does it in the Frontispice
of his Book, so in the Book it self, as in page 39. where he would make me a
liar in that Relation of Cosens of Rochester; in the very entrance into it he
stumbles, giving his own Relation the lie, as the Reader may perceive by these
words, Cretensis speaking of what was reported to me that Cosens should say of
Christ, says, let this be the first lie in this Catalogue, the man never said
it, so that he makes it a This is a lie in Cretensis Catalogue, that Cosens
never said it.
lie that Cosens never said it: Now if this be a lie that Cretensis never said
so, then by the rule of contraries, it is a truth that he spoke it; and however
Cretensis may mean otherwise, if the man knew how to bring it out, yet the
best that can be made of it, is, that this great Cri^ick, who for want of
matter, falls upon my words, making me to speak false English, nonsense, and to
be ignorant in putting the Nominative Case and Verb together regularly in
English, is himself ever and anon tardy in false English, nonsense, not putting
the Nominative Case and Verb regularly together, of which I could give (if I
had no material things against Cretensis, nor nothing else to do but to pick
straw^) many instances both in this and other of his Books; but I will name
only one, and that in this business of Cosens apealing to Cretensis himself,
where in this following sentence, His Relation here reports that one Cosens of
Rochester in Kent, that Jesus Christ was a Bastard, is the Verb for the
Nominative Case; and whether M. Goodwin has well ranged his parts of Speech in
this sentence, and put the Nominative Case and Verb together regularly in
English? besides add unto this what follows Hoc primum: Let this be the first
lie in this Catalogue, the man never said it: whether he has framed the
structure of a period according to the common rules of Reason, Grammar, and
common sense; but to put a period to this first Observation, let the Reader
take notice that in the thing wherein the man has sinned (his principal
design being this by all his Art, flourishes and fallacies to render me a
Falsifier and a Liar to the world) in that God has punished him, suffering him
to give himself the name of Cretensis, always Liar, by which name he will be
known and called as long as he lives, and after he is dead also.

Obs. 2. M. Cretensis Answer in the whole frame, drift, and in all the strains
of it is so carried (if not formally yet virtually and equivalently) to
justify and defend all the Heresies, Blasphemies, Practices I have spoken
against; for what one of all the 180. Errors or Blasphemies is spoken against,
disavowed or condemned in Cretensis Answer, but rather all along throughout the
Pamphlet, the Errors, Heresies, etc. are slighted, made nothing of, put off
with jears, scoffs, and great swelling words of vanity; yea, in a sort denied,
as if there were none such, and in fine, both Cretensis Conscience and wanton
wit are prostituted and stretched upon tenter-hooks to find evasions and
tricks to bring off without loss all sorts of Sectaries and opinions; as for
instance, Cretensis palliats and daubes with untempered mortar, the Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies, etc. with such kind of devices as these following:
Cretensis, page ^.
That he could make a Discovery of as many Errors and Heresies together in me
alone, and that the most Orthodox Presbyterian under Heaven (no nor Independent
neither) errors not much beneath the like rate or number of errors and
mistakes of Religion, that he marvails how M. Edwards could stay his pen at so
small a number as 180. and did not advance to ten thousand times ten thousand,
etc. that if I will own the verdict of as learned and ingeneous a pen as ever
wrote on my side, (Cretens. page 9.) I must release the better half of the
prisoners, and instead of 180. Errors and Heresies write down four score, and
that for twenty (Cretens. page 11.) and ten of those opinions which I have
impeached of Errors and Heresy (and he will not say for how many more) he
casts the glove to whosoever will take it up to bring them off with the honor
of truth; besides Cretensis makes a sixfold deduction from the Catalogue of
Errors and Heresies, ( Cretens. page 9.) and pleades formerly, and in terminis
for some of the Errors; lastly also he so minces and extenuats the whole
contents of my book, ( Cretens. p. 11. p. 20.21) That when all the accused ones
shall have time and opportunity to stand forth, and plead their innocence,
(Cretens. page 6.) there will be very little truth found remaining in any thing
reported by me, except in such things as are transgressions against no Law; and
indeed the whole Answer is in one kind or other a continued pleading for Baal,
and a calling Error Truth, and Darkness Light. O the wretchedness and
wickedness of Cretens. whereas for these abominations of the Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies of our times, (known too well to all the Kingdom) he
should have sat down astonished, mourning and sighing, rending his heart, crying
out, my bowels my bowels, I am pained at the heart; the man makes a sport and
mock of them to make himself and the Independent sons of Jeroboam who are of
his own constitution merry with them, using also several Artifices and
sophistications to elude the truth. And tho this be very sad that such a man as
Cretens. who pretends to so much Saintship and holiness should do thus, or
indeed any man who has but the name of a Christian, yet I cannot but observe a
good hand of God in this as well as in the former, thus to leave him as to
shame him before all the world, many besides my self taking notice and speaking
of this in Cretens. how without all distinction he speaks for, and most
shamefully excuses all kind of Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Antitrinitarians,
Ar^ians, Antiscripturists, etc. not finding any one Error or person throughout
my book worthy to be blamed; but in this we find no strange thing, for that
Scripture must be fulfilled, As for such as turn aside unto their crooked
ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity.

Obs. 3. Cretensis throughout his whole Answer, without excepting any one man
makes al those erroneous persons Saints, faithful servants of God, etc. whom I
have mentioned in my Catalogue, and though most of the instances in my
Relations, where I name persons and insist somewhat largely upon them, be of
most dangerous men, and of men holding most abominable horrid errors and
blasphemous, opinions, as Writer, Webb, Clarkson, Hich, Marshall, etc. yet does
not Cretensis condemn, speak against any one of them, or separate the vile from
such as may be precious among the lower sort of sects, but bundles them up
among the Saints, speaking of the Sts the Sts, whose nakedness M. Edwards being
of Satan's Council, has laid open, and spread a table for Satan with the shame
and sorrows of the Saints, so that in Cretensis Calendar ( Cretens. p. 5.)
Antitrinitarians, Antiscripturists, Arrians, Socinians, Perfectists, are
canonised for Sts as well as Independents, Brownists, and Anabaptists, and a
man may find there St Best, St Wrighter, St Webb, St Hieb, St Clarkson, etc. as
well as St Goodwin and his Church; and no question if Saint Best shall suffer
by the Parliaments authority, for his damnable Heresies and Blasphemies he
sha'l be a Martyr too as well as a Saint in Cretensis Calendar, and be reckoned
the Protomartyr of the Sectaries; and in this the Reader may observe how
Cretens. (no question against his own intention) whilst the main scope of his
Pamphlet is to make Gang^aena a lying book, confirms the truth of many passages
related in it, namely the Independents holding with all other Sects, not
dividing from them, pleading for them upon all occasions, strengthn^ng their
hands, bringing them off from danger, etc. all which Cretens. in many pages of
his book makes good, and though he had a fair occasion upon the coming out of
Gangraen^ to have casheired many out of their number (there being so many foul
Sects and Sectaries discovered) and can never come off with honor for not
taking it, yet it is evident Cretensis will not loose any one sort of Sects or
any one Sectary, but joins them with himself and his own Church, the Saints,
the faithful servants of God, and such like.

Obs. 4. Cretensis out of his pride, and in his rage casts fi^e brans every
where, abusing and having a fling at all he comes near, or takes an occasion to
speak of, and that not only particular single persons of approved integrity and
abilities, but whole societies, as the Honorable Court of Common Council, p.
49. calling them Brethren in iniquity with me, for representing in their
Petition to the Parliament, that there were Vide Petition of the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Comm^ns of the City of London, presented to the House of Peers.
Jan. 26.
e'even meetings at least of Sectaries in one Parish in this City, yea and all
Presbyterians Assembled and not Assembled: Had Cretensis only abused and
scorned me, a poor weak thimblefull of dust, that in his account knows not how
to range Parts of Speech in a sentence, nor to put the Nominative Case and Verb
together regularly in English; I could have born it, and passed it by, as I
have done many of the like kind; but who can without a check, suffer this proud
man to slight and scorn all kind of worthy men, as if all wisdom and
understanding dwelt in him alone.

Obs. 5. Cretensis in several places of his Book abuses Sctipture (bringing
that in to serve his turn to make j^st; and scoffs upon me and others, as in
page 9.15. etc. It Is a great iniquity in me (as Cretensis would make it) to
abuse his Saints, but no fault in him to make jests upon the Scripture.

Obs. 6. Cretensis Pamphlet consists of little else but great swelling words of
vanity, jears, scoffs, bitter reproaches, long-winded sentences, preambles,
circumlocutions, and multitude of words without weight and matter, so that if a
man substract all these, what remains? certainly all the matter, reason and
strength of this Book may be writ in a gold Ring, and there will hardly be
enough to fill a poor weak thimblefull of dust; as for example, what ado does
Cretens. make, speaking over and over the same things, spending whole pages and
leaves upon that which he might have spoken and answered to in three or four
lines; as about bowling on days of Thanksgiving, he runs out from page 28 to
36. and so carps at the word meeting in page 36, 37. Now it is an evident sign
the man could not find matter of exception in Gang^* to work upon, that he so
catches at words and phrases; no man who is in his wits, and has good
employments, will spend his time in picking of strawes and catching flies.

Obs. 7. Cretensis if not formally and in so many words, yet vir^ually does
animate and stir up the Sectaries to fall upon me, dealing by me in opposing
the errors of the Sectaries, just as the Jesuits and Papists do against those
who write and preach against their way, telling some of their seduced
followers, it will be a meritorious work to kill such, and take them out of the
way; and if Cretensis do not so, what mean these words p. 19. And let Mr.
Edwards know, and let his conscience and compeers know, that whatsoever he
shall suffer, whether from his Sectaries or others in this bloody negotiation,
he shall suffer not as a Christian, nor with Christ, but as a Malefactor and an
evil-doer; implying, that if the Sectaries mischief or kill me for my book it is
but an act against a Malefactor and an evill-doer.

Obs. 8. Cretensis takes upon him to set out a Book which he calls an Answer to
a Treatise lately published by Mr. Edwards called Gangraena, and yet in this
Answer Cretensis page 50.
professes that he has not read one quarter of the Book as ye^, and I profess
truly, that I had not read one quarter of the Book of yet, nor know whether I
shall ever care to read it through or no. And in page 6. I have neither leisure
nor opportunity to search to the bottom.
that he has neither leisure nor opportunity to search to the bottom, or sift
to the bran; all that the man storieth per se and per alios in his Gangraena.
Now I think these are the only true passages in the Book; for had Cretensis
read the Book thorough, and well laid to heart the Contents of it, and compared
one thing with another which I say in my Book, I think he would never have
written such an Answer, nor belched out such unsavory passages against it; I
believe if Cretensis had read it thorough, there are such sad and serious
passages in many places of the Book as would have awed his conscience; but in
the mean time how well becoming such a learned deep Rabbi and wise man as
Cretensis would be thought to be, it is to write an Answer to a Book, and to
profess he never read one quarter of it, I leave to all rational men to
judge, and to Cretensis himself upon a review: I had thought Master Woodwards
folly spoken of by many for giving his censure and judgment upon my Antapoligie
before he read it over (only dipping here and there) would have been a warning
to other men. Master Edwards as weak a poor thimblefull of dust as he is, not
knowing according to Cretensis Grammar, how to put the Nominative Case and Verb
together, etc. would have been ashamed to have had so little wit or reason, as
to make an Answer to a Book, and in that to declare to all the world he never
read a fourth part of it, but I cannot but take notice of the good hand of God
in befooling Mr. Goodwin in this, as in many other passages of his Answer to
cause him to proclaim thus his own shame and folly to the world.

Obs. 9. Great Cretens a deep Divine, a Teacher of Teachers (as some cry him
up) the great lying Oracle of the Sectaries, yet further (...) out his own
shame and folly in saying the far greatest part of the particulars detected
mi^e observed by others, and presented to him. ( Creten^. p. 50.) Is not this a
strange and new way of answering Books, for men to take up things upon trust
from others, to go by an implicit faith, and not to see with their own eyes,
nor examine things themselves, especially for a man upon things observed by
others, to make such a mighty business and to carry matters in such a
scornful triumphing way positively charging a Book with lying forgery, etc. as
Cretensis does? what if Cretensis Saints, who observed and presented matters to
him, (being parties) should out of weakness, in judiciousnesse, or partial
affection, if not malice and wilfulness mistake and pervert my sayings, where
is Cretensis then? I must tell Cretensis the poor weak thimbleful of dust, so
scorned by him as not worthy to carry his Books after him, does not use to make
Answers to Books without reading one quarter of them, but before he sets forth
Answers, he reads them many times over, laying and comparing one thing with
another, neither takes he any thing upon trust from other men's observations
which he writes as his own, or can come to see with his own eyes. Should Mr.
Edwards in writing any of his Books, or in this last have taken Cretensis
slight course, there is no question but before this time Mr. Edwards had heard
after another manner, and in another way of his Books then he has, especially
of his Antapologie and Gangraena; but the poor weak thimblefull of dust, that
knows not how to range his Parts of Speech in a sentence, etc. has more brains
in this then the bushel full of dirt, who though Cretensis have more guts and
garbage and be better bodied yet in the opinion of wise men will be thought to
have less understanding, and fewer brains in expressing himself so as he has
done.

Obs. 10. All the materials and ground-works Cretensis makes use of and goes
upon in his Answer to Gangrae. to disprove the truth of things related by me
(as the Reader may observe) are either the Testimonies of the parties
themselves, as Overton, Cosens, Kiffin, Lilburn, Mr. Buroughs, etc. (which in
their own case are little to be credited; and if according to Cretens. ( p. 12)
rule it be no regular process in Law, to ask my fellow whether I be a theif,
then sure it is no good o^e to ask a man's self if he be a theif) or doubtful
dark Answers to matters of fact, that may be taken in diverse senses just like
the Answers of the lying Oracles, of which there are many instances, as in that
of Lilbur* playing at Cards with many others, or else his witnesses will be
found to be Sectaries, Anabaptists, Apprentice boys, or parties interested, or
such like; ( Cretens. p. 44) as for instance in Mr. Ricrofts Letter, whereas my
proofs of things will be found to be of another nature, most of the greatest
things laid down in my Catalogue known to my self and many, many, the Books
being extant to prove them, and most of my witnesses will be found to be godly
able Ministers, and other eminent, sound, substantial Christians, and the worst
of them of more repute, more likely to know things they reported then the best
of yours (excepting Mr. Buroughs, whom yet I shall prove to have forgot
himself in writing that Paper set down by you Page 42.) beside, the persons
whom I had relations from, had no reason to speak things out of partiality,
prejudice, but only the naked truth, many things being related to others as
well as to me; besides, few of them who writ or related these matters, did them
out of any design against the Sectaries, but only in a way of declaring, and
bewailing to what pass things were come; and if to all these be added what
Cretensis himself grants, page 26. one affirmative testimony is more valid in
Law, then many negative, all that Mr. Goodwin has alleged by way of Answer is
to little purpose.

Observe. 11. That those very things Cretensis charges me with either in my
Antapology, or Gangraena (though most unjustly) as forgery, lying, juggling,
bitterness, malice, bloody negotiation against the Saints, taking up reports,
and printing them upon weak and slight grounds, obscene scurrilous writing,
contradictions, false English, nonsense, with such like; the man himself, as in
other of his Books, so also in this, is most faulty, as the judicious Reader
may observe more or less in one of these kinds or other throughout the whole
Book, and in my full Reply I shall more largely and particularly specify: In
one word, Cretensis is a most ungodly, Antichristian, insolent, proud,
malicious, wrathful, lying, obscent* scurrilous, nonsense, absurd,
contradictory piece.

Observe. 12. Cretensis in all his Books of Controversy and Answers of all
sorts that I have seen and met with, is of all Writers in this later age the
greatest falsifier of Authors, wresting them upon all occasions, and that with
a Gyant-like confidence against their own sense, and contrary to what they are
known ex professo to hold, and he will not be beaten off from it, as is
apparent in his Treatises of Justification, and in his Answer to Master Prynne,
and in this Book bringing in Master Ball for him in the point of Free Will: Now
this must arise either from that heretical genius of his, that he sins being
condemned of himself, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having his conscience seared
with a hot iron, or else from a high flown mad fancy, making things to appear
which are not at all, like to that mad man of Athens, who thought all the Ships
that came into the Haven were his (though he never were sharer, much less
owner in any Ship) so Cretensis sancies all learned Writers to be for him'
wheares indeed there never was any sound and Orthodox Divine for him, as I
shall show more fully hereafter, and divide Learned Master Gataker from him.

Observe. 13. Cretensis just Cretian like fastens that upon me in my Gangraena,
affirming I say that which I do not, as in page 28. Sect. 23. and does father
opinions upon me, merely from the leaving out of a word or two by the Printers
oversight, Cretens. page 23. (though corrected in the second Edition, and
abroad full fourteen days before Cretensis) which was either done wilfully and
on set purpose against his knowledge, or from his not reading over my Book, but
taking up things upon trust.

Observe. 14. There are many things in Cretensis Pamphlet which he pretends to
Answer, making much ado of, and laboring to fasten upon me lies, nonsense, etc.
which yet in the close, after a great many high flown words, Cretensis is
forced to confess them true, and that both of himself and others (though by
many words he has labored to pusle and cast a mist before the eyes of the
Reader.)

Observe. 15. I desire the Reader to observe, that this Answer made by this
great Rabbi, is but snatches here and there, answering Gangraena by great
leaps, as Leopards use to take; Cretensis answers one passage out of p. 70. and
then leaps to 128. taking another there, and from p. 128. leaps back to p. 8.
and after this sort the whole Answer is: And for those pages where Cretensis
fastens upon something to give an Answer unto, even there he snatches, takes
not the whole, what goes before, nor what follows after, so that after that
rate of Answering (if such kind of Discourses must have the names of Answers)
how may not men elude, and make nothing of the excellentest Books that ever
were written by men, yea of the Scriptures themselves, and wrest them, if they
will not take one place with another, and observe what goes before, and what
follows after: And as this great Rabbis Answer is by snatches, so it is full of
miserable shifts and poor evasions, as among others, page 16. Cretensis gives
that reason why my Antapology has not been Answered in 18. Months, because
the way by which light and truth should go forth into the world, was hedged up
by Clergy, Classique Councel^, as with thorns against him: Now I wonder with
what face Cretens. can write this, when as all men know the Independents have a
Licenser of their own at hand, Mr. Bachilor, who is such a Saltmarsh, groans
for liberty.
friend to all the world of Believers, that certainly he cannot deny Cretensis:
Do not we daily see the man Licenses without either fear or wit all kind of
Pamphlets, The Error of Anabaptism, against Mr. Marshal, the Error of Seekers
in The Smoke of the Temple, A pretended Answer of Mr. Saltmarsh to the
Assemblies Petition, and now Cretensis against Gangraena; and will Mr. Bachilor
with Clergy, Classique Councels, hedge up the way as with thorns against
Cretensis Reply to Mr. Edwards Antapologiae? Can Cretens. think though his own
deluded Church, and other Sectaries may have so much Independent faith as to
believe him, that any Presbyterian has so little wit as not to laugh at such
folly? why could not John Bachilor as well leap over the hedge of Clergy
Classique thorn to License a Reply to Antapologia, as an Answer to Gangraena;
and pray Mr. Goodwin in your next account you give unto the world by public
writing, give me an account why honest John Bachilor could not as well leap
over the hedge of Clergy Classique thorns to License a full Reply to
Antapologia, as to License A brief Answer to Gangraena? But no more of this now.

Observe. 16. The Christian Reader may observe Cretensis as in this, and his
former Books, so in all his preachings and ways, to have all the characters and
marks of false Prophets and false Teachers, not only in his hands, but upon his
forehead, so that if I would here enlarge, I might clearly show all that Christ
and the Apostles spoke of false Prophets, are to be found in Cretensis; but I
will only instance in a few laid down by Peter and Jude in their Epistles, and
upon the propounding of them, I know the Reader will say, as face answers
face in glass, so does Cretensis answer these Scriptures; Peter says of the
false Teachers in his time; that they speak great sw^lling words of vanity, and
that they promise their followers liberty; and Jude, They are clouds without
water, carried about of winds, raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own
shame, wandering stars; their mouth speaking great swelling words, having men's
person in admiration because of advantage, These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit: Now I do appeal to any man who
knows Cretensis, either in his Writings or Preaching, whether he be not a man
that speaks great swelling words of vanity; whether he does not promise his
followers liberty, yea, a universal liberty? whether he be not a cloud without
water, ^^ourishes and shows without substance? whether he be not a raging-wave
of the Sea, foaming out his own shame, witness his Answer, a wandering star,
wandering from one opinion and Religion to another? and lastly, whether he be
not a Separatist and sensual person without the spirit of love, meekness,
humility, zeal for Gods truth, and of a sound mind: In one word, I do not
think there is any man in the Kingdom has a more heretical head and he^^e th^n
Cretensis, and unless God give him repentance and recover him out of those
snares wherein he walks, I fear if the man lives but one seven years, he will
prove as arch an Heretic, and as dangerous a man as England ever bred, and
that he will be another David George, Francken, Socinus, and be canonized for a
Saint amongst those of Munster, Rae^conia, etc.

Quest. But it may be demanded by some, What Is the matter, and what are the
causes that such venomour ran^^rous Books as Mr. Goodwins Cretensis; etc. are
printed, and so many hard speeches in City and Country daily uttered against
Master Edwards and his late Book entitled Gangraena, is it not a Book full of
Lies, nothing but Lies? is it not a Book full of venom and malice against the
Saints and faithful Servants of God, calling for fire and sword against the
Saints?

Ans. It Is a Book full of truth, as will appear in the Replies I give to the
particular exceptions made against it, and have in part cleared already, and a
Book of so much truth, that I believe no Book written this hundred years,
having so much variety and particularity in it, will be found to have more; and
for the proof of the truth, and reality of the Errors, etc. contained in it, I
have expressed my self at large (as foreseeing the Sectaries would call it a
Book of Lies) in my Gangraena, page 5, 6, 7, 8. and as it is not a Book of Lies,
so neither of bitterness, nor of speaking evil of the Saints, but a Book free
from railing, evil speaking, against the Saints and Servants of God, which at
large in twelve several particulars in my full Reply coming after this Book I
show: But no judicious Christian need wonder at it that the Sectaries generally
give out so, for they have nothing else left to say for themselves, and to help
their desperate cause, so much discovered and wounded as it is by Gangraena; and
what do they do in this case, but as the Jesuits and Papists did by Mr. Foxes
Book of Martyrs, give out it was a Book of Lies, and writ Books to disprove
some matters of fact, taking advantage from some mistakes in circumstances
about names, places and such like, to cry it down; and yet all the Protestants
know it was full of truths, and is of precious esteem in the Church of God.
Just so do the Sectaries now by my Book; and many of them, that they might
possess the people the more against it, and make that imputation, That* it is
full of Lies, gain credit with the people, have invented many Lies and Stories,
which they formally tell up and down the City and Country for certain (and I
can produce several witnesses to prove this, namely Ministers and others, who
have come to me and to others to know the truth of them) as that some of the
Independent Ministers have been with me, Mr. G. Mr. B. and have convinced me of
some Lies in my Book, as that same of the Soldiers out of the Army, have been
with me about the story of Mr. Andrews, and proved it false to me, as that one
whom I name in my Book and speak of, as having some relation from the man's own
mouth, coming to me about it, I confessed I knew him not, nor never saw him
before, with some other such; all which are mere lies and fictions of the
Sectaries, (so wicked and cunning are they in their generation to uphold their
tottering Babel) to prejudice Christians from reading and considering my Book.
But good Reader, however falsehood and slandering of men, is pretended the great
cause of speaking so against me and my Book; the true cause of all the hatred
is, because there is so much truth in it: Many men who answer nothing to it,
and others who have appeared in writing to disprove the truth, know themselves
and others too guilty, and that in other passages where they are not named, and
know that I know and can prove it, and that vexes them to the heart; but were
it indeed (as many of them against their consciences give out) a Book of Lies,
they would not be so mad at it, but I should before this time a day by some of
my good Friends the Sectaries have heard of them after another manner, and i^
another place then yet I have done: But in a word, I apprehend these three
following Reasons, as principal causes both in Cretensis and others, of their
appearing against me in so much wrath, fury and rage.

1. A Vial is poured out upon the Sun, the glory of their prime men is darkened,
both by the Antapology and Gangraena, they who made themselves as the Sun in
the Firmament of the Church, are found, by these Books, not only to be as the
Moon full of spots, subject to like weakness as other men, but to be in the
Eclipse, fuller of blots then others; yea, their Sun is turned into darkness,
and their Moon in^o blood, and they who would have been thought to have been
the only Saints, nay Angels dropped from Heaven with new Gospel, new Light, and
new Revelations, do evidently appear (by what I have written) to all men who
have not sacrificed the principles of their ingenuity upon the gainful service
of the That is proverbially called the thriving side and way, Offices, Moneys,
Honors, Lands, great places attending upon them*
Independent Faction, to be strange kind of Saints, if Saints. The best of
them appear to be spots in the profession of Religion; but for many among them,
who yet are cried up to the Heavens, they have corrupted themselves, their spot
is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.
Now they being men proud, high-minded, impatient of any check and contradiction
in their way, who thought alone to have had the repute among the people for
sanctity, holiness, and to have been Idolized by them, and the contrary being
so clearly demonstrated by many particular instances and proofs given in my
Books, no wonder that they are so mad, and rage against me, and finding their
Kingdom full of darkness, that they gnaw their tongues for pain.

2. By my Books, especially Gangraena, many Sectaries being so discovered by
name, and places of abode, laid open in several of their opinions and ways,
will not be able for the future to do so much hurt and mischief among the
people; their Sheeps skins are by this pulled over the Wolves ears, and many
will now shun and be afraid of them, who before knew them not; and this
disappointment of infecting and corrupting others, vexes and mads them to the
heart.

3. Their way and design must needs suffer much by this last Book in the esteem
of all the Churches, and all the godly persons who are unprejudiced, yea, and
of all fair ingenuous men, who before (many at least not knowing the depths of
Satan) might think well of them; whereas now many of them upon reading my Book,
have lifted up their hands and blessed themselves, to think what kind of
Creatures these Sectaries are, saying, If Independents and Anabaptists be such
kind of men, do such things as this Book shows, God keep us from being such;
we had some good opinion of their way, but if they be such Merchants, and have
such tricks and ways as Mr. Edwards lays down, we will be none of them.

Cretensis design, next unto that of rendering my Book and all I relate in it to
be false and untrue, is this; The aspersing me and my Antapology and Gangraena
with such weakness and want of all learning, as if I understood neither Latin
nor English, nor knew not how to speak or write Reason, common sense, or to
frame the structure of a period according the common Rules of Grammar, but were
a profound Ignoramus, and so altogether unfit to take upon me the confutation
of Errors; and this he insists upon in several Pages of his Pamphlet or Answer.
Cretens. p. 10, 23, 24, 36.

Reply. Now in this, what does Cretensis else but play the Jesuit and Arminian,
in stead of solid Answers, thus to flight, vilify me and my Books, that being
just the way they took against such Books as were too hard for them, and knew
not how to Answer, as Dr. Twiss's Books against Arminians, etc. but whatsoever
Cretensis in his rage casts upon me and my Writings, my Books will speak for me
and themselves in the gates; having the testimony of many learned and godly men
both of this and other Churches, at home, and beyond the Seas; and could I
without blushing and all suspicion of praising my self, relate the passages in
Letters, messages sent me, speeches by word of mouth from great Divines, both
at home and from abroad, concerning my Antapology and Gangraena, and that not
only of particular men apart, but of many in a body both in City and Country,
as a common joint act, besides expressions that have fallen from some
Independents, and Independentis^^ concerning me, my studies in the
Controversies of the Church way, and some of my Books (as a speech of Mr.
Thomas Goodwin spoken to a Minister one Mr. T. and others then present upon
occasion of some Independents slighting me, and my first Book, as Cretensis
does here; yea, passages out of some of Mr. John Goodwins Answers to Mr.
Prynne, concerning me and my Antapology) it would be a full confutation of all
Cretensis has said against me in this matter; yea, a clear conviction that all
words of this kind, are nothing else but the venting of his spleen and passion
against me and my Books: But all I will say by way of Answer to Cretensis
reproaches of this nature, is, 1. The quick sale these Books had, being bought
up by learned and judicious men of all ranks, the last Book Gangraena being now
in the Press the third time within less then two Months, unto which adding
the greatness of the Book, consisting of so many sheets, with the not being
exposed to sale by setting up Titles in all places of the City, at Church
doors, Exchange, etc. like Wine that needs no Bush (though all ways under
Heaven were used by the Sectaries to blast it) is an evident Argument it is not
such a weak nonsense piece as Cretensis speaks of* for in these times when the
Press is so thronged with such variety of Books, and many excellent pieces
come forth, more then men can read, judicious understanding men have something
else to do with their money and time, then to buy and read Books full of
nonsense, contradictions, and whose Authors know not how to range their Parts
of speech in a sentence, nor how to put the Nominative Case and Verb together
regularly in English. 2. I will here give the Reader a true Copy of a Letter to
a tittle, sent me from Eight and twenty Ministers out of one County in this
Kingdom, whose joint judgment upon my Antapology and Grangraena, may serve
with every indifferent Reader to balance, yea, to weigh down Cretensis.

To our Reverend Friend Mr. Thomas Edwards Minister of the Gospel.
SIR,
WE cannot but acknowledge the great service you have done for the Church of
God, by interposing your self against the growing Schisms and Heresies of these
times: And upon conference had thereof at our weekly meetings here, we have
thought it our part to contribute somewhat to your encouragement, by testifying
how great acceptance your labors find among us; who give thanks to God for you
and your zeal to his truth, expressed not only in your usual Sermons, but
especially in your Antapology and Gangraena, by which you are well known to us
all; and we earnestly desire that you will continue the same endeavors for the
maintenance of the truth, and opposing of Errors. And as we are very sensible
of the great discouragements you are like to meet withal, so we shall the more
heartily commend you, and the success of your labors to Gods protection and
blessing, resting

Your loving Brethren and fellow laborers in the Ministry
March 19. 1645.

Unto this Letter the hands of twenty eight Ministers are Subscribed; but I
forbear the Printing of them, as I do the County where they live, to avoid all
danger which might come to any of them from printing their Names, if some
Sectaries in the Army come that way, as they are likely to do.

Now in my Reply to particulars laid down in Cretensis, I shall apply my self
chiefly to justify and make good those Relations in Gangraena, excepted
against by Cretensis, reserving other things in his Answer to my fuller Reply,
which Cretensis (God willing) shall be sure of, and that to the full.

Cretens. page 2. labors by all his Rhetoric and many words to insinuate to
the Reader, how in writing of my Book Gangraena, I have said all, and the worst
I can of the Independents and Sectaries, and that whilst I charge them only
with such and such crimes, I do not so much charge them with these, as acquit
and discharge them from all others, and that there is no reasonable man but will
abate and deduct, and that to a good proportion from such reckonings and
accounts, etc. much less will he judge such accounts short or defective in
particulars; and that Mr. Edwards has but faintly informed the world how vile
and bad the Sectaries are, but has justified and acquitted them from all other
crimes and imputations of any worse resentment or import then those wherewith
he afflicted them, and consequently has represented them to the world, as
better and far more deserving, then far the greatest part of his own
Presbyterian Generation.

Reply. However, Mr. Edwards, or the Printer for him, may possibly in some
places of his Book print none of the truest English, yet I am sure Cretensis in
this Page speaks none of the best sense nor Reason that ever I read in my life,
but every line and sentence is so slight and weak, that a man may look through
and through it; and the truth of it is, Cretensis all along has a multitude of
bom-basted, starched words, priding himself therein, but seldom or never in all
his answers has he any thing else; witness his Answers to Mr. Walker, Mr.
Prynne, and this present Passage: And first for that which Cretensis speaks
here, the man makes good what he says page 50. that he never read one quarter
of my Book, and that he took things upon trust, as observed by others; for
certainly had he read my Book over, he could never have writ thus, that in
charging the Sectaries with these, I acquit them from all others crimes and
imputations, and that I have represented them to the world, a better and far
more deserving generation, then the far greatest part of the Presbyterians.

1. Because in diverse pages of Gangraena I expressly declare I have many more to
lay to their charge, stiling this Book but a praeludium and preparative to
what is behind; does a man who accuses a guilty person at first but with two or
three Articles, and yet formally declares he has many more, and upon every
Article pleads his liberty and power of Additionals, justify and acquit him
from all others?

2. Had Cretensis but read over my Book, and considered what Errors* Practices,
Blasphemies I speak of, to what a nature some of them amount, and of what a
kind they are, that there can hardly be worse, he would never have said I had
dealt but faintly with the Sectaries, and that the Sectaries were a better and
far more deserving generation then the Presbyterians; for if the far greatest
part of Presbyterians be worse (or so bad) either for Doctrines, Practices,
etc. as I have proved many of the Sectaries to be, then I must profess I will
disclaim, and be the first that shall c^y out of them, and will never go about
to plead for them as Cretensis does for his Sectaries. But supposing I had not
declared my mind in this case, yet all that Cretensis says is in consequent
without all strength of reason; for therebe and are reserves when not thought
of, and wise men always in all matters of accusations and reckonings will fear
there is more behind, and suspect something worse, though not declared at first;
and I would ask Cretensis, whether either in impeachments, or reckonings and
accounts brought in to Courts of Justice against such and such men, though at
first but part of the Accusation be alleged, whether the accused can be
secure, they are justified with an high hand from all other crimes and
imputations of any worse resentment or import; and when one is impleaded and
endicted upon the la^ter, this be a good plea in Law, to say he is free,
because they were not mentioned at first; much less then will it hold in cases
where there was a formal Declaration and caution entered, that such Articles
were but a preparatory and not the whole matter.

Cretensis page 3. makes two Challenges, casting his Glove the first and second
time to me; first as to matter of Practice, look of what crimes or miscarriages
soever I have with any truth impeached the Sectaries, he will produce both as
many for number, foul (yea far more foul) for nature perpetrated and done by a
far less number of Presbyterians; yea and that he will give another manner of
account of the reality and truth of what he brings upon the Stage in this
kind. Secondly, for matter of opinion, that he will discover and find out as
many Errors and Heresies, and those of every whit as dangerous an Import, to be
at this day in a far less number of the Classique party; yea that he could
make a discovery of as many Errors and Heresies in me alone; and that he does
not think the most Orthodox Presbyterian under heaven, nor Independent neither,
erres much beneath the like number of Errors.

Reply. I accept these Challenges, and do take up the Glove both the first and
second time, rechallenging and defying Cretensis to make them good; and by
these ungodly Challenges made by him out of his great care and love of Errors,
to strengthen the hands of Heretics, least they should suffer loss, were he
John of Gaunt, and his Glove John of Gaunts Gantlet, I would take it up, And
first of all Reply to Cretensis, the man speaks he knows not what. Cretensis
not having read one quarter of my Book, as himself professes, knows not what
crimes or miscarriages, Heresies and Blasphemies, with the way of making them
good, I charge the Sectaries with: and yet he will at random, and blindefold
undertake to find as many in a far less number of my Classique Proselytes and
party. O what will not this man say, so it may make for the Independent party:
Surely he will startle at nothing who dares speak thus: Can you produce as many
Blasphemies against Christ, the Scriptures, etc. and find as many horrid
Opinions in Presbyterians as I have proved to be in Sectaries? where will you
find among the Presbyterians, such as Hich, Wrighter, Web, Clarkson, Marshal,
Nichols, Den, Oats, Cretens. cum multis aliis; As for the condition Cretens.
propounds, upon which he will make good his undertaking, and out at which he
hopes to escape, to salve his lying, I do for my own part accept it, and am
ready freely and heartily to declare my mind and judgment in all points of
Religion, and shall persuade others also to do the like: But of this more in my
full Reply, where I shall show the fallacy and shift of Cretensis in this; only
for the present the Reader may observe he puts in these conditions, that so he
may provide a Sanctuary for all kind of Heretics and erroneous persons, a a
place of retreat for himself one way or other to come off these Challenges,
which in the plain open field he foresaw he could never do.

Cretensis page 6. among other his Artifices and devices to weaken the credit
of the truth of those matters laid down in Gangraena against the Sectarian
party, labors to possess the Reader, That for saving of my own repute, and to
prevent, as much as might be, the thorough examination of the greatest part of
what Gangraena represents by way of disparagement to the Independent party, I
printed so many Letters without the names of their Authors; and upon this
Cretensis goes on vaporing and forging in his Heretical brain, certain Reasons
of my concealing the names of the Authors of the Letters, and in sum, would
render me to the Reader, a man to be suspected of juggling and forgery, and the
Letters to be void of all truth.

Reply. As for that fallacy of Cretensis, whereby he labors to delude the
Reader, infinuating that the Letters contain the greatest part of what
Gangraena represents by way of disparagement to the Independent party, and
those Letters being without names, the names were concealed on purpose for fear
of examination of the truth of the Letters, and so the Letters containing the
greatest part of disparagement against the Sectaries, the Sectaries are as it
were at once cleared from what Gangraena faith against them; I say only this.
That Cretensis is a man of that impudence and large conscience, that he will
say any thing, so it may make for the Sectaries, and against the Presbyterians;
for the Letters are not neither in number of sheets the tenth part of
Gangraena, neither contain they the tenth part of the Discovery of the Errors,
Heresies, Practices, etc. beside, some things in the Letters are of another
nature, and to one of the Letters is annexed a Confutation of the matter
contained in it, consisting of two whole leaves of those few sheets, within a
few lines.

2. As for that of juggling and forgery which Cretensis would put upon me, the
man measures me by himself and his party, because that he and some of his party
are used to juggle and possibly forge Letters and News, invent and give our
many things which never were; have with the Jesuits their piae frauds to
advance their Catholic cause, therefore he thinks so of me; but I bless God I
am a plain man, hating equivocations, mental reservations, plots, underminings
of men, playing under-board, carrying things in the clouds; I count honesty the
best policy, and faithful plain dealing the greatest wisdom, and the
Independents will find it so in the end, however for a while they prosper by
their shufling tricks, devices, policies, as Strafford, Canterbury, and others
did before them.

3. To come to the main charge of concealing the names of those who writ me
Letters, and all the inferences drawn from thence: I answer, I have already
given some Reasons for it, and do add these unto them; most of the men who
writ the Letters, writ them not for that end to be printed, knew not of, nor
imagined no such matter, neither did I acquaint them with it, and for me
without their leave obtained to print their Names to the world, I could not do
it, keeping unviolated the rules of friendship, besides I well understood that
were a way to cut off correspondency and Intelligence for the future, if I
should print men's Names publicly to the world, writing in a private way to me:
Of all the Letters written to me, there were two only which I expressed to the
Authors I would print them, and acquainted them with my purpose, whose Names
notwithstanding (excepting the two first Letters subscribed) I concealed with
the rest for company: But now that I may overthrow Cretensis Proposition, and
his Inferences, his Foundation, and his Superstructures, I shall name most of
them who writ the Letters to me and others, as also from whose hands I received
those Letters which were printed by me, though not written to me. The first
Letter was written me from Mr. Strong, a Member of the Assembly of Divines, who
after he had told me by word of mouth the contents of this Letter, promised to
send it me in a Letter, and I acquainted him then what use it was for, and he
said he would justify what he writ, and named others in whose presence Master
Den maintained these Points. The second Letter was written from Master Simon
Ford, to a Member of the Assembly Master Gower^s, from whose hands I received
it, and told Mr. Gowers I should print it, to which he was willing, and since
Gangraena was printed, the Author writes to me about his Letter, That he will
enlarge and confirm the particulars in that Letter, and send it to me. The
third Letter was one Master Josiab Ricrasts, who owns it, and has been with me
since Cretensis came forth, and to my knowledge is drawing up an Answer to
Cretensis, for so much as concerns that Letter. The fourth Letter was written
by a Weaver in Somersetshire, one Crab (if I mistake, not the name) and I
received it from M. Rosewal a City Minister well known, who will own it, and
make it good it is such a man's: And thus I have given an account of the Copies
of all the whole Letters printed by me: Now for the Extract of certain Letters
written to me and some other Ministers, for seven of them, which are the
greatest part of those Extracted Letters, namely all those which concern
Colchester and Mr. Ellis, or some others there (of which Letters Mr. Ellis
himself writes thus to a friend in London; The aspersions cast on me, and some
others here by Mr. Edwards, are as false as foul; which because they are a
great part of his Book and strength, those who are here concerned in it, will,
if God please, shortly make Reply, Cretensis p. 44.) he who writ them is not
afraid of his name, neither was his name concealed for fear of an Examination
of the truth of the Letters, as Cretensis by reading this Letter lately sent to
me from him may understand, which I here print to a tittle.

To my Reverend and worthy Friend Mr. Thomas Edwards Minister of the Word of
God.
Reverend Sir,
THere is a passage in Mr. John Goodwins Book, charging you with abusing Mr.
Ellis of Colchester, and the Saints in those parts, and that he will shortly
make Reply to your false and foul aspersions. These are therefore to certify
you, that concerning those Letters I writ unto you from Colchester, I have them
attested under the hands of many sufficient witnesses, each particular that is
material being ayerred by three witnesses at least, and those of piety and
judgment; which attestations I shall keep by me to produce them upon fit
occasions to justify those Letters to the world. Yet it is possible he will
Reply to those things as false and foul, or come off with distinctions and
mental reservations; but these things are so evident in this Town, and much
more then I writ unto you (as his Preaching for the pulling down of our
Churches, and other things that I can prove) that his Pamphlet will do him no
good in this place. For it will not be the first time that he has said and
unsaid the same things here, denying and dissembling his opinions for
advantage, as will be testified by many witnesses, by some of the Honorable
Members of the House of Commons, Ministers, and others, godly and judicious
Christians: This I thought good to signify for the present, recommending you
to the grace of God, I rest

Your affectionate friend and fellow labor in the Gospel Rob. Harmar.
April 1646.

Now by all this the Reader may see what to judge of Cretensis, and his false
glosses and commentaries upon the Letters Printed in Gangraena; and had I
Cretensis railing scoffing Rhetoric which he makes use of in this section, and
in many other places of his Book, I might spin out whole leaves in aggravation
and scoring up of lies, evil surmisings, bitter words scoff, and jeers
expressed by Cretensis upon occasion of the Printed Letters; but I forbear to
contend with him in this kind; truth needs not such colors, though errors does
to set it off. The hare relation of these things is a sufficient confutation of
Cretonsis; and if the printed Letters of which Cretensis, Master Ellis, yea and
Master Saltmars^ make such a cry of forgerie, falsitie, dare abide the light,
and their Authors are ready to justify them, the judicious Reader by this may
both judge of the truth of other things contained in Gangraena, and of the
folly and vanity of the rest of Cretensis allegations against my Book.

As for the extract of four or five Letters, whose Authors names I have not yet
mentioned, there is no one particular matter of fact, or relation of stories
excepted against any of them; the other Letters whose Authors I have named, are
the foul offensive Letters, and therefore I shall spare their names till the
truth of the facts related in them be questioned by Cretensis in a Rejoinder:
only for present I assert, I have the original Letters by me under the hands of
the Ministers to produce, and further I make no question, if the evils spoken
against in those Letters might be remedied, and the proof censured according
the nature of their offenses, but the Ministers who writ them would be ready to
come up and own them in the sight of the sun, and prove a great deal more then
they have written. And for a conclusion of my Reply to this eight Sect. of
Cretensis, had Cretensis and his followers but a little Presbyterian faith
(which Sectaries so scoff at) and ingenuity, out of all the particulars which I
have nakedly and clearly laid down, they would believe that all the Letters
from first to last were neither forged, nor names concealed, for fear of the
examination of the truth, nor because my name should be the greater, and rise
better by being only known, but be ashamed of all that is written in this
Section, especially considering Master Edwards has brought all the names of
the Writers, challenged from out of the land of darkness, into the land of
light, and given such reason (a^ he has) for the former concealing of them.

Cretensis page II. makes two challenges, casting the Glove to whosoever will
take it up; and his first challenge is, that for thirty of those opinions
impeached in my Catalogue of error and heresy (and he will not say for how
many more) he will undertake to bring them off with the honor of truth.
Secondly, for that error, viz. That Faith in a proper sense is imputed to
Justification, and not Christ's Righteousness; he challenges all the
Presbyterians one after another, assembled, or not assembled in England,
Scotland and Ireland to prove by Scriptures, or by dint of Argument either,
That Faith is not imputed in a proper sense.

Reply. The man from challenging me, page third, rises in his confidence to
challenge all the world (as if the man had learning and parts to deal with any
man under heaven) but Cretensis needed not to have gone so far, I shall find
him near hand those who will deal with him without going into France, Scotland
and Ireland; for the first of these, I take up his Glove again, and give him
his liberty to name twenty and ten of those opinions, and as many more of them
as he will, and do promise to enter into the Lift with him, that he shall not
prove them to be truths, and I expect he should make good his challenge out of
hand, at least to set out in his Rejoinder to my Reply, which of the 180.
Errors he will take the Tutoridge and Patronage of; And for the second, Master
Roborough (whom Cretensis scoffs at page 26. by the name of Servant and Clerk)
takes up his Glove, and desire me in my Reply to signify thus much unto him:
For that jeer of Master Robor. holding his peace when Master Gataker has
spoken, his playing on servant and Master, Justice of Peace and Clerk, Master
Robor. passes it by as he has much bad language from him in his Vindication
of Master Walker; only he faith such gibing and jeering cost him naught; Its
said it runs in the blood, that he had it by tradition, from which is seems he
is not yet redeemed for all his singular profession; Master Roborough will not
deal with him in that for shoebuckles, Cretensis shall have the pre-eminence;
yet does he modestly desire an Answer to his Animadversions on M. Goodwins
Book, and is ready to make his writing good, against Cretensis and his
accomplices in further writing, or by a dispute when and where Cretensis
pleases. This the man professes who is meant in that jeer, the Servant or
Clerk that must hold his peace.

And as M. Roborough gave me the precedent words in writing, under his hand; so
he added by word of mouth, that he challenges Cretensis to dispute this point,
about Faith being imputed in a proper sense, where, when, before whom, and how
he will, leaving him to nominate his own time, place, company, manner of
dispute, either by writing or by word of mouth; by Scriptures or by dint of
argument, in all which Cretensis having this liberty, and so the advantage of
him; yet M. Roborough will meet with him and dispute it as Cretensis has
stated the question, and that before all the Independents Assembled or not
Assembled; and Master Roborough much wonders Cretensis should thus vapor, and
in this point challenge all the Presbyterians one after another Assembled or
not Assembled in England, Scotland, France and Ireland, when as Master
Roborough, who is but a Scribe of that Assembly, (of which Cretensis would fain
have been a Member, and as it is thought by wise men, his great pride working
upon discontent in m^ssing of that honor, was one of the greatest cecasions of
his falling to Independency) professes that upon a conference and dispute with
him, he found him weak, not able to hold his ground, and in a word, a very
sorry Disputant; and Master Roborough offers in that Controversy about the
Imputation of Faith to Justification, wherein Cretensis boasts he is so versed
as to challenge all men, (it Cretensis dare give him a meeting) to manifest as
much to all the world in the sight of the Sun; and for a conclusion of my Reply
to these two Bravadoes of Cretensis, I desire the Reader to observe what an
impudent Braggadocio this man is, to m^ke new challenges, when as yet he has
not yet accepted of old, but lies miserably wounded both by his own pen, and
several others, not having yet answered several Books written against him, nor
a Book he promised above 12 month ago to answer, and therefore my advise to
Cretensis is, first to answer these following Books, viz. that of a Quaere upon
the Covenant, and a Letter from I. G. to T. G. Master Roboroughs Book of
Justification written against him, Master Lanes a young Merchant against that
Error of Natural men may do such things as whereunto God has by way of promise
annexed grace and acceptance, etc. Dr. Stewart against M. S. this Reply to
Cretensis, and a larger Reply already in the Press against Cretensis and my
Antapologie, and after he has answered all these from point to point, as
becomes a Scholar with reason and words of soberness, and not with rail^gs,
Scoffs, six footed words, then to make his new challenges, and defend 30.
Errors, and as many more as he will (laid down in my Catalogue) and among
others, for old acquaintance sake, that of Imputation of Faith.

Cretensis page 15. promises an Answer to the Antapologie shall be with me ere
long; and that he may abuse me, he abuses the Scripture, playing upon that of
Amos 5.18. resembling his Answer to my Antapologie to the day of the Lord, the
judgment of the 70. years captivity, me to the sons of Belial; his foretelling
long ago of an Answer, as to the Prophets predictions of judgment, and that
the Answer to M. Edwards Antapol. will not be for his honor, etc.

Reply. Belike I shall have a terrible thundering Answer from Cretensis, when as
it shall be to me as the day of the sore judgment of the 70. years captivity
to the sons of Belial, who derided the predictions of the Prophets, a day of
darkness, and not of light: I know not well what the man means by this,
whether he intend not (concluding by that time his Answer comes abroad to my
Antapologie the Cavaliers will be quite subdued) to try by his interest if he
cannot procure some part of the Army called by Cretensis and his Disciples, the
Saints, the honest men, etc. to carry me into captivity, and to imprison me all
my time in a Dungeon, where I shall not see the Son, nor be able to make no
Replies, nor never write against the Sectaries any more; this I confess were
like to prove as bad to me as the 70. years captivity to the Jews, to be a day
of darkness indeed; but as for any paper writing, an Answer by Reasons and
words to be so to me like the 70. years captivity and a day of darkness, I
cannot imagine: I had thought Cretensis Answers would have been rather a day of
new light to the world and to me, then a day of darkness, especially
considering what Cretensis faith page 16. of light and truth: I am somewhat
doubtful and suspicious of Cretensis threatenings, because of the ill usage of
some Ministers by some Soldiers, and of many words given out daily by too many
of Cretensis Saints in our Armies, against the Presbyterian Orthodox Ministers:
I cannot well tell what other construction to make of Cretensis words, they are
very doubtful and dangereous words; What an Answer, to be as the sore judgment
of the 70. years captivity against the sons of Belial, and to be darkness and
not light? I have read and heard of such Answers in matters of difference
between great men, who instead of an Answer in writing, or with an Answer in
writing have sent an Army of ten or twenty thousand men; and I must tell the
Reader what increases my fears, I cannot well tell how it first came into my
head, but I have had a strong opinion this 18. months, and expressed it to
diverse, that my Antapologie would never be answered till the Independents had
got that power one way or other as to cast me into prison, to seiz on all my
papers and writings by which I should make good my proof, and then they would
bring forth an Answer to my Antapologie: Now considering how far and how high
in many things the Independents have proceeded, and Cretensis threating me with
such a kind of Answer, I am apt to interpret him thus; and truly were it not
that there is a Noble General, and the greatest part of the Army by far, as I
have expressed often, free from Cretens. way, and that I live in a good strong
City near the High Court of Parliament, and by the Honorable Court of
Common-Counsel, I should expect and be afraid that his threating might be
fulfilled before ever his Reply to Antapologia would be ready to come abroad:
But whereas Cretensis says, that he verily believes his Answer to my
Antapologie will not be for my honor, in which respect I have no great ground
to be so restless and importunate in calling for it: I Reply, the Antapology
(I am sure) was for the honor of the cause I undertook, and turned to my honor
both at home and abroad, and made not for the honor of the Apologists and
Independent party; neither do I believe Cretensis Reply to my Antapology will
make more for his honor, then this brief Answer of his to Gangraena: And
however for the present Cretensis Reply when it comes first forth, by his
railings, revilings, scoffs and lies put upon me, may not make for my honor;
yet by that time my Rejoinder can be made and printed, it shall appear to all
the world, that the whole business, both Apologetical Narration, Antapology,
Cretensis Reply, and my Rejoinder, will make for the honor of the Presbyterian
cause, and of my self, as a poor Instrument pleading for it against the
Zanzumins of the time, and to the dishonor both of the Apologists and their
great Champion Cretensis.

Cretensis in this 15 page makes an Apology, and gives his Reasons why Mr.
Edwards Antapology is not answered in so long a time as 18. Months, namely,
That the Independents are not men who have little or nothing to do like
Presbyterians, having the privilege of ease to Preach to bare walls and pews
in their meeting places, nor that shamelessness of forehead to make the subject
matter of their Sermons little else but loose, lying, and frivolous reports and
stories, or virulent invectives against the Saints as the Presbyterians;
neither was the way free and open to bring light into the world, but hedged up
with Clergy, Classique Councels as with thorns against them: And besides, Mr.
Edwards took not much less then 18. Months time for his Antapology, and
therefore no Wonder if the Independents be not men of more expedition.

Reply. Cretensis plays the Sophister here, making use of that fallacy non
causa pro causa, giving the false cause of not Replying, and concealing the
true; and that all these are false, is evident: 1. Because Cretensis has had
leisure to have attended the motions of my pen, and has since the 18 months
given an account to the world more then once, twice, thrice, and had leisure
now, the privilege of ease, to make an Answer to Gangraena, and could he not
with the labor of all these have Replied to Antapology? It should seem for all
the weakness, contradictions, and such like, which Cretensis speaks of
Antapology, it is a hard piece that Cretensis can write and print five several
Books, have time enough from his constant and standing labors with those who
have committed themselves to him in the Lord, before he find time to Reply to
Antapology: Besides, Cretensis had five great Champions the Apologists to
assist him in it, some of which will be found to have or to take more
privilege of ease, and seldom Preaching then the Presbyterians use to take,
and some of them have had leisure to Print other things since, wherein not so
much concerned; as also Cretensis has a privilege of ease and idleness when
he pleases to help himself (which none of the Presbyterians have) viz. to
appoint some of his Prophets in his Church to Preach for him, which he
frequently practices upon all occasions, as I can prove, and has upon pretense
of answering my Antapology. 2. Some Independents have that shamelessness of
forehead, to make the subject matter of their Sermons little else but loose,
lying, frivolous reports and stories, or virusent invectives against the
Saints, etc. as Mr. Peter's, the Vicar General and Metropolitan of the
Independents, both in New and Old England: and I wonder how Cretensis forgot
him: Name any Presbyterian, who is of any account in the Church of God, such a
loose rambling Preacher as he: And for his invectives against the Saints, it is
one of his common places in many of his Sermons to speak against the Reformed
Churches, the Reverend Ass^mbly, and the godly Presbyterian Ministers of the
Kingdom, who are not only Saints, but godly Ministers: But Mr. Peter's is not
alone, for Cretensis himself is a loose Preacher, and full of bitter invectives
in his Sermons against better Sain^s and Servants of God, then ever himself, or
any of his Church is like to be (the particular passages which he has used in
Sermons, I will give the Reader in my full Reply) and so Mr. Archer of Hausted
is famou^, or rather infamous for this, cum multis aliis, whom in my large
Reply I may add to these: As for the third Reason, the way stopped against
Printing for want of a Licenser, I have already refu^ed, and shall speak more
to it in my next Reply: And for the fourth Reason brought by Cretensis, to
Apologize for not Replying in 18 Months, it is both for matter and form all
false, and a man would wonder that Cretens: should dare to write so (though
indeed nothing of this kind is a wonder in Cretensis). Cretensis, how can you
answer it to God, to your Church, and to all men, to write such a manifest
untruth? That I took not much less then eighteen Months in making the
Antapology, when as the Apologetical Narration (I am sure of it) came forth in
the Month of December, and to my best remembrance toward the later end of it,
and my Antapology was printed and abroad either the last week of June
following, or the first of July, which at the farthest was not full seven
Months, and is far from eighteen Months: As for that insinuation of Cretensis
joined to the eighteen Months, the advantage of liberty, and freedom from
other engagements which Mr. Edwards had above other men, it is a false one; for
from that time I began to Answer Apologet. Narration, till it came forth, I
never had less liberty or freedom in my life, nor more businesses and
engagements of several sorts in reference to the Public, Preaching in that
time of writing my Book very often, three times a week constantly, and many
times four, besides the tedious Journeys between London and Godalming, riding
to Preach there; together with all the difficulties and fears of many Alarums
from the Enemy, etc. in that time. But before I draw to a conclusion of this, I
desire the Reader to observe what a proud arrogant speech this is of Cretensis
to extol himself and his party, with the contempt and scorn of the
Presbyterians, If Independent Ministers had either the privilege of ease to
preach to the bare walls and pews in their meeting places: Now for this in my
large Reply I will acquaint the Reader what privileges Independent Ministers
and Independent Saints have and take above the Presbyterians, and what their
privilege of ease and idleness is above the Presbyterians, as also show the
true Reasons why the world wanders after the Beast, many of the Independents
are so stockt after before Presbyterians; as also by what a sort of people, and
what little cause Cretensis and his Saints have to glory and boast of it; and
when I have spoken to that at large, I believe I shall be out of Cretensis debt
for these words.

Only for present I shall tell Cretensis these three things. 1. That there are
Presbyterian Ministers who Preach no more to bare walls and pews then Cretensis
and the Independent Ministers, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Calamy, Mr.
Sedgwick, cum multis aliis, both in City and Country. 2. There are many
Independent Ministers who have Preached lately, and do so still as much to bare
walls and pews as any Presbyterians, witness Mr. Burton, Mr. Davis, Mr. Freak,
Mr. Ellis, Mr. Furman, etc. 3. Presbyterians do not use however Independents
may (as Cretensis in his speech implies) to have ever the more privilege of
ease by Preaching to a few rather then to many, by Preaching to a hundred two
or three, or Preaching to a thousand or two, for they Preach out of Conscience
and discharge of duty, to do good to the souls of men, and not for applause to
please a multitude, and therefore it is all one to them whether there be fewer or
more, one hundred or many; but this is expressed according to the Independent
humor, who have their Sermons of several sorts, those of greater pains and
study when their pews and walls are full, and their Sermons of ease when their
pews are empty, and their walls bare. Now to put a period to this fourteen
Section, with an Animadversion upon that passage of Cretensis in page 16. his
constant and standing labors with those who have committed themselves to him in
the Lord. I ask of Cretensis where he finds this used of a people to commit
themselves unto the Ministers; we are commanded to commit our way to the Lord,
and to commit our souls to him, and of God it is often used; but in what place is
it of people to Ministers, and then those who have committed themselves to you;
why did you not say to the Church rather? what is Cretensis become the Church?
And lastly, why was it not as well expressed, Those to whom I have committed my
self unto in the Lord? for I believe upon better consideration, it will be
found, that Cretensis has as much committed himself to his people, as they to
him; for they Preach and rule as well as Cretensis; and believe upon
Examination (the Church will be found to Preach oftener then Cretensis, for all
his constant and standing labors) and his young Prophets to exercise upon the
week and Lords day, and he bound to hear and obey them as well as they him: And
now if How the Cobbler were alive again, Cretensis and he would have no more
Disputation and difference about humane learning necessary to the Interpreting
of Scriptures, and Preaching of the Word, seeing Cretensis allows it now in his
Church Members far inferior to How, and Cretensis would crave pardon of him for
abusing him, so as he did upon that Controversy; and for a recompense unto
him, Mr. How should be preferred to be Teacher in Cretensis Church; Mr.
Cretensis the Pastor, and Mr. How the Teacher; for belike humane learning is
not now necessary to the Preaching of the Word; and sure we shall one day have
a Book of Cretensis Retractations and Confessions, and might have had it before
this time, but that Cretensis knows not how his mind may change again, and
what New Light he may yet have; and so he will stay till he dies, that we may
have it altogether, and without any more change.

Cretensis Sect: 15. page 17.18, 19. with a great many of flourishing words and
a bold face, labors to possess the Reader, That in my Antapology and Gangraena
I have done nothing else almost but labored with might and main to call for
fire from Hell to destroy the Saints, to inflame the powers of this world with
hatred and bloodinesse of spirit against the Sons and Daughters of God, and to
importure the Civil Magistrate to pour out themselves in wrath and indignation
against them, charging me with a bloody Negotiation in writing Gangraena,
inveteracenesse and Dragon-likenesse of spirit, and how diametrally opposite in
the cause and courses I take against Sectaries, I am to Christ, Paul, Austin,
Calvin and Luther.

Reply. Cretensis goes upon a false foundation, supposing all those to be
Saints, the Sons and Daughters of God, whom I speak against in Gangraena, which
is stark false, and of which I shall give in my large Reply a satisfactory
account to the world of that mistake; for however they are Cretensis Saints,
they are none of Gods Saints, and the man erres, not knowing the Scriptures;
they may well go for Saints in Cretensis Calendar, but never in my Creed,
neither go they for Saints in Mr. Thomas Goodwins late Mr. Thomas Goodwins
Sermon called The great Interest of State and Kingdom, p. 53. If any man think
I am a pleading for a Liberty of all Opinions, of what nature, and how gross
soever, I humbly desire them to remember that I only plead for Saints; and I
answer plainly, The Saints need it not. The Apostle tells us there are
damnable. Heresies, so 2 Pet. 1.1, 2 and they will soon unsaint them. So that I
speaking against the g^ossest Errors, and men holding such, in M. Tho: Goodwins
judgment I speak against those who are no Saints, but are persons
contradistinguished and opposed to Saints.
Sermon before the House of Commons, but are there blotted out by him.

2. What ever I speak in both my Books upon this point to the Civil Magistrate,
is no other but what the Scripture clearly holds out; and though I have done it
with affection and zeal, yet not with bitterness nor bloodinesse, and I am
confident that Cretensis nor all his compeers cannot in all their r^ading show
me two Books of any Divine who proves so much, and so foul things as I do in my
Antapology and Gangraena, written with more moderation, fairness, and with
less bitterness; and ^et Cretensis in his (...) Book instance in any bloody
bitter passages, always provided, he wrest not words nor leave out no part of
sentences.

3. The Sectaries themselves and Cretensis too will one day confess Master
Edwards in opposing Errors, Heresies, discoveri^g them, and stirring up the
Mag^strates to their duty, was their good Friend, a merciful man, one who both
with fear and compassion would have saved them out of the fire; and I would ask
Cretensis, whether are they more merciful, tender, that will not let little
Children, sick persons, mad men do what they will, go where they please, eat
what they list; or they who use all good means to hinder them, and provide
wholesome food and medicines for them; yea, I am of the mind, before a year
comes about the Magistrates and Kingdom will say Master Edwards, and those men
who either by Writing or Preaching spoke most against the Errors, Heresies,
Schisms of the times, and Toleration, and stirred us up to hinder and suppress
their growth, were most merciful both to the souls and bodies of men, and to
the Kindoms, and far from bloodinesse, bitterness, or inveteratenesse.

4. Whosoever does but well read the Scriptures, and observe what quick sharp
passages are there recorded to have come from the mouth of Christ and his
Apostles against Errors, Heresies, and false Teachers, yea, sharper and more
spoken against false Doctrines and false Teachers, then against bad manners,
(as for instance, Matthew 7.15. Galatians 1.8, 9. and 5.10, 12.2 Peter 2.1, 2,
3.2 John 9.10, 11. the whole Epistle of Jude, Revelation 2.14, 15, 20, 22, 23.
with a hundred other such) will never blame me for bitterness, bloodinesse,
inveteratenesse, etc. furiousness and over eagerness in my opposing Errors
and false Teachers, who according to my poor measure have endeavored in
opposing Errors, to follow the Example of Christ and his Apostles, though I
have fallen far short of my duty in this kind, not improving my time and
^alents, but wanting in that Zeal, Courage, Diligence, requisite to this work:
(And however Cretensis and his Compeers think I have over-done) yet I have
great cause to be deeply humbled for doing no more, and to hie me into my
Study, and cry, misirere mei Domine: But to draw to a conclusion, I shall in*
this case Answer Cretensis and all the Sectaries who accuse me, and cry out of
my eagerness and overdoing, as Luther did Erasmus, charging him for too much
vehemence. But that I have dealt in this cause more vehemently I confess it a
fault, Quod autem vehementius egovi^, agnos^^ culpum, (...) culpa est, (...)
testimonium hoc mihi in mundo reddi in causa Dei mirifice gaudeo: Atque utinam
and ipse Deus id testimo^ie in novis^ime die confirmares^? Q^is tum beatior
Luthero, qui tanti sui saeculi testimonio commendatur, quod veritatis causam,
non seguiter neo fraudulenter sed vehementer satis vel potius nimio egerit? tum
ill Iud Ieremiae feleciter evaserim, maledictus qui facit opus Dei negligenter.
Luthenus de servo Arbitrio.
if it be a fault; yea I do wonderfully rejoice this testimony to be given to
me in the world in the cause of God: And O that God himself would confirm this
testimony in the last day, who then should be happier then Luther, who is
commended by such a testimony of the age he lived in, that he did not handle
the cause of truth slothfully and deceitfully, but vehemently enough, or rather
too much? Then should I happily escape that of Jerem. Cursed be he that does
the work, etc.

5. The bitterness, bloodines, etc. with which Cretens. labors to load me, will
be found in Cretensis and the Sectaries, and as they grow in power and number,
will be discovered every day more and more; can any man think that Cretensis
who has so much rage and malice in his heart, and so much gall in his pen, (as
he discovers in this Book against all Presbyterians) would not if he had power
do as much with his hand^, and be another Bonner, or another John of Leyden?
God keep the Presbyterians out of the hands of the Independents and Sectaries
when they come to have power, and think they are strong enough to Master them;
does not Cretensis discover his bloody mindedness against me in the three last
lines, of this 15. Section, inviting as it were some of his Sectaries to fall
upon me, preaching that doctrine to them. That whatsoever I shall suffer by any
Sectary for writing against them, I shall suffer but as a Malefactor and an
evil doer; Now for proof of the bloody mindedness, persecution and liberty of
Conscience which the Sectaries will give the Orthodox, when they come to be
stronger, and of all the means they use, and ways they take to give the
Presbytery liberty of Conscience, I shall in my full Reply to Cretensis, speak
at large: only for present thus much, they labor to get all the power of Arms
they possibly can into their hands, and the command of all the great Towns and
Ci^ies, and by one way or other to turn out of place, keep out, obstruct, blast
all cordial zealous Presbyterians, all which, no doubt, are done to give the
Presbyterians liberty of conscience, and now they give the Presbyterians good
words viz. that they will send them packing to Rome, that it were a good deed
they were hanged, and knocked on the head, their guts goared out, that they are
Antichristian Priests, cursed Priests, damned Priests, with such like; all
which no doubt, are forerunners of the liberty of Conscience the Sectaries
intend for the Presbyterians; and for the proof I will give Cretensis a few
instances. The first is from Lynne, (a place well known to Cretensis)
concerning one Johnson a Sectary and a Cannoneer, who discoursing concerning
Presbyterians and Independents, said that Presbyterians would have their guts
goared out; and being answered that the Presbyterial government was ordered by
both Houses of Parliament, and that he being in the service ought not to speak
against them, This sent up to a Parliament man, and a true Copy of this given
me by a Member of the Assembly.
he answered for all that, they should have their guts goared out: Now this and
more will be averred upon o^th, and is subscribed by four hands, John Feek,
Robert Cut^ord, Thomas Edis, Richard Robinson. March 7. 1645. The second is of
my self ^old (...) me both by a godly Minister, and by a Gentleman of worth and
honesty, who were ear witnesses; namely, that that it was pity I was not hanged
for an example for making my last Book, and that it were a good deed I were
knocked on the head. A third is of another Minister, a Presbyterian, an active
man, some Independents in the hearing of ^ minister (who relates it) said they
hoped ere long to see him in Lollards Tower^: The last I shall instance is a
passage ou^ of a Letter sent from Dover subscribed by five hands, concerning an
Independent there, one Master Mascal, that in his expounding the Scriptures,
with much vehemence cries out to the people against our present Ministry, Your
Priests, your damned Priests, your cursed Priests etc. Now Cretensis I
challenge you in all my bloody negotiations against the Sectaries (as you
phrase it) to show in any of my Books any such passage against the Sectaries as
these are, This Letter was written to a Member of the Assembly, and the whole
Letter printed verbatim follows afterward.
or any so bit^ter as I can produce out of yours and other of your Saints
Books, as Arraignment of Persecution, etc.

Cretensis in Sect. 18. and 19. lays down four things, 1. That in the 70.
Error of this Catalouge I intended to arraign his opinion concerning the
imputation of Faith, and non-imputation of Christ's righteousness in
Justification. 2. That I do falsely and forgingly represent the opinion by
fathering that mangrel expression (...) credere upon it, and which is no where
used by him throughout the Controversy. 3. That I charge him to quote Calvin,
Bu^er, and affirm others for his opinion in the point of Justification, whom
yet I affirm to be professedly of another judgment in the Doctrine of
Justification, which he declares to be false, and then quotes some places out
of Calvin, Bucer, for the justifying of himself, and disproving my former
Allegation. 4. He recriminates, asperses, and jeers at me, that in my going
about to rectify the mistakes of others, and being the great Aristarchus of
the Errors, and Heresies of the times, have my self vented Atheological and
putid assertions in the point of Justification, as in Gangraena page. 22. in
the margin, and that if Calvin and Bucer be not for him, but I shall stand
still to deny it, he must profess ingenuously that he knows no reason but to
judge me incapable of the English sense of a Latin sentence; and that if I deny
Calvin, Bucer, and others whom he quotes to be of the same judgment with him
in the point of Justification, then I either show my self to be a very
illiterate man, and not able to construe a piece of plain Latin, or else charge
Calvin, Bucer, and the rest, with being of a judgment as contrary to
themselves as to him, and then quoting Calvin, speaks to me, If I can construe
Latin, to confess in English whether Calvin be of a differing judgment from
him in the point of Justification.

Reply. It Is a sign Cretentis has a quilty conscience, that upon the naming of
an Error about Justification, without the least reflecting upon him in any
kind, he should take it so to himself, as to say I meant him particularly;
there are diverse other Sectaries besides Cretensis who hold this Error, whom I
might aim at, and did intend as well as Master Goodwin. Secondly I have
neither falsely nor forgingly represented the opinion in using that expression
of (...) credere, though I should grant that to be true, (which yet I do not)
that Cretensis has never in Sermons, Disputations nor Books written by him
expressed himself after this manner. 1. Because there being other Sectaries
besides Cretensis holding the same opinion, if they have used To credere in
Discourses, and defended it, that is enough to justify me. 2 In Cretensis Books
of justification, it is more then once affirmed in terminis that Faith in a
proper sense, is imputed to justification, and not Christ's righteousness
imputed, and now indeed he says and unsaies, shuffles and cuts, seems to say
the same with other Divines, and then presently the contrary, I shall show (God
willing) at large in my full Reply. 3. To credere used by me in setting down
this Error, cannot be justly termed a representing the opinion falsely and
forgingly, it being used commonly by all Divines that handle this opinion, both
by the Orthodox who writ against it, and those who are for it: Arminius holding
this opinion, used this expression as learned Gomaras in a Conference held with
Praefat. ad Eccl. auie Acta Synod^ National, Dordr.
Arminius, proved from Arminius own hand writing, wherein he maintained that in
man's justification before God, the righteousness of Christ not to be imputed
to justification, but faith is self, or To credere by the gracious acceptance
of God to be that righteousness of ours by which we are justified before God;
yea, and Wotton de Reconcil. par 2. lib. 1 cap. 15. page, 175.176.
Mr. Wotton himself Cretensis Master speaks so, but when we say faith
justifies, we understand ipsum credere, (...); 3. For that charge against
Cretensis of quoting Calvin, Bucer, and and others for him, when they are known
ex professo to be of another judgment, ^tis most true and just, and a man
would wonder at the impudency of Cretensis to deny it, and to quote Calvin and
Bucer again as he does; and before I have done with Cretensis it shall appear
that I will make good the charge against him, and yet neither show my self a
very illiterate man, not able to construe a piece of plain Latin, nor yet
charge Calvin, Luther, and the rest with being of a judgment contrary to
themselves, but discover him to be an impudent caviller and falsifier of
Authors. As for those very places quoted by him out of Calvin, they prove not
the thing he quotes them for, and therefore did wisely forbear to english them:
He wretchedly and miserably wrests them, as that on Galath. 3.6. where Calvin
both in the words going before the words quoted by Cretensis, and afterward at
large, shows he takes faith not in a proper sense, but in a Relative,
respecting the object; and to satisfy the Reader, I will quote Calvin's words
upon that place next immediately following the sentence quoted by him out of
Calvin. Ergo justificari fide dicimur, non quia fides habitum aut qualitatem in
nos transfundat: sed quia deo accepti sumus. Cur autem fidei tribuitur tantus
honor, ut (...) causa justitiae nostrae; primo sciendum est esse causam
instrumentalo^ dunta^at; nam propr^e loquendo, justitia nostra nihil a liud est
quam grat^it^ Dei acceptio, in qua sundata est nostra salus: sed quia Dominus
testimonium amoris nobis amoris sui and gratiae per Evangelium reddendo, illam
quam dixi justitiam nobis communicate: ideo fide illam percipimus. Ergo quam
fidei tribuimus hominis justificationem non de causa principali disputamus; sed
tantum notamus modum quo perveniunt homines ad veram justitiam. Justitia enim
haec merum est Dei donum, non qualitas quae in hominibus haereat, sed fide
tantum possidetur, neque id merito fidei ut sit quasi debita merces: sed quia
fide recipimus quod Deus ultro donat. I forbear to English this pass^ge leaving
it to Cretensis, to have a proof of him whether he will not be as false in his
translations as in his quotations; So those words of Calvin on Romans 4 3. v. 6
make nothing at all to prove the Imputation of Faith and the non-Imputation of
Christ's righteousness, but even upon those verses Calvin expresses several
passages to the contrary, as they who turn to the places may see: And for Bucer
Mr. Wotton himself acknowledges he was of another judgment, speaking thus of
him, whom I persuade my self to have been the Author of this opinion of
Imputation; besides Reformed Divines generally, Wotton^ de Reco^e part. 2. l.
1. cap. 14. Quem ego de imputatione opinionis authorem fuisse mihi perswadeo.
not only two or three, but all are against this opinion of the Imputation of
faith, and non-Imputation of Christ's righteousness, and for proof of this the
Reader may peruse Mr. Roboroughs examination of Cretensis Treatise of
Justification, first part page 9, 10. where he shows that all our Divines are
against Faith in a proper sense, Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Pareus, Ursinus,
Musculus, etc. (however Arminius and Bertius were for it) unto which Cretensis
never to this day made any Reply (though he vapors and brag^ thus of his
opinion of Imputation of Faith) So also the Preface to the Churches, set before
the Acts of the Synod of Dor^ shows the same by Gomarus particularly
instancing in, and convincing Arminius of his Hetorodoxnes from holding of this
opinion, that in justification the righteousness of Christ was not imputed,
but believing: And now considering all this, and much more that has been said
and written to Cretensis, I cannot but wonder he should be such an impudent
Cretensis as to bring these places out of Calvin, Bucer, Pareus, and can give
no other reason of it, but that of Paul to Titus concerning Heretics, that the
man sins in this, being condemned of himself; and for this Error, and many more
which Cretensis holds (notwithstanding all his palliating and daubing) I hold
them so great, and the differences in opinions between him and I to be of such
moment, that as Gomarus told Arminius, he durst not appear before the judgment
seat of Christ with his opinions, so neither would I with Cretensis opinions,
nor his ways of managing them for a thousand worlds: As for Cretensis charging
me with venting Errors in the point of justification, whilst I was reckoning up
the Errors of others, I Reply, Cretensis takes advantage from a word or two
left out by the Printer in the margin of my Book, which was not the fault of my
Copy, as I am ready to satisfy any man, and to make it appear undeniable,
besides in the second impression of my Book (which came forth full fourteen
days before Cretensis Answer) the mistake was amended; however the sense of
the word before it was amended easily showed where the fault was, though
Cretensis aggravate it so high, as to make it amount to Atheological and putid
assertions. But in one word to stop the mouth of Cretensis, what I say of
Justification in the margin of page 22. it is verbatim to a tittle in the new
Annotations on the Bible, made by the joint labors of certain learned Divines
appointed thereunto by Authority, and whatever in the first impressio^ was
mistaken in that particular by the fault of the Printer, was in the second long
before Cretensis Animadversions amended by me, so that the Reader may observe
that Cretensis for want of matter finds fault where the fault is confessed to
his hand; and had I any hope Cretensis could understand Latin when it makes
against his opinion of the imputation of faith, and would be convinced, I would
turn him over to diverse learned men to English their Latin sentences, as Peter
Martyr, Lubbertus, Sibrandus etc. where the man should read other manner of
evidence against non-imputation of faith, and for imputation of Christ's
righteousness, then ever he yet offered in all his sermons and discourses
about justification; but for a conclusion, Cretensis answer me one question,
why did you not as well except against some other opinions named in my
Catalogue, viz. 84.85. as this 70. of faith in a proper sense imputed to
justification; you were as much named and particularized in them as in this,
and they call you Father as well as this; but I suppose the reason, you were
not yet willing in public to own those Children, and so would take no notice
of them, though I doubt not those and other things laid down in my Book (though
without your name written upon them) enraged you, and have made you as a Bear
robbed of her whelps, to think that I should know so much by you.

Cretensis, p. 27. Sect. 22. labors to clear himself from a passage I charged
him with, that he should utter in a Sermon against the Parliament and their
power, etc. saying, It was nothing else but a manifest and clear truth, and
that which had passed the trial of Presbyterian fire it self, and was come
forth in full weight without suffering the le^st damage or detriment by it, and
if any such gap was opened by it to slight their Authority and power, he knows
no wild Beasts have broke in at it, but some Presbyterians; and then goes on
according to his Dialect to inveigh against me for ^^^lling at the root of
Parliamentary Authority and power, because that I find fault with his truth
(as he calls it) viz. his speaking so disgracefully and contemptibly of the
Parliament.

Reply. O the impudence and incorrigiblenesse of Cretensis, after so high an
offense committed by him against Parliamentary Authority, complained of to a
Committee of Parliament, upon the debate of it judged by some of the Committee
to be an offense of that high nature, that these words were expressed of him,
and of his offense, that he as much or rather more deserved to be hanged then
the Archbishop, yea the whole Committee judged it of such a nature and crime,
as too great for them to censure, so that it was ordered to be reported by the
Chairman to the House it self, and Master White told me more then once, he was
by order of the Committee to report it (though by many great businesses of the
Kingdom he was hindered) now I say that after all this Cretensis should in the
sight of the sun justify it for a manifest and clear truth, and fly out upon
me and my Abbettors for finding fault with him, is a strange hight; certainly
Cretensis, if what you had said had been such a manifest and clear truth, it is
wonder such words should be spoken in the Committee of it, and the thing
ordered to be reported to the House it self, as to high for a Committee; and
that your words spoken against the Parliament were not a manifest truth; I
refer the Reader to such a Book of Mr. Master Pryns Truth Triumphing over
Falsehood, Epistle Dedicat. and in the Book 106 107 108 where Mr. Pri^ both
lays down his passages against the Parliament, and confutes fully his
justification and pleading for them.
Pryns, to your own confession in your Answer to him, and to the Record kept by
the Co^mittee for Plundered Ministers.

As for the reason you intimate why that which was uttered by you, was nothing
else but manifest and clear truth, because it has pass^d the trial of
Presbyterian fire it self, and is come forth in full weight, without suffering
the least damage or detriment of it, that is, upon complaint and examination
of it by a Committee of Parliament you are come off, and not censured. I Reply,
the Reader may observe that Presbyterian fire is a cooler, softer, gentler fire
then the Independent fire; and that the presbyterians are not so (...) crying
for fire from hell to destroy all those who receive the Lord Christ, only
because their faces are not instanly set to receive the Traditions of their
Discipline and Doctrine; for Cretensis has passed the trial of Presbyterian
fire it self, and is come forth in full weight without suffering the least
damage or detriment by it: I believe if either I, or any known cordial
Presbyterian in England in speaking against the Independent party, had said so
much to the vilifying and contempt of the Parliament as Cretensis did, in
speaking against Presbyterians, and we had come to the trial of Independent
fire it self, we should never have come forth in full weight without suffering
the least damage or detriment by it, but we should have carried to our graves
the scorching and skars of that fire, if not wholly consumed by it. (...) Though
you were one of the first; yet you are not alone, nor the last of those who by
writing or speaking having uttered things against the Parliament, and being
questioned by Committees have passed the trial of Presbyterian fire, and come
off too, witness your brother Lilburn, and yet all they have said and written,
have not been manifest and clear truths: You who are Independents and Sectaries
have privileges in many things which poor Presbyterians have not; you have a
privilege to steal horses, Cretensis page 34 whereas it is a great fault in
Presbyterians to look over the hedge; you have a privilege to set up Churches
and a Government of your own without leave, or waiting on the Parliament; but
it is a great offense in the Presbyterians to Petition the Parliament in all
humility to settle the Presbyterian Government, witness those many reproaches
in some printed news Books (those pensioners of the Independent party) as also
the bitter preaching against their Petitions by some Independent Ministers,
with the hard speeches cast out against them by the Independent party, You
belike have a privilege to preach, print, speak any thing against Parliament,
their Ordinances, Orders, Covenant, Members: yea to act against their Votes,
Ordinances, and to pass the trial of Presbyterian fire (as you term it) and
to come forth in full weight without suffering the least damage or detriment,
whereas I am persuaded a great deal less preached or printed by Presbyterians,
would have been censured to be burnt by the hand of the common Hangman, and the
men themselves in danger of hanging.

Thirdly; Cretensis, you have no such reason to bo^st so of what you have
preached, that it is a manifest and clear truth and has passed the Presbyterian
fire it self, and is come forth in full weight, etc. till you know what the
sense of the House of Commons will be upon it; when it is reported to the House
according to the order of the Committee, and the House has cleared you, then
you might better have used these words; but Cretensis, though you say the
bitterness of death is past, all danger is over, you may be deceived, quod
desertur non aufertur, the House may be at more leisure and call upon such
kind of things, and upon a review you may be made to know what it is, not only
to slight and vilify a Parliament, open a gap to a total contempt of all their
Authority and power, but when you have done so, then openly and publicly to
justify that what you have said is a manifest and clear truth. Cretensis I
tell you plainly, I would not for all the Books in my study, the Independens
could prove such words spoken by me against the power and dignity of
Parliament, how light account soever you make of them.

Fourthly, the Reader may by this clearly see what to judge of Cretensis
charging me and my Book with lying forgery etc. when as he is not ashamed to
tax me in this place, that I could not lightly have uttered any thing that
struck more dangerously at the very root of all Parliamentary Authority and
power, then to say that Cretensis in speaking against the Parliament and their
power, opened a gap to sl^ghting of their authority and power; what a strange
art and faculty has Cretensis as of making all Authors for him, though they
writ against him; so of making master Edwards, and his Abettors in pleading for
the Parliament against Cretensis, to strike dangerously at the very root of all
Parliamentary Authority and power? and that notwithstanding for the words
Cretensis spoke against the Parliament he was complained of to the Committee of
Plundered Ministers by understanding men and cordial to the Parliament, and the
matter so deeply resented by the Honorable Committee, as I have already
expressed; but the truth of it is, Cretensis in all his writings, both in point
of opinions, and words that he utters in defense of them, he will say any thing
as manifestly contrary to truth, as to affirm black is white, and darkness
light; neither will he be beaten out of it by any reason, but hides himself,
and clouds things in a multitude of words, where an ordinary Reader loses
himself as in a wood.

Fifthly, it is strange Cretensis, you dare say that you know none but
Presbyterians have broken in at the gap you have made, do you not know what
Lilburn has done? besides have you not read Englands Birthright, The Ordinance
for Tithes Dismounted? cum multis aliis? you indeed lead the way, and was the
first of all the pretended friends to the Parliament, out of discontent in
missing a place in the Assembly) who spoke so slightly and scornfully of the
Parliament; but many have followed you and broken in at it, both in Sermons,
Discourses, printed Books, especially when any thing the Parliament was about
displeased them: but as for the Presbyterians respects, duty, patient waiting
on the Parliament, as it is already evident to many; so I doubt not, but in due
time it will be manifested to all the world to their Honor, and the shame of
the Independent party; and I challenge you to instance in any one Presbyterian,
who has either abused the whole Parliament, or singled out many particular
Members by name, as many of your Sectaries have done; but of the difference in
the carriage and behavior of the Presbyterians to the Parliament, and of the
Sectaries to the Parliament, I have at large satisfied the Reader in Gangraena,
page 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. all which Cretensis takes no notice of, not giving
the least answer unto it, and therefore Cretensis before you vapor any more in
this kind, remember in your rejoinder, to answer all I have said against your
party, in those pages now mentioned.

Cretensis Sect. 23. makes a great deal of do, spending many leaves in excusing
himself, and some of his Church for bowling on a day of public thanksgiving,
telling the Reader it was in the evening, and in the company of Presbyterians,
and but for about half an hour; and he relates a story of four Presbyterians
spending an afternoon upon a day of Thanksgiving in fishing; and threatens that
if I go on in telling tales of Independents, he or some others will tell
stories of Presbyterian mistakes in the night, and of a Presbyterian Angel, who
has committed some foul offense, yea and that he has a Manuscript by him
concerning Master Edwards himself, which discovers his juggling, and indirect
walking between the two Towns of Godalming in Surry, and Dunmow in Essex; and
that if there be no remedy, it will be content to submit it self to the Press,
and therefore concludes if I go on to lay open the Sectaries; I have devoted
the names and reputation of all Presbyterians who are obnoxious to the universal
abhorring both of the present and future ages, and therefore says it concerns
all Presbyterians in general, and the Doctorage of this way more particularly
to heal the Gangren of my pen, and to restrain the further spreading of it,
otherwise their names and reputations are but so many dead corpses.

Reply. I shall reserve many things I could answer to this Section, till my
full Reply, and for present say these few things; First, Cretensis after two
whole leaves spent, and a mountain of words cast up, confesses in the close the
thing I charged him with, that he played at bowls on a day of public
Thanksgiving, only he minces, extenuates, hides his sin all he may, speaking of
it very tenderly, stirring himself a little by casting a Bowl, betaking himself
for about half an hour to the exercise; the sun being by that time either down,
or very near it. Now these words of Cretensis, b^ings to my mind that answer of
Aaron to Moses about the golden Calf; then I cast the gold into the fire, and
there came out this calf; as if the Calf made it self, and came out without
hands: So Cretensis cast a Bowl etc. How much mo^e becoming a Christian, and a
Minister of the Gospel had it been, for Master Goodwin to have given glory to
God, and to have said as Job, If I covered my transgressions as Adam, by hiding
mine iniquity in my bosom; but as Cretensis throughout his whole discourse,
has twenty and ten fetches about, to palliat, excuse, slite, make a mock of
all the horrid Heresies, Blasphemies, and Practices of all the Sectaries spoken
of by me, so does he the same here of himself and some of his Church. Now that
the Reader may be undeceived, though the first relation of this business was
told me accidentally as it was to another, without inquiry or thought on my
part (though then so spoken, as by circumstances I concluded it to be true;)
yet since Cretensis Answer came for^h I have enquired more particularly into
it, and I have it upon good ground to be after this manner; Cretensis preached
in the morning, but in the afternoon was at no Sermon, not joining himself to
spend the latter part of the day with any of the society of Gods people in
Thanksgiving for so great a victory; but in the afternoon went a walking with
some of his Church, and after that to Bowls, and instead of Cretensis about
half an hour, that he stirred himself a little by casting a Bowl; he played at
Bowls about two hours; and give over at such time, (which therefore is not
probable to be when the sun was gone down,) that another company came and played
after them. Now I could animadvert diverse things upon this relation of
Cretensis, as well as Cretensis has page 32, 33, 34, 35. viz 1. that we may see
Independents have a privilege of ease, yea, and of profaneness too, to sit
idle at home, or walk abroad to take their pleasure, when the poor
Presbyterians are either preaching or praying, or else joining themselves to
the Assemblies, where preaching, prayer and other holy worships are performing;
and if Cretensis will pretend he was a weary of his preaching in the forenoon,
and so somewhat indisposed to further labor that day; I answer, this is just
Bishoplike, who when their Lordships had preached in a forenoon, they were so
weary they could not so much as come to Church that afternoon; but Cretensis,
though you were so weary as you could not preach, could you not have come, and
given thanks for the Victory; nay, if that had been too much trouble for your
Lordship, because of your great weariness and indisposedness after your great
labors, to have gone abroad to some of the Presbyterians Churches; could you
not have gathered your Church together in your house, appointed some of your
Prophets to have exercised, and you only have sat by as at other times,
resting your weary bones. Truly Cretensis in my mind this is a very poor put
off, and sorry shift.

2. Cretensis for all his weariness and indisposednesse to further labor of
preaching, or hearing that day, yet was so eager upon his sports that he knew
not how the time went away making a long half hour, reckoning half an hour for
two hours* but Cretensis might easily mistake in this, and I shall excuse him,
it being usual for men in their sports to think time short, and to judge they
have not been an hour when they have been playing two or three; but I will
spare Cretensis and animadvert no farther for present, neither on the story nor
on his Animadversions upon it.

Secondly, as for that Cretensis brings by way of excuse, some Presbyterians
played with him, etc. I Answer, it was their fault and sin, neither will I go
about to plead for Baal, nor palliate excuse things that are evil in
Presbyterians, as Cretensis does all kind of horrid Blasphemies and Heresies in
his Sectaries: however Cretensis is never the less in fault because of
company; and indeed Cretensis being a Minister, should have given them (being
private Christians) better example, besides who knows but Cretensis example
drew these Presbyterians to it, and further it is likely these Presbyterians had
been in the afternoon at some Presbyterian Church, offered up to God both a
morning and evening sacrifice of thanksgiving, came from home later then
Cretensis and his Brethren, neither does Cretensis say the Presbyterians came
forth with him, but as he tells his own tale, he relates that after his walking
about a quarter of a mile (which might be a mile, as well as his half hours
bowling two hours) and after his coming into the Garden, and sitting about half
an hour in an Arbor (which we may well reckon for an hour to) came in some of
Master Edwards judgment of Church Government; all which being considered,
makes the matter not so bad in the Prebyterians as in Cretensis, but supposing
all this, yet I will not excuse them.

Thirdly, as for that story of one of the Assembly with three more of his com
-- or sub* Presbyters, rather four Ministers in all (expressed by Cretensis all
a long in a scoffing, yea in a profane manner; bringing in heaven and Gods
providence to make up his jefts and jeers) spending a whole afternoon upon a
day of Thanksgiving in fishing. I greatly blame them, and if there was any such
thing, they have cause to be ashamed of it as well as you for your bowling; and
it had been fitter for them four Ministers to have been fishing for the souls
of men, preaching somewhere in the afternoon, then a catching of Roaches; and
thus you see Cretensis I am impartial, not (like the Independents) excusing all
things in Presbyterians as they in Sectaries though never so vilde, and
therefore your Proverb of Presbyterians having a privilege to steal Horses
holds not as you see, for I am against a Toleration of them to look on.

Fourthly, As for your threats of discovering Presbyterian mistakes in the
night, and to leave the world to judge whether they be not worse then
Independents bowling on days, etc. and of the story of a Presbyterian Angel
which you will clap to my mouth, and stop it for ever: I answer, do your worst,
discover what Presbyterian mistakes in the night you can, and tell what stories
you please of a Presbyterian Angel, I fear you not, it will not stop my month:
I bless God, he who keeps the feet of his Saints, has so preserved me, that
I care not what all the Sectaries under Heaven can say against me, I bless
God, I have whereof to rejoice and glory before men (though before God I know
my manifold weaknesses and transgressions, and have nothing to glory in but the
free mercy of God, and the righteousness of Jesus Christ) and therefore
Cretensis i^ you mean me, by mistakes in the night, and by Presbyterian Angel
(as your words seem to infinuate, speaking unto me, and the Reader may be apt
to take your meaning so) speak out, do your worst, I defy you and all your
company to prove any such things, or but the suspicion of them; for I must tell
you Cretensis, I have ever since I came to be a Preacher of the Gospel walked
by that rule of the Apostle, Providing honest things, not only in sight of the
Lord, but in the sight of men: And as for other Presbyterian Ministers, if any
of them have walked loosely and scandalously, let them look to it, I will be no
Patron for them, neither will I have my mouth stopped from opening the Errors,
Heresies, Practices of the Sectaries, or laying open by name Impostors and
Seducers, to gratify the concealment of something soul in a Presbyterian, let
them bear the shame of it for all me, and give God glory in confessing; only I
would desire Cretensis and the Reader to observe the difference between my
Discourse of Errors, Heresies, and Practices in Sectaries, and Cretensis
discovery threatened.

1. Cretensis Discovery will be out of revenge, malice, because the Errors of
the Sectaries are laid open, and which otherwise he implies should not have
been discovered, and if I would cease laying open the Errors of the times,
those stories should never have come to light; but now my Catalogue was and is
purely out of conscience, not out of ill will to any man, but to preserve many
from falling, and to recover others before they are gone too far.

2. The Errors, Practices, ways which I lay down throughout my Book, are the
very principles and ways of the Sectaries as such Sectaries, either being
their Opinions, or flowing necessarily from them, or are means made use of by
them to increase their way, compass their designs, whereas any personal
miscarriages of the Presbyterians are far from falling under any such
considerations; but the fruits of the flesh and Satan taking advantage upon
them, of which things they have no fruit, but are ashamed and have repented.

3. These Errors and Practices in the Sectaries are now found in them, cleaving
to them since, and not before they turned Sectaries, whereas these miscarriages
of the Presbyterians, are not now upon them, nor never since they were
Presbyterians, but may be many years before, when Episcopal and foolish.

4. The Independents and Sectaries cry up themselves and their way as a purer,
holier way then other men's, making themselves the only Saints, the Paradise of
God, the tender conscienced men, thereupon separating from our Churches, and
accounting the Presbyterians as a dunghill; which kind of notions among the
people, crying the Saints, the Saints, tender consciences has gained them more
then all their Arguments; and therefore to take off this Argument, it is
necessary to show they are not holier then others, neither have tenderer
consciences, but are looser, and larger conscienced men: And I ask Cretensis,
when as Bellarmine and other Papists bring against Protestants holin^sse of
life as a note of the Church of Rome, and boast of the great holiness that is
in their Church above what is in the Protestants; whether do not the Whitaker,
Second Con^ro. De Eccles. quaest. 5. c. 11 p. 342, 343. Papistici Doctores
turpes and scelerati sunt and in deli^iis viv^^t omnes a Papa summo illorum
Pontifice ad infimum usque P^r^chum multi non ^aevi modo, sed flagitia etium
gravissima inter illos reperiuntur. vide ibi plura.

Willets Synops. Second General Controversy of the Church. Quest. 3. of the
notes and marks of the Church, page 98 Amesi Bellarm. Enervat, De Notis
Ecclesiae. Legantur igitur vitae Pontificum Romanorum, de Sanctitatem
Pontificum.


Protestants justly and properly to disprove them, give instances and stories
of the wicked lives and ways of many Papists, besides of the Doctrines in the
Church of Rome; and if the Protestants do it and are blameless, how can it be
a fault in the Presbyterians to do the same, when they are to answer the
Sectaries? but now the Presbyterians do not separate from the Independents out
of pretenses of greater holiness, nor cry up themselves in Sermons and Books
as the only Saints, and therefore the Independents cannot so justly bring these
things against the Presbyterians, as the Presbyterians against them.

5. As for that Manuscript which came to Cretensis above a year since
concerning Mr. Edwards, which discourses his juggling and indirect walking
between the two Towns of Godalming in Survey, and Dunmow in Essex, which will
be attested by good hands, and be content to submit it self to the Press: I
Reply, let Cretensis print it when he please, I challenge him to do it, so he
print nothing but what he will make good; I remember it is a speech of famous
Mr. Bolton in some of his works, Innocence and Independency makes men of the
bravest spirits, I bless God I have Innocence, knowing nothing by my self of
fault in this matter, and I have Independency, being an Independent in a true
notion, not hanging upon great men, nor hunting after Preferments and great
Livings, and I desire the Reader to observe what I shall say of this matter,
Cretensis could hardly have instanced in a business to make more for my praise,
and his shame, then this; and if he be able to give me any one instance of an
Independent and Sectary that has so denied himself for the Public, and for
strangers, as I did in that, I shall begin to think there are Independents in
England who seek the Public good, and not their own things. And for the matter
of Dunmow, I have so much certainty and confidence of it, that if it were known
commonly, it would turn to my great honor (which here Cretensis threatens me
with as a matter of reproach, and indeed the only thing, which belike Cretensis
in all his gathering and enquirings after me, could light upon to upbraid me
with) as that I dare refer it and stand to the Arbitrament of Mr. Thomas
Goodwin, Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Bridge, (whom all the world knows, through
difference of judgment, are not my best friend^) whether in that business I
be to be blamed, or rather have not done a singular thing, and like a man who
has walked circumspectly, avoiding all appearance of evil: And truly Cretensis
you may give a loser leave to speak, which for the present I shall do briefly
(reserving the large relation, both of Dunmow and Godalming, to my fuller
Reply) and whatever I speak, and much more will be attested under the hands of
many godly Ministers, some dwelling near Dunmow, and acquainted with this
business from first to last, others, Members of the Assembly entrusted also in
it, and under the hands of diverse godly persons of the Town, fully knowing the
business, together with the Minister of the Town, the now present Incumbent.

In brief, the great business of my juggling and indirect walking between the
two Towns of Godalming in Surrey, and Dunmow in Essex, was this, that to
prevent the coming in, and for removing out one gotten in against the consents
and liking of the godly people, and the Ministers entrusted in the business to
provide for them, my name was made use of to the Committee for Plundered
Ministers to be put in for the Sequestration of Dunmow; and without it, as
things stood in that case (the particular whereof, with that whole business
from first to last, I shall hereafter relate at large) it was judged both by
godly Ministers and the people, (and therefore I earnestly entreated to give
way to it) there was no other way to effect it; which title I held for a few
weeks, merely for the good of the People, till an able and fit man could be
found out for the place; in which time that my name was putting in, and was in,
though I was put to a great deal of trouble, and some charge in Journeys,
riding three several times to Dunmow, besides other expenses for the good of
the place, as in disappointing men to come in upon them, and otherwise (for
there were many difficulties in the business, as will appear when I shall give
a full relation of it, and that occasioned by a Sectary or two, par^ly out of
ill will to me, and for fear I should have gone thither, and partly out of
disappointment of some reward and thanks, which one of the Sectaries expected
in case one fair for it had come into the place, as may without all breach of
charity be conjectured by words heard by two godly persons of Dunmow Town) and
though (my name being made use o^) the profits were absolutely sequestered to me
at such a time of the year, as that I could have made my self whole, yea, a
great gainer, yet I never took penny nor f^^thing of the Living, no not so much
as one penny to pay the charges I had been put unto, for the necessary
preserving of the Living to the Town, nor never had penny to this day (which
though I conceive I might with a good conscience have taken, there being no
reason I should go to war at my own charge) yet because that I might honor the
Gospel, and take away all occasion from those who would seek to speak evil of
me; and because if I had taken any thing, it might have been interpreted and
reported a great deal more; besides all might not have known the reason of it,
therefore I forbear so much as ever to receive or touch one penny belonging to
Dunmow; and truly I believe if the persons be enquired of who chiefly labored
in this business, to bring in a godly able man to Dunmow, and know all
passages (men who are mere strangers to me save only in this business) will
say such was my care, pains, and faithfulness for their Town (in the midst of
many intervenient difficulties cast in by some instruments, who either had a
mind to the place, or hoped for something,) that Dunmow has great reason to
bless God for me, and that I was to them as one not seeking my own things, but
the things of Jesus Christ, their spiritual good: And now Cretensis print when
you please your Manuscript you have by you, only be sure it be not drawn up by
some persons, who by my means were kept out of the Livings of Dunmow, and of
Godalming, or by some who would have brought them in* but being disappointed of
their ends, were vexed, and imagining I might have converted the means of
Dunmow to my use, (because they would have done so, if it had been in their
power) though to be revenged of me by drawing up a story of my juggling, and
indirect walking, and putting it into the hand of Master Goodwin, to make his
use of; but Cretensis, let me tell you (however Independents, and Sectaries use
to jugle and walk indirectly) I hate juggling, and indirect walking, and am a
plain open-hearted man, and I will give you leave to follow me, in all places
this 22. years last past where I have lived and preached, from Cambridge to
Walden, and from Walden to London, and in London from one place and Church to
another, and from London to Harford, and Harford to London, and from London to
Isleworth, and from Isleworth to Godalming, etc. and to charge me justly if you
can with juggling and indirect walking: I am confident that in all those places
I have left a good savor, and none will blame me either for life or Doctrine
unless they be Sectaries or Cavaliers, yes I know there are some Independents
who were so convinced of my diligence, painfulness^ in my work, unblameable
good conversation, that however they love me not for opposing their way, yet
upon all occasions will testify for me against the fury and violence of some:
But Cretensis let me tell you, I wonder how you dare speak of my juglings and
indirect walking, when as the tricks and juglings of your party are so many,
and so m^nifest to all the world: I could write a good large Book of this
Subject, the juglings, indirect walking, equivocations of the Sectaries, yea of
their juggling between two Places and things: I could tell Cretensis now (but
that I must remember it is not my large Reply) of his juglings and indirect
walkings between his Fellowship in the College and a wife (both against the
Statutes, and I think against his oath) between the two towns of Raynum and
Lyn, between Raynum and Yarmouth, Raynum and Norwich, between Raynum and
London, between his two Churches and Livings, his Parish Church, and his new
separated Church, between his Vicaridge of Coleman street after Voted to be
Sequestered, and his gathered Church; as also his juglings in his Sermons and
discourses, saying and unsaying, affirming and denying, but I spare him; I
could tell Cretensis of Mr. Peter's juglings and indirect walking for four years
by gone between old England and new England, having every Spring taken his
leave in the Pulpit of old England, and yet he is not gone; of his juggling and
indirect walking between the West and London, London and other Countries to
make Vid. Minors no Sentors, page 26. These laws would save that Vbiquitary
perturber of, solicitor, and stickler at most of our late elections Mr. Hugh
Peter's a great de^l of unnecessary, unfiting pains, solicitation, and abuse of
the Pulpit, to the peoples great disgust, for his own private lucre, and
advancing the designs of his party
Burgesses for Parliament, I could relate also Master Wells his halting between
Giles Criplegate and New England, between Mr. Walker and the money for the poor
childrens sending over to New England; I could tell a story of an Independent
Minister who sought to have, and actually had about fourscore pounds for that
which he never preached one Sermon for, coming into the Sequestration about
Michaelmas, after all the Harvest was in; as also of another Independent
Minister (who has got well with his riding between places) who had forty
pounds in ready money upon his admittance to be Chaplain of a Regiment, who
after he had received it, never came at them, nor looked after them, not so
much as given one Sermon, or ever provided any m^n in his place: I could tell
of the juglings and shu^flings of the Independents about their new Model of
Church Government, their many pretended excuses why they put it not forth, as
also of Independents juglings and indirect walkings to the rasing of their own
foundation, both in the point of the Vid. Independ. rasing their foundation, p,
2, 3, 4, 5*
Sacrament and Church Government, but I spare them for the present. In one
word, the Reader may see the clear difference between my juglings and indirect
walkings between Godalming and Dunmow and the Independents walking^, they take
40. pounds nay 80. li. for preaching never a Sermon, taking never a journey,
being at no cost, pains nor trouble; but Mr. Edwards makes three journies from
London to Dunmow backward and forwards (each journey being 64. miles) preaches
Sermons when he comes there, is at a great deal of trouble in London, yea and
some charge for the good of Dunmow, and when many pounds lies in his power to
pay himself well for all this, he takes not one penny nor farthing, and is not
Mr. Edwards then a great jugler and indirect walker? Cretensis, show me but
such an Independent Jugler and indirect walker guilty of his fault, Et eris
mihi magnus Apollo; Certainly Cretensis if your informations of Presbyterian
mistakes in the night, and your story of a Presbyterian Angel wherewith you
threaten me if I meddle any more with the Independents, prove no better then
the Manuscript by you which came to your hands about a year since concerning
Mr. Edwards himself, which discourses his juggling and indirect walking between
Godalming and Dunmow, instead of hurting the names and reputations of
Presbyterians, and making them so many dead corpses, they will cause the names
and reputations of Cretensis and his Informers to be like so many stinking
Carrions, and by this one instance of Cretensis Manuscript upon which he puts
such choice special marks of truth, as that the writing will be attested by
good hands; and if there be no remedy, will be content to submit it self to the
Press: Cretensis p, 34. the Reader may judge of all his other informations,
and lawfully conclude, if his Manuscripts so and so qualified be such as he
could hardly have instanced in a business more to Mr. Edwards honor, and yet
according to his Manuscript is framed for his reproach, what must his loose
informations be by word of mouth, especially taken up from Anabaptists and
loose persons who care not what they say of the Orthodox godly ministers, whom
they look upon now as the only great block in their way of Error, liberty and
confusion.

Cretensis page 41. and 42. speaks of a long formal story of one Nichols living
about Moor-fields, etc. related by me in Gangraena, page 78, 79. of which story
Cretensis says it is long, the particular forgeries in it numerous beyond
measure, in which respect he desires the Reader to make the computation, which
he may do with exactness enough in comparing Mr Edwards Relation with some
lines given in to him by Mr. Buroughs in writing anent the business, and then
Cretensis sets down what Mr. Buroughs gave him in writing, which is to a
tittle, as follows. That Story Mr. Edwards has page 79 of one Nichols, and of
a meeting concluded of, occasioned by some vile opinions vented by that
Nichols; where Mr. Greenhil and my self (he says) was, together with diverse
passages that he relates came from me at that meeting is all false. I know no
such man as this Nichols, I never heard there was such a man in the world, till
I read it in Mr. Edwards his Book. I ^o this day know of no meeting about him,
or any of his opinions either intended, desired, or resolved upon, much less
that there was any such meeting. The next Lords day after Mr. Edwards his Book
came forth, Mr. Greenhil asked me whether I knew of any such meeting with that
Nichols; for his part he wondered to see such a thing in Mr. Edwards his Book,
for he knew of no such meeting.

This passage in Cretensis answer of all others (especially because of Mr.
Buroughs testimony given in writing under his hand, besides mention made of
Mr. Greenhil to in this testimony, that he knew of no such meeting with
Nichols, but wondered to see such a thing in Mr. Edwards his Book) took most
with many to weaken the truth and credit not only of this story related by me
of one Nichols, but of many other Relations in my Book, this being objected to
many of my Friends; you see what Mr. Buroughs has given under his hand; and
therefore because of the great name of Mr. Buroughs and Mr. Greenhil (which
Cretensis makes use of here) to make my story numerous in particular forgeries
beyond measure, I shall enlarge upon it, to make good the truth of it,
notwithstanding Mr. Buroughs testimony to the contrary, and Cretensis comments
and glosses upon Mr. Buroughs writing, and my story; and now what if my story
of Nichols prove true, and and that in all the particular branches in it, where
is Cretensis then? in what predicament will Cretensis, Mr. Buroughs, and Mr.
Greenhil be found, and that it is certainly true, and has been testified again
and again, both to me and to many others, both Ministers and Citizens since my
Book came forth, I desire the Reader to mark what follows. For the first part
of the Story related by me page 78. concerning one Nichols coming into Stepny
Parish, and to Mr. Greenhils face justifying those wicked Opinions there set
down, as that God was the Author of all sin, etc. (yea maintaining more then I
have particularly mentioned in page 78. namely, That children owe no obedience
to their Parents except they be godly) it is most certainly true, and Mr.
Greenhil dares not deny it; and for proof of it, Mr. This Mr. Randal is known
well to many godly persons, and is a godly man, a Schoolmasters about Stepny,
and a Minister also, not that Randal the Antinomian and Famili^^.
Randal an ear and eye witness related it to me, and to others, yea since
Cretensis Book came forth that denies the truth of this story; I have asked Mr.
Randal of it, and he affirms it to be undeniably true; and for to evince the
truth of it, Mr. Randal told me these circumstances, viz. who were present when
Nichols did maintain these opinions to Mr. Greenhil, namely, besides himself
one Oats a Carpenter, and diverse women; as also Mr. Greenhil could not stay
long with this Nichols, being to go forth to some place where he had appointed
to come, and should be staid for; so that thus far the story is without all
question true, and I am confident Mr. Greenhil upon new consideration and
rubbing up his memory, will speak no more such words to Mr. Buroughs, as to
wonder to see such a thing as this in Mr. Edwards Book, and that he knows of no
such meeting. Now for the second part of the story, namely that at a meeting
where Mr. Buroughs was present, with diverse others, Mr. Greenhil did relate
unto his Brother Buroughs this sad story of Nichols venting these opinions
forementioned, and upon that, how all the Discourse following related by me in
this story of Nichols, page 79. yea more passed between Mr. Greenhil and Mr.
Buroughs, is as certain as the first; and for proof of it one Mr. Allen of
Stepny Parish, a godly understanding man who was upon the place, and heard all,
related it to diverse in Mr. Bellamies shop in my hearing, of whom after he had
made an end of speaking to the company, I enquired more perfectly how he knew
all this to be true, and whether he was an ear witness, and got him to name
over the opinions again, and to repeat other passages to me for the help of my
memory, and for fear lest I should mistake the relation, so soon as Mr. Allen
had done, I went immediately home, and writ down in my Diary the whole business
from first to last, with the day of the month, the place, and persons, when,
where, and to whom also besides my self it was told: And further then all this,
since my Book came forth, and Cretensis Answer to it, though this story is
branded by Cretensis to have particular forgeries in it, numerous beyond
measure, and all Nichols Opinions related by Mr. Greenhil to Mr. Buroughs,
with diverse passages mentioned by me to come from Mr. Buroughs at that
meeting, all affirmed to be false, yet Mr. Allen (before ever I spoke one word
with him coming into Mr. Bellamies shop accidentally, where when he came in
some company were speaking of Cretensis Answer to my Book, and of this very
passage of Mr. Buroughs under his hand brought by Cretensis to disprove that
story) of his own accord justified the story of Nichols coming to Mr. Greenhil
and Mr. Greenhils relating it to Mr. Buroughs, with all the discourse
following upon it, saying I am the man that told it Mr. Edwards, and that in
this shop, and Mr. Greenhil and Mr. Buroughs dare not deny it; for the story
(says Mr. Allen) is most certainly true, and all the mistake is of those words
a meeting concluded of, where Mr. Greenhil should relate these Opinions,
whereas the making known of those Opinions and the Discourse upon occasion of
them was not at a set meeting on purpose appointed for that occasion, but at a
usual meeting on the Lords day after Mr. Buroughs his preaching in the
morning, where at Colonel Zacharies house Mr. Buroughs Mr. Greenhil and diverse
godly persons use to meet; and as Mr. Allen said this in the presence and
hearing of three godly Ministers and diverse Citizens, so has he (as I am
certainly informed) drawn up with his own hand for the Press a Narration of
this story of Nichols, maintaining those opinions to Mr. Greenhil, and of Mr.
Greenhils reporting the Opinions to Mr. Buroughs, with all their discourses
thereupon, yea more fully and particularly then I have in Gangraena, so that
it is strange to me that Mr. Buroughs should dare to give such a writing under
his hand to Cretensis, as to say that story Mr. Edwards has page 79. of one
Nichols etc. is all false, when as the whole story and all the particulars of
it are true, and there is nothing false in the story from first to last; only
there is a mistake in the transition from the first part of the story to the
second, and in the passing from the first meeting to the second (which in
strict acception of words is no part of the story nor of the matters contained
in it) namely in those words of a meeting concluded of, which implies a set
meeting occasioned upon those opinions, whereas the second meeting at which Mr.
Greenhil declared these opinions of Nichols, and all those speeches passed
between them, was not on purpose about Nichols and his opinions, but a meeting
where constantly on the Sabbath day mornings after Sermon, Mr. Buroughs, Mr.
Greenhil, and diverse private Christians using to come, Mr. Greenhil took
occasion to speak of this Nichols opinions. Now I desire the Reader to consider
Mr. Allen relating to me the first meeting where Mr. Greenhil was without Mr.
Buroughs, with the opinions vented then, and telling me there was a second
meeting presently after that, where, upon occasion of a former meeting and
opinions then maintained, Mr. Greenhil related the opinions, and all that
discourse above mentioned, passed, but not acquainting me with the nature of
the second meeting, viz. that it was of course every week after Mr. Buroughs
morning Sermon, whether I might not well conclude (and cannot easily conceive
how I could understand it otherwise) the second meeting to be occasioned by the
first, as well as the second Relation followed upon occasion of the first; and
though it were not just so, viz. a set meeting to that end, where all I set
down in Gangraena was spoken, but an ordinary meeting where M. Greenhil took
the occasion to declare as abovesaid, whether this mistake be a matter to be so
much made of as to be branded with forgery, falsenesse, or for me to be cried
out of for telling a story having particular forgeries in it, numerous beyond
measure, when as the circumstance wherein the mistake lies, is no repoach, or
c^lumny, but in favorem and honorem; and I appeal to the Reader whether if the
story had been in that particular circumstance according as I set it down, a
meeting concluded of, it had not been more for the honor of Mr. Greenhil and
Mr. Buroughs to have made a solemn business of it by appointing a set meeting
to have advised what to have done in this sad case, and such like, then only at
an ordinary meeting on another occasion by the by to speak and discourse of it.
But before I pass from this, I shall lay down four things. First discover and
lay open the equivocations and mental reservations of Mr. Buroughs and Mr.
Greenhil given in to Cretensis in writing. Secondly, Mr. Greenhils and Mr.
Buroughs plain untruths which cannot be salved, no not by equivocations.
Thirdly inquire into what may be the reasons moving and inducing them thus to
do. Fourthly, commend something to the Readers consideration and observation
from all this Discourse.

1. The Reader may here observe the fallacies and equivocations of Mr.
Buroughs and Mr. Greenhil; Mr. Buroughs gives a writing under his hand to
Cretensis concerning the story Mr. Edwards has page 79. of one Nichols and a
meeting concluded of, etc. saying it is all false; Now who is there that reads
these lines given under Mr. Buroughs his hand but conceives that Master
Buroughs brands this whose story of Nichols of forgery, as if there never had
been any such man, nor any such opinions maintained by him, nor Mr. Greenhil
and Nichols had never met, nor Mr. Greenhil had never at any meeting declared
to Mr. Buroughs and others any such opinions, nor never any such discourse in
reference to those opinions had passed between Mr. Buroughs and Mr. Greenhil,
as is set down by me; This is the English and common construction which all
people (who believe Mr. Buroughs) make of this writing, crying out, O what a
liar is is Mr. Edwards, and what a lying Book is Gangraena! yea we see
Cretensis himself, the profound Oracle of the Sectaries takes Mr. Buroughs
meaning thus, as the Reader may perceive by his commentary upon the writing,
rendering from thence this story of Nichols related by me, so to the world as if
it were all forged, and a mere fained thing, going over most of the particulars
in this story one after another in his scoffing way, damning each part of it as
false, and then passing his sentence upon the whole together in these words:
This story is long, and the particular forgeries in it numerous, beyond
measure; and all Cretensis grounds upon, is Mr. Buroughs writing which he
received from him; desiring the Reader to make the computation, which he may do
with exactness enough if he shall please to compare Mr. Edwards Relation with
these ensuing lines which he received from Mr. Buroughs himself in writing,
anent this business. Thus Mr. Buroughs gives a writing under his hand so
couched and drawn up, making use also of Mr. Greenhils testimony to strengthen
it, that all may take it, and many do, as if the story related by me were
false; but does Mr. Buroughs think, or believe so of this story as his words
carry it? no, he knows in his conscience the contrary, only he writes thus to
Cretensis for the present, because it will serve his design, and if his
fallacies shall happen to be discovered, he has so placed his words that he
will have a back door to come out at, he has all along so framed and penned
his writing, that though it carry in the face of it another meaning, yet upon
two or three words placed artificially he thinks to come off, and salve his
credit from being branded a liar under his own hand, and that is from putting
all he says upon those words a meeting concluded of; which words meeting and
such are several times used by him, (each of them six times a piece) and
brought in at every turn and corner to salve him, all the weight of his
testimony still referring to the words, meeting, and such, such meeting, such a
man, etc. which the Reader may easily perceive: So that Mr. Buroughs
equivocation lies thus, he puts all the story upon a meeting concluded of, and
speaks of the whole story still as upon such a meeting. Now there being no set
meeting on purpose for those Opinions, but the meeting where these Opinions
were declared by Mr. Greenhil an ordinary usual meeting, he thereupon in those
lines given to Cretensis, does not only conceal what he knew, but denies the
whole story all along, such a man, such opinions; such passages, related, etc.
carrying the matter so as if the whole story had been false, because one
circumstance in the manner of the narration of it was mistaken, and this is his
evasion framed with much art, and studied on purpose to deceive the Reader.

The second equivocation and evasion at which Mr. Buroughs thinks to come out
at to salve himself, and yet impeach my story of falsehood is this, that he
never knew such a man as Nichols, nor ever was at any meeting with him, neither
did he ever hear of his name, or that there was such a man in the world; which
things have been alleged for him by some of his friends upon my affirming the
truth of the story, and that I should prove it; Now granting all this to be
true (though some part of it I much question) yet my story is not made false by
this; Gangraena page 79. for I do not in my story of Nichols, charge Mr.
Buroughs that he ever was at a meeting with Nichols, or ever saw his face,
only I say Mr. Greenhil and he met (which is most true) and therefore Mr.
Buroughs confounds meetings, jumbles two into one, which I make in my Relation
distinct, on purpose for an evasion; neither of the second meeting (which I
speak of) where Mr. Buroughs was with Mr. Greenhil, do I say Nichols was
there, but rather the contrary, laying down that Mr. Greenhil related to Mr.
Buroughs and others, what had been vented by Nichols a few days before; and
now I appeal to the Reader whether this be ingenuous fair dealing to deceive
the Reader thus, by casting the aspersion of falsenesse upon a true story, and
yet to keep a reserve to come off with in case of being challenged? or rather
whether is not this Jesuitical equivocation, and whether any Jesuit could, or
would have drawn up half a score line^ fuller of equivocations, reservations,
and double expressions then Mr. Buroughs has in these few lines: I am of the
mind this Manuscript of Mr. Buroughs discovers his juggling and indirect
walking between the two meetings, that where Master Greenhil was without Master
Buroughs, and that where both of them were, that of a meeting concluded of,
such a meeting, and an ordinary usual meeting, more then Cretensis Manuscript
will do my juggling and indirect walking between the two Towns of Godalming in
Surry and Dunmow in Essex; but to make an end of Master Buroughs
equivocations, I wish Mr. Buroughs to think often of that in James, cap 1.8. A
double minded man is unstable in all his ways, which has been often in my
mind of him, he of all the Apologists in many things seeming to come near us,
even as if he were ours, and then flying off again; I could mind him of diverse
passages, both in the Assembly and out of the Assembly, in his Sermons, and
Conferences, wherein he of all the rest has most yielded, inclined to us for a
fit, and yet at other times none st^ffer nor fiercer then he.

2. As in Mr. Buroughs writing to Cretensis, I have shown plain equivocations,
so there will be found in it manifest falsity, and some passages that cannot be
salved from lying, no not by the help of an equivocation; as for instance,
Master Buroughs speaks as of the whole together, that story of Nichols, not a
part of the story, and says* all is false, which is an apparent untruth, for
though some part of it were false, yet if any of it were true (especially the
major part) it cannot be affirmed all is false, and then though in some parts
of it Master Buroughs may equivocate, yet in others he cannot; as for
instance, the first part of the story wherein is laid down Nichols maintaining
to Mr. Greenhils face those wicked opinions, is a part of the story of Nichols
and undoubtedly true, how then can that be said to be false? besides it
precedes those words expressed in Gangraena, a meeting concluded of, upon which
Mr. Buroughs evades, and so cannot be salved by having a reference to them,
and yet this is the first and one great part of that story Mr. Edwards has of
one Nichols; how then can Mr. Buroughs words, viz. of affirming that story Mr.
Edwards has of one Nichols, to be false, be in any sense justified to be true?
again, how can Mr. Buroughs say he never heard there was such a man in the
world as Nichols, when as it cannot be thought but that Master Greenhill named
him to him at Colonel Zacharies house? and that Master Buroughs should never
hear of Nichols name, Mr. Greenhil and Mr. Buroughs being so familiar, and Mr.
Greenhil relating to him the opinions, that Mr. Buroughs should never ask the
man's name who held such vile opinions, nor Mr. Greenhil never speak of his
name, seems to me very strange; and if so, how came Master Allen to hear and
know that the opinions related to Master Buroughs, were one Nichols opinions,
seeing Mr. Allen was not at the first meeting where Nichols was with Mr.
Greenhil, but only at this second meeting where Mr. Buroughs was? again how
can Mr. Buroughs give it under his hand, that he to this day never knew of any
of Nichols his opinions, when as the opinions of Nichols laid down by me in the
story of Nichols, were told him by Mr. Greenhil, and Mr. Buroughs thereupon
was so affected, that all those speeches fell from him, about the necessity of
a Government, and power in the Magistrate, and that over conscience, etc.
Lastly, for those two or three last lines of Mr. Buroughs, namely Mr.
Greenhils asking him whether he knew of any such meeting with that Nichols;
this being spoken of in reference to the story of Nichols set down by me in
Gangraena, that for his part he wondered to see such a thing in my Book, for he
knew of no such meeting, how durst Mr. Greenhil say thus, and Mr. Buroughs
give it under his hand to be printed to abuse the world thus; for did not Mr.
Greenhil know of a meeting with Nichols, which I spoke of in my Book in the
former part of this story of Nichols, where Nichols justified to his face these
opinions, and which was the ground and occasion of all the discourse related by
me in the second meeting? and yet Mr. Greenhils question to Mr. Buroughs, and
his own answer to it here set down by Cretensis as from under Mr. Buroughs
hand, are so set down that every Reader (who will believe them) believes and
takes it for granted, that Mr. Greenhil no more then Mr. Buroughs ever knew
such a man as this Nichols, nor never heard there was such a man in the world,
till he read it in Mr. Edwrrds his Book, nor ever knew of any meeting about
him, or any of his opinions; and so we see Cretensis (though an acute man)
understands it so, and vapors exceedingly upon it.

3. It may be demanded and asked what should be the cause, and what may be the
reasons why Mr. Buroughs and Mr. Greenhil should thus conspire together to
give such a testimony in writing as this against the story of Nichols, which
cannot b^t with all ingenuous men prejuduce them much, (the fallacy of it being
once made known) as being at the best but a gross equivocation, and a studied
piece to deceive the Reader, especially considering that nothing I speak of in
that story of Nichols was to the prejudice and disparagement of Mr. Greenhil
and Mr. Buroughs, but much to their honor, as being at that time in so good a
temper as to be affected with the evil of Errors, and wicked Opinions.

Now of this I conceive these three Reasons: First, Mr. Buroughs and Mr.
Greenhils earnest and eager desire of taking all advantages, and opportunities
to blemish me, and to render me a Liar to the world, which that they might do,
conceiving they had taken me tripping in a mistake (though no material one, nor
nothing to their prejudice, and so no slander nor calumny, but making for their
honor) they prosecute it, and improve it so far, that to make something of it
(poor men) their ill will and hatred against me, blinding and befooling them,
leads them into Equivocations, mental Reservations, and Untruths, even to the
wounding of their own reputations amongst all unprejudiced men. Secondly, a
Design thereby to blast my Book among the people, to render it odious, to cause
the truth of all matters of fact in it to be suspected, and so to hinder the
good intended by me in that Book: Now Mr. Buroughs and Mr. Greenhil having a
great name among many people, being accounted for men of that way somewhat
moderate and among the best of that party, they knowing that their testimony,
and that in the mouth of two witnesses (both being joined together in the
writing printed by Cretensis) might wound my Book, and from thence many would
take occasion to question all, therefore they catch at the least occasion to
declare themselves against my Book. Thirdly, they do it to free themselves from
suspicion and jealousy, which otherwise they might lie under from the other
Sectaries, as if they were against other Sects and Opinions, and for a
Toleration of no other Sect but their own, and were for the Government of the
Church to be settled in regard of these horrid Opinions and Heresies daily
vented, and for the coercive power of the Magistrate against Sectaries, which
these conferences upon occasion of Nichols Opinions seem to import, and might
give some jealousy of, and therefore to clear themselves from these, and to
ingratiate themselves to the Sectaries, and the Sectaries to them, to assure
them they will stand by them against the Presbyterians; they greedily catch at
the mistake of a circumstance, and thereupon Mr. Buroughs gives a writing
under his hand, so couched and curiously drawn up* as that all their fellow
Sectaries cannot but take it as if they denied the whole, and as if no such
words had ever been spoken by them about Opinions, and the necessity of
Government and power of the Magistrate. The Independents strictly so called,
are a very few in comparison of the Anabaptists, Antinomians, Libertines, etc.
a contemptible party as of themselves, Independents in Armies, Country, City,
falling daily to Anabaptisme, etc. and therefore Mr. Greenhil and Mr. Buroughs
being afraid they might suffer by this story, take this occasion to clear
themselves by sending this writing to Cretensis.

4. The Reader from this writing given under Mr. Buroughs hand to disprove one
of my stories, together with Cretensis glorious vaporing inferences upon it,
may plainly see what to judge of my stories laid down in Gangraena, and of
Cretensis confutation, seeing Cretensis signal choicest proof, and that which
among all the rest was the only testimony that gave him some credit in the
world, proves so weak and faulty, yea and at best but a mere juggle and
equivocation: what may the Reader think of Cretensis Answers to other passages
of my Book? his Testimonies being either from persons of no credit and worth,
Apprentice boys, Sectaries, and men in their own cause, or persons under bad
report, as Cosens, against whom there have been many other complaints and
depositions for miscariages and misdemeanors (as I am certainly informed) yea
among others for abusing a worthy Member of the House of Commons, when as Mr.
Buroughs testimony proves so invalid, and the whole story of Nichols
(excepting only one mistake in the transition of it from one part to the
other) proves all true, yea and more too then I have set down, as appears both
by what I have sa^d already, and from Mr. Allens printed Relation, being a man
from whom I had the first Relation of this story: Now by this time I conceive
that all men know what to judge of Mr. Buroughs Text, and Cretensis his
Commentary and Application, and must conclude Cretensis had little reason to
make such Tragical outcries, and a great noise of branding this story of
Nichols (as if there had never been any such man in the world, nor no such
Opinion, held by any, nor never no such discourse between Mr. Buroughs and Mr.
Greenhil) with particular forgeries in it, numerous beyond measure. And for a
conclusion of my Reply both to Cretensis and Master Buroughs writing* I report
thus upon Cretensis in his own words a little changed: That long formal story
of one Nichols living about Moor-fields, coming into Stepney parish to draw
away people: That to Mr. Greenhils face did justify and maintain many wicked
Opinions, etc. upon occasion whereof at a meeting where Mr. Greenhil, Mr.
Buroughs and many others were, which meeting was, viz. a little before Mr.
Buroughs fell upon the preaching of the power of the Magistrate in matters of
Religion, and the point of Toleration: At which meeting Mr. Buroughs and Mr.
Greenhil, with others, spoke many good words, particularly Mr. Buroughs, in
regard of these things, matters being so, there was a necessity of the
Government of the Church, and of the power of the Magistrate, etc. This story
is so long, and the particulars in it true beyond question: In which respect, I
desire the Reader presently to make the computation, which he may do with
exactness enough, if he shall please to compare Mr. Edwards his Relation in
Gangraena, this Reply, and Mr. Allens Relation anent this business, with the
Lines received by Cretensis from Master Buroughs himself in writing, and
Cretensis commentary upon them.

Cretensis page 42. Sect. 27. having had occasion to mention Mr. Buroughs
immediately before, falls upon a discourse to vindicate Mr. Buroughs of an Error
charged upon him by me in the Catalogue of Errors, and labors to clear him by
comparing it with other passages in his Book, page 34 35. and by showing Mr.
Buroughs his rule touching forbearance was of matters of Religion, not of
matters of State, and then concludes his confutation with a jeer and scoff of
what I said against Mr. Buroughs position, namely it was but a forlorn hope,
the forerunner of a great Army of Confutations advancing, and of resembling
Mr. Buroughs to Achilles, and applying that verse to me in answering Mr.
Buroughs,

Infoelix puer, atque impar congressus Achilli. Reply. I have much exceeded the
nature of a brief Reply to Cretensis, having already gone far beyond the number
of sheets I intended in this Reply to Cretensis, and therefore that I may
reserve matter for my large Reply, I shall not enlarge my self upon this, nor
the following particulars in Cretensis Book as I have done upon some others,
but shall pass by what I could say to Cretensis evasions of passages in other
pages clearing his meaning, etc. brought in defense of Mr. Buroughs, as
namely, that Mr. Buroughs uses to say and unsay, affirm and deny, as the
vanity and weakness of that distinction (as it is here applied) concerning
matters of Religion, and matters of State, as if an erroneous conscience did
not make things the Magistrates account, but matters of State, matters of
Religion, and the Magistrates also reckon many things to be matters of State,
which many consciences account high matters in Religion; all I shall say (and
justly) of of many things delivered by Master Buroughs about Toleration and
the Magistrate, is, what Galen said wickedly of Moses writings, Multa dicit sed
nihil probat; and therefore there will need no great abilities to confute
Achilles, Troilus may try his valor with him, by putting him but to prove his
own Positions and Assertions; only before I end my Reply to this Section, I
must tell Cretensis he forgot when he writ thus, Troilus will needs be trying
his valor with Achilles whatsoever it costs him, that Master Edwards had
already tried the strength of Achilles and four more joined to him, Master
Thomas Goodwin, Master Nigh, etc. in his Antapologie, or full Answer to the
Apologetical Narration, which was never yet replied to unto this day; and
therefore certainly if the unhappy boy were able (as many learned men are
pleased to think) to make his part good with four besides Achilles, he may
venture to try a fall with Achilles alone; and therefore if Cretensis will once
more get a writing under Mr. Buroughs hand to this purpose, and print it, that
Achilles will in writing openly maintain his and Cretensis Church way not to be
a Schism, and that it ought to be tolerated by the Supreme Magistracy of this
Kingdom, I do proffer to answer him, and to maintain the contrary, and then
leave it to learned men to judge which of us has the fall: only I premise this
condition, that both of us may, as in the presence of God, make a solemn
promise to call in no second, nor to have any help from others, or to
communicate our writings to any man, that so what we do may be a trial of our
valors, and not of other men's: And for a conclusion of my Reply to this
Section, had not Cretensis come in at the close of this Section with his
Troilus and Achilles, his Forlorn-hope, and his great Army of confutations, but
staid his pen and closed the period at an erroneous conscience may be such; he
had wrought little less then a miracle, for he had written one whole Section
among 35. without either giving me the lie, or jeering or scoffing at me, or
abusing some place of Scripture, etc. but the evil spirit that attends his pen
envied him the crown of that glory, to write one sober Section, and therefore
for uniformity sake he makes this like unto its fellows, ending with jeers and
scoffs.

Cretensis Sect. 28. page 43. says, How my pen has abused Mr. Ellis of
Colchester, and other faithful servants of God in those parts with base
calumnies and slanders, the world will shortly understand by an express from
thence, of which Mr. Ellis writes thus to a friend in London: The aspersions
cast on me and some others here by Mr. Edwards, are as false as foul: which
because they are a great part of his Book and strength, those who are here
concerned, will, if God please, make Reply.

Reply. Now whether my pen has abused M. Ellis of Colchester, and other
faithful servants of God in those parts with base calumnies and slanders, I
desire the Reader to turn back to Mr. Harmars Letter, p. 54, 55. and to read
what he has sent me under his hand; besides, Cretensis the great Critic upon
other men's words, in these words his pen (speaking of me) writes either falsely
or improperly; for what I print of Mr. Ellis, etc. in Gangraena, are Letters
written by another pen, not mine, and therefore if I wanted matter, or had
nothing else to do with my time, I could spend as many words (upon a better
ground) and expatiate upon calling Mr. Harmars pen my pen, as Cretensis does
upon the word meeting, p. 36, 37. As for the express from Colchester
discovering the base calumnies and slanders against the Saints there, I hear
nothing of it yet, but let it come when it will, I fear it not; for both I and
others know so much of the Sectaries of Colchester, of their baseness,
self-seeking, equivocations, etc. that the Answer to it will serve to make a
third part of Gangraena; their Errors, Heresies, Practices, etc. without any
help from other places, will serve to fill a good Book of it self. But to
animadvert no further on this passage of Cretensis, I put a period to this
Section with this short Animadversion, that the things I relate of Mr. Ellis or
some others of Colchester in Gangraena, are not false (though Mr. Ellis says
they be foul) neither are they a great part of my Book and strength, but a very
small little part, not the twentieth part of my Book; but I am of the mind,
when Mr. Ellis and those who are there concerned shall make a Reply, the
Rejoynde^ to it will have a great deal more, and other manner of things of the
Sectaries of Colchester then Gangraena has, and I must deal ingenuously with
Cretensis and Mr. Ellis, I have been told by one of Colchester, That if he had
thought or known I would have printed any Letters concerning the Sectaries of
Colchester, he would have furnished me with other manner of things then any
contained in those Letters Mr. Ellis writes of to a Friend in London.

Cretensis. 29. p. 44. labors to disprove the testimony given by me of the
Author of the third Letter printed in Gangraena, by printing a Letter written
to Kiffin concerning him, wherein the Author of that Letter denies Mr. Ricraft
to be a person religious, and cordially affected to the Parliament, intimating
and casting many foul aspersions upon him.

Reply. I leave Mr. Ricraft to justify the contents of his own Letter written
to me, and to answer this Letter written against him, which he assures me he
has done, and that by this time it is printed, wherefore I need say little;
only for what I expressed of Mr. Ricraft, I had good reason to do it, both from
the testimonies I had received of him upon enquiry from persons judicious and
godly, and from some converse and acquaintance which of late I have had with
him; and that which made me give him that testimony, A person cordially
affected to the Parliament, was his being employed in several matters and
affairs that concerned the Parliament; which besides that I had heard so, I saw
two Orders or Warrants, one from the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, the
other from the Committee of Examinations, testifying his good service, and
commending him, which are more to me to assure me that he is a man well
affected to the Parliament, then a hundred Letters written to the contrary by
This Letter which Cretensis here prints, was written by an Apprentise boy, an
Anabaptist, of Ki^^ius Church, unto Ki^^^^s himself, who belike by himself or
some other communicated it to Cretensis.
Anabaptists (such as Cretensis here prints) can be to deny it: Now as to that
particular instance in the Letter brought to disprove Mr. Ricraft for being a
person cordially affected to the Parliament (which indeed is all that has any
show of proof, all the rest being mere words) namely, of concealing a Colonel
which came out of the Kings Army, which Colonel would have taken away the life
of one Mr. Roberts Minister, and that if Mr. Roberts had known of the Colonels
being in Town, he would have endeavored the hanging of him, and yet not without
cause, for former discourtesies received from him, etc. I desire the Reader to
judge how true it is by these following lines which I received from Mr. Roberts,
under his own hand, and subscribed with his Name.

I Do not know of any Colonel or other Officer of the Kings party that Mr.
Josiah Ricraft did entertain, nor that the said pretended Colonel, nor any
other particular person did particularly endeavor to take away my life: and if
I had punctually known that the said pretended Colonel, or any other person had
endeavored at the taking of B^rmingham in hoe blood to have destroyed my life,
yet I do not conceive that a sufficient cause for me in cold blood, if I had
opportunity, to have sought the taking away of his life,

March 24. 1645.

FRAN. ROBERTS.

. 30. Cretensis thinking that by his Anabaptistical Letter he has weakened my
testimony of the Author, and branded him for a Malignant, he proceeds in this
Section against the master of the Letter, charging a great part of it to be
notoriously false, as some things about Kiffin and Palmer, and of a woman to be
Rebaptized, at which story, out of his love to Anabaptists and Dipping, not
knowing how soon he shall fall to that way, he is so offended, that he makes
the Tale of Gargantua and Donquixot, with his Wind-mills, to look like Gospels
in comparison of it, and thereupon breaks out into a passion, that he says, It
is pity the Relator should either eat or drink, till he either has proved the
truth, or else confessed the untruth of it.

Reply. The Reader may observe Cretensis cannot deny some part of it to be
true; and indeed the first part of it of one Web (the most material and foul
for the Opinions and Blasphemies; Cretensis does not so much as offer to
disprove:) For those other about Kiffins bragging upon Disputation, and those
lighter passages, I conceive Mr. Ricraft will clear in his Answer; but for the
main business of Kiffin and Patience anointing with Oil a sick woman, one of
their members, that is not denied neither, only some words, which being
recovered, she should speak, which is not much material to the thing; besides,
it is probable words to that effect were spoken, though not in terminis,
wherein, may be, the equivocation stands: And lastly, for that story of the
woman to be Rebaptized, and the Dipper which Cretensis makes such a quaint
invention and bold fiction, etc. as if no Anabaptist could be guilty of such
one; I Reply to Cretensis, There are fouler things done by Anabaptists and
Sectaries; Mistress Attaways story, with many particular passages in it are
fouler, as I shall by Letters, and other Relations make manifest; but whereas
Cretensis makes this Relation such a lie to the Wherstone, making all the
daring Relations (as Cretensis phrases them) in Gangraena besides to give place
to it, I will upon one condition (and that a very reasonable one) that
Cretensis and his Church will promise upon proof of it to join in a Petition to
the Parliament with the Presbyterians for the forbidding of all Dipping and
Rebaptization, and exemplary punishment of all Dippers, as his Brother Kiffin,
etc. set down in my large Reply to Cretensis, the place where, the name of the
Dipper, with other circumstances of this story; and I do believe, if my
intelligence does not extremely sail me, whereas Cretensis makes such a wonder
at one, I shall be able in my next to give instances in the plural number; and
for this end I have taken order to have sent me up with hands subscribed, the
proof with particular circumstances. And for conclusion of this, I cannot but
take notice of the extreme cruelty of Cretensis against the Relator of this
story (and by this we may see what liberty and favor Presbyterians must expect,
if once we fall into the hands of Independents) That it is pity he should either
eat or drink, till he has proved the truth, or confessed the untruth of it.
What Cretensis, no other way for a poor man who tells a story of an
Anabaptistical Dipper, but to starve him to death, or to make him sin against
conscience by confessing the untruth of that which he thinks in his conscience
to be true; and that I may convince Cretensis of his rashness in speaking
thus, I desire him in his Rejoinder to resolve this case, which is the true
case of this story: Suppose the person who can prove it lives sixty or seventy
miles off, how long, and how many days will you allow the Relator to find him
out, and to bring him, with all other Witnesses before the Magistrate to prove
the truth of it; must not this of necessity require some days (though no
accidents should fall out, sickness, or of being from home, etc. which might
retard it) and would you have the Relator all this while go so many days
without eating or drinking? that were indeed the ready way for the Relator
never to prove the truth of it: I suppose upon second thoughts Cretensis will
con^esse he writ this in a passion and flame, as I believe he did all the rest
of his Book.

Cretensis. 32* p. 38. denies and puts off several particulars laid down in
Gangraena, as about Lieut: Colonel Lilburn, as about one Thomas Moor of
Lincolnshire, as about a Woman-Preacher at Brasteed in Kent; and he adorns his
pretended Answers with jeers and scoffs, as that Lilburn can see and read
twenty and ten untruths in my Book, with the worst of his eyes, and that I am
the greatest manifestarian under Heaven, there being no man has manifested
that weakness of judgment, that strength of malice against the Saints as I
have done.

Reply. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburns playing at Cards, I have proved true in
Answer to Walwyn, page 30. where the Reader may by looking back be satisfied;
as for the rest I have said of him, when Cretensis goes about to disprove it, I
shall as particularly make proof of it by instances; and I am of an opinion
with Cretensis (though not in his sense) the other things instanced in as well
as playing at Cards, are Grapes growing on the same Thorn; only I cannot but
wonder at one fetch of Cretensis (indeed far fetched) to salve the credit of his
Brother Lilburn, That my reporting of Lilburns playing at Cards either is a
false report it self, or at least a report of a report which is false, and so
little better, which is to make all reports false of which a man is not an Ear
and Eyewitness, and so nothing to be believed, though related by never such
credible Ear and Eyewitnesses: Now after this rate to be sure the story of
Cretensis Presbyterian Angel which another has to tell (some Independent
Angel) is false, the story of the Presbyterians fishing on a day of
Thanksgiving is false, and little to be regarded; for Cretensis sure was none
of the Com -- or Sub-Presbyters (though I am confident he would have fished
with them a whole Afternoon upon a Thanksgiving day, on condition to have been
a Com -- or Sub-Presbyter with the Doctorate of the Assembly) The Manuscript of
my juggling between Godalming and Dunmow, is either a false report it sell, or
at least a report of a report which is false, and so all the stories which
Cretensis threatens Presbyterians with to make their Names and Reputations so
many dead corpses, will be but either false reports, or at least reports of
reports which are false, and so little better, for I believe Cretensis comes
little among Presbyterians, and so cannot speak much of his own knowledge.

As for that particular of one of Lilburns eyes put out by a Pike in the
street, upon which Cretensis makes jests, as that Lilburn is able to see and
read twenty untruths and ten in Mr. Edwards Book with the worst of them. I
answer, this passage, as also that of two Children taken away at a time from
Cretensis are not made any thing of by me, or insisted upon to upbraid them,
but touched only to show their own folly in rash censuring of Presbyterians
from acts of Gods Providence in afflicting, by giving instances in themselves:
However, for the truth of the thing, Lilburns eye was so run into by a Pike
immediately upon his Letter coming forth against Mr. Prynne and the Assembly,
as that he could not see with it for a great while, and it was feared, and
commonly reported, he would never see more with it; but for my part, I am glad
to hear he can see again with it; and the recovery of his sight does no whit
infringe the truth of what I have written, I expressing not how long he could
not see, speaking only of presently after his Letter came forth; but supposing
his eyesight to be as good as Cretensis expresses it, yet I am sure he cannot
read twenty and ten untruths in Gangraena, and I suppose by this time the
Reader by my Reply is well satisfied, that this speech of Cretensis is an
untruth; and as for that jeer of Cretensis, That if I had not a great beam in
my own eye, I might easily have seen that neither of Lilburns eyes are put out:
I Reply, that lately in Westminster Hall I walked by Leiut: Col: Lilburn, and
eyed him well, and could easily see a great blemish in one of his eyes which
was not in the other, and so visible, that many a one in whose eye less is
seen, yet cannot see at all; and I am of the mind, if Cretensis do but put on
his Spectacles, he may see a great blemish in the eye, upon occasion of the
Pike running in; but for my part, the greatest hurt I wish to Lieut: Col:
Lilburn is, that he may not lose the eye of his soul in the ways of Error,
Schism, contempt of the Ministry, dispising of Dominion, and speaking evil of
Dignities, yes, my earnest prayer to God for him, Cretensis and other of their
Brethren is, That God would anoint their eyes with eye salve that they might
see and be ashamed, and return. Lastly, for Thomas Moor a great Sectary, and
manifestarian that has done much hurt in Lincolnshire, which Cretensis denies,
by saying he does not more believe there is any such man, then he does that
there is any woman-Preacher at Brasteed in Kent, etc. and he believes me to be
the greatest Manifestarian under Heaven, there being no man that has
manifested that weakness of judgment, that strength of malice against the
Saints that I have done. I Reply, first the Reader may do well to take special
notice of the bold impudency of Cretensis, who dares deny any thing if it may
make for the Sectaries; and it is no wonder he denies many other things in
Gangraena, calling them lies, forgeries, when as he will dare to write thus,
and to deny that which is known to many hundreds, and to persons of all ranks,
Ministers, Gentlemen, Citizens, Soldiers. This Thomas Moor does much hurt in
Lincolnshire, some parts of Norfolk, Cambridgeshire; he is famous at Boston,
Lynne, Holland; followed and accompanied sometimes from place to place, with
many attending him; and I cannot think but Cretensis has heard of him, and
that he has some Equivocation in his words or evasions, as it may be upon the
word Sectary, Cretensis not judging any of his Saints Sectaries; or upon great
Sectary, as those words seem to imply, A Sectary of that magnitude which he
imports; or else upon those words, That has done much mischief, Cretensis not
believing that any of his Saints can do much mischief; and truly Cretensis may
with as much truth deny there is any such man as Master Hugh Peter's, as deny
what I have written of Thomas Moor; and that there is such a one, I have seen,
and have by me at this time writings of his to the quantity of almost twenty
sheets, for his Opinions, written by Thomas Moor himself, subscribed with his
Name, to a worthy and learned Member of the Assembly: As also this Thomas Moor,
since these Wars, was questioned and committed by the then Governor of Boston
Colonel King, for keeping an unlawful Conventicle at an unseasonable time in
the night in the Garrison Town of Boston, and for abusing and mis-calling the
Governor when he was brought before him about it. Secondly, as for that jeer,
There is no more any such man then such a woman at Brasteed in Kent, let
Cretensis know for all Master Saltmashes bold affirmation in his late Book,
that the contrary is known to himself and all the Town, there is such a woman
who Preaches often both at Brasteed and other Towns thereabouts; and besides
what the Reader in justification of this may find in this Book, p. 24, 25. I
shall add this as a farther proof related to me lately by two godly Ministers
of Kent, which is as follows. Upon Mr. Saltmarshes Book called Groans for
Liberty, coming forth, and denying there was any such woman, who Preached at
Brasteed, many of the godly Ministers of Kent in that part of Kent about Town
Mauling at a meeting of theirs, took it in consideration to enquire and find
out the truth of that related in Gangraena, but denied by Mr. Saltmarsh, and
entreated particularly a Minister on Mr. T. born in those parts near Brasteed,
knowing the Town, and the people thereabouts, to make it his business so to
search into it, as that the certain knowledge of it might be reported to them
at their next meeting, that accordingly it might be communicated to me for the
further clearing of the truth. Mr. T. willingly accepted of the Motion of his
Brethren, and accordingly did act in the business, and at the next meeting
satisfied the rest of the Ministers, that he had found out there was such a
Preaching woman an Anabaptist, who sometimes at Brasteed, and other times at
Westrum, a Town near Brasteed, does meet other women, and after she has
Preached, she takes the Bible and chooses a Text, some Verses in a Chapter, or
sometimes a whole Chapter, and expounds and applies to her Auditors; and Mr. T.
the Minister, who returned this relation to the Minister, knows this woman, and
knows this to be so. One of those two Ministers who acquainted me with this,
being entreated to give it me under his hand, has under his hand given it me,
which I keep by me to produce upon any occasion; so that the Reader may see
both the one and the other, Thomas Moor the Sectary, and a woman Preacher at
Brasteed, and both true, notwithstanding Cretensis will not believe them, but
makes a jeer and scoff at these as he does at all other things. Thirdly, to
that bitter, uncharitable, unchristian expression of Cretensis concerning me,
that I am the greatest Manifestarian under Heaven; There is no man has
manifested that weakness of judgment, that strength of malice against the
Saints which he has done. I would have Cretensis know, if I would give leave
to my pen, I could upon these words whip him so as to fetch blood in abundance
from him, but I will not write a Satyr, all I will say (though this is a
desperate provoking speech, and I have much ado to forbear) is this, I dare
appeal to the indifferent Reader, Whether Mr. Edwards or Mr. Goodwin in their
writings against Independents, and against Presbyterians, have manifested more
weakness of judgment, and strength of malice against the Saints: And to
satisfy the Reader and my self, I desire Cretensis in his Rejoinder to show
where in any of my Books I have manifested that weakness of judgment, to
declare to all the world as Cretensis has done) that (I put out an Answer to a
Book of which I never read one quarter of it; or writ a Book, wherein the far
greatest part of the particulars were observed by ot^ers; or had neither
leisure nor opportunity to search to the bottom all was storied, and yet
notwithstanding deny all with Gyant-like confidence, Cr. p. 50. or where, in
what pages of my Books, in^ituled, Reasons against Independent Government,
Antapologia, Gangraena, I have discovered that strength of malice against the
Independent Saints, as Cretensis in his Books called M. S. Theo-machia, Answers
and Replies to Mr. Prynne, A brief Answer to Mr. Edwards, has against the
Presbyterian Saints, and all the Reformed Churches. But no man need marvel at
Cretensis course language, either in vilifying, slighting me, or in charging me
so deeply, who considers how he has spared none, of what condition or quality
soever, that have come in his way, not regarding any man's age, calling,
learning, holiness, sufferings, place; witness his scornful bitter speeches
against Mr. Walker, Mr. Roborough, Dr. Steuart; yea, casting firebrarnds of
reproach upon City, Assembly, Parliament, and all Presbyterians, and
particularly upon that worthy, learned, and religious Gentleman Mr. Prynne, the
greatest and truest sufferer against those evils of that time, both for matter
and manner, of any one man in England, whom above all others (notwithstanding
all his sufferings, and other personal worth) he has slighted, and desperately
censured, as here he does me; which the Reader may find in Cretensis Books
against Mr. Prynne, and particularly in that Book Entitled, Calumny araigned
and cast, Page 22, and 17. I could prove (I say) by the Commission aforesaid,
that Mr. Prynne has done all these things, on purpose to despite the Spirit of
God, to defame the Gospel, to make the ways of godliness and religion hateful
to the world, to increase divisions, to multiply distractions, to bring a snare
and evil day upon the Parliament, to expose the whole Kingdom to ruin and
destruction.
Calumny araigned and cast.

Cretensis (. 33.49.) denies he holds any Errors in Justification greater then
I do, yea, or any so great by many degrees; and it will be a thousand times
said, before once proved, that Cretensis holds any such Errors, etc. He charges
me also, in my Epistle Dedicatory, to abuse the Parliament with a loud untruth,
That there are Eleven meetings at least of Sectaries in one Parish in this
City: which loud untruth he charges not upon me alone, but upon the Honorable
Court of Common Counsel, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, etc. calling them Brethren
in iniquity with me. And further taxes me, that because the Pages of my Book
are not large enough to contain my shameless untruths, therefore I quote them
in the Margin of it, as of Overton and Eaton, and some of Cretensis Church
reporting, etc.

Reply. Cretensis has been often charged to hold Errors in the point of
Justification and the particulars have been specified and proved by many godly
learned Ministers, both in Pulpits, writings, and conferences, as Master
Walker, Master Roborough by wri^ing; Master C^alamie in preaching.
Master Walker, Master Roborough, Master Calamie, etc. yea, some Independent
Ministers, as Mr. Thomas Goodwin, Master Burton, etc. have spoken against his
Errors in the point of Justification, using sharp and quick expressions upon
discoursing of them (as I can prove by good witnesses.) But for me, I was never
taxed by any man, either Presbyterian or Independent, for holding any Errors
in the doctrine of Justification: and indeed, I hold nothing in that point but
which is commonly laid down in the Confession and Articles of Religion made by
the Reformed Churches. And for the proving you guilty of Error, Master
Robrough has done it clearly and fully in his Animadversions and Examination
of both parts of your Treatise of Justification (which, me thinks, you never
having replied unto, should not have had the forehead to have boasted thus.)
Besides also, a godly orthodox learned Presbyt. of the Church of Scot^ and has
fully answered you, and discovered your weakness, as one of the Reverend
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland assured me upon his own knowledge.
Secondly, Cretensis shows his impudency and boldness in denying that which I
prove by a Petition of the Honorable Court of Common Council, wherein they in
terminis (as Cretensis cannot deny) affirm it; and I suppose, all men will
judge, such an Honorable Court affirming it, and that to the High Court of
Parliament, is to be believed before one Cretensis. And of this business I
know something, for I particularly inquired of some of that Committee appointed
to draw up the Petition, and to make proof of things, how this particular was
proved; and they told me, it was made apparent to the Committee of Common
Council, whereupon they put it in: and no wise man can conceive, that such a
representative Body as the Common Council, in a business wherein they knew
they had so many eyes upon them, and so many enemies, (all the Sectaries
mortally hating them for this, and other Petitions) would represent such a
thing to the Parliament, unless they could prove it. The Common Council
knows very well, the Sectaries want not friends to possess the Parliament
against them, and who watch but for such an advantage, as to take them
tripping, thereby to render all they present in this kind as false: and if
Cretensis, or any of his fellow Sectaries could have disproved this, it is a
wonder to me they did not: When a Committee was appointed to hear, and the
City to make proof of some of the foulest things mentioned in the Petition,
why did not Cretensis, or some of his Church then, for the weakening the credit
of the Common Council, and the better bringing their preaching-sisters off,
come in, and alledg this as a loud untruth? objecting, that by the same reason
the story of the preaching women might be false. But how true soever it is,
Cretensis has a good faculty, in all things that are brought against the
Sectaries, to believe nothing; but to be as confident as twice two makes four,
that all is false. Well, though I will not be so uncharitable as Cretensis was,
to wish Master Goodwin might neither eat nor drink till he had proved what he
here writes: yet I heartily wish, that my Lord Major and the Honorable Court
would not suffer Cretensis and his Church to meet any more in their
Conventicle, till he had made good what he here writes; which, I conceive, they
may the more lawfully and justly do, because he does not only give them the
--, but calls them Brethren in iniquity with me,, scoffing at a saying of mine
taken out of the City Petition, But this saying of his need not be melancholy
for want of company; it has brethren enough in the iniquity of it: and who are
these brethren, but the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council? O what an
insolent bold passage is this! The Reader need not wonder at his foul mouth,
and railing Dialect against me and my Book, who cares no more for this
Honorable City: I do not see how the Honorable Court of Common Council can
let it pass without questioning him, to suffer a man, who lives in the City
under their Government, to abuse them thus in print. I am confident, if the
Presbyterians lived in a City under a Magistracy and Government, where the
Governers were Independent, and should have abused them thus, they would have
made the City to hot for them. 3. As for that I say of Overton and Eaton, for
all Cretensis mincing and shuffling, I shall free my self from uttering
untruth; for Overton said, after a boasting manner, unto two sufficient
witnesses, that now there was an answer to my Antapologie, and entered into the
Hall-book; and they apprehend him so, especially one of them, as that he took
order to send me word (I being then in the Country) that an answer was
certainly printing; and for my greater assurance, he had searched the book, and
found it entered: so that I and many looked every day for the coming of it forth;
and I never knew before now, that books were entered into the Hall-book, but
just when they were going to the Press. For Eaton, an Independent Milliner, I
do not affirm, that he spoke the same words which Overton did, for his words
were spoken many months before Overtons; only he is quoted in the M^rgin as an
instance to make good those words in the second page of my Preface, Their great
words and threats of an Answer; which were these that he gave out, There was an
Answer to my Antapologie, and he had seen it, and the Author of it had
discovered me to be a poor weak man, and my Book a slight easy piece, neither
good sense, nor good English, or words to that effect; which Eaton confessed he
spoke before witnesses, since my Gangraena came forth: that is all I say of him,
or meant, and, I suppose, these are great words and threats of an Answer. Only
by the way, I desire Cretensis to resolve me these questions, and then I will
give him a good account why I called Eaton an Independent: namely, What was the
true reason that Cretensis Reply to my Antapologie, being entered in the
Hall-Book in July last, and given to the Bookseller to print, was not printed,
but stopped? And how it came to pass, that Eaton, if he be no Independent, had
the Reply to my Antapologie communicated to him to read and peruse? And when
Cretensis has resolved these questions, it may be, by the next, if he answer
not truly, I shall tell him the reasons of the stop, and to whom else besides
Eaton this Reply has been communicated, as to Master Sympson, and, may be,
tell him what Master Overton, or his man, or both, have told a friend of mine,
about the Answer to my Antapologie; as namely, what the Licenser did upon
perusing of it, and of the Title given to it about The Accuser of the Brethren
cast, etc. 4. As for the report of some of Master John Goodwins Church, etc. I
observe Cretensis denies it not, but puts it off with one of his usual tricks,
That he believes, I no more know it then declare it. And indeed, this is one of
Cretensis juggling ways which he makes often use of in this Book; when he
knows not what well to say, then he comes in with I believe, he no more
knows, and I no more believe. ( Cretens page 48, 49.) And truly, it is
somewhat strange to me, that he who is so hard of belief in divine things,
that he will not believe the Scriptures without reason, and has preached
lately with much earnestness and violence, that Faith is not to guide Reason,
but Reason Faith, will yet in humane things, believe any thing against all
sense and reason. But to put Cretensis out of doubt, that I know, and can prove
what I say, I offer Cretensis, upon promise made from him and his Church, that
the honest men who told it out of their zeal to the cause, and their rejoicing
in an Answer coming, and to persuade the Presbyterians to the truth of it (who
have always much doubted of an Answer to the Antapologie) shall not be
censured by the Church, nor looked upon with an evil eye, nor hundred by this
from being taken into the preferment of being a Prophet, and preaching for
Cretensis, I will name the Minister to whom it was told, and the members by
whom; and for encouragement to Cretensis and his Church to make this promise, I
will for present name the first letter of the godly Ministers name, well
acquainted with some of the Church, namely Master B.

Cretensis, Sect. 26. page 38, 39, 40, 41. spends many leaves in laboring to
disprove the information given me of one Cosens of Rochester, and related by
me, affirming that relation to be forgery of forgeries, and all is forgery, all
over it, and that in it there are well nigh quot verba, tot mendacia; and he
goes over seven particulars, putting the lie upon each of them, concluding,
there is scarce a clause of a sentence true in this Relation. And as all along
upon each particular, so both in the entrance to this Answer, and in the close
of it, he is full of jears, scoffs, and foul uncivil language.

Reply. This story being the last of those related by me in Gangraena, which
Cretensis excepts against in his Answer, and the story next unto that of
Nichols and Master Buroughs, (if not more in some respects) which he most
insults upon, and triumphs in, I have therefore reserved it to the later end,
as being the last particular matter of fact I shall reply unto for the
justification and vindication of my self against the foul-mouthd aspersions of
Cretensis: And I shall first speak to the manner of his Answer and confutation
of this Story, and secondly to the matter of it: But before I speak to either
of these, I shall mind the Reader of that which I have often spoken of upon
several other particulars which I have replied unto; namely, that he must not
look for all now that may be said, lest I anticipate my larger Reply; as also,
because there is a Gentleman out of Town, whom I have expected almost this
three weeks to come to London, who can tell me some circumstances in this
story for proof of some things more fully and clearly then the Minister from
whom immediately I received it: And indeed, I am told, there is a mystery in
some passages of this business about Cosens, which being unfolded, will give
more full satisfaction in some particulars to the Reader, then yet I am able to
do. For the manner of Cretensis Answer, how unlike it is to a Minister of the
Gospel, and how like to one brought up in an Alehouse, or in a Bowling-alley,
not only on a day of public Thanksgiving, but every day in the week, having
their terms of art at his fingers ends, Score up, Tallie on, and such
foul-mouthd language, It Is a lie, You lie, A loud lie, every impartial Reader
cannot but take notice, and many speak openly of it; and that which makes
Cretensis folly and insolency the greater, and more to be blamed by every
indifferent Reader, is this, that he gives me the lie so often, in such a
disgraceful, scornful way, making the relation all over forgery, and that
there are so many lies well nigh as words in the story; speaking also most
confidently, though falsely, against the worthy Minister who told me this
story, That he Works stoutly at the forge, and feeds both himself and the
world with all manner of scandals and falsehoods against the Independents
without fear, and in the close vapouring and triumphing at an excessive rate
with inferences drawn from his own confutations, as if all he had said in
answer to me had been Gospel; when as all this high and great building is laid
and raised solely upon the weak sandy foundation of Cosens his own relation;
Cretensis disproving the truth of my relation, and sealing the truth of his own
Answer in seven particulars by no other way, but The man professes (that is
Cosens) that he knows no such man, and this counter information I had from
the mouth of the said Cosens himself, and have the particulars under his hand.
Now I appeal to all the world whether any wise man would ever have made such
ado as Cretensis does here, giving the lie so often, triumphing so confidently
in a business merely upon the information of a man in his own case, and
whether this be not worse then to ask my fellow whether I be a thief; ( Cret.
p. 11.) namely, to ask a man's self, and upon a man's own testimony to call an
honest man a thief, and to declare a thief an honest man; especially
considering, besides Cosens being a party, and in his own cause, he is a man
against whom there are many depositions, and complaints against him for other
miscarriages and misdemeanors, a Copy whereof I am promised from a good hand,
and shall insert in my large Reply: But supposing all that Cretensis says
Cosens told him should prove upon further inquiry to be true, and not false;
(the contrary whereunto I shall presently make apparent) yet no wise man can
excuse Cretensis of a great deal of weakness and folly, to put so much weight
as he does upon such a testimony, and to declare so much to all the world:
Certainly great Cretensis is the greatest Manifestarian that I have ever met
with, and there is no man has manifested that weakness of judgment, besides
strength of malice against the Presbyterian Ministers and Saints which he has
done both in this, and in many other passages of his Book; as to make an Answer
to a Book, and profess truly he never read one quarter of the Book, etc. and
in my opinion these acts manifest greater weakness of judgment, far more
injudiciousnesse, then the not knowing how to range parts of speech in a
sentence, nor to put the Nominative case and Verb together regularly in
English, etc. And for a conclusion of what I have to reply against the manner
of Cretensis confutation of this story, I refer it to the judicious Readers
consideration whether Master Edwards, for relating a story as a Relation, upon
the information of a reverend godly Minister well known, living also upon the
place, who could upon no reason be judged to do it out of partiality, or for
sinister ends, be to be accounted a liar, and to have the lie often given him,
or M. Goodwin for denying the whole story, and affirming the contrary upon the
bare word and relation of a stranger, a great Sectary, and a party in the
cause, who according to all reason cannot be thought but he will speak
favorably for himself, especially being such a one, as a man may, without
breach of charity, presume he will speak any thing for himself in his own
cause, when as he did to me in the presence and hearing of three godly
Citizens allege in his own behalf to clear himself from all fault in this
matter, that one of the witnesses who deposed, said, he was hired to swear
against him, and had five shillings given him by one of the Justices, or some
about him, and had three or four cups of sack given him before he swore, and
was drunk when he took his oath; unto whom some of the March 30. Three honest
godly Citizens after supper coming to speak with me, as they were with me
Cosens came to speak with me, and was brought into the room where these three
Citizens were and I spoke nothing to him nor he any thing to me, but in their
hearing, who will testify this and more.
Citizens then present with me, replied, he had best take heed what he said to
accuse the Justices of Peace, that they should make any witness drunck, or
have any hand to give 5. s. to one to swear against him, and that this was no^
likely, nor to be believed by any wise man; and I suppose if I should reply
never a word more to what Cretensis has objected against this story of Cosens,
I had said enough to satisfy rational men, by declaring I had my information
from a person of worth, and by Cretensis nothing is here brought to infringe
it, but only the parties own testimony, who is a man also otherwise obnoxious,
as I have already declared. Now from the manner I shall come to the matter; and
for the Relation which I have set down of Cosens in the last leaf of my Book
save one, I received it from a Reverend Minister who is Preacher at Rochester
(the place where Cosens lives) and a Member of the Assembly, who told it me,
and a Common Counsel man of this City, and I writ it from this Ministers mouth
that I might neither forget nor mistake it, and read it to him after I had
done, and upon reading, he approved it as his sense, and that which he had
related. But now supposing there should be any mistakes in the first relation
made to this godly and learned Minister, yet I reporting it just as I had it
from his mouth (he being a man to be believed) and as an information only, not
as a thing of my own knowledge, I conceive I cannot be taxed for a liar, not
according to any acception or definition of a lie; and if I be in this kind to
be blamed for lying, I desire to know of Master Goodwin by the next in case he
have reported from Cosens a Sectary, a loose person, a man speaking in his own
cause, any thing that is untrue, (which that he has done I shall infallibly
prove) how he will free himself from the same crime, and not more justly
incur the title of great Master Cretensis, then I the brand of lying, which
he so liberally bestows upon me. But to come to the particulars, for the first
words that Cosens should say, Jesus Christ was a Bastard: it is confessed by him
who related it (though he had it from a very good hand) that those words are
not found in the deposition againg him before two Justices) but these, Christ
(alas) he was a child, and you must not believe all the words he said; and for
the fuller satisfaction of the Reader, I do here set down the Information and
Deposition to tittle as it was taken before the Major of Rochester, and another
Justice of Peace.

Civit. Roffens. The Information of John Cosens of Chatham', taken upon oath
the 19 day of August, 1644. before John Philpot Major, and Philip Ward Esquire,
Justices of Peace within the said City.
WHo says, that about July last was twelve months, he being at work at the
house of Master William Cobbams, in the said City with Robert Cosens his
brother, they fell into discourse concerning the Book of Common Prayer, when
the said Robert offered to lay a wager that the same should be put down within
a month, and should be read no more; whereupon the said John Cosens replied*
why Brother there are many things there commanded by God; by what God says the
said Robert? to whom he answered by our Savior Christ? Our Savior Christ,
said Robert Cosens (alas) he was a child, and you must not believe all the
words he said.

his mark. John Cosens John Philpot Major. Philip Ward.

Vera Copia, and examinat.

per me Johan, Goldwell.



Now I appeal to the Reader whether these words related in this Deposition, be
not Blasphemy as well as the other, and whether a mistake might not easily
arise from these words deposed, to report the other; but to put Cretensis out
of doubt that it is no lie, nor forgery to report such words, yea and more of
some Sectaries, Cretensis Saints, and therefore he needed not to have triumphed
so much in it: I will give him two instances of Sectaries, who have blasphemed
after this manner. The first is one Coleburne of Watford in the liberty of
Saint Albons, a great Anabaptist and Sectarie, who spoke these words, that our
Savior Christ was a bastard, and the first time that he taught was in a tub
upon the sea. This was found by a Jury upon oath, and was returned into the
Kings Bench by Certiorarie, in Michaelmas Term last. The second is one in
Midlesex, who is indicted at the Kings Bench, for saying that our Savior Christ
was a bastard, and the Virgin Mary a -- with many other blasphemous words,
which (being so horrid and filthy) I think not fit to make public: This is
found by the grand Inquest in Candlemas Term last, upon the knowledge of one
of the said grand Inquest; and to assure the Reader of what I write, I have by
me the whole Process and particulars at large, which I fetched out of the
Crown Office, subscribed with the Clarks hand, which because they are so
large, and I have much exceeded the number of sheets I allotted to this Reply, I
forbear to Print them; but if Cretensis doubt of the truth of what I here
write, he may if he will be at the charge, have the whole proceedings out of
the Crown Office attested under hand. And for Cosens speaking these very words,
Cretensis a little after (thoug here he denies them) yet confesses these words
were charged upon him; though upon examination waved; else what means that
passage of Cretensis, the witness upon whose single testimony (originally)
both these and the former words were charged upon him: Now what those former
words were, I desire Cretensis to resolve in his Rejoinder.

For the second, that if Jesus Christ were upon the Earth again, he would be
ashamed of many things he then did. This second part of the Relation of the
Information Cretensis calls ^a lie, and the second in order, and thereupon
enlarges himself after this manner. For neither did the man (namely Cosens)
speak any such words as these, the witness upon whose single testimony
(originally) both these and the former words were charged upon him, upon
rexamination, and that upon oath before the Committee of the County, waved both
the one and the other, as appears by the said examination under the hand of
the Clark of the said Committee, which I saw and read; and is forth coming for
any man to peruse for his further satisfaction. Now that the Reader may see
what Cretensis confidence and impudency is, and that Cosens spoke such words
as these, I desire him to read what follows to a word, taken out of the
originalls, kept in the Majors Court of Rochester.

Civit. Roffens. The Information of Francis Tillet, taken upon Oath the 19. of
August, 1644. before Master John Philpot Major, Philip Ward, and Barnabas
Walsall Justices of the Peace within the said City.
WHo says, that in Lent was twelve months last, he being upon his duty, at
the guard of the Bridge at the Centry with Robert Cosens, and some others, he
being talking with the said Robert Cosens about the troubles of the Church, and
some speech of our Savior Christ, he the said Cosens then said, that if our
Savior Christ were now again upon the Earth, he would be ashamed of what he
had done; and he further says, that he heard John Patten of Saint Margarets,
and John Cosens Brother of the said Robert, declare that they have heard him
say to the effect aforesaid.

the Mark of the said Francis Q Tillet.
John Philpot Major.
Philip Ward.
Barnabas Walsall.
Vera Copia and examinat. per me Johan, Goldwell.

Now for that which Cretens* alleges here to clear Cosens, that he never spoke
any such words as these, it is all false as I shall demonstrate it to the
Reader, and I am confident that Cretensis with all his Rhetoric, and great
swelling six footed words, can never clear himself, but must blush for shame,
unless he be past it, and confess that either he was too credulous to believe
such a Sectary and a man in his own cause as Cosens, or else out of haste and
eagerness to confute me, mistook the business quite, or which is worse, did
wilfully, and on purpose write thus to brand me, hoping that I should not be
able to disprove him by ever getting the Records to testify the contrary; and
before I do particularly disprove these six or seven lines of Cretensis, I
shall usher in what I have to say by retorting justly Cretensis words upon
himself, which he unjustly used against me, That forgery of forgeries, and all
is forgery, all over; for in this confutation of Cretensis (by which you may
judge both of those many that go before it, and those few that follow after)
There are not only well-nigh, but altogether, quot verba, tot mendica, and yet
even this has this banner of confidence displayed for the credit of it, as
appears by the said examination under hand of the Clerk of the said Committee,
which I saw and read; and is coming for any man to peruse for his satisfaction;
all which is false as I shall undeniably demonstrate under the Clerks hand of
the Committee; and therefore if I would deal in such a scoffing way with
Cretensis, as he has done by me (though falsely) I could marshall his lies,
and rank them in order, first, second, ^hird etc. and could at the end of
every one cry, keep tale, score up, tally on, and say this is a fifth (if not a
fifth and sixth) phib in the Relation of Cretensis; for here is a big lie with
a lesser in the belly of it; in brief, there is never a sentence, nay not a
clause, nor one word brought by Cretensis to disprove this second part of the
story of Cosens that is true, and yet it has Cretensis seal upon it, and this
foundation (greater then Mr. Edwards, I was informed for certain) namely, as it
appears by the said examination under the hand of the Clerk of the said
Committee, which I saw and read; and is forthcoming for any man to peruse for
his satisfaction; and I am confident there are more untruths in these seven
lines of Cretensis brought to disprove one clause of one story of mine, then in
all my Gangraena (unless mistakes in the manner of a Relation, as in the order
or mistake of a name, etc.) consisting of thirty sheets; and upon condition
that Cretensis will promise to submit to this fair condition, to be willing his
Church should be put down, and to Petition with me that upon proof of things by
me, his Saints may be punished, I am contented to refer the determination of
it to Authority, and if I make it not good, to be willing to suffer what the
Parliament shall think fit; but by the way, if Cretensis signal and choice
confutations founded upon examinations under the hand of the Clerk of a
Committee which he saw and read, and is forthcoming for any man to peruse for
his satisfaction, be of so dark and dismal a complexion, that there is scarce
so much as one beam, or the least glimmering of the light of truth in the whole
body of it; what shall we think of those that have no such image or
superscription of confidence upon them, but be only loose informations from
Anabaptists, Apprentices, persons in their own cause etc? If Cretensis Chariots
and horsemen fail, surely his Infantry will yield the field. And that I may
make good all this which I have said, and not only feed the Reader with words
and flourishes (as Cretensis does) I desire the Reader to peruse what follows,
which clearly proves what I say, and confounds Cretensis.

Whereas ceatain Articles are exhibited against Robert Cosens of Blasphemy,
which he now alleges is confessed by some of the witnesses to be rather a
suborning then truth; These are to require you to warn these underwritten to
appear before the Committee at Ail^ford to morrow being Wednesday; fail not,
for which this shall be your warrant.

Ail^ford November. 19. Anthony Weldon. John Bixe. John Cosens Francis Tillet
James Hills John Hills George Pain William Barnet


To all Constables, and other officers to whom this shall come, etc.
Let Mr. Goldwell send a Copy of the Articles with these witnesses.

The Examination of Francis Tillet taken upon oath before Sir Anthony Weldon,
William James, Richard Beale, and John Bixe Esquires, upon an information of
some subornation against Robert Cosens, November. 20. 1644.

Who says that Robert Cosens and this examinat being together upon the Centry,
they were talking of the Common Prayer, and the Lords Prayer; and in this
discourse the examinate affirmed, That the Lords Prayer was taught unto him by
his Forefathers, and that it was of Christ's making and framing; whereunto
Robert Cosens replied, That if our Savior were again upon earth he would be
ashamed of what he had done; and that afterward this examinate relating unto
his Brother John Cosens this discourse, the said John Cosens replied, that his
Brother Robert had said unto him as much before.

Andrew Lydall Clerk Committee.


Now I desire the Reader but to compare this Examination under the hand of the
Clerk of the Committee with what Cretensis has written anent his business,
and he will find Cretensis lines brought to clear Cosens from speaking these
words, to have forgeries in it, numerous beyond measure, the whole and every
part of it being nothing but lies; and for the further conviction of Cretensis,
I will go over his words. 1. Cretensis says, neither did the man speak any
such words as these. Cretensis, how dare you say so, when as before three
Justices of Peace upon oath these words were deposed against him? is your
negative testimony without oath sufficient to disprove it? 2. Cretensis affirms
for proof of his words, that Cosens never spoke such words as these, that the
witness upon whose single testimony (originally) both these and the former
words were charged upon him upon re-examination, and that upon oath before the
Committee of the County, waved both the one and the other, which is all stark
staring false; and Cretensis proof failing him, what is Cretensis testimony
worth? Now if the Reader do but read this Examination under the Clerk of the
Committees hand, and compare with that the first Deposition of Francis Tillet
before the Major of Rochester and two other Justices, he must presently see it
smells above ground, and that here Cretensis words takes place in himself, quot
verba, tot mendacia: I desire the Reader to tell the untruths, and that proved
upon Record, and not untruths made upon my saying they are lies as Cretensis
are upon his bare words.

1. Cretensis avoucheth confidently that it was one witness upon whose single
testimony (originally) both these and the former words were charged upon him:
let this be the first lie in this Catalogue, for it is evident by the
Depositions which I have set down, that there were two witnesses, John Cosens
and Francis Tillet; Francis Tillet who swore Cosens spoke these words, and John
Cosens who deposed the other words; so that there were two witnesses, and each
witness deposed not the same, but different words.

2. Cretensis here affirms the former words, namely, that Jesus Christ was a
Bastard, were charged upon him; which if they were, and that upon oath, that
was a good ground for the report; but if they were not charged upon him, but
other blasphemous words, then Cretensis tells another phib, which is the second
in order.

3. Cretensis positively (without saying I was so informed, etc.) asserts that
these words spoken, viz. by Cosens, If Christ were upon the earth again he
would be ashamed, etc. the witness upon re-examination, and that upon oath
before the Committee of the County waved them: Now how false this is, let but
the Reader compare the first and second Deposition of Francis Tillet, who
deposed these words against Cosens, before three Justices, and upon
re-examination, and that upon oath before the Committee of the County swore the
same again the second time, and was far from waving it as appears by the
examination under the Clerks hand of the Committee which I have set down; and
now I might say to the Reader, keep tale, this is the third downright fall,
more then a stumble, this is a big lie with others in the belly of it; for
first the former words were not charged upon Cosens by Francis Tillet, but only
these words; and therefore how could he be re-examined upon that of which he
never informed, nor was formerly examined? Secondly, much less then could he
upon oath wave them; and for the other words which he was re-examined upon, he
stood to them before the Committee, and is ready to testify them still
whenever he shall be called thereunto.

4. Cretensis affirms that he who deposed these words, viz. That if Christ were
upon the earth again, etc.) did upon re-examination before the Committee wave
them, as appears by the said examination under the hand of the Clerk of the
said Committee. Now I might here say, score up; this is the fourth word of
folly in Cretensis confutation; for there is no such examination under the hand
of the Clerk of the said Committee, but the contrary to it, as appears by that
examination set down already taken upon oath before Sir Anthony Weldon, etc.
and subscribed by Andrew Lydall Clerk Committee. This untruth may well stand
for two, or at least be printed in a Capital Letter, because he affirms a
gross lie, and a thing quite contrary to truth, to be under the hand of the
Clerk of the Committee.

5. Cretensis proceeds upon this examination, that he saw it, which I saw; I
might here say, Tally on, this is a fifth phib in this relation; for how could
Cretensis see that which never was; but if he saw any such thing that Francis
Tillet should deny these words, he must needs see something that was forged by
some of his Sectaries, to engage him to confute Mr. Edwards Book.

6. Cretensis further asserts, that he read this under the hand of the Clerk of
the Committee: I might here say Cretensis still advances in his Cretian way,
and this is the sixth flaw; for how could he read that which never was? and I
conceive Cretensis will upon a review of what he has written, cry peccavi, and
say, I was deluded and quite mistaken.

7. And lastly, the said Independent confutation and assertion, for uniformity
sake, that it may end as it began, or rather end worse, by rising and ascending
in untruths, affirms in the close of it, that this examination is forthcoming
for any man to peruse for his satisfaction. Now Reader remember the account,
for this is the seventh and eighth time at least, yea the ninth and tenth that
this confutation prevaricateth with the truth; for in these words, this
examination is forthcoming, there are many lies. First, there is no such
examination. Seconly, then it cannot be forthcoming. Thirdly, not for any one
man to peruse, much less for any man. And fourthly, it can be much less for
satisfaction. And I much wonder Cretensis, if you had seen and read an
examination under the hand of the Clerk of the Committee, proving what you here
say, and confuting this part of the story related by me of Cosens, and that
tending so much to the satisfaction of any man, why did you not cause it to be
forthcoming, printing it here together with your Confutation? Certainly
Cretensis, had you seen and read such an examination under the hand of the
Clerk of the said Committee, there can be no reason given why you should not
have printed that, as well as an Anabaptists Letter written to an Anabaptist,
and a writing given you from Mr. Buroughs; surely an examination under the
Clerks hand of a Committee, would have been more authentical with rational
men to have convicted my Book of untruths, then a Letter of an Anabaptisticall
boy, etc. and therefore for my part, I am confident, Cretensis saw that in the
examination brought him by Cosens, which being printed, would have
disadvantaged his foul-mouthed Confutation of this story, either contradicting,
or rendering the whole suspected; and therefore he suppressed it, being willing
to blast my Book for the present, while it was new come forth, and much sought
after; making account, if after I should be able to disprove him, yet he could
not play his after game, either by pleading mistakes, and that he was so
informed, or else by his Rhetoric and words at will, wrusting either the
examination brought him to these word in Cretensis, or else these words and
phrases of his to the examination; however one way or other to shift for his
credit, and to wrangle it out, in which Cretensis has a wonderful Art and
faculty by his wit and largeness of conscience, to call black white, and to
make quidlibet ex quolibet; and however Cretensis, to work the Reader to a
belief of him in the confutation of this part of the story of Cosens, speaks of
an examination under the hand of the Clerk of the said Committee, which he saw
and read; yet I am confident he knew it would not prove what he here says, and
my confidence is upon this ground, because from his own words I gather he had
this counter-information from the mouth of the said Cosens, and the examination
under the hand of the Clerk of the Committee (what ever it was) was brought him
by Cosens: Oretens. page 40. This Counter-Information I had from the mouth of
the said Cosens himself, and have the particulars under his hand.
Now I conceive that examination under the hand of the Clerk of the Committee
which Cosens showed Cretensis, he also showed me, which I carefully read, and
that in the presence of three Citizens, in which there was nothing in the
judgment of us four to weaken this testimony of Francis Tillet; but rather by
that, and the confession of Cosens himself to us, much fell from him to confirm
the truth of this, and other passages in this story, which I presently writ
down as soon as Cosens was gone: and for a need, besides my own testimony,
those Citizens will be ready to witness also the truth of what then passed; so
that by all this the Reader may see more untruth in one piece of Cretensis
confutation of the story of Cosens, then there are pretended untruths, made by
all the art and malice of Cretensis against the whole story of Cosens; so that
to conclude this I ask of Cretensis who is the liar now? and I suppose I may
more truly apply Cretensis own words a little changed, spoken against me to
himself: doubtless the man has sold himself to write all, and all manner of
untruths, that he can but scrapple together from what mouths, or tongues, or
pens, he cares not so they be but Independent in their constitution, and carry
any antipathy in them to the honor and good of Presbytery; and in case they be
but such, it is no matter if they be Anabaptists, Seekers, yea loose drunken
persons and Blasphemers. Cretensis by this Answer has proved many things I
spoke of in Gangraena, all the Sectaries and Blasphemers closing with
Independents, and the Independents with them to make one common party against
the godly Orthodox Ministers and people of these Kingdoms who are for truth
and peace.

3. Cretensis proceeds to infringe the truth of my Relation of the story of
Cosens in five other particulars; but by this part of the story which I have
made good, and the many particulars wherein I have disproved Cretensis,
especially considering it is all of the same complexion, Cosens information
being the sole ground whereupon Cretensis goes, (as he confesses page 40.) the
Reader may easily guess at the rest, and my Authors I with the Records
produced, are more authentic then Cosens bare no; therefore for present I
shall not enlarge further upon the third, fourth, fifth heads of Cretensis, but
reserve to my full Reply the whole Relation of Cosens being bound over by the
Justices upon these blasphemies attested against him to the Sessions, and of
his being imprisoned for speaking words against a Member of the House of
Commons, dwelling in that county, and of the complaint for his blasphemies
against Christ exhibited to the Recorder of Rochester, and of the Recorders
binding him to his good behavior out of the pious sense he had of the wrong
done to Christ, and the words he spoke to him, and of his address to the
Committee of Kent for a review of these Depositions, etc. only there seems to
be some interfering between the third and fourth branch of Cretensis
confutation; Cretensis denying Cosens to be ever under any restraint, or
needing any order from any in place, or to any in place to release Cosens, in
reference to his blasphemies; and yet he says presently after, upon the fight
of the forementioned examination taken upon oath before the Committee, by the
Justices the man was discharged: Now I demand, What was he discharged from? and
whether was not this discharging of the man a releasing of the man? Oportet
Cretensem esse memorem.

4. As to Cretensis sixth branch, calling that part of the relation of Cosens a
loud lying Information: I reply, It Is a mainifest truth, and will be witnessed
by many, that Den, Lamm, and Woodman, all three of them have preached in Cosens
house, which is so evident in Rochester, that as the days of the month when
they preached are known, so are the names of many of the Auditors that were
present: and for proof of it, it is given me under hand from Rochester, that
Woodman himself confessed it the very same day he preached before a Justice of
peace and other witnesses, being apprehended by the Officers, and brought
before him, who being thus convented gave it under his hand, that he would
never again preach within five miles of Rochester: and though Cosens says he
knows no such man (which we think, upon good ground, is a lie,) yet can he
deny that Woodman has preached in his house? which is the thing asserted.

5. For that last part of the relation of Cosens going to Master Clares, etc.
for uniformity sake, made a lie by Cretensis, because he was set upon it to
blast all for lies; Cosens going to hear Mr Clare preach.
I reply, that as the first part is confessed to be true, so is the last as
true, though denied; for Master Clare affirms, he said he would complain of
him; and let Cosens be think himself what he said of Master Clare, and he must
confess it. As for that argument Cretensis brings why he did not threaten to
complain of him, and that the man dares not threaten to question any
whatsoever, because it is his judgment, none ought to be questioned or troubled
for their judgments in matters appertaining unto God: I answer, It Is a weak
one, and it follows not; because the Sectaries principles and practices do not
agree, they practicing many things often wherein they profess contrary: How
many Sectaries have we in these days, who plead for, and profess liberty of
conscience, which yet have not only threatened godly Ministers and Christians
for their consciences, but actually have brought them into trouble, and
punished them several ways? Surely Cretensis, if you had read Histories of
the Church, both ancient and modern, you would have sound Heretics and
Sectaries, as Arians, Donatists, Anabaptists, Socinians, Arminians professing
as Cosens here does, who yet when they have had opportunities, proved great
persecuters of the Orthodox godly Ministers; and we well know by many shrewd
signs and instances, that if Cretensis and his abettors, who have so much
pleaded for a Toleration, shall come once to get power in their hands, they
will as much tolerate Presbyterians, as now they will to come into any place,
office, employment Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, where it is in their
power to hinder them. And therefore Cretensis, you had need bring better
Arguments to confute my Antapologie, (which your Sectaries give out you are
upon); or else you will do the Apologists little good either in matter of
fact, or in answering the argumentative part of it.

6. Cretensis in his animadversions and inferences made upon my relation of the
story of Cosens, not knowing who related it to me, nor the occasion of the
relation, etc. yet in the close of his confutation of the story of Cosens, most
falsely and wickedly, without fear or wit, brands him who related it to me with
such words as these, But who is Master Edwards godly orthodox Presbyterian
Minister^? Is he not such a one who works stoutly at the forge, and feeds both
himself and the world with all manner of scandals and falsehoods against the
Independents without fear? Certainly, Cretensis throat is an open sepulcher,
and the poison of asps is under his lips. What shall be given unto thee, or
What shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? This passage against the godly
Minister who told me this story, fills up the measure of Cretensis rage, lying,
and evil speaking; and he could hardly have spoken more untrue words then
these, whether he consider the man himself, or the manner of his relating it.
In one word, the Minister who related this story to me, is a reverend, learned,
godly, humble, retired man, a man who has been many years of good account in
the Church of God, a Member also of the Assembly, and a man far from forging,
or feeding himself and the world with all manner of scandals against the
Independents, etc. and this Minister did not make it his business or work to
tell me this story, coming to me, or ever intending to come: but I, going in
London upon my occasions, this Minister accidentally being in a shop with a
friend of his, a Citizen whom I knew also, I spoke to them as I was going by,
and they to me; and so in the shop exchanging a few words, the Citizen asked
me if my Book were come forth, or when it would: whereupon this Minister and I
had some words about the subject of it, and falling into discourse, he related
this story to me and the Citizen; which when I had it from him, the last sheet
of my Book being either printing off, or quite printed off, I put it in a
Postscript, as the Reader sees: and therefore let all the world judge what
untruths Cretensis has belched out against this reverend and worthy Minister.
But Cretensis is a man that in all his Writings and Sermons falls upon all that
come in his way, having no respect of age, place, gifts, sufferings, etc. if
they be against his fond conceits and Sectaries.

And thus, good Reader, I have gone over all the particular material
exceptions made against my Book entitled Gangraena, by Master Saltmarsh,
Master Walwyn, and Cretensis; and I doubt not, but by this time, even by this
briefer Reply, every indifferent Reader is satisfied, how unjust and false
those outcries and clamours of lies lies, are, and how in them that Proverb is
verified, A great cry, but a little wool: little cause, but only the rage and
madness of the Sectaries to see themselves and their ways so laid open in the
sight of the Sun. And yet I have not done with my Antagonists, but shall more
fully anatomize and rip them up, and further justify and clear all things
excepted against in Gangraena, which being lighter, are now passed over, or
though spoken unto, need further amplification and illustration. In a word,
there is nothing behind untoucht, that either glances upon me, or speaks for
themselves and their party; but I intend to speak to it fully, and am resolved
(God sparing me life and opportunity) not to die in their debt. And I could now
play the Rhetorician, and spend some leaves in running over all the Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies, Practices, Stories, etc. laid down in Gangraena, not so
much as once offered to be disproved, though they be of persons and things here
living, and acted in London, and near at hand, and which Cretensis, with all
his gatherings, intelligences, observations and presentations from Sectaries of
several sorts, Anabaptists, Independents, Seekers, etc. and of several parts
in the Kingdom, Kent, Essex, London, etc. has been able to say nothing
against; and might, going from one particular to another, triumph over
Cretensis, stamping the superscription of Truth upon them, and ask him, What
say you to the 84. and 85. Errors laid down in the Catalogue? Is it not true
that such things were preached in London? Whether is not that which I have
related of Paul Best true? Whether did not Master Buroughs and Master
Greenhill preach bitterly against the Petition of many well affected Citizens
for the settling of Government? And so I might go through hundreds; and of all
those facts, opinions, practices that these three men have not been able
(though so willing) to except against, infer, conclude, and flourish over
Cretensis with his own sword. There is no reasonable man, that considers the
malignitie, wrath, etc. of Master Saltmarsh, Master Walwyn, but especially of
Cretensis, against me and my late Book, and the opportunities they have had
through their acquaintance with Sectaries of all sorts; besides the public
notice given of answering me, as appears by the intelligence and particulars
brought in to Cretensis from several places, to furnish him their Champion;
together with the extreme eager desire of Cretensis taking all advantages
against me, making matter of confutation and lies of that which I am confident
was never made by any Scholar in an Answer before, (as, the house a meeting for
Sectaries; as, the not being able to put the Nominative case and Verb together,
and such like) but will think they have spoke the utmost they possibly could
against my Book, and that of course some of the things drawn up and represented
by the hand of Envy must needs be false: so that whereas Cretensis conceives,
that now in his Answer he has informed the world how many lies and untruths
there are in Gangraena; the truth is, that he and his fellow-sectaries have
done it but faintly, and with the extreme damage of their own cause: for all
wise and unprejudiced men will acquit all the other particulars from the crimes
and imputations of lies and falsehood, and conclude them all true and certain;
for surely, if there had been any hole to have been picked in them, either the
malice, or the wit, or the industry, or one thing or other of Cretensis and his
associates, would have found it out, and not have spared me: so that the very
enemies bear winesse to the truth of the body of my Book, the things that are
found fault with by them being but a spot here and there, a few in comparison,
(if spots) and I may say of all the exceptions taken by my three Antagonists,
supposing them to be mistakes, (though I have showed the contrary) What are
these among so many not excepted against, being but as gleanings to the vintage?

Cretensis, page 50. and in his last Section, winds up his Answer in speaking
to the Reader, that though for the present he has given him only a taste of
Master Edwards grapes, yet sufficient, he presumes, to convince the Reader,
that his vine is the vine of Sodom, etc. and professes that he has (...) read
one quarter of the Book as yet, nor knows nor whether ever he shall care to
read it through or no: and then labors to possess the Reader, that what he
has not answered, others will very shortly: a few days (he makes no
question) will give the Reader more light to comprehend the darkness of
Gangraena; and prophesies, The day will come, and is even at the door, when
there will be scarce one stone left upon another of all this false building,
which will not be pulled down by the hand of Truth: And when the servants of
God shall have had the opportunity to wash off that dirt and filth which Mr.
Edwards has cast upon them, Gangraena will be found a strumpet, yea, and of
the race and lineage of that great scarlet Whore, which corrupts the earth
with her fornication.

Reply. As for Cretensis saying, he has only for present given a taste of
Master Edwards grapes, implying, he could feed the Reader with whole clusters,
and intimating he has a great deal more to say to my Book, as other passages
express besides this, viz. page 38. I presume that Mistress Gangraena has not
as yet paid me the tithe or tenth part of her forgeries, etc. I answer, I
believe Cretensis has said all he possibly could against Gangraena; I do not
think he left out any thing he could object against it: Whosoever reads but
his Answer, and observes his rage and heat, his playing at the smallest games,
and picking of straws to find matter against my Book to fill up six sheets
with, railing and declaiming against it, will not think he gave but a taste,
or a tenth. But how could Cretensis say he had given only a taste for the
present, and not the tenth part, when as he professes truly he had not read
one quarter of the Book then, neither knew whether he should ever care to read
it through or no? Could he divine of what he had not read, nor knew not
whether ever he should read, that there was ten times more behind? And
besides, How could Cretensis, out of what he knew not whether he should ever
read, promise the Reader to give him not only a taste, but abundance?
Certainly Cretensis meant the far greatest part of his grapes promised the
Reader, should be gathered by other hands, and be (as he says of the
particulars detected already) observed by others, and presented to him: and
after this rate of the far greatest part of particulars observed by others,
and presented to him, it is easy for Cretensis to give Answers; and I much
wonder we have no more of them, but that he takes almost two years to give an
Answer to the Antapologie. And no wonder, Cretensis going upon an implicit
faith, making an Answer out of particulars observed by others, without reading
one quarter of my Book, not seeing with his own eyes, but making use of a pair
of Independent, Antinomian, Anabaptisticall, etc. spectacles to write with, the
man is so much mistaken, and sometimes takes that to be great which is little,
and that which is great he cannot see at all. As for that Cretensis says,
that he presumes by the taste he has given, he has convinced the Reader
that my vine is the vine of Sodom, my grapes grapes of gall, my clusters
bitter, etc. I believe every Reader who is not bewitched with the Independent
Schismatic way, is convinced, that Cretensis has said enough to satisfy
all men, that his vine is the vine of Sodom, that his grapes are grapes of
gall, his wine the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps, and that
generally all men say of his Answer, yea, some of his own party cry out of it,
that it is too bitter: But as for my Gangraena, though objective, the object
about which the Book is exercised be the vine of Sodom, grapes of gall, poison
of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps, treating of and laying open the
Heresies, Blasphemies and Practices of the Sectaries, which indeed are
poisonous and venomous; yet subjective, the Discourse it self, and the way of
handling those things, is healing and medicinal to cure the Reader of those
stings and poisons, which by eating of those sour grapes of the Sectaries they
have contracted; and my Book is far from being like the vine of Sodom, the
poison of dragons, that in writing of it I have played the part of a Physician,
made a precious treacle and sovereign antidote to cure and expel poisons, by
correcting, qualifying, binding them, etc. laying open the Errors, Heresies,
etc. their evil, danger, and discovering remedies and cures proper for them,
which, were they taken, and the prescriptions followed, I am confident would
prove the healing of these Nations.

As for Cretensis profession that he has not read one quarter of the Book as
yet; nor knows whether he shall ever care to read it through or no: I reply,
that Cretensis at once, and in one breath discovers himself to be both weak and
proud, he shows his folly and horrible pride. First, his folly; for what wise
man that had reason and common sense, though he could not Cretensis page 10.24.
have * construed a piece of Latin, write true English, nor framed the structure
of a period according to the common rules of Grammar, would have writ so? and
truly this and other passages in this Answer, confirms me much in that opinion
which many understanding learned Divines have had of Cretensis a great while,
that he is no judicious rational man (as his followers cry him up) but only a
wordy Divine, a multitude of words, that is all; that being true of him which
was said of Erasmus, that his writings were verba, non res; but of this folly
of Cretensis, the Reader may remember what I have written page 39. of this
Book; and let Cretensis ever take me so writing, and I will confess my folly.
Seconly, It Is horrible pride and arrogancy; what a proud passage is this,
Cretensis thinks himself so great, and looks down with such disdain upon me, as
that he knows not whether ever he shall care to read my Book thorough or no,
^lighting it as not being worth his reading, nor I worthy to carry his Books
after him; this speech indeed is near akin to that in page 15. Indeed if
Independent Ministers had either the privilege of ease to preach to the bare
walls and pewes in their meeting places: The Independent Ministers are so taken
up with preaching to great Congregations, and with the resort of great persons
to their houses, and with the consultations they are admitted until midnight
about great affairs; and particularly Cretensis of late, as it is talked every
where in London, that he knows not whether he shall ever care to read my Book
thorough or no, or shall ever have leisure to do it; but Cretensis, let me tell
you how much soever you slight my Books, and care not to read them thorough, as
too much below you, yet there are your betters for all kind of learning, years,
piety, that care to read thorough my Books, and bless God for them; and though
they be of as piercing deep judgments as Cretensis, yet could never find that
nonsense, weakness of judgment, etc. which Cretensis* speaks of so often. As
for that Cretensis promises the Reader, that a few days (he makes no question)
will give the Reader more light wherewith to comprehend my darkness, implying
as if more Answers were suddenly to come forth, to discover the falsehood of
matters contained in Gangraena. I reply, a few days are past, yea some weeks,
between seven and eight, and yet there is none of Cretensis new-light come
forth, no Answers disproving any one particular in my Book; there is a Book
indeed of one Bacons come forth, who both in the Title page and Book speaks of
my Gangraena, but he confesses the truth of what I speak of him, viz. his being
put out of Gloucester, his being received in a great man's house, and his going to
Bristoll since the Parliaments taking of it; so that it seems by the confession
of one of Cretensis ^a^nts, all matters are not lies which are mentioned in
Gangraena; and yet before Master Bacons Book came forth, I was told confidently
several times (as the report of the Sectaries) that was one of my lies,
speaking of Master Bacons going to Bristoll, whereas he had never been out of
London since the taking of Bristoll: But I suppose however Cretensis days are
past, and nothing is come forth to comprehend my darkness, yet I make no
question but this Reply with the further Reply coming after will give light to
the Reader to comprehend Cretensis ^his darkness. As to that passage of
Cretensis, that the far greatest part of the particulars detected, were
observed by others, and presented to him; I Reply, though I have animadverted
upon it already page 29. in Observation 9. and also in this present Section,
yet I shall add this, (that besides his great weakness in taking things upon
trust, and making an Answer to a Book out of other men's collections* himself
never reading one quarter of the Book) he here proclaims himself guilty of the
great crime and transgression which in many places of his Answer he loads me
with, and with all his railing Rhethorick aggravates against me, namely of
persons resorting to him to furnish him with intelligence, his taking up and
entertaining of reports, his publishing them to the world, wherein besides his
contradicting other passages in his Answer, as that in page 6. nor do I hold
intelligence with any man to inform my self of his haltings, he shows himself
faulty in laying snares of intelligence in many places, and holding
correspondence with several parts of the Kingdom to receive intelligence of
the miscarriages and undue deportments of all such as are Anti-Independently
given; and if it were not so, whence comes it that so many particulars detected
and observed by others, were presented to him, and that Cretensis has ready by
him a year ago, a Manuscript in his hands concerning Master Edwards himself,
discoursing his juggling; a story also of a Presbyterian Angel, together with a
story of the Doctorate it self of the Assembly, yea that all sorts of
Sectaries, and that from several places have resorted to Cretensis with
presents in their hands toward the perfecting of this goodly work, as Master
Buroughs, Li^utenant Colonel Lilburn, Ki^^in, Cosens, a friend of Master Ellis
in London, etc. being like so many rivers (...) and emptying themselves into
the Cretian Sea, where all these meeting make so many raging waves to beat upon
and disturb the Ship of the Reformed Church; all these Sectaries ^ though
distant from one another in places, opinions, yet as so many lines meet
altogether in Master Goodwyn against the Presbyterians; and as in this, so in
other particulars wherein Cretensis deeply charges me, he himself is most
faulty, as in taxing me with immodest lascivious expressions, for printing a
letter where an immodest fact is related (though for such a foul offense
modestly expressed) when as Cretensis, as of himself, and as his own words
(when free to have used any other) speaks of monthly courses, etc. more then
once* expressions most immodest and uncivil. For that expression of Cretensis
by that time the boughs of the trees are a little more withered, they will be
broken off, the women will come and set them on fire. I answer, I suppose by
this time the boughs of the tree, instead of being withered, do flourish more,
and are more fresh and green, and do here bring forth new fruit* and whereas
Cretensis had for a (...) cast* dust and dirt upon this tree, my Reply like a
good shoute of rain, has washed all off, making it look pleasantly, smell
sweet, and Cretensis Answer by that time I have done with it, it will not only
be like boughs a little withered, and broken off, but like Saint Iudes
Sectaries, a tree whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, and plucked
up by the roots. As to those words of Cretensis, The day will come, and is even
at the door, when there will be a scarce one stone left upon another of all
this false building, which will not be pulled down by the hand of truth. I reply,
for all Cretensis prophesying of such a day, and that even at the door; there
is no such day yet come, not any hand since Cretensis, having pulled down one
stone from this building, though it be now about two months ago since Cretensis
threatened this; but the Reader may see the contrary is fulfilled this day, and
that instead of pulling down this building of Gangraena, the building is
enlarged a story higher, and in breadth also, by the addition of this second
part of Gangraena; and Cretensis will find Gangraena will be so far from
being pulled down, that other buildings of the same kind will be framed by it;
and this first stone laid by me, or first building will prosper into a row, a
whole street before I and others have done with the Sectaries, whereas
Cretensis Babels, built without any foundation, and daubed with untempered
mortar, will fall down to the ground, and be as a refuge for lies, that fails,
and is swept away as the Spiders Cobweb.

And lastly, to those words of Cretensis, When the servants of God shall have
had the opportunity to wash off that dirt and filth which Master Edwards has
now cast upon them, Gangraena will be found a strumpet; etc. I reply, The most
of those persons whom I have named in Gangraena, I durst not for all the world
call them the servants of God thus publicly as Cretensis does, lest I should
be found guilty of strengthening them in their wicked errors and practices
(but of my grounds in this, the Reader shall have a more full account in my
second Reply): and therefore (meaning it of such) the servants of God shall
have no opportunity to wash off that dirt and filth which I have cast upon
them; for they that are such, as Clarkson, Webb, Wright, Hich, Den, Nichols,
L^m, Oats, Kiffin, Walwyn, Marshall, Ienney, Mistress A^^eway, cum multis aliis,
(I may say with the Apostle) serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own
bellies, and their own lusts; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple. But as for some few, among many whom I have named in
Gangraena, as Master Buroughs, Master Greenhill, and some such, it may be they
are the servants of God, and Saints, though wherein I have blamed them, they
walk as men, and as carnal, and not as Saints; and can never wash off that
dirt I have cast upon them (so is Cretensis phrase) without repentance, and
that they will find one day, when they shall come to be awakened from their
wine. And therefore instead of Gangraena being found a strumpet, Cretensis will
be found a liar, and Gangraena a chaste Lady, and true Virgin; and it will
appear (I doubt not, before it be long) when the time of the reign of the
Sectaries shall be over, and they no more heard of, unless it be by way of a
proverb and reproach, that then Master Edwards Gangraena shall be looked upon
by all as a witness of the truth, even against Sectaries in the ages to come,
and as a discovery of the wickedness and vileness of the Sectaries of this
time. And whereas Cretensis would make my Book of the lineage and race of the
great Woore corrupting the earth, etc. Gangraena is of a quite different
nature, and contrary lineage, being a great means (through the blessing of God)
of preserving the earth from being corrupted and tainted by the fornications
and poisonous principles of the Sectaries; the Book doing much good; as I could
prove by plentiful testimonies of Letters written from many parts, I received
a Letter last week out of the Country subscribed with ^o hands of Godly
Ministers testifying to my work* and earnestly entreating my constant
persuance, with a promise that I shall not want what their prayers and
endeavors can contrib^^e to that work. A Letter from a godly Minister cut of
Warwickshire written thus, M. Edwards Book does much good here.
as also by speeches expressed of it: and if C^etensis would confess, that is
the true reason he is so offended with it, because it hinders making of
Proselytes, and so for want of growing up to such a number as they desig^e and
hope for, they may miss of a Toleration, and so in the issue, a Domination,
which is so much sought for by them, And for a conclusion of my Reply to
Cretensis, I shall turn my self to speak a few words to Master Goodwin, and
to the Reader. Master Goodwin, Consider sadly of what you have done in your
Book Cretensis, how you are become guilty, and have made your self partaker of
all the Heresies, B^asphemies, wicked practices I have spoken against, in
pleading for all (without any distinction) as Saints, servants of God, and such
like, and speaking against with envenomed malignity that necessary useful Book
as a very pest and plague, which I writ for discovery of Errors and erroneous
persons, that so the Saints might take heed, and beware of them; and in which
all godly orthodox, faithful Ministers do rejoice, and bless God for it. I
have received several Letters from particular Ministers in Essex bearing
witness; and so Letters out of Kent to the same purpose, and from other places.
O wretched man, to carry things so, as if Errors would do no harm to men's
souls, but a Book written against them, that will hurt and hazard men's
souls; which is all one, as if a man should say Strong poison would do no
hurt, nor kill, but a precious Antidote will destroy and ruin men's bodies. And
now, good Reader, I desire thee impartially and without prejudice to weigh
Cretensis objections and exceptions against my Book, and my Answers, and then
judge whether I have not wounded, and laid this great Goliath of the Sectaries
(coming out in defiance against the Reformed Churches) upon his back; and
whether God, who chooses the weak things of the world to confound the things
that are mighty; and things which are despised, to bring to naught things that
are of esteem, has not made use of me, a man so vilified by the Sectaries, a
poor weak thimble full of dust, by the wind strongly blowing this thimble full
of dust into Cretensis eyes, to blind him, and befool him. And yet I have not
done with Cretensis, but let the Reader look for what is behind, viz. my fuller
Reply; and what ever in this first is either omitted, or not so fully spoken
unto, in that he may look to receive more satisfaction. And I no whit doubt,
but that, as I have now (by Gods assistance) made a good beginning both
defensive and offensive; so by the same good hand upon me, I shall in the next
give so good an account, that I shall deal with this daring enemy, as little
David with Goliath, stand upon him, and triumph over him, and give you his head
upon the top of my sword: And in my next I intend to dress him up, and set him
out in all his ornaments and flowers, in his practices, opinions, and ways of
promoting them; in all which I shall render him and his name an abhorring to
this and the following generations.

Since Cretensis answer, there is a Book come forth, written by one Mr. Bacon,
which Book is answered by one Mr. Corbet, (the man whom in that Book he so
often speaks of) and it is abroad in print already: What I spoke of him in
Gangraena, he in that Book confesses, as his being cast out of Gloucester, and
his coming to London, etc. speaking particularly of that which I touched only,
and but in general (as the Lords house in which he lives.) And besides that,
I hear one Web has an Answer in the Press to what I relate of him page 106,
107. which Answer, before it went to the Press, by a providence came to my
hand without ever seeking it, or indeed imagining that ever Web (such an
Heretic and Blasphemer) durst have appeared in print, or been taken notice of
to be in London, for fear of being questioned for those things I have written
of him: But we may see what sad times we are fallen into, and that the
Sectaries are grown fearlesse, that they dare come abroad and plead their
desperate cause, as Master Saltmarsh, Walwyn; so now Master Bacon, and Web;
which symptom, among many others, makes me fear the night and darkness is
at hand, when as the wolves and the wild beasts dare come thus out of their
dens; whereas when the Sun arises they go to their dens. The Psalmist tells us,
Psalm. 104.20, 22. Thou make darkness, and it is night, when all the beasts
of the forest do creep forth. The Sun arises, they gather themselves
together, and lay them down in their dens. Hence the Scripture calls wolves the
wolves of the evening, Zeph. 3.3. and look as the Frogs croaking and making a
noise use to be in the evening, so the croaking of false Teachers resembled to
wolves, the beasts of the forest, and Frogs, presages the going down of the
Sun, and night coming. But because I purpose not to trouble my self with
giving any formal answer to it by it self, I shall now give these
Animadversions upon it: First, That Web confesses most of the things I relate
of him; only he says of some of them, he had recanted and disclaimed them;
and I should not have upbraided him, but rejoiced in his conversion. But unto
that I reply; Had not this Web, since his Recantation and Release, both in
City and Country, vented many desperate things, and gone on in his heretical
ways, I should never have mentioned them. Secondly, That this Web rancks
himself in his Answer among the Independents, speaking of me as being so
against him out of my ill will to Independents; and I find John Bachiler, an
Independent, not only (April 1. 1646.) setting his Imorimatur, but helping him
in his Answer, mending several things in the Answer: as for example, For those
words I charge him with, that he should say, For him to say he was equal with
Christ, was no robbery; in his Answer to that, Bachiler helps this Blasphemer,
and takes part with him: as for instance, whereas Web justifies it, that Gods
love is the same in every respect unto the Saints as unto Christ, and therefore
a Saint may say he is equal with Christ, and count it no robbery; [ in every
respect] is blotted out by Bachiler. And Web further pleading he might say,
The Saints were equal to Christ; next following these words of Webs, [ As I
conceive, the word of God to be my rule,] there is interlined under Bachilers
hand these words, [ Provided I meet with a fair and candid interpretation of
my Words.] And so I could instance in diverse other alterations: so that we may
see the Independents will not lose any the most blasphemous, Atheistical
heretical men, but further them, and join with them against the
Presbyterians, licensing their Writings, helping them to conceal, and deliver
more cautelously their dangerous opinions. Thirdly, for that which is related
by me in Gangraena of Webs speaking so wickedly of the Scriptures, he denies it
not, but says to this purpose, How could he say so? for he should contradict
himself in other things which he has said and holds: But to that I answer,
It Is no new thing for such men as he to say, and unsay, affirm and deny
according to the companies they come in, and advantages they think they have.
Fourthly, To that which I relate of him concerning those expressions of his, We
might not say, God the Father, God the Son, God the holy Ghost, he makes some
shuffling Answer; but I reply, he spoke so, and I can produce good proof of
that and all the rest. If a Committee of Parliament shall be pleased to take
notice of it, and send for this Web, and proceed against him upon proof, I am
ready to produce witnesses, and upon his own confession and those witnesses to
make proof. Only I desire the Reader to take good notice of one expression in
his Answer to this head, which shows the ignorance both of him and Bachiler in
the very principles of Religion; and is not Bachiler a fit man in such a
Kingdom as this, to be a Licenser of Divinity Books and Controversies, who
besides that he is no Minister, nor well studied man, is such an Ignoramus as
this clearly discovers him to be? Web saying he acknowledges the Trinity,
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, has these words, That he acknowledges the
Father is the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and to that purpose; whereas we are
taught from the Scriptures by all Orthodox Divines, that though every Person
be God, as the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; yet
the Father is not the Son, nor the Father is not the Holy Ghost; nor the Son
the Father, nor the Holy Ghost. Now Bachiler passes this, and though he mended
many other passages in Webs Answer putting in words in some places, blotting
out words, and changing some expressions for others, yet he let this pass
without any correction or note upon it; which no man can conceive to proceed
from any thing else but profound ignorance. And that the Reader may know I
speak these things upon good ground, I perused this Answer after it was
licensed with Master Bachilers hand, and compared the hand of Imprimatur, John
Bachiler, with the hand where other words were put in, and found it the same
hand, and writ out with my hand, several amendments made by John Bachiler,
which I have by me in writing, and then subscribed my hand under them, with
the day of the month when I extracted them out of the Original Copy; and one
being with me, who was a witness of all this, I also entreated his hand to
attest it, which he willingly did: all which I can produce to satisfy any man
who desires it.

And for the winding up of all I have to say by way of Reply to Mr. Saltmarsh,
Mr. Goodwine, etc. in vindication of my Gangraena, by this time, the Reader may
see what to think, if among so many hundred particulars which are laid down
by me of Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Stories, etc. with so much variety,
such a venomous virulent man, picking and choosing, catching and snatching,
having Intelligence, and great resort to him from Sectaries of all sorts, and
out of several parts, as Essex, Kent, etc. could yet find so few things to
question in Gangraena, (which yet also are justified and made good;) what must
the whole body of the Book be, which is not so much as touched, either by
Cretensis, or any of the rest? And that which alone may satisfy any rational
man that there is too much truth in Gangraena, is this, that I have never been
called in question to make the things good. I have been informed from good
hands, that some of the Sectaries have had meetings, consultations, and
several debates about my Book, what to do in it, whether to complain, or
what else; and I am confident if they were not afraid that things would be
found too true, and very foul, and upon the through examination might hazard
the danger of bringing an old house upon their heads, and the punishing of
many, they would before this time have tried all their friends, and party, to
see what they could have done against me:

Having finished my Reply to Cretensis, Master Saltmarsh and Master Walwin, as
before it I gave the Reader a fresh, and farther Discovery of Errors,
Heresies, Practices of the Sectaries; So I shall finish this book with matters
of that kind, laying down more Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Stories,
Letters, concerning the Sectaries, concluding all with a few Corollaries drawn
from the whole Book. And first, I shall add other dangerous Errors come lately
to my hand; and so the first of these Errors in this latter part of my Book is
the The 11. error specified in the former part of this book, is in the
Catalogue of Errors contained in the first part of Gangraena, which sl^pt me
before I was aware: and therefore upon comparing of both together, I put it
out, and reckon not that, but make these Errors to begin here at number 23.
which otherwise should have been number 24.
23 Error.

23. That Saints are justified by the essential righteousness of God, and not
by Christ's obedience.

For the full proof of this, I will give the Reader ( verbatim to a tittle) a
passage taken out of a Letter written by a godly Minister in Bristoll, to a
godly Minister here in London, wherein this Minister writing to his friends
that things are pretty well here, and speaking of his own preaching there,
says, One of the greatest rubs in the Town, is the br^aching of a mad error
concerning the justification of Saints by the essential righteousness of God,
and not by Christ's obedience, which some do hold, and express with a world of
vanity and contempt of Christ.

Osiander public in Schola propon^t, nos sola essentiali Dei justitia justos
esse: essentiali ejus vita vivere vel victuros esse: essentiali ipsius gloria
glorificari; essentiali illius charitate ad diligendum Deum and proximum
propter ipsuminflammari, and gravissime errare omnes qui putent alia re quam
solo uno and vivo Deo Patre, Filio, Spiritu sancto nos posse justificari,
vivificari, glorificari: and glacie frigidiora docere qui doceant nos tantum
propter remssione^ peccatorum reputari justos: and non etiam justitiam Christi
essentialem and divinam perfidem in nobis habitantis, vit. Osiand. page 228.
Andreas Osiander an acute and great Divine, who lived in Luthers time, held
such an Error, though not expressed with that vanity and contempt of Christ,
as these Sectaries do now; concerning which opinion of Osiander, and the great
abilities that were in him, and his way of managing that and other opinions,
Scholars may be further satisfied by reading Osianders life written by
Melchior Adamus, and Schlusselburgius in his Catalogue of Heretics, De Secta
Osiandrist.

24. When either of the parties married is asleep, the other is free of the
bond of matrimony, sleep being in a kind natural death for the time, and by
death the bond of matrimony is null; so that if a woman should have to do with
any other man, her husband being asleep, she commits not adultery.

25. That the Apocrypha Books, and particularly the Book of Esdras* are
Canonical and the Scriptures, as well as the Canonical Books generally owned
by all to be Scripture.

26. That the people of God are a free people, and what they do they should do
freely and voluntarily, and not be assessed and rated by the Parliament,
compelled to pay rate upon rate, assessment upon assessment.

27. That the The Sectaries who call themselves the Saints and believers, if
they have husbands and wives that will not turn Sectaries, they may leave their
own because they are unbeleevers, and join themselves to other women's
husbands, and other men's wives: I read in a Letter subscribed by W I. and E.I.
Wi^liam Ienny and Elizabeth Ienny, written out of Holland to one in London:
Dear friends, as you have cast off many Antichristian yoaks, so proceed to
cast off all, a chief whereof are unequal marriages.
Saints and Believers, who have husbands or wives that are unbeleevers, they
may put them away and take others, because God gave wives to be a meet help,
and the Saints are to proceed to cast of all Antichristian yoaks, a chief
whereof are unequal marriages.

28. That sin is but a shadow.

29. The promises belong to sinners as sinners, not as repenting, or humbled
sinners.

30. Faith is truly and simply this, a being persuaded more or less of Christ's
love.

31. That there is no other Seal but the Spirit, and for the elements
consecrated to be Signs and Seals to us in the Sacraments, they are not, but
empty things and of no effect.

32. That Christ is Baptism to us, the outward sign needleesse.

33. No Christian Magistrate has power of inflicting capital punishment, and
taking away of the life of any member of a Church, unless first he be cast out
of the Church, and so delivered to the Secular Power, no, what ever his offense
should be, though murder or treason.

34. That place of Scripture, He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be he shed, belongs to Moses his Disciples, and not to Christ's Disciples,
and Christians have nothing to do with it.

In my last Book I gave the Reader an account of many of the practices of the
Sectaries, both more generally and particularly: and I instanced in twenty
eight practices: Now, though there are many more behind, yet because my Book is
both expected suddenly to come forth, and is enlarged beyond my first
intention, I will only instance in two.

1. They do deny and profess to many that they are no Independents, no
Antinomians, no Anabaptists, but they are thus and thus, and will be so and so;
and these are but reproachful names given out, and cast upon honest, godly,
conscientious men by the Ministers and Presbyterians, as Puritan and such like,
were in former times by the Bishops; and of this I could give the Reader many
proofs in printed Books of the Anabaptists, Independents, Antinomians, as such
Churches falsely called Anabaptists, etc. And now there is never an Independent
in England, if you will but take what themselves say, though they be such who
stickle, act, work, vote, and by all ways, in all places, where they have any
thing to do, promote, side with Independents, Anabaptists, etc. yet they will
confidently say they are no Independents, they are of no Church way, nor know
not what it is; nay, some of them will say they are Presbyterians in their
judgment, or at least do wait and stay to see what the Results of the Assembly
and Parliament after them will be; and yet there is many of these men, that let
any person or thing come in nomination and competitition, that concerns
Presbytery, and they will favor, promote, further Independencie (be it right
or wrong) and on the contrary discountenance, hinder, obstruct the
Presbyterians, wherein they just walk in the steps of the Bishops and their
creatures, who upon all occasions dsclaimed Popery, Arminianisme, and when
Papists and Arminians were spoken of, they would be hot against them, and were
against Popery properly so called (as the expression was) and against Arminius
(meaning those points Arminius held about the government of the Church) not
those of Grace and Free Will, etc. and yet these Bishops and their Chaplains
preferred Arminians and persons Popishly affected, licensed Books tending that
way, brought them often when in trouble, would remember those who preached
against Popery and Arminianisme; and it was observed, and I have been told it
by a man of place in those times, who disliked such ways, that when the
Archbishop blustered and spoke most against any Priest or Papist, and for the
Church of England, then the next news they were sure to hear of, was a
Release; and whether there be not too many such in these times, who will not be
accounted Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomians, that yet countenance their
Books, are familiar with such, being all in all with them, bringing them off
when in question, sitting hard on the skirts (when there is any opportunity)
of all those who have complained, or been active against the Sectaries, I leave
to all to judge.

2. Some of the Sectaries when they have been questioned, and in trouble, or
been by some Ministers convinced, that they had nothing to say for themselves
and their way, have and will do any thing for the present, as recant, confess
their Errors, say they are convinced and satisfied, promise never to go about
preaching or dipping any more; and yet afterward, when free, and come to their
companions, go on in their ways, both against their hands, promises,
professions; and of this there are many examples and instances among us, as of
a Sectarie an Emissarie sent into Northamptonshire, being for his Doctrines,
separated meetings, affronting a Minister in the Pulpit, complained of by some
Ministers, and questioned by the Magistrates, gave it under-his hand to
forbear his course, and return home; yet afterward goes to other parts of the
Country, and draws the people into houses, preaching to them, etc. So some
Sectaries of Lams Church, or their great Associaces, coming into Essex, to
corrupt the people; and some of the Ministers dealing with them upon some of
their Tenets, convinced them so, as that they openly blessed God for that days
work, and the light they had received, even weeping for joy; and yet presently
afterward going on their progress to seduce at another Town in the same
County (some hint or notice being given of their late conviction) they said
they wept to think how nigh the Ministers were come to them; and so I might
give instance in Clarkson professing against the dipping to get out of prison,
and as soon as he was loose turning Seeker; and so in ^ b; but I must take off
my hand; only this fulfils what is spoken in the Scriptures of Heretics, That
they have their consciences seared with an hot iron, and sin, being condemned
of themselves.

A Relation of some stories, and other remarkable passages concerning the Sects
and Sectaries.
THere is an Independent Antinomian Libertine Preacher here in London, a man
much followed and cried up by the Sectaries, who in Sermons has delivered
these passages, That a poor whoore-master, or a poor drunkard cannot look
into your Churches (speaking of the Presbyterian Preachers) but hell fire must
be flashed and thrown in their faces. That if a Saint should commit a gross
sin, and upon the committing thereof should be startled at it, that were a
great sin in him; And in obedience to this and other Doctrines of some of the
Sectaries of our times, I will give the Reader some instances both of words and
facts.

There is a godly understanding man, an old Disciple, who told me on April 28.
1646. That having a daughter, a young maid, religiously affected, she was
drawn in to affect the Independents, and to cry them much up, and to follow
them, and she procured her self to be servant in a family of some rank and
place, where the Master and Mistress are Independents: Now being there, she
expected some great holiness and extraordinary strictness in the family; but
she found matters thus. On the Lords day they were very loose, in the
fore-noon they would go to hear Mr. Sterry at White Hall, (as not living far
from thence) but in the afternoon stay at home, and some other Independents
and Sectaries resorting thither on the Lords day in the afternoon, they spent
it in common discourse, making no more of it than other days; a great part of
their discourse on the Lords day being railing against the Scots, and against
some of our Ministers, and the books written against the Sectaries; and some
men (whom a man could hardly have thought it of) would curse the Scots, saying,
A pox upon the Scots, would they were gone, we would give them any thing to be
rid of them, and pay them all their money in time: many persons of note of the
Independent Faction did often resort to this house, and still they would speak
most bitterly and basely of our Brethren of Scotland: The Master of the Family
would be often attempting to kiss this young maid, watching her upon the
stairs and other places, as going up and down, and has tempted her to be
naught, insomuch that the young maid spoke to him, Sir, You have a wife of your
own, why should you speak thus? how dare you offer to do this wickedness, and
sin against God? Unto whom this Gentleman the Independent (and an Antinomian
too surely) replied, That God saw no sin in his children, that these were but
sins in the flesh, which Christ had satisfied for, with other words to that
purpose. One time this man tempting her, threw her all along, so that she was
forced to cry out, and her Mistress came in to her rescue, and said, Fie
husband, will you never leave these tricks? whereupon the maid would not stay,
but came away, and when her father heard it, he would not endure she should
stay any longer, but had her away presently; and so this young maid is
converted from being an Independent and Sectarie, by beholding their carriage
and looseness, blessing God she is delivered from that way and those persons:
she had thought the Sectaries had been such holy persons, that there had been
none like them, till she saw both that family, and many who resorted thither of
the same way, so loose. This godly Christian tells me, That his daughter is
ready to take her oath of the truth of these things which she has both seen
and heard, and with many circumstances has declared to him, as the names of
such that resorted thither, that she never knew nor heard of before, with other
circumstances; and that he believes them to be so true, as that they are past
all question.

There is a Sectary, an Independent Antinomian Tailor, who stealing a whole
yard of Plush from a Gentleman, and some yards of Satin from another, and
being found out in his sin, and convinced, so that he could not deny it; some
speaking to him how sorry they were that such a man as he should do these
things; he replied, (as I had it from two honest men of good account) to this
effect, that he was troubled for them to see them sorry, but as for himself,
he was not troubled.

One of the followers of Mr. Simpson the Antinomian, said it in the hearing and
presence of diverse (Mr. Simpson being then also present) That if a child of God
should commit murder, he ought not to repent of it, and Mr. Simpson never
reproved him for it, though by one present in the company he was spoken unto to
do it.

An Antinomian Preacher preaching in London on a F^st day, said, It was better
for Christians to be drinking in an Alehouse, or to be in a whore-house, then
to be keeping fasts legally.

Many Sectaries have said, that when David lived in adultery and murder, even
before his repentance he was as dear in the sight of God as ever he was at any
time.

There is one Samuel Oats a Weaver (a man I have spoken of in my former book,
and in this too, page 10.) who being of Lams Church, was sent out as a Dipper
and Emissary into the Countries: Last summer I heard he went his progress
into Surrey and Sussex, but now this year he is sent out into Essex three or
four months ago, and for many weeks together went up and down from place to
place, and Town to Town, about Bo^hen, Braintry, Tarling, and those parts,
preaching his erroneous Doctrines, and dipping many in rivers; this is a young
lusty fellow, and has traded chiefly with young women and young maids, dipping
many of them, though all is fish that comes to his net, and this he did with
all boldness and without all control for a matter of two months: A godly
Minister of Essex coming out of those parts related, he has baptized a great
number of women, and that they were called out of their beds to go a dipping in
rivers, dipping many of them in the night, so that their Husbands and Masters
could not keep them in their houses, and it is commonly reported that this Oats
had for his pains ten shillings apeece for dipping the richer, and two
shillings six pence for the poorer; he came veriebare and mean into Essex, but
before he had done his work, was well lined, and grown pursie. In the cold
weather in March, he dipped a young woman, one Ann Martin (as her name is
given in to me) whom he held so long in the water, that she fell presently
sick, and her belly sweld with the abundance of water she took in, and within
a fortnight or three weeks died, and upon her deathbed expressed her dipping
to be the cause of her death. There was another woman also whom he baptized, as
a godly Minister that came out of those parts, and had been at Braintry
related to me from a good hand, whom after he had baptized, he bid her gape,
and she gaped, and he did blow three times into her mouth, saying words to this
purpose, either receive the holy Ghost, or now thou have received the holy
Ghost. At last for his dipping one who died so presently after it, and other
misdemeanors the man was questioned in the Country, and bound over to the
Sessions at Chen^ford, where April the seventh, 1646. this Oats appeared, and
I had the relation I now speak of, from three persons that were ear and
eyewitnesses, two godly Ministers, and the other Gentlemen of great worth and
quality, viz. that Oats being brought before the Bench, the Coroner laid to
his charge, that in March last, in a very cold season, he dipping a young
woman, she presently fell sick and died within a short time, and though the
Coroner had not yet perfected his sitting upon her death, all witnesses being
not yet examined, nor the Jurie having brought in their verdict (so that the
full evidence was not presented) yet the Bench, upon being acquainted with the
case, and other foul matters also being there by witnesses laid against him,
committed him to the Jaile at Colchester: It was laid to his charge then, that
he had preached against the Assessments of Parliament, and the taxes laid upon
the people, teaching them, that the Saints were a free people, and should do
what they did voluntarily, and not be compelled; but now contrary to this,
they had assessment upon assessment, and rate upon rate. Some passages also in
his prayer were repeated, as that he prayed the Parliament might not cart the
Ark, nor meddle with making Laws for the Saints, which Jesus Christ was to do
alone. Since Oats commitment to Colchester Jaile, there has been great and
mighty resort to him in the prison, many have come down from London in
Coaches to visit him, as a godly Minister who came out of Essex told me: And I
have a Letter by me from a Minister in Colchester, sent last week to a friend
of his in London, wherein he writes thus; Oats the Anabaptist has had great
resort to him in the Castle, both of Town and Country; but the Committee
ordered the contrary last Saturday.

There is one Collier, a great Sectarie in the West of England, a mechanical
fellow, and a great Emissarie, a Dipper, who goes about Surrey, Hampshire, and
those Counties thereabouts, preaching and dipping; About a fortnight ago on the
Lords day he preached at Guilford in the meeting place, and to the company of
one old Mr. Close, an Independent Minister, who has set up at Guilford, and
done a great deal of mischief, having drawn away many of the well-meaning
people from the Ministry of those godly Ministers, whom before they much
prized; there this Collier exercised, and it was given out in the County he
was a rare man, and the people came from the Towns about to hear him: This
fellow, in his circuit, at an exercise where he was preaching to many women for
rebaptization and dipping, made use of that Scripture to that purpose (as it is
reported) Isa. 4.2. And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man,
saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us
be called by thy name, to take away our reproach. And truly, it is a sad thing
there should be such Emissaries (so like the Devil their Master, compassing
the earth, and going about seeking whom they may devour) in the several parts
of the Kingdom, North, East, West, and South, not one part free; for the East
and South, we who live in these parts know it fully, for London, Kent, the
Associated Counties. As for the West (besides this instance of Collier) I
received a Letter out of Dorsetshire, dated March 13. written by a godly
Minister from thence; Sir, I am not yet furnished to my mind with particulars
of that nature you expect; but with the help of my fellow-Ministers in these
parts, I shall send them to you in an exact History of our Western
confusions. And for the North, besides many instances I could give you of Hull,
Beverley, York, Hallifax, etc. of Independent Churches gathered there, and of
many Anabaptists and other Sectaries in those places, I shall only desire the
Reader to mind these three or four lines written to me from a country further
North: I received the books sent me, and shall make the best use I can of them;
the one I keep for mine own use, the other I pleasure friends with (and truly
never more need in our Country;) for whereas formerly we wanted the
Ministry, now we have such variety and strife amongst them, that truly I
know not what will become of us.

A person of quality and a godly man told me ( April 15.) meeting me
accidentally in Westminster Hall, that (says he) just now, near the House of
Commons door, I had discourse with a great Sectarie ( viz. one of Wrights
Disciples, and presently the man came into the Hall with another great
Sectarie, and he showed me him:) and the discourse was as follows, That he
would be loath the Parliament should bring Paul Bests blood upon them for his
denying the Trinity. Whereupon this Gentleman answered him, that he could
prove clearly out of the Scriptures a Trinity of Persons. Unto whom this
Sectarie replied, How will you prove the Scriptures to be the word of God? and
this Sectarie reasoned against them, saying, there were twenty several
Scriptures, as many as Translations, and Translations are not true; for so the
Priests will tell us, that this is not rightly translated: and for the
Originals there are diverse Copies; besides, I cannot understand them, neither
is it my fault that I do not: In sum, the man reasoned there was no Religion at
all in the Kingdom, but all Religion he knew of was, To do justly, and be
merciful. Unto which the Gentleman replied, The Heathen they were just and
merciful, and therein did as much as you. This Sectarie re-joyned, For ought he
knew, the Heathens were saved as well as any now.

A godly Minister of the County of Middlesex told me (April 16.) that there
was a great Sectarie and a Soldier, because he had persuaded a family that he
was well acquainted with, and where the Sectarie much resorted, to cast him
off, and to have nothing to do with him; this Sectarie conceiving it to come
from this Minister, when this Minister came down one day to this house, this
Sectarie came to the house and enquired for him, to speak with him* this
Minister fearing the Devil might stir him up to do him some mischief, refused
to speak with him, as having no business with him; this Soldier and Sectarie
sent him in word, if he would not come out to him, he would come in to him:
Whereupon he desired the Master of the house he might be safe in his house,
and as he came in love to him, so he would defend him, and let him return
home in safety; whereupon the Master of the house sent out a serva^t to him to
be gone, for this Minister had nothing to say to him; and as the servant was
going, this Sectarie was already come in: whereupon the servant asked him, why
he came in without bidding; he replied, to speak with Master --; upon that
the servant caught him by the collar, and said he should not; the Master
hearing them bustle together, he went out, and his wife followed to oppose
him; and in conclusion, having his knife before ready by his side, he reached
it to pare the dirt off his shoes, to shake it off against that house, because
they would not receive him, as making himself an Apostle: and when he had
done so, he departed.

There is one Master Durance, a Preacher at Sandwich in Kent, a bold conceited
man, and an Independent, who since the beginning of this Parliament was a
Washing-ball-maker, or seller of washing-balls here in London, but now turned
Preacher; and being never ordained Minister, has consecrated himself to be
one of the Priests of the high places: Among many high affected strains of new
light, and strange expressions, which the man uses in his Sermons, prayers, to
get himself a name by, viz. of a Washing-ball-maker to become such a rare man,
these are some; He prayed to the Trinity to take care or cure of these three
Kingdoms, God the Father to take care of one, God the Son of the second, and
God the Holy Ghost of the third Kingdom: he prayed also for Jesus Christ, that
God would, etc.

A godly Minister in Northamptonshire told me (April 17.) that there was a
Sectarie in his Parish, a Yeoman, who has said it to him and to many others,
that now the time is coming, when we shall all have and be alike: I shall
have as much estate as such a Knight, naming a Knight of great estate in that
County, one Sir W. W. The Sectarie also holds there is no Hell.

There is a godly Minister in Essex, who related this story to me (April 6) in
the presence of a Minister of the Assembly, and he who told it me had it from
the man's own mouth, whom this Minister knows well to be an honest godly man:
This man, viz. one Master A. living at R. in Essex, a godly religious man, and
an old acquaintance of Master S^idr. Sympson, coming up to London, and meeting
with M. Sympson, among other discourse, asked him if he might come to his
Church, and whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper would be administered the
next Lords day, and whether he might come to it: Master Sympson answered yes,
he had the Lords Supper, and he might come; whereupon this Master A. went,
and after Sermon stayed with the rest of the company to partake in the Lords
Supper, and joining with them, received the bread; which when he had received,
there were some of the Church Members began to take notice he was none of
their Church, and there was a great stir and muttering about it, and they told
him they admitted none but of their Church Way: whereupon this religious man
was not permitted to partake of the Cup, but was glad to withdraw, the
Independents dealing with him (though a godly man, and a visible Saint, because
he was not one of their members) just as the Papists do with the people,
allowing them the Bread, but not the Wine. When all was done, this Master A.
went to Master Sympson, and spoke to him, saying; Sir, Did not you tell me I
might come to the Lords Supper at your Church? Master Sympson replied, I said
you might come, but not that you might receive. Upon this business the honest
man was much troubled, and for their administering the Sacrament to him after
the Popish manner, they have lost a Proselyte of him, this having quite turned
him off from the Independents.

The same Minister at the same time related it to me for certain, as a thing
not only known to him, but to many in the County of Essex, that a compounded
Sectarie, an Anabaptist, etc. whose dwelling is at Castle-Henningham, preached
at Chelmsford in a house where (as a common fame goes) there wine and women
good store; and as he was preaching to the Sectaries, there came by the house a
kind of a wild Gentleman, who was speaking against the Presbyterians, and this
man was brought in to the meeting whilst the Sectarie was preaching; and as in
the very midst of their preaching there was wine and liquour, drinking to one
another, so before they parted there was good store of it; this wild Gentleman
for his part spending about four shillings, who when he was come away,
meeting some Gentlemen and others, commended the men for honest men, and
praising their meetings, said, Why should they not have the liberty of their
consciences?

The Sum of a Sermon preached by a Sectarie, and of some Conferences with
Sectaries.
On New Years day, Ian. 1. 1645. a Surgeon belonging to the Army preached at
one Goodman Bolters of Bear, a Town in the West, on Colloss. 2. out of verse.
7. he observed, All the Saints duty is to believed and be thankful, (he
enlarged) Where Is the humiliations, repentings for sin which your godly
Ministers (you say) have taught you? Out of ver. 14. he observed, The
handwriting of ordinances, the ten precepts fair written by the finger of
God, altogether taken away. On ver. 16. he observed, New Moons, Sabbaths,
meats, drinks, empty things; Sabbaths not to be observed, shadows, and since
Christ's coming taken away: he said, we had deceitful Ministry, Sacraments,
Ordinances, meats and drinks, though their learned godly Ministers had told
them, that when they had consecrated them with their sanctified garments on,
they were holy, and were to be given only to those to whom they pleased, yet
empty, and shadows too. Afterward, being asked what he meant by these meats
and drinks, whether the elements consecrated to be signs and seals to us in
the Sacrament: He said, he knew no seal but the Spirit; and for those things,
they were empty things, and of no effect. Out of ver. 11, 12. That (there being
three things in Baptism, a death, burial, and resurrection) Christ was
baptism to us, and the outward sign needless.

The same person in private, in the house of a Reverend godly Minister, Master
R. in conference asserted, That there is no Sabbath to be kept since Christ's
fulfilling the Law, since no command for it in the Gospel. He being urged with
places out of the Old Testament and fourth Commandment: He and a Captain, and
one Lieutenant I. affirmed, those belonged to the Jews, not to us. 2. Being
urged in point of prayer for forgivness of sin with the Lords prayer: The
Lieutenant said, that the Lords prayer, when Christ gave it to his Disciples,
was spiritual to them, but it is not so to us. 3. The same Lieutenant being
urged with David's practice of bewailing ^in, and craving pardon, answered,
David was under a double covenant, of the Law, and of Grace; we only under that
of Grace: and though a believer should commit as great sins as David, murder,
adultery, there was no need for him to repent, and that sin was no sin to him,
but a failing. 4. The Surgeon and the rest being told by some parties present,
that they would believe that which their godly Ministers had taught out of the
word: he answered, he doubted whether yet the word had been taught or no. Then
the Surgeon asking what the word was: being answered, The Old and new
Testament; he replied, He doubted whether those were the word or no. Then being
asked what was the word; he answered out of John 1.1. and told us, he knew no
word but that.

Item, This Surgeon and a Quartermaster-generall to the Regi^ent having
conference with one Thomas Spear a Papist, asked him, How long he had absented
himself from the Church of England; it was answered twenty years: They
commended him for it, and told him they had done so too, and were not
themselves of that Church. And hearing from him of some of his opinions, they
told him by way of encouragement, he said well, and was able to say more for
his way, then all the Presbyterian Priests in Dorsetshire. Lieutenant I. being
asked what he thought of the Directorie; answered, He^ thought of it as of the
Common-Payer, and of that as of the Mass. Being like wise asked concerning the
Assembly of Divines; he answered, They were most part of them enemies to Christ
and his truth. That Lieutenant I. and an Ensign denied all ecclesiastical
Government. Item, Lieutenant I. said, he fought not for the Parliament, but
for liberty of conscience, and not for Reformation. Item, He affirmed, that he
thought days of public Humiliation needless, and unlawful, and would not
observe them. Item, Concerning Prayer; That we must not pray morning and
evening, but when the Spirit pu^s ejaculations into us; for that were to make
prayer an Idol.

This Sermon, and these Conferences are subscribed by the hands of godly
persons, two witnesses, and I have them in my hand to produce, but forbear the
printing of their names, because I know not what prejudice may come to them by
some soldiers that may go that way.

There is one A. a Shoemaker not far off Tower-street, who speaking of the
Assembly, said, There were but seven in the Assembly that stood for God, all
the rest of them were for the Devil: An honest godly man brought thi^ f^ll^w
before a person of quality, and in Authority, for speaking these words; and at
first this man denied it: whereupon, he offering to fetch two witn^sses to
prove it, the man confessed it, and said, he had spoken rashly.

The Sectaries have within this two years last past, especially this last year
since the Victory at Naseby, abused (in the most insolent and unheard of
manner, and that all kind of ways) all sorts and ranks of men even to the
highest, both particular persons, and whole Societies that have but any way
appeared against them, or they think will not be for them, as the King,
Parliament, the Kingdom of Scotland, the City of London, the Assembly, all the
reformed Churches, the City Ministers, particular Ministers, and other
Christians, and as in their printed book, Sermons, Speecches, so by affronts
offered Ministers in Churches, Pulpits, and several other ways, and that in
the highest unsufferable manner that (considering all things together) ever was
in any age since the coming of Christ: and for the proof of this, a man might
make a large book to set down the pregnant undeniable instances and
particulars in this kind; and a man would wonder what should be the mystery
of it, and no question many do (though for my part, I do not) that this last
year, since not only the Assembly, but the Honorable Houses of Parliament
have voted the Presbyteriall Government, declared to the world they will settle
it, made diverse Ordinances for it and about it, that ever since the
Presbyterial Government, all the Parts, Acts, and Friends of it have been
written, preached against and abused more then ever; yea j^alousies, false
reports, calumnies raised, nou^ished, fomented, and yet never any of the
Sectaries exemplarily punished, o^ their Libels and desperate Pamphlets ever
publicly censured (as I can learn,) or effectual courses used to supp^esse
them; but let the men or the books be what they will, abuse whom they will,
Parliament, etc. so that they do but abuse the Presb^terians, and the
Presbyterial Government, and plead for the Independents and liberty of
conscience, all is well enough; nay, not only so, but some such books are
licensed, and some persons known to be most desperately opposite to the
Presbyterians, to the Covenant, to our Brethren of Scotland, the Assembly, to
the godly Orthodox Ministers, the men in great request, walking boldly in
Westminster Hall, at the House of Commons door daily, familiar with some
Parliament Men, preferred to places of trust, and honor, having favor in
things wherein other men can find none; yea, have been able to do those things
for themselves, and such as they appear for, which otherwise were never
likely, or not so quickly to have been effected. And in things done by the
Sectaries against persons affected to the Presbyteriall Government (though in
the way and manner of doing them) if Presbyterians should do so, it were a
great breach of Privilege of Parliament, and an arraigning their Ordinances;
yet in the Sectaries it is nothing, nor we never hear of any such complaint or
words made of them: For instance, How many Votes, Orders, O^dinances of
Parliament have been spoken against, writ against, acts done point blank
against the Letter of them? not humble Petitions made to represent the State of
things, and to desire so and so; but downright railings and s^^ffes, or else
taking cogniz^nce of things whilst before the Houses, and in d^bate: As for
example, The Assembly who sits by Ordinance of Parliament, have they not been
fearfully abused, scorned by those Books of Arraignment of Persecution, Martins
Echo, and^. and now lately by a Ballad made of them, having a first and second
part, wherein they are scoffed with the title of Blackbird Divines? The name
of the Ballad against the Assembly of Divines is called, A Prophecy of the
Swineherds destruction* To the tune of the merry Soldier, or the joviall
Tinker; and two men pictured at the upper end of it, with the inscription of
Sir John Presbyter and Sir Simon Synod. This Ballad c^lls the Assembly
Swineherds, says, These Swineherds they are sitting to build old Babells
Tower: And in this Ballad the Directory made by the Assembly, and establish^d
by Ordinance, is scoff^d at, and the Assembly i^ brought in, and jeered at for
b^ing against Anabaptists, Brownists, Independents: and they are in that Ballad
called B^^ls Priests. The Assemblies last Petition to the Parliament, whilst
it was in debate before the Houses, before they came to give their sense of it,
Vide Saltmarsh, Divine Right of Presbytery.
Saltmarsh (the annagram of whose name is to a tittle, M. all is trash) takes
notice of it, prints a great part of it, prejudges and anticipates the
Determinations of the Honorable House of Commons, and uses the Assembly very
coursely. There is a pamphlet called A Letter of Advice unto the Ministers
assembled at Westminster, with several Quares recommended to their saddest
considerations, wherein the Assembly is not only abused, but threatened, that
if they give advice to the Parliament against a Toleration of Independents,
they are so many in number, that the Assembly shall be chastised as evil
Counselors, disturbers of Church and State, no less than great Strafford, or
little Canterbury. In the case of Paul Best, whilst it is before the House of
Commons, and under debate, comes out a Pamphlet censuring their proceedings
against him, as fearing what the sentence may be; in asserting the possibility
of an Heretics repentance so long as he lives, and such as do any ways cause
him to die in heresy, as much as in them lies, do effectually damn him
eternally: and consequently, that Paul Best, (whatever his error be at
present) as well as Paul the Apostle, once a Blasphemer, may one day become a
Convert, if he be not untimely starved to death beforehand. And to give only
one particular instance more: There is a Pamph. entit. Tender Con. relig.
affect p. 14, 15. Do not the Synod (having two ^o^ns like a Lamb, but a mouth
like a Dragon) teach the Parliament to speak blasphemy against those Saints
that dwell in heaven? And speaking of the Preamble to one of their Ordinances,
wherein the Parliament acknowledged their strong engagements heartily and
sincerely to endeavor the complete establishment of puri^y and u^itie in the
Church of God (for these are the Parliaments words, not the Assemblies) this
book calls this blasphemy, and says of the Lords and Commons, For shame leave
speaking blasphemy: Remember the judgments upon the Whore for her blasphemy.
Where had the Lords and Commons this large Commission to meddle in the
affairs of King Jesus so far, as to determine to have a complete establ^shment
of purity and unity?
Book lately come forth about the sixth of this month of May, called Tender
Conscience religiously affected, fearfully abusing and descanting upon all the
Ordinances of Parliament, in reference to the Directorie, Ordination of
Ministers, and Church Government, leaving out none but the last Ordinance about
Commissioners: wherein the Parliament and Assembly are usufferably reviled and
railed at; and particularly the Parliament charged with speaking blasphemy, and
being guilty of many other crimes.

And lastly, The Sectaries are so violent, and insufferably insolent, that
though they abuse persons or things, or do the strangest actions either against
Laws or Ordinances, if they be but questioned by any in authority for these
things, in stead of confessing their offenses, submitting, and carrying
themselves peaceably and humbly, they will abuse and miscall Authority to their
faces, yea, set out printed books against them, reproaching and reviling them
to the open world; of which I might give many instances, as in the case of one
Hawes committed lately by some Justices of Peace, upon two witnesses testifying
words spoken by him derogatory to the second and third Persons in the Trinity;
a book was printed, wherein they are reviled and clamoured against. So upon one
Larner's commitment, about a dangerous book entitled Londons last warning,
there is a book put forth aspersing the L. Mayor of London, the Committee of
Examination, and the Right Honorable the House of Peers. And lastly upon
Lievtenant-Colonell Lilburns commitment, many Pamphlets were printed, speaking
bitterly against the Committee of Examinations, and the honorable House of
Commons; as Englands Birthright, several printed Letters, etc.

The Sectaries have lately put forth two pamphlets with a picture drawn and
affixed to them, greatly abusing all the Presbyterians: The first is called
Dictated thoughts upon the Presbyterians late Petitions to the Parliament: the
other is the book called, Tender Conscience religiously affected, propounding
questions upon the Ordinances of Parliament. The maine of the picture is an
heart pictured, over which is written, Tender Conscience religiously affected,
with some verses over that: and under the heart, with daggers at it, stands the
Pope, the Prelate, and the Presbyter in the midst of them two, with a book in
his hand, where Directorie is written, Antichristian Presbyter written by him,
and the Crown under his foot, he treading upon it, and a dagger in his hand,
reaching at the heart of tender conscience, but a chain with a weight hanging
at his arm, whereby he is hindered and falls somewhat short of pricking tender
conscience with his dagger.

Now I could write a book in giving observations, and making a confutation of
this picture, and these mottoes, but I must study brevitie, I will only hint
a few things.

1. That I have been informed for certain, and it was spoken of by some
Merchants on the Exchange, that in Holland the picture of an Independent is
drawn, and set out publicly, and he is pictured thus, with God written in his
mouth, the Devil written just upon his heart, and the world written and
pictured as he holding it in his arms.

2. It may be this picture of a Presbyterian will cause the picture of an
Independent to be drawn here in London, set out with Mottoes, as also what he
has under his feet, etc. and if it prove so, it is but just and the
Independents may thank themselves.

3. For the Picture it self of a tender Conscience, which they make the
Presbyterian lifting up a dagger to stab; I am confident the Presbyterians are
as truly tender-conscienced men as any in England, yea far above the Sectaries;
and for the Sectaries (take them generally) they are far from being
tender-conscienced men, as I shall show at large in my Treatise against
Toleration, under that head of answering that objection, that tender
Consciences must be ^orn with; where I shall prove by many instances they are
men of large consciences, and have consciences, like to Ostrich stomachs, that
can digest iron, that can digest a general Toleration of all Religions, can
bear with them that are evil, or any thing that is wicked, so it will promote
the Catholic Cause; and in truth, in stead of being a truly conscientious
people, and going upon religious principles, they are a mere politic Faction,
driving on strange designs, and having ends of their own.

4. Whereas they place the Presbyter in the midst of the Pope and Prelat, how
might they more truly have placed an Independent and other Sectaries, the
Independents shaking hands, and complying more with Papists and Prelates than
Prebyterians, as I could prove by many instances of familiar passages and
speeches that have passed between some Sectaries and Papists and Prelates, and
some speeches again of Papists and Prelates of the Independents, some whereof the
Reader may find in this Book, page 16, 126.

5. That of the Presbyterian trampling the Crown under his feet, is a most
wicked lie, and confuted in the sight of the Sun, by the experience of these
times; for who stand more for the Crown, the Kings Person and Honor, his just
greatness, and his Posterity after him, than the Presbyterian party; and who
are more against Monarchy, the Kings Person and Honor, than the Independent
party? A Sectarie indeed may well be pictured with the Crown under both his
feet, trampling it, and breaking it all to pieces, and together with the Crown
trampling the Church, Ministry, and the Kingdom of Scotland under their
feet; and for proof of Sectaries treading the Crown under their feet,
witness Londons last warning, commended, sold, dispersed up and down by
Sectaries, witness Walwyns an Arch-Sectaries speeches, Vide p. 22. of this
present book' and page 7.
with othea passages of some of them, as giving over praying for the King above
this year, laughing at them who pray for him, as Mr. Durance an Independent
Preacher at Sandwich.
one of them praying publicly in the Church, that the King might be brought in
chains to the Parliament, as speaking against his coming in or being received
in but under the notion of a Delinquent, and that he deserved to die if any man
did, with such like speeches.

6. That of the Presbyter endeavoring to destroy the ^^nder Conscience
religiously affected, only hindered by a great clog hanging upon him, is a
wicked scandal; for the tenderness, forbearance, love, indulgence of the
Presbyterians, when they were in their highest power, and the Independents weak
and low, is known to all this Kingdom; and had they been such men as the
Independent Painter would make them, the Sectaries had never grown to this
boldness to make such a Picture, nor these Kingdoms so troubled with them as
now they are; but the truth of it is, a Sectarie may well be painted with a
dagger thus running at the heart of the Presbyterians tender consciences
religiously affected, and had they not clogs upon their arms, we should find it
so by lamentable experience; they have made violent attempts against
Presbyterians, and they have given out many threatening words; and certainly
designed and comforted themselves, that ere long they should be able to crush
the Presbyterians; for proof whereof, besides instances already given in this
Book, page 67. I shall add two or three at present: One Smart a great Sectarie,
upon the fifth or sixth of May last, speaking against the Presbyterian
Ministers, and calling them Priests, spoke these words; That we hope to have,
or shall have shortly the This was spoken in the hearing of three Citisens, and
given me under the hand of one that heard it, who also told this Smart he
would make it public. The Presbyterians may do well to take notice, that the
Sequestration of their estates, and hanging at Tyburn, was designed and counted
good enough for them, if some Independents and Sectaries might have had their
will. This is the liberty of conscience they must expect when the Sectaries
grow so strong as to have power to effect it.
Sequestrations of the Presbyterians, as well as formerly of Malignants; unto
whom one of the company replied, that I suppose you will get a good office or
place then, when the Pr^^^^terians estates shall come to be sequestered. Another
Sectarie, a Bodies-seller in London (whose name I conceal, upon the entreatie
of him who related it) speaking of the Ministers of Sion College, said these
words; Many have gone to Tyburn, who have less deserved hanging than those of
Sion College; and he further spoke these words, that the Ministers were the
cause of all our troubles and stirs. This relation was given me under the hand
of one who was an ear-witnesse, and delivered to me in the presence of two
sufficient persons. A third man, who is for the Independents, and that way,
came to a person of quality in the City of London, and taken notice of for a
man of great estate, and wished him, out of his respect to him, to take heed
how he engaged or showed himself for the Presbyterians, and against the
Independents, for there was no way for him to keep his estate, or to be secure,
unless he were of that side, with other words to that purpose.

Here follows a Copy of some Letters, with a Narration of some more
remarkable Passages concerning the Sectaries.

A Copy of A Letter written to me from a godly and learned Minister living at
Yarmouth.
Worthy Sir,
BY A Minister out of Essex writing up to a Minister in London, of a horrid
blasphemy, I sent to a Minister of that Town, to inform me of the truth of
it, which accordingly be has.
your Letter coming to my hand, I take notice of an Information handed to you,
wherein I wish there were not so much truth. For your better security, I have
procured the Examinations out of the Office, and have transcribed one of them,
which here I send you enclosed. At our late Sessions, this cause was heard, Our
Recorder professed, that had he had power, he had a great mind to hang the
man for his Blasphemies; but in conclusion, he was bound over to the next
Sessions: Touching the person of this blasphemous wretch, one John Boggis, he
was an Apprentice to an Apothecary in London, and came down hither with (your
good friend) Captain Hobson, as his Chyrurgion. Soon after his coming into
these parts he turned Preacher; and so in a little time seducing, and being
seduced, he came from Antinomianisme and Anabaptisme, to this desperate height
of Atheism. Your great Rabbi Oats told me before his face, that M. Boggis
might be his Master, notwithstanding his youth; and so highly extolled him, as
if he had been Adam Hamagnalah. One passage more I shall acquaint you with.
About a year since or somewhat more, this Boggis with Oats, (then of Norwich)
and one Lockier a Ringleader of the Anabaptists in this town came to my house,
desiring some discourse with me for their pretended satisfaction. Providence so
ordered it, that M. W. my fellow Minister, and one other, were with me at the
present. Thus three to three we fell into debate (amongst other matters) about
the power of the Magistrate in inflicting capital punishments, and taking away
of life. Hereupon Oats (to whom the rest agreed) peremptorily affirmed, and
stood to maintain, That there was no such power in any Christian Magistrate
over any Member of a Church, unless first he was cast out of the Church, and
so delivered to the Secular power; no, whatever his offense was, though Murder
or Treason.

His Argument was, That all Church Members were the Temple of God, and who so
destroys the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. Being pressed with the
Authority of that Text, He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, he and the rest cried out, what had they to do with Moses? They were
Christ's Disciples, not Moses Disciples. Being minded of the antiquity of this
Law before Moses his time, they replied, it was all one being part of the Old
Testament. Withal Oats added, that that Law was fulfilled; demanding of him
how, he answered, in and by Christ In as much (said he) as Christ shed his
blood, my blood is shed already; for (says he) Christ's blood is my blood, and
my blood is Christ's blood. At the same time Boggis being pressed by my self in
some particulars, still his reply was, I have the Spirit. My self impatient of
his arrogant boasting, told him. That certainly if he had that Spirit he
pretended to, he would not so boast of it: Whereunto (clapping his hand upon
his breast) he replied, I thank God I have enough of the Spirit. Hereupon I
having enough of him, told him, that the doors were open for him, and so
parted with him. The Lord direct, and assist you in all your undertakings, and
make your endeavors successful. With my prayers, and hearty salutations, I
rest

Your assured Friend, and Brother in the Lord.
Yarmouth, May 11.

A copy of the Deposition made against one John Boggis, for horrid and unheard
of Blasphemy.
Great Yarmouth Ian. 24. 1645.

THis Informer says upon his oath, that some few days since, one John Boggis
came to the house of this Informers Master about dinner time, and being
requested to stay at dinner there, he sat down at the Table, and being also
requested by his said Masters wife to give thanks, he asked to whom he should
give thanks, whether to the Butcher or to the Bull, or to the Cow, (there being
then a Shoulder of roasted Veale upon the Table.) And the said Informers Masters
wife, saying, That thanks should be given to God; the said Boggis replied, and
said, Where is your God, in Heaven, or in Earth, aloft or below, or does he
sit in the clouds, or where does he sit with his --. And further this Informer
says, The word is so horrid and obscene, that I forbear to express it.
That at another time the said Informers Masters wife having speech with the
said Boggis about the Church, and concerning the Bible, the said Boggis wished,
he had not known so much of the Bible, which he said, was but only paper.

The former part of this Information (to And further, etc.) is also attested
upon Oath in the same words by the said Informers Master wife.

A true Copy of a Letter sent from Dover, to a worthy Member of the Reverend
Assembly, and subscribed by five hands of persons of worth, Ministers and
others.
Worthy Sir,
Our true respects of you prefixed: We entreat your favor to acquaint us what
you think will be the result at last about the Independents; if they must be
tolerated, it is then in vain for us to strive against it by any humane helps,
and must expect to live in all confusion and disorder, except it be in our
Families, and there we shall hardly avoid it, for there are some that creep
into Houses. We desire you to take notice, that for three years last past
there has been some differences about that way in Dover; but of late they are
fallen into a Congregationall-Church, have made Members, and ordained a Pastor
one. Mr. Davis of London, who will settle here with them: Hereupon they are
presently so high flowne, that they will have our public meeting place
commonly called the Church to preach a weekly Lecture, though we have an Order
from the Committee of Parliament, that there shall be none without the consent
of both the Ministers in Dover, and have acquainthem with it; yet some have
threatened, if the Key be kept away, they will break open the doors; and since
M. Davies journey to London, the Members of his Church meeting every Lords day
twice, and once in the week, Mr. Mascall (a man employed by the State to be a
perfector of the Customs) undertakes to feed the flock, expounds the
Scriptures, and with much vehemency cries out to the people expressing
himself thus against the present Ministry: Your Priests, your damned
Priests, your cursed Priests, with their fools Coat. Your Levites, who if they
get an Ordinance of Parliament, will thunder it out, but they let alone the
Ordinances of Christ, and persuades the people of the evil that Synods and
Learned men have done to the Church, and therefore presses them to the
uselessenesse of humane learning, and at other times in private meetings,
persuades people, that they will fall into most miserable slaverie, if they
have a Presbytery; and says, That he shall stand and laugh at them, when they
are under their burdens. For our parts, if the State will suffer themselves to
be so vilified in what they have by the best advice proposed, and will have us
trodden under foot for following Christ, and obeying them, and will have us
take Covenants, and suffer as many as will to violate them, we shall then
think that we are fallen into worse times then ever we yet saw. We desire
you to counsel us, and to improve your power in the Assembly, and with the
Parliament what you may to stop these violent proceedings here, that we may
enjoy our privileges, especially the peace of our Consciences and Country, we
rest

Your loving Friends.
Dover, April 13. 1646. This Letter is given into the hands of a Peer of this
Kingdom.




The Copy of a Letter written from a learned and godly Divine from beyond the
Seas, to a special Friend of his here in London, and translated by him out of
Dutch into English.
WE do earnestly long for some Ordinances from England, for the suppressing of
the high growing Sects, Heresies, and Schisms, which get the upperhand: We are
afflicted in our very souls, that there is such a depth of Distractions and
Errors, such liberty for Schism, Blasphemy, and ungodly Tenants, both at
London, and in the whole Kingdom. O blessed holy Holland, righteous Amsterdam,
heretofore accounted the sink of Errors and Heresies, but now justified by
London. With us are punished with banishment, or piercing through the tongue with
a hot Iron, those that but slanderously speak of the Virgin Mary: Here we burn
the books of the Socinians Errors, and they may not with knowledge be sold in
these parts: Here indeed every one is left to enjoy the freedom of his
Conscience in his own Family, but to keep Conventicles and meetings of diverse
Families together, Amsterdam it self will not suffer, except in Anabaptists,
Lutherans, and Remonstrants. At London is taught Blasphemy against Christ, God,
his Word, Worship, and Sacraments, by Enthusiasts, Antinomians, Libertines, and
Seekers: There the Socinian tricks are new molded, there all Sects and
Heretics may keep their separated, public and secret Conventicles. Whence is
it that you are so suddenly led away unto another Gospel? Is there no balm in
Gilead, that the wounds of the daughter of Sion are not healed; are the Prayers
of the Saints, and the Labors of the upright, all in vain? Gods judgments
hang over that Kingdom, which feeds and fosters such sins.


A Passage extracted out of a Letter lately sent from a godly Minister in
Colchester, to a Minister in London.
This Clarkson is spoken of also in this book, p. 7, 8.
THe last Sabbath day we had one Clarkson a Seeker that preached at Butolph
Church, the same man I believe that M. Edwards mentions in his Book: His Sermon
tended to the vilifying of the Scriptures, all Ordinances, Duties, Ministers,
Church, State: He vilified the Scriptures and would not have the people live
upon white and black, and that they of themselves were not able to reveal God,
of which I shall give M. E. a full account the next week.


An Extract of a Letter written from a Minister in New England to a Member of
the Assembly of Divines.
DIscipline, or Church Government is now the great business of the Christian
World, God grant we forget not the doctrine of Repentance from dead works, and
Faith in the Lord Jesus: I long much to see, or hear, what is done in England
about this matter. I shall not fall into particulars, as I might do, could we
speak mouth to mouth. I am no Independent, neither are many others, who say,
Communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae ab initio regebantur; nor am I of a
democraticall spirit: Much have I seen in my almost eleven years abode in
this Wilderness; and I wish such as maintain an Independen Democracie, had
seen and found as much experimentally. A house like to be well governed, where
all are Masters; but no more of this. For my self, God has been here with me,
and done me much good, learning me something of himself, of my self, and of
men. N. E. is not Heaven, and here we are men still.

December. 8. 1645.

To his loving brother, M. Thomas Edwards. SIr,
that Book which discovers our general Gangraena, contains truth, which
will procure you many enemies, its the fate of Truth: But to this end (says
our Lord John 18.37.) was I born, and for this cause came I into the world,
that I should bear witness to the truth; and so for this Cause are Christians
begotten again by the Word of Truth: Every one that is of the truth should do
so, espcially such as are his Ministers. Revelasse will be superasse: I Will join
with one of your adversaries in that alleged Text. But they shall proced no
farther; Cretens. frontis picio.
for their folly shall be made manifest to all men, as theirs also was, 2 Timothy
3 9. I wait for its accomplishment. You, yea we all must look to suffer for
plain dealing, especially now when as truth lies in the streets and is
trampled on by dirty feet; when as there are so many adversaries unto it, and
such an Independent Combination against it: The great objection against you is,
You are too too vehement in your opposition; which when I heard, I remembered I
had read in Luther de servo Arbitrio, the same objected to him, by old Erasmus.
The Answer of Luther unto it, me thinks may well be ours, yours, and yield
us much comfort and encouragement. Quod antem, vehementius, egerim, Luther de
servo Arb. c. 207. p. 319.
agnosco culpam si culpa est, imo testimonium hoc mihi in mundo reddi in causa
Des mirifice gaudeo: Atque utinam and ipse Deus id testimonii in novissimo die
confirmaret quis tum beatior Luthero, qui tanto sui saculi testimonio
commendatur, quod veritatis causam non segniter nec fraudulenter sed vehementer
satis, vel petius nimio egerit? Tum illud Ieremae soeliciter evaserim,
Maledictus qui facit opus Dei negligenter. So Luther; and so may you in my
judgment.

As for Cretensis (so one of your adversaries styles his Book) I find him
still a confident man, his Challenge of all the Presbyterians one after
another, assembled or not assembled in England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
in that question of the imputation of faith in a proper sense, etc. shows so
much, and also that, that he may do it as well as you did Antapol. p. 117. To
whom you may say from me, He cannot so well do it as you, because that as yet
we see none has accepted your challenge, whereas the strength of him is tried
(in what he did against M. Walker, and his other two Treatises of that subject)
and is found weakness; so that until he vindicate himself, we have but the
words militis gloriosi, the vent of spleen against Presbyterians and the
Assembly, say, I could tell him Presbyterians and Independents assembled, have
weighed that controversy, and found his opposition therein too too light. Tell
him that (though the servant is not greater then his Master, nor the authority
of the Clark equal to that of the Justice of Peace; and that when M. Gataker
speaks, M. Robrough may hold his peace, as he speaks, page 26. Cret.) M.
Robrough may say so much unto him in behalf of some of those he thus
challenges, and tell him that he do no more with challenges, trouble those
Masters, being in serious employments. It suffices a servant has routed his
forces, and is in readiness (with Gods help) if M. John Goodwin can but
recruit, to meet him in that controversy in whatsoever field. Blessed be God,
he is much more enabled and imboldened to that by his attendance; so far is
he from being ashamed of that which he objecteth as a jeer: he is strong at
that (as in his Recipe to M. Walker* and that whole Book) the blood that
runs in that vein (as I have heard) cost him naught, he received it by
tradition, he is not as yet redeemed from it; will him as a grave and learned
Divine to answer M. Robroughs Animadversions, and after that propose his
vainglorious challenge unto Presbyterians: they and Independents will surely
answer him, if between him and me there be indeed found on my part impar
congressus.

That charge of yours ( Gang. p. 70. that Faith in a proper sense, is imputed
to justification, and not Christ's righteousness) is owned (I see) still by
him. Only he says, that you falsely and forgingly represent the opinion,
because you father on it that mungrell expression (as he calls it) (...)
credere, an expression ad invidiam comparata It my be said its usually so
expressed by such as handle that controversy. Mr. Wootton abhorred it not.
Fidem autem cum dicimus ipsum credere, (...) significamus, De Reconcil par. 2.
l. 1. c. 15. p. 175. and again, p. 176. for what he mentions else to that
further, he may do well to take notice that he is examined, as in all that he
has written,

The other Charge ( page 23. about quoting Bucer and Calvin against their
judgment) in my opinion it is very just. Let Mr. Walkers Book and mine be but
consulted, it is made evident in theirs, and others testimonies quoted by him:
when as Bucer says, Faith is imputed to righteousness, and so Calvin, they
take it not in a proper sense but figurative, or relative to the object, which
Sibrandus against Bertius, shows to be the judgment of all Protestant
Divines, Vid. mine Animadvers. part. I. page 9.
and challenges him to show one man, or one place to the contrary. For Bucer,
Master Wotton, shows his opinion in these words, Quia hac fide apprehendimus
justitiam perfectam Christi; ideo Apostolus dixit, credenti in cum qui
justificat impium, fidem ejus reputari in justitiam: fidem, scil.
apprehendentem justitiam Christi, id est, ipsam Christi justitiam: Wo^t. de
Reconcil. part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 14. page 170. and therefore says of Bucer,
Quem ego de imputatione opinionis, authorem fuisse mihi persuadeo. He might
have read it cited in mine Animadvers. part. 1. page 150. And as for M. Calvin,
the very places whence he quoteh him express so much. Let him peruse what is
extracted from him in mine Animadversions, page 134, 135, 136, and p. 162, 163.

As for that opinion of Calvin's, That Justification consists in remission of
sins, tell him he needed not to call in witnesses, it is confessed: The question
is about the word only; neither is that word denied to be in Calvin: but the
qustion is, whether only excludes in his sense imputation of Christ's
righteousness (the tenet of Protestants;) or that of inherent righteousness
(the Doctrine of Papists:) I deny the former, and assert only the later
against the Papists; and I appeal to his witnesses, let them give their
verdict. Yet tell him, that in mine Animadversions, in answer to this very
head, he may read it determined by many witnesses against him; by Bellarmine,
his adversary, an accuser of Calvin (as he is for this,) by his own witness,
Pareus, by D. Downham, D. Davenant and Polanus, though he will not see it:
part. 1. page 76, 77, 78, 79. Yes, when as in his book he mentions these two
witnesses (as he here does) he may find them answered out of the same
Authors, where Mr. Gatakers judgment may be also seen of that thing,
Whether Justification consists in remission of sins. Surely, had he thought
of these Answers given him against his opinions for mine, that they are to be
seen in the world, he would never have made so loud a challenge, neither yet
have spent time in repetition of these testimonies; for the determining of
which between us, I appeal to all the world, and am ready (whenever he
pleases) to contend for this with him, or any part of the Controversy, in
writing, or viva voce.

Sir, I thought good to write so much to you in defense of Truth, and somewhat
in reference to my despised self: It is now yours, do with it as your self
shall please. The Lord make us valiant for truth; for this I know, I have
abettors enough, such as himself does otherwise highly honor. But service
calls for mine hand elsewhere, which I must obey: and therefore with prayer to
God for his blessing on you, and all your labors in his cause, he takes leave
of you for this time, who is

Your loving friend and Brother in every cause of Christ, HENRY ROBROUGH.
April 23. 1646.

A copy of a Letter lately written to me from a godly Minister in the West of
England.
WOrthy Sir, whom (though unknown to me by sight) I love and honor for your
love to truth, and for your zeal against the spreading infectious Errors of
these times, wherein we once hoped for better things. I wrote to Master F. of
some discoveries that were made to me by some reclaimed from Anabaptisme,
concerning the workings of Satan to and in that way, being much affected with
the relations they first gave me by word of mouth: I desired them to commit
their experiences to paper while the remembrance of them was fresh with them,
that they might be able hereafter as well as at present, to tell what the Lord
had done for their souls, in breaking such a dangerous snare as Satan with so
much art and subtilty had laid for them: This upon persuasion they did, and at
last gave me in about two sheets of paper close written, wherein they discover
not only how the snare was laid for them, and how they were first caught and
entangled with a liking of the novelty of Anabaptisme, but being caught, how
they were carried on to it with the strongest violence and impulse of spirit
that is imaginable: they also discover the sad effects and influence which that
way had upon their spirits while they lay but under a liking and good opinion
of it, and how it pleased the Lord to rescue and bring them off, before they
were actually engaged, and duckt into that seduced society. Sir, all these
things were so fully and largely expressed in the manuscrip^ I had from them*
that others as well as my self held them very fit to be published for the
public good; and supposing they should be, I was preparing some considerations
upon the passages to come forth with them. Since their coming of the
Anabaptists, they have found their spirits in a much better frame then before,
and out of pity to others engaged in that way, have endeavored to reclaim
them. And now Sir, for my own part I must needs say, it is much that I have
suffered from Opinionists of all sorts in these times, and merely because I
could not be false to my Covenant (nor I trust never shall) by a sinful
silence, when heresy and schism do lift up themselves against truth and
unity. I praise the Lord this happiness I have, though the unkind dealing of
these men has sometimes occasioned much grief of heart, and weakness of body
to me, yet they have not prevailed in the least wise to weaken my resolutions
in contending for the truth; yea the more the truth is opposed, the more
earnestly I hope I shall contend for it, though it be to the utter exhausting
of that small strength of body which I have: I cannot sacrifice my self in a
better way. I know it is not necessary that I should live, but necessary it is,
that truth should live and be maintained to the utmost of our power. Me thought
it was somewhat harsh to me at first (till God accustomed me to the yoke) to
suffer frowns, reproaches, imprecations, and all manner of hard speeches for
the discharging of my conscience, and that from those whose professed principle
it is that all should have the liberty of their consciences: It seems they
would take liberty, but will not give it. If my conscience bids me to oppose
some of their tenets and practices, and I can have no peace without so doing,
how can they in reason deny me this liberty by their own principle? Surely it
would be a sad day to all Orthodox Christians if they should be brought to
stand to the mercy the Sectaries liberty. Some of them have partly well used
their liberty against me in speaking, writing, printing against me, in the most
scurrilous, rancorous, injurious manner that could be, and only for preaching
that, which if I had not, my conscience I fear would have preached against me
while I had lived, for holding the truth in unrighteousness. Sir, I will not
hold you with particulars, this place has been a troublesome place to me, for
which I know whom I have to thank. I wish it may be quieter to the next
Minister that succeeds me, for God is pleased by a clear providence to open me
a way to some other place. Sir, being lately at Dorchester, the Town I heard
was somewhat disturbed the week before by a wandering Sectary, who had gathered
a company about him, and preached in the Shire Hall (as I think they call it*)
choosing that of the Apostle for his Text, But we have the mind (...) Christ.
Afterward, through too much pride, and too little wit, the poor fellow was so
ill advised as to challenge M. Ben to a public dispute imp^^r congressus
Achihi. offering to make good the lawfulness of private men's preaching, which
challenge was accepted, but how the Opinionist was foiled by that worthy
Minister (fitter to grapple with that Punies Instructors) was easily perceived
by all understanding hearers. The godly people of those parts have been so well
catechized and grounded heretofore, that the Opinionists complain they can make
no work with them. Certainly the good old English Puritan (which Mr. Geere does
so well characterize) is the Novellists greatest enemy, or rather the Novellist
his. Alas, how sad is the destiny of Orthodox Christians, that no times will
favor them? We have not yet lost the sense of what we suffered heretofore by
those wicked Prelates, whom God has therefore cast out as an abominable Branch;
and surely if all the Orthodox in the Land should bring in their several
complaints of what they have suffered since by turbulent Opinionists, it would
fill the world with wonder, and the Reformed Churches abroad, who cannot but
sympathize with us, with much heaviness of spirit in our behalf. Heretofore
it was counted a crime to preach against profaneness, as sporting on the Lords
day, and the like; and now as great a crime to preach against Heresies. Only
let me acquaint you with one thing I have observed, This vein of persecution
for the most parts runs along in the same persons; they who most countenanced
profaneness and superstition heretofore against Orthodox Ministers, are the
same men who under a form of godliness, without the power, do now countenance
Heresy and Schism against it; but Sir, let nothing discourage. It it given to
us, not only to believe, but to suffer; but he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry: and in the mean while it is enough for us that Christ reigns.

May 11. 1646.

THere is a young man who lives in London, and not far off the Exchange, who
went not long since to Lams meeting place, to see and hear what they did there;
and when he was come, found many of them reasoning and conferring about strange
opinions: and among the rest, there was one Sectarie who maintained and
affirmed, That he was Jesus Christ. At which this young man was so offended and
troubled in his spirit, that he (upon the place, and to his face) spoke much
against him for his blasphemy: This fellow still maintained it stiffely, and
told this young man he would power out his judgments on him, and damn him
for opposing and speaking thus against him. This young man was so affected with
it, that when he came home, he told it his Father and other friends: and being
asked by some, whether he thought the man was in his wits or no, this young man
replied, Yes sure, for he spoke sensibly, and to the things that were spoken
of, though in this blasphemous abominable way.

Many Sectaries have distrubed godly conscientious Ministers in the Pulpits,
standing up in the very face of the Congregation, and speaking to them, giving
them the lie, charging them with false Doctrine, calling them Antichristian
Ministers, and such like: Of some of these I have given instances in my late
Book, page 102, 103, 104. And to add a few more, Mr. Andrews of Wellingborough
had the lie given him whilst he was preaching; and many Ministers have been
put by preaching, and kept out of their own Pulpits by force of Arms, Captains
and Troopers coming up into the Ministers Pulpits with their swords by their
sides, and against the mind of Ministers and people: Thus Paul Hobson has done
in Northamptonshire, Buckingham-shire; and thus at Ravensden in Bedford-shire
a Soldier went up against the mind of the Minister; and here in London, the
face of the Kingdom, at Christ-Church there have been many affronts offered,
as jeering and scoffing in the midst of the Sermons, speaking loud against
things delivered, to the disturbance of those who have sat near: and now
lately at Christ-Church, on Tuesday the 20. of April, just upon concluding my
Sermon, and going to my last Prayer, up stands one Colonel Washington of
Hartford-shire, (so his name and place is related to be) and spoke openly
against what I had preached, that I had not rightly given the sense of that
Parable of the Tares, and that I was a false Prophet, or Beware of false
Prophets. Now if the Sectaries will do thus to the Presbyterians whilst they
are in their minority, and underlings, what will they do when they come to be
in their Kingdom, to be increased in number and power above the Presbyterians?
But now on the other hand, let Independents and Sectaries give any one instance
that the Presbyterians, when they have come to hear them preach, (though they
have preached their erroneous opinions, and for liberty of conscience, and
against Presbyterians, and all this in the Presbyterians Pulpits and Churches)
that ever the Presbyterians have stood up and made disturbance in the public
Assemblies, or carried themselves uncivilly and scoffingly in Sermon time
toward them.

There is one Gorton, who was a great Sectarie in New England, holding many
desperate opinions there; a copy of which, given by Mr. Williams of
New England (that writ the Book called The bloody Tenet) unto a Reverend
Minister now at London, I have seen and perused. Now this Gorton with others
being banished out of the Patent of the Bay, and when they were gone, holding
and venting strange and horrid opinions, whereby they highly dishonored God,
and did hurt and mischief to some of the people in the Patent, and under the
New England government; the Governor and Magistrates sent a company by force
of Arms (though they were in a place, as it is thought, out of their Plantation
and Patent) to bring them to Boston; who accordingly, being too strong for
Gorton and his company, brought them to Boston: and when the Governors had
them in their hands the Court sat upon them what to do with them; and there
were some motions and consultations (as I and other Ministers have been
informed by some that are come from New England) about putting them to death,
or what other punishments to be infl^cted on them for their blasphemous
opinions. But how Gorton escaped, whether because the place they fetched him
and the rest from was not in their Patent, or what other reason, I know not;
only this I am assured of from diverse hands, that Gorton is here in London,
and has been for the space of some months; and I am told also, that he vents
his opinions, and exercises in some of the meetings of the Sectaries, as that
he has exercised lately at Lams Church, and is very great at one Sister
Stags, excercising there too sometimes.

There is one John Durance an Independent, (whom I mentioned a little before)
who preaches a Lecture on the week day at Sandwich in Kent, and has a Lecture
at Canterbury too, and would have had a Lecture also at Dover for the farther
spreading of Independency: but by the godly Ministers of Dover opposing it, and
writing up to London against him, such means were used, as he was put by, and
kept from coming thither: Now among many other of his pranks, A godly Minister
who heard it will depose it, if called, and so will many more who heard it.
the Reader may take notice of these; He has at Sandwich in the Church
publicly prayed to God two or three several times, that the King might be
brought up in chains to the Parliament: upon which prayer, one or two of
Sandwich went to M. Durance, to know what his meaning was in that prayer: upon
putting the question, M. Symonds, an Independent Minister in the same town,
and his great friend (but more politic) being with him, answered, M. Durance
meaning was that the King might be brought up in chains of gold: whereupon M.
Durance replied, that was none of his meaning; but he meant, he might be
brought in chains of Iron. In a Sermon one time this Durance told the people
he was sorry he had spent so much time, or lost so much time in reading or
turning over the Fathers: and yet he said he honored the Fathers as much as
any man. This man after his preaching at Canterbury, has the use of a great
room near the Cathedral, where many resort to him; and he takes occasion to
build them up in Independency. Not long since M. Durance, on his Lecture-day,
just before the last day of public Thanksgiving in the Country, preaching in
one of the Churches in Sandwich, told the people he would finish the Text he
was then preaching upon on the Thanksgiving day, and that in the afternoon, in
a private house: whereupon, when he had done, M. Sherwood a godly Minister in
whose Church he preached, turned himself to the Congregation, saying, Mr.
Durance, you shall not need to do so, you shall have the liberty of my Pulpit,
I here offer it you; and if you may have liberty of the public Church, I hope
you will not go into corners. Whereunto Master Durance publicly replied, he
would not preach in the Church, but was resolved of his way; and accordingly in
the afternoon, when the people went to the public exercises to Church, Mr.
Durance went to a private house, and two or three hundred people after him, to
hear him preach in private.

I have many other remarkable stories and passages of the Sectaries, proved by
witnesses, by Letters under their hands, and the notorietie of the things
themselves, of their horrible uncleanness, forsaking their husbands and
wives, fearful defraudings, and seeking by desperate ways to cozen and
deceive; as also of their strange conceits: That there is a Prophet arisen, who
is shut up for a time, but at the end of this Summer is to come forth with
power to preach the general Restoration of all things; which Prophet has
given a roll forth already into some hands, in which roll many things are
written, and whoever has that roll, has the spirit of prophecy: He has
appointed some to be Publishers and Prophets, and to go to Jerusalem to build
it up, where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall meet them from Heaven; and these
persons thus sent unto Jerusalem, are assured they shall never dye, with many
other of this kind. But I will reserve these to make another book of, and come
to give the Reader some Corallaries drawn from the whole matter.

Certain Corallaries and Consectaries drawn from the Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, Practices, and Stories of the Sectaries laid down in this present
Book.
CORAL. I.
HEnce then from all these Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Practices, etc. laid
down both in the first and second part of Gangraena, we may see how far the
Sectaries of our times have proceeded, and how high they have risen: In a word,
to sum up in one page what more at large is expressed in many sheets, the
Sectaries are gone very far, both in damnable doctrines and wicked
practices, in holding principles and positions destructive to Church and State,
against all Government, both Civil as well as Ecclesiastical, and that not
only for the matter, but in the (...) and way of propagation and (...) of them.
They have questioned and denied all the Articles of faith, and have justified
and pleaded for all kind of errors and abominations: They have denied the
Scriptures, Trinity, the Godhead of the Son, and Holy Ghost, Justification by
Christ, the Gospel, Law, holy duties, Church, Ministry, Sacraments and all
Ordinances: They hold there are no Devils, no sin, no Hell, no Heaven, no
Resurrection, no Immortality of the Soul: And together with these, they are
against all Kingly government, the King* Lords, the House of Commons, as to
have any thing to do in matters of Religion, or in Civil matters any longer
than the people who chose them think fit, and to be chosen yearly, or of^ner,
according as they carry themselves; yea, against all kind of Civil government
and Magistraticall power whatsoever, as appears by denying the power of
imposition of taxes and assessments, in denying the power of Magistrates over
Church Members in cases of murder, treason, etc. And as they have denied all
these, so on the contrary they have maintained and pleaded for all kind of
blasphemous and heretical opinions, and loose ungodly practices; yea, they
have publicly in print justified there should be an open Toleration for all
these: and if any man should so far degenerate, as to believe there is no Pamph
e^^it. Tolora^ justified.
God; nay, come to bl^spheme God and the Scriptures, yet he should not be
troubled nor molested, but enjoy the liberty of his conscience: And they have
not only pleaded thus, but some of them have actually blasphemed God, Christ,
the Spirit, the Scriptures, Ministers, Sacraments, and all holy Ordinances;
besides committing of horrible uncleanness, forsaking of husbands and wives
as Antichristian, being guilty of thefts, defraudings, etc. being partakers
also of that horrid Rebellion of Ireland, in justifying the Rebels, Vide page
27* of this book Mr. VValvvyns speech.
that they did no more than what we would have done our selves, etc. All these
with many others, as the pleading for stage plays to be set up again, some or
other of the Sectaries have been guilty of: and unto all these have added this
moreover, to canonize and cry up for Saints, faithful servants of God, etc.
Antiscripturists, Antitrinitarians, Arrians, Perfectists, yea, Blasphemers and
Atheist, ^o they be but for Independencie, and against Presbytery: and
particularly, how is Paul B^st, that fearful Blasphemer, now he is in question
by the House of Commons, pleaded for by many Sectaries of our times, and bitter
speeches spoken against the House of Commons for meddling with him? yea, and in
Vide Pamph entit. Letter of advice to the Assembly. In case Paul Best continue
in his opinion, his heresy through ignorance, whether is it not possible that
God may yet have mercy on him, as he had on Paul the Apostle, and in his due
time bring him to the knowledge of his truth, as he did the Apostle Paul?
Whether it can be demonstrated beforehand* but that Paul Best (what ever his
heresy be) may possibly in Gods secret will be ordained to conversion
hereafter, as well as Paul the Apostle (...) he was a blasphemer.
print too he is pleaded for, and compared in a sort with Paul the Apostle.
Certainly, neither we, nor our Fathers before us ever heard or saw such evils
of blasphemy, heresy, etc. in this Kingdom, as we have done within these
two or three last years: The worst of the Bishops and their Chaplains, when
they were at worst, were Saints in comparison of many of the Sectaries of our
times, and would have abhorred (as bad as they were) such opinions and
practices which some of the Sectaries magnify, cry up, and pretend to do by
virtue of new light, the Spirit, and as a matter of great perfection, as for
instance; A man's or woman's forsaking their own husbands and wives, and taking
others at their pleasure, out of pretense of casting off Antichristian yokes,
the pleading for a general Toleration of all Religions, yea Blasphemies, and
denying a Deity, out of pretense of liberty of conscience. But what speak I
of the Bishops and their Chaplains? I am persuaded all the stories and
relations of the Anabaptists and Schwenkfeldians in Luthers time, of the Baleu^
de Roman Pontificum Actis^vita Leon. decim. and Iul. teri. Quantum nobis ae
nostro coetui pro^uerit ea de Christo fabula, satis est saeculis omnibus notum.
Popes and Papists blasphemies, of many Heathens and scoffers of the Scriptures
and Christian Religion, as Galen, Porphirius, Lucian, Julian the Apostate, etc.
do fall short of the blasphemies and ways of our Sectaries: Which of all these
ever so blasphemed as Boggis? or what story is there since the creation of the
world that mentions a more horrid and wicked blasphemy than that of Boggis, Tum
Julius: Si voluit Deus usque adeo propterunum pomum irasci, ut ejiceritprimos
parents ex Paradiso: curnon liteat mihi, qui sum ejus Vicarius, irasci propte^
pavonem, cum multo major res sit pavo quam pomum?
a great Sectarie, page 133, 134, 135? Or where is there a blasphemy to be
found beyond that spoken of in page 116 of this Book? In a word, to conclude
this first Corollatie, The Sectaries of our times have in many respects (as in
regard of breach of Covenant, ingratitude, falsnesse, etc.) gone beyond the
Sectaries of other ages and Kingdoms, and done worse than their fathers,
justifying them in all their abominations which they committed; and have vented
and spread so many poisonous and dangerous principles and positions, as are
enough to corrupt and infect all the Christian world, if the Lord in mercy do
not prevent it.

CORAL. II.
HEnce then from all that I have laid down of the Sectaries of our times, of
their errors, heresies, blasphemies, strange practices, and their ways of
managing them, we may learn what is like to become of them and their way, and
what their end will be; namely, confusion, desolation, and being brought to
naught suddenly, as in a moment, and if ever God spoke by me, I am confident he
will curse this Faction of Sectaries in England, and cast them out as an
abominable branch: Me thinks I see their day a coming and drawing near;
Schismatici non sunt longaevi.
Heretics and Schismatikes do not use to be long-lived: no heresy (as Luther
speaks) uses to overcome at the last. Nulla haeresis unquam, etc.
What is become of the Arrians, Donatists, Novatians, Pelagians, etc? though
they were like a mighty flood, overrunning and drowning all for a time, yet
like a flood they were quickly dried up; and so will the Sects now: and we may
expect it so much the sooner, because the visible symptoms and forerunners of
destruction are upon them. And therefore I shall now toll the great Bell for
the Sectaries, the Anabaptists, Antinomians, Independents, Seekers, etc. and
hope shortly to ring it out, and to preach their Funeral Sermon, or rather
keep a day of public Thanksgiving and rejoicing, for the bringing down of the
Sectaries, and the breaking up of their Conventicles, as well as for the
downfall of the Popish and Prelaticall party. And that they shall shortly fall
and be dried up as a flood; and though they have been in great power, and
spreading themselves like a green Bay Tree, yet that they shall pass away, and
not be; that they shall be sought for, and not found, I shall give these
Symptoms.

1. Their horrible pride, insolency, and arrogancy, extolling themselves and
their party to the Heavens, with the scorning vilifying, trampling upon, and
despising of all others; and that in such unparalled ways, as no age c^n
show the like; and that not only against particular persons of all ranks,
Nobles, Gentry, Ministers; but great bodies and Societies, as the Parliament
of England, the Kingdom of Scotland, the Common Council of the City of
London, Assembly, etc. The Luciferian pride, high spirit, and haughtiness of
the Sectaries of all sorts, in all places and businesses, and toward all
persons they have to do with, in their writings, speeches, gestures, actions,
is seen and spoken of thorowout the Kingdom, and breaks out daily in their
impatiencie of being contradicted, or having any thing said against their way;
in their endervouring to break and crush all that will not dance after their
pipe; in their not caring to hazard and ruin all Religion, both Kingdoms,
but they will have their wills; and so in many other things. Now God assures
us in the Scripture that Vide car^w. in locum, quamobrem illud statuamus, eos,
qui se effe^ unt, dejectos iri, and decasuros, etiamsi vertice coelum
atrigerint: unde nostro proverbio jactatur; Pride will have a fall.
Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall: Prove. 16.
18. that A man's pride shall bring him low: Prove. 29 23. that When pride comes,
then comes shame: Prove. 11.2. and God threatens by his Prophets, he will cause
the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the
terrible, Isa. 13.11. Dan. 5.20. and indeed pride hardens men's hearts, and when
their hearts are lifted up, and their minds hardened in pride, then God throws
them down.

2. The Sectaries in promoting of their ways and cause are grown extreme
violent, desperate, and unreasonable, knowing no rules of moderation nor
forbearance; they go violent ways, and like Iehn, d^ive furiously; they do
those things daily which wise, staid considerate men would never have done, nor
any but mad men; and which any man who has his eyes in his head may see,
must needs destroy them: God has hid wisdom from them, and befooled them,
leaving them to do many things against sense and reason. God has left them,
yea given them up to those courses and ways (of which I could give diverse
instances) which no wise men would ever have taken, and which makes them
abhorred of all good and moderate men. Now the befooling of men, hiding wisdom
from them, leaving them to rashness and violence, are presages of ruin,
according to that saying, quos Deus vult perdere hos dementat, and according to
that of the Prophet, I will hide wisdom from them: Nullum violentum est
perpetuum, is seen in daily experience, and we may remember that the violence
and fury of the Prelaticall party did undo them; and according to all humane
reason, without that, it had been impossible to have c^st them out, being so
deeply rooted in the laws and customs of this Kingdom; and therefore the
Sectaries before they are rooted and settled, being so violent, furious, and
daring far above the Bishops, what can we expect but their speedy downfall?
give them but rope enough and they will hang themselves; they run so fast, and
^ide so fiercely that they cannot but fall and break their necks, they drive so
furiously and madly, that they cannot but overthrow all.

3. The great prosperity, strange success, and marvailous prevailing of the
Sectaries in their ways and opinions, their devices and designs for the most
part taking effect and succeeding, so as they are mightily increased, many
fallen unto them, and (...) wind, almost, favoring them; whereas on the other
hand the Presbyterian party, both our Brethren of Scotland, and the Godly
Ministers and People in England have been sorely afflicted, much crossed and
troubled to to see things as they are; The Scots have been sorely visited with
Sword, Pestilence in their own Land, obstructed, reproached, evil entreated by
many in this Land: the Assembly, the godly Ministers and people of the
Kingdom, despised, scorned and abused several ways, yea, deserted, and
looked upon with an evil eye, as if the troublers of Israel, and worse then
Malignants, so that they have been forced many a time to cry out to God,
Hear O our God, for we are reproached; Now great prosperity, success in a
bad way, and in the use of bad means, as lies, scandalous reports,
under-minings, plottings, false-dealings, etc. is a great Symptom of
destruction both to particular persons, and to a party: whom God intends
certainly to destroy, he fattens before, and lets them be very happy,
thereby to prepare them for the day of slaughter: whom he means to do good
unto in the latter end and deliver, he afflicts and lays them low before,
lays the Foundation deep that he may build high, and for this let the Reader
consult with these four places of Scripture, Ier. 12. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 37.7, and
10.35, 36. Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5. and 18, 19, 20. Psalm. 92. 7. the sum of all which
places is to teach us, that the more men prosper in a bad way, and flourish
more then ordinary, having what their hearts can wish, bringing all their
devices to pass, the more sure they are of being pulled out as sheep for the
slaughter, and prepared for the day of slaughter, and that within a little
while, they shall not be, nor their place found, but brought to desolation as
in a moment, and utterly consumed; and then when they are at their height of
flourishing, then is it that they shall be destroyed for ever; great
prosperity is but a lightening before death, and as a great calm which
presages the more dreadful storm and tempest.

4. The great plotting of the Sectaries, laying their counsels deep,
contriving and working continually night and day by all kind of ways and
means, and all kind of instruments to effect their work, and to carry on
their way; I do not think this many hundred years there has been a more
cunning, plotting, undermining generation in the Church of God then our
Sectaries, or more plots and devices of all sorts on foot, more irons in the
fire within so few years, as has been, and is among them: there is nothing they
do but they have a design in it, they conceive many plots at once to effect
it, they have plot upon plot, and lay snare upon snare: Machiavel and the
Jesuits are but punies and fresh men to them. I am confident they had so laid
their plots, cut out their way, removed the rubs, prepared all things, so as
that they had set their time, by which they should effect their ends, and speak
out what they would have: Now God delights to bring to naught plots, to
disappoint the devices of men's hearts, to blast and blow upon tricks and
under-boord workings, to take the wise in their own craftiness, and wherein
men deal proudly to be above them: the ripening, growing big of plots, is
commonly the forerunner of the downfall of the plotters, and the miscarriage
of their plots: for the further clearing of which the Reader shall do well to
consider what God speaks in Job. 5.12, 13, 14. Psalm. 37.12, 13, Isa. 29.15.16.
Isa. 30.1, 2. and indeed God is such an enemy to plots, devices, tricks, that
he will cross and disappoint his own children in their workings, devisings,
and contrivances even for good, when they are too plotting, anxious, or delight
and please themselves too much in them; and this he does often, lest they
should attribute the events of things to their counsel, care, etc. and that
the work may appear to be of himself, and not of men, that God may be known
to be Deiu activus and non passivus, as Luther expresses it upon a like
occasion, and that God does not use to call Martin Luther or any of his Saints
to be his councellor, but that he does all things according to his own
counsel; hence we are commanded to be careful for nothing, or thoughtfull,
but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let our
requests be made known to God: Now if God will go quite cross and contrary,
to the counsels, workings, of his servants for the maintaining his Church and
truth, and bring about all quite another way, then he will much more carry the
counsels of the froward headlong and make them meet with darkness in the day
time, and grope in the noone day, as in the night.

5. Sympt. of the certain destruction of the Sectaries is this, That
Independencie and Sectarisme in England is a mere Faction, a party grown to
this height upon particular interests, nourished and favored all upon politic
grounds and ends: Independencie now is no religious conscientious business,
but a politic State Faction, severing and dividing it self upon other private
interests from the public interests of this Church and State, and the interest
of both Kingdoms, united by Covenant: In a word it is just such anoanother
Faction as the Arminians was in the Netherlands. I believe that seven or eight
years ago Independencie and the Church way had somewhat of Religion and
conscience in it, many then falling to it much upon those grounds (though even
then there were other ends in it also, Antapol p. 21, 28.
as I have shown in my Antapologie.) But now since these times of troubles and
difference betwixt King and Parliament, these four years last past, wherein
men have seen some probability and possibility, in these times of war and
unsettlement of things, to bring about and effect those things they could not
hope for before, it has been and is matter of faction, particular aims and
ends, and not of conscience and piety, as all wise men may see, and is
apparent by these particulars:

First it is not carried on as a way of God, as a matter of Religion and
Conscience, in Gods way, and with Gods means; but carried on altogether with
policy, art, plots, tricks, equivocations, mental reservations, lies,
falsenesle, doing any thing though never so unjust and unrighteous, if it will
further and advantage, that way, and hinder its opposite, viz. Presbytery, and
the settlement of the Church; yea, declining and forsaking the professed
principles that way, and going contrary threunto, in razing the very
fundations of Independencie, and the Church way.

Secondly, There are multitudes of persons in all places, who do not so much
as know or understand any of the principles of Independency and the Church
way; yea that hate most of those principles if they were tied to live according
to them, that yet are great sticklers for Independencie, and the Sectaries,
yea, are the heads and patrons of it in all places, and upon all occasions, and
this is observed by many wise men, that take those who now are friends for it,
and stand for it upon all occasions, among them all there is not one in ten
that conscientiously and in his judgment holds that way to be of God, or is
an Independent, which clearly shows it is a Faction.

Thirdly, All other errors and opinions, Sectaries of all sorts (as well as
Independents) are encouraged, nourished, favored, and the worst of them though
being so abominable, it is not any policy to appear for them; yet one way or
other, under one notion or other, are pleaded for, dealt gently with, either
delayed and put off, or brought off by one means or other, and are freely
suffered to grow and increase, and no way taken to suppress or discourage
them, which clearly shows Independency is a Faction, and has other designs
then that of Conscience, in furthering the growth of all sorts of Sectaries,
holding tenets against their principles as well as ours, by Licensing their
Books, etc. and upon all occasions, shelters and protects all sorts of them.

Fourthly that Independencie is a Faction, and not matter of Conscience,
appears because all these following sorts and ranks of men come in unto it; 1.
Needy, broken, decayed men, who know not how to live, and hope to get
something, turn Independents and sticklers for i^. 2. Gail^ie, suspicious and
obnoxious men, who have been or are in the lurc^, and in fear and danger of
being questioned, or have bin questioned, they turn Independents to escape
questioning, or if questioned, that so they may come off the better,
Independency being a Sanctuary and the horns of the Altar where many obnoxious
persons fly and are safe; and many of these guilty persons that they may merit
the more prove fiercer Independents and Sectaries then many others. 3. Some
who have businesses, causes, and matters depending, strike in with the
Independent Sectaries, pleading for them, that so they may find Friends, be
sooner dispatched, fare better in their causes, etc. 4. Ambitious, proud,
covetous men, who have a mind to Offices, places of profit, about the Army,
Excise, etc. turn about to the Independents, and are great zealots for them. 5.
Libertines and loose persons, who have a desire to live in pleasures, and enjoy
their lusts, and to be under no government, they are fierce and earnest for
Independents, and against Presbytery. 6. All wanton-witted, unstable, erroneous
spirits of all sorts, all Heretics and Sectaries strike in with Independency,
and plead they are Independents. 7. Such who have no mind to peace, nor to the
settlement of things, either out of hope, whilst things remain unsettled,
Bishops and former times may come in again; or that love to fish in troubled
waters, or are afraid to lose Offices and Places that may fall with the ending
of these troubles, these persons strike in with Independents, and side with
them. 8. Many who in our Churches are discontented at the faithful preaching
of their Ministers close to their consciences, at their Admonitions and
Suspensions from the Sacrament, because loose, scandalous, or because of some
difference upon their Tithes, or such like, forsake our Assemblies, and betake
themselves so Independents and Sectaries, of which I could give diverse
instances; all which shows the Church Way and Independency to be nothing else
but a Faction: Now Factions and Parties in Kingdoms and Commonwealths, though
they may prevail to a great height, and grow for a time, especially in
troublous unsettled States, in the Springs and Falls of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths; yet when they come to be discovered, laid open, and come to some
head and ripeness, they use to fall and be cast out: If we consult with the
Scriptures, or with the Histories and Chronicles of Kingdoms, as the French
and English, etc. we shall find the strongest, powerfullest Factions and
Parties both in Churches and States, who have had divided interests from the
Public, have come down and miserably perished: and we may see this fully made
good in the Anabaptists of Germany, the Arminian Faction in the Netherlands,
and our late Prelaticall Faction, who though they were all grown so high, as
they hazzarded the ruin of the Countries and Commonwealths wherein they
arose, yet they all fell and were brought down, and so shall it be with this
Sectarian Faction; can they think that either God, or these Kingdoms will
suffer these men long, or that the people will be always bewitched with them?
no, the eyes of men will be open, and they will be discovered every day more,
and we shall see them falling down like lightning.

6. Symps. Their reaching after, and meddling with all kind of persons and
things, grasping of all at once, laboring to ingrosse all Offices, places,
power into their hands, and those of their party, st^ighting, abusing, and
trampling on one way or other, all that stand in their way, and are their
opposites, there being nothing Military, Civil, Ecclesiastical, but they have
an eye upon, and do endeavor to have a hand in, not caring in the least when
it furthers their designs, to discontent all sorts and ranks of persons, King,
Parliament, our Brethren of Scotland, the City of London, reformed Churches,
Assembly, the godly Ministry of the Kingdom, particular worthy persons in the
Armies, among the Gentry, etc. they make account to carry all before them, to
get all to be for them by one means or other, and in time to break all that
shall dare to appear against them, or cross their ways. Now in all States
and Kingdoms Polupragmaticalnesse in some persons, greediness and
over-hastinesse to have all, and thereupon offending and provoking many, has
been a forerunner of their fall: I shall only instance in this Kingdom, and
of the late times, which all remember. What it was that ruined the Bishops and
their party, but their grasping and meddling with all at once, Church and
Commonwealth together, England and Scotland both, provoking also all sorts of
persons against them, Nobility, Gentry, City, Ministers, common people? whereas
(as many wise men would often say, and comforted themselves in the worst of
those times) if the Bishops and that party had dealt but with a part at once,
one Kingdom only, as England, or or the Church alone, or Commonwealth alone,
letting the other Kingdom be quiet to enjoy their Laws, and suffering men to
enjoy Religion and their Ministers, though they had some pressures upon them in
Commonwealth, yet in all probability in time they might have had their wills:
but now the Bishops and that party oppressing both Church and Commonwealth at
once, grasping to have all, they will lose all; and we see what is befallen the
Bishops and that party: so our Sectaries meddling with both Kingdoms at once,
with Church and Commonwealth together; and having provoked all sorts of men,
Nobility, Gentry, Ministers, City, People, our Brethren of Scotland: will not
be able to stand long, but King, Parliament, Scotland, City, Ministry,
Country, will be so against them, as they must fall, let who will or can hold
them up.

7. Sympt. of the downfall of the Sectaries, is the great sins and
wickedness of that party, who are even now ripe for judgment, and their
iniquities almost full; and I am confident, that for this many hundred years
there has not been a party that has pretended to so much holiness,
strietnesse, power of godliness, tenderness of conscience above all other
men, as this party has done, that has been guilty of so great sins,
horrible wickedness, provoking abominations as they are. The Sectaries are
full of Ephra^^^^ gray hairs (though they will not know it) and these
following sins and courses presage their ruin, viz. their deep hypocrisies
and pretenses of Religion and Conscience merely to serve their lusts, and to
bring about their own ends, their perjuries and breach of solemn Covenant with
God, making nothing at all of it, their great unthankfulness and ill use of
Gods mercies and deliverances, their great ingratitude and unkindnesse to men,
particularly to (...) Brethren of Scotland, their blood guiltiness in
destroying the lives of many by dipping weakly and ancient persons in rivers in
cold seasons, and in the destroying of so many souls by Errors and Heresies
and drawing them from their faithful Pastors, their horrible uncleanness
and lusts, their fearful despising and mocking of all Gods faithful
Ministers, and Ordinances, their oppressions, injustice, and unrighteous
dealings with many they have had to do with and where they have any power,
their base self-seekings, seeking their own things, their honor, profit,
advancement of their Faction under pretenses of selfe-denyall, and the public
good, their holding of damnable Heresies and all kind of abominable Errors,
their horrid blasphemies against God, Christ, the Scriptures and all his
Ordinances, their Machiavillian policies, Jesuiticall equivocations, falsnesse
and treacherousnesse, their underminings and laying snares for men, their
countenancing standing for the unworthiest vilest of men, so they will be for
their faction, their justifying and pleading for a Toleration of all religions,
and consciences, even to blasphemies against God and his Word, their inventing
of lies and raising scandalls upon the worthiest and innocentest men, as
Ministers and others to blast them with the people, their profaneness and
looseness of life in making nothing of the Lords day, days of Fast and
Thanksgiving, nor of holy duties, as praying, etc. their carnal confidence and
trusting in arms of flesh, their using of wicked and unjust ways, and means to
compass their ends, not standing upon any rules, or keeping to any principles,
so it may advantage them, violating bonds of friendship, going against the
laws of Nations, joining with the worst of men against good men, laboring to
sow divisions among brethren, raising evil reports, fomenting jealousies, and
using all ways in their power to engage the two Nations in a war one against
the other, not caring to hazard the ruin of all for the upholding of their
faction. Many of the Sectaries have forfeited all principles of ingenuity and
conscience, and will not stand upon any thing that may probably do their work
for them: they will take counsel of Baalzebub the God of Ekron whether they
shall recover, use the Devils means, as lying, breach of promises, joining
with wicked men, etc. for pretended liberty of Conscience and upholding their
way. In a word, they are like that Judge spoken of in the 18. of Luke, which
feared not God, neither regarded men; all they regard is the effecting of their
designs, and other things in order to that. And ^s many Sectaries are in these
too faulty and guilty, so the very best of them that I know, their Ministers,
and others who are leaders, and have been any long time of the way, Vide
Independ. razing their own foundation page 314, 5.
and unsterstand the state of things, they are extremely faulty in patronizing
all kind of Sectaries, and being against all the ways of suppressing them, in
using all subtle politic ways and devices to hinder and delay the
Reformation, in joining with bad men against what they acknowledge good, in
going against their own principles, razing their own foundation; besides,
they are very proud, lofty, touchy, full of equivocations, reservations,
pretenses, pretending one thing, and doing quite otherwise; so that I may say
of them with the Prophet Micah, The best of them is a brier, the most upright
is sharper then a thorne-hedge; and therefore the day of their visitation
comes, now shall be their perplexity. And certainly, these fearful sins and
strange ways (especially in men who have pretended to more sanctity and
holiness then other men, having also, upon those pretenses of greater purity,
etc. g^ounded their great Separation and Division from all the reformed
Churches) must needs provoke God to visit and to punish them severely; and
because of his great Name which they have taken upon them and so profaned, God
will be sanctified (unless great and speedy repentance prevent it) in
punishing them sooner and more remarka^ly then the Prelates and their party:
And therefore in the close of this Symptom of the downfall of the Sects, I
shall, in the name of the Presbyterian party, and of all those who are for the
solemn League and Covenant in both Kingdoms, make use of those words to and
against the Sectaries, which both Kingdoms (upon the coming in of our Brethren
of Scotland) used in their joint Declaration to and against the Popish,
Prelaticall and malignant party: The Declaration of the Kingdom: of England and
Scotland, by the honorable Houses of the Parliament of England and the
honorable Convention of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, in the year 1643.
page 3, ^.
It is his own Truth and Cause, which we maintain, with all the Reformed
Churches, and which has been witnessed and sealed by the testimony*
sufferings and blood of so many Confessors, and Martyrs, against the heresy,
superstition and tyranny of Antichrist. The glory of his own Name, the
exaltation of the Kingdom of his Son, and the preservation of his Church, and
of this Island from utter ruin and devasta^ion is our aim, and the end which
we have before our ^ies. His Covenant have we in both Nations solemnly sworn
and subscribed, which he would not have put in our hearts to do, i^ he had been
minded to destroy us. The many prayers and supplications which these many
years last past, but especially of late have been offered up with fasting and
humiliation, and with strong crying and tears unto him that is able to deliver
and save us, are a seed which promise unto us a plentiful harvest of comfort
and happiness: and the Apostasy, Atheism, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
Prosanenesse, Cruelty, Excess, and open mocking of all godliness and
honesty have filled up the cup of our adversaries to the brim, and threaten
their speedy and fearful d^struction, unl^sse it be prevented by such
extraordinary repentance, as seems not yet to have entered into their hearts.

8. Sympt. is this, When God has at some times testified against them, and
spit in their faces, as by laying open their nakedness, and fully discovering
their ways, by some books written, by some Sermons preached by godly Ministers,
by casting some rubs in their way, in stirring up the City of London to
appear against them, or in disappointing some of their purposes by strange and
unexpected passages of his providence from Heaven, yet upon none of these
occasions have they repented of their deeds to give God glory, or humbled
themselves before his Ministers speaking to them from the mouth of the Lord, or
abated of their spirits; but contrariwise, have gnawed their tongues for pain,
blasphemed the more because of their pains and sores, and stirred up themselves
with so much the more industry and subtlety, to plot and work by all kind of
ways and means to heal their wounds: and I could give many instances, how
upon such books coming forth, and upon such acts of providence, which a man
would have thought should have made them give over, they have been more
resolved, active, desperate, betaking themselves to evil ways and strange
courses for the saving of themselves, as aspersing and raising scandals and
false reports upon the persons whom they think have wounded them, as in the
weekly Pamphleters venting some desperate passages, and putting forth strange
books upon the nick of things, with many other ways, all which wise men cannot
but observe; in which courses they have been like Balaam, Numb. 22. going on
their way resolvedly, though the Angel of the Lord have stood in their way
with a sword drawn, and their feet have been crushed against the wall. Now it
is a great symptom of destruction and ruin to a party, or to particular
persons, when the hand of God is lifted up against them, that they will not
see; and that when God wounds them, instead of falling down before him, they
seek to cure their wounds by unlawful means; and that when he powrs our vials
upon them, and scorches them with great heat, they blaspheme, and do not
repent, that when he stops them, they will drive more furiously, and that when
he makes men's pride testi^^e to their faces, they do not return nor seek him
for all this: This is the forerunner of destruction in the Antichristian
party, Revel. 16.8, 9, 10, 11. And this was a forerunner of destruction in
the Prelates and that party; that after their great and long prosperity and
success, when God did by writing, preaching, raising up of witnesses testify
against them, and did by other acts of his providence cross them, in raising
up the Kingdom of Scotland against them, yet they would not give in, nor
abate; and when a peace was concluded with Scotland upon the Kings first going
into the North, and they might have enjoyed their honors, greatness, for all
that, they wrought so upon the Kings return, as to procure those Articles to
be burnt by the hand of the common Hangman, and the war to go on, which proved
their ruin and fatal destruction. And for a conclusion of this Symptom, I
will end it with those words of the Prophet Isaiah, Lord, when thy hand is
lifted up, they will not see; but they sh^^ see, and be ashamed for their envy
toward thy people: yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them. Lord,
thou will ordain peace for us: for thou also have wrought all our works for
us. And though it be a sad thing, that men holding forth a profession of
Religion should fall to those ways, and grow to such an height as I have laid
open; yet I am persuaded it is a good hand of God, and his special providence
and mercy to his Church in these Kingdoms, to leave the Sectaries to fall
into so many evils, to take such strange ways thus to discover themselves, and
to proceed so far, that so the Kingdoms knowing them well, they might in the
issue be more effectually cured, and perfectly delivered from them: for, had
these men kept themselves within the compass of a few of their opinions, and
carried things fair, and not broke out as they have done, we should have
thought them good holy men, been much taken with them, and many would have been
deceived by them; yea, in time they might have got such an interest, and had
such an influence, as to have corrupted all; but now having thus early
discovered themselves, both in matters of Church and State, in opinions and
practices, this has so opened the eyes of this Kingdom, yea of both, that it
will cause them to abhor and abominate them as a wicked Faction, whose
principles would bring in an universal Anarchy, both upon Church and State,
overthrowing all Ministry, settled Government, and order in the Church; being
against Kingly Government, the House of Peers, House of Commons (unless ad
placitum, and so long as the common people like them;) and all power of
Magistrates (in capital matters over Church members) in the Commonwealth; and
who cared not to have sacrificed the Religion, peace, happiness of these
Kingdoms, upon the ambition, fury, pride, lust, opinions of Anabaptists,
Libertines, Seekers, Brownists, Independents: And therefore, however the
Sectaries may flatter themselves in the increase of their party, in the power
they have in some places, in the favor they find among some great men; yet let
them know, notwithstanding their policies, all their arms of flesh, all their
friends in the Armies, in the Mr. Prins Discovery of prodigious new lights,
shows some Sectaries boasting of their friends in the House of Commons.
House of Commons, and in Some Sectaries have said it to some who have told it
me, that there is never a Committee about London, but they have some friend or
other in it, that as soon as any of them is in question, gives them notice of
it, and of the Articles against them, and acquaints them with the state of
things.
Committees which they so boast of, yet God will overthrow them; and these
eight particulars are certain symptoms of their ruin; and let who will do
what they can to uphold them, yet God will bring them down; for, when they
spring as the grass, and as the Workers of iniquity flourish, then is it that
they shall be destroyed for ever: And therefore let us be courageous and
faithful to the cause of God, contending earnestly for the faith which was
once at livered to the Saints; and let us be in nothing terrified by the
Sectaries. And to all the Symptoms I have given already (being so many
forerunners of their fall) let the Reader consider this, That they have their
deaths wound already, the fatal arrow sticks in their sides, and having begun
to fall, they shall surely fall: and that (besides the City of London, and
other instruments) God will honor our Brethren of Scotland, to make them a
great means of their falling; and they shall fall before the Scots (whom they
have so vilified and unworthily dealt with) as the Prelaticall and Popish
party did: and, me thinks, the way of Gods proceedings all along this way of
Reformation, and many passages of his providence hint and point it out to us;
for the Sectaries are a Faction alike opposite to our Brethren of Scotland,
viz. the other extreme; and all along, from first to last, God has made the
Scots isntrumental for the good of this Kingdom, and bringing things thus
far. And that God will honor the Kingdom of Scotland, and the
Church-reformation according to their way, to bring down the Sectaries, let the
Reader consult with M. Brightman (a man of a prophetical spirit) in his
Exposition on the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 8, 9, 10. where he shows,
that Church to whom so many promises are made, to be the reformed Churches of
Geneva, France, Scotland, and those who are according to that way of
Reformation in Doctrine and Church Government; and among many things observed
by M. Brightman on that place, I shall only point at two.

1. That Philadelphia (the type of Geneva, Scotland, and the Churches of that
Reformation) is most famous for truth of Doctrine: As for truth of Doctrine,
where is there any place in the whole world chaster and sounder? Here the whole
Papacy is destroyed; Quod autem ad veritatem Doctrinae spectat, ubi castior
and integrior, vel in universo terrarum orb* Totus Papatus hic jugulatur:
Anabaptistae, Antitrinitarii, Arriani, and hujusmodi monstra, excitata rursum
ab inferis, partim in Germania, partim in Transylvania, nusquam ac^orem hostem
invenerunt: quid etiam non tentaverit ut Germanicis Eccles^is errores suos
evelleret? Brightman. In Apocalyp. page 53. In Antitypo, Iudaeisunt quotquot
ertoribus implica^i, sibi unis veritatem, fidem, salutem, promissiones Dei
arrogant, nihil nisi Templum, Templum crepantes; quales fuerunt Arriani
Episcopi sub Constantino, Constantio, and Valente. Vide plura, Brighton. page
5^.
Anabaptists, Antitrinitarians, Arrians, and such monsters raised again from
Hell, partly in Germany, partly in Transylvania, never found a sharper enemy.

2. By those who say they are Jews, and are not, verse. 9. in the Antitype are
all those who holding errors, do arrogate alone to themselves truth, faith,
salvation, the promises of God, boasting nothing else but the Temple: such were
the Arrians under Constantine, Constantius, Valens* and such are at this day
the Papists, glorying in Peter's Chair: these will be accounted the only
Catholics, and their Church the only Church of Christ, etc.

Now if we consider well of these two things, 1. We shall find no Church
sounder for Doctrine than the Church of Scotland, nor greater enemies, not only
against Papacy and Prelacie, but against Anabaptists, Seekers, and all kind of
Sectaries, than they are. 2. We shall not among all Heretics and Sectaries
that have been since the writing of this Epistle, find any that have more
resembled the Jews, in boasting themselves to be the only people of God, than
the Sectaries of our times, the Anabaptists, Independents, who extol
themselves for the only Saints, calling themselves the Saints, the people of
God, the Church; and their way is called by them the Church Way,
Church Fellowship, Christ's way, and that all who are not of their way are
without, etc. so that these words do most fully agree to them, who say they are
Jews, and are not, but do lie; and therefore to conclude this Corallarie, all
the promises made to Philadelphia, do belong in a special manner to our
Brethren of Scotland: as,

First, That God will make them come (viz. those who are the Antitype to those
Jews, the Sectaries, Anabaptists, Independents, that whole Faction) and worship
before their feet, and to know that God has loved them; that is, they shall
overcome and triumph over these Sectaries: and however they have been hitherto
abused and scorned by them, neither have these unthankful men acknowledged my
love from that singular gift of zeal, piety, which I bestowed upon thee; yet
I will adorn thee with those things which are in great account in the world:
thou shall have victories over these enemies, and thou shall enrich thy self
with their spoils; so that no man but shall be compelled to acknowledge thee
deerly beloved, whom, above all hope, they shall see so wonderfully increased.
O Church of Scotland, and all ye that are for Reformation Presbyteriall
against the Sectaries, nourish your hopes by these things, neither let your
hearts be troubled whatsoever the w^^ld speaks against you.

Secondly, Vide Bright^n, in loc. page 56.
Because they have kept the word of Gods patience, God will keep them from the
hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell
upon the earth: That is because they stood for my Doctrine and truth with a
great deal of danger, and yet with a great deal of patience have constantly
continued in their duty; I will therefore deliver them out of their dangers, I
will not suffer them to sinck and perish in their trialls, but I will give them
strength whereby they shall not only strongly bear their calamity, but they
shall also overcome and be conquerors; not that the hour of temptation shall
not at all touch these Philadelphians, (for it can hardly be in the common
calamity of the whole world, that they should be wholly free) but to keep them
from the hour of temptation, is to deliver them as God saved them from the
hands of their enemies that is, deliver them, 2. Judge. 18.

3. Him that over-commeth God will make a Pillar in his Temple, he shall go no
more ou^, etc. that is, God promises to make that Church over-comming, being an
Hebraisme nominativi absoluti and the reward is, that that Church shall be like
a Pillar in the Temple of God, that is, shall remain firm and lasting in the
Church, neither shall that Church fear any ruin or destruction, however the
rain falls, the floods beat, the winds blow, and all things with a joint force
break in upon them. Vide Brightman^um in Apocalyp. page 57.
The spirit of God alludes to the two Brazen Pillars placed by Solomon in the
Temple of God, which set forth the stability of the sons of God. And so by
the grace of God is this Church not tainted nor corrupted with Schism and base
defection as the Church of Sardis was, which having no care of a full
Reformation, by the just judgment of God lost the most of the people.

CORAL. III.
HEnce then from all these Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and Practices of the
Sectaries, we may see what a great evil and sin separation is from the
communion of the Reformed Churches, and how highly displeasing to God for men
to make a Schism and Rent in the Church of God in a time of Reformation, God
punishing the Schism and Separation of our times with so many Heresies,
Blasphemies, wicked practices, etc. as I have laid down in this and my former
Book, wherein God witnesses from Heaven against the present separation in
giving men up to great spiritual judgments and evils; and indeed God
testifies more against the Sectaries of our times, then against the old
Brownists and Separatists, leaving the Sectaries of these days to fall into
greater Errors, Heresies Blasphemies, and more pernicious Practices then the
former, few of them in comparison falling either to those Opinions or Practices
which generally the Separatists do now, but held to their first principles
more; a great reason whereof I conceive to be this, the old Separatists having
greater scandals, and more just occasion of separating then the new the old
Separatists being like men stealing upon need, or some want, the new like those
who steal upon wantonness, and for their pleasure, the onelike wives and
children going away and leaving harsh, bitter, hard, unkind husbands and
parents, the other forsaking loving and kind husbands and Parents allowing them
all things siting, and that can reasonably be desired) their sin was not so
great then as now, and so the punishment not so great: There are two ways to
judge of the greatness of sins, and of Gods displeasure against them, either
by the nature and kind of them, viewing them formaliter in their formality, or
in the effects and fruits of them effective: Now this Corallary leads me to
judge and speak of Schism and Separation in the latter, and among all
punishments the effects and fruits, which declare the greatness of any sin,
spiritual judgments and punishments are the sorest and sadest. The punishment
upon the Heathen, ( Romans 1.21.24 etc.) when they knew God, for not glorifying
him as God, and for their idolatry, is giving them up to uncleanenesse and vile
affections, to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient,
suffering them to be filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness,
covetousness, malitiousnesse, deceit, malignity, debate, to be proud,
inventers of evil things, without natural affection, Covenant-breakers,
implacable, etc. (2. These. 2.11.) The judgment of God upon the Antichristian
world as a fruit of their sin in not receiving the truth in love, is Gods
sending them strong delusions that they should believe a lie; 2. Tim. 13. and
the punishment of God upon Seducers is, that they shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived, that they who are filthy shall be filthy still;
Revel. 22 11. Now the judgments of God upon the Heathen Idolaters, upon the
Antichristian Faction, upon Seducers and filthy persons, are upon the
Schismatics and Separatists of our times: God has given them up to fearful
Opinions, to damnable Heresies, blasphemies, God has sent strong delusions to
believe lies, strange conceits, and God has left them to all kind of
filthynesse, unrighteousness, uncleanness, unnaturalness, etc. Whosoever
does but read and consider the First and Second Part of Gangraena, must needs
say that God hates Schism and Separation, in leaving those who are guilty of
it, to do those things they do daily: I may truly say God has set marks and
brands upon this way of Separation, not only burning them in their hands, but
branding them in their foreheads, Schism has Coins mark and brand upon it of
a Fugitive and Vagabond upon the earth: How do we see in daily experience our
Sectaries have no rest, but wander and go from one Error and way to another
till they quite lose themselves? being Saint Iudes raging waves of the Sea
foaming out their own shame, wandering Stars to whom is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever? The punishment of Schism and Separation from the
Church, is Separation from God, Heresy, Blasphemy, Atheism, uncleanness,
unrighteousness, Schism does most easily draw into Heresy, and we hardly
ever knew or read of any Hieron. in Epist. ad Titum cap. 3. Vi^ esse Schisma
ullum quod non aliquam confingat haeresim ut ab Ecclesia merito recessisse
videatur. Quicunque enim labit^r in Errorem aliquem, and ab unitate Ecclesiae
se divelli nunquam patitur, ille Error in eo esse poterit hoeresis
materialiter, non formaliter; non enim in eo est pertinacia, qui Ecclesiailli
adhaeret, a^ qua para^us est docerl. M. Antonius De Dominis de Republ. Eccles.
l. 7. c. 10. August coatralit. Petil. lib. 1. Schisma omnia scelera
s^pergreditur.
Schism in the Curch which did not make a Heresy that it might deservedly
seem to forsake the Church: The ancient Fathers, as Irenaeus, Cyprian, do
excellently show that those who forsake the Church do necessarily fall into
most foul Errors against the truth of faith, and some of them show that
Schism is a worse and more pernicious evil in the Church of God then Heresy,
and no Error will be a complete and formed Heresy in any faithful man, if
Schism be not joined, and so consequently it will not much hurt the Church of
God: But Schism of it self, even with sound Doctrine in every point, is a most
grievous wickedness which exceeds all other wickedness. I might out of the
Fathers enlarge and show the great evil of Schism both in it self and the
effects of it, how it is a greater evil to rend the Church, then to worship
Idols; yea, that Martyrdom it self cannot profit a Schismatic, that it is so
great an evil that the blood of Martyrdom cannot blot it out, so Cypr. and
Chrysostom. and that God has more severely punished it then mur^her and other
great crimes. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram for their Schism were punished more
severely, with the earth opening and swallowing them up quick, then Cain, and
then those who made an Idol; so Optatu^ lib. 1. Distantiam esse delictorum,
aut remissio testatur, aut paena, and quod in sacrilegos and parr^cidam non
secerat, in s^ismaticos ^ect. August. Epist. 142. Qui fecerun^ idolum usitata
gladii morte perempti sunt, qui vero schisma facero volnerunt, Matu terra
principes devorati, and turba consentien^ igne consumpta est: Diversitate
paenarum, diversitas agnoscitur meritorum.
Optatus and Augustine; but I shall leave the enlarging of these, and the
adding of more to a Tractate I intend of the nature of Schism; only by this
and all the dreadful examples laid down in the First and Second part of
Gangraena, as Wrighter, Clarkson, Hicb, Webb, Boggis, Oats, Ienney, Mistress
Attaway, Ni^bols, Den, etc. we may learn to see that Schism and Separation
are great evils highly displeasing to God, and that we have great reason to
shun and fly from them, as from a Serpent, lest we become Monsters of men,
and God give us up to a reprobate sense and a spirit of Error. In a word, to
conclude this Corallarie, what the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians of
Idolaters, etc. long before their time, that these things happened unto them
for examples, and these things were their examples, to the intent they should
not be Idolaters, etc. that I may say of our times, that all these spiritual
punishments on Schismatics in our days and times are our examples to the
intent that we should not separate from this Church, and set up other
Churches, lest God let us fall from Independency to Anabaptism, and
Antinomianism, and from Anabaptisme to be Seekers, and from Seekers to be
Antiscripturists, and Sceptiks, yea, Blasphemers and Atheists.

CORAL. IV.
HEnce then we see from all these Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, proceedings
of the Sectaries, That Magistrates, Ministers, and other Christians, Masters of
families, Parents, etc. have been asleep, and too careless, that so many tares
have been both sowed, and are grown up to such an head: If the Magistrates,
Ministers, and Christians every one in their places and callings had been awake
and watchful, improving their power, authority, gifts, for purity of Doctrine
and Unity, the field of this Kingdom could not have been so sown with tares,
nor the garden of this Church so overgrown with weeds, yea, briers and thorns.
Christ tells us in the Parable, Matthew. 13.25. While men slept, the enemy came
and sowed tares among the wheat; that is, the Devil takes occasion by the
negligence and slothfulness of those that have the charge of others, Vide New
Annotations on Matt. 13^25.
to do mischief in Gods Church. The Prophet Isaiah shows, Isa. 56.9, 10.
that All the beasts of the field, yea, the beasts of the forest come to
devour: viz. Heretics and Schismatics (resembled to wolves, foxes, etc.)
enter in, not sparing the Flock: and the reason is, The watchmen are blind,
dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber; that is,
their Rulers, both Ecclesiastical and Civil that should watch the approach of
the enemy, and be as watchful mastives to give warning of thieves approaching
to the house, or wolves to the flock, are either dumb, or drunk, or fast
asleep. And truly, we may thank the connivance and winking of Magistrates, the
silence and forbearance of Ministers, the want of zeal in Masters and Parents,
that spirit of slumber and sleepines that has fallen upon the Kingdom, for all
the tares, wild oats, and weeds that are grown and sprung up among us: And to
all the sorts of Sects in this Kingdom which I have named, as Seekers, etc. I
may add this of Sleepers and Dreamers, which I am afraid are the most general
of any other, there being too many Sleepers in all places, and among all ranks,
in City, Country, among the Magistrates, Ministers, and private Christians;
and would to God this were the worst in this Kingdom, that many both in
Magistracy and Ministry were only sleepy and heavy, and that they were not
in a dead sleep, in a lethargy that nothing can awake them: but it is too
apparent that God has powered out upon many the spirit of deep sleep, and has
closed their eyes, even Rulers and Seers has he covered, and all the Sermons,
Books, Speeches (which one would think would awaken men) are as the word of a
book that is sealed, which men deliver to one, saying, Read this; and he says,
I cannot, for it is sealed: nay, not only so, but this is the condition of
this Church and State, that many who are dead asleep as in reference to prevent
or suppress the sowing of Heresies and Schisms, are awake and alive, yea,
watchful at midnight, and waiting upon all opportunities to promote and
further Heresy, Schism, and to hinder, cross all means for the suppressing of
them; witness the many Emissaries sent forth into most parts of this Kingdom,
witness the many books written, sermons preached for them; witness those who
stand up for, and use all means to bring off Sectaries when in question, etc.
witness many (who profess to be against Independency, and for Presbytery, to
be with us) that upon all occasions, even before the Parliament, and in other
places, heal the hurt of this Kingdom slightly, and dawb with untempered
mortar, preaching that our errors are not so many, that there are them who
make them to be more then they are, and call Truths of God Errors; and they
say, that in other times, as in the Primitive Church, etc. there were greater
errors, and therefore we need not be so troubled. But (for my part) I look
upon this lukewarm temper, remissness in reference to the faith once
delivered to the Saints, which has possessed so many in this Kingdom,
Magistrates, Ministers and people, as that which may hazard all, and may once
more provoke God to spue out of his mouth the lukewarm Angel that is neither
cold nor hot. And to draw toward a conclusion of this, I shall speak to those
in authority in the words of the Prophet David, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12, Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth: Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and
ye perish from the way. The sum of which Scripture is an exhortation to
Kings, Parliaments, and all sorts of Governors in high place, 1. To lay aside
pride, and self-conceit of their own carnal wisdoms, and with meekness to
receive the yoke and Government of Christ laid down in his word, and by their
Laws and Ordinances to serve Christ, in establishing the true worship of God,
and to suppress all false worship and doctrine. 2. He calls upon Kings and
Judges to be wise; implying, First, That the Calv. in Psalm. 2.10 Add quod
inanis sapientiae f^ltus q^o turgent eos quid re^^on sit dis^ere non patitur.
Quum eos jubet intelligentia esse praeditor; oblique fals^m prudentia
confidentium in ipsis persiringit. Ergo quansumuis sibi placeant mundi
Principes in suo ocumine, sciamus eos pla^e desipere, dene^ fiant humiles
Christi discipuli.
conceit of their own wisdom (by which they are puf^ed up) hinders them from
learning that which is their duty, and truly right. Secondly, implying,
Magistrates of all sorts, both Kings and Judges, are subject to want spiritual
wisdom, and to be fools, to go by crooked rules of carnal policy, as
Jeroboam, fearing to lose parties, to part with any State-interest, etc. rather
then to keep close to the word of God, to do their duties, and to trust him.
3. The Psalmist teaches Kings and Judges wherein true wisdom and understanding
consists, viz. in serving the Lord with fear, and kissing the Son; not only in
their own persons serving God, and subjecting to him with the kiss of honor
and reverence as ordinary private men, but quatenus tales, as Kings and
Magistrates, to submit their Scepters to Christ, to serve him, and to convert
the power they have received from God, to the propagation and defense of his
Kingdom. Then indeed (as learned Gerb. de Magistratu politico, Sect. 5.
Tuncuero Christo serviunt, ipsamque osculantur, si non ipsi soluin doctrinam
Christi recipient, ac fide amplectuntur, sed etiam potestate divinitus sibi
data hoc efficient, ut puritos doctrinae in Ecclesia conservetur, idololatriae
and falsi cultus aboleantur, lupt ab ovisi Dominico arceantur, Ministri
Ecclesiae comm^de alantur, etc.
Gerhard speaks) Kings and States serve Christ, and kiss him, if themselves
do not only receive the doctrine of Christ, and embrace it by faith; but also
with the power given them of God, see to this, that purity of doctrine shall be
preserved in the Church, Idolatry and false worships shall be abolished,
wolves shall be driven from the fold of Christ, the Ministers of the Church
shall be competently provided for etc. And Aug. Epist. 166. Et quibus dictum
est, Servite Domino in timore; etc.? Nonne Regibus? At quonam modo serviunt
Dominy Reges in timore, nisi ea quae contra Domini jussa fiunt, religiosa
seueritate prohipendo? Aliter enim eorum quisque servit quia (...) quia Rex
est: uam (...) s^rvit vivendo fideliter; quia vero Rex est, servit Leges
pracipientes, and connaria prehibentes conven^enti rigore sanciendo.
Austin (speaking upon these verses of the Psalmist in one of his Epistles)
says, To whom is it spoken [Serve the Lord with fear, etc.]? Is it not to
Kings? But how do Kings serve the Lord with fear, unless it be by a religious
severity forbidding those things which are against the commands of the Lord?
For every one of them serves him after one manner as he is a man, after
another manner as he is a King: for as he is a man, he serves him in living
faithfully; but as he is a King, he serves him in making Laws commanding
just things, and prohibiting the contrary: like as Ezechias served him in
destroying idols, groves, and high places; like as Josias served him, etc.
(...) ^4. God by the Prophet here threatens Kings and Judges, that if they do
not serve him with fear, and kiss the Son, he will be angry with them, and
they shall perish from the way: that is, the sudden fury of God shall surprise
and intercept them whilst they are in the midst of their way; so Cal^in in
Psalm. 2.12. Pe^i^e de vi^ quidem exponunt propter viam perversam, vol
s^eleratam vivendi rationem. Ahi resolvunt, (...) via vestra percat. Mihi magis
anida diversus sensu^, quod David fere denuntiet, ut ^os intercipiat subitus
Dei furer, dum se putabant adhue, esse in medio sladio: Scimus enim ut Dei
contempteres sibi in secunda fortun^ Llandi^i seleant, and quasi in la^^ campo
se (...). Non a^s re (...) minatur Propheta, quum dixerin^; ^ax and securitas,
se procul (...) sieve suo putantes, repentino interitu (...).
Calvin. To perish or be lost in the way imports sudden destruction whilst
they are in doing their actions; so Ainsworth upon the place.

And for a conclusion of this Corallary, O that any particular Members of
Parliament who are for pretended liberty of conscience, a Toleration of Sects,
favorers of Sectaries, and out of those principles hinder all they can the
settling of Religion and Government by civil sanction, would often and sadly
meditate upon this Scripture, and be wise now (whilst there is time) thus to
serve the Lord, lest suddenly, when they least think of it, they perish from
the way, and God make them examples, for adhering so pertinaciously to the
Sectaries and that party. They may read in Ecclesiastical Stories what has
befalle^ Princes for not serving the Lord in fear, and kissing his Son; and
they see before their eyes the many evils that have befallen the King, and the
great straights to which he has been reduced for favoring too much the
Popish and Prelaticall party against the mind and humble desires of both his
Kingdoms: and can particular persons think (who are not Kings, but under that
title of Judges) that they can prosper long in standing for a Sectarian faction
against the mind of both Kingdoms, and that the Kingdoms will not see and
desire to understand how it comes about? and by whose means it is, that we
having taken a Covenant for uniformity in Doctrine, Government, etc. and for
extirpating of Heresy, Schism, and the Parliament having declared and made
Ordinances for Presbyteriall Government, and declared in some Declarations and
Remonstrances against Anabaptists, Brownists, preaching of men not ordained,
and against leaving particular persons and Congregations to their own liberty;
that yet all things should be done quite contrary with an high hand? For may
not now whoever will both preach and gather separated Churches, print and act
against Presbyteriall Government; and for all sorts of Sectaries? Yea, such
persons are countenanced, preferred in all places, and to all kinds of Offices
and employments (which makes many turn Independents) and the most zealous
cordial men against Sectaries are displaced, or discountenanced, or
obstructed, etc. These things do seem strange and against all reason, that the
Parliament, professing and declaring one thing, yet the quite contrary in all
things of this nature should be done daily in City and Country. In the worst
times, when the King was most misled by the Councels of Prelates and evil men
about him, there were not actions more contrary in many Ministers of State and
other persons to Proclamations and Declarations, then are now to Ordinances,
Declarations and Votes of Parliament; and yet we hear of few censured or made
examples. Now the people everywhere say, These things could not be, persons
durst not be thus bold to do these things, but that they know they have some
great ones to back them and stand by them; and the people enquire after, and
speak who they be, and questionless will represent these things as
unsufferable, and as most dishonorable to the Parliament, and they will humbly
desire these things may be remedied by the power and wisdom of the Parliament:
and therefore O that all such would be wise in time, be wise now, desert the
Sectaries, further the work so much the more as before they have hindered it,
for there is an emphasis and weight in that Adverb Calv. n Psalm 2 10. Per
Adverbium nune, significat mature illis esse res^pescendum, quia non semper
eadem dabitur oppertunitas.
now, signifying they should do it speedily, because the same opportunity will
not be always given, and the Psalmist hints they may yet do it profitably if
they make haste; but if any do persist and go on, working day and night,
rolling every stone to uphold that party, he that strikes through Kings in the
day of his wrath, will not spare them, and they shall find by sad experience,
when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

CORAL. V.
HEnce then, from all the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and wicked Practices
that are to be found among the Sectaries in their Assemblies and Conclaves, let
all such who have been deceived and drawn to them under pretenses of greater
purity, holiness, etc. and have any fear and awe of God and his Word, be
exhorted to leave and forsake them, and to return to the public Assemblies,
and communion of this and other Reformed Churches; and I shall bespeak them in
those words, Cant. 6.13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we
may look upon thee; in the exhortation of the Apostle Peter, Save your selves
from this untoward generation; and in that call from Heaven, Come out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues: I know there are many in the way who are not of the way, that know
not the depths of Satan, who are merely deceived out of their high opinion of
some of the men, and of the way, as a most holy people, and as a way wherein
they should enjoy an heaven upon earth, a great deal of love, holiness,
sweetness, comfort, etc. Now I have good hopes that all such, upon the
discovering to them the dangerous Errors, Heresies, pernicious practices that
attend that way, will be recovered, and bless God for delivering them from
such a dangerous snare; and I am persuaded that all those who are fallen from
us upon mistakes, that are not Dogmatists, nor engaged to the Sectarian party
upon points of credit, profit, interest of relations, etc. and shall in the
fear of God, and in humility read my first and second Part of Gangraena, by
the blessing and grace of God they will be a means to convert and bring them
back to us; and I the rather insist upon this exhortation, because I find both
in Histories, and in the experience of our own times, that many Sectaries have
been regained Scult. Annal. Dec. ^. Melch Adam. vit. Musculi, page 377. Musculi
loci commun. de Haeresi, page 611. Johannes Gaster. Anabaptistaru^ Doctor quem
in colloquio Ambiosins glaureus Eslingae in viam reduxit. Scultet. Annal. Dec.
2.
: Johannes Denkius an Anabaptist and a great Scholar, was converted by
Oecolampadius, * Obbo Philippus a famous Anabaptist, yet recanted, and by an
ingenuous and free confession laid open the impostures of his companions, and
Theodor. Philippus. out of the persuasion of Obbo afterward repented. Many
Anabaptists were reclaimed by learned Musculus, and among the rest, one who was
a Scholar, afterward being made a Minister of the Church, spent a great deal
of pains in converting the Anabaptists. And now in these times in mine own and
other Ministers experience, some who have been of that way told us, they
thought the Anabaptists a most holy people, which made them to join with them,
but now seeing their errors and their loose Vide Letter page 70, 71. of the
second part of Gangraena.
practices, what a wicked people they are, that has caused them to leave them.
And among the Independents I know some These persons have been with me and what
I write, I had from their own mouths and relations, as many others also have
had.
who have forsaken the Church Way, and are returned to our public Assemblies.
A Minister of that way, and a Pastor of an Independent Church for some years,
upon re-examination of his former grounds, and holding them up to the light by
the word of God, and the writings of some Presbyterians giving grounds out of
the word of God, saw the Independent way to be a garment full of holes, and
from the factions divisions he saw in that way, and the strange opinions and
errors that the members of his Church run into, he is turned Presbyterian, a
Minister of one of our Congregations in England, and has publicly in his
Parish Church given God glory, recanted, professed his being humbled for being
in the Independent way, and is a great Zealot for Presbytery, and against
Independencie. Another of that way, a good Scholar, Fellow of a College,
member of an Independent Church in London, upon reading some books against
Independencie, and other things he found in that way, left his Church, and is a
professed Presbyterian: I could tell also of a Schoolmaster, member of a Church
in New England, who is of our Churches now since his coming over; but I must
hasten, and unto all these examples for to cause you to return, consider these
following particulars.

1. Stay no longer in the way of Schism and Separation wherein thou art, but
upon all these discoveries of the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, etc. of the
Sectaries leave them left God be provoked to leave thee to go a great way
further, then yet thou art, from Independency and Anabaptisme, to a Seeker, to
Arrianisme, Antiscripturisme, yea, Blasphemy, and Atheism.

2. The Independent Church Way, is a way of error, confusion, division, a way
that God never shined upon nor blessed spiritually with the blessing of
edification, oneness of heart, and peace in their Churches, but has been a
bitter root of division, contentions, errors in all places of the world where
ever such Churches have been set up, as in New England, Holland, Island of
Providence, the Summer Islands, Old England.

3. Come out from these Sectaries, this Babell, lest being partakers of their
sins, you be partakers of their plagues also; for these Sects (as I have showed
you in the second Corallary) must be destroyed and cast out: and not only out
of this Church, but out of all the Christian world, and that either as the
lesser Antichrists, the forerunners of the great Antichrist, or together with
him as a part of Antichrist, the tail of the Beast; and then all the friends
and lovers of Sectaries, the merchants who were made rich, and traded in the
commodities of the Sectaries, shall cast dust upon their heads, and weep and
wail when they see all that is come upon them. And for a conclusion of this
Corallary, I shall wind it up with that sad and patheticall exhortation of M.
Brightman to the Separatists of his time, applying it to our Sectaries now:
There is in the Church of England a twofold great good, the preaching of the
Word, and the administration of the Sacraments, in either of which Christ
imparts himself celebrating a mutual feast with them; he is first received
of us by the hearing of the Word, then he does again receive us in the Supper
of his body. O we most base and unworthy as often as we fly away from hearing
the Word I for we refuse Christ our Ghuest. O we wicked despisers as often as
in the Sacrament with our brethren we with-d^aw our selves I for we despise
Christ calling us to the Supper. But these things are added for the singular
comfort of the godly. For who would not fear, and with all speed think of
flying from this Church, when they should hear the condition of these
Ministers to be so hateful to Christ, as that in a short time, unless they
repent, he would spue them out of his mou^h, unl^sse that in the words of
Christ himself they had been assured of communion and fellowship with Christ
in that Church? Praise therefore to thee, O most meek Lamb, who finding the
doors shut against thee, do not, being stird up with fury, presently
withdraw thy self, and deprive us (according to our deserts) of salvation; but
still leavest a plentiful store of thy self to all them who open to the
knocking by thy word, and do not contemn thy most gracious invitation by the
Sacraments. Therefore it is a wicked and blasphemous error of them who do so
forsake our Church, Igitur scelestus and blasphemus est eorum Error, qui sic ab
hac Ecclesia deficiunt, quasi hinc Christus exularet prorsus nec ulla spes
salutis manentibus esse posset. Cogitent hic Christum convivantem cum suis. An
pudebiteos illic discumbere, ubi vident Christum non pudere? An illo sanctiores
and mundiores erunt? Sed quare se non convincunt suo ipsorum usu? non possunt
inficiari quin prius in Christum crediderint, quam secerunt a nobis divortium;
unde haec fides? Annon ex praedicatione in nostra Ecclesia? Nunquid autem
praedicare quis potest nisi mittatur, Romans 10, 13, etc. Quamobrem redire ad
unitatem Ecclesiae, quae vos genuit and aluit. Si fugiatis hunc Christum, qui
cum electis in nostris cae ibuscaenat, ac eos vicissim excipit, profecto
nulquam invenietis. Sanitatis mentem precor illis ut ad veritatem redeant, quo
fugiant sup, licium quod desertores manet.
as if Christ were wholly gone from hence, neither could there be any hope of
salvation to them who staid in it. Let them think that Christ is here supping
with his. Is it a shame for them to sit down there where they see Christ is
not ashamed? Are they holyer and purer than he? But wherefore do they not
convince themselves by their own experience? They cannot deny but they first
believed in Christ, before they made this separation from us: was not this from
preaching in our Church? But can any man preach unless he be sent Romans 10.13?
Why do they therefore so perversely refuse the Word for some blemish of the
external calling, whose divine virtue they feel in their hearts? Although
that fruit does no more free our depravations from all fault, than a true issue
of ones body does adultery: neither therefore must we rest contended in these
corruptions, or they separate from us for some blemishes. Wherefore return ye
to the unity of the Church, which has begotten and nourished you: If you fly
this Christ, who sups with his Elect in our Assemblies, and likewise entertains
them as they him, truly you shall find him no where else. And then speaking of
those who forsake our Church, he wishes soundness of mind to them that they
may return to the truth, whereby they may avoid that punishment which abides
deserters and revolters. Now if when the lukewarm Angel was in our Church,
and so many corruptions of ceremonies, etc. that attended him, it was so
unlawful and dangerous to forsake this Church, and it was the duty of those
that deserted us, to return, lest the punishment of revolters should abide
them: what then is the sin of those who now forsake our Assemblies, set up
separated Churches, when the lukewarm Angel is cast out, and all his
Attendants, and a godly zealous Ministry is brought in, and the Ordinances
administered free from ceremonies and the inventions of men, and Discipline of
Censures and Excommunication a setting up? O let all such be exhorted to
return to the unity of the Church, that they may escape judgments both
temporal, spiritual and eternal, and not be judged of the Lord as revolters.

CORAL. VI.
HEnce then from all I have laid down in the first and second Part of
Gangraena of the Practices, Proceedings, and ways of the Sectaries, we may see
and observe the great difference between the carriage of the Independents, and
our Brethren of Scotland: our Brethren of Scotland have been constant and true
all along to their first Principles, to the ends they always held out, to the
grounds which they declared they went upon, to the Covenant they have taken,
and that in every branch and part as well as some, in standing for the Kings
honor and just greatness, etc. as well as standing for their own Liberties;
in standing for uniformity in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government in
the three Kingdoms, as for preservation of their own, etc. and neither all
their sufferings, hardships, difficulties on the one hand, nor all the offers,
temptations, flatteries on the other hand, have made them decline from their
way, either in their own Country, or since they have been in Covenant with
us. I challenge any man in all this nine or ten years of their troubles, to
charge them justly with falsnesse or breach of Covenant in pretending one
thing, and intending another, in forsaking former Principles, and falling upon
new, according to any advantages offered them; but now the Independents and
Sectaries have been inconstant, uncertain, and unstable in all their ways,
crying up and extolling our Brethren of Scotland to the heavens, and afterward
as much casting them down, pretending a regard to some branches of the
Covenant, as extirpating Popery and Prelacy, but not minding others, as
maintaining the Kings Honor, his just power and greatness, the extirpating of
heresy, schism, the endeavoring the nearest conjunction and uniformity
between the three Kingdoms in Government, Discipline, etc. not certain to any
principles or ends they have propounded, except those of Anarchie, and
pretended new light; not well knowing what they would have, but changing their
minds, and framing their ways according as they have seen their opportunities
and advantages; And because I observe it has been one great part of the
design of the Sectaries, yea and as the maine medium to effect their ends by,
the aspersing and reproaching of the Scots (the Sectaries looking upon them as
that which lets, and will let until it be taken out of the way) which has
been therefore with all industry, artifice and vigor prosecuted ever since the
battle at Marston Moore, and more especially since the moulding or new model
of the Army: I shall therefore (to undeceive the people) as in the sight of
God, out of pure conscience, speak a few things of our Brethren of Scotland,
and show particularly some differences between them and the Sectaries.

1. The Scots still upon all occasions have improved and made use of all
victories, successes, and advantages put into their hands (as the coming in of
the King now to them) for the good of both Kingdoms, and for effecting the
ends declared in the Covenant, not for any particular ends, as to get
possession of Newarke, or to be revenged for affronts offered them, or injuries
done them by the Independent party, or to increase divisions, jealousies,
discontents between the Nations: But now the Sectaries have made use of all
advantages, and of all successes they have had, and of all events that are
fallen out for the increase of their own party, and effecting their particular
ends divided from the interests of both Kingdoms, and the ends expressed in
the Covenant; yea to increase and further jealousies, discontents, differences
between the two Kingdoms, by blowing up and aggravating upon all occasions all
things against the Scots, by railing against and speaking evil of the Scots in
all companies and places, by aspersing them in many printed books, (carefully
spread and dispersed abroad by the Sectaries) and by many false reports and
other dangerous insinuations against the Scots vented in weekly news books
(the Pensioners of the Independent party) and particularly since the Kings
coming to the Scottish army, many things have been related and spoken of by
the weekly Pamphleters, which reflect upon our Brethren of Scotland, and some
upon the Kings Majesty (which must needs seem strange and be very offensive
to all good and wise men) and so much the more, the King being come in, and in
the Parliaments Quarters. I cannot stand to name the particulars, nor to
animadvert upon them now, but refer the Reader among others, to peruse
Mercurius Britanicus, numb. 130. The Scotch Dove, number. 134. Moderate
Intelligencer, number. 62, 63. neither shall I much need to do it, for I doubt
not but they will recant shortly, and being mercenarie fellows, we shall see
them within a few weeks ring the changes.

2. Our Brethren of Scotland have borne with much patience and long-suffering,
quietness of spirit and humili^ie, infinite reproaches, evil speakings
against in City, Country, by all sorts of Sectaries, passed by also many
affronts, neglects, abuses offered them; and when many things in this Kingdom
have gone cross to their desires, hopes, and the Reformation they expected,
and diverse things have succeeded to the content and desire of the Sectaries, yet
they have put up all, waiting upon God for a change, said little; neither the
Commissioners for Scotland, nor any particular person of their Nation having
put forth intemperate books against those whom they conceived the Authors and
chief Engines in these matters, but have borne to admiration (considering they
left their peace, and incurred the displeasure of their native King to come in
to our help, and lay under such great sufferings in their own Country) all
the evil surmisings, scandalls, reports, jealousies raised of them, disgraces
and scorns, without any breaking forth. But now the Sectaries, upon every
little occasion of being crossed in their way, as by Ordinances coming forth
against any of their principles and practices, (though God knows they have
been little put in execution) by calling in question any of their party,
though most deservedly and justly, by petitions put up against the Sectaries,
how proud, how impatient have they been? what strange words have they given
out? what meetings have they had? and what railing Pamphlets have been written
one upon another, against Parliament, Assembly, City.

3. The Scots upon all occasions and opportunities have been forward for
peace, moving for peace and the settlement of the Church, desirous of
Propositions to be sent to his Majesty: But now many Sectaries could not
endure to hear of peace, not of the Kings coming in, nor of the settlement of
the Church, they have looked so much to their particular ends of profit,
increase of their party while things were unsettled, that they have always
expressed themselves to the contrary, fearing their way could not thrive nor
stand, if once things should come to be settled, and the Government and the
peace concluded of. Many more differences might be shown between them; but I
must draw to an end, and the understanding Reader may by these easily hint at
more, and it concerns the whole Kingdom now at this time wisely to consider
and lay things together concerning the different carriage of our Brethren of
Scotland and the Sectaries, that so a good understanding may be between the two
Nations for the putting a speedy end to our troubles and distractions in Church
and State, and that we may not by misunderstanding of things, nourishing
jealousies, believing false reports, serve the designs of some particular men,
to put us into a new war, and occasion new differences now that (blessed be
God) our work is even done, and the ship richly laden come into the haven. And
to stop the mouths of Sectaries and Malignants forever, and to possess us of
the reality, honesty, faithfulness of our Brethren of Scotland, consider but
what we have found them all along experimentally from first to last, and let
any man instance (if he can) in any one action, from the beginning of our
troubles, wherein the State of Scotland has broken with us, or been
unfaithful: Their going out of this Kingdom to their own Country when they
had been in England about the space of a year with their good carriage in the
Land, and upon going home, is known unto all and confessed; and it was a real
confutation of many evil surmises against them in those times. When they were
desired to come into this Kingdom, then they were a most worthy Nation, a
Nation that God loved and honored, and that in the judgment of Let us now
reach forth our hearts and hands unto our Brethren of Sea land, let us come up
fully unto this our engagement, and rejoice in it, for certainly that Nation is
a Nation that God does love, a Nation that God does honor, and by those many
expressions of his love, shows that he does intend to make them special
instruments of the great things he has to do in this later age of the world.
It is a Nation that is united the most firmly of any people under heaven: we
may truly call it a Philadelphia; And Brightman (that famous light in for^er
times, 30, or 40 years since) did parallel the Church of Philadelphia with the
Church of Scotland Philadelphia signifies br^therly love; When was there ever
a Nation, such a Church that joined together in such firm Covenants as they
have done? had we had that Reunion among us, O how great things had we done
before this time! A Nation it is that has engaged it self to God in a higher
way in a more extraordinary way, then any Nation this day upon the face of the
earth has done; in the most solemn way covenanting with the eternal God,
paw^ing sorth their prayers and their tears for joy together with their
covenanting: A Nation that has reformed their lives for so smalltime, more
then ever any people that we know of in the world have done: And a people that
have risen up against Antichrist more in another way then ever people have
done, and that is the great work of God in these times. And therefore God
certainly has a love into them, because they break the ice, and begin the
work, and arise in such a way as they do, for the pulling down of the man of
sin. Mr. Buroughs Speech delivered at Guild Hall, page 28, 29. Vide plura.
Mr. Burr^ug^^ an Independent, who in a Speech at Guild Hall in the face of the
City and Kingdom, proclaimed them so; and as they showed themselves a
faithful people, in returning back to their Country, and are confessed a
worthy people at the time of their coming in, so in their coming in in the
depth of winter, wading up to the neck in waters, and leaping over the
mountains of ice and snow, and so in all the time they have been in this
Kingdom (having wrastled with many difficulties, a cruel prevailing enemy at
home, and many sad discouragements in this Kingdom) yet they have been
faithful to the Cause of God and both Kingdoms, resolving when they were at
lowest, in all respects, both in regard of the common Enemy and false Brethren,
to stand to the Covenant in all the parts of it, and to see it kept though they
all perished; and now lately, since God so strangely and unexpectedly moved the
heart of the King to cast himself upon them, by their good and faithful
carriages in the bunsiesse, they have confuted and given the lie to all the
evil surmizings, jealousies fomented, reports raised, false suggestions given
out against them, as that they meant to possess themselves of Newark, the
Kings person being as the shadow, and Newark as the substance, as that the
Kings party should repair to him, yea, that the Newark Army was joined to the
Scots, as that they would protect Delinquents and Malignants against the
Parliament, that they would keep the King, and require a ransom for him, and
make use of him for their own designs, and such like; whereas we see they
would not meddle with Newark, but professed, if it were given into their hands
one hour, the next hour they would surrender it to the English for the
Parliament; Vide Scots late Declaration

I saw some Letters written lately from Newcastle by English there, as one Mr.
P. and others, who speak much of the integrity and faithfulness of the Scots,
and that they suffer not a man ill affected to come to Court, no not so much as
into the Town.


they have not suffered any who have been in Arms, or ill affected against the
Parliament, to come to his Majesty, have taken order to discourage all
Malignants, have commanded obedience to all Ordinances of Parliament, even at
Newcastle where the Kings person is, and have made use of the Kings coming to
them, to persuade with him for a speedy settling of Religion and Peace in both
Kingdoms. God in his wonderful providence gave the King to them for this end
among others to shame their adversaries, and to stop the mouths of all
gainsayers, that he might bring forth their righteousness as the light, and
their judgment as the noonday, and might honor them before all the world: So
that I may say of them in the words of Mr. Buroughs, page 29. of his speech at
Guild Hall, upon the coming in of our Brethren of Scotland. A Nation that God
has honored, by giving as glorious success unto, as ever he did unto any;
whose low and mean beginnings he has raised to as great a bright as ever low
beginnings in any Country were. How has God dissipated and blasted the
counsels of their Adversaries? How has he discovered all their treacheries?
although they be in themselves (comparatively at least) a poor people and of
little strength (as the Church of Philadelphia was) yet they have kept the word
of Gods patience, and God has kept them in the hour of temptation; God
therefore is with them. Well, I say it is happy for England, that we are joined
with them in Covenant, for we needed them as much now as ever before, and we
are as much beholding to them in regard of our divisions, many of us not
knowing what we would have; and in regard of the many Sectaries among us, and
the height they have risen unto, as ever we were before, for their help against
the Popish, Prelaticall, and Malignant party; and therefore happy England,
both for the present and for the future, that now we are coming to a Peace, we
are so joined and wrapped up in Covenant with Scotland, that the Peace and
Union is not of England alone, but of both Kingdoms; and that this is our
advantage I shall commend to the Readers consideration some particulars out of
the Speeches of Mr. Solicitor, a prime able Member of the House of Commons, and
Mr. Buroughs a chief man among the dissenting Brethren Mr. Solicitor speaking
of the benefits that will redound to this Kingdom, and the advantage we shall
have by a nearer Association with the Scots, and by their coming in to this
purpose for our assistance, shows that certainly they are many.

The third is this, that whosoever we do come to a Peace, whom Gods time is
come, that we shall have one, yet their coming in, in all probability it will
cause us to have a better, a surer, and a better grounded Peace, then if they
do not come in. And likewise what peace soever we have, that it will be
perpetuated, and be the securer for us and our posterity to reap the benefit of
it. But how is it like to be, when there shall not only be our own Kingdom,
but a Brother Kingdom, an entire Kingdom, one of the same Religion with us,
one that loves their liberties as well as we, when they shall be engaged in
point of interest with us, when the same Law, the same Acts of Parliament that
shall compose the differences, when if it be broken on our parts in any thing
that concerns us, they cannot conceive but that it may be their case the next
day, because it all depends upon one Law, one and the same title, and their
interests is the same; So that if there were nothing else in it, but that we
were like to have the better peace and on better terms, and whatever it be
it is likely to be kept the better to us and our posterity, if nothing else
were in it, that were much to our advantage: surely if by some considerable
sum of money, we might have brought in, and have them at the end of this
Peace, and interested in it as well us our selves. Master Buroughs says, how
happy should we be, if we might have them in a near union with us? And a
people that have carried themselves with as great honor and faithfulness,
with as great wisdom and order in the most difficult work that ever a people
did undertake in those by and intricate paths that were before untrodden.
Certainly, that they undertook at the beginning of their work, but a few
years since, it could not but be looked upon with the eye of reason, as the
most unlikely work ever to have proceeded, a^ any work has ever done, and
yet how has the Lord been with them, and with what wisdom and graciousnesse
have they carried it. So that from the consideration of all I have said in this
Corallary and from these passages in these speeches, it is good by all means to
preserve the union of England and Scotland, and seeing we shall be so happy in
a near union, and God is so much with them, and carries them thorough with so
much wisdom and graciousnesse, and that we shall have the better Peace, and
have it the better kept, by having them at the end of it, and interested in it
as well as our selves; let us hearken to no Sectaries nor Independents false
surmisings, evil reports, and scandalls, cast upon our Brethren of Scotland,
but pray and seek by all means a more near union and communion between that
Kingdom and this, for there is a blessing in them; and for my part I had a
great deal rather fall and perish (if the will of God were so) with the
Kingdom of Scotland, and the Presbyterian party in England, standing for the
Covenant and the truth professed in all the Reformed Churches, then to grow and
flourish for a while with the Sectaries standing for a Toleration of all Sects
and Opinions, yea, then to be a King among them, as John of Leyden was at
Munster.

FINIS.
Errata.
First part Epist Dedicat. page 2. Parenthesis ends after your pleasure. Epist.
Dedic. p. 8. l. 13. r. can you think. Preface p. 6. l. 2. r. eternal. p. 6. l.
16. r. rejected. p. 9. l. 22 dele and p. 11. l. 5. r. eternal. Gangraena
second part in the License r. Dau^us. p. 66. l. 19. r. many. p. 27: l. 26. r.
Cosens. p. 29. l. 4. r. formally. p. 30. l. 37. r. his. p. 34. l. 14. r. by
snatches, p. 36. l. 13. r. show. p. 41. l. 22. after but dele a. p. 45. l.
101 r. aggravating. p. 45. l. 27. for and the proofs, r. and the persons upon
proof. p. 45 l. 28. r. to the nature p. 46. l. 9. after Scotland add France. p.
46. l. 25. r. desired. p. 47. l. 17. after as dele yet. p. 47. l. 20. r.
months. p. 48. l. 7. r. Sun. p. 51. l. 34. r. not. p. 54. r. Presbyterians. p.
55. l. 13. dele that, p. 56. l. 23. r. how. p. 57. l. 18. r. quum. p. 58. l.
22. r. undeniably, p. 58. l. 24. r. words. p. 58. l. 37. r. imputation p. 100.
l. 14. r. of. p. 123. r. VVrighter. p. 127. l. 31. r. books. p. 114. l. 27. so
to that purpose. p. 128. l. 12. r. are men. p. 132. l. 13. r. Sprat. p. 146. l.
2. r. propagating. p. 66. marg. note, r. sanctitate. p. 72, 73, etc. for M.
Allen, r. M. Alley. p. 89. r. proved. p. 97. r. mendacia.

THE TABLE.
THe first part of Gangraena is by the Printer cast into two several numbers
of pages, which divides the whole into two, the first consisting of 66. Pages,
the other of 116. Pages, according unto which division the Reader must go in
finding out the Contents specified in these following Tables.

The first Table, showing the Contents of the first Division, consisting of 66.
pages, besides the Preface, is as follows:
THe Authors Preface, wherein are laid down these Particulars. 1. The Authors
long expectation of a Reply to his Antapologia, according to the great words
given out, of a Reply by the Independent Party. 2 The reason of his so long
silence, and discontinuance from the Press. 3 His purpose and resolution of
often coming into the Press for the time to come. 4 The Authors account to
the Reader of the nature of the present Book, and his scope therein. 5 The
hatred, malignity, reproaches from the world, yea misconstructions from
friends, which Ministers who appeared against the errors of the times have met
with, as Christ, the Apostles, Fathers, Athanasius, Augustine, Hierom; modern
Writers, as Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin. 6. Their undaunted courage, constancy,
in going on against errors, notwithstanding all their sufferings. 7 The
Authors preparation, and expectation of all kind of reproaches and oppositions
from the Sectaries in this work. 8 His firm resolution (by the grace of God)
not to fear nor be discouraged in this work, but having such a cloud of
witnesses, to follow their example, and to go on with the more earnestness,
activity and courage, the more he is opposed. In the Book itself in the first
Division, page 1. are premised some particulars from the better understanding
of this Book. The Catalogue of Errors, etc. is not of old Errors, opinions of
a former age, but of Errors now in being in these present times, page 1, 2.
Though it is not a full catalogue, and perfect enumeration of all erroneous
opinions etc. of these times, yet it is the fullest that has yet been made, p.
2. The intent of this work, not a formal confutation of errors, and opinions,
but a discovery of them, p. 3. Errors and strange opinions scattered up and
down, and vented in many Books, Manuscripts, Sermons, Conferences, drawn into
one Table, and disposed under certain heads, p. 3.4. The errors and opinions
contained in this book are laid down in terminis, in their own words and
phrases, as near as possible can be, page 4. The way laid down of the proof
of the truth and reality of the errors blasphemies, etc. contained in this
Tractate, and that by a sevenfold way, p. 4, 5, ^. All the errors and opinions
mentioned in one, and the same Catalogue not all alike, p. 7. The Reader is
forewarned not to be hindered from believing the truth of things contained in
this Book, by all the clamours and reproaches cast upon it, p. 8. Three Answers
given to the first objection that may be against this Book, as that it is not
seasonable, nor convenient, to discover our nakedness, and weakness, so far
to the common enemy, page 8.9, 10. Four Answrs to a second objection, made
against this book, that it may cause distractions and divisions among our
selves, and may offend many good persons that are not Sectaries; p. 1^.12. The
errors, heresies, etc. of the times refered to sixteen heads, or sorts of
Sectaries, p. 13. Among all these sorts of Sects, there is hardly to be found
any Sect that is simple and without mixture, but all the Sects are compounded,
p. 13. All these sorts of sects, how different soever, yet all agree in
separating from our Church, and in Indepency, being all Independents and
Separatists, p. 14. The first Independent Ministers that we read of in
Antiquity, and how they were proceeded against in a Council held at Carthage,
p. 14, 15. Some of the errors and opi^ions laid down in this Catalogue are
contrary and contradictorie to others of them, p. 15. The Catalogue of the
Errors Heresies contained in p. 15, 16, 17, 18, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. The blasphemies of the Sectaries, p. 32, 33, 34.
Some passages in the Prayers of the Sectaries, p. 34, 35, A Parallel between
our Sectaries and the Donatists, agreeing in the particulars, p. 37, 38, 39.
The Sectaries and Jesuits agree in 7. things, p. 4^, 41. The Sectaries and the
Netherland Arminians agree in these eight particulars, p. 41, 42, 43. A
parallel between the Bishops, and that Court-party heretofore, and the present
Sectaries, in six things, p. 43, 44, 45. The Sectaries and Malignants agree
both in the general, and in three particulars, p. 45, 46, 47, 48. The
Sectaries like Julian the Apostata, and some other enemies of Christians, in
four things, p. 48. 49. The difference in the carriage and behavior these
four years last past, all along, of the Presbyterians both to the honorable
Houses, and to the Sectaries; and of the Sectaries to the Parliament, and to
the Presbyterians, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53. The Sectaries practices and ways
referred to ten heads, p. 54. Some of their particular practices named, to the
number of 28. and laid down in page 54, 55, 56. etc. unto 66. An Answer to an
Objection, what are practices of some men, and matters of fact to a way, it is
arguments must convince men, and not practices, p. 66.
A second Table, showing the Contents of the second division of the first part
of Gangraena.
Four Letters written concerning the Sectaries, from p. 1. to p. 9.
Animadversions on the last Letter, p. 9.10.11. An Extract of certain Letters
written by some Ministers concerning Sectaries, from p. 12, to p. 18. A
relation of some women preachers and of their doctrine, 29, 30, 31, 32. A
relation of some stories and remarkable passages concerning the Sects, from p.
17, to p. 42. An Extract of 2. Letters more, 42, 43. Some more remarkable
passages concerning the Sectaries, from p. 44, to p. 52. Sectaries anointing
of the sick with oil, p. 6, 44. A Love-Feast kept by some Sectaries, with the
laying on of hands upon their Members, for receiving of the Holy Ghost, p. 45.
A petition drawn up by some Citizens, preached against by Master Greenhill and
M. Buroughs, page 48, 49* A discourse between Mr. Greenhill and M. Buroughs
upon occasion of some wicked opinions maintained in the hearing of M.
Greenhill, p. 25. The great evil and mischief of a Church being long without a
Government, p, 52, 53. It Is more then time to settle the Government and
Discipline of the Church, the many Errors, Blasphemies cry aloud for a speedy
settling of Church Government, 53, 54, 55. The mischief, evil and danger of a
Toleration and pretended liberty of Conscience to this Kingdom and how a
Toleration is the grand design of the Devil, his masterpeece and chief engine,
57, 58, 59, 60. Independencie in England has brought forth in a few years
monsters of errors. As Independency is the Mother and Original of other
Sects, so it is the Nurse and Patroness that nurses and safeguards them, p.
61, 62. M. Burton who was so zealous against Errors, Arminianisme,
Innovations, in the Bishops days, can now let false Doctrines go unquestioned,
not writing against, nor complaining to the Parliament of Sermons, Books,
wherein all kind of false Doctrine is vented, 62, 63, 64. The confusions and
mischiefs we lie under, charged upon the consciences of the Independenns, as
having been the great means of hindering and delaying the settling of
Church Government, page 64.65. The Devil an active restless subtle Spirit,
when he can no longer do things one way, then he will try another, page 65,
66, 67, 68. New light and new truths a weak and deceitful Argument to commend
any way or opinion, by all errors vented under this of new light, p. 68. The
true reason and cause of that great growth and increase of the Sectaries among
us, and so few falling to the Presbyterians, is because the Sectaries* opinions
and practices*, are so pleasing to flesh, and blood, and sundry particulars are
instanced in, that feed the carnal hearts of men, p. 69, 70. An Apology and
Justification sufficient for those Ministers and people who are zealous for
settling Religion, and cry out for Government, p. 70, 71, 72. The Sectaries are
a subtle, cunning, active, nimble, deceitful, self*seeking, plotting,
undermining generation, and we have cause to suspect them in every thing, to
fear them yielding, and to fear them flying, and to look about us in all
kind of transactions with them, p. 73. Many moderate men both Ministers and
others, by their indifferency compliance, and favoring the Sectaries, have
done much hurt, and been a great cause of the evils and mischiefs that lie
upon us, p. 74. The sad and dangerous condition England is in at present, in
regard of the Heresies, Errors, Blasphemies, and Disoders, p. 75. England is
in a far worse condition then in the late time of the Prelates, and that both in
regard of the corruption of the Doctrine of Religion, and in regard of
Toleration of all Religions. p. 76, 77. Englands condition so sad in regard of
the errors heresies from twelve circumstances that accompany them, p 77, 78,
79, 80. Errors and wicked opinions are worse then the sword, p. 82. Eerrours
Heresies, are a greater evil then bad life and wicked manners, p. 82. Remedies
and directions given both to Ministers, Magistrates and People, suitable to the
condition of this Kingdom, in reference to the Errors and Heresies among us,
p. 83. Ministers must set themselves as to witness for truth against Errors,
so in a special manner against a Toleration, and many instances are given both
of the Fathers, modern Divines, and of Bishops, and Ministers among our selves
opposing Toleration, p. 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91. Ministers should agree
together, to make a Remonstrance of all the errors, heresies, blasphemies,
schisms, insolences, tumults of the Sectaries that have been in England these
five last years, p 93. The Magistrates from the consideration of all the
errors, heresies, blasphemies, etc. should appoint and command a solemn
general Fast to be kept throughout the Kingdom for this very end, that the
Land might be humbled, and mourn for these heresies, blasphemies, and for the
great growth, and too much suffering of them, and for the fearful breach of
our solemn Covenant with God, p. 95, 96, 97. The Magistrates should command
the solemn renewing of the National Covenant upon such a Fasting-day, and
command in the close of such Fasting days the wicked books printed of late
years (some whereof have been licensed) to be openly burnt, p. 97. The
Magistrates should put out some Declaration against the errors and ways of the
Sectaries, as their sending E^issaries into all parts of the Kingdom, to
poison the Countries, and should execute exemplary punishment, upon some of the
most notorious Sectaries and seducers, p. 98. Private Christians must take heed
of going to the Sectaries Conventicles to hear them preach and exercise, their
private meetings are the nurseries of all errors and heresies, very Pest
Houses, p. 99. Error is a vast thing without all bank, or bottom, Error knows
no end, nor where to stay, p. 100, 101. The benefit and excellencies of the
Presbyteriall Government, viz. preventing and keeping out errors, and as soon
as errors do but peep out, plucking them up, p. 102. Some of the Sectaries of
our times are worse enemies to the truth, then the Papists, p. 103, 104. Some
additionall errors laid down, p. 104, and in p. 110, 111, 112. An Extract of
another Letter, concerning the Sects, p. 113. Two Letters, one of the preaching
woman, Mrs. Attaway to William Ienney, and another of William Ienney to his
wife, presently upon his going away from his wife with Mrs. Attaway, p. 115.
A third Table, containing the names and relations of the principal
Ringleaders of corrupt opinions and Errors in the first Part of Gangraena.
Paul Bests horrid blasphemies, p. 33. of the first Division of the first Part.
M. Henry Den p. 2. of the second Division, p. 22, 23.105, 106. of the same
Division. John Hi^h, p. 18, 19. of the second Division. Laurence Clarkson his
Petition, Recantation, p. 19.20. of the second Division of the first part of
Gangraena. Thomas Web, p. 21, 22. of the second Division of the first part. M.
Erbury that lived in Wales, p. 24. One Nicholls, p. 24, 25. One Marshall a
Bricklayer, p. 26. Clement Wrighter, p. 27, 28. Captain Paul Hobson, p. 33.34.
One Lam an Anabaptist, p. 35. Oats a great Dipper, 35, 36.106, 113. One Mills,
p. 36. Kiffi^ an active Anabaptist, p. 36, 37, 44. One Patience, p* 37. One M.
C^x, p. 38. Thomas Moore, p. 38. One Walwin, p. 38. Lieutenant. Colonel
Lilburne, p. 46, 47. of the first Division, and p. 38. of the second Division.
M. Bacon sometimes of Gloucester, p. 38. M. Bachiler, the Licenser-Generall of
the Books of the Sectaries, p. 38.39. One Randall a great Antinomian, p. 39.
M. Knollys, p. 39, 40. M. Peter's, p. 40, 41, 42, 106, 107. One Barber, p. 45.
M. John Good ^ine, alias Cretensis, p. 39, 47, 63. of the first Division. One
Cosens, p. 105. Mrs. Attaway, p. 31, 32, 113, 114, 115. One William Ienney, p.
113, 115.
A TABLE of the main matters contained in the Second Part of GANGRAENA.
THe Preface.
Additionall Errors to the former Catalogue of Errors, Heresies, page 1, 2,
3* 116, 117 A relation of a Monster born of Parents that are Sectaries. p. 4 An
extract of three Letters. p. 3, 4, 5 A relation of some passages of a
Lieutenant a great Sectary. p. 5 A relation of some stories and remarkable
passages concerning the Sectaries from p. 6. to p. 11 A Hymn of some of the
Sectaries. p. 11.12 A Disputation held at the Spitle, about the Immortality of
the soul by some Anabaptists. p. 14, 15 A Copy of a Letter sent out of
Suffolk. p. 16, 17 An extract of a Letter. p. 18, 19. The proof of a Woman
Preacher at Brasteed, and the confutation of Mr. Saltmarshes boldness in
denying it. p. 20.87 A discovery of Walwyn to be a dangerous and desperate man,
a pleader for all Religions, etc. p. 21, 22, 23 A proof of Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburns playing at Cards p. 24 A discovery of the spirit of Mr. John Goodwin,
alias, Cretensis. p. 25 The reason of Cretensis falling to Independency p. 26
Sixteen observations upon Cretensis, or a brief Answer from p. 27 to p. 36 The
true Reasons why the Sectaries called Mr. Edwards First Part of Gangraena a
Book of lies, whereas it is proved to be a Book full of truth. p. 36, 37 A
Letter sent Mr. Edwards subscribed by the hands of 28 Ministers, giving him
thanks, and witnessing to the First Part of Gangraena. p. 39 Cretensis his two
challenges accepted, and his glove taken up both the first and second time p.
41.^2 Reasons given why the names of the men who writ Letters were concealed,
with a discovery now of the names of those who writ Letters. p. 26, 27.43, 44,
45 Two other challenges of Cretensis taken, and he challenged to make good his
challenges. p. 46, 47 Independents preaching to bare walls and pewes as much as
Presbyterians. p. 51. The bitterness, bloudinesse which Cretensis charges upon
Mr. Edwards, will be found in Cretensis and the Sectaries. p. 54, 55 Cretensis
Error about Imputation of Faith, and not Imputation of Christ's righteousness,
with his quoting of Calvin, Bucer, and others for him who are known ex professo
to be against him, made good against him. p. 56, 57, 58 Cretensis desperate
passage in a Sermon against the Parliament, which he labors to clear himself
from, made good against him, with his and other Sectaries speaking slightly and
scornfully of the Parliament. p. 59, 60, 61, 62 Cretensis bowling on a day of
public Thanksgiving made good. p. 63, 64 The Errors and Practices of the
Independents and Sectaries justly brought against them to prove their way to be
naught. p. 65, 66 and in Epist. to the Reader. p. 2, 3 A clear confutation of
that accusation cast upon the Author of the Book entitled Gangraena,
concerning his indirect walking between Dunmowe and Godalming. p. 67, 68, 69 70
A clear vindication of the truth of that story of Nichols, Master Greenhill,
and Master Buroughs related in the first part of Gangraena, with a discovery
of the juggling and equivocations of Master Buroughs writing given under his
hand to Cretensis. p. 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79 Master Buroughs
resembled by Cretensis to Achilles, and Master Edwards to Troilus, where see
Master Edwards answer to that comparison. p. 80, 81 A Reply to that passage of
Master Edwards being charged to abuse Mr. Ellis of Colchester, and the servants
of God in those parts. p. 81, 82 A full proof of such a Sectary as Thomas
Moore, though denied by Cretensis. p. 86 The strength of malice, and weakness
of judgment which Cretensis has manifested against the Saints. p. 87, 88
Cretensis his fearful abusing of the Honorable Court of Common Council. p.
89.90. The clearing of that relation of one Cosens of Rochester, and the
confutation of Cretensis Answer in that business. p. 92. to p. 105 Cretensis
his folly and horrible pride discovered in professing he had not read one
quarter of the Book as yet; nor knows whether he shall ever care to read it
through or no. p. 108 Some brief Animad versions on Master Bacons Book and one
Webb. p. 109.113, 114, 115 Some Practices of the Sectaries. p. 117 118, 119 A
relation of some more stories and remarkable passages concerning the Sectaries.
p. 119 to p. 125 The sum of a Sermon preached by a Sectary a Surgeon
belonging to the Army. p. 125, 126 A Ballad made by the Sectaries of the
Assembly of Divines. p. 128 The Assemblies last Petition answered by Saltmarsh,
with the Anagram upon his name M. all is trash. p. 129 A Letter of advice to the
Ministers Assembled at Westminster, with the Sectaries threatening of them. p.
129 A confutation of the Picture made of the Presbyterians by the Sectaries. p.
130, 131, 132 Copies of Letters and some Extracts of Letters concerning the
Sects, from p. 133 to p. 142. more particularly a Letter from a learned Divine
beyond the Seas, showing how London goes beyond Amsterdam in Errors and
Heresies p. 138 A horrid and unheard of Blasphemy of one Io. Boggis a great
Sectary. p. 134 A story of a Sectary maintaining that he was Jesus Christ. p.
142 A clear discovery how far the Sectaries of this time have proceeded and
how high they have risen. p. 145 146, 147 A clear discovery of what is like to
become of the Sectaries, and of their way. p. 148 Eight symptoms of the certain
ruin and downfall of the Sectaries, from p 148 to p. 159 God will honor our
Brethren of Scotland to make them a great means of the falling of the
Sectaries, with the proof of that. p. 159, 160, 161 A discovery of the great
evil and sin of separation from the communion of the reformed Churches. p.
161, 162, 163, 164 Magistrates, Ministers, and all sorts of Christians have
been asleep, and too careless, that so many Tares have been sown, and are
grown to such an head. p. 164 An exhortation to all those in Authori^ty, Kings,
Parliaments, and all so^^ of Governors in high places to serve the Lord with
fear, to kiss the Son. p. 165, 166 An exhortation to some particular members
of Parliament who are for pretended liberty of conscience, and ^avourers of
Sectaries. p. 167 An exhortation to all those who have forsaken the public
Assemblies to return. p. 168 Some examples of Anabaptists and Independents who
had forsaken the communion of this and other Reformed Churches repenting and
returning. p 1^^ The great difference between the carriage of the Independents,
and our Brethren of Scotland. p. 172 and the particulars instanced in p. 173,
174 The faithfulness and reality of our Brethren of Scotland toward us all
along from first to last. p. 174, 175.176 The happiness of England in being
joined with them in Covenant, as in other respects, so that whenever we shall
come to have a Peace, in all probability it will cause us to have a better, a
surer and a better grounded Peace. p. 176, 177 The names of some Ringleaders of
Faction and of Errors not named in the Table of the first part of Gangraena.
Mr. Saltmarsh. p. 20.87, 124 Mr. Durance p. 124.131.144. One Tho. Colyer. p.
122. One Gorton who came from New England. p. 144
FINIS.

