AN ACT For the promoting and propagating the GOSPEL OF Jesus Christ IN NEW
ENGLAND.
WHereas the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, have received certain
intelligence, by the testimonial of diverse faithful and godly Ministers, and
others in New England, That diverse the Heathen Natives of that Country, through
the blessing of God upon the pious care and pains of some godly English of this
Nation, who preach the Gospel to them in their own Indian Language, who not
only of Barbarous are become Civil, but many of them forsaking their
accustomed Charms and Sorceries, and other Satanical Delusions, do now call
upon the Name of the Lord, and give great testimony of the power of God drawing
them from death and darkness, into the life and light of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which appears by their diligent attending on the Word so
preached unto them, with tears lamenting their misspent lives, teaching their
Children what they are instructed in themselves, being careful to place their
said Children in godly English Families, and to put them to English Schools,
betaking themselves to one wife, putting away the rest, and by their constant
prayers to Almighty God morning and evening it their families, expressed (in
all appearance) with much Devotion and Zeal of heart: All which considered, we
cannot but in behalf of the Nation, represent, rejoice and give glory to God,
for the beginning of so glorious a propagation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ
amongst those poor heathen, which cannot be prosecuted with that expedition and
further success as is desired, unless fit instruments be encouraged and
maintained to pursue it, Universities, Schools, and Nurseries of literature
settled for further instructing and civilizing them, Instruments and Materials
fit for labor, and clothing, with other necessaries, as encouragements for the
best deserving among them, be provided, and many other things necessary for so
great a work; the furnishing of all which will be a burden too heavy for the
English there (who although willing, yet unable) having in a great measure
exhausted their Estates in laying the Foundations of many hopeful Towns and
Colonies in a desolate Wilderness; and therefore conceive our selves of this
Nation bound to be helpful in the promoting and advancing of a work so much
tending to the honor of Almighty God. Be it therefore Enacted, and it is hereby
Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the authority thereof, That for the
furthering so good a work, and for the purposes aforesaid, from henceforth
there shall be a Corporation in England consisting of sixteen persons (viz.) a
President, Treasurer, and fourteen Assistants; And that William Steel Esquire
Harbert Pelham Esquire James Sherley, Abraham Babington, Robert Houghton, Richard
Hutchinson, George Dun, Robert Tomson, William Mullins, John Hodgson, Edward
Parks, Edward Clud, and Richard Lloyd, Thomas Ares, John Stone, and Edward
Winslow, Citizens of London, be the first sixteen persons whereof the said
Corporation shall consist; out of whom the said sixteen persons, at such time
and place as they shall think fit, by themselves or the greater number of them,
shall elect and choose one of the said sixteen persons to be President, and
another of them to be the present Treasurer; and ^^at the said sixteen persons,
or the greater number of them, shall have power, and are hereby authorized at
any time or times, to Elect a new President, Treasurer, or Assistants, so
often, and from time to time as any the said President, Treasurer and
assistants shall dye or be amoved; which said President, Treasurer and
Assistants for the time being, shall for ever hereafter in name and fact be one
Body Politic and Corporate in Law, to all intents and purposes; and shall
have perpetual Succession, and shall be called by the name of the President and
Society for propagation of the Gospel in New England; and shall be from time to
time Eligible as aforesaid; and by that name they and their Successors shall
and may, without License in Mortmain, Purchase or Acquire to themselves, any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments in England or Wales, not exceeding the
yearly value of Two thousand pounds; and any goods and sums of money
whatsoever, to the uses and purposes herein limited and expressed, and sue or
plead, and be sued or impleaded by the name aforesaid, in all Courts and places
of Judicature in England or Wales: And that the persons of the said
Corporation, or any nine of them, shall have power, and are hereby authorized
when they shall think fit, to make and appoint a common Seal for the use of the
said Corporation; and from time to time to meet and choose such Officers, and
make such allowance to them, and them also to remove, and after death or
removal, to choose such others; and to make from time to time such Orders and
Bylaws, for the better ordering and carrying on of this work, as they shall
think fir; and also to make conclusive bargains for Lands and Tenements, to be
purchased by the said Corporation for valuable consideration. And for the
better ordering of the Government of the said Corporation, Be it enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That the President or Treasurer, and four or more
Assistants, shall and may from time to time, upon summons from the President or
Treasurer, hold a meeting for the debating and concluding of affairs
concerning the Collecting and bringing in the profits and revenues (to the said
Corporation accrewing) into their Treasury; and for direction in all emergent
occasions, execution of all Orders and Bylaws, and for Summons of a general
meeting of all the Society, as the cause shall require: In all which the
conclusion shall be made by the said President or Treasurer, and the said
Assistants, or the major part of them, the said President or Treasurer, and
Assistants so meeting, and that they shall and may adjourn their meeting from
time to time, as shall be by them deemed most expedient.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners of the
United Colonies of New-Engl. in New England for the time being, by themselves
or such as they shall appoint, shall have hereby Power and authority to receive
and dispose of the moneys brought in and paid to the said Treasurer for the
time being, or any other moneys, goods and commodities, acquired and delivered
by the care of the said Corporation at any time; Whose Receipt, or the Reccipts
of such person and Persons so authorized by them, shall be a sufficient
discharge to the said Corporation and Treasurer; Which said Commissioners are
hereby Ordered and appointed, to dispose of the said moneys in such manner as
shall best and Principally conduce to the Preaching and propagating the Gospel
of Jesus Christ amongst the Natives; And also for maintaining of Schools and
Nurseries of Learning, for the better Education of the children of the Natives:
And forasmuch as we cannot but be induced from the consideration of the
Premises, to recommend the furthering thereof to the charity of all such whose
hearts God shall incline thereunto, by their Christian and charitable
contributions, to be as the Foundation of so Pious and great an undertaking; Be
it therefore, and it is hereby Enacted by the Parliament assembled, and by the
authority thereof, That a general Co^ection (...) all the counties, cities,
Towns and Parishes of England and Wales: And for the more speedy and better
effecting thereof, Be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the several
Ministers within the said several places, are hereby required to read this Act
or a copy thereof, in the presence of their several congregations, upon the
next Lords Day after the same shall be delivered unto them, and to exhort the
People to a cheerful and lyberall contribution, and are to give their best
asistance to so pious a work; and the Ministers and churchwardens, or
Overseers of the Poor of every such Parish and place, together with such other
well-affected Persons as God shall stir up to be active in such an undertaking,
and as shall be nominated and aproved by the Minister for that purpose, are
hereby authorized after the reading hereof, to go with all convenient speed
from house to house, to every of the Inhabitants of the said Parishes and
Places respectively, and to take the Subscription of every such person in a
Schedule to be presented by them for that purpose, and accordingly at the same
time to collect and gather the same; A Duplicate whereof, as also the money so
to be collected, shall be paid within ten days after the collection so made
into the hands of Persons of quallity resident in each County, specially
deputed by the said Corporation under their common Seal; to be Treasurers for
the receiving of the sane; and the names of such respective Treasurers shall be
notified in writing to every place wheresoever such collection is to be made;
and the receipt under the land of such respective Treasurer so appointed and
authorized, shall be a sufficient discharge for the said several Ministers,
churchwardens, and Overseers, for the collection by them paid. Provided
all-waies That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not be construed
to extend to the enabling or allowing of transportation of any Gold, Silver,
Plate, Bullion, Money, or other commodities inhibited by the Laws and Statutes
of this Nation, other or otherwise then according to the said Laws and
Statutes, and the true sense and meaning of them.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

Die Veneris, 27 July, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

THe Corporation within mentioned, desire all men to take notice, That all such
whom God shall stir up to contribute to help forward this great work, may
repair to Coopers Hall in London, where the said Corporation (...) have the
sight of their books, how the Moneys collected and received for the use
abovesaid, are from time to time disposed and improved, according to the true
intent and meaning of the said Act.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Golden-Dragon,
nere the Inner Temple, 1649.


