Christian Reader,
I Have lived an unworthy Minister in the same town with the Author of this
Treatise these six and twenty years, and have been a constant observer and
admirer, as of her other eminent gifts, so especially of (those which give the
highest luster to them all) her humble piety and charity. And (if I mistake
not) this Deborah does here present unto thee in these her labors Bee-like a
sting and honey conjoined. Hony-sweet instructions, counsels and exhortations
gathered out of several flowers growing in Gods Paradise, tending to all sorts
of good husbandry, and also sharp stings of reproof against all kinds of
unthriftiness, not sparing the worst of them, our Church* dividing Errors in
these times. Who knows, but that, after the lightnings of so many worthy
Barak's, and thundrings of ^om^ powerful Boanergesses both from the Pulpit and
Press, against th^^^ Troublers of our Israel, the Lord may be pleased to make
so man^ (...) these Sisera's fall by the hand and pen of a woman? First read,
(...) judge: a(...) (as Barnabas did at Antioch, Acts 11. 23.) when (...) have
seen the grace of God, be glad and say, The Lord be magn(...) who (as he may do
what he will with his own, so) has given (...) gifts to a woman, the fruits
whereof she here by her private (...) sends forth with her earnest desire for
the glory of God, and (...) public good. Which is also the hearty prayer of

Thy Christian friend and well-wisher in the(...) Robert Cade.

REader, in this Tract as in a former by her written, thou m(...) find
verified, eminency of gifts, humility of spirit, elegan^^ (...) style, soldity
of matter, height of fancy, depth of judgment (...)nesse of apprehension,
strength of reason, all sweetly met (...) and truly (as well as piously)
improved for the mayntenance (...) old ^^uths of Jesus Christ, against the new
errors of these i(...) the Phoenix of this age, this rare and precious
Gentlewoma^ (...) envy and glory of her sex.

A Warning to all the Inhabitants of the Earth where this shall come; but
especially to those that are called Magistrates, or Rulers, and so pretend to
bear a Sword of Justice, for the punishment of Evildoers. These are those
things which has been laid upon me from the Great Jehovah, as His Commands to
you; and they are as follows.
First, I warn you, that you under the pretense of bearing a Law to execute
punishment on all those that offend, as you call it, that you do not form your
Weapons against the Work of this the day of my God, in which he is over-turning
Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, even the Mystery of Iniquity, under
which you have committed all your Spiritual Whoredoms, under the Name of
Christians; and so Lucifer which was a Morning Star, but was cast off, and
droven into Darkness, is become your Head and Lawgiver; from whence did come
all your Church-Forms and Powers, seeking to make all the Earth to worship the
Beast and the Dragon, and they have had power to slay the two Witnesses and
have caused their dead bodies to lie in the streets, not being buried, because
they were not to rot, but to be dried up by the heat of their Persecution; for
Darkness has been spread over all Nations, by reason of the abominations which
they have been made fat withal, having drunk the blood of the Innocent, as an
Ox drinks the water, and yet have they not enough; therefore Cain's Spirit is
not satisfied with blood, till he has blood to drink; and then will he cry out
enough, which the Lord will assuredly do* if he cease not to shed blood:
Therefore, before the day of Reward come upon you, cease, cease persecuting any
for matter of Conscience, for the Lord is breaking the Clouds, and the Vail is
a rending, and the Sons and Daughters of Adam shall be redeemed from the Earth,
in which they have been in bondage. Therefore I warn you all, that you abound
no longer in making use of those old cursed laws, which Bloud-suckers did
create and form, in the time that Darkness had wholly clouded the mind of man
from knowing any God in being, and so made Gods unto themselves, and worshipped
the works of their own hands, and leaving a Law that after Generations should
bow to their Idols; but the Spirit of Jah has blown the breath of Li^e into
the dead bones, and ^^esh, and Sinews, are they covered now with all, which
feels and knows the living God from a dum Idol; and the Invisible Life of Power
has raised up a quick living Witness, whose Mouth shall declare his Work in
this day, which is to bring to an end all Types and Figures which are all to
end in the body for Sacrifices, offering burntoffering, and the blood of Bulls,
and the fat of Rams, could not perfect the Comer then unto.

Therefore a Body did he prepare to do the W^ll; which Body put an end to all
Types and Figures, Days, New Moons, and Sabbath Days, as you call them; for who
have you consecrated them to, to your Selves, or to the Lord: if to your
Selves, then are they abomination unto the Lord; for he that keeps a day, let
him keep it to the Lord, and not unto his own Lusts, for that is not pleasing
in his sight; and if it had been kept unto the Lord, why are you w^ath when he
has brought an end to it? But you will say, What will He put an end to our
Sabbathday? Did he not make Heaven and Earth on six days; and did he not rest
the Seventh Day? And did He not g^ve a C^mmand that on the Seventh Day, Man
should do no manner of work, he, nor his Ox, nor his Ass; and there was no
Burden to be born within the Gates, nor no fire to be kindled on that day: And
what will you not keep it now? O foolish people! void of Understanding! where
are you? what is become of your Jesus, as you call him, that you stand in the
Observations of Days and Times? For when God made all things, was it not by
Him? For without Him, was not any thing made that was made; for He was the
Word, which Wotd was his Power; by which power he formed all things; and his
Power was the Light or Life of Man; and in it was Man in perfect Rest or Union
with his Maker.

And what need had man of one day of Rest, when as he rested in God; and a
thousand years was but as one day in his sight. Nay, man had no need of one day
in seven, if man had no need: of necessity it will follow, God had no need.

Why what was the Seventh Day for, seeing that in six days he sp^ke, and did
not rest; what of his Works did he rest in? Was it not in man, that the Godhead
did rest in first? Yea, for man was the express Image of the Father, which he
could not have been, had not the Seed rested in him.

But if God did make man his Rest, and man did rest in God, what need had men
of a Seventh Day? which is a day of rest.

Yea, God's Wisdom was seen in providing a Day of Rest for Fallen-Man* that so
man might not altogether faint; but having one Day of Rest, it might figure
forth* that there was a Restoration for Man, to rest in God, or God to rest in
man; and for that purpose, was there one day left to be kept, till the time
that the Godhead should in body it self in the Humane Nature, which was
acc^mp^ished when the Eternal Light of Life did over pour or operate with the
Nature of the Virgin; and then did God rest again in man, and man in God; and
put an end to the Seventh Day, having abol shed all the enmity which was
between the God head and the Man-head. And so is he the Day of Rest to all that
come to live in him; for he is Light* (...) staid in Him, they have no Lack;
but He is their Life, in which they rest out of all observations; and they dare
not stand in the observing of your Holy days, nor of your Sabbath Days for if
they should, they must deny Christ come in the flesh, and if Christ the Light
be not in them, then are they Reprobates. But you may s^y, We do not keep our
Sunday as the Jews Sabbath, but as the first day of the Week, on which Christ
rose from the Dead and met with his Disciples, for breaking of Bread and
Prayer. Oh fools! When will you be wise? Was there ever any Command given by
Christ, or any of his Apostles* that the Generations to come should cease from
public labor, and in private should serve their Lu^^s, in providing dainty
Food, and brave Cloths; and so your backs and your bellies are your ^ods. O
abomination! must we suffer in imprsonments, if we will not mock God with you
in owning such a day, and call it a Sunday or a Sabbath, or a day holier then
another days, when you have consecrated it more to the Devilish Lusts, then
all the other days: For is it not the Market Day wherein all your false
Tea^hers, be they never such Drunken Beasts, if they can but get the Bible in
their hands, and words in their mouths, will prate an hour for ten or twenty
shillings; and ^f any of the People of the Lord be moved to go into their
Idol-Temples to declare against their wickedness, presently hall them to the
Magistrate, and then the Whip, or Stocks, or Prisons, or any cruel usage you
can afflict on them, is too go^d in your sights: O abominable stink are you in
the Nostrils of my God, made up in Iniquity, fit for destruction, if you repent
not quickly.

Therefore, all you Children of Light, bring forth your Testimony against their
Idol-day break it down to the ground, and the living presence of Him that is a
cons^mi^g fire shall be with you, and one shall put a thousand to flight, and
the Wicked shall be as stubble before you, when as one man, you shall in the
strength of JAH every one appear in your outward labor on their Sunday, as
they call it. Take no thought what to say, I the Lord will be words in your
mouth, and a Sword in your hands, and it shall pierce their bowels; for when
they think to execute their law on your bodies, I Will raise up my Light in them
sharp and powerful, and it shall kindle as a fire in their Breasts to devour.
Therefore in tender bowels of love, am I made to warn all, professors and
profain, that you take heed how you reject the light that is in you* which
reproves for sin; and if you would believe it to be the Spirit of God made
manifest in you, to destroy the lusts of the flesh, the power of Death, Hell
and Grave; for whosoever ver comes to believe in him that is l ght, shall not abide
in darkness; but Christ, in them, the first fruits unto the Father; and then in
order the members of your mortal bodies, which shall be made his; when by
Judgment they are redeemed from the Earth, up into the invisible love or life
of God; For man's love or life has been wholly drawn or droven into the Earth,
and has united it self unto the visible things; And so the visible have been a
vail or separation between God and men.

B^t as man comes to feel something to judge him for his loving earthly things,
more then the Command of God; for his Commands have been near, even in thee if
thou would have obeyed it; That would have led thee to love the Lord (...)
an end to all sin would soon be known; For, if man's love were returned unto God
from the things of this world, all coufening, cheating, lying, swearing,
stealing, and murder would be at an end; for were there not something that were
the Cause these sins would not be produced; which Cause, is love to the things
of this life; for man's love being in them, what will he not do to obtain the
thing, that he coveteth after: So the root of all evil is covetousness:
therefore there is but one way for man to be set free from the root of sin, and
that is by owning of Gods Righteous Law; in himself, By which he may come to
feel; Judgment executed on the first Adam, which is now a Child of wrath,
being poluted by transgression: and concluded under sin, which none can see but
those that own that light in them, which is the pure Law, that reveals the man
of sin, to be in all the Children of the earthly Adam; for before ever man can
come to know life in God, he must come to know a Death; in, and to self; for
the whole have no need of a Phisician; but such as be broken; for if man be not
lost in the Earth; what need was there of the blood of the Son of God; to
ransom man; But when with the Law, or light, man comes to see himself polluted
in his own blood; cast out into the open field; no eye to pity, but a
will-leading to sin; And a Law-condemning sin: which Law is quick and powerful;
in rendering condemnation on the body of sin; or the Child of the fallen Adam:
which Law or light will not depart, from the seed of Judah in thee: If thou
cast it not behind thy back, until it has brought thee to know the wrath of
God due to all sinners; and to thee in particular, And then the Earth shall be
shaken and thou shall quake and tremble, by reason of the terrors of the
Almighty, that shall be poured out upon the head of the Dragonish nature, that
has born rule in thee.

Then paleness of face with thy hands on thy Loins, as a woman in travil
crying to be delivered, from that body of sin, which is the cause of such a
sorrow; but from it thou shall not git, till every tittle of the Law be
executed on thee; that so thou may come to know the worth of the blood, that
satisfies the wrath of God, and turns it into love; for in the revealing of
his love to thee in time of need; thy Body, Soul and Spirit shall be ravished,
to behold that way of Life, which he shall make thee partakers of, when he
shall appear to anoint thy wounded Spirit, and by his free eternal love, shall
bind up that which he has broken: And this shall he do, and more then tongue
is able to express; for all that will be willing, that his light, life and
power in them shall rain; to the glorifying of him in their mortal bodies: But
if you will not own his Light, and to it bring all your deeds, that thereby
they may be Judged, and you by Judgment be redeemed, this is that you shall
have at the hand of my God, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish for
ever.

This from one that is a Daughter of JAH, Judith Eeds.

London, Printed by J. B. for the Author, 1659.


