To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY: The humble Petition of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament: Sent by Sir Philip Stapleton, to his Excellency the
Earl of ESSEX: And by him to be presented to his sacred MAJESTY.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament that this Petition be forthwith
printed and published: Hen. Elsygne, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for F. Coules. September 27. 1642.

The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to his sacred
Majesty: Sent by Sir Philip Stapleton to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, and
by him to be presented to his Majesty.
WE your Majesty's loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
cannot without great grief and tenderness of compassion behold the pressing
miseries, the eminent dangers, and the devouring Calamities which do extremely
threaten, and have partly seized upon both your Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, by the practices of a party prevailing with your Majesty, who by many
wicked plots and Conspiracies have attempted the alteration of the true
Religion, and the ancient Government of this Kingdom, and the introducing of
popish idolatry and Superstition in the Church, and Tyranny and confusion in
the State, and for the compassing thereof, have long corrupted your Majesty's
Councels, abused your power, and by sudden and untimely dissolving of former
Parliaments, have often hindered the reformation and prevention of those
mischiefs. And being now disabled to avoid the endeavors of this Parliament
by any such means, have traitorously attempted to overawe the same by force;
And in prosecution of their wicked designs, have excited, encouraged, and
fostered an unnatural Rebellion in Ireland, by which, in a most cruel and
outrageous manner many thousands of your Majesty's subjects there have bin
destroyed. And by false slanders upon your Parliament, and malicious and
unjust accusations have endeavored to begin the like Massacre here. And
being through Gods blessing therein disappointed, have (as the most mischievous
and bloody design of all) drawn your Majesty to make War against your
Parliament, and good Subjects of this Kingdom, leading in your Person an Army
against them, as if You intended by Conquest to establish an absolute and
illimitted power over them, and by your power and the countenance of your
presence have ransacked, spoiled, imprisoned and murdered diverse of your
people, and for their better assistance in their wicked designs, do seek to
bring over the Rebels of Ireland, and other Forces beyond the Seas to join
with them; And we finding our selves utterly deprived of your Majesty
protection, and the Authors, Counselors, and Abbettors of these mischiefs in
greatest power and favor with your Majesty, and defended by you against the
Justice and Authority of your high Court of Parliment, whereby they are grown
to that height and insolence as to manifest their rage and malice against those
of the Nobility and others who are any whit inclinable unto Peace, not without
great appearance of danger to your own Royal Person; If you shall not in all
things concur with their wicked and Traiterous courses, have for the just and
necessary defense of the Protestant religion of your Majesty's person, Crown,
and Dignity, of the Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Privileges
and power of Parliament, taken up Arms and appointed and authorized Robert
Earl of Essex to be Captain General of all the Forces by us raised, and to
lead and conduct the same against these Rebels and Traitors, and them to
subdue, and bring to condign punishment. And do most humbly beseech your
Majesty to withdraw your royal presence and countenance from these wicked
persons, and if they shall stand out in defense of their rebellions and
unlawful attemps, That your Majesty will leave them to be suppressed by that
power which we have sent against them, and that your Majesty will not mix your
own dangers With their's; but in peace, and safety without your Forces
forthwith return to your Parliament, and by their faithful Council and
advice Compose the present distempers and confusions abounding in both your
Kingdoms and provide for the security and honor of your self and your royal
posterity, and the prosperous estate of all your Subjects, wherein if your
Majesty please to yield to our most humble and earnest desires, we do in the
presence of Almighty God profess that we will receive your Majesty with all
honor, yield you all due obedience and subjection, and faithfully endeavor to
secure your Person and Estate from all dangers, and to the utermost of our
power to procure and establish to your self, and to your people, all the
blessings of a glorious and happy Reign.

FINIS.
C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT.

royal blazon or coat of arms


