The Paraselene dismantled of her Cloud. OR, Baxterianism Barefaced. Drawn from
A Literal Transcript of Mr. BAXTER's, And the Judgment of Others, In the most
Radical Doctrines of Faith; Compared with those of the Orthodox, BOTH
Conformist and Nonconformist; And transferred over by way of Test, unto the
PAPIST and QUAKER.

Ezekiel. 8. 11. There stood before them seventy of the Ancients of the House of
Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazania the Son of Shaphan, etc. Isa.
62. 1. For Zion's sake I will not hold my Peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I
will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. Pro Thesauro Carbones, Or the
Babylonish Garment fetched from a Protestant's Tent, the accursed stop to
Israel' s Camp in its Progress toward Reformation. Front mel apparet; tegitur
sed ventre venenum, Melleque sub cauda toxica mixta jacent. Paraeus. By THOMAS
EDWARDS, Esquire LONDON, Printed, and sold by Will. Marshal at the Bible in
Newgate-street, and John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street. 1699.

The INTRODUCTION.
Reader;
THE following Treatise is not so much of the direct Nature of a Controversy,
whatever like it may occasionally fall in, or within compass of the same, as it
is literally, by way of Quotation, expressive of the distinct Judgments of
several Persuasions, and that about the main Salvation Points of the Christian
Religion (such I mean as lie more immediately next unto the Notion of a Deity,
the mysterious Doctrines both of a God in Trinity, together with that ineffable
Discovery of eternal Love in the Hypostatical Union) which when thou have
perused, thou art at full liberty to make thy discriminative choice of either
of them; and this we must all certainly do sooner or later: for there is not in
the least any Medium between them; but Life entirely, or Death entirely, and
that both spiritual and eternal, are held forth disjunctively or immixedly, i.
e. not partly Life, and partly Death, either in the one or in the other: This I
say is so, in a doctrinal Sense or Acceptance; for I determine no Man's final
State, as to his particular Person; no! That is a sovereign Flower of an
unchangeable God's Prerogative, which must not be touched upon by any one,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. But this I say, as worthy Mr. Perkins of old did, That a Papist,
as a Papist, cannot be saved, i. e. upon those Principles whereon such lay
their stress of hopes for Salvation; viz. That the Righteousness of Christ made
way in the Merit's thereof, for the Justification of the Person of a Sinner, in
the material Righteousness of Faith, Repentance, Holiness, etc. before God. Now
if the rankest Papist in the World will not acknowledge and own this as the very
Foundation of his hopes for Glory, I am utterly at a loss: Nay I am so far from
being mistaken in this Point, that do but allow of it, and I shall easily or
with a wet Finger reconcile both Papist and Protestant; and so overthrow the
very standing or vertical Spring of the Reformation, yea the very Natures of
both Covenants in their public, federal, and as such substitutive Headships,
whereon as Covenants they mainly depend. The Thoughts of which cause me to lay
before thee what Mr. Troughton, in the close of his Preface to his second part
of Lutherus Redivivus, recites out of Mr. Norton. Taking Heresy for a
fundamental Error, i. e. such as whosoever lives and dies in, cannot be
saved. The Dialogue contains three Heresies; The first denying the imputation
of the Sin of the Elect unto Christ, and his suffering the Punishment due
thereto. The second denying that Christ as God-man, Mediator, obeyed the Law,
and therewith that he obeyed for us as our Surety. The third denying the
imputation of Christ's Obedience unto Justification, destroying the very being
of a Sinner's Righteousness, by taking away the Obedience of Christ unto the
Law, and Imputation, which are the matter and form, i. e. the essential Causes
of Justification; and placing a Sinner's Righteousness in a fictitious
Atonement or Pardon of Sin, such as in effect manifestly does not only deny it
self to be the effect of, but denies, yea and defieth the very Being of the
mediatorial Obedience of Christ to the Law for us.

The nine subsequent Heads being according to my Apprehension the Substance of
the Protestant Reformation, as Apostolical, I think meet to lay here before
thee. And that because of the several Citations out of diverse Authors inserted
in the twice told three Columns of this Piece, do either fall in with one or
other of them, or are wholly rejective of the same: This thou will find out by
comparing each with other. Only by the way take notice of what Mr. Theophilus
Gale declares as the Excellency of Mr. Strong's Treatise of both Covenants. 1.
That God never did nor will deal with Mankind merely in a way of Dominion, but
also in a way of Covenant. 2. That both Covenants are made with Men not
immediately, but in and by some public Person. 3. That it is Union with either
of these public Persons, that brings a Man under their Covenants. 4. That it
is impossible for a Man to be under both Covenants. The Heads designed follow,
as,

1. That Predestination, and consequently Election and Reprobation, are
absolute; Romans 9. 11, 15, 16, 22, 23. chapter 11. 5, 7, 28. Ephesians. 1. 5, 11. The
following Texts hold forth the Marks, not Causes of Reprobation; 2 Cor. 13. 5.
2 Timothy 3. 8.

2. That the Covenant of Grace had not a temporal but eternal Origination, was
in all Generations particular and special, the same in matter and effect, never
of an universal nature, or differently transacted Mediums between God and Man,
any further than as Type and Antitype stood related each to other, and that not
only as abiding in the Purpose and Decree of God, but as made, agreed and
entered upon, by a mutual personal Compact between the Father and the Son; and
that none but those that were personally and formally inserted then in that
Covenant, and that respectively in each Individual of them (tho not then
created, yet as truly known as if so, in God's intuitive Vision, 1 Pet. 1. 2.)
ever have been or shall be in time actually taken into the same; Prove. 8. 30,
31. compared with John 17. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 2. 11, 12, 13. 2 Timothy 1.
9. Rev. 13. 8. Luke 10. 20. John 10. 3, 4, 5, 16, 26, 27, 28, 29. Isa. 59. 21.
For the confirmation of this Truth, take Dr. Owen's Testimony unto the same.

(1.) That the Lord Jesus Christ was the principal subject matter of this
Covenant, the Undertaker in it, and Surety of it, the Scriptures expressly
declare; for the great Promise of it was concerning him and his Mediation, with
the Benefits that should redound unto Mankind thereby in Grace and Glory. And
the preceptive Part of it required Obedience in and from him, new and distinct
from that which was exacted by the Law of Creation, although enwrapping all the
Commands thereof also. And he was the Surety of it, in that he undertook unto
God whatever by the terms of the Covenant was to be done for Man, to accomplish
it in his own Person; and whatever was to be done in and by Man, to effect it
by his own Spirit and Grace; that so the Covenant on every side might be firm
and stable, and the ends of it fulfilled. Exercit. Vol. 2. Heb. p. 50.

(2.) Such is the Distinction of the Persons in the Unity of the divine
Essence, as that they act in natural and essential Acts reciprocally one
toward another; namely, in Understanding, Love, and the like; they know and
mutually love each other. And as they subsist distinctly, so they also act
distinctly in those Works which are of external Operation. And whereas all
these Acts and Operations, whether reciprocal or external, are either with a
Will, or from a freedom of Will and Choice, the Will of God in each Person, as
to the peculiar Acts ascribed unto him, is his Will therein peculiarly and
eminently, tho not exclusively to the other Persons by reason of their mutual
In-being. The Will of God, as to the peculiar Actings of the Father in this
matter, is the Will of the Father; and the Will of God, with regard unto the
peculiar Actings of the Son, is the Will of the Son; not by a distinction of
sundry Wills, but by the distinct Application of the same Will unto its
distinct Acts, in the Person of the Father and of the Son. And in this respect
the Covenant whereof we treat differs from a pure Decree, for from those
distinct Actings of the Will of God in the Father and the Son, there does arise
a new Habitude or Relation, which is not natural or necessary unto them, but
freely taken on them. And by virtue hereof were all Believers saved from the
Foundation of the World upon the account of the Interposition of the Son of
God, antecedently unto his Exhibition in the Flesh. For hence was he esteemed
to have done and suffered what he had undertaken so to do, and which through
Faith was imputed unto them that did believe. Ibid. p. 56.

(3.) When God came to reveal this Counsel of his Will, this Branch and Part of
the eternal Compact between him and his Son, and to represent unto the Church
what had been transacted within the Vail for their Faith and Edification, as
also to give them some previous insight into the manner of the accomplishment
of these his holy Counsels, he did it by the Institutions of a Priesthood and
Sacrifices, or a sacred Office and sacred kind of Worship, suited and adapted to
be a resemblance of this heavenly Transaction between the Father and the Son.
For the Priesthood and Sacrifices of the Law were not the original Exemplar of
these things, but a Transcript and Copy of what was done in Heaven it self, in
Counsel, Design and Covenant, as they were a Type of what should be afterward
accomplished in the Earth. Now although the Names of Priest and Sacrifice are
first applied unto the Office mentioned under the Law and their Work, from
whence they are traduced under the New Testament, and transferred unto Jesus
Christ, that we may learn thereby what God of old instructed his Church in, yet
the things themselves intended and signified by these Names, belong properly
and firstly unto Jesus Christ, upon the account of this his Undertaking, and
the very Names of Priests and Sacrifices were but improperly ascribed unto them
who were so called, to be obscure Representations of what was past, and Types
of what was to come. Ibid. p. 61, 62.

3. That Original Sin is absolutely distinguished in its inherent communicative
Defilement, from what it is under an external and personally juridical Charge;
Genesis 3. 6, 7, 8, etc. Psalm. 103. 3. Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

4. That peculiar Redemption, as wrought out by an immetaphorical Sacrifice,
and identically substituted Sufferings, offered, laid down, and accepted of as
a Price, Solution, or personally proper Ransom, is vastly dissonant from the
same in its Consequences and infused Effects, which consist barely (as
physical) in a Deliverance from the Dominion of Sin, a Communication of Grace,
and thereby an actual, gracious and presential Enjoyment of and Fellowship with
God, both here and eternally. For whether is it Persons or a Law that was
purchased by Christ? If Persons, the Athenian Club must down: If a Law, then
Bellarmine's Cap must up, lined with a new Covenant of Works, and wreathed with
his Motto, Sic volo sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 2.
20. John 10. 15. Romans 8. 32. Col. 2. 13. Psalm. 56. 13.

5. That a proper representative Headship, entirely as such, highly, yea
essentially differs from that which is more particularly a Headship of
Pre-eminence, Politicalness, Rectoralship and Influence, tho all wholly and
eminently in Christ; Romans 5. 12, 17. Isa. 45. 24, 25. chapter 54. 17. Jer. 23. 6.
compare chapter 33. 16. 1 Cor. 12. 12. Col. 1. 18. chapter 2. 3. Isa. 9. 6. 1 Cor. 15.
45.

6. That personal Justification is positively and materially distinct both in
its Order and Place, Nature or Kind, from a Heart-Renovation or Change of the
inward Man; Ezekiel. 16. 8, 9. Zech. 3. 4, 5, 7. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Luke 1. 74. Psalm.
56. 13. our Lord speaking to Peter, John 13. 8. where Christ says not, If I
wash thee not thou shall have no part in me; but, If I wash thee not thou never
had it, as previous unto the same, i. e. have it not at present even before I
wash thee. Psalm. 40. 2. the Psalmist rejoices in his being freed from a
damnatory State, brought into a justified one, and that thereby his Walkings
with God were established.

7. That inherent Sanctification is the Fruit both of the Change of our State
and Nature; and not any thing either of the Nature or Essence of that
Reformation which purely arises from the refining and new furbishing of old
depraved moral Principles; Mat. 7. 17, 18. Hos. 14. 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 1. 3.
John 15. 5. Ephesians. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Romans 8. 1.

8. That the Doctrine of Assurance is the Scripture Protestant Doctrine, and
which all the People of the Lord are enjoined by way of Precept, and encouraged
by infinite Promises to pr^ss after, and is attainable; 2 Pet. 2. 10, 11. Hos.
6. 3. Job 22. 21. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57, 58. Ephesians. 2. 16,
17; 18, 19.

9. That true Grace in its saving nature and kind carries in the very Bowels
thereof the Promise of Perseverance unto Glory; Phil. 1. 6. Romans 14. 3, 4. Isa.
35. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

The Substance of these Positions, Reader, is what the old Protestant
Reformers, as such, adhered unto, yea for which in all Generations they
earnestly contended against their most subtle and violent Opposers; and many of
them as by Providence called unto their Trials did in Faithfulness testify unto
the same, even unto Blood. New Attempts have been made formerly and of late,
both by Craft and Subtilty, Violence and Impudence, and that under a pretense
of Moderation, and a new-coin'd milder way to strip us of the same, as thou will easily find from the Quotations expressed in the following Tract, unto
which I shall refer thee, and the guidance of that blessed God, who ever was
and ever will (notwithstanding the seeming Success of his Enemies) be seen in
the Mount of Difficulties in defense both of his Truths and People; which puts
me in mind of the following Lines.

Away Despair, my gracious Lord does hear:
Tho Winds and Waves assault my Keel,
He does preserve it: he does steer,
Even when the Boat seems most to reel.
Storms are the Triumph of his Art:
Well may he close his Eyes, but not his Heart.
Herb. Poem, p. 145. It may not be improper here likewise to insert the
following Passage relating to the chief Author of the bold Attempts lately made
against the Truths of the Gospel, as it is in Mr. Walter Cross's Sermon of
Justification, preached at Pinners Hall Lecture in 1695. p. 10. The Scholastic
Pitcarne, Provost of the Old College of St. Andrews, weeps over this Opinion,
and its Reverend Author thus: cap. 285. O Reverend Baxter, for what end, or to
what good have thou wrote so many Volumes for thy conditional Justification by
Faith and Obedience? To how many Contentions have thou given occasion? How many
precious Hours have thou lost to thy self and thy Reverend Brethren? Into an
Abyss of how many anti-Gospel Errors are they now sunk, who glory in thee as
their Guide and Patron? Who after they have once left the way of Truth, scarce
know where to stop; and yet thou still tellest the World, all thy Disputes are
about the Wool of a Dog, for thou differest only in Words and Names from thy
Brethren.

To conclude, Reader, take along with thee this following Advertisement or
Neonomian Test; that whenever any Position of Truth seemingly so is laid down
by them, whereby they delude the Hearts of the simple, it is in such terms as
are capable of letting go that which thou or another think they hold forth in
the face of them, and yet sufficiently retentive of their Errors, even to an
utter Exclusion of the Truth it self. As for instance, we shall for the present
allow them perhaps more than ever yet they have acknowledged, or are willing to
own (if they do not think us Imposers for the same) as that whereby under a
shadow of Orthodoxy they would absolutely undermine the Doctrine of
Justification, and the whole of both Covenants, as each are founded upon their
different or distinct, substitutive and representative Person or Headship. Now
suppose they should own Election in its proper Sense, suppose also they should
acknowledge a peculiar Redemption, and that of individual distinct Persons, as
particularly selected from the rest of Mankind; yet the Question is, how and
when are they justified? Is it that they are materially justified in the sight
of God, before or only when they actually believe? they may perhaps own that
they are materially justified before God, and that even before they actually
believe: Let us see then upon this supposed Concession, how far this may,
according to their usual Fetches and Prevarications, secure them in their
undiscerned heretical Reserves, and thereby indeed overthrow the whole of that
Doctrine, which they seem to own. As thus, they are materially justified before
God, and that before they actually believe, in that the Righteousness of Christ
in the matter thereof is always in the approved sight of God for them, as
having a Sufficiency of Merit in it to plead for, and procure that Faith,
Repentance, Sincerity, Holiness and Obedience, which in time upon their actual
Believing and persevering Reformation, through the Merit of this material
Righteousness, becomes their Robe of justifying Righteousness before God, upon
which the Sentence of a juridical Condemnation or Justification must pass; and
so far is it materially owned by them as our Righteousness, and no further: and
herein let them disprove me if they can. This is their new Law forsooth of
Justification, as purchased by the Righteousness of Christ: whereas do but
observe the Apostle, Romans 5. 19. who speaking of the Disobedience of one, and
the Obedience of another, mentions not in the least any two distinct Laws,
(wherein he had a fair Opportunity so to do if any such thing had been) whence
that by a Disobedience unto one of them many were made Sinners, and that by an
Obedience unto another of them, or some peculiar mediatorial Law, a remote
meritorious Righteousness must come forth to make many righteous by a third
Law; or that a former Law was vacated by Obedience to a middle Law, and all to
bring in Justification by a third Law: Not at all, for the Apostle as acted by
the Spirit of the Lord, speaks but of Disobedience and Obedience, without the
Interposition of two different Laws unto which apart they must stand related,
but that both had a positive relation either in Condemnation unto Death, or
Restoration unto Life, to one and the self-same Law. And tho our Adversaries
would confidently assert, that the Law of Innocence had no relation unto the
moral Law, or that of the ten Commandments, which is quite contrary to
Scripture and all sound Interpreters; yet see Romans 5. 12, 13. By one Man Sin
entered into the World -- and until the Law Sin was in the World, but Sin is not
imputed when there is no Law. How came it then to be in or imputed unto the
World, before the coming of the Law? and that the selfsame Sin that was in the
World before the coming of the Law, should be the selfsame Sin that was charged
upon and imputed unto the World after its Promulgation? for it is plain from
the scope of the place, that this Sin has its Denomination of being a Sin from
one and the same Law as well before as after its Publication. It is indeed, as
one well observes, that from that one Species of Sin in Adam, the whole Genus
or Kind is shown, as the same Law being more clearly unfolded does express;
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. I shall shut up this with some Observations of Dr.
Light foot: Adam heard as much in the Garden as Israel did at Sinai, but only
in fewer words, and without Thunder. Again, how could there be a greater Sin
committed than that when Adam at that one clap brake all the ten Commandments?
1. He chose himself another God when he followed the Devil. 2. He idolized and
defiled his own Belly; as the Apostle's Phrase is, He made his Belly his God.
3. He took the Name of God in vain, when he believed him not. 4. He kept not
the Rest and Estate wherein God had set him. 5. He dishonored his Father which
was in Heaven, and therefore his days were not prolonged in that ^and which the
Lord his God had given him. 6. He massacred himself and all his Posterity. 7.
From Eve he was a Virgin, but in Eyes and Mind he committed spiritual
Fornication. 8. He stole (like A^han) that which God had set aside not to be
meddled with, and this his stealth is that which troubles all Israel, the whole
World. 9. He bare witness against ^d, when he believed the witness of the Devil
before him. 10. He coveted an evil Covetousness, like Amnon, which cost him his
Life, and all his Progeny! Miscella. p. 282, 283.

Melius est pro pietate dissidium, quam concordia sucata. Nazian. Si autem de
veritate sumitur scandalum, utilius est ut scandalum oriatur, quam veritas
relinquatur. Bern. Mat. 18. 7. Woe unto the World because of Offenses: For it
must needs be that Offenses come; but woe to that Man by whom the Offense
comes. Mat. 11. 6. Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me. Thine
in the Truth as it is in Jesus, THOMAS EDWARDS.

Baxterianism Barefaced, etc.
COntroversies nakedly considered in themselves are not (with truly peaceloving
and ingenuous Souls) in the least pleasant, but rather regretful and irksome,
especially where they are managed with a spirit of Revenge, Self-interest,
Treachery, and Vainglory. But where Truths lie in danger of being subverted,
and particularly those of a more fundamental Station and Magnitude in the
Church of God, without which all other superstructuated ones will prove but
mere Ciphers, even so, that the very things which Men seem to have shall be
taken away from them and given to the Just, i. e. the justified of God, who
will be found to have that Faith, Repentance, Sincerity, etc. as a Consequence
of such a State that others thought they had or pretended to have, Mat. 25. 28.
chap. 13. 11, 12. Job 27. 16, 17. compared with Luke 8. 18. (as if there were
no other way of preserving the Moon and Stars in their refulgent Splendour, but
by putting out the Sun; so with some Persons they know not how sufficiently to
press on Graces and Duties, unless it be by a dethroning of Christ, and that as
he is indeed the alone Sun of Righteousness:) Then I say Polemical Engagements
are not only absolutely necessary in themselves, as arising from the nature of
the Cause in hand, wherein every one ought to take care of his own Soul, and
the eternal Welfare thereof; but to be silent herein, would be so to quit and
cast off that Duty enjoined us by the Lord, as to run the hazard Minoris
peccati est sequi malum, quod bonum putaris, quam non audere defendere quod pro
bono certo noveris.

It is a lesser Sin to follow that evil which thou think to be good, than
not to dare to defend that which thou know for a certain good or truth.

Hierom. Dialog. 1. advers. Pelagian.


of being reckoned even by himself amongst the number of his professed Enemies
and Betrayers of his Church: Mat. 12. 30. Acts 20. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Now
for any one Servant in a Family, whose Duty indeed it is to cover the
Infirmities and Weaknesses, properly and truly such, of his Fellow Servants;
yet to connive at, or be mealy-mouthed when they become secret Domestic
Pioneers (tho he himself have no co-actual hand with them therein) by their
diverting what is committed to their charge from its peculiar use and
intendment, will be found not only an Argument of his Unfaithfulness, but
Rebellion in a high degree, as thereby rendering himself no less than a
Co-partner or Partaker with them in such vile and ruinous Undertakings: Acts 7.
58. compare chap. 8. 1. chap. 22. 20. Gal. 2. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 22, (...). Leigh's
Critica Sacra in the Margent tells us, the simple word signifies, Certamina
prop^sita qualia sunt inter Athle^as; sed compositio illustrior est, and
si^nificat certare cum (...) studio. Aret.
24, 25. Nay, the slothful Servant is reckoned of God, to be no less than a
Brother to the great Waster, Prove. 18. 9. Hence it is that the Apostle Jude, v.
3. exhorting them unto whom he wrote, to contend earnestly for the Faith once
delivered to the Saints; he does it by a word significative of a hot and
violent Fight, an instant Contention; even such a word as that those who
diligently, together with Faithfulness to and Zeal for the Lord and his
Interest, attend unto the same in the contextual as well as analogical design
of the Holy Ghost therein, must be content to undergo the scalding Sarcasms of
our new Schematists; and well they may, for it is but what a Prophet of the
Lord has undergone in the judgment of some of late, that in his Testimony for
God against a wicked King, and his false Prophets, he was acted by a Zeal which
proceeded from an irregular Passion; 2 King. 3. 13, 14. Thus they, to stave off
Persons from a just and weighty attendance upon the very things themselves in
debate, represent their opponent Authors either as a piece of tumified Flesh,
jocular, passionate, or too strait-lac'd, and all bound up together with the
old invented and artificial Twig of Antinomianism: Whereas indeed there are
none that I know, especially under a Vizard of Reformation, that would more
promote such a Religion as is absolutely destructive of the Law, both in its
foederal Relation, together with its practical Efficacy, as laid up in Christ
the Ark of the Covenant, than these Persons do. For thou will find this to be
but the same method and to the same end, as arising from the same Principle in
the Pharisees of old, and their dealings with the People thereupon against a
Reception of the Ministry of Christ, and his faithful Witnesses; John the
Baptist's work being to guide Sinners wholly unto Christ for Salvation: Joh. 1.
29. This also being expressly the design of Christ to bring Souls nakedly unto
himself: Mat. 11. 28. Nay, that the very Scriptures themselves would little
avail them without coming unto and laying hold of him in and by their searching
of the same: Joh. 5. 39, 40. Now which way do the Pharisees take to divert the
People from closing with these gracious Instructions and Offers? Even by
representing John as a morose, austere, and stern Man, i. e. too strait-lac'd,
passionate, or a piece of tumified Flesh: And Christ as a Man gluttonous, open
or loose, a Converser with Publicans and Sinners, i. e. jocular, licentious, or
a real (in their sense) Antinomian; and also all his Followers and their
delegated Teachers such as were ignorant, blockish, illogical Creatures,
unintelligent, unstudied Divines, full of mysterious Nonsense. And this merely
to serve their own inherent Righteousness in order unto their Justification,
and that by the Messiah himself whom they expected as their Rectoral Governor
and Deliverer, i. e. in that very sense to be their Savior; tho all
acknowledged also with thankfulness to spring from the free Grace of God: Mat.
11. 18, 19. John 7. 48, 49. chapter 9. 28, 34. chapter 5. 45, 46. Romans 9. 31, 32. Luke
18. 11, 12, 14. This is deductively clear from both what was prophesied of John
as the immediate forerunner of Christ, that he should preach, and as is
expressly declared, did preach, Isa. 40. 3, 4, etc. compare Luke 3. 4, 5, 6.
That all towering Imaginations of Man's own Works and Righteousness should be
brought low or to nothing, and every self-abased Soul should be filled with the
Righteousness, Salvation and Glory of God in Christ. This is also positively
apparent from their coming unto Christ, and for what end, together with his
Carriage toward them thereupon: Luke 16. 15. chapter 18. 9, 18, etc. chapter 5. 31, 32.

Therefore it is that Christ likens that Generation (tho great pretenders to
Holiness) to a pitiful trifling sort of Fellows, Mat. 11. 16, 17. such as never
descended into the just merits of a Cause laid before them, but were taken up
with some empty, external, shadowy Appearances and Florishes of things: And
from thence draws a most divine Inference, leaving it as a standing doctrinal
Position against all the false charges of Self-justiciaries, and in defense
both of himself and his People, ver. 19. But Wisdom is justified of her
Children: q. d. whatever imputation of Folly and Irrationality may be cast upon
my Truths and People, in order to evade the one and asperse the other, as being
absurd, impious, and a mere putative Imagination, yet one day shall discover
and make it evidently appear, that both the one and the other in their
synonymous Testimony for me against the fleshly Reasons and carnal Artifices of
Man, will prove (as it is at present in my judgment and irreversible esteem) no
less than a justifying of, or a setting the Seal even unto infinite Wisdom it
self, in the whole of the Economy of Man's Redemption, and that both as to
order and matter: 1 John 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

I shall lay these three Heads before thee in reference unto a real and genuine
work of Regeneration, both as to its Rise, Nature and Growth, and that as it
stands related to the Grand (and yet opposed) Doctrine of Justification.

1st. As to its Rise, Spring, or original Cause, I mean in a more immediate,
contiguously apprehended, and present applicatory sense, as precedaneous in
order of Nature to an actual setting of the same (in the new Creature) on foot
in the Soul; tho the efficient creating Cause thereof be the Spirit: therefore,
To be born again, is to be born of the Spirit; John 3. 3, 6. But this he does
by receiving of that which is peculiarly Christ's, showing it unto the Sinner;
and through an effectual, imputative application of the same, enabling him by
Faith of his own mighty Operation; whereupon the n^w Birth springs forth, to
close and invest himself therewith, which indeed is the Righteousness of
Christ, for which end the Comforter is promised; Joh. 16. 14. compare v. 7, 8,
9, 10. together with Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. Nay, on this very Righteousness God has
founded his Proceedings in both the ruin of his Enemies, and salvation of his
People: Isa. 46. 12, 13. for it shall either dissolve (wherein Regeneration
consists) the obstincy of the stout-hearted; or if pertinaciously opposed by
stumbling at and falling upon it, as reckoning it unintelligible, licentious,
and unscriptural, they shall not only for the present be broken in all their
attempts against it, but hereafter it shall so fall upon them, not as a
Covering or Shelter by imputation, (being as such in its essential matter and
imputative form rejected by them) but an exact Accountant, weighing and
scanning both their Persons and Performances from the complete dimensions of
its infinite and scrutinous Perfection, as to grind them to Powder. Hence it is
that Christ in a familiar comparison declares bemoaningly, as well as
figuratively, wherein the actual Rebellion of the Jews was originated,
notwithstanding their great pretenses unto Religion, Holiness, and the several
Duties performed by them; and yet that they were but Hypocrites, and all they
did but mere Hypocrisy; namely, that they would not come unto him as their
Righteousness or Covering, under the shelter of which (as a Hen with her Wings
both protects, engenders and cherishes her young ones even from the Egg) he
would not only have saved them from an incensed justice, the infinite Charge of
a contemned and violated Law, the Accusations of Conscience, Men and Devils;
but also by his Spirit have begotten them after, or Genesis 1. 2. Spirit moved] or
was moving. The Hebrew Racha^h signifies generally a waving or moving, Jer.
23. 9. and in special such a moving and fluttering as Eagles use over their
young, cherishing and stirring them up; Deuteronomy. 32. 11. So it is used here for
the effectual comfortable motion whereby God's Spirit justained, and as it were
stirred up the wast Creature. Ainsworth in locum.
br^oded them in his own likeness, who is the express Character or Image of God
in the Person of the Father: Mat. 23. 37, 38. Luke 13. 34, 35. compare Exodus
25. 20. chap. 37. 9. Psalm. 17. 8. and 36. 7. and 57. 1. and 61. 4. and 25. 14.
and 91. 1. compared with ver. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Joh. 5. 40. chap. 13. 8. Heb. 1.
1, 2, 3. That this is no forced Notion or novel Opinion, will appear from Isa.
8. 14, 15. Mat. 21. 44. compare Romans 9. 33. together with the end for which the
Apostle quotes the same, Ver. 31, 32. For all that Faith, Repentance, and
Obedience precedent unto, and persistingly rejective of this Righteousness in
its material appropriation, as abstracted from a bare meritorious Subserviency,
will not only be found legal and mercenary, but also fall under the
denomination of Presumption, worldly Sorrow, and actual Rebellion: Mat. 22. 11,
12. Rev. 20. 15. compare chap. 19. 14. 2 Cor. 7. 10. Hos. 7. 14. chap. 10. 1,
9, 13. compare v. 12. Romans 10. 2. compare chap. 9. 31, 32. Psalm. 118. 19, 20,
21, 22. Nay, observe, that that Faith and Repentance antecedent unto an Act of
Justification and Pardon, are materially for the present no more, than that the
damned are, and for ever shall be possessed of; only with this difference, that
in this Life they have the hope of the Hypocrite to support them, with some
flashy unrenewing Impressions, whereof they are wholly divested in the World to
come: Acts 16. 29, 30. compare v. 34. compare Judas his case with that of
Peter's. On these sorts of Convictions, previous to this Application, rested in
or taken up with, as I could easily manifest, does the Doctrine of
Non-perseverance tacitly (tho not ownedly) grow.

Hence it is that amongst the Jews there were two sorts of Grapes, the one
genuine and the other wild: Deuteronomy. 32. 32. Isa. 5. 2, 4. Cant. 2. 13. chap. 7.
7. Isa. 17. 6, 7, 8. The whole in substance of this Head is comprehended in Job
33. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. But,

2dly. The nature of it, and that still as mainly referring to this Doctrine of
Justification, and therein its genuine Offspring from its resultive Operation,
is highly discovered, as all other things are, by their bending, bowing,
inclining; hastening, yea pressing toward their proper Center and Element. And
as the Eagle tries the Legitimacy of her young ones by bringing them to the
Sun, so will the Faith, and consequently in order of Nature, Regeneration, and
Holiness of the Church in each of its individual subjective professing Matter,
be proved as to the reality of the same. Now toward what does it work? whether
would it head that Person in whom it is formed to be enwrapped, against the
eternal demand of an infinite Justice, upon the eternal charge of an imputed
Sin? As knowing that though God will testify unto it, as his own Image, being
his Workmanship in Regeneration, yet it also knows, when in its right mind (not
clouded or distracted with Corruptions) and proper operation, as sitting at the
feet of Jesus, that it is not either the material, meritorious, formal or
prerequisite adapting and conditional cause of God's Act in justifying a
Sinner, or the Ungodly; but that by it, and the testimonial Seals of that
Spirit who is its Author, God manifests to that Soul wherein it is, that he was
materially and really, tho not appliedly and sensibly, justified of God, and
that before this new Creature put forth it self in a proper act of believing:
It is the spiritual Optic of the Soul given and wrought of God, to discern
into the Secret of his Covenant. And tho it knows, and gives them also to
understand in whom it is wrought, that by it alone God is to be enjoyed, I mean
as to Experience and Complacency, yet it also knows and gives them to
understand, that this will never be truly attained unto without a previous
personal acquitment in Judgment arising from an external imputed Righteousness.
But how will this be proved?

The Apostle tells us from what this very new Creature put him upon, (as having
by the same discerned into his Acquitment and Justification wrought out by
Christ, when he was in the height of Rebellion against him, Acts 9. 1. compare
Gal. 2. 20.) even to renounce it (which no natural Man, tho never so moral, was
ever capable of) as any cause, part or matter of his Justification before God,
and to betake himself wholly unto the Righteousness of Christ, for his
appearance and standing before him, and that even at the day of Judgment,
before which time we may safely suppose that he knew that this new Creature in
him should be rid of all Sin and Corruption, as completed in the perfect and
unspotted Holiness thereof, and that this would be upon the first moment of his
Dissolution; and yet renounces it as the matter of his Justification in the
last and universal day of the trial of all Flesh, Phil. 3. 3, 8, 9, etc. This
Language also proceeds from the new Nature in David, who was reckoned a Man
after God's own Heart: Psalm. 71. 16, 24. I will go in the strength of the Lord
God; I will make mention of thy Righteousness, even of thine only. My Tongue
also shall talk of thy Righteousness all the day long, etc. His Graces
constantly, as you will find throughout the most part of his Psalms, more or
less, as a real Evidence of the truth of Regeneration, excite him unto Duties,
so as to betake himself unto the Lord, as his not only providential, or barely
gracious and rectoral Protection, but as his Covering, Shelter, strong Tower,
Fortress, Hidingplace, etc. which bespeaks an imputed material Righteousness:
Psalm. 27. 5. and 91. 1, etc. and 61. 1, 2, 3, 4. And that which is exceeding
remarkable, the Psalmist pleads with the Lord in Prayer for his being covered
with the same, and that he might have a continual resort unto it as his strong
Habitation, and that from his Interest therein, as arising from the Tenure of
the Covenant of Grace between the Father and the Son, Psalm. 71. 2, 3. compare
Psalm. 40. 8, 9, 10. with John 17. 6, 8. For this Pavilion, shadow of Wings, or
Cherubims, it is true, had a reference to the Mercy-seat, and therein the free
Grace of God, upon which the whole is founded; but all this bore a connective
respect unto the Ark of the Covenant, over which they were placed, wherein the
Law lay, not one jot removed, or ever to be so; and in whom, i. e. the Ark, all
renewed Souls (which David knew full well, as the natural tendency of the new
Creature did dictate unto him) desire to be found, being assured by
Regeneration, that tho the Law be not vacated or abrogated by Christ, yet that
they may safely, with an unaccusing Conscience, and unimpendent Wrath, lie by
it in him, by whom they know it was perfectly fulfilled in and on their stead
and behalf; it being there and thence, as such alone in its Antitypical Design
or Institution, that God meets and communes with his People, Exodus 25. 21, 22.
Hence it is that the Apostle tells us that the Law is not against the Promises,
and reason good; for what Creditor would not rather close with a willing and
responsible Surety, than run a poor Bankrupt out of House and Harbor, yea into
Jail to die and rot there, and yet never be satisfied, tho always demanding?
For the cancelling of a Bond does not disanul any Law, only it disengages from
an Obligation thereunto in a Covenant-sense, and that as to any possibility of
incurring the Penalty thereof, either to the loss of a freedom from a charge
unto Punishment, or title to an Inheritance: Gal. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
Ephesians. 2. 15. Col. 2. 14. Many more Instances might be given to show that true
Regeneration is the result of an essential (as respecting the Law) material
application of the Righteousness of God in Christ unto the Soul, from the very
nature of its Operation, and the Effects thereof upon such Souls in whom it is
wrought. This is clear from Experience; for the more a truly renewed Creature
apprehends this Righteousness and his Interest therein, the more active and
transparent are his Graces, the more ready and regular his Duties, and the more
genuine and evangelical is his Obedience; for causa causae est causa causati:
And on the other hand, their Overwhelmings, Deadness, Darkness, Unsavoriness,
Tossings, etc. do arise from God's hiding his Face in the aforementioned sense,
the Land of Promise being a hilly Country: Cant. 6. 12. Psalm. 118. 19, 22. and
143. 1, 11. and 17. 15. and 4. 1. and 31. 1. and 35. 28. and 71. 15, 16, 24.
and 51. 14. and 69. 27. and 119. 40. and 88 11, 12. and 89. 16. Whereas on the
contrary, where the Righteousness of Christ is regarded in a more remote
meritorious subserviency only, there is little care taken as to Graces or
Duties, either in their spring, nature, place, or exercise, (the difference
lying only in words, as if God had only a House, but that this House wants a
form, and that he were not the God of Order but Confusion) as is too apparent
this day, so something like them be attended unto in a blustering Zeal,
together with a laborious bodily Exercise, and external glorious appearance
therein, which profits little; and that as forecasting that the aforesaid
Righteousness in the forementioned sense, will secure all in a dying hour, or
at a dead lift, especially if they can produce these their supposed Evidences,
whereby to lay a causa sine qua non-claim unto the same. Thus they make Christ
not only a Minister of Sin, but cast the Efficacy of his Sacrifice to depend
upon their own Works. Then,

3dly. The Growth of Regeneration: And herein we shall find that it springs
from a material application of the Righteousness of another by way of
imputation; and that its native Disposition, when formed, is to head the Soul
unto and keep it under the shelter and protection of the said Righteousness: so
also is it maintained and cherished by a continued appropriation of the same
unto such a Soul; Mal. 4. 2. But unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of
Righteousness arise with healing in his Wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow
up as Calves of the Stall: i. e. That unto such as so fear the Name of the
Lord, as to dread standing before him in their own Righteousness, God makes a
gracious and ample Promise of healing them of such a fear, (otherwise for what
must this healing come in?) and that in Righteousness, but not as at Mount
Sinai, where indeed he manifested himself in this very Righteousness, then unto
the Israelites, as is here spoken of; but that was in and immediately by the
Law: and hence it is that it was attended with a keep-off, or touch not, a
burning Fire, Blackness, Darkness, Tempest, etc. And the issue upon their
Spirits was fear and trembling, and a wishing that God in such a Voice would
withdraw; Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. But in this Prophecy of Christ wherein the
self-same Righteousness materially was of God to be revealed, which consists of
an exact Obedience unto the Moral Law, and was their Terror in the Wilderness,
it is quite otherwise: for here, that which formerly laid them open and naked
in their Guilt, and that immediately before a just and holy God, and threatened
present Destruction, is promised to become their speedy and sheltring Relief,
couched in the word Wings: And that which formerly kept back from the Lord, as
a burning Fire, Blackness, Darkness, Tempest, and so broke the very Nerves and
Sinews of Faith, Love and Obedience, here is promised to become their healing
by an exhaling, cementing, bright, gentle, refreshing, nourishing and
fructifying Power. The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing, etc. And
yet after all, the Law not vacated or abrogated; for ver. 4. Remember ye the
Law of Moses, and that as not disanulled, only in a Covenant-sense, but as a
discovery of that Righteousness (tho wrought out by another) wherein you must
stand justified before God; and also as the safe Rule unto and Test of that
Sanctification (tho inherently and efficiently created by the Spirit) as will
prove acceptable with God. Therefore the Church of God in all Generations
thought it not only necessary to pray unto him in the name of a Mediator, as an
interposing Peacemaker, Interceder or Reconciler, but Advocate also, that had
laid down a proper Ransom and Price for another, and that from a mutual,
personal Compact; and therefore now claims for such a juridical Discharge.
There is sufficient proof for this in John, chapter 17. compared with chap. 10. 15.
1 John 2. 1, 2. and in numberless other places of Scripture. The Psalmist also
infers, Psalm. 92. 12. That he that is justified or covered with this
Righteousness, shall flourish in the fruits of Regeneration: And ver. 13. Those
that be planted in the House of the Lord, (which House, I suppose, in an
antitypical acceptance, is Christ, in whom it is said that the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily, and that as tabernacling in our Nature) they shall
flourish in the Courts or Assemblies of our God, viz. such as are changed in
the state of their Persons by a Transplantation of them, since nothing can be
planted but what had its Being and Station before, from the first to the second
Adam, or united unto Christ by the Spirit and realizing Faith, they shall not
only have true Grace, but grow and persevere therein unto the end, ver. 14. Now
all this is discerned, received, applied, cherished, and particularly improved
by Faith, and that both in its objective and subjective Operation, as it is the
principal leading Member of the new Creature; 2 Pet. 1. 5. and as truly
necessary and useful thereunto, as the five Senses are to a healthful,
serviceable, and well-ordered Constitution in the Body. As,

1. It is the hearing Faculty of a newborn Soul: wherein note, That
Regeneration (as being God's peculiar Act) in order of Nature precedes this
hearing of Faith, i. e. in its actual exercititious Office, as differing from
an habitual Qualification; Joh. 1. 12, 13. For if an effectual saving Faith be
part of the new Creature, then it must necessarily follow, that this must be
created before it can act; for as our Lord says, He that has Ears to hear, let
him hear: Now he knew they had (as having created the same) Ears to hear in a
natural, acquired, moral, or civil sense; but it was the hearing of Faith that
he insisted upon, as being not only part, but the very root in a subjective
internal sense of that new Creature. And this perfectly demonstrates God's
passive Act in justifying, as not only precedent unto, but causal of our Act in
believing, in a proposal and application of some distinct Substance, or (if I
may so say) Matter to be fixed upon in God, which particularly relates to a
righteous, tho violated Law, and consequently the condemning Guilt of a wilful
Transgressor: for the word of Faith is not Faith it self, but a Righteousness
offered in the preaching of the Word to be received by Faith: Therefore with
respect unto this Righteousness, both as to Matter, Form, Office, Use and
Effects, the Apostle tells us that Isaiah was very bold, which our brisk
impertinent Antievangelical Scriblers this day would have called Antinomianism
in another. See Acts 16. 14. Romans 10. 4, 8, 14, 16, 17. compare ver. 20. Gal.
3. 2, 5. Mat. 13. 14, 15, 16. chap. 11. 15. Rev. 2. 7, 11, 17, 29. chap. 3. 13,
22. Hence,

2. It is the Eye thereof, or the new Creature exerting it self by Faith in its
discerning Faculty. Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of
the Earth. It is the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. And that from a
distinct Consideration of several things proposed unto it from that very
Chapter, Isa. 45. As,

(1.) That none but he who is God, and that by Nature, can save; ver. 22. For I
am God, and there is none else: Intimating, that if ever polluted, forlorn and
rebellious Wretches (the ends of the Earth, by Sin become the very shreads and
refuse of the Creation) would be saved, they must look for the same from a God
of such infinite Perfections, whose very Nature and Essence is not only
Holiness, Justice and Righteousness it self, and yet saves as such, as well as
Love, Mercy, and Grace, but also that will not save without a complete regard
unto the whole of his Attributes in the uttermost, immense and incomprehensible
Dimensions of the same, and that not by a new-formed milder Law, curtailed
Covenant, nor by entire or pared whole, or sophistically scraped Conditions (an
Arminians Crutch or Wooden Leg) and all this attended with the squinting
reserves of annihilating an eternal Law, expressive of as eternal a
Righteousness; which had he done, or should he do, he would not only impair and
eclipse himself in this very Property of his Divine Nature, but without a due,
full commensurately adequate regard unto the same, bring an indelible Stain
upon the rest of them; Psalm. 145. 17. For to save from a precedent Act of Grace
in God, which our Adversaries themselves will acknowledge (or they are horn-mad)
and yet to do this without as equal a regard unto a precedent Act of
Righteousness in the same God, I suppose, is highly irregular, and not suitable
in the least to a Covenant well-ordered and sure. Therefore,

(2.) He swears by himself, That this Salvation should be founded in
Righteousness, even such a Righteousness as should not be remotely the cause
thereof in a bare atoning, meriting or procuring sense, but such as wherein
(and not barely for which) the saved Sinner must as such be found, and that as
in a material clothing; ver. 23, 24, 25. Isa. 61. 10. For if I be not
righteous, and perfectly so, both in degree as well as kind, or reckoned upon
as such of God before he actually justifies me, he cannot (with reverence be it
spoken) be just in justifying of me. Now this word cannot in God arises not
from any Impotency in him, no more than that he cannot lie, either as to
diminish his Sovereignty, or eclipse any other of his Divine Attributes; but it
is an Evidence of his Perfection, which in the issue will redound infinitely
more to his Glory in a comparative sense than to the Sinner's advantage, tho
that be unspeakably Consult Dr. Owen's Diatriba de justitia divina, which piece
of his I could freely wish were by some skilful hand translated into English,
and am persuaded would be of great use this day.
and immensly great: for were it not so, and to this end mainly contrived and
cast upon by eternal Wisdom it self, he could take no pleasure in the Salvation
of a Sinner, which certainly he does, but therein his chief respect is to his
own Glory. And tho it is true that God may, yea will in due time testify unto a
real work of Regeneration, when wrought, yet to justify in and for the same,
is, 1. To make him a Minister of Sin, the best of our Righteousness being but
as filthy Rags, attended with manifold Corruption, and consequently that there
is no complete, perfect Justification in this Life. And, 2. To change the
Covenant of Grace into that of Works, or cause the former in its Administration
and Dispensation to depend upon the latter; and herein by a preposterous
Hysteron Proteron, if the Scriptures may be our Judge, postpone God's moral Act
in the Justification of Sinners in the material Righteousness of Christ, unto
his Physical Act from infused Qualities in their Regeneration and
Sanctification by his Spirit. The compleatness of God's Act in Justification
both in its negative and positive form, without any respect to an inherent
Qualification, is conspicuously held forth in the Vision that Zechariah had of
Joshuah's typical Representation of the Church, whom tho Satan accused, yet the
Lord, as we find, does not excuse (as appears from his owning that he had
filthy Garments upon him) by either pleading his Graces, or extenuating his
Faults, from a new compiled and pretendedly purchased Law, but from a change of
his Station: Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire? But how? By removing
him from a state of Sin and Guilt unto Death, in taking away his filthy
Garments, and thereby causing Iniquity to pass from him, which includes the
dying Obedience of Christ, and by clothing him with change of Raiment, which is
that Righteousness that springs from the Life-obedience of Christ, and thereby
intituling him unto Glory; whence it is that a fair Mitre is put upon his Head,
which principally has a relation unto Christ's Priestly Office, intimating that
in his Death Joshua overcame the Accusations of him that had the power of
Death, which is the Devil. Hence,

(3.) The Faculty of Faith in a renewed Soul, as it is the spiritual Eye
thereof, discovers the absolute necessity of all Self-abasement, the Glory of
free Grace in its distinguishing Sovereignty, and the miserable Disappointment
of all such who will not stoop or bend the Knee unto, but rather arm and
incense themselves against this way of God's justifying a Sinner in his own
Righteousness, ver. 22, 23, 24, 25. compare Romans 10. 3, 4. with chap. 9. 31,
32, 33. Mat. 21. 44. But,

3. Hence comes in the spiritual Ability of the Soul by Faith, viz. the
feeling, handling, or fastening nature thereof, as having apprehensively
discerned and felt Substance, it lays hold upon the same, and that from the
Strength of God; as Jacob's wrestling, who is called Israel: and therefore God
styles himself the Strength of Israel, who cannot lie, or fail, where he by
Faith engages in the Soul; hence it removes Mountains, overcomes Difficulties,
yea does Wonders, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Heb. 11. 1. Isa. 27. 5. Hos. 12. 4. 1 Samuel 15.
29. Isa. 53. 1. Col. 1. 29. Psalm. 36. 9. Phil. 4. 13. Romans 8. 37. Psalm. 87. 7.
It is remarkable in Mark 11. 22. Have Faith in God, is in the marginal reading,
Have the Faith of God. Now what can stand before a Faith of God's creating and
managing?

4. This Faith is the Taste or relishing Disposition of a newborn Soul, it is
the Savor of God in Christ, yea it is Truth received in the love of it; it is
that whereby the Soul is enabled to say, as Isaac in another case commanded,
Make me savory Meat, such as I love: Nay, it is that branch of Faith in its
actings wherein the Salt of the Covenant consists, and without which no
Sacrifice, whether taken in a proper or improper sense, would ever be
acceptable with the Lord; 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4. compare ver. 7, 8. 2 Cor: 2. 14, 15.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Genesis 27. 4. Numb. 18. 19. Lev. 2. 13. Psalm. 40. 7, 8. John 4.
32, 34. Mark 9. 49, 50. Mat. 5. 13.

5. This Faith puts forth it self in a spiritual sense as the smelling Capacity
of the Soul, or as the judicious Sentiment of the new Creature, exercising it
self between one thing and another, both as to Kinds, Parts, Offices and
Degrees; as whether the Persons in the Trinity be essentially one God, and yet
three positively distinct Subsistences; and in their peculiar relation one to
the other, whether there be not one and the self-same Will and Purpose in each
of these blessed Three, as to one and the self-same thing, and yet this exerted
as the proper separate Act, not in Deity but Personality, of each of them;
whether Christ without or Christ within us does materially and personally
justify us before God; whether Morality and Grace differ only in kind or
degrees, etc. Now Faith in this respect, from a scriptural acceptance, is
termed the Nose of the Church, and that as directed toward Damascus, or the
Church's Enemies, scenting and discriminatively determining between what is
true and false: and this Act of Faith is reckoned upon to be no less (from the
figure of a Tower, by which it is set forth) than to be in its place, the
Strength or Fort of a Church; not promiscuously to take in things, as
pretending that the difference lies only in words, from a supposed Notion of
Metaphysics to amuse People withal, but righteously and accurately to scan and
weigh them, and assign unto each Truth its proper station and office, which tho
materially owned; yet if misplaced, will be of as little use unto the Glory of
God, and the benefit of Souls, as Error it self; Cant. 7. 4. Heb. 5. 14. 1 Cor.
12. 10. John 7. 24. Jer. 15. 19. Psalm. 48. 12, 13. Mat. 23. 23. Now all this is
done by Faith, which is a fruit of the Spirit, and without which it is
impossible to please God, Mark 9. 23. Gal. 5. 22. Heb. 11. 6. Hence it is that
the Messengers and Servants of Jesus Christ are termed Watchmen, Seers, a Light
upon a Hill, the Salt of the Earth, the Savor of Christ, and the living
Epistles of Jesus Christ seen and read of all Men.

And now I must needs say, that I am fully satisfied that there is as deep a
sifting hand of Providence on foot this day, and that both with respect unto
Persons; and therein Practices, Things, and therein Doctrines, as has been
since the Reformation first received its Commencement: Neither can I call to
mind from the little reading I have perhaps been engaged in, any particular
Reason that may in the least give us a resemblance of the Trials of this day,
unless it be the deceitful Practices of the Socinians with the Churches in
Poland, who subscribing Articles sound in themselves (yet retaining their own
wretched reserves) did thereby the more covertly and unexpectedly proceed in
the carrying on of their Designs, their AGREEMENT on the one side being no more
than a Bait to cover the cursed Hook of their rotten Doctrines withal, whereby
they more undiscernedly sowed their pernicious Seed, caught and ensnared Souls,
and that is to be feared to their eternal ruin and destruction. Wherefore,

Note, That in all Ages it has evidently appeared, that those who have most
cried up Graces, Duties, and good Works, tho not in a meritorious sense, yet as
either being in part or in whole the Matter of, or necessary Prerequisites unto
God's Act in justifying of a Sinner, have proved the loosest in their Lives,
most deceitful in Practices injurious unto Authors, and of the most proud,
insolent, morose, and pharisaical Spirit imaginable, witness the Church of Rome
and her Popes, together with all those that adhere unto her in the controverted
Point this day; whereof it is possible, if Provocations be renewed, as
undermining Truths of so great a moment, a particular account both of Persons
amongst us, and their vile Proceedings therein, may be openly produced: for
none do more obstruct a through spreading of the Gospel, both in its distinct
and shining Purity, its effectual and abiding Power, and thereby endanger the
Souls of the Children of Men, than, mere legally zealous and (as such) devout
Professors: Nay, the more externally exact in Practice, and yet unsound and
rotten in Principle, the more will such become the prepared as well as coveted
Engines by which the Enemy would mainly desire to carry on his Designs; and
yet, after all, none will appear more opposite unto God, and destructive unto
Men than such Persons: Romans 10. 2. Acts 18. 14, 15. compare chap. 13. 50, 51.
with 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Luke 23. 20, 21. Acts 5. 33, 34, 35.

But before we proceed, take along a charging Sentence of one of the Heads of
their Tribe, as if fulminated out of the Papal Chair, thoroughly leavened with a
pretended spirit of Infallibility, and that against some by name, and all by
consequence, of our former precious and industrious Reformers, who in their
understandings of matters in difference (it seems with him) were but pure
Idiots, and in their Labors both for the Lord and his Truths but superfluous,
needless and impertinent; nay further, that Augustine and Pelagius were of one
and the self-same Judgment, but it seems, poor Fools, they did not understand
it; here is a swinging Bombard with a Taratantara murmur at the tail of it, a
curious Meteor-light he has been indeed to the Church, exhaled out of the
Pope's Dunghill. But his words are, It has often grieved me to read in Dr.
Heylin's Life of Archbishop Laud, how great a hand the Controversies, then
called Arminian, or of the five Articles, had in the Divisions of the Church of
England, between those that he makes Archbishop Abbot in England, and
Archbishop Usher in Ireland to head on one part, and the few that at first, and
many after that followed Archbishop Laud in England and Archbishop Bramhall in
Ireland on the other part; and to find what a stress the many Parliaments that
Baxter's End of Doctrinal Controversies, in his Prefatory Chapter, p. 17, 18.
feared Popery did lay on the thing they called Arminianism; and being carried
down by the strea^ of many good Men's Opinions and Fears, I was my self some
years confident that Arminianism was a Character of an Enemy to the soundness
and safety of the Church: Alas what a loss the Church has had, if not from the
Apostles times, yet at least from Augustine's even to these latter days, that
this Panaretus had not entered into the World upon the first plantation of the
Gospel, and taken a double lease of Methusalem's Years, whereby with his
Paludament, as a chief Leader, he might have eased the Church of many Broils,
secured it from an Impeachment of want of Brains, but especially saved it from
a needless dying in defense of that which they as it seems erroneously took to
be Truth?
But when I set my self thoroughly and impartially to study it, I found that
which so amazed me, that I durst scarce believe what I could not deny, even
that from the beginning of the Quarrel between Augustine and Pelagius, all the
voluminous Contentions of the Thomists or Dominicans, and the Jesuits and
Franciscans, and between the Lutherans and Zuinglians (herein) and the
Synodists and Arminians, have been mostly about either unsearchable things,
which neither side understood, or about ambiguous words, which one party takes
in one sense, and the other in another; or about the mere methodizing and
ordering of the Notions which both sides are agreed in; and that indeed the
most reach not the very Point of the Difficulty and Controversy, but talk
before they understand, as their Leaders have taught them; (now they are become
mere Parrots) and that when the matter is distinctly opened, it is found, that
multitudes that write, rail, and plot against one another, are really of one
opinion de rebus (a bold Assertion) and did not know it: And that the few
remaining Controversies that are real, and not only verbal, are but of such
small or dubious things, as should break no Love nor Communion among
Christians, but all should with forbearance love each other, in that liberty of
judging which they cannot remedy.

Now there are three things that eminently appear in this Author and his
Followers, especially in Debates of this nature. 1. Rotteness in Principle. 2.
Imperiousness in Spirit. 3. Deceitfulness in Practice with Authors, Hearers and
Readers. This contexture of Qualifications runs through their Polemical
Treatises, and that principally and more apparently when they set themselves,
and that with the most accurateness and sedateness, against Sin and
Righteousness, both as to the form and matter of their Imputation. Wherefore it
is that I think it not altogether unnecessary to lay down some Prelibations or
Foretastes of their Methods, whereby the observant Reader may discern into, and
thereby be enabled to judge upon the present Controversy, that whenever they
enter upon the same, either in their Teachings or Writings, they never lay
before thee a just and naked account of the Debate between us, either as to the
matter or nature of the same: for they fully in their way secure, tho but in
cloudy Expressions, their own Judgment, and that with as seeming an appearance
of Truth (where indeed it is not) as possibly can be imagined; and to enforce
the same home upon thee and others, they represent their Opponents thereunto by
Exceptions drawn forth from most precarious Positions, issuing in as beggarly
Conclusions, never so much as dreamed of by them, and those not inferred from
their just stating either in Words or Matter, of that which they in opposition
unto the same do really hold. As when Justification is pleaded for without
Works, Romans 4. 5. That God justifies the ungodly, they presently foist in that
word continuing so; or that if Si^ as a matter of Fact be charged upon Christ,
Isa. 53. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. tho but by Imputation, then of course (as if it could
be no otherwise) he must be looked upon as an actual Sinner; and all this
merely to hide from us the main Tenure of both Covenants, as subjectively
bottomed on foederal Headships. This let me tell thee, is in plain terms their
constant course and practice. For instance, Mr. Baxter in his Scripture-Gospel
defended, lib. 2. Postscript to the Reader, compared with Mr. Crisp's Preface
to his Father's Works, p. 6. positively asserts, without any manner of just
distinction, which he ought to have attended to, if either God or Man had been
regarded by him, That his Opposers hold that Christ and the Elect are one and
the same Person, i. e. identically or essentially the same, viz. as he
expresses it, by a physical or substantial Personality; here lies his bold,
prevaricating and blinding Dexterity: In which method he constantly, for that
ever I have seen of his Books in Controversial Points of this nature, proceeds;
and then tells us, This, Mr. Crisp says, is more than natural, we being one
Spirit, and Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh. Now Mr. Crisp's Assertion
and Explanation being both scriptural and sound, Mr. Baxter could not wholly
omit, tho he gives but a partial recital of the same; and all that he does
therein is but to anticipate the designed sense thereof, merely in a
prejudicate way to forestal thy Apprehension: That because we are one Spirit
with him, therefore we must be essentially and individually one and the
self-same Spirit; and because Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh
(omitting as foederal Members of his, in a spiritual relation, wherein one main
part of the force of this Mystery lies, tho Mr. B. thought meet for several
reasons not to mention it) therefore we must be materially and substantially
but one Person; and from hence draws a number of wild, yea most blasphemous
Inferences, tho congenial enough with his forged Proposition. Thou may see in
Dr. Willet's Tetrastylon Papisticum, that this is the very way the Papists took
of old in their misrepresenting and accusing the Protestant Doctrine in
general; they would parcel so much out of every Head thereof that they had a
mind to expose as a ridiculous Notion, not leaving out the whole, but either
cut off, or add unto what might best lay the same more naked, and liable to a
seemingly just Exception: Thus also Mr. Baxter deals in his doctrinal end of
Controversies, chap. 10. p. 94. where treating of original Sin, he tells us;

. 1. By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death
passed upon all, in that all have sinned -- This is pretty honest -- But never
tells thee; that this same All have sinned in him; but as clean Water is
defiled by pouring foul into it, so we sinned in him. Now comes in his
Exceptions.

. 2, 3, 4. We were not in Adam distinct Persons really, (but whether we were
not in God's account considered as such in a foederal sense, he never offers
at; Romans 5. 12. compare chap. 4. 17.) for our Persons then existed not, (here
lies the Fallacy) and therefore did not inexist, etc. with a great deal more of
such pitiful stuff. Now who tells him so? Who pleads this? For unless, it seems
with him and the rest of his Disciples, that all the Posterity of Adam had been
createdly and so personally presential in him, as the Grecians were in the
Trojan Horse, God did not enter personally into Covenant with them by their
Representative Head, Adam. Thus instead of giving a just account of his
Antagonists Sentiments of things in Controversies, he presents them unto thee
under disallowed and most gross Absurdities, never so much as thought of or
owned by them; as do also the Opposers of Dr. Crisp's Works: And from hence
informs us how we were in Adam.

. 5. We were seminally or virtually in Adam when he sinned, as a virtus
generativa, etc. Why all this is very true, but this is no ^e than a History of
the Creation, and the natural Consequences issuing therefrom, that Mr. Baxter
offers us: For what is this to God's foederal dealing with Man in a commutative
juridical Act of his, and that by way of transferring Sin or Righteousness from
the one to the other? He might as well have told us that all the Oaks in the
World were seminally and virtually in the first Oak, and have proved it also
with as many Arguments, which might have passed for as many Divinity Topics
and Cases, as wherewith he has endeavored to fortify this his jejune Notion.

But the Question is, Whether all the Posterity of Adam, according to the
nature and tenure of that Covenant God entered into with him, had not a
foederal (not personally created, wherewith he would blind us) Existence as
well and as truly as a radical one in him? The latter he acknowledges, the
former he denies, tho very obfuscingly, like the Fish Sepia, when she designs
the overturning of a Ship, vomits out of her Gorge a Cloud of Ink, under which
Umbrage, as being therewith and therein encompassed and hidden from the sight
of the Mariners, she the more covertly and securely accomplishes her Purpose.
Thus the Socinians deal with their Opposers; e. g. they will in their pleadings
against the Doctrine of the Trinity betake themselves unto Genesis 1. 26. Let us
make Man, etc. and draw Conclusions from thence, that if there be distinct
personal Subsistencies in the Deity, and that to be pleaded for from thence,
why then they blasphemously infer, that the word [us] may bespeak either a
lesser or greater number than three in that glorious, tremendous and blessed
Trin-union, not at all regarding, or giving their Readers to know, that that
place speaks of a plurality of Persons, which as to their precise number
[three] ought to be regulated and guarded by other Texts of Scripture, none
being of a private Interpretation.

This is the constant diverting method of these our Athenian Logicians; some
new thing (which indeed is not new if considered, but an old Error new vampt)
they would intrude upon us, tho by old Measures and Practices. For tho it is
true, God personally and orally entered into Covenant with Adam, but whether it
was with him upon his own account, or with Mankind in and by him, is that which
is so far from being brought into the state of the Question, that Mr. B.
perfectly shuffles it (by his false and disingenuous forming of the same) out
of thy sight. Nay, suppose now since the Fall, that any one Person of the Race
of Mankind should be brought into the World with an universal rectitude in his
Nature unto the whole of the Law of God, as the direct Medium between a Creator
and a rational Creature, and should yield, living and dying in that state of
natural Perfection, an unspotted or sinless Obedience unto the same, yet since
that his Representative not quatenus infusing original, but substitutive Head,
sinned, this very act of Transgression would perfectly overthrow him in
Judgment, and that by Imputation. For tho physical Transgression, and
consequently sinful Habits and Practices do contract Guilt in themselves barely
as such considered, yet these have no proper, material, or congenially strict
relation (any further than as a consequential Effect) unto a personal, eternal
and juridical Charge or Discharge; the one respecting an inward, depraved
Nature and Qualification, the other a personal Title, and Obnoxiousness by way
of judicial Right unto this or the other Good or Evil in a forensick sense:
Infusion and Imputation being of two different natures, both as to their
Matter, Ends and Uses; the one to qualify, the other to justify; the latter to
enstate, the former inherently and apprehensively to fit for that said state in
a fruitional not entituling sense. Adam's Case fully manifests this, in which
three things are observable: As, 1. His Sin as a matter of Fact laid to his
charge, and that by the Lord, Have thou eaten of the Tree? etc. 2. The Guilt of
that Sin breaking in upon him, as Eyes opened, Nakedness discovered, and Fear
oppressing. 3. A defiled, crooked and besotted Nature issuing, therefrom, as
extenuating the Crime, casting it wretchedly rather upon God than where it
should be, sewing Aprons of Fig Leaves to secure from the stroke of an infinite
Divine Arm of offended Justice, and seeking a shelter in the Creature (behind
the Trees) from the allseeing Eye of an uncircumscribed boundless Creator. Now
there is not any one of the after Sins of Adam, i. e. after his Fall; that is
charged upon his Posterity; but this of his Transgression that cast him out of
his state of Innocence is fully so, and only imputed unto them, Romans 5. 14. not
any, of his other Sins being in the least mentioned in that respect; which
fully demonstrates, (as overthrowing Mr. Baxter's Position) that their Guilt as
a Covenant-Charge, was not propagated or transferred from Adam barely as a
communicative Root, through their Defilement, Channel-wise, or in a derivative
sense; for he was as much the first of Mankind, truly and properly so, and the
Original of all his Offspring afterward as before. This Supposition of Mr.
Baxter's, it is true, constitutes a Headship, but it is by way of Primacy, or
Aeval Precedence, and not Headship by way of Foederacy or Covenant in a
substitutive sense; for by his account we were no more in Adam as a common
Person, than as seminally and virtually so: but thus we were in him after his
being turned out of the Garden as well as before; which strikes at the very
root of the nature of Imputation it self. This indeed is the full compass of
Mr. Baxter's, and the Concessions of some others, as to the charge of Original
Sin, it being in their sense only imputed as it is transfused and inheres, and
not as an external, juridical Charge; but it seems it is with them [original]
because Adam happened to be the first of Mankind, and the first that sinned,
but not by them counted Original Sin, because the all of Mankind as in the just
and true esteem of God sinned, in his very act of Transgression: which more
fully appears from what Mr. B. further urges in the aforesaid Chapter, That the
Sins of our more immediate Parents are as much, if not more, reckoned upon us
as our Sins, than the Sin of Adam. Now consider, tho Eve was first in the
Transgression, yet we find not that she saw her Nakedness till Adam had sinned,
which fully proves, not barely his original but representative Headship; nay,
had she only her self eaten of the forbidden Fruit, unto all eternity she had
never in a proper juridical sense broken that Covenant, her Guilt not being
charged upon her, till her and our public Head had transgressed, and she and
we in him: for tho in what she did as to matter of Fact, in her disregarding of
and disobedience unto a negative Precept, rendered her a Transgressor, and that
in a positive sense, against her Creator, Rector and Lawgiver; yet there was no
place, no not for infinite Justice it self, to come in and pass a Sentence of
Condemnation upon her whilst Adam stood, for she foederally stood in him; and
whilst he performed the Conditions of that Covenant, she was safe from any
thing that Divine Vengeance could inflict upon her. Whence, viz. from a just
Consideration of Adam's being treated with the Lord as a public Person, or
common Head, it clearly appears to me, that the reigning Pollution of our
Natures is the effect of an imputed Sin unto our Persons (weigh these Texts
Psalm. 32. (...), 2. and 103. 3.) tho not identically the same, either as to
God's judicial and gracious way of proceedings with Sinners, or his
Determination therein and thereupon; and that this imputed Sin is the personal
Sin of him who was and ever will be in that very single Act of his
Transgression the Representative Head of all Mankind, and will abide so unto
all such, i. e. in that condemning relation unto them who live and die in a
state of Nature, tho they themselves had never personally committed so much as
one Sin, either in thought, word, or deed: That wherever, ^or on whomsoever
this Sin lies actually charged, such an one still remains and shall remain
during (...), his state under the dominion of Sin, and that by a Covenant
stated Consequence; no one yet being ever able to walk after the Spirit, who
was not first brought into an uncondemned state; Romans 6. 14. chap. 8. 1. 2.
Cor. 5. 17. Acts 9. 5, 6. compare chap. 22. 3, 4, 14, 15. Gal. 1. 13, 14, 16.
chap. 2. 19, 20.

All this my Apprehension ^ay be clearly vindicated from several places in
Scripture, especially from the Analogy of Faith therein, and more particularly
from Phil. 3. hinted at before (beside that of 1 Cor. 15. 44, etc.) if the
scope of that Chapter in the main design thereof be attended unto: for tho the
Apostle (as has been said) knew that he had attained unto Holiness in the
reality of its kind, and withal pressed after the same in the perfection of its
degree, which he knew would be at farthest made apparent unto all (in the
re-uniting of Soul and Body) at the Resurrection of the Dead; yet he also knew,
that if he stood not materially invested with the Righteousness of another, he
would be cast in Judgment (notwithstanding his unspotted Holiness) from a
juridical Covenant-charge of the Sin of another, in the complete matter of Fact
thereof lying upon him.

Therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 5. 2. If ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing. Now the Question will arise, Whether does the Apostle
intend, that this Ordinance of Circumcision in its bare external
Administration, by a mere literal cutting off of the foreskin of the Flesh
only; or, that in its spiritually figurative relation also, as holding forth
the change of the Heart, would be so far from contributing any thing, either in
whole or in part, toward their Justification, if relied upon for that end,
that even Christ himself thereby would be rendered of no effect, or
unprofitable unto them? I suppose he means it chiefly in the latter sense, the
former being too gross a piece of Hypocrisy, even for those false Teachers
themselves who had crept in among the believing Galatians, to insist upon; and
so palpably absurd, that it is hard to imagine how Peter, Barnabas, and other
good Men should be caught by it: But that tho they brought in a
Heart-renovation, or a Circumcision of the Heart, shadowed forth by their
actual compliance with its outward Application in the use of that Institution,
yet if as to any part of the matter of their Justification, they excluded
Christ thereby. Therefore Circumcision, the Law, and the Works of the Law are
convertible terms with the Apostle in this case, as totally expunging and
abhorring them from having any share or part in this Doctrinal Point and
Concern: For a spiritual Circumcision is the Law written in the Heart, which if
either more or less relied upon as to the forementioned end, will absolutely
make us Debtors to do the whole Law, by which we must be either acquitted or
cast, Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4. But the Apostle, whatever others might do, durst not
trust unto this, Romans 7. 22, 23, 24, 25. and therefore says, Phil. 3. 3. We are
the Circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus,
and have no confidence in the Flesh; compared with ver. 9. Nay, grant we were
thoroughly, by way of Inherency, holy, yet this Sin of Imputation, which
respects a foederal Headship, tho not actually in our own personal existence
contracted by us, notwithstanding the complete supposed healing of the
vitiosity of our Natures, would absolutely and irresistibly condemn and
overthrow us. Job knew this very well, chap. 9. 15. Whom tho I were righteous,
yet ^ould I not answer; but I would make supplication to my Judge.

It is remarkable here, how this gracious Man styles God, even no less than a
Judge, which is the Character of one executing Jus^ice, and therein proceeding
according to Law, and that righteously (...) (...) not present his own
Righteousness, tho he were perfectly righteous, (which the word, as
indefinitely spoken, does import) as the Test whereon God as a Judge must pass
his Sentence upon him; well knowing, that the most complete through Renovation
of his Nature, even unto an entire riddance of Sin, would never quit him from a
personal Charge, when God as a Judge should come to try him; and yet in his
Supplication (as is clearly included) he would beg God's Acquitment and
Justification of him, and that as a Judge, in a forensick, juridical; and
righteous way, and all this without any regard to his own inherent
Righteousness, tho it had been spotless and sinless.

Want of an admission of this fundamental Truth has opened a door to this
following wretched Assertion: In quantum sincere obediens aliquis est, in
tantum non peccat; and in quantum non peccat, in tantum remissionis neque eget
neque capax est. Ideoque in tantum Christi Justitia ei ad remissionem non
impuatur. Bax. Meth. Theol. par. 3. p. 307. i. e. As far as any ones Obedience
is sincere, so far he sins not; and as far as he sins not, so far he
neither needs nor is capable of Remission. Therefore Christ's Righteousness so
far is not imputed unto him for Remission. A piece of perfect Diabolism! And no
less indeed than that wherein and whereby all those wild, heretical, yea
blasphemous Notions and Treatises, that have pestered the Church of God in all
Generations, do lie and are cherished; nay the very bottom on which the Papal
Justification, and the Quakers state of Perfection in a Selfrighteousness are
founded.

Now it is true, many may be qualified for the managing of vast Estates,
Offices and Places, yea Kingdoms, who yet have no right thereunto; and their
entrance upon the same without a juridical Title thereunto, would soon
constitute them Thieves and Robbers, as not entering into and upon the same
legally, or at the door, Joh. 10. 7, 8, 9. compare Mat. 22. 11. Hence Christ is
called the Door, or certain unquestionable entrance into a legal Inheritance;
which tho of Grace it becomes such to all the Elect, in the drawings of the
Father by his Spirit, yet in Righteousness through the Son they come in time to
lay claim unto the same; for no elect Vessel, as chosen in Christ, but has as
just a Title (tho founded in Grace) unto such a Faith as enables him to receive
that Righteousness to his Justification, as he has a right to Glory in and by
virtue of the same Righteousness so received, nay, his very Faith depends
absolutely upon the application thereof, or otherwise what must we believe or
receive by Faith? for this Righteousness in the preaching of Christ is the
first thing offered unto Sinners, as unrighteous and ungodly ones: and to
whomsoever of them this Righteousness does belong, Faith is given unto such to
receive the same; but those that have not a previous Interest in and Title unto
it, tho in the right of another, are left to stumble at it through Unbelief;
Acts 13. 48. chap. 18. 10. Luke 10. 6. Mark 4. 11, 12. Joh. 6. 36, 37, 39, 64,
65. Romans 9. 30, 31, 32, 33. chap. 10. 3, 4. Acts 13. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
chap. 28. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

True Regeneration never more expresses it self in the reality of its kind and
genuine Operation, than by bringing the Soul under a submissive active
reception of an external Righteousness for its Justification in a material (not
meritorious, and as such subservient thereunto) sense before God; not as it is
previous thereunto, but consequential upon such an Imputation, and ever
operates toward, and terminates in the same as its proper Basis, resultive
Center, and cherishing Spring; Romans 10. 3, 4. Isa. 61. 10. Mat. 22. 11. Rev. 3.
18. Psalm. 69. 27, 28, 29. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. Joh. 6. 68. Psalm. 119. 40. Mal. 4. 2.
Psalm. 87. 7. And indeed it is this, and this alone, that is the physical or
internal cause of a Person's actual discerning, embracing and submitting unto
the same; which tho it be the first in Man's Experience, yet it is the last in
God's Order; there being nothing that can dispose the Sinner unto a reception
of such an Offer, but what becomes the holy Nature of God himself, even his
Image, which is made up of sound Knowledge, exerting it self into practical
Wisdom, as its Flower or the perfection of its Growth, issuing in a well
sounded and stable Judgment, altogether attended, at least habitually, with a
readiness of Will and warmth of Affections, etc. Now tho all that be the Fruits
and Effects of an imputedly righteous or justified State, yet it is through
these as created and managed by the Spirit of the Lord, that the Soul comes
sensibly to apprehend, approve, lay hold of, and experimentally to apply the
same unto it self, Mark 4. 11, 12. compare Luke 10. 20, 21, 22. Therefore it is
that our actual seeing of the Kingdom of God arises from our being born again,
Joh. 3. 3. tho our Interest therein depends not upon the same, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

Now this blessed Image is not in the least any part of that Righteousness
which the Scripture calls for our voluntary submission unto, either as to the
matter or form of its application to our personal Justification; for what
should incline us unto an actual submission or stooping unto this Image or
express Likeness of God in Regeneration? there being nothing in us by Nature
but what is perfect Enmity against the same, therefore wrought by
Super-creation Grace: But it is that whereby God capacitates the Soul
discerningly, perswasively and experimentally to receive this external
Righteousness, and to take full possession thereof as its material Clothing,
being previous unto this act of Submission, reckoned upon and imputed unto such
of God himself; Mat. 4. 16. compare Psalm. 119. 18. Joh. 6. 29. Romans 10. 4.
Psalm. 69. 27. Isa. 46. 13. chap. 51. 5. Phil. 3. 9. Therefore says Christ, Luke
10. 5, 6. Into whatsoever House ye enter, first say, Peace be to this House:
And if the Son of Peace be there, your Peace shall rest upon it; if not, it
shall return unto you again. Here we find that the offers of Peace and
Reconciliation was the Commission that the Primitive Gospel-preachers were
entrusted with by Christ the great Lawgiver, to lay before Sinners; but these
offers of Peace and Reconciliation Christ positively declares should not be
received but by those who were indeed the Sons of Peace, even before they heard
so much as the glad tidings thereof, much less received it: for it is one thing
to have Peace with God, and another thing to be at peace with God, 2 Cor. 5.
18, 19. compare. ver. 20.

Hence it is, that tho Christ is said to be made Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption unto his People; yet we find also that this his being so made
over unto them is manifested in order to their reception of, comfort and
establishment in the same, by his being made also of God, and that in the first
place, Wisdom unto them, 1 Cor. 1. 30. for it is he, tho by his Spirit, that
opens their Eyes, takes away the Vail off their Hearts, causes them to dive by
Faith into the very inward Spiritualities of the Word, unseals the Book of
Life, and gives them a saving sight of the Mysteries of Divine Love, together
with their Privileges therefrom, and Interest in the same, and that from
Eternity; to Eternity; Joh. 1. 18. Rev. 3. 18. Mat. 11. 27. 2 Cor. 3. 16, 17. 1
Cor. 2. 9, 10. compare ver. 16. Joh. 1. 50, 51. Rev. 1. 18. chap. 5. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. chap. 13. 8. chap. 17. 8. chap. 20. 12, 15. chap. 21. 27.
Mark 4. 11. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. chap. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19. Jer. 31. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Into a want of this it is that the Apostle
ultimately in a radically decreed sense resolves the Stubbornness of the Jews,
who would not submit unto this Righteousness for their Justification, Romans 9.
30, 31, 32, 33. chap. 10. 3, 4. compare Acts 28. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor.
1. 23, 24. 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15. For a visive and receptive Faculty or Disposition
is not the thing received for this use, either in a meritorious or material, or
precedent as titular sense; common Reason will tell us this; but it is wrought
in us for a certain distinct Use, End and Employ. Now does my faculty of
seeing, and apprehending, or laying hold of, give what is seen or apprehended,
either a being unto it in it self, or me a Title thereunto? In the prosecution
of such an Hypothesis what desperate work would Men make with the Tenth
Commandment? since it is either mine before this, and that in a righteous as
well as a material sense, or it never will be. An Inheritance is an external,
bequeathed, and appropriated Blessing, and that by a Law-Title settled upon us;
but our Qualification for both our reception, entrance upon, and improvement of
the same, springs from an inherent Endowment, which cannot be either the
material, meritorious or moving Cause of our right unto, tho it make way for
our actual possession of, the same; the state of a Man's Person, and
qualification of his Nature being two absolutely distinct things, both as to
matter and order: for if we have not the matter of our Justification, either in
or of our selves, whence and for what is it, that a Qualification, properly
such, must arise? as the hearing, seeing, etc. Faculties of Faith. And if we
have the same within us, for what uses and ends are our Qualifications? for if
that Righteousness be in us, which must materially justify us, what needs a
Qualification to receive it, or Merits to subserve it? since God will testify
unto, and uphold his own Image, both as to its matter, use, and place, being
his particular Workmanship whenever it is wrought. Now this is either pure in
it self, (which as a Creature of God, is certainly and essentially so) and if
so, what need remote Assistances to render it acceptable as the matter (if it
must be such) of our Justification? If impure, for what is Merit, as abstracted
from Matter, brought in? Will the Merits of Christ's material Righteousness
render our Pollutions, in a proper, or improper sense, Holiness unto the Lord?
For either the new Creature, and that wrought of God in us, is in its own
immix'd nature undefiled, or it is not; which certainly is not, tho attended,
yet not contemperated with various Defilements; for his Image can no more
essentially be polluted in a proper identic sense, than he himself can be, it
being in Believers (tho much darkened from their sight, and kept back from its
proper Evidences by reason of permitted and inter-operating Corruptions) as
wrought and maintained by God himself, entire in its nature, tho dogged and
attended with manifold Infirmities, and Pull-backs, as Oil mixed with other
Liquors; Romans 7. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Mat. 5. 48. 1 Pet.
1. 15, 16. Gal. 5. 17. 1 John 2. 20. compare chap. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. with chap.
1. 7, 8. And if so, it is as to its own Essence and Nature distinctly pure, and
shall by a dissolution between Soul and Body, be perfectly cleared and rid of
all manner of sinful adherences.

Object. But some may suppose, that this seems to confirm what was so highly
and lately condemned in a Latin Saying of Mr. Baxter's above cited.

Not at all: for tho it is true, That the Image of God sins not, neither as
such can it sin, 1 John 3. 9. and therefore needs not Pardon; and it were
very uncouth, yea perfect nonsense, to say, that a Creature which springs from
the new Birth, wholly compacted and made up of the Graces of the Spirit, should
in se be capable of sinning; but that any, or the best of Persons in whom the
same is wrought, does not daily sin, and as daily stand in need of Pardon, is
high Blasphemy, if lying against the Truth may be reckoned upon as such, 1 John
1. 8, 10. It is not Natures, but Persons, that are the capable and proper
Objects of Pardon, Justification and Salvation: Nature, it is confessed, is
inherently the distinct Subject of Sin, or Grace; and where totally under the
power and dominion of Sin, if in an elected and pre-justified Vessel, in time
it is renewed by the mortifying and quickening Efficacy of the Spirit's
Operation; which, as renewed, so maintained, and as maintained, so testified
unto, and that from impressive Evidences congenial with his Work manifested,
which is either sooner or later, more or less, oftener or seldomer, longer or
shorter, as to its experimental abode; and all by the self-same Spirit, who as
a free Agent both works and seals unto the same, when and how he pleases.

But the grub of Mr. B's Notions lies here, as retaining this in it, that an
inward special work of Grace (to speak more favorably of him than ever yet I
could see ground for) being the material Righteousness of a Sinner's
Justification before God, of consequence it must be, that where this is truly
wrought and drawn forth into sincere acts of Obedience, then, thence and there
he rationally concludes according to his own moral Swasion, that there needs
not any thing of the Righteousness of Christ, either to acquit such in whom it
is created from the charge of Sin, or give them a forensick Title unto Glory.
This is the secret Radix on which all his Antichristian Pile and Fabric of
Divinity is laid and built.

Do but clear up this, and you will soon find from a diligent attendance upon
the Treatises of these Men, into what it is that they both materially, formally
and inferentially lodge and resolve this their violent, false and new-coin'd
Charge of Antinomianism; namely, That an actual commutative transferring of Sin
and Righteousness, and that in the very matter of Fact as to each of them, by
as true and real an Imputation as God himself could, at leastwise (with a
complete respect to his own Attributes, and the Salvation of a Sinner) would
charge upon the suffering, innocent, voluntary Substitutive, and the ungodly,
yet righteous Sinner, is the very bottom on which it is essentially founded,
and whence it as essentially springs and is nourished, under the various
pretenses of Graces; Duties, Holiness, and Obedience therein. Remove but this,
and I shall engage a perfect Coalescency between Parties more immediately at
variance this day, without so much in the least as a talk of Heads of Union,
nay, or oral Conference between them: For it is as evident as the Sun at
noonday, that they knew it was in vain to engage plainly and above board about
this Point with their Orthodox tricked Subscribers; and therefore thought the
most likely Expedient for their success in an insensible removal of this
Foundation, and introducal of their own rotten Principles into the room
thereof, and all to deceive the People by their cloudy Preachments, as well as
their Couniters with their false Subscriptions, was by a hooking in some of the
most eminent of their Teachers and Leaders into a seeming agreement in
Fundamentals, in which they were even then in their judgments no more one, than
white and black as Colors are; and this these double-dealers knew very well,
as appears by unforced and just Consequences, even at the time of their
compiling and signing this their subtle Engine and Instrument.

Nay, even many, if not most of those deceased that they impeach for
Antinomians, they cannot but acknowledge to be gracious and holy Men; which,
when the good fit takes them, they will pretty honestly own, provided you
disturb them not in their designs therein; yea further, I have seen, I think in
print, if they may be believed, that they think their Souls are in Heaven, even
the Souls of such who when upon Earth they charged for being the promoters of
the Doctrines of Licentiousness. Whence then comes in this Charge of
Antinomianism against them? Why hence, as was said before, merely from their
holding of a transimputation of Sin and Righteousness, in their distinct
matters of Fact, from one to another; which when once quitted, Reader, let me
tell thee, thou may bid a through adieu to the Christian Religion, as to what
advantage thou will reap by it, either as to any hopes of Peace with God
therefrom, acquitment from Sin in its Guilt, or a standing in a justified state
before him.

Now consider, That the Righteousness of Christ in its pure merit procures and
purchases a free and irrevocable Pardon for Sin, or makes way for the full
manifestation and application thereof from the Heart of Grace and Mercy,
through the hands of infinite Justice, by an immaculate, proper and bloody
Sacrifice; Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. And that the same Righteousness in the complete
matter thereof, as truly imputed, is that for and in which the Elect are
reckoned just, and thereupon brought into an actual state of Grace here, as
also an entitling state unto Glory hereafter; and tho they always stand
indistant one from the other, yet they fall under a separate Consideration (if
the Analogy of Faith be regarded) as to their distinct Uses and Ends: which
distinction duly attended unto according to Scripture allowance, would soon
unravel the crafty Designs of such who say, That Merit and Matter are the same
in judicial Acts.

Therefore if this indwelling Righteousness so much pleaded for, be our
justifying Righteousness, what needs the application of an external one in any
sense to support the same? (unless, as they say, in a meritorious way; but that
can be no longer than whilst we are in the Body, after which it is cashiered
both as to its Merit and Matter, as being of no further use unto them, when
they are thereby made perfect to stand justified before God in their own
Holiness) for as it is pure in its kind, ut supra, so at death all the
remainders of adhering Sin shall be done away, where ^ue Regeneration is
wrought. Now if so, then a Justification in this Righteousness, by virtue or
through the Merits of the Righteousness of another, especially at the day of
Judgment, is a downright double-branch'd piece of Popery, it being in it self
but a mere Act of Supererrogation, and a Justification by Works also.

But and if this justifying Righteousness both as to its Matter and Merit be
without us, How shall we attain unto it, unless the same be given unto us as
previous unto our Qualification for our reception of the same? An Heir is an
Heir, and that by Law, even before he enjoys his Estate, Gal. 4. 1. chap. 4. 5,
6. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6. And when he comes to claim Possession, what does he do it
by? Is it because he is qualified by his attaining unto such a number of Years?
Not at all, he is thereby qualified it is true to plead his Right: But how does
he do it? It is by producing old Deeds of Settlement, pleading ancient
Covenant-Contracts, former Conveyances, ratified, sealed and confirmed even
before he was born, and that from a mutual Compact betwixt Party and Party upon
valuable Considerations, which tho founded in a free act of Donation, yet is
transferred over unto him in a juridical sense, by which he pleads, carries on
his Cause, and enters upon his Right. And although nothing can be freer than a
Gift, yet I suppose no way safer for our reception and retention of it, than by
attending upon the Intention of the Conveyer, in his dispensing and
communicating of the same. Wherefore,

Note, That unless the Name of God in the whole and complete dimensions of the
infinite Attributes of the same, be more glorified in the Salvation of a
Sinner, than the said Sinner can possibly be benefited thereby, he cannot
either unreservedly or unfeignedly rejoice in God, and consequently find any
solid Peace and Comfort in his own Soul; 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. Revel. 1. 5, 6.
chapter 4. 2, 8, 9, 10, 11. observe therefore those Authors and Teachers that
give thee Truth by its handle; for many will speak and write that which is
Truth in it self, but if either it be mistimed, misapplied, and especially
misplaced, or not kept within its proper bo^ and station, it will do thee more
harm than good. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Rightly dividing the word of Truth, is the mark
of a sound as well as faithful Teacher; for no positive Error will prove more
pernicious unto the Soul than an irregulated or falsely managed Truth, which
usually drops from the Pens and Mouths of such who would rather manage Truth,
than suffer themselves to be managed by it. Corruption optimi est pessima. I
shall hereunto add a Saying of one truly termed a Reverend Prolocutor, and
quoted as such by worthy Mr. Robert Lancaster, in his defense of Dr. Crisp's
Works, lately come out, against the unjust Exceptions of one Mr. Geree; That
the Righteousness of Christ is said to be imputed to us by Faith, because it is
not discerned to be imputed to us of God but by Faith. This plainly shows, that
it is imputed before it is either discerned or received. A Sentence highly
deserving to be writ in Characters of Gold, both for its Matter and Conciseness.

Now that thou may see that the main design of these great Pretenders unto
Holiness (in whose Writings and Practices it could be wished that some proper
Vestigias of its true nature did appear) is but that whereby they might deprive
us of a Covenant-Headship, I shall lay a parallel Instance before thee of their
Proceedings herein, from a recited Passage out of the Council of Trent, and
that verbatim, lest I be thought to impose upon the Reader, from Sir Nathaniel
Brent's account of the same, as managed between one Friar Ambrosius Catarinus
on the one hand, and Friar- Dominicus Soto on the other. Nine Articles having
been proposed to that Synod, some of them containing the very Abstract of our
Neonomian Scheme (both jointly synonimous in their Methods for establishing the
same) few opposed them save Catarinus, and that very worthily and judiciously,
as to the main of his design therein; against whom Soto objected, whose
Divinity was received and ratified by that Convention, and the former's
rejected. For had Catarinus's, sound Proposition taken place, including in it a
foederal Headship, (which the Pope dreaded, and therefore posted away his
Portmantuas of Gold to make friends [the method of some this day] to preserve
his own blasphemously assumed Capitalship, and that upon the same bottom that
our present Opposers go to work) Antichrist, or the Man of Sin had long since
been laid in the Dust. Now I must desire thee to take notice of what Catarinus
his design is, in what he urges about Sin, otherwise thou may stumble at some
Expressions of his in this Citation, viz. that he speaks only of that Sin,
whereby in the imputation thereof as a matter of Fact, the Sinner in a
Covenant-sense stands condemned juridically before God, (the Conference being
more immediately about Justification) which his Opponent Soto endeavors, with
the Arguments of some this day, to refute. The words are as follows.

No Man resisted the Condemnation of the Articles: But Friar Ambrosius
Catarinus noted the Reasons for unsufficient, in that they declared not the
true nature of this Sin, and showed it in a long Discourse: The substance
whereof was, That it is necessary to distinguish the Sin from the Punishment;
that Concupiscence and privation of Righteousness is the Punishment of Sin,
therefore that it is necessary the Sin should be another thing. He added, that
which was not a Sin in Adam, it is impossible it should be a Sin in us: but
neither of these two were Sin in Adam, because neither privation of
Righteousness, nor Concupiscence were his Actions, therefore neither are they
in us; and if they were effects of Sin in him, of necessity they must be so in
others also.

By which reason it cannot be said that Sin is the Enmity of God against the
Sinner, nor the Sinner's Enmity against God, seeing they are things that follow
Sin, and come after it.

He oppugned also the transmission of Sin by means of the Seed and Generation,
saying, That as if Adam had not sinned, Righteousness would have been
transferred, not by virtue of the Generation, but only by the Will of God, so
it is fit to find another means to transfuse Sin. And he explained his Opinion
in this form; That as God made a Covenant with Abraham and all his Posterity
when he made him Father of the Faithful, so when he gave original Righteousness
to Adam and all Mankind, he made him seal an Obligation in the name of all to
keep it for himself and them, observing the Commandments; which because he
transgressed, he lost it as well for others as for himself, and incurred the
Punishments also for them; the which as they are derived into every one, so the
very Transgression of Adam belonged to every one; to him as the Cause, to
others by virtue of the Covenant: so that the Action of Adam is actual Sin in
him, and imputed to others, is original; because when he sinned, all Mankind
did sin with him. Catarinus grounded himself principally, for that a true and
proper Sin must needs be a voluntary Act, and no other thing can be voluntary
but the Transgression of Adam imputed unto all. And Paul saying that all have
sinned in Adam, it must be understood that they have all committed the same Sin
with him. He alleged, for Example, that St. Paul to the Hebrews affirms,
that Levi paid Tithe to Melchisedec when he paid it in his great Grandfather
Abraham; by which reason it must be said, that the Posterity violated the
Commandment of God when Adam did it, and that they were Sinners in him, as in
him they received Righteousness. And so there is no need to run to Lust which
infecteth the Flesh, whence the Soul receives Infection: For it cannot be
understood how a Spirit can receive a corporal Passion; and if Sin were a
spiritual Blemish ^in the Soul; it could not first be in the Flesh; and if it
be corporal in the Flesh, it can work none effect in the Spirit. That the Soul
by joining it self with an infected Body, does receive spiritual Infection, is
an unconceivable Transcendency. He proved the Covenant of God with Adam by a
place of the Prophet Osea, by another of Ecclesiasticus, and by many places of
St. Austin. That the Sin of every one is the Act only of the Transgression of
Adam, he proved by St. Paul, when he says, That by the Disobedience of one
Man, many are made Sinners: and because the Church has ever understood that
Sin is nothing else but a voluntary Action against the Law, of which kind there
was none but that of Adam; and because St. Paul says, that Death entered by
original Sin, which entered only by actual Transgression. And he brought for
the principal proof, that tho Eve did eat the Apple before Adam, yet she knew
not she was naked, nor that she had incurred the Punishment, but only after
Adam had sinned. Therefore Adam's Sin, as it was not his alone, but of Eve too,
so was it also of all his Posterity.

But Friar Dominicus Soto, to defend the Opinion of St. Thomas, and the other
Divines from the Objections of Catarinus, brought a new Exposition, and said,
That Adam sinned actually in eating the forbidden Fruit, but after he remained
a Sinner by an habitual Quality, caused by the Action, as by every bad Action
such a Disposition is bred in the mind of the Actor, by which, tho the Act be
past, he remained and is called a Sinner; that Adam's Action was transitory,
nor had existence but while he wrought; that the habitual Quality remaining in
him, passed into the Posterity, and is transfused as proper unto every one;
that Adam's Action is not original Sin, but that consequent Habit which the
Theologues call privation of Righteousness, which may be well expounded,
considering that Man is called a Sinner, not only when he transgresses
actually, but after also, until the Sin be cancelled, not in regard of the
Punishments, or other consequences of Sin, but in regard of the preceding
Transgression it self; as that which makes a Man crooked until he be straightened
again, who is said to be so, not by an actual Action, but by that Effect which
remains after the Action is past. He compared original Sin to Crookedness, as
it is indeed a spiritual Obliquity; for the whole nature of Man being in Adam,
when he made himself crooked by transgressing the Precept (here lies the
Baxterian Hook) the whole Nature of Man, and by consequent, every particular
Person remained crooked, not by the curvity of Adam (mark that Friend!) but by
his own, by which he is truly crooked and a Sinner, until he be straightened by
the Grace of God.

This last of Soto's definition of Sin, and the concerns of a Sinner therein,
as he stands either juridically acquitted from or charged with the same before
God, is that which was received by that general Synodical Congress at Trent,
whereon it was, is, and shall remain the foundation of all the hopes o.
Self-justiciaries, till the full accomplishment of those Promises and Decrees
touching the total and final downfall and overthrow of that Man of Sin, (whose
main support, as such, lies in this Doctrine) with all his Adherents, be
brought about.

And now, before we enter upon the following Quotations, let me say, which I
solemnly do, That I desire no more as to my Justification before, Acceptance
and Peace with God both here and hereafter, and that as to the matter and
manner of its Communication, together with its assigned, genuine influential
Effects both in Graces and Duties, and from the whole my Fellowship with the
Lord thereby, than what these Persons, with whom our present Contest does lie,
do with the greatest industrious Malice, and deceitful Impudence seek to
deprive us of. Luther was very sensible of this, when he said that he could
overlook many things in the Romanists, were they but clear and steadfast in this
point of Justification. The same may be said of several this day.

The subsequent Citations have each of them distinctly their peculiar relation,
either in a congruous or incongruous sense, to one or more of the nine
Doctrinal, Reformed, Protestant Heads mentioned in the Introduction, unto which
the Reader is referred, to determine the matter in hand by an impartial
weighing both the one and the other of them in the Balances, of the Sanctuary.

Head 1. That Predestination, etc.
Conformist.
PRedestination to Life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
Foundation of the World was laid) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Condemnation those whom he has chosen
in Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation,
as Vessels made to Honor, etc. Artic. 17. C^. Engl.

As many as are in this Faith (viz. Faith in Christ) steadfast, were
fore-chosen, predestmate, and appointed to everlasting Life before the World
was made: Witness hereof, they have within their Hearts the Spirit of Christ,
the Author, Earnest, and unfailable Pledge of their Faith; which Faith only is
able to perceive the Mysteries of God; only brings Peace unto the Heart, only
takes hold on the Righteousness that is in Christ Jesus. K. Edw. 6. Catechism.
Prinne, p. 36.

God from Eternity has predestined certain Men unto Life; certain Men he
has reprobated unto Death: Lambeth, Art. 1. November. 20. 1595.

The moving or efficient cause of Predestination unto Life, is not the
foresight of Faith, or of Perseverance, or of good Works, or of any thing that
is in the Persons predestined, but only the good will and pleasure of God..
Art. 2.

There is a predetermined and certain number of the predestinate, which can
neither be augmented nor diminished. Art. 3.

By the eternal Counsel of God he has predestined some unto Life, and
reprobated some unto Death, of both which there is a certain number known only
to God, which can neither be increased nor diminished. In a Convocation of the
Clergy of Ireland, held at Dublin, 1615. Art. 12.

The cause moving God to predestinate unto Life, is not the foreseeing of
Faith, or Perseverance, or good Works, or of any thing which is in the Person
predestined, but only the good pleasure of God himself. For all things being
ordained for the manifestation of his Glory, and his Glory being to appear both
in the Works of his Mercy and of his Justice;

It seemed good to his heavenly Wisdom to choose out a certain number toward
whom he would extend his undeserved Mercy, leaving the rest to be Spectacles of
his Justice. Art. 14.

What is Predestination?

It is the special Decree of God, whereby he has from everlasting, freely and
for his own Glory, foreordained all reasonable Creatures to a certain and
everlasting estate of Glory in Heaven, or Shame in Hell.

What is the cause of this Decree?

Only the mere Will and free Pleasure of God, to dispose of his own Work as he
will, Romans 9. 21. Jer. 5. 14. and 18. 22. Isa. 64. 8.

Is this Decree certain and unchangeable?

Yea, it must needs be so, because it is grounded on the eternal and
unchangeable Will of God; and therefore there is a certain number of the Elect
and Reprobate known only to God, which cannot be increased or diminished, Joh.
13. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 19.

What are the parts of Predestination?

Election and Reprobation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Romans 9. 13, 22,, 23.

What is Election?

It is the everlasting Predestination, or fore-appointing of certain Angels and
Men unto everlasting Life and Blessedness for the praise of his glorious Grace
and Goodness, 1 Timothy 5. 21. Joh. 15. 16. Romans 9. 22, 23. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 9.

Is there no Cause, Reason, or Inducement of Election in the Elected
themselves?

None at all, it is wholly of free Grace, without respect of any Goodness that
God foresaw in us, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Romans 9. 16. Phil. 2. 13. Ephesians. 1. 9. for
otherwise Man should have whereof he might glory in and of himself, as having
discerned himself from others, and God should not be the cause of all Good; nor
should his Counsel be incomprehensive.

Is not Sin the cause of Reprobation?

No; for then all Men should be reprobate, when God foresaw that all would be
Sinners; but Sin is the cause of the execution of Reprobation, the Damnation
whereunto the wicked are adjudged being for their own Sin.

Is there no cause then of Reprobation in the Reprobate?

None at all, in that they rather than others are passed by of God; that is
wholly from the unsearchable depth of God's own free will and good pleasure. Bp
Usher's Body of Divinity, p. 91, 92.

The particular end of the Elect depends either on some fatal Necessity, some
accidental Chance, or on the Will of Man; or it stands by God's everlasting
Decree: there can be assigned no other cause. Not the first, for that were to
tie God to Secondary Causes, for such was the Stoical Destiny; not the second,
for that were to overthrow God's Providence, by the which all things are
governed, and not by Chance: Not the third, which were to advance the Creature
above his Creator: And St. Paul says, It is not the Willer, nor the Runner,
etc. Ergo, God's special and definite Decree must stand: As August. certi hic,
etc. Certainly in this case, where neither things are governed by fatal
Necessity, nor by rash unadvised Chance, what other Cause remains than the
profundity of God's Mercy and Truth? Contr. Julian. 6. cap. 5. It skilleth not
concerning the matter in hand, namely, the particular and personal Election of
those that shall be saved, whether we urge God's Prescience only or
Predestination; for if God did onl^ foresee in particular who, and how many,
and of what condition, should believe in Christ and be saved; and that as God
foresaw, so it must be, that the same, so many, no other, no more shall believe
than God foresaw; then must the number of the Elect and Believers be as
certain, definite and determined, as if they yielded to God's Decree herein:
Wherefore they must either doubt of God's Prescience, or confess a certain
Determination of the number of the Elect. We have direct places of Scripture
for particular Election; Christ calls his Sheep by name, Joh. 10. 3. They are
all known particularly, and assigned to Salvation as by Name. The Apostles were
personally elected of God, and given unto Christ, Joh. 17. 3. and as some of
the Elect be, so are the rest, for there is one condition of them all. St.
Paul, speaking of certain Persons his fellow laborers, amongst whom he names
Clement, says, Their Names are written in the Book of Life, Phil. 4. 3. Ergo,
they were specially and particularly elected. Further, the Scripture says,
that God calls the Stars of the Sky by their Names, how much more the Sons of
Men, the Children of Salvation, are particularly known unto him? and if the
Hairs of their Head are numbered, much more themselves. Dr. Willet, Synop.
Papis. p. 899.

If God from Eternity absolutely elected some unto the infallible attainment of
Grace and Glory, we cannot but grant that those who are not comprised within
this absolute Decree are as absolutely passed by, as the other are chosen. Dr.
Davenant Animadv. upon a Treatise entitled, God's Love to Mankind, p. 5.

Election or Predestination finds or considers all mere Men in one and the
self-same condition; and it is the Grace prepared for them in Predestination,
which makes the Predestinate become holy and happy Men. Ibid. p. 10.

They who will have God in his Divine Predestination to behold all Men, and
elect those Men consequently whom he considers, as believing and persevering in
Faith and Holiness to the last gasp, are in an Error. For, 1. This is to elect
or predestinate Men, not considered in statu integro, nor in statu lapso, but
in statu reparato, and tantum non glorificato. 2. Again, This is not to bring
Faith, Holiness, Perseverance, out of the gracious benefit of Election, but to
bring Election out of the foreseeing Acts of believing, obeying, persevering,
quite contrary to the Doctrine of our Church, and of the Truth. 3. Last of all,
If we admit this Opinion of conditionate Predestination following the eternal
foresight of Men's final Obedience and Perseverance, we must of necessity grant,
that the Grace or Benefit of Predestination affords no Man any help at all in
the way to eternal Salvation, or Glorification; which no Christian Ear can
patiently hear: for how can that be the cause leading infallibly in the way
unto eternal Life, which comes not so much into consideration, until a Man
have run out his race in Faith and Godliness, and be arrived at Heaven Gates?
Such a falsely named Predestination might more truly and properly have been
called a Postdestination: But call it how they please, it enacteth only per
modum legis, that Men thus living and dying, shall be received into the Kingdom
of Heaven; but it does not per modum decreti operantis, infallibly work those
Graces and gracious Actions, whereby Men are brought unto Heaven. Ibid. p. 10,
11.

Neither does the Decree of Preterition shut up any Man under a necessity of
sinning, and being damned; but it permits Man voluntarily and freely to run
into damnable Sins, and through their voluntary Impenitency to incur eternal
Damnation. Ibid. p. 20.

In the beginning of the Wars when many good People came unto him, (i. e. Mr.
Dod) being affrighted with the Soldiers, he encouraged them, using this
Speech, That if an House were full of Rods, what need the Child fear, when none
of them could move without the Father's hand? and the Lord was a loving Father;
and Estate, and Life and all were at his disposal.

When afterward some Soldiers came to his house, and threatened to knock him on
the head; he answered with Confidence, that if they did, they should send him
to Heaven, where he longed to be, but they could do nothing except God gave
them leave.

When the Soldiers broke open his Chests and Cupboards, and plundered him of
his Goods, he said to a Friend of his, that he would not do them that honor to
say that they had taken ought from him, but it was the Lord, alleging that of
Job, who, when he was spoiled by the Sabeans and Chaldeans, yet did not so much
as name the Instruments, but said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken
away. Mr. Dod's second Sheet, Head 30, 31, 32.

God is not the Author of any evil Action, as it is evil, either by willing,
decreeing, bidding it, or moving thereunto, but only as he gives Power, as our
Creator, to his Creatures, to move or work this or that; therefore a sinful
work. As it comes of God the Author, it is a Work only, and no Sin; as it is
of Man it is Sin and Wickedness.

Again, God is no otherwise to be respected in a sinful Work and Action, but as
a just Judge, which punishes Sin by Sin; for it is a just thing before God to
recompense one Sin by another: and so it is to be considered not so much as it
is a Sin, as a Punishment of Sin. Again, in the same Action God propounds one
end, as the exercising of his Children, and manifestation of his Mercy, as in
the Temptation of Job; the Instrument whereby he works respects some evil
end, as Satan labors the subversion of Job: and the evil affection and
purpose of the Instrument makes the Action evil, but God is free and
unspotted: God therefore is not any ways the Author of Sin. Dr. Willet Synop.
Pap. p. 854.

God did eternally decree to glorify himself in the Salvation of some, and
Damnation of others, which the Event does plainly demonstrate: But for those in
whose Salvation he decreed to glorify his Mercy, he works in them the means
of their Salvation, Faith, Repentance, perseverance in Faith and Godliness, by
an influx of Grace into their Souls, by a powerful, yet not violent, by a most
sweet, and yet most infallible guidance of their Wills, in and over which God
has a more predominant Power than themselves.

As for those in whose Damnation God glorifieth his Sovereignty and Justice, he
does it not by an influx of Malice into their Souls, nor by unavoidable
wresting of their Wills unto any particular Sin, but leaves all sinful
defective Actions to their own sinful defective Wills, which wanting the
special Grace and effectual guidance proceeding from divine Predestination,
never fail to run themselves willingly and wittingly on their own Damnation.

The means whereby Men are brought unto Salvation, are real Effects of the
Divine Election wrought by God's Spirit, as the light and heat of the Air is by
the Sun.

But the means whereby Men are carried to their Damnation grow from themselves,
as the coldness and darkness of the Air is from it self.

In this Decree Faith, Perseverance, and all saving Graces are not in order of
Nature the foreseen Conditions, but the afterseen Effects of Predestination.

God is not to learn of us what makes most for his own Glory; he could have
upheld the Angels which made a voluntary Apostasy from him; he could have
upheld our first Parents; he could by his special and effectual Grace have
brought every particular Man in the World unto Salvation; and all this he could
undoubtedly have done without prejudice to the Creature's free will: but since
we know and see he has done otherwise, we must confess that this order of
Divine Providence, whereby he has decreed to guide and bring some infallibly
unto eternal Happiness, and whereby he has decreed to permit some infallibly
to fall into eternal Misery, does make most for his Glory.

The Maintainers of the absolute Decree hold that nothing is acted in this
World good or bad, without an eternal Determination or Decree of God's Will for
the being of such a particular Act: But they detest the Manichees, and make
this difference betwixt good. Actions and bad, that good and holy Actions have
God, not only a determining Cause for their Event, but an effectual working
Cause in their Production; bad Actions have God the determining Cause of their
Event, but the permissive Cause only of their Malice.

If any Man think that Non-election, or negative Reprobation implies that some
Men are made to be tormented in Hell for God's Absolute Pleasure, and not for
their own Sin, he is in a foul Error. God made all things for himself, and for
the illustrating of his own Glory: And he eternally saw that he could
illustrate his Glory in most excellent manner, by making all Men capable of
Salvation, and yet by permitting some Men to incur Damnation: This he eternally
and absolutely decreed to do by preparing special Grace for some, and bestowing
it upon them in due time he infallibly works their Salvation: and these only
in Scripture are termed Men predestined or elected. And on the contrary, by
not preparing, and not bestowing effectual or special Grace upon others, they
do wilfully and willingly work their own Damnation and Destruction; and these
we call not elected, not predestined, or (in the most harsh term) reprobated.

The second Distinction opposed by this Author is that which considers in
Sin, the material and the formal, which is the substrate Act, and the obliquity
of the Act; and so grants God to be the cause of the material part, as it
denies him to be any cause at all of the formal, which is the repugnancy or
disconformity which the Will of the Agent has with the Law or Will of God.

This Distinction is a sound and necessary Distinction, and approved by all
judicious Divines, whether Papists or Protestants.

De malo culpae quoad substratum and materiale, quod est actio naturalis cui
mali^ est annexa, nulla est difficultas in inquirendo and explicando quidnam
illud sit, quoniam ex hac part malum culpae non est malum, ficut nullus actus
naturalis est de se malus. Penot. lib. 8. cap. 11. Omnes Theologi convenient
quod Deus est author entitatis naturalis ipsius. Ibid. 477.

Against this is excepted, That all Sins receive not this distinction.

If all Sins subsist in some actual motion of the Soul, Body, or both, and this
motion abstractively considered be the material part of every actual Sin, and
has God for the prime cause in whom we live, move, and have our being; then no
Sin can be assigned wherein this material part may not be found. In the eating
the forbidden Fruit, the material part of the Sin in regard of the Soul was the
Appetition thereof; in regard of the Body, the Mastication and Manducation, and
other bodily Acts: Separate these from the formal part which is modus
appetendi, and contains a Repugnancy to God's Command, and God was the prime
Author thereof. The Act of desiring and of eating, must of necessity be reduced
to God, without whom there neither is or can be any motion of Body or Soul: But
the disorderly manner of desiring and eating contrary to the Law of God, this
is reducible (as being a defect) only to the defective Will of Man.

This is well observed by Ruiz, Aliqui modi se habendi in voluntate non
reducuntur in Deum tanquam in causam, praesertim quando culpabilis est modus,
etc. habendi. And more fully, Potest voluntas divina amando quamlibet actionem
sub ratione actionis non amare differentiam monstrositatis per quam positive
repugnat divinae legi. Dr. Davenant's Animadversions on a Treatise entitled,
God's Love to Mankind, p. 22, 23, 48, 51, 52, 54, 75, 136, 137.

It is a common demand which the Patrons of universal Grace and Free Will use
to make: How God can be excused from Collusion and Deceit, if he has not
seriously purposed in his secret and eternal Will, effectually to convert and
save all such to whom he offers Grace by his revealed Will, but only the Elect?

1. Tho the bare hearing or preaching of the glad Tidings and Promises of the
Gospel be alike communicable unto all Men, yet their Benefit and Comfort are
proper, yea peculiar to the Elect alone; not common to the Elect and
Reprobates, as the Law is, which binds all Men alike. Hence it is that the
Elect only are styled, The Children of the Promise, the Seed of Abraham, 1 Cor.
2. 6, etc. chap. 3. 21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 15. Psalm. 50. 16, 17. Luke 10.
6. Col. 1. 26, 27. Hence the Promise of Faith by Jesus Christ, is said to be
given only to them, not generally to all Men; Romans 9. 7, 8. Galatians 3. 22.
The Voice of Christ (to wit the Gospel) is proper only to the Sheep of Christ,
who are the Elect, Joh. 10. 3, 4, 27. whence the Faith of the Gospel is styled,
the Faith of God's Elect, as being proper, yea peculiar to them alone: Tit. 1.
1. Christ Jesus has revealed, Col. 1. 26, 27. Ephesians. 1. 5, 9, 10. has
bequeathed his Gospel as a peculiar Legacy to his Saints and chosen ones, and
delivered, or committed it to their trust; Joh. 17. 6, 8, 14, 17, 26. Jude v.
3. whereupon the Apostles did always dedicate and direct their Epistles, not to
all Men in general, but to the Elect, the chosen and faithful in Christ Jesus,
the Saints, the sanctified, called and preserved in Christ, and to no others:
to signify that the Benefits of the Gospel are entailed upon them alone, Romans
1. 7, 16. chapter 8. 26, to 35. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1, to 15. chapter 2.
1, to the end: Phil. 1. 1. Col. 1. 26, 27. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1, 3, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 1,
3. chapter 2. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1. 1 to 24. chapter 2. 7, 9, 10. 2 Pet. 1. 1, 10. 2 John
3. 3. 3 John 2, 3. Jude v. 1, 3. Psalm. 50. 16, 17.

2. You must observe, that tho Ministers are to preach the Gospel to every
Creature, Mark 16. 16. yet it is not with an intent to convert all those to God
that hear it, but only the Elect. Paul did preach, and endure all things, not
for all those to whom he preached, but only for the Elect's sake, that they
might obtain the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal Glory; 2 Timothy
2. 10. God has given some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Teachers; but this is not for the conversion or good of all
Men, but for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, who are the Elect: Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. chapter 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 22,
23. chapter 2. 7, 10, 13, 19, 21, 22. chapter 5. 23, 29, 30. 1 Pet. 5. 13. Romans 8. 29,
30. Heb. 12. 22, 23.

The Preachers of the Gospel, who are styled Angels, are sent out only to
gather the Elect (not all Men) from the four Winds, from the one end of Heaven
to the other: they are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them
(and for them only) who shall be Heirs of Salvation, not for Reprobates or
wicked Men: they are only to feed the Church, the Lambs, the Sheep, and Flock
of Christ, who are none but the Elect, as the Scriptures and Fathers have
defined it. See my Perpetuity, p. 20, 21. Therefore the Milk, the Food of the
Word, and Gospel, are proper and peculiar unto them alone; Mat. 24. 31. Ephesians. 1.
5, 9, 10. Heb. 1. 14. Rev. 7. 3, to 16. chapter 21. 27. Acts 20. 28. Joh. 21. 15,
16, 17. 2 Timothy 2. 10. Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

3. You must take notice, that tho the Gospel is to be preached unto every
Creature, yet it is not with an absolute intent to convert or save all those
that hear it, but only such as do believe it: This is evident by that
Commission which Christ gave unto his Apostles; Go ye (says he) into all the
World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. By which
conditional Clause of limitation, and sundry other Texts of Scripture, where
God commanded his Word to be preached to such who should neither hear nor obey
it, nor yet reap any Profit, Conversion, or Salvation from it; it is most
apparent that God did never intend his Gospel should convert and save all such
as hear it preached, but only such as should believe, and embrace it in their
Hearts. Now these are only the Elect, and no others, for they only do believe:
Therefore the Gospel is intended unto them alone, because they only profit by
it. Mark 16. 15, 16. Isa. 6. 9, 10. chap. 29. 10. chap. 65. 2. Jer. 1. 8, 10.
chap. 7. 26, 27, 28. Ezekiel. 2. 3, to the end. Mat. 13. 13, 14, 15. Mark 4. 11,
12. Luke 8. 10. Joh. 12. 39, 40. Act. 28. 25, 26, 27. Romans 10. 16, 21. chap.
11. 8. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. Heb. 4. 2. chap. 6. 6, 7. Acts 13. 48. Joh. 10.
26, 27. Romans 8. 30. Luke 10. 6. God no Impostor nor Deluder. Prynne, p. 1, 2, 3.

These words escaped me in my Sermon, viz. As for those that are not saved, I
do most strongly believe, and do freely protest, that I am so persuaded
against. Calvin, Peter Martyr, and the rest, that Sin is the true, proper, and
first cause of Reprobation: But now being better instructed, I say, that the
Reprobation of the wicked is from everlasting, and that the saying of Augustine
to Simplician is most true, viz. If Sin were the cause of Reprobation, then no
Man should be elected, because God has foreknown all to be defiled with it;
and (that I may speak freely) I am of the same Mind, and do believe concerning
the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, as the Church of England believes
and teaches in the Book of the Articles of Faith, in the Article of
Predestination. Barret's Recantation at Cambridg about 100 years ago. Vid.
Fuller's Hist. of the University of Cambr. p. 151.

Where some are chosen, others are refused; and where some be refused, all be
not chosen. They err, who hold Election unto Life to be common, or to depend
upon foreseen Faith, or Works, for it is most free. The choosing of some to
obtain Salvation by Christ, according to the good pleasure of God, Romans 9. 11.
Election of Grace. This has two Acts, 1. Of the End, called the Decree. 2. Of
the Means, called the Execution of the Decree.

Reprobation is the most wise Purpose of God, whereby he has before all
Eternity (for his own Will's sake) constantly decreed, without any Injustice,
not to have Mercy on those Angels and Men whom he has not loved, but has
passed them over when he did choose others, that by their just Condemnation, he
might declare his Wrath toward Sin, to the Glory of his Justice, Romans 9. 10,
11, 18, 22, 23. In the Decree of Reprobation there be two Acts to be considered
by us, viz. a purpose of not showing Mercy, and of not choosing, of not calling,
justifying, etc. This is privative, or negative, or absolute Reprobation,
having no cause impulsive without God. Ephesians. 1. 11. Prove. 16. 4. Jer. 6. 30.

The second Act is a purpose of condemning, or an Ordination to Pain, even
eternal and most just Damnation. This is positive, affirmative, or respective
Reprobation, which respects Sin original or actual (as the meritorious cause
of Destruction.) But note further, that this Ordination to Pain (which is the
second Act of Reprobation) is either simple, whereby this or that Man (as Cain
or Judas) were ordained to Pain; or comparative, whereby Cain rather than Abel,
and Judas rather than Peter, be ordained: of this latter the Will of God is the
sole cause, but the sovereign cause of both; yet in the former not without
relation to Sin, as a mean of the Pain. Note yet further, That what place
Christ (in whose Obedience and Suffering we are chosen, Ephesians. 1. 4.) has in the
Election of saved Persons; that place Sin has in the Reprobation of the
wicked, in which it is no Efficient that is in God's Will, but a material cause
of their Condemnation. Tho. Wilson's Christian Dictionary.

Object. 7. If God did elect some, and reject others, he must needs be [(...)]
a respecter of Persons. Answ. 1. One is said to accept, or have respect of
Persons, when as he by some Circumstances inherent in the Person, is moved to
do this or that. Now as for God, he did upon his mere pleasure elect some, and
reject others eternally, not moved or urged thereunto by any thing whatsoever
out of himself. 2. He is Debtor to none, but may by good right do with his
Creatures what seems good unto him in his own eyes. 3. It is one thing with
God to accept of Persons, and another to make choice of Men; this if we should
not grant, it would follow that God must be deemed blameworthy, because he
made not all his Creatures most glorious Angels. Perk. Golden Chain, p. 170,
171.

Prosper writing to Augustine of the Relics of the Pelagian Heresy, names
this to be one, they affirmed God only to have predestined those, quos dignos
futura electione, etc. praevidisset, whom he foresaw would be worthy of
Election, etc. Dr. Willet's Synop. p. 907.

Baxterian.
I Shall premise some few things to the Reader's Consideration before my
quoting Mr. Baxter as to this Head.

1. That whenever he seems to engage more capitally, or more particularly in
this Point, he leads his Reader with all the imaginable art he can into the
Clouds, never solidly stating the thing in it self as scripturally laid down,
or separately distinguishing it, i. e. Election, etc. from its proper Objects,
as they are the peculiar Subjects, quatenus such, of Redemption, Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification and Glory.

2. That he materially confounds, and that with an obfuscating dexterity the
Volitions of God with the nature or substance of his Essence, and that
districtively from the allowance he himself gives unto the said Volition in God
peculiarly, and diversely exerting it self according to the different methods of
its Exercise and Operation in other cases. As for instance, if absolute
Election be pleaded for, and that as considered in God's personal intuitive
discerning of and actual in him, according to the unchangeable purpose of his
Will, pitching upon, tho individually uncreated Objects of the same; then (with
him it is) that for want of a created personal in esse cognito, or existence of
them, God's Volition must from all eternity lie dormant in his Essence, until
by a production of these Objects in time, his Will in Election may occasionally
have some proper and peculiar Matter to fix upon in a way of choice, which
before could not put forth it self, in that an all-seeing infinite Eye of an
eternal God had no personal prevision or prescience of them unto their being
created, formed and brought forth.

3. He constantly jumbles, and that very promiscuously (a perfect blind) God's
Act in Reprobation, and his Act in Damnation, whereas the Sin of Man is the
only meritorious cause and grounds of God's Proceedings in the latter; but it
is the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God that is the alone Spring and Origin
of the former: so that with him and his Followers Reprobation was never
individually designed of God toward any, till their final Unbelief and
Impenitency make way for the same, no more than a definite and formally
numerical Election was in him, till Men exist, are converted, justified,
adopted, and hold out to the end.

4. I shall leave the Reader to compare impartially what he says, and that both
in the matter and manner thereof, with those of his right and left hand
Authors, and to the Lord's Direction in the whole.

1st. Election in Scripture sometimes signifies God's actual choosing or
taking one Man or People from amongst others to himself, either for his special
Complacency and Service by Sanctification or Conversion, (where it is plain, as
compared with the rest of his Notions, that God's Love unto or Complacency in
their Persons arises not from a pure distinguishing Act of his Love toward
them nakedly considered, the very root-cause of Election; but that this love of
Election, which is the same with that of Complacency, depends upon their
Sanctification, which it seems with our Author, if his emphatical Note may be
regarded, is the groundwork of Conversion. Uno absurdo concesso, mill
sequuntur.) Mr. B. Doctr. End of Controv. chapter 5. So that Election, and the Love
of God therein, respects Qualifications not Persons. More of this. 2. God will
convert, justify, adopt and save some Men by his Grace. Ibid. But what is this
to Election, as to a distinct personal Act in God toward any, even such whom
by Name he gave unto and chose in Christ before the foundation of the World?

. 3. Therefore it is certain that God from Eternity did will or decree so to
do; for the Event in time makes it fit so to denominate God's eternal Will:
Tho there was nothing before the Creation really but God, (here lies his
shuffle) and so real existent Man (here lies the Evasion) was not the Object of
his Will; and Man in esse cognito, was nothing but God himself, there being
nothing else from Eternity (except as Eternity comprehends Time.) Ibid. How
far this will agreee with the Lord's knowing, yea calling of Cyrus by name
about an hundred years before he was in esse cognito; and whether King Josiah
long before his Birth and Existence, was not even then, as named by the Lord,
the personal tho materially uncreated, Object of his Will, let the Learned judge.

. 4. In the same manner as God brings Men to Grace and Glory, he wills or
decrees to do it: for his Decree to do it is no real Act of God distinct from
his Essence, but it is his simple, essential Will denominated from the Effect
related to it.

Therefore the Controversies about Election are resolved into those about the
giving of Grace and Salvation: Whence note, that God's personal electing of any
depends upon their electing of him. Ibid.

. 14. As to the Controversies about the Objects of God's Decrees, meaning the
personal or subjective Object as distinct from the Effects of the Volition, (or
the presupposed state of him that God decrees the Gift to) If we will
distribute God's Decrees or Volitions as the Parts or Gifts decreed or
distributed, then the Question is all one, as, what state a Man is supposed to
be in when God gives him such or such a Gift; which is a thing that we are not
much disagreed about. Ibid.

. 15. e. g. The Recipient of the Gift of Glory is a persevering faithful Saint:
The Receiver of the Gift of Perseverance is a true believing Saint: The gift of
Justification, Adoption, and the Spirit of further Sanctification, is given to
a penitent Believer; Faith and Repentance are given usually to Persons prepared
by a more common Grace, having the means of Grace, and for ought we know
sometimes suddenly without such Preparation. Ibid.

Common Redemption and the Decree of common Grace, both antecede that which is
properly called Election, in order of Nature in esse objectivo: that is, God
decrees to give Faith and Salvation effectively to some of them that had
common Grace. Chapter 13.. 19.

Chapter 6.. 2. God's essential Will, as such, is not called Reprobation, nor a
Decree of Damnation, as distinct from other Volitions: therefore the
distinguishing denomination must be fetched from the Effects or Objects which
it has relation to.

. 3. Therefore where there is no Effect or Object of God's Will, there is no
such Will to be named or asserted: (What a blind Deity does this wretched
Sophister make of an infinite God? as if he could not call things that are not,
as if they were.) But so much as God effects in or toward Man's Damnation,
so much he must be said to will.

. 7. If it be said that God permits Sin, therefore he decreed to permit it:
These things must be answered.

1. Permission is an ambiguous word, (something like our Author) strictly it
signifies in Physics nothing at all but a mere Negation, (that is directly
like him in sound Divinity above all things else) which is non impedire, not to
hinder; but in Politics it often signifies a positive license or voluntary
concession of leave for a Man to do or possess something.

And many Divines by Permission mean not bare non-impedition, but also some
Action that tends to the procuring of the Event. In the first and proper
sense it follows not, that God decreed to permit Sin, because he permits
it, (most audaciously attempted, that any thing should come to pass without the
compass of God's Decree!) for permitting here is but a bare Verb, (no more is
saving and damning) and signifies nothing. Not to hinder is merely nothing.

And nothing is no terminus to denominate God's Decree or Will. (Whether this
has more of Sophistry or Ignorance in it is hard to determine; for is not God's
willing to help, or keep from Sin, as truly an Act flowing from a Decree and
Will in him, as his Volition is to assist against the same? Does not my
Resolution not to relieve a hunger-bitten Creature as effectually contribute to
his famishing, as my supplying the wants of another does to his Preservation?
And are not these two Branches of one and the self-same Will, exerting it self
in a positive and negative Act?) But as permitting signifies any positive Act
which Men make an occasion of Sin, it is improperly called Permission, and it
was spoken of before: And tho God's general influx be presupposed, that is not
Permission, nor part of Permission. And as Permission signifies leave to sin,
God permits none: for it is not Sin if so permitted. (Were not the Prophets
of Ahab acted by a lying Spirit, and that as to a fore-known and fore-designed
Will in God? And was not this done by a positive Commission from the Lord? So
in the dispoiling and perplexing of Job.)

2. And if it would hold that God decrees his Permission of Sin, it follows
not that he decrees the Sin permitted, for that is not a capable Object of his
Volition. (Then Christ came not to do the Will of his Father, whose determinate
Counsel was, that Judas should betray him, when his positive Command was, and
that as to the very matter of Fact, What thou do, do quickly. So for
Shimei's cursing of David, says he, So let him curse, because the Lord has
said unto him, Curse David; Who shall then say, wherefore have thou done so?
Let him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord has bidden him. But to show the
Reader the way that Mr. Baxter takes to evade the force of such Scripture
Testimonies, I shall offer him his sense concerning Ahab's Prophets.)

Obj. Nonne Deum, etc. Obj. Does not the holy Scripture testify that God sent a
lying Spirit into the mouths of the Prophets of A^ab?

Answ. 1. Thence it clearly follows that God himself is not the
predeterminating cause of all Lies: otherwise what need was there to send lying
Spirits to effect that which he himself works in all Liers? yea take it from
the lesser; for Satan cannot determine Men to lie.

2. To send here signifies nothing else than to permit the Devil greatly
desiring this, etc. (whence it seems this proceeded not from God's foreseeing
and irreversible Decree, but that he in time perceiving the desire of the
Devil, could not forbear gratifying of him. [If this were the grounds of God's
Proceedings, what would become of the whole Generation of Mankind?] But this
Reason he might have brought in for God's Permission of his own Treatises to
come forth, as well as the Imprimaturs and Subscriptions of some others.) Baxt.
Method. Theol. Part 1. page 294.

. 9. God damneth none but Sinners; therefore he decreed to damn (or reprobate,
which are but blinding convertible terms, with him) none but Sinners.

Therefore a Man only as a Sinner is the Object of the Decree of Damnation (i.
e. Reprobation) or Punishment, seeing the Decree is denominated from the Effect.

. 10. It is not a Sinner, merely as a Sinner, that God will damn (or
reprobate); else all Sinners should be damned (or reprobated.) But it is only a
certain sort of Sinners who prevalently and finally reject redeeming Means and
Mercy.

Therefore it is only such that are the Objects of the particular Decree of
Damnation, or (which is all one with him, according to his Title of this
Chapter) of Reprobation. Chap. 6.

Chap. 8.. 2. To say that God is the principal determining cause of every
sinful Act, with all its Objects and Circumstances (called the materiale
peccati) and also the cause of the Law that forbids it, and the Person that
commits it, is to make him the chief cause of Sin, as far as it is capable
of a cause, even of the formal cause.

. 3. To say, that such a Cause is the cause only of the Act, but not of the
Obliquity, is absurd, because the Obliquity is a relation necessarily resulting
from the Law and Act with all its modes and circumstances; and the Obliquity
can have no other cause.

. 4. To say that God wills, and loves, and causes Sin, not as Sin, but for
good ends and uses, is to say no more for God than may be said for wicked Men,
if not for Devils, save only that God's ends are better than theirs.

. 8. They that hold that God does by immediate, physical, efficient,
predetermining premotion principally and irresistibly cause every sinful Act,
with all its Modes and Circumstances, do certainly deny all certainty of Faith,
and so subvert all Christianity: for, the formal Object of all Divine Faith is
God's Veracity (that God cannot lie;) if God could lie, our Belief could have
no certainty. Now God speaks to us but by inspired Men, and not by an
essential Voice of his own. And if God cause, as aforesaid, all the Lies that
ever were spoken by Men or Devils in the World, then no Man can be sure that he
does not so by Prophets and Apostles, or that ever they say true; and God's
Veracity then is gone. (The hellish Sottishness of this Section, together with
his subtle and blasphemous Inferences thereupon, I shall leave to the ingenuous
Believer, and that Text, Try the Spirits, etc.) Mr. Baxt. End of Doctrinal
Controversies.

If the Covenant be not conditional, as to the disposing of these Benefits, it
would follow,

That all to whom the offers are made have an interest in them, or it is not a
serious offer, no, nor a true offer, as not containing a real and mutual
Connection between the Benefit and the Duty. Mr. D. W. Gospel Truth, p. 52, 53.

It is a display of God's Wisdom, in conferring the Benefits sutably to the
nature and state of Men in this Life, whose eternal Condition is not eternally
decided, but are in a state of trial, p. 46. This he seems to confirm and
vindicate by his Explanation of it, p. ult. against Mr. Mather.

1. Says he, I do not here mention Believers, but Men in general, yea, rather
Unbelievers. (Now Men in general, their State is eternally, decided, or it is
not; if not, why then this State-decision God must, as a longing, unresolved
Spectator attend for, during their state of trial: If rather Unbelievers, then
their State was eternally more unknown unto God than the State of Believers.)
But,

2. By eternally decided, any Man may see that I had an eye only to God's
judicial decision at death, and the more solemn Sentence at the last Judgment:
when we die our Warfare is finished, and our State, as Viatores, is at an end.
(The truest word I think he ever spoke, especially to those who know that our
Author seldom means literally what he speaks; for if the second
Eternity-decision must with God, who certainly makes the Decision, commence at
Death and the day of Judgment; then their State was not decided in the first
Eternity-determination, or from all Eternity: if it was, and yet needed a
second Decision, then there was either a fault in the first Decision of their
State, which God must amend in his second Decision; or the Elect by
unbelieving, and the Reprobate by believing, have quite altered the scene of
the Purposes of his unchangeable Will.

What a Reflection is it on the Divine Wisdom, and the glorious Platform of the
Redeemer's Work and Kingdom, that he cannot purchase Benefits for Sinners,
unless he forbear to use them as Motives to Obedience? Yea, the whole of his
serious pleadings with Men must be a mockery, rather than he must be allowed to
bestow his Blessings in a rectoral way. Mr. D. W. Gospel Truth, etc. page 109.

Now this Rectoral Way in the Baxterian sense has always a respect unto the
merit of the Subject, either in a way of Congruity or Condignity. See Metho.
Theol. Par. 1. p. 52, 53.

Election is not eternal, Rem. Apol. complete Election regards none but him
that is dying; for this peremptory Election decrees the whole accomplishment
and consummation of Salvation, and therefore requires in the Object the
finished course of Faith and Obedience.

Grevin ad Ames, fol. 136. Yea we acknowledge no other Predestination to be
revealed in the Gospel, besides that whereby God decrees to save them who
should persevere in Faith. Rem. Col. Hag. fol. 34. There is a complete
Election, belonging to none but those that are dying, and there is another
incomplete, common to all that believe: as the good things of Salvation are
incomplete, which are continued whilst Faith is continued, and revoked when
that is denied; so Election is complete in this Life, and revokable. Grev. ad
Ames.

Three orders there are of Believers and Repenters in the Scripture, whereof
some are beginners, others having continued for a time, and some Perseverants;
the two first Orders are chosen truly, but not absolutely, but only for a time,
so long as they will remain as they are; the the third are chosen finally and
peremptorily: for this Act of God is either continued or interrupted according
as we fulfill the Condition. Rem. Confess. cap. 18.. 6, 7.

We deny that God's Election extends it self to any singular Persons, as
singular Persons. Rem. Col. Hag. fol. 76.

God has appointed without difference, to dispense the means of Faith; and as
he sees these Persons to believe or not believe, by the use of those means, so
at length he determines of them. Corv. ad Tilen. 76.

It is obtruded on the Church as a most holy Doctrine, that God by an absolute,
immutable Decree from all Eternity, out of his own good pleasure, has chosen
certain Persons, and those but a few in comparison, without any respect had to
their Faith and Obedience, and predestined them to everlasting Life. Praef.
lib. Armin. ad Perk. No such Will can be ascribed unto God, whereby he so
wills any one to be saved, as that hence their Salvation should be sure and
infallible. Arm. Anti Perk. fol. 583.

The Decree of Election is nothing but a Decree whereby God has appointed to
justify and save them that believe in Christ. Corv. ad Tilen. fol. 13.

That the only cause why God loves (or chooses) any Person, is, because the
Honesty, Faith and Piety wherewith, according to God's Command and his own
Duty, he is endued, are acceptable to God. Rem. Apol. p. 13.

We roundly confess that Faith in the consideration of God's choosing us unto
Salvation, does precede, and not follow as a fruit of Election. Rem. Hag. Coll.
p. 35.

The only absolute cause of Election and Reprobation is not the Will of God,
but a respect unto our Obedience or Disobedience. Epist. Disp. 8.

When I place Sin as the meritorious cause of Reprobation, think not that I
less place Righteousness to be the meritorious cause of Election. Armin. Anti
Perk.

Upon this Dr. Owen in his Display of Arminianism (whence these last Authors
were quoted by me) concludes in these words, p. 67.

The sum of their Doctrine is; God has appointed the Obedience of Faith to be
the means of Salvation: if Men fulfill this condition, he determines to save
them, which is their Election; but if after they have entered the way of
Godliness, they fall from it, they lose also their Predestination; if will they
return again, they are chosen anew; and if they can hold out to the end, then,
and for that continuance, they are peremptorily elected or predestined, after
they are saved. (Now whether these Positions may be gathered from those places
of Scripture which deliver this Doctrine, let any Man judge.)

I shall close this with a Quotation out of a deceased Author, cited by him out
of Augustine.

The Pelagian says, God foreknew such as would be holy and immaculate by the
freedom of their Will, and therefore he chose them before the foundation of the
World in his very Prescience, whereby he foreknew they would become such:
Whereas the Apostle says, he chose us in him before the foundation of the
World, that we should be holy and without spot; not therefore because we should
become such, but that we should be such: This is certain, this is manifest,
that therefore we would become such, because he did choose us, predestinating
us, that we should become such by his Grace. True it is, that St. Augustine
himself was once of that Opinion with the Pelagians, Pontificians, and our new
Pelagians, concerning God's Prescience, as understanding it to be nothing else
but a prevision of future Things and Events, and thereupon to have grounded his
Decree: Which Opinion Augustine ingenuously retracteth and recanteth in the
first Book of his Recantations, chapter 23. The same Author having spoken of (...),
or the word Predestination, says, Now for the Predicate of the Definition, it
is an Act or Decree, called sometimes in Scripture (...), God's Counsel, Ephesians.
1. 11. sometimes (...), God's Purpose, Romans 8. 28. sometimes (...), 1 Pet. 1.
2. which is such a foreknowledg as is not only a bare Prescience, but a
praescitum, an established or decreed Foreknowledg, as the Latins call a Decree
of the People plebiscitum: and also the Decree or Judgment of a Cause,
cognitio, or Trial, or Knowledge. So (...), or praecognitio, or foreknowledg of
God, is his witting and willing Act or Decree.

And is their Obedience or Disobedience an indifferent thing as to their
Happiness or Misery? Must he save or damn all, or else be a respecter of
Persons in his judicial Distributions? And afterward in the same Chapter, The
Decree comes not in opposition to the Methods of his Government. Mr. Dan.
Williams's Gospel Truth, page 115, 125. So that with Mr. Williams God must be
reckoned a respecter of Persons, if he chooses and saves any without a previous
regard to their Qualifications.

Nonconformist.
I shall begin this Column with some Sayings of Mr. Perkins, a famous old
Puritan, who for his soundness and clearness in most of the Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion, may well be entertained by the Orthodox both Conformists
and Non-conformists.

God's Decree, in as much as it concerns Man, is called Predestination, which
is the Decree of God, by the which he has ordained all Men to a certain and
everlasting Estate: that is, either to Salvation or Condemnation, for his own
Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Romans 9. 13, 22. Predestination has two Parts, Election
and Reprobation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Election is God's Decree, whereby on his own
free will he has ordained certain Men to Salvation to the praise of the Glory
of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. This Decree is the Book of Life, wherein are
written the Names of the Elect, Rev. 20. 12. ^2. Tim. 2. 10.

The Decree of Reprobation is that part of Predestination, whereby God,
according to the most free and just purpose of his Will, has determined to
reject certain Men unto eternal Destruction and Misery, and that to the praise
of his Justice, Romans 9. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Jude 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Perk. Golden
Chain, p. 10, 23, 163. This is verbatimly contradicted by Mr. B. Method. Theol.
Par. 1. p. 59.

This Election the Word of God proposes unto us, as the gracious immutable
Decree of Almighty God, whereby; before the foundation of the World, out of his
own good Pleasure, he chose certain Men, determining to free them from Sin and
Misery, to bestow upon them Grace and Faith, to give them unto Christ, to bring
them to everlasting Blessedness for the Praise of his glorious Grace. Dr. O's
Display of Arminianism, p. 51.

Thirdly, The Article of the Chapter of Engl. (which he recites) is clear, that the
Object of this Predestination is some particular Men chosen out of Mankind;
that is, it is such an Act of God, as concerns some Men in particular; taking
them as it were aside from the midst of their Brethren, and designing them for
some special end and purpose: the Scripture also abounds in asserting this
Verity, calling them that are so chosen a few, Matthew. 20. 16. which must needs
denote some certain Persons; and the residue according to Election, Romans 11. 5.
Those whom God knows to be his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Men ordained to eternal Life, Acts
13. 48. Us, Romans 8. 39. those that are written in the Lamb's Book of Life, Rev.
21. 27. All which, and diverse others clearly prove, that the number of the
Elect is certain, not only materially as they say, that there are so many, but
formally also, that these particular Persons and no other are they, which
cannot be altered: Nay the very nature of the thing it self does so
demonstratively evince it, that I wonder it can possibly be conceived under any
other Notion: to apprehend an Election of Men, not circumscribed with the
circumstance of particular Persons, is a conceited Platonical Abstraction, as
it seems strange that any one dares profess to understand. That there should be
a Predestination, and none predestined; an Election, and none elected; a
choice amongst many, yet none left or taken; a Decree to save Men, and yet
thereby Salvation destinated to no one Man, either re aut spe, in deed or in
expectation; in a word, that there should be a Purpose of God to bring Men unto
Glory, standing inviolable, tho never any one attained the proposed end, is
such a Riddle as no Oedipus can unfold. Now such an Election, such a
Predestination have the Arminians substituted in the place of God's everlasting
Decree. Page 54, 55.

If final perseverance in Faith and Obedience be the cause of, or a Condition
required unto Election, then none can be said in this Life to be elected; for
no Man is a final Perseverer until he be dead, until he has finished his
course, and consummated the Faith: but certain it is, that it is spoken of some
in Scripture, that they are even in this Life elected: Fow are chosen, Mat. 20.
16. For the Elect's sake those days shall be shortened, Mat. 24. And shall
seduce, if it were possible, the very Elect, ver. 24. where it is evident, that
Election is required to make one persevere in the Faith; but no where is
Perseverance in the Faith required to Election: yea, and Peter gives us all a
Command, that we should give all diligence to get an assurance of our Election
even in this Life, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and therefore surely it cannot be a Decree
presupposing consummating Faith and Obedience, p. 62.

Election is an eternal Act of God's Will; He has chosen us before the
foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. 4. consummated antecedently to all Duty of
ours, Romans 9. 11. Now every cause must in order of Nature, precede its Effect;
nothing has an Activity in causing, before it has a being; Operation in every
kind is a second Act, flowing from the essence of a thing, which is the first:
But all our Graces and Works, our Faith, Obedience, Piety and Charity, are all
temporal, of yesterday, the same standing with our selves, and no longer, and
therefore cannot be the cause of, no nor so much as a Condition necessarily
required for the accomplishment of an eternal Act of God, irrevocably
established before we are.

If Predestination be for Faith foreseen, these three things, with diverse such
Absurdities, will necessarily follow: First, That Election is not of him that
calls, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 9. 11. that is, of the good pleasure of
God, who calls us with an holy calling, but of him that is called; for
depending on Faith, it must be his whose Faith is that does believe. Secondly,
God cannot have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, for the very purpose of it is
thus tied to the qualities of Faith and Obedience, so that he must have Mercy
only on Believers antecedently to his Decree; which, thirdly, hinders him from
being an absolute free Agent, and doing of what he will with his own, of having
such a power over us as the Potter has over his Clay; for he finds us of
different matter, one Clay, another Gold, when he comes to appoint us to
different uses and ends; p. 63, 64.

And principally, the Effects of Election infallibly following it, cannot be
the causes of Election certainly preceding it: this is evident, for nothing can
be the Cause and the Effect of the same thing, before and after it self: But
all our Faith, and Obedience, Repentance, good Works, are the Effects of
Election flowing from it as their proper Fountain, erected on it as the
Foundation of this spiritual Building: and for this the Article of our Church
is very evident and clear; Those, says it, that are endued with this excellent
benefit of God, are called according to God's purpose, are justified freely,
are made the Sons of God by Adoption, they be made like the Image of Christ,
they walk religiously in good Works, etc. Where first they are said to be
partakers of this benefit of Election, and then by virtue thereof, to be
entitled to the fruition of all those Graces. Secondly, it says, Those who
are endued with this Benefit, enjoy those Blessings; intimating that Election
is the Rule whereby God proceeds in bestowing those Graces, restraining the
Objects of the temporal Acts of God's special Favor to them only whom his
eternal Decree does embrace. Both these indeed are denied by the Arminians,
which makes a further discovery of their Heterodoxies in this particular. You
say, says Arminius to Perkins, that Election is the rule of giving, or not
giving of Faith, and therefore Election is not of the Faithful, but Faith of
the Elect: But by your leave this I must deny. Armin. Anti-Per. fol. 221. But
yet whatever it is the sophistical Heretic here denies, either Antecedent or
Conclusion, he falls foul on the Word of God: They believed, says the Holy
Ghost, who were ordained to eternal Life, Acts 13. 48. And the Lord added daily
to his Church such as should be saved, Acts 2. 47. From both which places it is
evident, that God bestows Faith only on them whom he has pre-ordained to
eternal Life: but most clearly, Romans 8. 29, 30. For whom he did foreknow, he
also predestined to be conformed to the Image of his Son: Moreover, whom he
did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified, them he also glorified. St. Austin interpreted this place, by adding
in every link of the Chain, only those: however, the words directly import a
precedence of Predestination, before the bestowing of other Graces; and also a
restraint of those Graces to them only that are so predestinate. Now the
Inference from this is, not only for the from Logical, but for the matter also,
it contains the very words of Scripture, Faith is of God's Elect; Tit. 1. 1.
For the other part of the Proposition, that Faith and Obedience are the fruits
of Election, they cannot be more peremptory in its Denial, than the Scripture
is plentiful in its Confirmation. He has chosen us in Christ, that we should
be holy; Ephesians. 1. 4. not because we were holy, but that we should be so.
Holiness, whereof Faith is the Root, and Obedience the Body, is that whereunto,
and for which we are elected: The end and meritorious cause of any one Act
cannot be the same, they have diverse Respects, and require repugnant
Conditions. P. 64, 65, 66.

The rule and measure of the Communication of the Spirit for Regeneration is
Election: The rule and measure of the Communication of the Spirit for
Sanctification, is Regeneration, etc. Dr. Owen's Discourse concerning the
Spirit, p. 359. That there is an Election of Grace, with a non-election or
passing by others: That difference to be out of the pure Grace and good
Pleasure of God, which purpose of Election is the cause of their effectual
Calling and Salvation. Dr. Tho. Goodwin of Election, page 12. Contents of Chap.
2.

The Elect before ever they are converted, are styled by God his People, Acts
18. 10. And Christ says, Sheep [I have] not of this fold (Gentiles) them I
must bring. They were Sheep before they were brought in, and they were so
determinately, fixedly, and resolutely God's Sheep, foreknown by him to be
such, as that Christ himself (to whom God has committed the Salvation of them)
says, I must bring them in, as upon God's peremptory Command to have them
saved: And therefore Election, or foreknowledg of them, is as the cause joined
with their being HIS, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord [knows] who are [his.]

This their Election that makes them his, and is here signified by
fore-knowledg [whom he foreknew] is a word appropriated to the Elect, and their
Election by God; and Election is ascribed unto it, as Romans 8. 29. Whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate. And 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the
foreknowledg of God the Father; that is, out of that special foreknowledg which
God took of those whom he chose; even such a foreknowledg as is common to no
other Creatures or Persons; although known unto God are all his Works from the
beginning.

And, as several Interpreters have observed on the same word, Romans 8. 29. he
says not, (...), whom he knew, as but with a bare simple Act of Knowledge, for
so he does all things; but (...), whom he acknowledged, approved of with a
knowledge of Liking and Love. And so he notes,

1. A singular Love joined with a foresight of them, or God's casting a loving
Eye with Affection upon them. Words of Knowledge import Affection; Conjugal
Communion which is transacted between Man and Wife, and rises from the
entirest Love, is styled Knowledge of each other: As on the contrary, I know you
not, and I never knew you, do in Christ's speech express our utter rejection
and privation of Affection to them.

2. There is (...) (or before) added to this Knowledge; by comparing other
Scriptures to which, imports that this his Love was before the foundation of
the World, and so from everlasting: And so that Particle is explained in the
same Chapter of Peter, ver. 20. when Christ's Election is spoken of, whose
Election is the Pattern of ours: Who verily was [fore-ordain'd] before the
foundation of the World. And Christ himself, Joh. 17. 24. Thou lovedst me before
the foundation of the World.

3. It was not such a foreknowledg as that whom he foresaw would believe, and
be holy; that them, as such foreseen, he chose, and loved; that were unworthy
of God, qui scientiam non accipit a rebus, and had been an uncertain Foundation
for God to build upon, who builds not upon Sand, the mutable Will of the
Creature: But the Foundation of God is said to be sure, by this, that he knows
who are his; qui not qua; that is, the individual Persons, who they are, not
who, that is, so or so qualified. And in Romans 8. 29. it is not said, he
predestined those whom he foreknew that would be conformable to the Image of
his Son: no, but contrary, that those whom he foreknew, and so loved, he
predestined to be conformable unto the Image of Christ his Son. Yea and in
this place, Romans 11. 6. he expressly puts it wholly upon Grace, and utterly
excludes Works, foreseen as the Motive unto God. And thus the sense or meaning
of this Foreknowledg rises up to this, That those particular Persons whom out
of pure Grace and Love, (without any consideration of Works of any kind that
were to be in them) he casting his Love freely upon them, did from everlasting,
and out of that Love choose to be his, they are alone his People. And so for
substance and in effect, both these words in v. 2. Whom he foreknew, and those
that after follow [A Remnant according to Election of Grace] prove both to be
one and the same.

Text Romans 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Doctrine. That there is an Election of some, with a Non-election, or passing
by of others; which Election is out of the pure Grace of God, and is the cause
of their effectual Calling and Salvation.

1. That there is an Election: That Is in the letter of the Text, wherein the
Elect are called the Election: And Election imports a calling, or singling some
from others, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. (...), exemit, selegit, he exempted, excepted
some, or as it is here, ver. 4. reserved to himself. If some were not passed
by, there were not an Election. On the opposite side, the other are called the
rest, v. 7. that is, non-elected: And to say the rest, is the mildest and
softest word that could be given of it, and imports merely a non-election, as
it stands in this distinction here from the Election which is its opposite.

2. Of the one he says, God did foreknow them, [His People which he foreknew]
and by his foreknowing took them to be his. 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord knows who
are his: He speaks it of Election. But there is another part of that
Distinction, (for such those words in ver. 7. are) there is a rest whom he
never knew, although he foreknew them, as he foreknows all things, yet without a
love or owning of them: Thus Christ, Mat. 7. 23. I never knew you: There is the
Badg of the rest, that he says he never knew them: That [never] reaches up as
high as Eternity; and that from thence even to the hour, he never knew them:
And as he never did know them, so he never will to Eternity. You see here are
two Companies, Elect, and the Rest; one foreknown, and the other never known.

3. There are different Issues and Events befall these two; proceeding the one
from God's foreknowing the one, and the other, that God never knew them: The
first does infallibly obtain, The Election have obtained it: Obtained what? and
how? Effectual Calling first, and Salvation at last thereby. What then does
befall the rest? They are blinded, so the Text, [And the rest were blinded.] In
like Equipage Christ speaks in the 10th of John, That he had Sheep which were
yet to be called. So at ver. 16. And other Sheep I have which are not of this
Fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice, and there shall be
one Fold, and one Shepherd: And that his Father had given them him. And then
oppositely he speaks of another company, ver. 26. Ye are not of my Sheep: And
the same different Events follow on each that are here said to befall these two
Companies here. Even as here, of those that were his Sheep, he says, ver. 16.
They shall hear my Voice, and them I must bring: And ver. 27. My Sheep hear my
Voice, and I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish, ver. 28.
But of the other, You believe not, because you are not of my Sheep; ver. 26.
Observe, It is not that Christ says, they were not of his Sheep, because they
believed not; but on the contrary, They believed not, because they were not of
his Sheep -- So it was his Father's Gift of them before calling, for which they
are in these places called his Sheep, and given by his Father with such a
Command, as I must bring them in, says Christ.

4. This Separation by Election is of pure Grace: And so it is here said to be
according to the Election of Grace; that is, Grace was the Founder and sole
Author of that Decree, and that Election merely of Grace; for it follows, ver.
6. If it be of Grace, then it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more
Grace: which plainly excludes Works, of Man, as foreseen, and therewith shuts
out also the Will of Man, which is the Author of Works, to be any way the cause
of such an Election as foreseen, etc. Ibid. p. 14, 15, 16.

That God's purpose according to Election] which first always imports with it a
singling forth one or diverse from others who are not chosen: And so here does
connotate the Rejection of others, namely, Ishmael and Esau. Or, that Clause is
put in to distinguish it to be that sort of Purposes which are
Election-Purposes: That whereas to reject, or pass by others, is from a Purpose
too; but this is his Purpose according to Election. Ibid. p. 17.

That it might stand:] That is, firm or sure, as being built upon the
unchangeable Will and good Pleasure of Grace in God himself; that it did not
stand waiting or suspend upon Man's Will to see how it would work, and cast the
matter, and use his Grace ere he would decree or purpose their Salvation. Ibid.
p. 17. Now then look as this false Supposition, that all the People of Israel
were the Children of God, by reason of their being Abraham's and Israel's, or
Jacob's Seed; and hereupon those their Titles and Privileges aforesaid, were
the occasion in that 9th Chapter of his treating of the Doctrine of Election
there; so here in this 11th Chapter he reassumes the very same occasion, when
he goes on to apply it to the Jews, beginning at the very first Verse; I say
then, has God cast away his People? He speaks in reality the same thing: To
which he answers, v. 2. with that distinction taken from Election, God has not
cast away his People whom he foreknew: the occasion is the same, and the Answer
is the same, and the Objection is solved by the Doctrine of Election. Ibid. p.
19. They are so distinguished, as that none of the Elect do become of the
number of the Rest; nor of the Rest do become of the number of the Elect: and
therefore you must never intermingle them, by thinking that a Man may be of the
Elect to day, and at his death Reprobate; for these two are contra-distinct
Sayings, remain such to Eternity. If any of the Elect were finally hardened,
then this other saying, The rest were blinded, were not true: Or if any of
those that are the rest did obtain it, then that first, the Election have
obtained (as they stand thus differenced one from the other) were not true.
Ibid. p. 23.

There are those in the World that say God loved all Mankind alike as to
Salvation, and to that purpose has in all Ages given them Helps and Divine
Assistances in common, more or less, which we usually term common Grace; which
if their Wills, being stirred up and moved thereby, will use well, then they
may and do obtain Faith, and an effectual calling unto Salvation. And upon the
right use of those common Adjutories it is that God does then elect them, and
not till then; or upon the foresight from all Eternity that they will do so.
But if they do not use those Helps well, then they are reprobated, or rejected.
But from that rehearsal of Instances through all Ages, when put all together,
it will appear, that the special Grace of Election has put the difference: The
one obtaining, the orher blinded, etc. Ibid. p. 24.

First, Christ, God and Man, as the Head, as the prime Foederat, after whom,
and in whom in the order of Nature all the Body are elected; so that the Grace
of Election begins first in Christ our Head, and descends unto us in him; it
notes the order in which we are elected, and not the cause of our Election; not
that we were first elected, and then Christ chosen by occasion of our Fall; but
he is the firstborn in the Womb of God's Election, The firstborn amongst many
Brethren. Now the Election of Man is not an Act of Sovereignty, and merely
comes under the Will of God; He has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. But
Christ as God, could not come under an Act of his Will, as Election is, but by
his own Consent. Ephesians. 1. 5. It is according to the good pleasure of his Will:
he is appointed Heir of all things; as he was the Son, he was Haeres natus, a
born Heir, that being an Act of his Nature; but as the Head of the Church, so
he was Haeres constitutus, a constituted Heir, and comes under an Act of God's
Will. Mr. Strong on the Covenant, p. 134.

God, as a Proprietor and Lord of his Creatures -- manifests his Dominion in
the choice of some Persons from Eternity; he has set apart some from Eternity,
wherein he will display the invincible efficacy of his Grace, and thereby
infallibly bring them to the fruition of Glory, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. Why does he write
some Names in the Book of Life, and leave out others? Why does he enrol some
whom he intends to make Denizons of Heaven, and refuse to put others in his
Register? The Apostle tells us, It Is the pleasure of his Will: you may render a
reason for many of God's Actions, till you come to this the top and foundation
of all; and under what Head of Reason can Man reduce this Act, but that of his
Royal Prerogative? Why does God save some, and condemn others at last? Because
of the Faith of the one, and Unbelief of the other. Why do some Men believe?
Because God has not only given them the means of Grace, but accompanied those
means with the Efficacy of his Spirit. Why did God accompany those Means with
the Efficacy of his Spirit in some, and not in others? Because he had decreed
by Grace to prepare them for Glory. But why did he decree or choose some and
not others? Into what will you resolve this but into his sovereign Pleasure? It
could not be any merit in the Creature that might determine God to choose him.
Mr. Charnock on the Attributes of God, p. 720, 721. Nor could it be any
foresight of Works to be done in time by them, or of Faith, that might
determine God to choose them. What Good could he foresee resulting from extreme
Corruption, and a Nature alienated from him? What could he foresee of good to
be done by them, but what he resolved in his own Will to bestow an Ability upon
them to bring forth? His choice of them was to a Holiness, not for a Holiness
preceding his Determination; Ephesians. 1. 4. and 2. 10. What is a Fruit, cannot be a
moving Cause of that whereof it is a Fruit. Grace is a stream from the Spring
of electing Love: The Branch is not the cause of the Root, but the Root of the
Branch -- Good Works suppose Grace, and a good and right habit in the Person;
as rational Acts suppose Reason. Can any Man say that the rational Acts Man
performs after his Creation, were a cause why God created him? This would make
Creation, and every thing else, not so much an Act of his Will, as an Act of
his Understanding. God foresaw no rational Act in Man, before the Act of his
Will to give him Reason: Nor foresees Faith in any, before the Act of his Will
determining to give him Faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. In the Salvation which grows up from
this first Purpose of God, he regards not the Works we have done, as a
principal to settle the top-stone of our Happiness, but his own Purpose, and
the Grace given in Christ, 2 Timothy 1. 9. The Honor of our Salvation cannot be
challenged by our Works, much less the Foundation of it. It was a pure Gift of
Grace, without respect to any spiritual, much less natural Perfection. Why
should the Apostle mention that Circumstance when he speaks of God's loving
Jacob and hating Esau, when neither of them had done good or evil, Romans 9. 11.
if there were any foresight of Man's good Works as the moving cause of his Love
or Hatred? God regarded not the Works of either as the first cause of his
Choice, but acted by his own Liberty, without respect to any of their Actions
which were to be done by them in time. If Faith be the fruit of Election, the
prescience of Faith does not influence the electing Act of God: Tit. 1. 1. It Is
called the Faith of God's Elect: Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to
the Faith of God's Elect, i. e. settled in his Office to bring the Elect of God
to Faith. If Men be chosen by God upon the foresight of Faith, or not chosen
till they have Faith, they are not so much God's Elect, as God their Elect;
they chose God by Faith, before God chooses them by Love. It had not been the
Faith of God's Elect, i. e. of those already chosen, but the Faith of those
that were to be chosen by God afterward -- Men are not chosen because they
believe, but they believe because they are chosen. The Apostle did ill else to
appropriate that to the Elect, which they had no more interest in by virtue of
their Election, than the veriest Reprobate in the World. If the foresight of
what good Works might be done by his Creatures; was the Motive of his choosing
them, why did he not choose the Devils to Redemption, who could have done him
better Service by the strength of their Natures, than the whole Mass of Adam's
Posterity? Ibid. page 722, 723. ELECTION is the pitching of everlasting Love,
or the good pleasure of God choosing and decreeing to eternal Life: It is the
great Charter of Heaven, God's special and free Grace Deed of Gift to his
chosen ones, made over in trust unto Jesus Christ for their use and benefit.
Mr. Cole's Practical. Discourse of God's Sovereignty, p. 41.

Prop. That there is a peculiar People, who were personally chosen of God in
Christ according to his own good pleasure, and ordained to eternal Life before
the World began. Ibid. p. 42. They were [personally] chosen; that is, the
Objects of Election were singled forth and pitched upon by name.

Chosen [in Christ, or into Christ] as their Head and Mediator, that thereby
their Election might be secured; that is, that the good Things and Benefits
they were chosen unto might (by their being in Christ) be righteously theirs,
and accordingly applied to them. Ibid. p. 43.

It was not the whole lump of Mankind that was the Object of Election; nor was
this Election (as some speak) a Decree to elect such as should happen to be
thus and so qualified: but certain determinate Persons were chosen by name, or
singled out from among the rest, and ordained to eternal Life. Our Savior
styles them, The Men that were given him [out] of the World, Joh. 17. 6. And
they were given him by name (as well as number) and by those Names he knows
them, Joh. 10. 3, 14. And that this Election was transacted from Eternity is
evident, Joh. 17. 23. with v. 24. Ephesians. 1. 4. Rev. 13. 8. chap. 17. 8, etc.
Ibid. p. 58.

And if the Election of the Head was personal, and from Eternity, why not
theirs that should make up his Body, since they did as really exist then as the
Human Nature of Christ did? Besides, it was very agreeable that he and they
should both be appointed together; for he could not be a Head but with respect
to a Body; and that they were expressly determined of, appears by Psalm. 139. 16.
In thy Book are all my Members written, when as yet there was none of them. If
any say, that was meant of David's Members: I answer, That if God thought the
Members of an Earthly Body worthy his registring, he could not be less
particular and exact about the Mystical Body of his Son. Besides, David was his
Type. Ibid. p. 59.

Great endeavors there are to father Election upon foreseen Faith and Works,
which that they call the Covenant of Grace, has (they say) qualified and
capacitated all Men for; and which certain more pliant, ingenuous and
industrious Persons (as they speak) would attain unto by the helps they have in
common with other Men: But this Pedigree of Election is excepted against as
being not rightly deduced. Ibid. p. 73. Faith follows Election; God respects
the Person before his Offering. Ibid. p. 74.

If Men be predestined to Faith and Holiness (as they are) Romans 8. 38, 39. 1
Pet. 1. 2. Then they were not seen to be such before their Predestination: or
if they were, then their Election (as to that particular) would seem
impertinent.

There can no rational account be given, why Men foreseen to be such, should be
so solemnly predestined thereto. Ibid. p. 75.

To derive Election from any Root besides the good Pleasure of God, is to
frustrate the principal end of Man's Salvation, viz. the Glory of God's Grace,
Ephesians. 1. 6. chapter 2. 7. Ibid. p. 76.

This gives a reason why Men of the largest Capacity for Learning and natural
Understanding, are so mightily puzzled and labyrinth'd in spiritual matters,
particularly the Doctrine of Election; why they do so strongly oppose it, and
are so hardly reconciled with it: They are not in truth subdued to the Doctrine
of God's Sovereignty; and therefore, whilst in discussing those Points of Faith
they judge as their natural Optic represents them, they lose both themselves
and the Truth; which yet (in some degree) is made known unto Babes (Men of low
stature to them) whose Spirits the Lord has subdued to rest contented with
what their Father is pleased to tell them: and for the rest (as namely, the
manner and reason of God's Disposements and Dispensations) they live by Faith
in his Righteousness, waiting for the day that shall reveal all things; when
the Tabernacle of God which yet is in Heaven, shall be let down among Men, [or
they taken up into it] and these hidden things of Sovereignty shall be more
openly known among them.

Lastly, This Doctrine of God's absolute Dominion clears away all that
made-Ground and Rubbish which the Principles of free will Grace do found their
Election upon, and shows us the only proper and true foundation of
Scripture-Election, with those other important Truths which hold upon it, or
are Consequents of it; all which have their Head in the Sovereignty of God, and
derived thence as Rivers are from the Sea, etc. Ibid. p. 25, 26.

The Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance explained and confirmed, or the
certain permanency of their acceptance with God, and Sanctification from God,
manifested and proved from the eternal Principles, effectual Causes, external
Means thereof, in the immutability of the Nature, Decrees, Covenant and
Promises of God, the Oblation and Intercession of Jesus Christ, the Promises,
Exhortions, and Threats of the Gospel. Dr. Owen's Title Page to his Treatise of
the Saints Perseverance explained and confirmed, etc.

Hitherto I have delivered the truth of this weighty Point of Religion, which
also is the Doctrine of the Church of England; now it follows that we should
consider the Falsehood. Sundry Divines have devised, and in Writings published a
new frame or platform of the Doctrine of Predestination; the Effect whereof is
this. The Nature of God (say they) is infinite Love, Goodness, and Mercy it
self; and therefore he propounds unto himself an End answerable thereunto, and
that is, the communication of his Love and Goodness unto all his Creatures. Now
for the accomplishing of this supreme and absolute End he did four things.
First, He decreed to create Man righteous in his own Image. Secondly, He
foresaw the Fall of Man after his Creation, yet so, as he neither willed nor
decreed it. Thirdly, He decreed the universal Redemption of all and every Man
effectually by Christ, so be it they will believe in him. Fourthly, He decreed
to call all and every Man effectually, so as if they will they may be saved.
This being done, he in his eternal Counsel foreseeing who would believe in
Christ, did thereupon elect them to eternal Salvation: And again, foreseeing
who would not believe, but contemn Grace offered, did thereupon also decree to
reject them to eternal Damnation.

This Platform, however it may seem plausible to Reason, yet indeed it is
nothing else but a Device of Man's Brain, as will appear by sundry Defects and
Errors that be in it. For, first, Whereas it is avouched that Adam's Fall came
by the bare Prescience of God, without any Decree or Will of his, it is a flat
Untruth. The putting Christ to death was as great a Sin as the Fall of Adam,
Acts 2. 23. nay, in some respects greater: Now that came to pass not only by
the foreknowledg of God, but also by his determinate Counsel. And therefore as
the Church of Jerusalem says, Acts 4. 28. Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and People of Israel, gathered themselves together to do whatsoever
thine Hand and thy Counsel had determined before to be done: So may we say,
that Adam in his Fall did nothing but that which the Hand of God and his
Counsel had determined before to be done. And considering the Will of God
extends it self to the least things that are, even to Sparrows, whereof none do
light upon the ground without our Heavenly Father; How can a Man in reason
imagine that the Fall of one of the most principal Creatures that are, shall
fall out altogether without the Will and Decree of God? And there can be
nothing more absurd than to sever the Foreknowledg of God from his Counsel or
Decree. For by this means things shall come to pass, God nilling or not
knowing, or not regarding them. Mr. Perkins' s Exposition of the Creed in his
Golden Chain, p. 477.

You are therefore to understand, that in the point touching Man's Conversion,
there is scarce any Circumstance that we have formerly spoken of, but it is
quarreled at, and corrupted with false Opinions; not the nature and substance
of our Conversion, which, say they, is not by the infusion of habitual Sanctity
into the Soul, but through Grace acquired by much Pains and industrious Actions
of our own, excited and assisted by some help of the Spirit; not the moving
cause, which is affirmed by them to be, not God's special and actual Love to
his Elect, but his common and equal Love to all Mankind alike; not the
efficient cause, which we affirm to be the Work of God's Spirit, they say it is
the freedom of our Wills: not the manner of it, without and above the strength
of our natural Abilities, as we hold, but so far in the compass of our own
Power, that we may help or hinder it at our own pleasure: not the Instrument of
it, the Word by the work of the Spirit, but as they would have it, the Word
working by it self, without any inward virtue of the Spirit besides: Lastly,
not the Subject, the Elect only, as we maintain, but all in common, upon whom
sufficient Grace to Conversion is bestowed, if we will believe them. All these
erroneous Opinions are founded upon other rotten and unsound Principles, which
are chiefly these. 1. That God has not precisely determined of any Man's
Salvation or Damnation in particular, but has left it to be decided by the
liberty of their own Wills. 2. That God does not bear any special Favor to one
more than another, but that his Love is equal to all in general, and his desire
of the Salvation of all Mankind alike. 3. That Christ has died for all Men
alike, procuring so much by his Death, that God is placabilis toward all, and
all Men indifferently are salvabiles, if they list to make use of the Benefits
purchased for them. 4. That God requires Faith in Christ of all Men whatsoever,
even of such Insidels as to whom Christ was never preached. 5. That God cannot
in Justice demand of Man the performance of those things, which since his Fall
he has no strength to perform: and that if God require any such Service, he is
bound in Equity to give unto Man new strength for to perform it. I do but only
name these Articles of the Arminian Faith, tho even that is enough to show their
Weakness and Untruth, to any that can judge of sound Doctrine; but I say, I
mention them only, that you may the better perceive what is that main Issue
whereinto they are finally resolved; and that in plain terms is this [That all
Men, whether Christians or Infidels, within or without the Church, may be
converted and saved if they will] you will say this is broadly spoken; but I do
them no wrong, read their Books, compare their Tenets, and you shall see that
this is the upshot of all their Discourses. God has excluded none, he loves
all alike, Christ has died for all, Faith is required of all, sufficient
Ability to believe and repent is given to all; who then, or what should hinder
the Conversion or Salvation of any one, but himself, his own mere Free Will?
Surely an Opinion that should not be gainsaid by any, but readily embraced by
all, if it had as much Truth in it as it caries show of Pity and Commiseration
to Mankind: We would be loath to be judged cruel; but it is Folly, not Pity, to
take upon us to be more merciful than God has declared himself to be; and it
is Impiety to tell a Lie for God, by magnifying the glorious largeness of his
Mercy beyond the bounds which himself has prescribed unto it. Wherefore
against this wide and vast Conclusion of Arminianism, that [God has given
sufficient Grace to all the World to convert and believe, if they will] I
oppose this directly contradictory, [God has not given sufficient Grace unto
all; and in those to whom he has given such Grace, it depends not on their
Free Will, whether they will be converted or no.] These two Propositions
destroy one another, and one is confuted by that which confirms the other, etc.
Pemble's Plea for Grace, p. 52, 53, 54.

Head 2. Covenant of Grace not of a temporal, but eternal Origination, etc.
Conformist.
THere are none elected in the eternal Counsel of God, (which respects a
personal Consultation, and so a Covenant) but are ordained in time to believe;
nor none excluded, but do afterward by their own Malice and Frowardness justly
exclude themselves from Belief: (not from this Counsel or Covenant, for they
were never taken into it) yet it is certain, that the number and company of
Believers (such as were individually pitched upon and mentioned in this Counsel
or Covenant) is foreseen and pre-ordained of God, and so consequently of the
other also; as it may thus appear, Christ praying for those that shall believe
in him, Joh. 17. 20. says v. 22. I have given them the Glory, etc. and ver.
24. I will that they which thou have given me, etc. They which as yet believed
not, but should believe, are already given unto Christ, and even now glorified.
What is this else, but that they are preordained of God, which should believe
in Christ, and that they are already given (which imports a Gift by way of
Covenant from all Eternity unto Christ, for whom he engages) and glorified in
the Purpose of God. Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 896.

Whose Names are in the Book of Life: Whose Names are not written in the Book
of Life from the Foundation of the World: Phil. 4. 3. Rev. 17. 8.

Huberus answers, that all are elected in Christ, and written in the Book of
Life (or inserted into the Covenant) but with a condition, so that they believe
and continue in Faith: whereupon it comes to pass that they which believe not
do lose their Salvation, and so are as not written in that Book, but are rased
out of it. These. 917. Puckius also answers to the same effect, that not to be
written in the Book of Life, must be understood positively, not privatively,
that is, they are written and declared through their Contumacy or Contemt
worthy of Damnation. Ration. 896.

Cont. 1. The Text is, They are not written in the Book of Life (or taken into
the Covenant) from the foundation of the World; which, first, overthrows
Huberus's Answer, etc. 2. It meets with the other Cavil; for in that they
were not written from the foundation, etc. it shows, that they were shut out
of the Book (or Covenant) of Life, before their Contumacy or Infidelity
appeard; and therefore their Contumacy which appeared in the World could not be
the cause of their Names not written in the Book of Life, (or not being taken
into the Covenant) which was done before the Foundation of the World. Ibid. p.
897.

They only are ordained or elected to Life that are given to Christ, (giving
and taking includes covenanting, especially when a Condition is, that something
be done for them by him who receives them) Joh. 17. 2. but a certain number
taken out of the World, not the whole World, is given to Christ (or covenanted
for by Christ) v. 6. Thou gave them me out of the World, (here is the
Covenant) thine they were, (here is Election) etc. Ergo, The number is certain
and definite before God, (both by Election and Covenant) of them that shall be
saved -- Christ saying, The Men which thou gave me out of the World,
assigns some special Persons that were given unto him; namely, his Apostles,
as it is clear by the Text: And if some particular Persons were given unto him,
why may there not be a particular Assignment and Cognizance also before God of
the rest that are given unto him? Where Christ says, speaking of his Apostles,
Thine they were, and thou gave them me, v. 6. it shows an absolute Election
before God, without any respect of their Faith: For, first, Christ says, They
are thine, that is, by Election; and then they are given to him (that is, by
Covenant) to know him, and believe in him, ver. 8. Ibid.

They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every Man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his Life according to that Law, and the Light of Nature: for the holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ whereby Men must be saved.
Church of Engl. Art. 18.

(All the World being wrapped in Sin by breaking of the Law) God sent his only
Son our Savior Christ into the World, to fulfill the Law for us; and by
shedding of his most precious Blood, to make a Sacrifice and Satisfaction (or,
as it may be called, amends) to his Father for our Sins, to assuage his Wrath
and Indignation conceived against us for the same. But Justification does come
freely by the mere Mercy of God, and of so great and free Mercy, that whereas
all the World was not able of their selves to pay any part toward their
Ransom, it pleased our Heavenly Father of his infinite Mercy, without any of
our desert or deserving, to prepare for us the most precious Jewels of Christ's
Body and Blood, whereby our Ransom might be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and
his Justice fully satisfied; so that Christ is the Righteousness of all them
that truly do believe in him: He for them paid their Ransom by his Death: He
for them fulfilled the Law in his Life. So that now in him, and by him every
true Christian may be called a fulfiller of the Law -- For the very true and
lively Christian Faith is not only to believe all things of God which are
contained in holy Scripture, but also is an earnest Trust and Confidence in
God, that he does regard us, and that he is careful over us, as the Father is
over the Child whom he does love: And that he will be merciful unto us for his
only Son's sake, that we have our Savior Christ our perpetual Advocate and
Priest, in whose only Merits, Oblation and Suffering, we do trust that our
Offenses be continually washed and purged -- Homilies appointed to be read in
Churches by Q. Elizabeth, Part 1. fol. 13, 15, 23.

None can come unto Christ unless it be given unto him, and unless the Father
draw him.

And all Men are not so drawn by the Father that they may come unto the Son;
neither is there such a sufficient measure of Grace vouchsafed unto every Man,
whereby he is enabled to come unto everlasting Life. In a Convocation of the
Clergy of Ireland held in Dublin. Art. 32.

All God's Elect are in their time inseparably united unto Christ, by the
effectual and vital influence of the holy Spirit derived from him, as from the
Head, unto every true Member of his Mystical Body. And being thus made one with
Christ, they are truly regenerated, and made Partakers of him, and all his
Benefits. Art. 33.

By justifying Faith we understand, not only the common belief of the Articles
of the Christian Religion, and a persuasion of the truth of God's Word in
general, but also a particular application of the gracious Promises of the
Gospel to the comfort of our own Souls, whereby we lay hold on Christ with all
his Benefits, having an earnest Trust and Confidence in God, that he will be
merciful to us for his only Son's sake: So that a true Believer may be certain
by the assurance of Faith, of the forgiveness of his Sins, and of the
everlasting Salvation by Christ. Art. 37.

Works done before the Grace of Christ, and Inspiration of his Spirit, are not
pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ;
neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School-Authors say)
deserve Grace of Congruity: yea rather, for they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, (viz. by Faith in, or Union with Christ)
we doubt not but they have the nature of Sin. Art. 13. Church of Engl. or as
Dublin Art. 26. speaking of such Works, We doubt not but they are sinful.

That the holy Patriarchs; Fathers and Prophets died in the same Faith before
the coming of Christ -- They had all Faith, and believed in Christ; yea, the
same Faith that is now preached, as it is defined by the Apostle, Heb. 11. 1,
2, 13. Romans 4. 7. -- The same Faith which saves us, did also save the ancient
Righteous, the great with the small: for as we believe that Christ is come in
the Flesh, so they, that he was to come: As we believe that he died and rose
again; so they, that he should die and rise again.

And Gregory compares both to those that went before, and followed Christ
riding to Jerusalem, crying, Osanna, etc. From this place we may further reason
thus: The same Faith has the same Effects and Fruits: The Patriarchs had the
same Faith with us. Ergo, They were saved and went to Heaven, as all Believers
now do. Again, They that went before Christ, entered into Jerusalem as well as
they that followed: Wherefore the forerunners of Christ that believed in him,
by the same Faith entered into Heaven. -- A Martyr being asked where the old
Fathers were before the Death of Christ? Answered, They were in Life eternal,
which they looked for, being promised before to Adam, Abraham, and the
Patriarchs in the Seed to come. Fox, p. 913. -- Latter. Confession of Helvetia,
chapter 12.

The Fathers had the Gospel in the writing of the Prophets, by which they
attained Salvation in Christ, through Faith. They believe the Fathers were
saved in Christ -- Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 401, 402.

We believe that the Patriarchs and godly Fathers were in Heaven or Paradise,
as well before the Resurrection of Christ as after: for in as much as they
were, justified by Faith in his Blood, they received the same. Crown and Reward
of Righteousness that we do, being justified by the same means. Ibid. p. 1153.

As none die but in Adam, so none are made alive but in Christ. Aug. So then as
all that pertain to Adam in the first Generation, are dead in Adam; so all that
by Regeneration and new Birth, are engrafted into Christ, are made alive by
him. The Apostle says, that all they which are justified by Christ, shall
reign in Life by Christ; but all that are of Adam shall not inherit eternal
Life: Frgo, All are not universally justified by Christ, neither died Christ in
that sense for all. Ibid. p. 887, 888.

By what means is it that they shall attain unto Salvation, who never heard of
Christ, either by Old Testament Promises and Prophecies, or New Testament
Revelations and Evidences?

When was the Mediator given? 1. If we regard God's Decree, from all Eternity,
Ephesians. 1. 4. 2. If the virtue and efficacy of his Mediation, as soon as need was,
even from the beginning of the World, Rev. 13. 8. 3. If his Manifestation in
the Flesh, in fullness of time, Gal. 4. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Dr. Usher's Body of
Divinity, p. 160.

Is not the knowledge of the Wisdom, Power, and Goodne^s of God in the Creation
and Government of the Heaven and Earth, with the things that are in them,
sufficient to make us wise uuto Salvation? No; it serves rather for further
Condemnation without the Word, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21.

Where God is actually reconciled, there he actually loves; for Love and
Reconciliation are inseparable: But with the Elect before they convert and
believe, God is actually reconciled. Ergo, He loves them before their Faith and
Conversion. The Minor is evident, because before they were born, much more
before they are regenerat, a full Atonement and Satisfaction for all Offenses
is made by Christ, and accepted on God's part: Whereupon actual Reconciliation
must needs follow. And this the Scriptures make manifest, Christ being [the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the World] and God testifying of him at his
Baptism, long before his Death, in that Speech of admirable Consolation, (This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.) Well pleased with him for the
unspotted Holiness of his own Person, well pleased with us in him for his
unvaluable Merits. Hence a second Reason a pari.

If God did actually love the Elect before Christ's time, when an actual
Reconciliation was not yet made, then much more may he actually love the Elect
after the Atonement is really made by Christ's Death, even before they believe
it. But the former is true, as appears by the Salvation of the Patriarchs; and
therefore the latter may not well be denied. The reason of the Consequence is
this, because it is far more probable, that God should love us upon
Satisfaction made before our Faith, than love them upon their Faith before
Satisfaction was given; especially seeing neither their Faith nor ours is any
efficient cause why God loves either them or us. Election, effectual Vocation,
and Faith, all are Fruits and Consequents of God's actual Love unto the Elect:
which Graces and Favors he therefore bestows upon them, because he loves them:
And therefore it is vain to say, Deus elegit homines diligendos, non dilectos.
-- Pemble vindiciae gratiae, p. 17.

God's Love to our Persons, and to our Qualities and Actions, is a distinction
which God well knows how to make; Parents are well skilled in putting this
difference between the Vices and Persons of their Children, those they hate,
these they love; and when for their Vices they chastise their Persons, they
remember with much Compassion, that it is a Child whom they have under the Rod
-- The Cause is alike between God and the Elect, his Love to their Persons is
from everlasting the same, nor does their Sinfulness lessen it, nor their.
Sa^ctity increase it; because God in loving their Persons never considered them
otherwise, than as, most perfectly holy and unblameable in Christ. But God's
Love to their Qualities and Works then begins, when both the one and the other
become holy by the Grace of Conversion; before which time, and after too, God
is angry even with his Elect, and testifies his hatred of their Sins, as much
as of any others, by manifold Chastisements upon their Persons for their
Offenses. Wherefore tho Paul was a chosen Vessel, dearly beloved of God for his
Person, even then when in ignorant Zeal he furiously persecuted the Church, yet
for his Conditions they were hateful and highly displeasing to God till after
his Conversion. Most true it is, that Sin does justly make the Person hateful
in whom it is -- Yet in the Elect whom he has loved for ever, this difference
of Affection is manifest, God approves of their Persons, whilst he disallows
their Corruptions; and when his fiercest Wrath was showed against the Sins of
the Elect in the Person of Christ, then did God most compassionately love the
Persons both of Christ and of all the Elect. Wherefore God might easily take
away his Image from Adam's Nature, yet not his Favor from his Person, which he
loved as elect in Christ, whilst yet he punished his Transgression ^arply -- In
God's sight justification goes before all our Sanctification: for even whilst
the Elect are unconverted, they are then actually justified and freed from all
Sin by the Death of Christ; and God so esteems of them as free, and having
accepted of that Satisfaction, is actually reconciled to them. By this
Justification we are freed from the Guilt of our Sins; and because that is done
away, God in time proceeds to give us the Grace of Sanctification to free us
from Sin's Corruption still inherent in our Persons. -- -- Our Justification in
God's sight even long before we were born is purchased for us by Christ. For
it is vain to think, with the Arminians, that Christ's Merits have made God only
placabilem, not placatum, procured a freedom that God may be reconciled, if he
will, and other things concur, but not actual Reconciliation. A silly shift,
devised to uphold the liberty of Man's Will; and universality of Grace. No,
it is otherwise; the Ransom demanded is paid and accepted: Full Satisfaction to
the Divine Justice is given, and taken; all the Sins of the Elect are actually
pardoned: God's Wrath for them is suffered and overcome, he relis contented and
appeased, the Book is crossed, and the Handwriting cancelled. This grand
Transaction between God and the Mediator Christ jesus, was concluded upon and
dispatched in Heaven long before we had any being either in Nature or Grace:
yet the Benefit was ours, and belonged to us at that time, tho we never knew so
much till after that by Faith we did apprehend it. As -- Lands may be
purchased, the Writings confirmed, the Estate conveyed and settled upon an
Infant, tho it know nothing of all till it come to Age, and find by Experience
the present Commodity of that which was provided for him long ago. Ibid. p. 19,
20, 21, 23, 24.

The Faith of the Patriarchs is expressed in the Apostle by saluting or
embracing, Heb. 11. 13. they did not only clasp Christ, but he them again. Dr.
Reynolds' s Life of Christ, p. 443.

Let him (i. e. one searchingly humbled with the sense and consciousness of
some great Relapse) consider the safety and firmness of his Life in Christ,
upon God's eternal Love and free Grace which is toward us, the highest Link of
Salvation both in order of Time, Nature and Causality; Romans 8. 29, 30. it is
not these he will glorify, but has glorified, to note that Glorification is
linked and folded up with Justification, and is present with it in regard of
their eternal Co-existency in the Predisposition and Order of God, tho not in
effectu operis, in actual Execution.

Now this eternal Love and Grace of God is not founded upon Reasons in the
Object; for he justified, and by consequence loved the ungodly, he loved us
when we were his Enemies -- If neither Iniquity, Transgression, etc. could
interrupt or frustrate his Counsel (i. e. his Covenant) of loving us when we
were his Enemies: Why should any other Sins overturn the stability of the same
Love and Counsel? -- Ibid. p. 446, 447.

In the Covenant of Grace, the first Treaty is between God and Christ; for tho
the Covenant be between God and us, the Negotiation and Transaction of it is
between God and Christ, who was a Surety of the Covenant for us, Heb. 7. 22.
For, first, God in his Decree of Love bestowed us upon Christ, (Thine they
were, and thou gave them unto me) we were chosen in him; we to be Members in
him, and he to be a Head and Fountain unto us of all Grace and Glory: For God
had committed unto him an Office of Power to redeem his Church, and he received
a Commandment from his Father to finish the Work of Mediation. Ibid. p. 512,
513.

The ordaining of a Mediator is that, whereby the second Person being the Son
of God, is appointed from all Eternity to be a Mediator between God himself and
Men. And hence it is that Peter says, that Christ was foreknown before the
Foundation of the World. And well said Augustine, that Christ was predestined
to be our Head: For howsoever he is ((...)) the substantial Word of the Father,
or the Son, he does predestinate with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; yet as he
is the Mediator he is predestined himself. Mr. Perk. of Predest. p. 13.

Christ is the Head of such as are not together in the being of Nature or
Grace. Mr. Byfield on the Co^ossians, chap. 1. p. 122.

Christ was known to God's People in all Ages; Heb. 13. 8. chapter 11. 4. Man. 3.
1. Mic. 5. 2. To Adam, Genesis 3. 15. To Abraham, Joh. 8. 56. To Moses, Heb. 11.
26. To Israelites, 1 Cor. 10. 9. To Job, chap. 19. 25. To Esaias, Joh. 12. 41. To
Prophets and Kings, Luke 10. 24. To the Samaritans, Joh. 4. 25. Bernard of
Batcombe Thesaur. Biblicus.

Object. Christ took on him Man's Nature, therefore he redeemed Man's Nature
generally. Ans. 1. It follows not, except we would say that Christ redeemed
his own Humanity, which cannot be any ways possible. 2. Every Woman does
partake of the Human Nature of every Man, yet is not every Man each Woman's
Husband, but here is alone with whom by the Covenant in Matrimony he is made one
Flesh: and in like sort Christ did by his Incarnation (sua (...)) take also
upon him Man's Nature, and that common to all Adam's Progeny; yet is he the
Husband of his Church alone, by another more peculiar Conjunction, namely, the
Bond of the Spirit and of Faith: And by it the Church is become Flesh of his
Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, Ephesians. 5. 20. And therefore she alone may justly
claim Title to the Death of Christ, and all his Merits. Mr. Perkins' s Gold
Chain, p. 169.

Except. God appointed all to be saved, with this Covenant and Condition, If
they believe. Ans. This is absurd to affirm: For, 1. By this means the Decree
of God should depend upon the Will of Man, when as contrarily God's Decree does
limit and order all inferior Causes. 2. It quite takes away the certainty of
God's Decree, because a conditional Proposition does set down nothing as being,
nor dos it certainly affirm any thing, Ibid. p. 171, 172.

Object. The Covenant of Grace was made with Adam and Eve, and in them all
Mankind was received both into the Church and Covenant, and also called to the
Knowledge of God. Answ. 1. This Reason wants even common reason and sense, to
say, that God giving his Promise in the days of Adam and Noah, did in them call
all Mankind that should come after. 2. Adam before his Fall did indeed receive
the Grace both for himself, and for others also; and in the Fall he lost it
both for himself and for all others; but after the Fall, he received the
Promise for himself alone, and not for the whole World, otherwise the first
Adam should not only have been a living Creature, but a quickening Spirit, the
which is proper to the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 45. Ibid. p. 174, 175.

Elect.] God's Servants are God's Elect, and that both in respect of Election
before time, and also in respect of Election in time; for the Lord has in his
eternal Counsel chose them in Christ to the obtaining of Salvation, to the
praise of his Grace. --

Holy] They are holy diverse ways -- 1. In the Head. 2. In their Laws. 3. In
their Sacraments. 4. By Imputation, etc. Mr. Byfield, Col. 3. p. 75.

A Supplement by a Nonconformist.
By the Covenant of Suretiship Christ and the Believer are in a manner in one
Writ; for notwithstanding that there be differences between the Covenant made
with him, and that which is made with us, yet it may be said, that Christ and
the Believer are some way in one Writ. 1. Because these two Covenants are all
of a piece; they are to be distinguished, but not to be divided; it is the same
design of Grace, the same business of redeeming and saving lost Man that is
carried on in both. 2. Although Christ and the Believer be not formally, and as
Parties, in this Writ of Christ's Surety-covenant to God; yet they are
virtually, and as to their Interests and Concernments: it is Christ's Business
and Concernment, and the Believers too, even all his eternal Concernments that
are in that Covenant and ours; these meet together, are transacted in one Writ:
And thus even among Men, a Person may be said to be in a Writ when his
Concernments are handled. 3. Because of the contexture and interweaving not
only of Christ and the Believers Interests, but also of their Names in the same
Writ: for in the Covenant where his Name is put alone as Undertaker, and which
is his single Bond, to wit, the Covenant of Suretiship, even there is the
Believer's Name put, as being the Person for which he paid a Price, and for
whom he undertook, and who were promised to him for a Seed, as a satisfying
sight for the Travel of his Soul. And again, in the Writ given to us, we stand
not alone in Covenant-dealings with God; but in the same Writs of the Promises
made to the Believer, Christ's Name stands as principal Party covenanting for
us, and receiving the Promises, as is manifest from what is already said. 4.
There is not only a Contexture, but a Commutation with Christ and the Believers
Name in the Covenant-Writs; for his Name is put in our Bond, for he wrote
himself the Sinner (legally) and in the Sinner's place under the Law accursed:
and our Name is put in the Writ of Justification given to him; and the new Law
of Faith writes the Believer righteous and blessed, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13,
14. Romans 3. 22. 5. There is not only a Commutation, but a Community of Writs
betwixt Christ and the Believer: for one Writ and Promise writes God, the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the God and Father of the Believer;
this Covenant Relation to him and us, is by the great Promises of the Covenant,
Heb. 1. 5. Psalm. 89. 26, 29. One Writ makes Christ the first Heir and Son of
the Promise, and the Believer a younger Brother coming in under Christ the
first Heir, Psalm. 89. 27. Gal. 3. 26. Romans 8. 17. One Writ and Letter of
Acquittance discharges both Christ and the Believer from the Curse and
Condemnation of the Law, Romans 8. 3, 4, 6.

By the Covenant of Suretiship Christ is constituted the grand Instrument and
Actor of all things that appertain to his Peoples Redemption and Salvation, and
that not only of eternal Salvation and Redemption, which he alone brought unto
his People, Heb. 5. 9. chapter 9. 15. Luke 1. 68. and of such part of that
Redemption as is wrought within time, Heb. 7. 25. but of whatsoever Salvation
and other Administrations are good for them in this Life: And therefore we find
that Christ was the grand Instrument, and had an active hand in the Deliverance
of his People from all Afflictions and Oppressions in all Ages, Isa. 63. 5, 9.
Again, By the Covenant of Suretiship, all the hard Conditions lay upon Christ,
all that the Law requires of Man Condition-wise, Gal. 4. 4. Romans 6. 14. -- All
the Conditions that are Works, and nothing rests to the Believer
Condition-wise, but that which is Grace, Romans 4. 16. The Believer works, and
is created unto good Works, Phil. 2. 10. for by this Suretiship he is under a
Covenant to work in his People what God requires Condition-wise of them, Joh.
6. 37. That in the Covenant of Suretiship the Believer is undertaken for by
both the Parties; Jehovah undertakes, Isa. 53. 10. Christ undertakes, Heb. 7.
25. He is by this Covenant of Suretiship in a sure confirmed State. And
whatsoever Christ acted by the Covenant of Suretiship, he did it for us, [And
we did that in him.] By the Covenant of Suretiship, besides all other
Attributes in God, Justice it self, that is most terrible to the Believer, and
was sometimes a dreadful Attribute, and speaking nothing less than Condemnation
to fallen Man, is now turned to be as much for the Believers Salvation, as any
other Attribute in God; and upon that account is and may be comfortably looked
upon, 1 John 1. 9. Ark of the Covenant, p. 131, etc.

By this procuring of the new Covenant for us, which they ascribe to the Death
of Christ, they intend the Abrogation of the old Covenant, or the Law, or at
least such a Derogation from it, that it, shall no more oblige us either unto
sinless Obedience or Punishment, nor require a perfect Righteousness unto our
Justification before God, and the Constitution of a new Law of Obedience
accommodated unto our present State and Condition, on whose Observance all the
Promises of the Gospel do depend. Others say, that in the Death of Christ there
was real Satisfaction made to God; not to the Law, or to God according to what
the Law required, but unto God absolutely: That is, he did what God was well
pleased and satisfied withal, without any respect to his Justice, or the Curse
of the Law. And they add, that hereon the whole Righteousness of Christ is
imputed to us so far, as that we are made partakers of the Benefits thereof:
And moreover, that the way of the Communication of them unto us, is by the new
Covenant, which by his Death the Lord Christ procured: For the Conditions of
this Covenant are established in the Covenant it self, whereon God will bestow
all the Benefits and Effects of it upon us, which are Faith and Obedience;
wherefore what the Lord Christ has done for us is thus far accepted as our
Legal Righteousness, as that God upon our Faith and Obedience, with respect
thereunto, does release and pardon all our Sins of Omission and Commission:
Upon this Pardon there is no need of any positive perfect Righteousness unto
our Justification or Salvation, but our personal Righteousness is accepted with
God in the room of it, by virtue of the new Covenant which Christ has
procured. Dr. O. Justi. p. 265, 266. See Mr. Baxt. Meth. Thcol. Part 3. p. 46,
47.

That Christ did not satisfy the Law, but the Lawgiver, because he is above his
own Laws. Christ, as proved, satisfied not the threatening of the Law, or its
obligation unto Punishment, whereby it obliged us Sinners; for nothing else
could be the fulfilling of it, but the Damnation and eternal Death of all
Sinners. -- Here he abrogates the Law, tramples under foot its Righteousness,
makes its Author to slight it in his Demands of a full Satisfaction unto
Justice, and renders the Death of Christ a mere fantastical Chimaera, or at
least but a Metaphorical Sacrifice.

Baxterian.
THey feign God to have made an eternal Covenant with his Son; that is, God
imposing on God the Law of Mediation. B. Brevi Just. par. 2. p. 10. (It is well
if our Author owned a Trinity; for he cannot conceive a personal Transaction
before the Incarnation.)

That which is called the Covenant between the Father and the Son, is this
Covenant made to and with Christ incarnate, and the foredecreeing thereof, with
the Prophecies of it. If there be more, it is past our reach. Ibid. Part 1. p.
4.

An eternal Covenant properly so called must not be supposed to have passed
between the Father and the (...) (i. e. the Word or Son) but when certain it is
that some things are to be done by the Son, and some things to be given to the
Son himself as incarnate, and some things for his sake to be given to Men;
these Decrees or Divine Volitions are oftentimes called by Divines by the name
of Covenant: And some certain form of the holy Spirit's speaking in the sacred
Scriptures, has given occasion to this use; whilst it oftentimes expresses
Properties, to wit, of Christ by words of Promise, as if the Father in
promising had said these things to the Son not as yet Man. Mr. Baxter's Meth.
Theol. Par. 3. p. 9.

That which they call the Covenant of God with Christ, not as yet incarnate, is
only God's Decree, Promise, prophetical Prediction, p. 30. In his Postscript to
Method. Theol. he pleads for an universal Covenant of Grace, into which all
Mankind were taken: and God's taking of Abraham into a Covenant of peculiarity,
he judges to be but an Adjunct added to the universal Covenant of Grace; and
the universal Covenant stood unabrogated: neither (says he) has this Covenant,
or first universal Law of Grace ceased by the coming of Christ, in which he
graciously commanded certain means to obtain pardon of Sin and Life, even to
them to whom the Gospel was never preached.

Who dare say that no Duty, no Means unto Salvation are prescribed even to the
Americans and Indians? No Mercy leading to better things granted to them, or
all Duties and Means to be used as vain and without hope: and to favor this
Notion he brings Heb. 11. 6. Act. 10. 35. Act. 14. 17. Romans 1. 19, 20. and 2.
to ver. 17, etc. He tells us in the sum and substance thereof, that the
Covenant was made to all Mankind; and because God deals not in a way of
strict Justice; and because Vessels of Wrath are born with, therefore he
affirms that we may easily gather, that God is appeased, Sin not only
pardonable, but after a sort pardoned. Part 3. p. 19, etc. This elsewhere he
will not grant unto the Elect until they believe.

This Law and Covenant was made to and with Christ incarnate; for so he was a
Subject under the Law. It is too bold, improper and offensive a Phrase, to call
God's eternal Decree of Redemption by the name of a Law, yea, or a Covenant of
God with himself, that is, of the Father with the Son.

Therefore all the descriptions of it in the Old Testament are but Prophecies
and Promises containing the terms of the future Covenant. Mr. Baxter's End of
Doctr. Controver. chap. 12. Sect. 2.. 2, 3.

And he that gives Man forfeited Life, Health, Time, and all the abundant
Mercies which the World is full of, does thereby so far actually forgive Sin.
Chap. 12. Sect. 3.. 7.

This Law or Covenant in this first Edition was made with Adam as the Father of
all Mankind, and so with all Mankind in him, as truly and as much as the
Covenant of Innocence was: For, 1. God's Word makes no difference. 2. Adam was
as much after the common Father of Mankind, and all we as much in him as before
the Fall. Ibid.. 21.

Abraham being a Subject to this same Law of Grace, (i. e. the universal,
common Covenant of Grace in which all the World were) did so faithfully believe
and obey it, that (he thereby having made his Maker his Debtor) it pleased God
to reward him extraordinarily, by, 1. Renewing the Covenant, (i. e. a refined
limbeckning of common Grace) by special Application to him, and by the Promises
of peculiar Privileges to him and his Seed.

This Covenant did not discovenant the rest of the World, nor put them into any
worse condition than they were in before. Chap. 12. Sect. 4.. 1, 5.

As the Covenant of Peculiarity was not a separated state, but an additional
Privilege and Reward to Abraham, as faithful to the common Covenant of Grace.
Ibid.. 7. (So that the Salvation-faith of Abraham, quatenus as such, had no
other Foundation but what the Faith of Infidels and Idolaters had, tho out of
them and from amongst them he was called into a state of Salvation, not being
therein before. Josh. 24. 2, 3.) See Meth. Theol. Part 2. p. 415.

Q. 5. Whether Abraham was justified by the universal Covenant of Grace, from
his performed Conditions of the same, or by his own particular Covenant of
Peculiarity, to wit, out of his performing the Condition thereof?

Answ. Abraham was firstly (or chiefly) justified by the universal Covenant of
Grace, from the performed condition of the same; and from an eminent particular
Act (of his) he was afterward eminently justified, etc.

It was not only the Nature of the Elect, but all Mankind that Christ assumed
in his Incarnation, contrary to Heb. 2. 14.

(Peter Martyr, speaking of some of this Author's Complexion, says, Whilst
these Men make Grace so common to all, they turn Grace into Nature. And
Augustine (it seems, not well scenting the Baxterian Notion) tells Julian, Thou
bring in a kind of Men which can please God without the Faith of Christ, by
the Law of Nature; this is the cause why the Christian Church does especially
detest you. Perk. of Predest. p. 122.)

The Gentiles living under the Old Testament, tho it was not revealed unto them
as unto the Jews, yet were not excluded from the Covenant of Grace, and from
Salvation. Corvinus.

I deny this Proposition, that none can be saved that is not ingrafted into
Christ by a true Faith. Bertius.

To this Question, Whether the only way of Salvation be the Life, Passion,
Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ? I answer, No: Venator. See
Dr. Owen' s Display of Arminianism, p. 122. With this agrees Mr. B's Method.
Theol. p. 394.. 36. Part 2.

Whether Faith in God's Mercy and Holiness, or the Sacrifice and Merit of
Christ were more necessary unto the Salvation of Man? Answ. Without hesitation
it must be said from the nature of the thing, that Faith, Holiness, and love of
God, are more necessary unto Salvation, than either Faith in Christ, or the
Sacrifice of Christ himself. Ibid. p. 418. He queries thus, May Abraham be said
to be united to Christ by Faith, and he made a Member of him? Answ. He could
not be united to Christ the Mediator incarnate, not as yet existing: He that
was not as yet, was not as yet one with Abraham: But he may be said to be
united to the second Person to be incarnated, in that sense in which the
faithful are said to be united to God himself.

Whereas God has made through Christ a general Act of Grace or Gift of Christ,
Pardon, and Life eternal, to all the World, on condition of fiducial acceptance
of it as a free Gift (is it not enough to be corrupt in Principles, without
acting the part of a Fool therein? What, a free Gift and a Condition in it?)
and commanded the offer of it to all, and will doubtly condemn the final
Refuser; and by this Gospel-Gift (not given without a meritorious qualifying
Disposition, and effectual to its reception) as his Instrument, (a poor dead
thing, till we put Life into it by our Faith) pardons and justifies the
believing Accepters. These Men (i. e. such as say that this Gift of Christ from
an Act of Grace in God gives the Life of Faith, and that passively unto, and
yet actively in believing) deny the very being of this Gospel-Act: (And it is
pity they should breath if they did not) they deny it to be either Christ's Law
or Covenant, or Grant (especially upon conditions.) Mr. Baxter's Brev. Just.
Part 2. p. 15.

God has commanded Men that hear not of Christ, the use of some Means, which
Mercy has (through Christ) afforded them, which have a tendency to their
Salvation, and should be used to that end: And his bare Command to use such
Means (much more as seconded with abundance of Mercies) tells us, that he bids
not Men use them in vain, or without any hope of good success. He that hears
of Christ, and believes not, or believes uneffectually, and is not a
converted sound Believer, is under God's Command to use certain means allowed
him to procure Faith and true Conversion, and that not without all hope of good
success. Mr. B's End of Doctr. Controv. chap. 25.. 30, 31.

Having proved it is a Law of Grace that all the World is to be ruled and
judged by, it remains to be enquired, Whether any of them that have not the
Gospel (or never heard of Christ) do keep the Conditions of this Law, and so
are justified by it, and saved? It is exceeding probable, at least, that God
would never govern many hundred parts of the World (compared to the Jews)
before Christ's Incarnation, and five sixth parts since his Incarnation, by a
Law of Grace, which yet no Person should ever have effectual Grace to keep as
far as was necessary to his Salvation. Every Law of God is a Means, and
appoints the Subjects the use of much Means for their own Salvation: These
Means they are bound to use, and shall be condemned if they use them not; and
that none should ever use them savingly, is an Assertion so unlikely, that he
that has the boldness to affirm it, should bring certain Proofs of it, which
the Scripture, I think, does not afford him.

I wish the impartial Reader to study Mal. 1. 10, 11. whether seven this be not
the sense, [Nor will I accept an Offering at your hand: For from the rising of
the Sun to the going down of the same, my Name is great among the Gentiles, and
in every place Incense offered to my Name, and a pure Offering: for my Name is
great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts, but ye have polluted it.] Our
Translators have, as Expositors, thrice (at the least) added the future Tense
[shall be] but all the old Translations, Syriack, Chaldee Paraph. Greek, Latin,
etc. put it in the present Tense [is great, is offered.] I do but desire the
Reader to study it; it is strange that all the ancient Churches should
misunderstand it. It seems more probable by the Context that the Hebrew Text
understood the present Tense (none being expressed.) Ibid. chap. 16.. 28, 29,
32.

They feign that God made a Covenant with Adam, (and all his Posterity say
some, as in him) that if he stood, God would continue him and his Posterity;
and if he fell, God would take it as if all his Posterity then personally
sinned in him; and so that, either we were all then personally in him, or God
by Imputation would take us to have so been: And so that God's Covenant and
Imputation made Adam's Sin ours, further than it is by natural propagation, not
truly distinguishing between our being persosonally in him, and being but
virtually and seminally in him; and feigning God to make Adam not only the
natural Father and Root of Mankind, but also arbitrarily, a constituted
Representer of all the Persons that should spring from him; and so that God
made them Sinners that were none, and that before he made them Men. Whence they
infer, that Christ was by God's imposition and his own sponsion, made the legal
Representative Person of every one of the Elect taken singularly; so that what
he did for them, God reputed them to have done by him. Hereby they falsely make
the Person of the Mediator to be the legal Person of (...) Sinner, and deny the
true Mediatorship. But they cannot agree when this personating of the Elect
began: some say it had no beginning, but was from Eternity, because Election
was from Eternity, and we were elected in Christ; and so were Persons from
Eternity in him. Others say, That it began at the making of the World, Christ
being then the first of God's Works in a superangelical Nature emaning from the
Divine, which contained all our Persons in it, as the Beams are of or in the
Sun. Others say, that this Personation began at the giving to Adam the first
Law or Covenant of Innocence, and that Christ, was a Person in the Bond or
Covenant; and that the meaning of it was, Thou, or Christ personating thee,
shall perfectly obey; or thou or he shall die the threatened Death for Sin.
Others say, that this Personation began at the making of the Promise, Genesis 3.
of the Seed of the Woman, etc. and so that Christ personated none under the
first Covenant. Others say, that it began at Christ's Incarnation, when he took
the Nature of (...), and therewith (...) our Persons. Others say, that it began
on his Cross, or at least at his Humiliation, and that he only suffered in our
Persons. Others say, that it begins at our believing and our Union with Christ
by Faith, and then he by Union personateth us. They deny God's Covenant or Law
of Innocence, that required our personal Obedience as the Condition of Life.
They forge a Law that God never made, that says, Thou or thy Surety shall obey
perfectly, or die: They falsely say, that God justifies none that are not
really or imputatively perfectly innocent, obedient, and such as never sinned,
but kept all that Law. They confound God's Covenant with Christ as Mediator,
imposing on him his Mediatorial Part, and the Covenant of the Father and Son
with fallen Man, imposing on them the terms of Recovery and Life. They hold
that the first Law (and some of them also Moses's Law) is done away as to all
the Elect, but is still in force to all the Reprobates, and was in force to
Christ: But whether it bound him to Obedie^ as our Representat^ antecedently to
Man's Fall, or only consequently, they are in their Confusion at a loss. And
they hold that its Curse and Penalty sentenced after the Fall by God, fell on
all the Reprobate, and on Christ, but none of it on any of the Elect, as having
been suffered by Christ fully for them. As I have said, the promissory part of
that Law ceased, and so did the Condition of the Promise, by Man's Sin making
it impossible, but the threat did transire in sententiam. And if Christ was
antecedently in the Bond of Obedience for us, he was bound not to eat the
forbidden Tree, and bound to dress the Garden, and bound to take Eve for his
Wife, etc. which are all false. If he were bound by it as our Representative
after the Fall, it bound him when it ceased, and bound not us, which is false:
And therefore it was only the Law of perfect Innocence anew imposed on himself,
by the Mediatorial Covenant that bound him. And if the penal Sentence and Curse
be executed on all the Reprobate, the^ it is not ceased; and then it must be a
Penalty, and that Curse even on the Elect before they believe, because till
then they have no part in Christ; and after they believe, they must bear part
of the Penalty called a Curse; which was fixed and not reversed and pardoned;
that is, the privation of those degrees of Grace, Peace and Joy, which they
should have had if there had been no Sin; the Curse on the Earth, Sorrow in
Childbearing and Death. -- -- -- They that make this Imputation to be before
the Incarnation, make God to make himself this great Sinner; that is, Christ
while he was mere God; and so make us a wicked God. When Satan can but tempt us
to sin, and it is not proved that any one Devil is guilty of all Men's Sins, they
make God guilty of all; yea, they that lay it on Christ only afte^ his
Incarnation, lay it on him that is God. They that feign Christ to have
personated us in his first Covenant of Redemption, make us by him to have
covenanted to redeem our selves, and to do the Mediatory work. Mr. B^xt. Brev.
Just^. 2. p. 7, 8, 9, 11.

Could you but get out Prejudice and Ignorance so far as to teach these Men but
two or three distinctions, in all likelihood it would cure them, E. G. 1. To
distinguish between a Surety antecedent and subsequent. 2. To distinguish
between the Righteousness of Christ given or imputed to us in se it self (one
Man's Accidents made another) and his Righteousness given us in its Effects
and Benefits reputed the sole meritoous Cause. 3. Between Justification by
Efficiency (principal and instrumental) and justifying of us constitutively (as
matter and form) justifying by Grant in Law, or by Evidence, or by Witness, or
by an Advocate-Defence, or by judicial decisive Sentence, or executively; and
these as supposing actual or legal Accusations. 4. Between the Law or Covenant
of Innocence with Adam, the Mediatorial Law or Covenant to Christ, the common
Law of Grace made with Adam and Noah, the Covenant of Peculiarity with Abraham,
the Political Law of Moses to the Jews, and the Law (...) Covenant of Christ,
^race, of Faith, by which Christ does govern, and will judge his visible Church,
Get unstudied, dull Heads but to understand these four Distinctions, and you
cure them without a new Regeneration: To instance no more but in the first, an
antecedent Surety is either, 1. A Party in the Bond. 2. Or an Instrument of the
Party bound. 1. If two Persons be bound disjunctively (this or that) to a Duty
or a Penalty, the Bond is answered if either of them perform it. If the Law to
Adam had either said, Thou, or Christ for thee, shall perfectly obey, shall
dress the Garden, shall take Eve for thy Wife; or that thou or Christ shall
suffer for not doing it; then Christ's performance had antecedently freed us
from Guilt and Punishment. 2. Or if the Law had said or meant, Thou shall obey
or suffer by thy self, or by thy Substitute, or per alium, as a Man may pay his
Debt by his Servant, or appear by his Attorney; then Christ's Righteousness or
Sufferings would have proved us guiltless. But a subsequent Surety, who, after
the Guilt, does voluntarily as a Mediator undertake the discharge of the
Guilty, is no strict or absolute Representative, but, as a Mediator, purchases
the Captive, to receive his Grace on the terms and to the ends which by a Law
or Covenant of Grace the Mediator shall appoint. Ibid. p. 56, 57.

This Law of Grace was made to Adam the lapsed Head of all Mankind, and so to
all Mankind in him: And it was renewed to Noah in the same Capacity: so that
all fallen Mankind was put under this Law of Grace in the first Edition of it
made to Adam and Noah; and were neither left lawless, nor utterly desperate as
the mere damning violated Law, which now no more offered Life to any, the
Condition being become of natural impossibility. God is not to be supposed to
say now to Sinners, If you be not Sinners, you shall live; when it is known that
they are. Ibid. p. 2, 3.

Whether the Covenant of Grace be made only with Christ, or with us also?

Answ. The first is put into a Catechism, where I am sorrier to find it than in
Maccovius, Cluto, Cocceius and Cloppenburgius. The Covenant made with Christ is
not the same that is made between Christ and us, and which we celebrate in
Baptism. It is not only Christ that is baptized, but all his Members, and
Baptism is the mutual Covenant; we are the Receivers of the Relation to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and we are the Promisers (the word Restipulation is
too presumptuous.) If we are not Covenanters, we can be no Covenant-breakers,
nor have right to the Benefits of such a Covenant: It is the same thing that in
several respects is called a Law and a Covenant. And if we are not under
Christ's Law, we are lawless, or not his Subjects. Deny Christ's Law and
Covenant to us, and you will subvert all Christianity, and deny the Rule of
Judgment and Justification. Ibid. p. 10.

(Here lies the Mystery of Iniquity, that as we are obedient Subjects unto the
Covenant, or Law of Christ, so we stand or fall in Judgment, and are justified
or are not justified.)

Error 54. Christ only is covenanted with by the Father, and he is the only
Promiser as for us, and not we for our selves.

Contr. Christ only has undertaken to do the work of Christ, but Man must
undertake, and promise and covenant even to Christ himself, that (by the help
of his Grace) he will do his own part. Mr. Baxter's Life of Faith, p. 358.

Object. God loves us from Eternity, and when we were his Enemies, not because
we were good, but to make us better than we were.

Answ. God's Love (and all Love) consists formally in Complacency. God has
no Complacency in any thing but in good, or according to the measure of its
goodness: from Eternity God foreseeing the good that would be in us, loved us
as good in esse cognito, and not as actually good, when we were not. When we
were his Enemies, he had a double Love to us (or Complacency) the one was for
the natural good which remained in us as we were Men, and repairable, and
capable of being made Saints; the other was for that foreseen good as in esse
cognito, which he purposed in time to come to put upon us. -- But Christ did
not die or merit to change God's Nature, and make him more indifferent in his
Love to the holy and the unholy, or equally to the more holy, and to the less
holy: But his Complacency is still in no Man further than he is made truly
amiable in his real Holiness, and his relation to Christ, and to the Father. --
But as he loves not Saul a Persecutor, under the Notion of a fulfiller of his
Law in Christ; so neither does he love David in his Sin, under the Notion of
one that is without Sin, and perfect, as having fulfilled the Law in Christ:
But so loves him in Christ, as to pardon his Sins, and make him more lovely in
himself, by creating a clean Heart, and renewing a right Spirit within him, for
the sake of the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ. Ibid. p. 362, 363.

The thing that I deny is, That Christ by his Obedience made Atonement and
Merit for us, as a proper peculiar Surety in the Law of Works. The thing is far
otherwise, for Christ suffered and obeyed as a principal and sole Undertaker,
and not as a Surety, that supposed us Principals in that Undertaking. (Here
lies the Baxterian Fallacy.) He bound himself to God, to give his Life by dying
in our stead to save ours (very remotely) but he never was bound in one Bond
with us, that he should do so. 1. Reas. God never proposed it to fallen Sinners
to make Atonement for their Sins, and by Merit recover eternal Life, which they
had forfeited.

Where is the Law or Covenant whereby God proposed this to Sinners as their
Duty, and a way for their Recovery? By the Law of Works it was impossible, and
a Contradiction. The Gospel condemns a thought of it, as contrary to the whole
scope of it: The Compact between the Father and the Son, was not a Law or
Covenant proposed to Sinners for their performance of the Conditions thereof.
Now a Mony-Surety is bound to no more than the Principal is bound to do. If I
am not obliged to pay a hundred Pounds, neither is my Surety bound to pay a
hundred Pounds.

Object. You Will say by the Law we were bound to obey the Law perfectly, or to
die for it.

Answ. Yes, to obey was your Duty, to die was the Penalty if you disobeyed.
But, 1. You were not bound to die, tho you obeyed perfectly: But Christ was
bound to obey, and suffer tho he obeyed. Mr. D. W. Man made righteous, etc. p.
92, 93.

(And thus all along does he tantivy it upon his forged unsupposed
Suppositions, as upon a Spanish Jennet begotten by the Wind: But lest he should
crack his own by it, I shall desire him to bait a little by the way. -- Sir,
what more proper Expression can set forth Christ's Engagement from Eternity
with the Father on the behalf of the Elect, [so far forth as terrene
Comparisons may subserve for the Illustration of Divine Mysteries] than a
pecuniary Surety does? for, as the wise Man says, -- Money answers all things; a
Ransom from Slavery, and a Purchase of an Inheritance: But the return of the
Elect from their fallen State unto God must be a Payment of the very idem, both
in Acquitment and Title, as that self-same Law requires (never abrogated, but
stands in full force to all Eternity, both in Hell and Heaven) by a breach
whereof they lay under this double forfeiture of Life and Glory.) But our
Author tells us, were Christ a proper pecuniary Surety in his Death and
Obedience, there would be no room for God's forgiving us any Sin (and if it
were not so, how should he forgive us for Christ's sake if he had not paid the
Debt? for adequately to his Payment will God's Forgiveness be, especially for
his sake) or giving us any Mercy as of free Gift, unless he forgave us more
than Christ satisfied for, or bestowed what he did not merit. Ibid. p. 96.

Dr. Reynolds tells us, that the Remonstrants say, that Adam being by God
deprived of original Righteousness (which is the Faculty and Fountain of all
Obedience) and being now constituted under the deserved Curse, all the Debt of
legal Obedience, wherein he and his Posterity in him were unto God obliged, did
immediately cease: So that whatsoever Outrages should after that have been by
Adam, or any of his Children committed, they would not have been Sins, or
Transgressions, nor involved the Authors of them in the Guilt of just
Damnation. That which unto us reviveth Sin, is the new Covenant, because
therein is given to the Law new strength to command, and unto us new strength
to obey, both which were evacuated in the Fall of Adam: upon which Promises it
does most evidently follow; that unless God in Christ had made a Covenant of
Grace with us anew, no Man should ever have been properly and penally damned
but only Adam, and he too with no other than the loss of God's Presence, (for
Hell and Torments are not the Revenge of Legal, but of Evangelical
Disobedience) not for any actual Sins, for there would have been none, because
the Exaction of the Law would have ceased; and where there is no Law, there is
no Transgression: not for the want of Righteousness, because that was in Adam
himself but a Punishment, and in his Posterity neither a Sin nor a Punishment,
but only a Condition of Nature; not for habitual Concupisence, tho it be a
Disease and Infirmity, yet it is no Sin, both because the being of it is
connatural and necessary, and the Operation of it inevitable and unpreventable,
for want of that Bridle of supernatural Righteousness which was appointed to
keep it in.

Lastly, Not for Adam' s Sin imputed, because being committed by another Man's
Will, it could be no Man's Sin but his that committed it. Sinfulness of Sin, p.
203, 204.

Thus the Baxterians in effect: That the Law of Innocence is abrogated, and
that by the Promise and coming of Christ the whole World is brought upon new
Terms with God, viz. under a Law or Covenant of universal Grace, by which,
according to their improvement or non-improvement thereof (tho they never heard
so much as a word of a Redeemer) they must stand or fall.

Nonconformist.
HEb. 10. 4, 5, 6, 7. God has been in Christ reconciling the World; that is,
in him and by him, (as a Mediator, and Umpire, and Surety between him and you)
this great matter has been taken up and accorded. He and Jesus Christ his only
Son, have from all Eternity laid their Heads together (as we may speak with
Reverence) to end the Quarrel; Christ should undertake to satisfy his Father
for all the wrong was done him: He was made Sin, that is, a Surety and a
Satisfaction for it, who knew no Sin, ver. ult. that they, etc. And God the
Father upon it is so fully satisfied, as he is ready not to impute their Sins
to them, but to impute all Christ's Righteousness to them, and to receive them
into favor more fully than ever. God was in Christ reconciling the World, not
imputing their Sins, etc.

And this, my Brethren, is to preach the Gospel unto Men, which is the best
News that ever Ear heard, or Tongue was employed to utter, which took up God's
thoughts from Eternity, and lay hid in his Breast, which none but he and his
Son knew; which, if it were but for the antiquity of the Story of it, it is
worth the relating, it being the greatest Plot and Stateaffair that ever was
transacted in Heaven or Earth, or ever will be.

These words are a Record of the greatest and deepest Mystery of State, and the
secret Passages thereof, that ever was transacted either in Heaven or Earth. No
less than the Consultation and Conference, yea, the very words that past
between God the Father and the Son, spoken at the Council Table, at which no
one was present besides, but the great Secretary of State, the blessed Spirit,
who revealed this.

And this, when they sat upon the greatest Business of State, the Treaty of
Peace between God and Men; and this, just at the time when God was dispatching
his Son to come down into the World, and had prepared him a Body ready for him
to transact it in.

Then when he comes into the World, He says, etc. which Speech of his has
yet further reference unto, and quotes a Record far more ancient, even the
first general Council kept in Heaven, and the Records of it; In the Volume of
thy Book, etc.

The Book is, Liber Decretalium, the Book of God's Decrees; yea, and a Record
that was written in the first Page of that Book. In the Volume of the Book
indefinitely, says the Psalmist; but the HOly Ghost, who had read over and
written every leaf of it, quoting it here, says, (...), in capite, in the
beginning of it, which varies not the sense, but interprets it: And if you hope
to find it (as some have gone about to do) in the first words of Genesis, In
principio crea^it Deus, you are deceived, it is the Book of God's Decrees, there
Christ remembers it written, that he was appointed to do God's Will. Dr. Tho.
Goodwin Vol. 1. Part. 3. p. 91, 92.

The main part of this Covenant (to wit, of Grace) is transacted by God without
us, which will appear if we consider the Particulars of it.

1. The Purpose and Intention of it, that is in himself, from his own Will
only; for all is done according to the good pleasure of his Will: And he will
have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy; Ephesians. 1. 9. Romans 9. 15. So that the whole
Purpose and Plot of it is in the Bosom of God alone, and according to this Plot
all things are done in this Covenant: As in the Creation all things are done
from an Idea of God, and according unto that Platform; as the Temple was built
according to the Pattern, so in the Covenant also: and therefore Christ is said
to come from the Bosom of the Father; being from this gracious Intention and
Purpose of God himself from everlasting.

2. He entered into Covenant with Christ the second Adam, that he should be the
Mediator of the Covenant, and the Person that should do all the great Works
that he had intended in this Covenant; and therefore we read of a Promise of
eternal Life made unto us before the World began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. God did not
content himself with a Purpose, but he added thereto a Promise and Covenant to
his Decree, which could not be unto us, because we were not; therefore it must
be to one that did represent our Persons, and was looked upon as in our stead:
for a Purpose might be in himself, but a Promise cannot be but to another; and
there was a Glory and a Posterity that God did promise unto him in this
Covenant, and that he would carry Christ through the Work that he had to do, as
appears afterward; and therefore Christ says, He is (...) God, and the Lot is
fallen to me in a fair ground, which is the speech of Christ, Psalm. 16. 5, 6.
and therefore Prove. 8. 22. he says, The Lord possessed me in the beginning of
his way. The Covenant that he made with Christ was the first of his going forth
unto the Creature, and upon this were grounded those true Delights of Christ
mentioned Prove. 8. 30, 31. And my Delights were with the Sons of Men. Mr.
Strong of the Covenant, page 117, 118.

When did the Lord make this Covenant with Christ, and when was it to take
place? This Covenant passed between God and Christ, the Father and the Son,
before the World began. How many are thy thoughts to usward? Psalm. 40. 5. It is
Christ that knew the thoughts of God, whose Name is Palmoni, qui secreta
numerata habet peccata, who has all our secret Sins numbered. And what be
those thoughts?

It is, Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings thou would not, etc. Thoughts of
Satisfaction to the Justice of God, and the Redemption of the Elect by a
Sacrifice; and they are no new thoughts, but such as God took up from Eternity,
and such Transactions as past between God and Christ before his coming into the
World: And then said I, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God. In the beginning of
his way was I set up, as a King, and Priest, and Prophet, from Eternity; and
this is not only in Decree and Appointment, but also by Covenant and Compact,
and by mutual Agreement between them. Ibid. p. 130.

We may hence see how deep the Plot of our Redemption and Salvation by Christ
was laid, it was not a thing occasionally taken up, and barely to serve a turn,
but it was a plotted thing. I confess the Scriptures do hold forth the
Incarnation of Christ to be the ground of his redeeming Men that were Sinners.
He came to seek and to save that which was lost, etc.

But the Foundation of this was laid in a deep Counsel between the Father and
his Son, at the Council Table before the World was; and the Covenant of Man's
Redemption was made with our Surety before the Covenant of your Creation was
made with you: And so much those two words Prove. 8. 22, 23. The Lord possessed
me, and the Lord anointed me, do necessarily import; and that word also Mic. 5.
2. His goings forth are from the days of Eternity; which, as Calvin expounds
it, refer unto the Mediator as being Head of the Church, and not unto his
eternal Generation, as is commonly expounded; and this is the ground of
Christ's Delight with the Sons of Men before the World was, Prove. 8. 31. as
those whose Names he had covenanted to bear, and whose Persons he had engaged
himself to represent before the Father; and this shows how the design of God
from everlasting has been to save Sinners, and to glorify himself in a way of
Mercy and Grace, through a Mediator: And it is the consideration hereof that is
the greatest Engagement in the world to Sinners to come in and return to him,
because God is in Christ reconciling the World, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 19. for he did
undertake to represent your Persons as your Surety and Representative, before
the World was, Ibid p. 135.

Now we come to the grounds why this Covenant must be made with Christ first,
and with us only as we are Members of Christ, and in him. 1. Because the
Covenant of Grace is a Transcript of the eternal Purpose of God in Election,
and does fully set forth the way how the Ends of God's electing Love should be
effected. Now the Ends of God's electing Love are, (1.) The Praise of the Glory
of his Grace. (2.) The Glory of his Son. (3.) The Holiness and Happiness of the
Saints. These Ends are sutably accomplished by this Covenant. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5.
He has blessed us with all spiritual Blessing; in heavenly things in Christ;
according as he has chosen us in him. Here three things are observable, (1.) It
is spoken of Christ as a Mediator, as Godman; for in him we are blessed, in him
we are chosen, but our Blessings proceed from Christ as Mediator. (2.) The
order of Election, we are chosen in him, that is, in him as the Head; and
therefore he is first elected, as he is first beloved: In whom I am well
pleased, Mat. 3. 17. well pleased with his People, all the Members of Christ,
but first with Christ, and with them only as they are in him, and one with him.
Ibid. p. 140, 141.

All that serves to make a Covenant are here, (1.) God demands of his Son,
that he lay down his Life; and for his labor he promises, That he shall see
his Seed, and God shall give him many Children; Isa. 53. 10. (2.) The Son
consents to lay down his Life, and says, Here am I to do thy Will; thou have
given me a Body.

This is the formality of a Covenant, when Christ consents to the Conditions.

Now this Covenant was manifested in time between the Father and the Son, but
it was transacted from Eternity.

This is comfortable, that the Father and Christ transacted a Bargain from
Eternity concerning thee by Name.

There was a communing between the Father and Son concerning thy Heaven:
Father, what shall be given thy Justice to ransom such an one, John, Anna,
etc.? And Christ from Eternity did bind for such a Person, He shall believe in
me. The Redemption of Sinners is not a work of yesterday, or a business of
chance; it was well advised, and in infinite Wisdom continued, etc. Mr.
Rutherford' s Trial and Triumph of Faith, p. 52.

And hence (i. e. from the Eternity of the Covenant) was the Salvation of Men
before the Incarnation, by the Undertaking, Mediation, and Death of Christ.
That the Saints under the Old Testament were saved by Christ -- That they were
saved by virtue of a mere Decree, will not be said. From hence was Christ
esteemed to be incarnate, and to have suffered; or the fruits of his
Inc^rnation and Suffering could not have been imputed to any; for the thing it
self being denied, the Effects of it are not. The Revelation of this Covenant
is in the Scripture; not that it was then constituted, when it is first
mentioned in the Promises and Prophecies of Christ, but then first declared or
revealed. Christ was declared to be chosen of God, by the Resurrection from the
dead, but he was so from Eternity.

As in other places, as shall be evinced, so in Isa. 53. is this Covenant
mentioned; in which Chapter there is this Prophetical Scheme, the Covenant
between Father and Son, which was past, is spoken of as to come, and the
Sufferings of Christ which were to come, are spoken of as past, as appears to
every one that but reads the Chapter. It is also signally ascribed to Christ's
coming into the World, not constitutively, but declaratively. It is the
greatest folly about such things as these, to suppose them then done, when
revealed, tho revealed in Expressions of doing them. Dr. O. against Biddle, p.
569, 570.

There are the Father and the Son as distinct Persons agreeing together in
Counsel, for the accomplishment of the common End, the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of the Elect.

The End is expressed, Heb. 8. 9, 10. chapter 12. 1. now thus it was. Zech. 6. 13.
And the Counsel of Peace shall be between them both, inter ambos ipsos: that
is, the two Persons spoken of, not the two Offices there intimated, that shall
meet in Christ; and who are these? The Lord Jehova, who speaks, and the Man,
whose Name is the Branch, ver. 12. who is to do all the great things there
mentioned. He shall grow up, etc. but the Counsel of Peace, the design of our
Peace is between them both: They have agreed and consented to the bringing
about of our Peace. Hence is that Name of the Son of God, Isa. 9. 6. Wonderful
Counselor. Ibid. p. 572.

The Covenant of God is founded upon his Eternity; the Oath whereby he confirms
it is by his Life: since there is none greater than himself, he swears by
Himself, or by his own Life, Heb. 6. 13. which he engages together with his
Eternity for the full performance; so that if he lives for ever, the Covenant
shall not be disannul'd, it is an immutable Counsel, Heb. 6. 16, 17. The
Immutability of his Counsel follows the Immutability of his Nature.
Immutability and Eternity go hand in hand together. The promise of Eternal Life
is as ancient as God himself in regard of the Purpose of the Promise, or in
regard of the Promise made to Christ for us. Eternal Life which God promised
before the World began: Tit. 1. 2. As it has an Ante-eternity, so it has a
Post-eternity; therefore the Gospel, which is the new Covenant published, is
termed the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. 6. which can no more be altered and
perish, than God can change and vanish into nothing: He can as little morally
deny his Truth, as he can naturally desert his Life. The Covenant is there
represented in a green color, to note its perpetual Verdure. The Rainbow, the
Emblem of the Covenant, about the Throne, was like to an Emrald, a Stone of a
green color, Rev. 4. 3. whereas the natural Rainbow, has many colors, this
but one, to signify its Eternity. Mr. Charnock, p. 194.

The whole Gospel is nothing else but a Declaration of God's Sovereign Pleasure
concerning Christ, and concerning us in him; it is therefore called the Mystery
of his Will, Ephesians. 1. 9. God had a sovereign right (not as to his Divine Nature
only, but as considered in the Economy of a Redeemer) to dispose of Christ
according to the Articles consented to. In regard of his Understanding, and the
advantage he was to bring to the Elect of God upon the Earth, he calls God by
the solemn Title of his Lord, in that prophetic Psalm of him, Psalm. 16. 2. O
my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord; my Goodness extends
not unto thee, but unto the Saints that are in the Earth. It seems to be the
Speech of Christ in Heaven, mentioning the Saints on Earth as at a distance
from him. Ibid. p. 741, 742.

There is a great deal of difference between God's doing a thing in Christ, and
through Christ, (...), and (...). It is Zanchy's Observation, That when God is
said to do a thing in Christ, it usually notes out some one of these immanent
Acts of God's toward us, that past between him and Christ for us when they
were alone, before we existed; and Jesus Christ was a common Person
representing us all, and God gave all to Christ* for us; as it is said, [The
Grace that was given us in Christ before the World was.] But the things that
God does through Christ, as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. He has appointed us to obtain
Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, are usually some transient Acts of God's
toward us, or those things which he actually performs and applies to us
through Christ: So that God redeemeth through Christ, justifies through
Christ, saves through Christ; but he chooses in Christ.

Q. In what further sense are we said to be chosen in him, so that the Act of
choosing should be referred to in him, and we to be in him at our Election? --
First, I will show you what he has not: He was not the cause of God's electing
us; for the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1. 9. [According to the good pleasure of his
Will, which he has purposed in himself.] What is the cause of all God's
Purposes toward us? Himself. -- God as he is the first Being, so he and his
own Will are the first Movers of himself: So that this [He chose us in Christ]
imports not, that Jesus Christ was the cause of our Predestination (taking him
a God-Man, as here he is meant) -- for he could not be the cause of our
Predestination, who himself was predestined. In 1 Pet. 1. 20. it is plainly
said of Christ, That he was preordained before the World was founded: He
himself was chosen as well as we, therefore he could not be the cause of our
Election: And both he and we being elected by one simple and entire Act, the
Predestination therefore of one could not be the cause of the Predestination of
the other: And as Christ was not the cause of. Election for the substance of
the Act, so nor was he the cause of it for the Persons elected.

Jesus Christ, as God-Man and Mediator, did not choose so much as one Man; it
was God that elected all those that were elected: Thine they were, (says Christ
to the Father) and thou gave them me. And it were a much more fond Conceit to
think that God chose such to be saved as he foresaw the Human Nature of Christ
would love and choose: This were to make the Divine Will conformed to that of
the Human Nature; whereas, Not my Will, but thy Will be done, said Christ unto
God the Father. 2. Affirmatively, The meaning is this, that Jesus Christ in
Election was the Head of the Elect. He was considered, and from the first
ordained by God as a common Person to represent us. He undertook for us then,
and so in him we' are chosen as in a Head. This is the sense that holy Bains
gives of it; to note out (says he) the order of Election, namely, that Christ
was chosen first as a Head, and we in him. -- 1. Learn to distinguish between
being elected with Christ, and being elected in Christ. To be elected with
Christ, is to be elected at the same time he was, for matter of time, for all
was from Eternity: But to be elected in Christ is with this difference, That
Christ at God's first Act of Election was considered as a common Person, a
Head, and Root, and we all in him. This is common both to Christ and to us,
that we were elected with him, and he with us, for matter of time. But this is
proper to Christ, that we were elected in him, he not in us. -- Genesis 1. 27. He
created Man; in his own Image created he him (Adam) Male and Female created he
them. God in creating Adam created all Mankind, as in blessing Adam he blessed
all Mankind; yea the Creation of Adam was all the Creation that the rest of
Mankind had: for, tho they exist by Generation successively, yet in him were
they created virtually, and then only.

Thus in choosing Christ, God looked upon him as a common Person, as a second
Adam, and chose us in him. And therefore you shall find, 1 Cor. 15. that God
speaks of Christ and of Adam, as if there had been but those two in the World.
[The first Man] (says he) and [the second Man] Was there then but a first Man,
and a second Man? Yes; but these two Men stood for all the rest. -- 2. Take
heed how you understand it, as if Christ alone were distinctly chosen, and that
our Persons were not as distinctly chosen too: yes, both Christ and we too were
distinctly and particularly thought of, and so individually elected. The
meaning (I say) of this our being elected in him, is not as if he only had been
distinctly and by Name chosen, and we all but confusedly and in gross, and as
in his Election only. God did not choose in the general, as a Kingdom does
choose the Children of a King that comes after him, and are involved in him,
in a general Notion only; so as their distinct choice is of the King himself
alone: No, the Scripture says, God knows who are his; he knows the very
Persons fully and particularly, yea, and distinctly viewed them then when he
elected them. And yet notwithstanding he thus chose us as distinct Persons from
Christ, yet still our Election was in Christ -- -- Some Divines yield that he
was chosen to be a common Person, when he should take up Man's Nature; and that
we were chosen then to be by him represented. They acknowledge that he was a
common Person, in his Death representing us, and is now a common Person in
Heaven, and sits there in our stead, representing us. But (say they) in the Act
of choosing, how should he be considered as a common Person in that he did not
then exist as God-Man? He might indeed be ordained to be a common Person after
he did exist as God-Man; but how in Election was he, or could he be such, he
being as then only the Son of God, and not Man? To solve this -- 1. That the
Person of the Son of God (who was ordained this common Person) he was with God
then; he was then existent. So Prove. 8. 30. Then (says Wisdom, namely Christ) I
was by him, etc. And the Evangelist John says, He was in the beginning with
God; that is, from everlasting. 2. This Son of God that then existed (consider
him as one that was to become Man) was the Object of Election as well as the
Manhood (which was chosen to become one with God.) That Divine Person was by an
Act and Decree of God's Will pitched upon, and singled out to assume our
Nature, and so sustain the Person of a Head before God in the mean while. 3. At
or in the Act of Election, this Son of God, as he actually existed at the
passing of that Act of Election upon himself, so he actually and solemnly
undertook to be a Head and common Person, representing us, and to that end to
assume our Nature. And this is in order of Nature to be supposed before our
Election, tho co-existent together from Eternity. 4. Upon this he was in repute
such with God the Father; he was a common Person in God's esteem, and that
justly. So Prove. 8. 23. I (namely Christ) was set up from everlasting, ere ever
the Earth was, etc. that is, in esteem with God for such. Now this cannot be
understood of Christ as he was the second Person only: But God did set him up
from the beginning, as bearing and sustaining the Person of God-man (to which
Manhood he was chosen, and undertook to assume) and as a Head to his Members
before God, who reputed him such. And of him considered as such are those words
spoken, for so only he is called Wisdom, as there he is: For Christ is not
called the Wisdom of God essentially taken, for that is one of his Attributes,
and not a Person: But he is called God's Wisdom manifestative, that is, as
ordained to manifest God's Wisdom unto us, he being to be God manifest in the
Flesh.

And such a Person or Relation as he thus then actually undertook, such did God
then and from that time repute him, and actually entitle him by, as between
himself and his Son. Therefore in Joh. 17. 5. (observe the Phrase there)
Glorify me (says Christ to God) with the Glory which [I had with thee] before
the World was.

What Glory was that? He does not mean his Glory as he was simply the second
Person, because he had that Glory now, and therefore needed not to beg it: Nay,
he could not beg it, it was too much for him so to beg, for so he is equal with
God: Therefore it must be the Glory of the Mediatorship [Which I had before the
World was] that is, in thy repute; thou accountedst me thus and thus glorious
in respect of the Glory ordained me by my undertaking to be Man, and the
Mediator too of the Church. And this is plain if you compare it with the 24th
Verse, for there he speaks of that Glory which was given him, which can be no
other than the Glory of the Mediatorship: So then Jesus Christ the second
Person being existent, and undertaking to be a common Person and a Mediator for
Men, God did reckon him as such; he was in his account at the choosing of him,
as a common Person, and Head, and as a Mediator too: And indeed there was this
great advantage of our Mediator his being God, that thereby he was not only
present at, and privy to the making of all God's Decrees, but was also by, to
undertake for all that concerned his part in it which God should decree, and to
enter upon the Title and Relation of our Head and Mediator then. And there is
this reason why Christ must needs have been an Head to his Members before his
assuming our Nature, or his ascending up to Heaven, (which I see not how it can
be answered) because otherwise Jesus Christ had not been an Head to the Fathers
under the Old Testament, for he had not then taken an Human Nature; and yet was
actually a common Person, for forgiving their Sins, by virtue of that Atonement
he had engaged to perform for them, which was such in God's repute existing
before him in Job's time. Deliver him, I have found a Ransom, Job 33. And upon
the account thereof, God did as actually and really forgive the Sins of the Old
Testament as he did, Romans 3. 25. Now if he was a Head then, and they actually
Members of him, then he might be so virtually and representatively, from
everlasting, through his undertaking of it, and this in as just sense as he is
to be the Lamb^slain from the beginning of the World. Why may not the Promise
of the second Person then passed unto God, give as full, yea a fuller
subsistence of those things which God decreed, and which he undertook for
before God his Father; as God's Promises which were written in the Old
Testament gave to the Fathers Faith then, in respect to which Christ was then
already slain? God the Father, who was then present, had a certain assurance,
that Christ his Son, that gave his Promise for performance, would and should
perform it. And Christ, as Son of God, who was God, having promised, I may say
of both, that Christ's Word then was as good as his Bond, and the Father's
assurance that he should perform it, as good as if he had already seen it done:
And his calling things that are not, as certain as if they were: And may apply
one and the same effect of the Apostle Paul equally to both, if of God the
Father giving Christ his Promise before the World began, it must be said, God
that cannot lie. And so it is, and was as firm and sure, as if done and
fulfilled, and this because he is God; Tit. 1. 2. it is expressly there said, In
hope of eternal Life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World
began. I may invert it, and say, for the same reason that that Promise which
Christ made the Father to undertake the Mediatorship in Man's Nature before the
World was, and to do all that he did in the fullness of Time, that Christ's
Promise then must have been, and was reputed as sure and steadfast by God the
Father, as if it had been already done; and God the Father might as certainly
build upon it to do any thing that was to be done, depending upon what Christ
undertook to do then, as if Christ had already performed all that Promise and
Undertaking; and this upon as equal Reasons, for Christ was God then as well as
the Father, and could no more lie than he; for they both are Equals, Joh. 10.
and all the Terms of both sides are Equals before the World was, etc. Dr.
Goodwin on the Ephesians, p. 58, 59, 60, 61. See his Discussion of the 10th
Verse, chap. 1.

Imo nihil, etc. yea there is nothing more false than that Arminian Dogma, that
no one is beloved in Christ, unless he actually exist in him by Faith: for
through, and for the sake of Christ the holy Spirit is given, by whose Grace we
believe, Joh. 7. 36. chap. 15. 16.

Therefore God loves us in Christ before we believe: Yea, that Complacency of
God is one and the same, immutable; and that Love wherewith he embraces us, as
well before as after the Death of Christ. Mr. Rutherford' s Exercit. Apol. p.
45, 46. God always loves the Elect, and always hates the Reprobate, p. 47.

But the Arminians always measure God by their own Model, as if so be after the
manner of Men, he should be turned from Hatred into Love, and again from Love
into Hatred. Ibid. 49.

By which Covenant I mean that foederal Transaction that was betwixt God the
Father and the Son from everlasting, about the Redemption of lost and fallen
Man. -- The Covenant of Redemption is that foederal Transaction, or mutual
Stipulation that was betwixt God and Christ in the great Work of Man's
Redemption. I call it a foederal Transaction, or mutual Stipulation, because
therein lies the nature of a Covenant; it is (as Civilians define it) a mutual
Stipulation or Agreement betwixt Party and Party upon such and such terms, with
reciprocal Obligations each of other. That the business of Man's Redemption was
transacted betwixt the Father and the Son, is clear, Zech. 6. 13. the Counsel
of Reconciliation.

That this Transaction betwixt these two glorious Persons was also foederal, or
in the way of a Covenant, and that too from everlasting, is to me a very great
Truth. -- This foederal Transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, it was from
all Eternity.

Here lies the Difficulty, and this is that which stumbles some. -- I say, the
Covenant of Redemption, it was from all Eternity; it was not made when Christ
was just coming into the World, but from everlasting, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Here is the
Purpose of God, here is Grace given in Christ Jesus: How? in the Covenant
betwixt the Father and him. When was this given? before the World began, (h.
e.) from all Eternity. So, Tit. 1. 2. how was this Life promised before the
World began, but in this everlasting Covenant, wherein the Father promised to
Christ eternal Life for all his Seed? Dr. Jacomb's Sermon in the Morning
Exercise methodiz'd, p. 204, 205, 211, 212.

The Covenant of Works was made with all Men in Adam, who was made and stood as
a public Person, Head and Root in a common and comprehensive Capacity; I say,
it was made with him as such, and with all in him: Quo mansit remanente, and
quo per^unte peribat; he and all stood and fell together; for even the Elect
may say, We are all by Nature the Children of Wrath as well as others: And that
of St. Paul, We know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them
who are under the Law, that every Mouth may be stopped, and all the World may
become guilty before God. But the Covenant of Grace is a discriminating thing,
it takes in some, and leaves out others: Christ is not a Head in Covenant with
all, as Adam was, but of his Elect only; for we find many in the World under
the Headship of Satan, and Antichrist, and old Adam, who are out of Christ, not
only because unconverted, as Saints themselves are before Regeneration, but out
of Christ in the account of God's Election, Donation and Covenant, who have
none of his special Love, nor ever shall have. Mr. Cooper's Sermon in the
Morning Exercise methodiz'd, p. 117.

The Lord Jesus Christ engages in the Work, accepts of the Terms and Conditions
set before him, and undertakes to satisfy his Father's Demands. And in order to
Satisfaction (which God stands upon, as you have heard before) Christ is
willing to fulfill the who^e Law, which was the Rule, or Measure, or Standard of
this Satisfaction. God has been dishonored by the Violation of his Law, and
the Disobedience and Nonperformance of it was that which kept God and the
Sinner at a distance, and therefore he will only be satisfied and reconciled
upon the fulfilling of it; here is my Law, says God, satisfy it, and my
Justice is satisfied. You must know this, that tho a Sinner as to himself is
justified upon the terms of the Covenant of Grace, yet as to his Surety, he is
justified upon the Covenant of Works: for the Surety must pay the whole Debt,
and the Father will bate him nothing.

Object. Where is then, some will say, the freeness of Grace in the justifying
and acquitting of a Sinner? If God will be satisfied to the utmost, what
becomes of Mercy? If the Surety pay the Debt to the Creditor, is it any great
favor for the Creditor to let the Debtor out of Prison?

Sol. Free Grace is very well consistent with full Satisfaction: and
notwithstanding the latter, the former is very glorious, partly because God
himself found out this way of Satisfaction, partly because God accepts it for
the good of the Sinner, as tho he had made it in his own Person, Romans 3. 24.
Notwithstanding Redemption by Christ, yet we are justified freely, as freely as
tho Christ had done and suffered nothing at all -- I say the Father demanding
the fulfilling of the Law, Christ undertakes to do it, and therefore he
willingly puts himself under this Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. And he submits not only to
the Duty of the Law, but also to the Penalty of the Law; not only to do what
the Law enjoins, but also to suffer what the Law threatens: and the former he
makes good by his active Obedience, the latter by his passive. Ibid. p. 208,
209.

The Conditions of the Covenant of Suretiship made with Christ, did fully and
perfectly answer the intent of the Covenant of Works, and that in both the
parts of it copulatively, which did but alternatively oblige Man; for the Law
does not oblige Man in an absolute sense, both to perfect doing and suffering,
but to one of them; for if we keep the Law, we are not obliged to suffer; Genesis
2. 17.

But Christ by the Conditions of the Covenant of Redemption, (1.) He is a full
Doer and obedient Fulfiller of the Commands thereof in all Points, Mat. 3. 15.
(2.) He fully suffers the Penalty of that Covenant, and satisfies for the
broken Commands thereof, Isa. 53. 5, 6. Hence, (3.) By the Conditions of this
Covenant which he performed, he had right to Law-Justification, and Life
eternal, even by the Law of Works; for the Righteousness which he wrought was
perfect Lawrighteousness, tho the Imputation of it to us be an Act of Grace,
and our receiving it by Faith make it Gospel-Righteousness to us, 1 John 1. 7.
compared with Romans 4. 5. Ark of the Covenant, p. 89.

Upon this complete Justification Believers are obliged to universal Obedience
unto God. The Law is not abolished but established by Faith: It is neither
abrogated nor dispensed withal by such an Interpretation as should take off its
Obligations in any thing that it requires, nor as to the degree and manner
wherein it requires it: Nor is it possible it should be so; for it is nothing
but the rule of that Obedience, which the Nature of God and Man make necessary
from the one to the other. And it is an Antinomianism of the worst sort, and
most derogatory unto the Law of God, which affirms it to be divested of its
Power, to oblige unto perfect Obedience, so as that what is not so, shall (as
it were in despite of the Law) be accepted as if it were so, unto the end for
which the Law requires it. There is no Medium, but that either the Law is
utterly abolished, and so there is no Sin; for where there is no Law, there is
no Transgression; or it must be allowed to require the same Obedience that it
did at its first Institution, and unto the same degree. This is that Law which
our Lord Jesus Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill, that he might be the
end of it for Righteousness unto them that do believe. This Law he abrogated
not, nor could he do, without a destruction of the Relation that, is between
God and Man, arising from or ensuing necessarily on their distinct Beings and
Properties; but as this cannot be destroyed, so the Lord Christ came unto a
contrary end, namely, to repair and restore it where it was weakened. Dr. O.
Just. p. 201, 343.

First then, They (i. e. the Arminians) grant Salvation to the ancient
Patriarchs and Jews, before the coming of Christ, without any Knowledge of, or
Faith in him at all: Nay, they deny that any such Faith in Christ was ever
prescribed unto them, or required of them.

It is certain that there is no place in the Old Testament, from whence it may
appear, that Faith in Christ (as a Redeemer) was ever enjoined, or found in any
of them, say the Remonstrants jointly in their Apology, chap. 7. fol. 91. The
truth of which Assertion we shall see hereafter; only they grant a general
Faith, involved under Types and Shadows, and looking on the Promise as it lay
hid in the Goodness and Providence of God, which indirectly might be called a
Faith in Christ; from which kind of Faith I see no reason why thousands of
Heathens and Infidels should be excluded. Agreeable unto these Assertions are
the Dictates of their Patriarch Arminius, affirming, That the whole description
of the Faith of Abraham, Romans 4. makes no mention of Jesus Christ, either
expressly, or so implicitly, as that it may be of any one easily understood: and
to the Testimony of Christ himself to the contrary, Joh. 8. 36. Your Father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad; he answers, he
rejoiced to see the Birth of Isaac, who was a Type of me. A goodly Gloss,
corrupting the Text. 2. What they teach of the Jews, that also they grant
concerning the Gentiles living before the Incarnation of Christ; they also
might attain Salvation, and be justified without his Knowledge: For although, says
Corvinus, the Covenant was not revealed unto them by the same means that it was
unto the Jews, yet they are not to be supposed to be excluded from the Covenant
(of Grace) nor to be excluded from Salvation; for some way or other they were
called. 3. They are come at length to that Perfection in setting out this Stain
in Christianity, that Bertius on good Consideration, denied this Proposition,
That no Man can be saved, that is not ingrafted into Christ by a true Faith.
And Venator to this Question, Whether the only means of Salvation, be the Life,
Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ? answers, No; Thus
they lay Men in Abraham's Bosom, who never believed in the Son of Abraham; make
them overcome the Serpent, who never heard of the Seed of the Woman; bring
Goats into Heaven, who never were of the Flock of Christ, never entered by him
the Door; make Men please God without Faith, and obtain the remission of Sins,
without the sprinkling of the Blood of the Lamb; to be saved without a Savior,
redeemed without a Redeemer; to become the Sons of God, and never know their
elder Brother: which prodigious Error might yet be pardoned, and ascribed to
human Inbecillity, had it casually slipped from their Pens as it did from some
others. But seeing it has Foundation in all the grounds of their new Doctrine,
and is maintained by them on mature deliberation, it must be looked upon by all
Christians as a Heresy to be detested and accursed. For first, They deny the
Contagion and Demerit of original Sin: Then make the Covenant of Grace to be
universal, and comprehend all and every one of the Posterity of Adam. 3. Grant
a Power in our selves to come unto God by any such Means as he will appoint and
affirm; that he does assign some Means unto all: and it will naturally follow,
that the knowledge of Christ is not absolutely necessary to Salvation, and so
down falls the Pre-eminence of Christianity, its Heaven-reaching Crown must be
laid level with the Services of Dunghill Gods -- If we look upon the several
Branches of this Arminian novel Doctrine, extenuating the precious worth and
necessity of Faith in Christ, we shall find them hewed off by the two-edged
Sword of God's Word. 1. For their denying the Patriarchs and Jews to have had
Faith in Christum exhibendum and moriturum, as we in him exhibitum and mortuum,
it is disproved by all Evangelical Promises made from the beginning of the
World to the Birth of our Savior, as that Genesis 3. 15. chap. 12. 3. chap. 49.
10. Psalm. 2. 7, 8. and 110. with innumerable others concerning his Life,
Office, and redeeming of his People; for surely they were obliged to believe
the Promises of God. 2. By those many clear Expressions of his Death, Passion
and suffering for us, Genesis 3. 15. Isa. 53. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. chap. 63. 2, 3.
Dan. 9. 26. Our Savior taught his Disciples, that all the Prophets from Moses,
spoke concerning him, and that the sole reason why they did not readily embrace
the Faith of his Passion and Resurrection was, because they believed not the
Prophets, Luke 24. 25, 26. showing plainly, that the Prophets required Faith in
his Death and Passion. 3. By the explicit Faith of many of the Jews, as of old
Simeon, Luke 2. 34. of the Samaritan Woman, who looked for a Messiah, not as an
Earthly King, but as one that should tell them all things; redeem them from
Sin, and tell them all such things as Christ was then discoursing of concerning
the Worship of God, Joh. 4. 25. 4. By the express Testimony of Christ himself:
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad, Joh. 8. 56. his
day, his hour in the Scripture principally denote his Passion; and that which
he saw, surely he believed, or else the Father of the Faithful was more
diffident than Thomas the most incredulous of his Children. 5. By these
following, and the like places of Scripture, Rev. 13. 8. slain in Promises,
slain in God's Estimation and the Faith of Believers, He is the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. under the Law and the Gospel, Acts 4. 12. --
On these grounds holy Ignatius called Abel a Martyr of Christ, he died for his
Faith in the promised Seed: and in another place, all the Saints are saved by
Christ; hoping in him, and waiting on him, they obtained Salvation by him. So
Prosper also, We must believe that never any Man was justified by any other
Faith, either before the Law, or under the Law, than by Faith in Christ, coming
to save that which was lost. Whence Eusebius contendeth, that all the old
Patriarchs might properly be called Christians, they all ate of the same
spiritual Meat, and all drank of the same spiritual Drink, even of the Rock
that followed them, which Rock was Christ. Dr. Owen's Display of Arminianism,
p. 116, etc.

Head 3. That Original Sin, etc.
Conformist.
OUR first Parents by God's Appointment were to stand or fall in that Trial,
not as singular Persons only, but also as the Head and Root of all Mankind,
representing the Persons of all that should descend from them by natural
Generation; and therefore for the understanding of the ground of our
Participation with Adam's Fall, consider, that Adam was not a private Man in
this business, but sustained the Person of all Mankind, as he who had received
Grace and Strength for himself and all his Posterity, and so lost the same for
all; for Adam received the Promise of Life for himself and us, with this
Condition, if he had stood; but seeing he stood not, he lost the Promise of
Life, both from himself and from us: and as his Felicity should have been ours
if he had stood in it, so was his Transgressions and Misery ours: so that as in
the second Covenant, the Righteousness of the second Adam (Christ Jesus the
Mediator) is reckoned to those that are begotten of him by spiritual
Regeneration (even those that believe in his Name) although they never did it; so
in the first Covenant, the Sin of the first Adam (who herein sustained a common
Person) is reckoned to all the Posterity that descended from him by carnal
Generation, because they were in him, and of him, and one with him, Romans 5. 15,
16, 17.

What is the Sin imputed? Our Sin in Adam, in whom as we lived, so also we
sinned; for in our first Parents (as has been showed) every one of us did
commit that first Sin which was the cause of all other, and so we all are
become subject to the imputation of Adam's Fall, both for the Transgression and
Guiltiness, Romans 5. 12, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15. 22. Dr. Usher's Body of Divinity, p.
138, 144.

We affirm, that we are guilty of the Sin of Adam, not by bare imputation, nor
yet potentially only in Adam's Loins, but really, verily, and in some sort
actually by Propagation. Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. 865.

The first is, the Participation of Adam's both Transgression and Guiltiness;
whereby in his Sin, all his Posterity sinned, Romans 5. 12. The reason of this is
ready: Adam was not then a private Man, but represented all Mankind; and
therefore look what Good he received from God, or Evil elsewhere, both were
common to others with him, 1 Cor. 15. 22. Here we must not omit to remember the
largeness of Adam's Fall. Sins are either personal, or general: Personal are
such as are peculiar to one or some few Persons, and make them alone guilty.
General, that is common to all Men; and such is Adam's Fall. It is a Sin not
only of the Person of one Man, but of the whole Nature of Man. And Adam must be
considered not as a private Man, but as a Root or Head bearing in it all
Mankind; or as a public Person, representing all his Posterity; and therefore
when he sinned, all his Posterity sinned with him: as in Parliament, whatsoever
is done by the Burgess of the Shire, is done by every Person in the Shire, Romans
5. 12. And here lies the difference between Adam's Fall and the Sins of Men, as
Cain's Murder, which makes not the Posterity of Cain guilty, because he was
never appointed by God to be the Root of his Posterity, as Adam was, and
therefore his Sin is personal, whereas Adam's is not: Yet this must not be
understood of all the Sins of Adam, but only of the first. Mr. Perk. p. 16, 254.

To speak distinctly, in original Sin there are three things. 1. The Guiltiness
of Adam's Fact derived unto us by just Imputation. 2. The want of that original
Justice which was in us in the Creation. 3. The depravation and corrupt
Disposition of our Natures. Mr. Byfield, Col. chap. 2. v. 13. p. 61.

Adam sends over to all that come of him Guilt of Sin, and Death by his
Disobedience imputed: Christ conveyeth over Righteousness and Life to his
Members by free imputation of Faith. Also they differ in this, that the Offense
of Adam, by which Death came upon all Men, was but once; but the Obedience of
Christ imputed to Believers, does not only cover and do away that one, but all
other Offenses of the Elect: also his Obedience puts upon the faithful a
Righteousness which meriteth a far better Condition than we lost by Adam's
Unrighteousness. Mr. Wilson of Canterbury on Romans 5. 12. p. 303.

The Act it self was peculiar to Adam, but the fault lies upon all. The words
Romans 5. 12. In whom all have sinned, being rightly understood, make it plain:
Paul affirms, that in one all sinned; and after, By the Offense of one, a fault
came upon all. We all were that one Man, says Augustine. His Offense is not to
be conceived of as personal, but as common; such as into which we are all
engaged. 2. It stands in a kind of an illness and depravedness, both in regard
that that singular Excellency, wherewith Adam was once endowed for himself and
all his Issue, is utterly lost; and in respect that in the stead thereof there
is come in a kind (as I may term it) of positive Corruption, which is much like
the raging Sea, etc. Mr. Sam. Hieron, Par. 2. p. 144.

We were all one in Adam, and with him; in him legally, in regard of the
Stipulation and Covenant between God and him; we were in him Parties in that
Covenant, had Interest in the Mercy, and were liable to the Curse which
belonged to the Breach of that Covenant; and in him naturally, and therefore
unavoidably subject to all that Bondage and Burden which the Human Nature
contracted in his Fall. And tho there be risen up a Sect of Men, who deny the
Sin of Adam to be our Sin, or any way so by God accounted, and to us imputed;
yet certain it is, that before that Arch-Heretick Pelagius, and his Disciple
Caelestius, did vex the Churches, never any Man denied the Guilt of Adam's Sin
(and Guilt is inseparable from the Sin it self, being a proper Passion of it)
to belong to all his Posterity. This then is the first Charge of the Spirit
upon us, Participation with Adam in his Sin. And in as much as that Commandment
unto Adam was the Primitive Law, so justly required, so easily observed,
therefore exceeding great must needs be the Transgression of it, Pride,
Ambition, Rebellion, Infidelity, Ingratitude, Idolatry, Concupiscence, Theft,
Apostasy, unnatural Affection, Violation of Covenant, and an universal
Renunciation of God's Mercy promised; these and the like were those woeful
Ingredients which compounded that Sin, in the committing whereof we all are
sharers, because Adam's Person was the Fountain of ours, and Adam's Will the
Representative of ours. Dr. Reynolds' s Sinfulness of Sin, p. 134, 135.

They say, that tho Adam's Sin may be thus far said to be unto Posterity
imputed, as that by reason of it they become obnoxious unto Death (namely an
external Dissolution of Body and Soul without any reunion, and an eternal loss
of the Divine Vision without any pain of sense) vet that Death which to Adam in
his Person was a Punishment, is not so to his Posterity, but only the condition
of their Nature. Ibid. p. 190.

The first is Adam's Sin, from whose Fall this natural Corruption and Weakness
is derived unto us.

He sinned, and we in him. Mr. Pemble' s Mischief of Ignorance, p. 4.

In Sin are three things. 1. The Offense of God, which is the fault. 2. The
Obligation unto eternal Punishment, which is the Guilt. 3. The Stain or
Pollution of the Soul (viz.) the inherent vicious Inclination of it unto Evil.
Sin does not remain in those that are justified, and regenerated in the two
first respects, (viz.) of the Fault and the Guilt, both which are taken away by
the Death of ^st.

But Sin does remain in the Regenerate according to the third respect, (viz.)
the vicious. Quality and Corruption thereof inherent in the Soul: We say, that
the fault and guilt of Sin in the Regenerate is utterly abolished by the Death
of Christ, which we do not take in such a sense as this; That in a Man
regenerate there is not at all any Fault or Guilt to be found: for to say that
a Man regenerate, when he sins, were neither faulty nor guilty, were a gross
Untruth, seeing it is impossible that Man should sin, yet God not to be
offended; that Man should sin, and yet not be guilty, and deserving eternal
Death: wherefore we confess that in the holiest of Men, if they sin, there is a
true Fault, and God is displeased with it; there is also true Guilt, and for it
they deserve to go to Hell. But yet this truth also must be acknowledged
withal, that all Faultiness and Guiltiness are quite abolished and taken away
from them by Christ, because that both are pardoned to them. God is offended,
but yet they feel ^not the woeful Effects of his Indignation, because in Christ
he is graciously contented to be reconciled with them -- He forgives all our
Iniquity, and that is done entirely and totally, [And heals all our
Infirmities] but this is by degrees, not all at once. In which course God has
no cause to fear the Censure of a Jesuit for Unskilfulness, nor stands he in
need of Man's Counsel for Prescription, nor Man's help to hold his hand in
working, if the Cure go on more slowly than our foolish Hastiness thinks fit.
That Is fit and best what God thinks so; and if we count him faithful and wise
in his Art, it is our duty to take his Advice, but saucy Presumption to give him
any. Pemble of Justification, p. 78, etc.

The Sin of Adam was not only personal, neither did he sin as a singular
Person, but as carrying all Mankind in the Stock and Original, no otherwise
than Christ satisfying for us on the Cross, has not suffered as a private
Person, but as sustaining and representing the whole Church in the Head.

The Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Romans 6. does affirm, that we are dead and crucified
with Christ.

If therefore we died in Christ dying, and were crucified with him, it is no
doubt but that it may likewise be said, that we sinned in Adam: for if the
Satisfaction and Righteousness of the second Adam be imputed to us, why shall
not the Sin of the first Adam; seeing that therefore the Righteousness of
Christ is imputed to us, that the Sin of Adam might not be imputed to us?
Reason it self does consent to this; for if Adam had received good things not
for himself alone, but for his Posterity, it is no marvel, if being spoiled of
these good things, he lost them for himself and his Posterity.

If any one be capitally punished for Treason, and brought to extreme Poverty,
his Children also with him do lose their Nobility: Nor is any thing more equal,
than that the Son should pay his Father's Debts, and that as they are Heirs of
their Estates, so they might be Heirs of their Debts. But in this Similitude
there is one, and that a notable difference; that is, when the Debtor has
wasted the Inheritance, and there is more in Debt than in Goods, the Son may
renounce the Inheritance, and leave his Fathers Goods; but here this yielding
up cannot be made, because to the Guilt, by the Sin of Adam, there comes also
the natural Depravation and Contagion; like as he that is born of Parents
infected with Leprosy, which Contagion cannot be put off when they please. --
Adam while he lived committed many Sins, yet I think that only first Sin of
Adam was imputed to his Posterity, because only by this Sin he violated that
Covenant which was made with him, as with the Author (or Original) of Mankind.
Peter du Moulin's Anatomy of Arminianism, p. 50, 51, etc.

Baxterian.
THey feign us to have been in Adam by a certain Covenant, more than we were by
natural Inexistency: And that this Sin was arbitrarily by God through that
Covenant imputed to us, further than we were guilty of it by any natural
In-being or Derivation; as if God made all Men Sinners by his arbitrary
imputation of that to them, which in their Natures they were all really guilty
of. Mr. Baxt. Brev. Justi. Part 1. p. 86.

If you say, Adam was legally as many Persons as are born of him in Sin, I deny
it: He was the Root of all his Posterity, and they were in him seminally and
virtually, but not personally, actually, or imputatively: But by one Man's
Disobedience, as their Root and Cause, many are made Sinners: And by one Man's
Obedience, as the Root and Cause, all Believers are made righteous. P. 113.

Do you mean that Guilt resulteth from God's part of the Covenant, or from
Adam's, or from his Posterities? Not from ours, for we existed not, and made no
such Covenant; not from Adam's part (antecedent to natural Derivation.) For, 1.
No Man can prove that ever Adam made such a Covenant. 2. Or that God gave him
any such Power (much less Command) to bring Sin and Death on his Posterity by
his Consent, or Will, or Contract, further than by the Law of Nature they must
derive it from him if he sinned. 3. Not by God's Covenant-act. For, 1. No such
Covenant of God can be shown that made Men Sinners further than natural
Derivation did. 2. Else God should be the Author of Sin, even of all Men's
original Sin, if his Arbitrary Covenant made them Sinners where Nature did not.
P. 103. (Observe these infernal Positions, if God impute Sin to him that
committed it not, he must be the Author of it; if Sin materially be imputed
unto Christ, he must of course be a real Sinner; and if the Abettors of this
gracious and mysterious Doctrine of Imputation appear in defense of the same,
they must be reputed Antinomians. Rejoice O Antinomians, if this be your Crime,
for your God and your Christ conjointly suffer with you!) And so that God's
Covenant and Imputation made Adam's Sin ours, further than it is by natural
Propagation, not truly distinguishing between our being personally in him, and
being but virtually and seminally in him: And feigning God to make Adam not
only the natural Father and Root of all Mankind, but also arbitrarily, a
constituted Representer of all the Persons that should spring from him; and so
that God made them Sinners that were none, and that before he made them Men.
Part 2. p. 7.

We say not that any of the Adult are damned for original Sin only; neither
that this Sin is now an irremediable Evil: but there is a sufficient Remedy
granted of God in the Covenant of Grace, and that to a Participation,
Application and Efficiency of the same; there are many subordinate Mediums
prescribed unto Men, according unto the special use or abuse whereof Men now
are judged. Mr. Baxt. Method. Theol. Part 1. p. 357.

It will be said, because God so covenanted with Adam, that he should stand or
fall for himself and his Posterity. I answer, That there was any such Covenant
that if he stood his Posterity should all stand, or be confirmed and saved, is
more than ever I found in the Scripture, or can prove, or do believe; but that
it would have been to the benefit of his Posterity I doubt not. And that his
Fall was to the Guilt and Corruption of his Posterity I doubt not: but (as I
said) not without and beyond their natural Interest in him, and derivation from
him as the reason of it: And we were as much naturally in our next Parents. The
first Law said, [If thou sin thou shall be filius mortis, and so shall those
that are propagated of thee.] The second Covenant says, [For thy original and
actual Sin Death is thy due, but I will give thee a Pardon and redeeming Grace
procured by the Righteousness of Christ.] But note, that this Covenant
pardons our original Sin as from Adam; and yet it follows not that we had
none because it is pardoned: even so it pardons the Guilt of our next Parents
Sins, and therefore we had it to be pardoned: both are pardonable to us,
therefore we had both. Mr. Baxt. End of Doctrinal Controv. chap. 10. Parag. 13.
(So that no one of the whole Race of Mankind was ever born under the juridical
external charge of this Sin, it being done away by the Covenant made with Adam
in the promised Seed, and the universal Grace that he received both for himself
and all his Posterity.)

We no way doubt to affirm that ever any one was damned for original Sin.
Corvinus.

We were not in Adam distinct Persons really; for our Persons then existed not,
and therefore did not inexist. God does not repute us to have been what indeed
we were not; for he judges truly, and is not mistaken: Therefore he judges
not Peter and John to have been those Persons in Adam then, nor Adam's Person
the same with theirs. We were seminally or virtually in Adam when he sinned;
which is but that he had that virtus generativa, from which we naturally sprang
in time: but to be virtually in him, is not to be personally in him, but
potentially, it being as to Existence terminus diminuens. Mr. Baxt. End of
Doctr. Controv. chap. 10. Heads 2, 3, 4, 5.

Adam sinned in his own proper Person only, and there is no reason why God
should impute that Sin unto Infants. Borraeus.

We receive our original Guilt and Pravity immediately from our next Parents,
and but remotely from Adam; it could never have come to us but through them
from whom we receive our Nature; from them we receive the Guilt and Pravity of
our Nature. And the Guilt of our Parents Sins being of a more diminute nature
than that of our own actual Sin (caeteris paribus) it falls not so fully on
us, as it did on the Committers themselves, nor as our own do. Mr. Baxt. Ibid..
9, 15.

And tho Mr. Baxter makes a fair show of Imputation of original Sin, in Method.
Theol. Part 1. page 358, 359, 360. yet this Imputation he explains, or what he
means by it. -- So they talk much of Imputation, and neither know nor tell you
what Imputation is; but take it mostly to be that which even Dr. Crisp calls
a charging God with Falsehood; as if it were his reputing, reckoning, esteeming,
or supposing us to be what indeed we are not, or to have done or suffered what
we did not, or to have what we have not: whereas Paul means nothing (and
(...) signifies nothing) but a true accounting us to be what we are, and to
have done what we did, and to have what we indeed have. And to impute
Righteousness to us, insignisieth but truly to repute, account, or judge us
righteous. Mr. Baxter's Brev. Justif Prol.

Whereas he (viz. the Arminian, against whom Dr. Davenant wrote) supposes that
Adam's Sin cannot be truly accounted a personal Offense in his Posterity, both
the Scripture and the common Consent of Divines run against him. For tho it be
not personal in the same sense wherein actual Sins done by Men, having the use
of Reason and Freewill, are said to be their personal Actions, yet it is in
another sense voluntary and personal, because it was so done that every
singular Person of Mankind is involved in that very voluntary Sin, and in the
Guilt of Punishment or Death due thereunto. So says the Apostle, Romans 5. Sin
and Death entered into the World by one: But how? In quantum in eo omnes
peccaverunt. And again, By one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners.
Haleuscio to this purpose says, Secundum Augustinum, concedimus quod non
punitur parvulus pro culpa patris, sed pro culpa sua, proprie loquendo. Non
enim dicit Apostolus quod solum Adam peccavit, sed dicit quod omnes peccaverunt
in Adam: Erat enim in Adam non solum volunt as unius singularis personae, sed
volunt as universalis Naturae. Adamo cadente a justitia originali, cecidit
etiam quaelibet volunt as posterorum. Caret enim volunt as cujustibet illa
certitudine quam habuisset si Adam stetisset, i. e. We grant, according to
Augustine, that speaking properly, a little Child is not punished for the fault
of his Father, but for his own fault. But the Apostle does not say that Adam
alone sinned, but says that all have sinned in Adam: for in Adam there was not
only the Will of his own singular Person, but the Will of his universal Nature.
Adam falling from original Righteousness, every (distinct) Will of his
Posterity fell also. -- Last of all; Whereas he takes it for granted, that
Adam's Sin is only imputed unto his Children, and so they are determined to
Death and eternal Torments for a Sin only imputed, he is contrary to the
Judgment of the Catholic Church: for it is generally held against the
Pelagians, that as Adam's Sin was the Sin of every Person that was a Member of
him, so likewise Adam's Crookedness of Will was not barely imputed, but
actually propagated to every singular Person derived from his Loins.

Object. 1. By the Arminian -- Adam's Sin is the Sin of Man's Nature only, and
no Man's personal Transgression but Adam's: it was neither committed nor
consented to by any of his Posterity in their own Persons. Answ. Adam's first
Sin committed in the state of Innocence, wherein by God's appointment gessit
personam generis humani, was every Man's personal Sin, and was consented unto by
every Man's Will, because in Adam there was not only the Will of one singular
Man, but the universal Will of all Mankind, and of every singular Person, as
before has been declared. And I would fain know, if Adam's first Transgression
was his only, and no Man's else, how every singular Person is by God himself
for that very Transgression esteemed liable unto Death. Durandus answers the
Doubt: Tho it were not voluntary actu personali infantium (who were not yet in
rerum natura) yet it was voluntary voluntate primi hominis, quae fuit
interpretative voluntas omnium. And if God himself and the Catholic Church
interpret this Will of Adam in disobeying God's Commandment, to be so far forth
our personal Sin, that every singular Person stands culpable of it, and
liable unto Punishment for it, we must not give Credit either to the old
Pelagians, or new Remonstrants, when they tell us that such a Decree cannot
stand with God's Mercy.

Object. 2. That it was the Sin of our Nature, not by Generation, but by God's
own voluntary Imputation. Answ. Original Sin sometimes notes that voluntary
and free Transgression of the Divine Commandment, whereby Adam's personal
Disobedience made every singular Person a Sinner in the sight of God, as before
has been said.

Sometimes again it notes that Corruption or Pravity of the Will and of the
whole Soul which remained in Adam after his Rebellion, and which by him is
traduced unto every singular Person, descending naturally from him: Neither of
these becomes the Sin of any particular Person otherwise than by Generation,
tho not without a free Constitution of God's Will. And as for the latter, it is
in all singular Persons of Mankind, not only by Imputation, but by real
Inhesion or Contagion, as the whole Church confesses.

Object. 3. God pardoned Adam who did actually and freely commit it in his own
Person; for so it is generally believed. Answ. God pardoned Adam, but no
otherwise than upon his repenting and believing in the promised Seed: which
being Acts performed by him after he had lost his original Justice, in them he
sustained not the common Person of Mankind, and therefore they were available
only to himself. Any of his Posterity upon the same Conditions shall assuredly
obtain the like Pardon. The Conclusion which he should prove is this, Absolute
Non-election, or Negative Reprobation cannot stand with God's Mercy. His
Reasons are, Adam's Sin is the Sin of Man's Nature only; it is ours not by
Generation, but by Imputation; it was pardoned in Adam. Were all these true,
show me any necessary Connection betwixt the Premises and the Conclusion, and
take the Cause. Dr. Davenant's Animadversions upon a Treatise entitled, God's
Love to Mankind, p. 230, etc. (This Author's Sentiment of the Truth in the main
part thereof, viz. God's dealings with Man by Imputation and Infusion, is that
which renders him exceeding lovely; tho in the distinct handling of the same
according to the trial of this day, warding Expressions could not be rationally
expected from him suitable unto the same, unless he had seen it; the Mystery of
Iniquity lying then in a more indigested and opacous Embrio, especially amongst
Protestants, than now it does, in a more spiritually refined, and reformed
Monster thereof, by sophisticated Reason, or Logic diaboliz'd.

Nonconformist.
AUgustine writing against Pelagius, thought the sum of Religion consisted in
the right knowledge of original Sin. -- Now this original Sin Divines usually
distinguish in peccatum originali originans, and in peccatum orginali
originatum; into original Sin originating, and into original Sin originated;
into the cause and into the subject of this Sin, the Fountain and its Streams;
one Man infecting, and all Men infected. -- Omnes Adamo peccaverunt, quia omnes
unus ille fuerunt. Aug. All were entangled in Adam's Sin, because all were
folded up in Adam's Person. And the same Father in another place, Traxit reatum
homo, quia unus erat cum illo a quo traxit. Man drew down Guilt upon himself,
because he was one with him from whom he drew it -- Adam's Sin is transmitted
to Posterity two ways, 1. By Imputation. 2. By Inhesion -- By reason of the
Covenant of Works which God made with Adam, we were in him all of us legally;
when God first made a Covenant with Man, it was not with Adam ratione
individui, as an undividual Person, sed ratione naturae, as he bore our Nature
with him, as the Representative of Mankind -- Now Adam violating the Covenant,
the Guilt of that Violation descends upon all his Posterity, Romans 5. 19.
Constituti sunt peccatores, they were constituted Sinners -- and Romans 5. 12,
etc. 1 Cor. 15. 45, etc. Now the Righteousness of Christ redounds to Believers
to Justification; so the Sin of Adam redounds to his Posterity to Condemnation;
by Adam we are cast, by Christ we are cleared; by Adam guilty, by Christ
innocent: the Comparison else would be wholly insignificant; as by Christ we
are made really righteous, so by Adam we are made really Sinners; we are
Princes in Christ, Prisoners in Adam; crowned in Christ, cursed in Adam. -- Mr.
Weils' s Morning Exercise Method. P. 123, 124, 126, 128.

God may as well by Imputation make Adam's Sin become our Sin for Condemnation,
as he may by Imputation make Christ's Righteousness become our Righteousness
unto Salvation; and yet Christ is made of God unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
etc. and we have no other Righteousness to appear in for Justification before
him at the great day. Hence Rivet well observes, that the Church has ever
found, and still does, that those very Men that are Enemies to the Doctrine of
original Sin, are Enemies also to the Doctrine of the Grace of God in Christ.
Thus the Socinians, who deny that we have contracted any Debt by Adam's Sin,
deny also that Christ satisfied and paid our Debts to Divine Justice; and if
they take away this, let them take away all -- Tho original Corruption be truly
Sin by Imputation, yet it is not so by Imputation only. It is our Sin by
Inhesion, inhering in us, and making of us otherwise than God made us. -- It Is
more extensive than other Sins; every actual Sin has some more particular
Faculty in Soul or Body, which it does defile and charge with Guilt, wherein it
was conceived, or whereby it was acted; but original Sin stains all alike; so
far as by their several Natures they are receptive of its Defilement, it ruins
the whole little World of Man. -- Personal Faults of Parents are not imputed to
Children, and defile not their Children, unless imitated or unbewailed. Mr.
Vinke. Ibid. p. 152, 153.

This was a Covenant not made with Adam as a particular Person, but as a
Representative -- Hence it is that in Adam all sin, and in Adam all die. -- The
Covenant of Works did not cease by the Fall, but it stands still in force unto
all those that are yet in the first Adam -- God will deal with Men both in a
way of Sin and Righteousness, by way of Imputation, and the ground of all
Imputation is Union. In the first Adam all sin, and all die, because by their
Union they stood under his Covenant; so in the second Adam we are made the
Righteousness of God in him. Mr. Strong of the Covenants, p. 1, 2.

Our Divines do make, and most truly and rightly according to the Scripture, a
twofold Sinfulness, which we have hereditary to us, as from our first Parents;
the first is, the Guilt of that first Act of sinning, which Adam committed: and
the second is an inherent Corruption of Flesh, the Inclination to all Sin
derived as the Punishment of the Guilt of that Fact. -- Now it is not only
inherent Corruption that makes us Children of Wrath, but it is also the Guilt
of the first Act. -- -- -- Q. Why should the Guilt of that Act which infects
our Nature, be conveyed to us by Generation, as the Channel, and by Nature,
rather than the Sins of our Parents? Answ. All Divines answer that clearly:
That Adam was a public Person, and he was therein Christ's Type, which no
other Parent is: Eve was not; for tho she was first in the Transgression, yet
it is not said, By the Obedience of that one Woman, or, By the Disobedience of
those first Parents, we are made Sinners; but it is clearly put on the
Disobedience of that one Man: Why? because he was made a public Person, and
stood so, which Eve in that respect did not. -- As soon as ever he had eaten
the forbidden Fruit, as soon as he had committed that same one Sin, he ceased
to be a common Person, he is then but as an ordinary Parent, otherwise we had
not been made Sinners by that one Disobedience, as Romans 5. but we must have
inherited all the Sins that he committed. -- Generation is but the Channel; it
is the Act of Adam's Sin, and the first Act of Adam's Sin whilst he stood a
common Person, being imputed to us, charged upon us, that makes us sinful. --
Adam is not a common Person to him (Christ) no, he was ordained a common Person
before Adam was made one; for Adam was his Type. -- And let me add this
likewise for our comforts, that Christ, because he would take away original Sin
in us, he came as near as possible could be, so as to escape Pollution. He
would be made of the same Matter we were made of, he would be made in the Womb
of a Virgin, he would be conceived, and he took upon him too the likeness of
sinful Flesh, with all the Frailties of it, as like sinful Flesh every way as
could be; nay, he would have his Mother go and be purified, as if she had
brought forth an unclean Son; for the Law in Leviticus was, to show the
Impurity of our Birth, that the Mother was to be purified. Nay, and not only
so, but he was circumcised, as if he had had original Sin to be cut off as well
as we. What was all this for? The Apostle tells us, Col. 2. 11. We were
circumcised in Christ, that the body of Sin might be cut off by the
Circumcision of Christ. It was, that he might take away this original
Corruption, which we had from the first Adam. Dr. Goodwin on the Ephesians,
Part 2. p. 108, 116, 117, 118, 119.

By some the imputation of the actual Apostasy and Transgression of Adam the
Head of our Nature, whereby his Sin became the Sin of the World, is utterly
denied; hereby both the ground the Apostle proceeds on, in evincing the
necessity of our Justification, or our being made righteous by the Obedience of
another; and all the Arguments brought in the Confirmation of the Doctrine of
it in Romans 5. are evaded and overthrown. Socinus de Servator, Part 4. cap. 6.
confesses, that place to give great countenance unto the Doctrine of
Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ: And therefore
he sets himself to oppose with sundry Artifices the Imputation of the Sin of
Adam unto his natural Posterity; for he perceived well enough that upon the
admission thereof, the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto his
spiritual Seed, would unavoidably follow according to the tenor of the Apostles
Discourse. Some deny the Depravation and Corruption of our Nature, which ensued
on our Apostasy from God, and the loss of his Image: or if they do not
absolutely deny it, yet they so extenuate it as to render it a matter of no
great concern unto us. Some Disease and Distemper of the Soul they will
acknowledge arising from the disorder of the Affections, whereby we are apt to
receive in such vicious Habits and Customs as are in practice in the World.

And as the Guilt hereof is not much, so the danger of it is not great. And as
for any spiritual Filth or Stain of our Nature that is in it, it is clear
washed away by Baptism -- No wonder if such Persons look upon imputed
Righteousness as the shadow of a Dream, who esteem those things which evidence
its necessity, to be but fond Imaginations; and small hope is there to bring
such Men to value the Righteousness of Christ as imputed to them, who are so
unacquainted with their own Unrighteousness inherent in them. Until Men know
themselves better, they will care very little to know Christ at all. Dr. Owen
of Justificat. p. 20, 21.

-- All Men that ever were, are, or shall be, were not then (when Adam sinned)
existent in their own Persons.

But yet were they all of them then, upon the first entrance of Sin, made
subject to Death, or liable to Punishment: They we^ so by virtue of Divine
Constitution upon their foederal Existence in the one Man that sinned: And
actually they became obnoxious in their own Persons unto the Sentence of it,
upon their first natural Existence. It is here manifest what Sin it is that the
Apostle intends, Romans 5. 12. namely, the actual Sin of Adam; the one Sin of
that one common Person whilst he was so: For although the Corruption and
Depravation of our Nature does necessarily ensue thereon, in every one that is
brought forth actually in the World by natural Generation, yet it is the Guilt
of Adam's actual Sin alone, that rendered them all obnoxious unto Death upon
the first entrance of Sin into the World: So Death entered by Sin, the Guilt of
it, Obnoxiousness unto it, and that with respect unto all Men universally.
Ibid. p. 467, 468.

They (i. e. Arminians) deny that they are guilty of Adam's Sin, as sinning in
him, or that his Sin is any way imputed unto us -- It is, say they, against the
nature of Sin, that that should be counted a Sin, or be imputed as a Sin to
any, by whose own proper Will it was not committed. Which being all they have
to say, they repeat it over and over in this case, it must be voluntary, or it
is no Sin. But I say this is of no force at all: For first, St. John in his
most exact definition of Sin, requires not Voluntariness to the nature of it,
but only an Obliquity, a deviation from the Rule; it is an Anomy, a Discrepancy
from the Law, which whether voluntary or no, it skills not much; but sure
enough there is in our nature such a Repugnancy to the Law of God: So that,
2dly, If originally we are free from a voluntary actual Transgression and
Exorbitancy from the Law; yet, 3dly, In respect of our Wills, we are not thus
innocent neither, for we all sinned in Adam, as the Apostle affirms: Now all
Sin is voluntary, say the Remonstrants, and therefore Adam's Transgression was
our voluntary Sin also, and that in diverse respects: 1. In that his voluntary
Act is imputed to us as ours, by reason of the Covenant which was made with him
in our behalf: but because this consisting in an Imputation must needs be
extrinsecal unto us; therefore, 2. We say that Adam being the Root and Head of
all human kind, and we all Branches from the Root, all parts of that Body
whereof he was the Head, his Will may be said to be ours; we were then all that
one Man, we were all in him, and had no other Will but his: so tho that be
extrinsecal unto us, considered as particular Persons, yet it is intrinsecal as
we are all Parts of one common Nature; as in him we sinned, so in him we had a
Will of sinning. 3. Original Sin is a defect of Nature, and not of this or that
particular Person; whereas Alvares grounds this difference of actual and
original Sin, that the one is always committed by the proper Will of the
Sinner, to the other is required only the Will of our first Parent, who was the
Head of Human Nature. -- The sum of their Endeavor in this Particular is, to
clear the Nature of Man from being any way guilty of Adam's actual Sin, as
being then in him a Member and part of that Body whereof he was the Head; or
from being obnoxious unto an imputation of it, by reason of that Covenant which
God made with us all in him: so that denying, as you saw before, all inherent
Corruption and Pravity of Nature, and now all Participation by any means of
Adam's Transgression, methinks they cast a great Aspersion on Almighty God,
however he dealt with Adam for his own particular, yet for casting us his most
innocent Posterity out of Paradise. -- But let them enjoy their own Wisdom,
which is earthly, sensual and devilish. The Scripture is clear, that the Sin of
Adam is the Sin of all, not only by propagation and communication (whereby not
his singular Fault, but something of the same nature is derived unto us) but
also by an imputation of his actual Transgression unto us all; his singular
Disobedience being by this means made ours. The grounds of this Imputation I
touched before, which may be all reduced to his being a common Person and Head
of all our Nature, which investeth us with a double Interest in his Demerits,
whilst so he was, 1. As we were then in him, and part of him. 2. As he
sustained the place of our whole Nature in the Covenant God made with him, both
which even according to the Exigence of God's Justice, require that his
Transgression be accounted ours. And St. Paul is plain, not only, That by one
Man's Offense many were made Sinners, Romans 5. 19. by the derivation of a
corrupted Nature, but also by one Man's Offense Judgment came upon all; ver.
18. even for his own Sin all of us are accounted to have deserved Judgment and
Condemnation: and therefore, ver. 12. he affirms, that by one Man Sin and
Death entered upon all the World; and that because we all sinned in him; which
we no otherwise do, but that his Transgression in God's estimation is accounted
ours: and the opposition the Apostle makes between Christ and his
Righteousness, and Adam and his Disobedience, does sufficiently evince it, etc.
Dr. Owen' s Display of Arminianism, p. 72, 73, 74, 76. See Dr. O. of
Justification, p. 19.

Adam was the Father of all Mankind, from whom they spring, but he did not so
represent the Persons of all that were to spring of him, as if his Obedience
without their own would have justified any of them at Age; if Adam had not
sinned, Cain should have been condemned if he had sinned, and so others --
Bonum est ex causis integris; malum ex partiali: Any Defect makes Sin, but
Good must have entire Causes. -- Adam's Sin causes original Sin in all, ex
privatione causationis boni: But if Adam had not sinned, every Sin of their own
would have made his Children unrighteous -- They hold that we are justified by
the same Law or Covenant of Innocence, which condemns us; because, say they,
we have fulfilled it in and by Christ; falsely (as is aforesaid) supposing that
Christ was either such a Surety as was in the same Bond disjunctively with the
Principal, or else that the Principal (Man) was allowed to do his Duty, or bear
his suffering by another: And so they deny the Gospel Covenant and Gift, which
is that indeed which justifies us by the way of Redemption, falsely supposing
that the very damning Law does justify us by way of prevention as innocent, as
having fulfilled it in Christ. Mr. Baxt. Brevi. Justif. Part 1. p. 2, 88. Part
2. p. 34, 35. See Pinching the Socinian, and Mr. Norton's Answer, p. 353.
Dialog. taken out of Mr. Chauncy's Rejoinder to Mr. D. Williams, p. 17. I grant
that all Mankind are one with Adam by a natural Union, as proceeding from the
same Root; but I fear Mr. Forbes does stretch out our natural Union with Adam
to a personal, to the end that he might make Adam's personal Action to be ours
by Imputation.

Norton. The scope of Mr. Forbes is to prove the Imputation of Christ's passive
Obedience, and that only in his Death, to be the matter of our Justification,
etc. We consent to Mr. Forbes as to the Argument taken from the Comparison, but
dissent from him as concerning the Restrictions, the Reasons of the Comparison
being founded upon the Conditions of the Persons and Divine Institution it
holds betwixt such Acts, as the first and second Adam acted as public Persons:
Adam therefore being in that Act of Disobedience only a public Person, hence
that Act only is imputed unto his Seed: But Christ being in all his Acts of
Obedience a public Person, hence therefore all the Acts of Christ's Obedience
are imputed to his Seed. As upon supposition of Adam's continuing in Obedience
(because he had then continued a public Person) all the Acts of his Obedience,
even to the finishing of perfect Righteousness, had been imputed to his Seed,
according to the nature of the Covenant of Works, unto their attaining of
Justification by the Law. The Union between Adam and his Posterity was not
personal, nor only natural, but mystical: It was a Conjunction of the Person of
Adam, and all contained in his Loins in one spiritual Body, by the Institution
of God, whereby he was as their Head, they as his Members, to stand or fall
with him, standing or falling.

Head 4. That peculiar Redemption, etc.
Conformist.
WHen Christ died, he offered a propitiatory and real Sacrifice to his Father;
and herein his Death and Passion differs from the Sufferings and Deaths of
all Men whatsoever. -- As for the universal Redemption of all and every Man, it
is no better than the forgery of Man's Brain. There shall be many in the day of
Judgment of whom Christ shall say, that he never knew them.

Again, he says, He which believes not is already judged, and the Wrath of
God abides upon him. But if all were effectually redeemed, and only condemned
for not believing in Christ, it should have been said, that all are already
judged, and that the Wrath of God abides not, but returns upon them. Christ
makes no Intercession for the World; and therefore his Redemption is not
effectual to all Men; for the Intercession is the means of applying the
Satisfaction. If it be said, by the World is meant only the Contemners of
Grace, it appears to be otherwise, in that Christ opposes the World to them
which are the Father's, and are given to Christ by him; thereby signifying,
that by the World he means all such as are not the Father's, and were never
given to Christ. And he lays down his Life for his Sheep: now the Sheep have
all these Brands or Marks, they hear his Voice, they know him, they follow him,
they shall not perish, none shall pluck them out of Christ's Hands; and these
are only such of whom Paul says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's Elect? it is God that justifies, who shall condemn?

And if this should be true, that Christ was crucified and died, no less to
make Satisfaction for the Sins of the damned, than for the Sins of Peter and
Paul, and the rest of the Saints, it follows necessarily, that all their Sins
are forgiven, considering the Remission of Sin depends inseparably upon
Satisfaction made to God's Justice for Sin; and Satisfaction does necessarily
abolish all Fault. Perkin's Golden Chain, p. 349, 478.

That Christ died only for the Elect. -- Christ only was given to die for the
company of the Elect. Christ lays down his Life for his Sheep, Joh. 10. 15.
The Elect are only his Sheep: Ergo. Huberus denies the Assumption, saying,
that all Men are God's Sheep and Inheritance, who if afterward they stray from
the Lord's Sheepfold, the fault is in themselves, These. p. 1069.

Contr. But our Savior speaks of such Sheep as do hear his Voice, and follow
him, and they will not follow a Stranger, Joh. 10. 5. They therefore that fall
away and follow any other, are not the Sheep of Christ's Fold; therefore for
such Sheep only he died, as finally are his, those are the Elect only. --
Christ died not for the Nation only, that is of the Jews, but, That he might
gather together in one the Children of God that were scattered, Joh. 11. 52.
But the Elect only are the Children of God; of whom he speaks again, namely,
of these dispersed and scattered Children, Joh. 10. 16. Other Sheep I have also
which are not of this Fold, them also I must bring. -- Christ died only for his
Friends, Joh. 15. 13. the Elect only, and such as shall be saved, only are the
Friends of Christ. And if that place be objected, That Christ died for us when
we were yet Enemies: We answer with Bernard's Distinction, That Christ,
according to the dispensation of Time, died for the Wicked and his Enemies: but
in respect of his Predestination, for his Friends and Brethren. Paul testifies
that Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify it, etc. Ephesians.
5. 26. And he is the Savior of his Body, v. 23. But the Elect only, and such
as shall be saved, are Members only of his Body: Ergo, for such only he died.
-- Christ died only for those that should believe in him, Joh. 3. 16. But it is
not given to all to believe in Christ, except only to the Elect, which are
ordained to Life: Ergo, for them only Christ died. That Faith is only of the
Elect, it is thus proved: First, To you it is given to know the Secrets of the
Kingdom, to them it is not given; Mat. 13. 11. This Knowledge then is not given
to all.

Contr. (As Mr. Baxter's usual Objection) The meaning is, not that God in his
eternal Decree had ordained Knowledge unto some, and denied it unto others, but
that the Ministry of the Word being offered to all, some through their
Incredulity refused the same, and so their Hearts were justly hardened, as Acts
13. 46. That they did put away from them the Word of God, which it was
necessary should be first spoken unto them, and do judge themselves unworthy of
everlasting Life. The rest, which did not abuse their natural gifts of hearing
and understanding, but willingly gave ear to Christ, had power to believe in
Christ, and to continue therein. Sic Huber. These. 826. Snecan. p. 522.

Answ. 1. That they which love not the Truth, are justly given over of God to a
reprobate sense, we grant, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. yet Men are not so the cause to
themselves of their Unbelief, as they are of their Incredulity; but the cause
and beginning is of God, as our Savior testifies, Mat. 11. 26. The cause then
why some understand the Mystery of the Kingdom, is not in their Willingness,
but in the good Pleasure of God: It is not a Gift equally offered to all, which
all may receive if they will; it is given unto you, says Christ, it is not
given to them. -- Christ only died for those, to whom the benefit of his Death
verily and indeed is applied -- But all the World is not sanctified: Ergo. Joh.
17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self: that is, to be an acceptable
Sacrifice upon the Cross. -- Christ died for all, because all may if they will
believe, and so be saved. -- Christ speaks not of a power or possibility only
to be sanctified, and so saved, but an actual Sanctification and Salvation:
they are verily sanctified for whom Christ sanctifies himself. -- Christ was
first a Firebrand himself, touched or scorched with the Fire of his Father's
Wrath, and then as the Coal from the Altar he also purifieth us. Thus then we
fear not to confess with the Scriptures and Fathers, that Christ bearing our
Sins in himself upon the Cross, did feel himself, during that Combat, as
rejected and forsaken of God, and accursed for us, and the flames of his
Father's Wrath burning within him: So that to the honor of Christ's Passion we
confess, that our blessed Redeemer refused no part of our Punishment, but
endured the very Pains of Hell so far as they tended not neither to the
derogation of his Person, depravation of his Nature, destruction of his Office.
-- The Saints of God need not fear Hell, because Christ felt it, but they by
his Hell-sorrows are delivered from Hell: Let them rather look to this Danger,
that would make us believe that the Hell-sorrows of the Soul have not yet by
suffering them, been satisfied for: for seeing they must be endured, and you
say Christ has not endured them for us, this will rather strike into the Mind
a fear of Hell, that these Sorrows remain yet to be suffered, than the
Meditation of Christ's Hell in his Soul, whereby our Souls are delivered.
Wherefore the Saints need not fear Hell Flames, because they were kindled in
Christ's Soul, but to be bold against them, because Christ in his Soul has
quenched them. -- The Question confirmed, that Christ in Soul suffered the
Pains of Hell. -- Thus then we doubt not to deliver our Opinion, that our
blessed Savior, as in himself he bore all the Sins of the Elect, so he also
suffered the whole Punishment of Body and Soul in general due unto us for the
same, which we should have endured, if he had not satisfied for it: and so
consequently we affirm, that he felt the anguish of Soul, and horror of God's
Wrath, and so in Soul entered into the Torments of Hell for us, sustained them
and vanquished them. -- Christ more sharply and vehemently felt God's Wrath
than ever any Man did or shall; yea, we except not the very Reprobate and
Damned, because the Scripture says, That God laid on him the Sins of us all,
Isa. 53. 6. then all the Sins of the World (i. e. of the Elect) concurring
together must needs bring with them a greater Horror than the Sins of one Man.
-- That Christ by his Death did fully satisfy the Justice of God, and appeased
his Wrath in paying the Ransom for our Sins, which he took upon him, together
with the Punishment thereof, in which respect he is truly said to have died
justly, and as a Debtor to the Law of God's Justice for us. -- None are
forsaken of God, or stand accursed by the Law unjustly: for God is just, and
the Law is just, holy, good, Romans 7. 12. But Christ was as forsaken of God in
part in the instant of his Passion, as, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Mat. 27. 46. He was also by the Law a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. Ergo,
Christ in respect of our Sins in the sight of God suffered justly. -- Christ as
a Sinner did sustain the Death of Sinners. -- We conclude that Christ's Death,
as he was our Surety, and took upon him our Sins, could not in the Decree and
Counsel of God be unjust.

If Christ then suffered according to God's Justice, and died to satisfy God's
Justice, how could his Death be unjust? -- That Christ in his Soul did truly
feel his Father's Wrath kindled against him for our Sin. -- Object. If ye say
God loved him as a Son, yet hated him as our Surety, or became a Servant for
us, ye fall into Nestorius's Heresy, and so make the Persons of Christ, one
beloved, another hated: If we say that God was not angry indeed, but Christ so
persuaded, you will coin a new Heresy that Christ had a false Opinion of his
Father. Fevard, page 571. God in Christ loved his Holiness and Innocence, but
he was angry with our Sins and Iniquity, which were upon him: Here then are not
two Persons, but one and the same Person diversely considered: this then is no
Nestorianism. Take you heed of Manichism, that you make not Christ to have done
all things fantastically and in show, while he sweateth drops of Blood,
complains that he was forsaken, as tho God were thoroughly angry with him, and
yet no such matter; neither do we say that Christ was only so persuaded of his
Father, that he was angry, but indeed he was so for the same, and he verily in
his Soul felt it so to be. -- That Christ was verily made a Curse for us, and
did bear both in his Body and Soul that Curse, which by reason of the
Transgression of the Law was due unto us. -- It is evident that Christ did
sustain in his Soul, and not in his Body only, the Wrath and Curse of God,
which was due unto our Sins; and so by bearing our Sins has acquitted us
thereof, and by enduring the Curse, has also freed us therefrom. -- Part 1.
That Christ's Agony in the Garden was not caused by the fear of his bodily
Death, but proceeded from the fear and feeling of God's Wrath. Part 2. And
seeing our Savior suffered properly and immediately in Soul, and not by
Compassion only, or Consent with his Body: Part 3. If Christ did sustain the
very Torments of Hell in his Soul, as is proved; Part 4. and did appear before
God as guilty of our Sins; Part 5. and was perplexed in his Soul and Conscience
for the same: Part 6. If our Savior by the Justice of God was to die for our
Sins, and by his Death did satisfy his Justice, and appease his Wrath: Part 7.
If in his Soul he verily felt the Wrath of God kindled against our Sins; Part
8. and truly complained that he was in that instant forsaken of God; Part 9.
And lastly, if he were made a Curse for us in his Body and Soul; Part 10. it
remains that Christ did not only suffer in Body for our Sins, but sustained
also in his Soul such Punishment, Vexation, and Sorrow, as was due unto us, and
which we should have endured, if he had not as our Surety in his own Person
undertaken for us, Dr. Willet Synop. Papism. (...). p. 893, 894, 895, 896,
1112, 1113, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1130, 1134, 1135, 1137, 1138, 1145, 1147,
1148.

The sum of all this. That seeing all our Iniquities were laid upon Christ,
Argum. 1. Seeing he was made Sin for us, Argum. 2. He was clothed with our
filthy Rayments, Argum. 3. He became deformed, and without Beauty for us,
Argum. 4. He by his Sin, that is, his Flesh, wherein he bare our Sin, condemned
our Sin, Argum. 5. we doubt not to affirm, and verily believe, to our endless
Comfort, that Christ was reputed before God as guilty of all our Sins, which he
willingly undertook, and so satisfied for them for ever. -- Another Lie
wherewith the Friar slandreth Calvin is this, that he should say, that Christ
was, re ipsa peccator, a Sinner indeed: non tantum, etc. not guilty only of our
Sins, but of his own P. 462.

Calvin only says, Oportuit eum, etc. He was to stand before God's
Judgment Seat as guilty of all our Sins: He took upon him our Person, and
undertook our Sins, as the Prophet says, Isa. 53. 6. God has laid upon him
the Iniquity of us all: And the Apostle says, He was made Sin for us, that
knew no Sin, that we should be made Righteousness in him.

As we are Sinners in our selves, yet made righteous by imputation of his
Righteousness: so Christ being righteous in himself, was a Sinner for us, and
in our Person by imputation of our Sins. This is neither Heresy nor Blasphemy.
-- This threatening of Adam, Thou shall die the Death, was truly performed in
Christ: But if this Death to Adam threatened be the Death of the Soul, and not
of the Body, as I have proved, because Adam's Body died not in that day, etc.
how could the Death of Adam's Soul be truly performed in Christ's Body? so that
this makes a strong Argument to prove a kind of dying in Soul in Christ: that
Death which was to Adam threatened, Christ suffered. I think this will be
confessed, that it was truly performed in Christ, but not in his Body; Ergo, in
his Soul: and so it follows in the Epistle of Felix before alleged: Itaque
Deus donum dimidiatum non fe^it, etc. God gave not half a Gift, but he took
whole Adam of the Virgin's Womb, to save the whole that was lost. The Reason
thus stands: To redeem the whole, Christ must die in the whole, for he took
the whole to redeem the whole; if it had not been needful to die or suffer in
the whole, he needed not to have taken the whole: But Christ redeemed the
whole, Ergo, he died in the whole. -- Ten several Challenges whereby they
practice to make this Doctrine odious, I have answered: and all those
Blasphemies, which they would fasten upon us, and Christ's holy Cause, we wipe
them off, as Paul did the Viper, without any hurt to our Cause, no more than
the Viper did to the Apostle's hand. Ibid. p. 1127, 1081, 1082, 1084.

He has delivered us from the Wrath to come, and from Punishments Temporal, as
formal Punishments. -- We have Communion with Christ in his Merits, which are
as fully imputed unto us for Justification, as if his Sufferings had been by us
endured, or the Debt by us satisfied. As we find in the Body Medicines often
applied unto sound Parts, not with relation to themselves, but to cure others
which are unsound; in a Distillation of Rheums on the Eyes we cup and scarify
the Neck which was unaffected, to draw back ^e Humor from the Part distempered:
even so Christ, the glorious and innocent Head of a miserable and leprous Body,
suffered himself to be wounded and crucified, to wrestle with the Wrath of his
Father, to be one with a wretched People in the Condition of their Infirmities,
as he was with the Father in the Unity of Divine Holiness; that so by his
Infirmity being joined unto us, the Communion of his Purity might join us unto
God again. He alone without any demerit of his, suffered our Punishment, that
we without any Merit of ours might obtain his Grace. The Pains of Christ's
Wounds were his, but the Profit ours. Dr. Reynold' s Life of Christ, p. 405,
468, 469.

How has Christ wrought this Redemption? Having taken our Nature upon him, he
has in the same as a Surety in our stead, made full Satisfaction to God his
Father, by paying all our Debts, and so has set us free. Heb. 7. 22.

What is thi^ Debt that we owe to God, that he has said for us?

This Debt is twofold: one is that perfect Obedience which we owe unto God in
regard of that excellent Estate in which we were created, Deuteronomy. 12. 32.

The other is the Punishment due unto us for our Sins in transgressing and
breaking God's Covenant, which is the Curse of God and everlasting Death, Deuteronomy.
27. 26. Romans 6. 23. Mat. 5. 17. Gal. 3. 13. chap. 4. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 5. 2. all
which is contained in the Law of God, which is the Handwriting between God and
us concerning the old Covenant, Col. 2. 15*

How was our Savior to make Satisfaction for this our Debt? 1. By performing
that perfect Obedience which we did owe. 2. By suffering that Punishment due
unto us for our Sins, that so he might put out that Handwriting between God
and us, and let us free.

What then be the Parts of Christ's Obedience and Satisfaction?

His Sufferings and his Righteousness* Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 2. 24. for
it was requisite that he should first pay all our Debt, and satisfy God's
Justice, Isa. 53. 5, 6. Job. 33. 24. by a Price of infinite Value, 1 Timothy 2. 6.
2^y. Purchase and merit for us God's Favor, Ephesians. 1. 6. and Kingdom by a most
absolute and perfect Obedience, Romans 5. 19. By his suffering he was to merit
unto us the forgiveness of our Sins, and by his fulfilling the Law he was to
merit unto us Righteousness, both which are necessarily required for our
Justification.

Whereunto was he offered? unto the Shame, Pain, Torment, and all Miseries
which are due unto us for our Sins; he suffering whatsoever we should have
suffered, and by those grievous Sufferings making Payment for our Sins, Isa.
53. Mat. 26. 28.

What Profit comes by this Sacrifice? By his most painful Suffe^ings he has
satisfied for the Sins of the whole World of his Elect, Isa. 53. 5. 1 Pet. 2.
24. 1 (...). 2. 2. and appeased the Wrath of his Father: so that hereby we
receive Atonement and Reconciliation with God, our Sins are taken away, and we
are f^eed from all those Punishments of Soul and Body, which our Sins have
deserved, Heb. 9. 26.

How is it then that Christ having born the Punishment of our Sins, the Godly
are yet in this World so often afflicted for them with grievous Torments both
of Body and Soul, and that for the most part more than the Ungodly? The
Sufferings of the Godly are not by desert any Satisfaction for their Sins in
any part; but being sanctified in the most holy Sufferings of Christ they are
Medicines against Sin: neither are their Afflictions properly a Punishment, but
a fatherly Correction and Chastisement in the World, that they should not
perish with the World. -- Christ suffered the weight of God's Wrath, the
Terrors of Death, Sorrows of his Soul, and Torments of his Body, Isa. 53. 4,
10. Mat. 26. 37, 38. Luke 22. 24. Mat. 26. 67. -- He drank the full Cup of
God's Wrath filled unto him for our sakes, the whole Wrath of God due to the
Sin of Man being poured forth upon him; and therefore in Soul he did abide most
unspeakable Vexations, horrible Griefs, painful Troubles, fear of Mind, feeling
as it were the very Pangs of Hell, into which both before, and most of all when
he hanged upon the Cross, he was cast. -- Dr. Usher' s Body of Divinity, p.
170, 171, 172.

We are not only freed from Condemnation, but we also are made Heirs with God:
The Offender being absolved from the Sentence of the Judge, is not upon that
honored and rewarded: so that it stands with the Law of natural Reason, and
course of Civil Justice, that two things must concur unto Justification, an
Ablation of Sin, and Collation of Righteousness. -- Paul shows this to be one
of the Ends for which Christ took upon him our Flesh; Romans 8. 4. But it will be
said, that both are not requisite in God's Justice to keep the Law, and to pay
the Punishment; God's Justice is satisfied in that the Punishment is answered
for transgressing the Law.

Answ. True it is, if we expect to receive no more in Christ than we lost in
Adam, which was the loss of a terrestrial Paradise, to restore us to what we
were in Adam, Satisfaction for the Punishment had sufficed; but to bring us to
Heaven, a new Merit by Christ's perfect Obedience was to be procured, by the
which Heaven is purchased. -- Object. Christ's Satisfaction was, plusquam
sufficiens, more than sufficient, Fevard. p. 382. therefore he was not bound
unto by Law. Answ. Where the Debt is but of Money, the Surety indeed neither by
God's Law nor Man's, is compelled to give Life or Soul; but where the Debt is
of Body and Soul, it cannot otherwise be paid in the Law of Justice, but by
giving Body and Soul. -- The Argument follows not, he paid more than we did
owe; Ergo, he paid not that which we did owe: rather the contrary follows, he
paid more, Ergo, he paid less. If a Surety in his great abundance will pay
twenty thousand, where the Debt is but ten thousand, is not the Debt answered?

He that gives more than measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over,
do^ he not give measure? Dr. Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 1001, 1130, 1131.

He, i. e. Christ suffering for us whatsoever we should have suffered, yea,
even eternal Death it self, for as much as the Eternal suffered the nature of
that Death, tho he only tasted of it, as Heb. 2. 9. yet he so tasted it, as at
once, as it were at one morsel, he wholly devoured it and swallowed it up in
Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54. Mr. Burton' s Christian Bulwark, p. 76.

How can it stand with God's Justice to lay Punishment upon the most righteous
Man that ever was, and that for grievous Sinners; considering that Tyrants
themselves will not do so? Answ. In the Passion, Christ must not be considered
as a private Person: for then it could not stand with Equity that he should be
plagued and punished for our Offenses; but as one in the eternal Counsel of God
set apart to be a public Surety or Pledge for us, to suffer and perform those
things which we in our Persons should have suffered and performed. Mr. Perkin'
s Golden Chain, p. 296, 297.

This Hypothesis, or Platform is but the varnishing and fresh trimming over of
certain Opinions, which the Church in former Ages did condemn. The Pelagians
taught that all Men were redeemed by Christ, but not made free; because God
distributed his Gifts according to the capableness of them that came to receive
them. Aug. contr. Jul. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 3. The same did Faustus the Pelagian
also affirm, lib. de great. and lib. arb. 1. cap. 16. How has God (says he)
redeemed all the World? Do we not see Men to live still in their Sins? How
shall we think that they are ransomed whom we see still continue Captives? Let
us gather that which is here meant by using a Similitude: As for Example; If
any Ambassador, or Priest, purposing to make Intercession for a City taken by
War, shall bestow a very great Ransom, and set from his Servitude who is the
chief Commander, all the multitude which is in Captivity, in so much that they
are altogether delivered from all Constraint on necessity of Bondage; and then
if happily either their usual delight, or some soothing Slave shall so
instantly urge some of the Captives, as that every one turning Servant and
Slave to his own Will, shall refuse that truly bestowed Benefit; shall we say
that the Contempt of the unthankful Captive has lessened the Estimation of the
Ransom? or, that he which refuses Liberty, does any way diminish the good Will
of him that ransometh? Surely no; for even as he that returns may be well
accepted with him, so is he guilty of Contempt who did not return. Mr. Perkin's
Treat. of Predest. p. 174, 175. When all hope of Righteousness was past on our
part, when we had nothing in our selves whereby we might quench his burning
Wrath, and work the Salvation of our own Souls, and rise out of the miserable
Estate wherein we lay; then, even then, did Christ the Son of God by the
appointment of his Father, come down from Heaven to be wounded for our sakes;
to be reputed with the Wicked, to be condemned unto Death, to take upon him the
Reward of our Sins, and to give his Body to be broken on the Cross for our
Offenses. Homil. Chur. Engl. fol. 198.

Baxterian.
MR. Baxter in his Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 55. in answer to this Question,
Whether Christ died for all, or for some certain elect ones? refers his Reader
for a more full explicatory Solution of the same, unto a Piece that had not
then past the Press, but since his Death, as I hear, tho I have not seen it,
has given, as the reviving Ashes of his religious Memory, a general and open
Visit to the World, as universal as his Redemption-sentiments are: But here he
positively declares, and that in short, that Christ died for none personally
(or discriminatively) but for all, which, he says, shall afterward be
explained; unto which, for his satisfaction, let the Reader have his recourse,
whilst in the mean time I shall lay before him his own sense literal from other
places; tho there he tells us that Christ died in two senses, in one for none,
and in another for all; and where the particular Redemption-work of Christ is I
cannot tell, unless it lurks in the Popish Chair catholically, as the universal
particular Head of the Church.

Errors. In Mr. Baxter's sense, Christ's Sufferings were caused by the Sins of
none, as the assumed meritorious Cause, or, as they usually say, as imputed to
him, or lying on him, save only of the Elect that shall be saved.

Contr. The Sins of fallen Mankind in general, except those Rejections of
Grace, whose Pardon is not offered in the conditional Covenant, did lie on
Christ as the assumed Cause of his Sufferings.

Error. Christ did both perfectly obey, and also make Satisfaction for Sin by
suffering in the Person of all the Elect in the sense of the Law, or God's
account; so that his Righteousness of Obedience, and perfect Holiness, and his
Satisfaction is so imputed to us, as the Proprietaries, as if we our selves had
done it and suffered it, not by an afterdonation in the Effects, but by this
strict Imputation in it self.

Contr. Christ's Satisfaction, and the Merit of his whole Obedience is as
effectual for our Pardon, Justification and Salvation, as if Believers
themselves had performed it; and it is imputed to them, in that it was done for
their sakes, and suffered in their stead, and the Fruits of it by a free
Covenant or Donation given them. But, 1. God is not mistaken, to judge that we
obeyed or suffered when we did not. 2. God is no Liar, to say we did it, when
he knows that we did it not. 3. If we were not the Actors and Sufferers, it is
not possible that we should be made the natural (but were we not the foederally
imputed?) Subjects of the Accidents of another Body, by any putation,
estimation, or misjudging whatsoever; no, nor by any Donation neither. (Here Is
a bold word, the Righteousness of Christ was not materially and properly given
or imputed unto the Elect for their Justification.) It is a Contradiction, and
therefore an Impossibility, that the same individual Actions and Passions, of
which Christ's Humane Nature was the Agent and Subject so many hundred years
ago, and have themselves now no Existence, should in themselves, I say in
themselves, be made yours now, and you be the Subject of the same Accidents. --
(Vain Man would be wise!) But, 1. By a true estimation of the Reasons why
Christ underwent them, viz. for our sakes, as aforesaid. 2. And by a Donation
of the Effects or Fruits of them, (now the Fox has unkennel'd himself) viz.
pardoning, and justifying, and saving us by them (on the terms chosen by the
Donor himself, and put into his Testament or Covenant) as certainly (but not in
the same manner) as if we had done and suffered them our selves. If Christ had
suffered in our Persons reputatively in all respects, his Sufferings would not
have redeemed us, because we are finite Worms (whether this savours more of
Fool or Knave, let the Learned judge) and our suffering for so short a time
would not have been accepted instead of Hell-sufferings (this would have been
true if Christ had suffered in our Persons) but the Person of the Mediator made
them valuable. God never made any such Covenant with us (tho with Christ he
did) [that he will justify us, and use us just as he would have done, if we had
our selves perfectly obeyed and satisfied.] They that take on them to show such
a Promise, must see that no wise Man examine it. (Reader look to this Caution,
and beware of what thou either say or writest before those Critics, unto
whom this Author has left his Spectacles.)

Error. That God were unjust if he laid any degree of Punishment on those that
Christ died for; or (say others) on the justified; because he should punish one
Sin twice.

Contr. It is certain that God punishes the Justified in some degree, (much
more the Elect before Conversion) and it is certain that God is not unjust.
Therefore it is certain that the ground of this Accusation is false; for it was
not our deserved Punishment it self; or the same which was due in the true
sense of the Law, which Christ endured: but it was the Punishment of a
voluntary Sponsor, which was the equivalens, and not the idem that was due, and
did answer the Ends of the Law, but not fulfill the meaning of the Threatening,
which threatened the Sinner himself, and not another for him: seeing then it was
a Satisfaction, or Sacrifice for Sin, which God received for an Atonement and
Propitiation, and not a solution or suffering of the Sinner himself in the
sense of the Law, the Charge of Injustice on God is groundless. Mr. Baxter' s
Life of Faith, p. 321, 322, 325.

Reader, observe Mr. Daniel Williams' s Gospel Truth stated and vindicated,
chapter the 6th, the scope whereof is, under various blinding Terms, and
diverting Arts, to overthrow Christ's Sufferings, as the very idem due to the
Elect. It was not the Sin of the Elect only, but of all Mankind that were the
occasion of Christ's Sufferings (called by some, an assumed meritorious Cause,
because by his Consent they were loco causae meritoriae) it is not to the Elect
only, but for all the World (as to the Tenor of it) that Christ has purchased,
and given a conditional Pardon of Sin, and a conditional Donation of Life
eternal in the Covenant of Grace, both of the first and second Edition: That
is, the conditional Grant is universal, Whoever believes shall be saved; tho
the promulgation of it may have many stops. The old Solution which Schoolmen
and Protestants have acquiesced in, is, That Christ died for all, as to the
sufficiency of his Death, but not as to the efficiency of their Salvation;
which is true, but must be thus explained: Christ's Death and Obedience were
not only sufficient, but effectual, as to their first Effects; that is, they
effected that which is commonly called Satisfaction and Merit; and hence and
from the Covenant of God they were also effectual to procure the Covenant of
Grace as of universal Tenor, and herein a free Pardon of Sin, and Gift of right
to Life eternal to all, on condition of due acceptance: This conditional Gift
of Christ and Life is effected: And this Efficacy of the antecedent Mercies,
must either be called part of the Sufficiency of Redemption, as to the
consequent Mercies (viz. actual Pardon and Salvation) or else an Efficiency
beyond the Sufficiency antecedent to the said Efficiency. (See Tedious
Nonscientius, Doctor of our Modern Sophistry, Founder of Ignoramus his College
at St. Omers, p. millimo quillimo trillimo.) That Christ's Death has
effectually procured the Act of Oblivion, or conditional Gift of Life to all
Mankind; but it does not effect the actual Salvation of all: To the universal
Grace it is both sufficient and efficient, but to the special Grace, and actual
Salvation it is sufficent to all, but not efficient, (which is by the Refuser's
fault and forfeiture.) Mr. B. End of Doctr. Controv. chap. 13.

Now having rendered the Blood of the eternal Covenant but a common ineffectual
thing, dependent both in its Satisfaction and Merit upon the Will of Man; let
us see how he treats the blessed Spirit.

Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 7. The holy Spirit is present with all in some part
of Grace, which if they abused not, he would have regenerated them. Not unlike
Mr. John Goodwin.

See Dr. Owen of Perseverance, p. 115. That the reason why Believers are
overcome by the lustings of the Flesh, is not because the Spirit is not
stronger than the Flesh, but because Man has more will to hearken to the Lusts
of the Flesh, than to the Spirit. -- Fortunam Priami cantabo, and nobile bellum.

Sinners were in a manner innumerable Persons, Christ really and reputatively
but one Person, (for God judges not false, that one is a thousand) therefore
Christ was not really or reputatively the Person sinning. Mr. Baxter's Method.
Theol^ Part 3. p. 42.

Thus Socinus: One Man can but redeem one; and therefore either there must be
found out an infinite sort of Redeemers for all Men, or Christ redeemed but one.

The immediate Effect of the Death of Christ is not the Remission of Sins, or
the actual Redemption of any. Armin.

Christ did not properly die to save any one. Grev.

A potential and conditionate Reconciliation, not actual and absolute, is
obtained by the Death of Christ. I believe it might have come to pass, that the
Death of Christ might have had its end; tho never any Man had believed; the
Death, and Satisfaction of Christ being accomplished, yet it may so come to
pass, that none at all fulfilling the Condition of the new Covenant, none might
be saved. Corvi.

The Impetration of Salvation for all by the Death of Christ, is nothing but
the obtaining of a possibility thereof, that God without wronging his Justice,
may open unto them a Gate of Mercy, to be entered on some condition. Rem. Coll.
Hag. Why then the Efficacy of the Death of Christ depends wholly on us: True,
it cannot otherwise be. Romans Apol.

As he took the common Nature of Man, so the Sin of all, and not only the
Elect, were the causes of his Sufferings, and laid upon him; and the fruits of
his Sufferings and Merits were some common, and some peculiar to the Elect. --
Christ's Sufferings were not the same Punishment which the Law did threaten,
but it was Satisfaction instead of it, which is the tantundem, not the idom
quod debi^um suit, but redditio aequivalentis alias indebiti, as the Schoolmen
call it: for noxa caput sequitur; the Law threatens not a Surety, but only the
Sinner; and ubi alius solvi^, simul aliud solvitur. -- It is not the idem, but
the aequivalens that Christ suffered as to our Debt* -- Christ having suffered
in the common Nature of Man, so far did it in their stead; and if you will
needs (...) call it, so far represented fallen Mankind, as that if they will
personally receive him by Faith in the new Covenant, they shall not perish for
Adam's Sin (or their own) supposing that the Parent is the Accepter for the
In^* None perish for original Sin alone, without the addition of the neglected
and refused Grace and Remedy. (Thus Corvinus, We no way doubt to affirm that
never any one was damned for original Si^)

It is not only the spiritual Offspring that Christ was a second Adam to, but
partly ^o all Mankind; for by a Resurrection (tho not to Glory) all Men are
made alive by Christ, Joh. 5. 22, 23, 29. (...) Cor. 15. (now that Christ
raises the quick and dead, viz. the spiritually alive, and spiritually dead, as
their (...) lie in a relative state-unto their Souls, is true; but that he does
so as a second Adam unto each of them, is a positive Falsehood.) And all have a
general conditional Reconciliation and Pardon, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Joh. 3. 16.
(Till Christ by trial and examination of them, finds who have brought the
Conditions thereof with them) so that actual Justification results to no Man
from Christ's mere Representation of him, but from his free Donation by the new
Covenant. -- God accounts the Righteousness which Christ fulfilled to be only
the Causes of our Righteousness, and not our Righteousness it self: Tho the
meritorious Cause may be called the meritorious Matter in a remote sense, as
purchasing the free Gift of our formal Righteousness. -- I still grant that
Christ suffered, yea and obeyed in some sort in our stead, tho not in our
Person, civil or legal, so as that we are legally reputed the Doers of it, by
or in him. Mr. Baxter's Brevi. Justi. Part 1. p. 4, 5, 48, 66, 88, 108, 112.

They say, if God should punish any Sin of the Elect, it would be Injustice,
because it is all punished already on Christ, and the Debt is fully paid by
him. -- They say, that Christ's Satisfaction by Sacrifice, was the solutio
ejusdem, the Payment of the same Debt of suffering that was due to us, and not
properly Satisfaction, which is, Redditio aequivalentis, or tantidem alias in
debiti; as if he had suffered Death spiritual by loss of Holiness, and the
Torments of Hell by an accusing Conscience, and the hatred of God. Ibid. Part
2. p. 13, 15.

Mr. Baxter, Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 36. puts this Question, Whether Christ
bore infernal Pains, or the same in kind with what are due unto Sinners? After
a bundle of Crudities he concludes, p. 38. I only say, although nothing of the
nature of infernal Pains was in the Sufferings of Christ, yet there was a
tantillum, or some diminutive little; and in other respects there is so great
an imparity and dissimilitude, as that the name of infernal Pains, or such as
the Damned suffer, agrees not to them. -- p. 45.

Whether Christ in suffering fulfilled the Threatening of the Law, as against
us, or rather promised the Dispensation or Relaxation of the Penal Law? or,
whether the Punishment of Christ was the same, or idem, that was due unto
Sinners, or only what was equivalent and tantamount? He positively determines
upon the latter, that Christ did not bear the idem, or same that the Elect
should have born, but some forbearance-mony for Relaxation, to see if Men will
come in with their conditional Qualification or no; if not, then of course with
him (which is dreadful Blasphemy to suppose) the blessed Jesus died in vain.

Now a Mony-surety is bound to do more than the Principal is bound to do. If I
am not obliged to pay a hundred Pounds, neither: is my Sur^ty bound to pay a
hundred Pounds.

Object. You Will say, by the Law we are bound to obey the Law pe^ctly, or to die
for it. Ans^. Yes, to obey was your Duty, to die was the Penalty if you
disobeyed. But, 1. You were not bound to die, tho you obeyed perfectly; but
Christ was bound to obey, and suffer tho he obeyed. 2. Were you bound when you
did sin, and suffer the Penalty, to obey afresh in a way of Merit of forfeited
Blessings? But Christ suffered, and yet obeyed, to merit forfeited Blessings,
and more. 3. Were you bound to suffer as your Duty, and that in a way of
Propitiation to reconcile the offended God by it, as an Act of Obedience? Yet
Christ engaged in this manner. 4. Were you bound by the Law, that the Son of
God should assume your Flesh, and therein obey and suffer? yet thereupon
depends the Satisfaction and Merit of the Obedience yielded: hence is the value
of the Acts done, and Sufferings endured; it were not a Payment without that,
for dying and obeying too would not serve to save Sinners, if it were not the
Son of God in our Nature did both; This goes into the Price and Payment: could
Men have done it, it had been no Payment, supposing but one Sin before. So that
in this very respect Christ was bound to redeem you by paying a Million in the
value of his Person; and the same Actions and Passions as done and suffered by
you, would not have been one Penny in value. And is he but your pecuniary
proper Surety when he is bound for a Million, and you for a Penny, as in
Redemption-work? Mr. D. W. Man made righteous, etc. p. 93, 94.

There is a great degree of Pardon given to the World before Conversion, which
shall yet justify and save none but Believers: God's giving a Savior to the
World and a new Covenant, and in that an universal conditional Pardon; yea his
giving them. Teaching, Exhortations and Offers of free Grace, and his giving
them Life and Time, and many Mercies which the full Execution of the Law would
have deprived them of, is a very great degree of Pardon. God pardoned to
Mankind much of the Penalty which Sin deserved, even presently after the first
Transgression, in the Promise made to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. Many Texts of Scripture
(which partial Men for their Opinions sake do pervert) do speak magnificently
of a common Pardon, which must be sued out, and made particular upon our
believing. The World was before under so much impossibility of being saved by
any thing that they could do, that they must have procured all to be done first
which Christ has done and suffered for them, which was utterly above their
power. They that were actually obliged to bear the Pains of Death; both
temporal, spiritual and eternal, are now so far redeemed and pardoned, and
delivered, that all the Merit and Satisfaction necessary to actual Forgiveness
is made for them by another, and no one of them all shall perish for want of a
Sacrifice made and accepted for them; and an universal conditional Pardon is
enacted, sealed, and recorded, and offered and urged on all to whom the Gospel
comes, and nothing but their obstinate, wilful refusal or neglect can deprive
them of it; and this is so great a degree of Pardon, that it is called often by
such absolute names, as if all were done, because all is done which concerns
God as Legistator, or Covenant-maker to do, before our own acceptance of it.
Mr. B' s Life of Faith, p. 335, 336. where by a Similitude of redeeming captive
Subjects, he casts the Blood of Christ as a proper Sacrifice under the highest
Contempt imaginable, that thousands and Millions of those that he died and
satisfied for shall be eternally damned; and likewise his Purchase, in a
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, as to his peculiar, physical, energetical
Operation, in that those Captives that accept of that Ransom have no more to
plead the efficacy of it upon them unto the same, than the Autocracy of their
own Wills managed by themselves, which selfsame Power others refusing to
employ, are finally damned notwithstanding their being personally redeemed by
Christ.

Error. That no one shall suffer whose Sins lay on Christ, and were suffered
for by him.

Contr. Many such shall suffer the sorer Punishment for sinning against the
Lord that bought them, and treading under foot the Blood of the Covenant,
wherewith they were so far sanctified as to be a People by their own Covenant
separated to God. Ibid. page 325. Suppose a Prince redeem all his Captive
Subjects from the Turkish Slavery, and one half of them so love their state of
Bondage, or some Harlot, or ill Company there (yea, if all of them do so, till
half of them are persuaded from it) if they will not come away, it is no
improper nor unusual Language to say that he has redeemed them, and given them
a Release, tho they would not have it; that may be given to a Man which he
never has, because he refuses to accept it, when the Donor has done all that
belongs to him in that relation of a Donor, tho perhaps as a Perswader he may
do more. Ibid. p. 336.

Nonconformist.
THat Christ gave himself a Ransom for the Elect, or, the Redemption wrought by
Jesus Christ, was peculiarly designed for elect Persons. The most high, who
divided to the Nations their Inheritance, he gave the Elect to Christ as his
Portion: And tho Satan (through their ill Husbandry in Adam) has got a
temporary Mortgage upon them, yet the Fee-simple or Right of Inheritance
remains in Christ; and therefore at the Year of Jubilee (that is, in the time
appointed by the Father) they return to him as the right Heir, tho not without
both Conquest and full Price. By [Christ giving himself a Ransom] understand
the whole of his Humiliation, whatever he did or suffered as a Mediator, from
his Incarnation to his Resurrection: All which are summarily expressed by [the
Blood of his Cross] as all the precious Fruits of his Death are by [forgiveness
of Sins.] This was the Price wherewith he bought them that should be saved.
Election is the original Pattern, according to which the line and compass of
Redemption is to be measured, Joh. 5. 19. To make Redemption larger than
electing Love, is to overlay the Foundation, and what is so built will surely
suffer Loss; it therefore behooves us to see, that we separate not what God has
conjoined, either by stretching or streightning the Bonds he has set. The Jews
were opinion'd, that the Promise of the Messiah belonged only to them,
exclusive to the Gentiles: Others since would extend it to all the Sons of Men
universally and alike [not considering the reason why the Promise was made to
the Woman's Seed, and not to Adam's.] But the Messiah himself, who best knew
the End of his Coming, and Line of the Promise, exempteth none, but extends it
to all Nations indifferently; yet so, as that he restrains it to the Elect
among them. These are called his Seed, and the Travel of his Soul, Isa. 53. 10.
with respect to whom he^ should make his Soul an Offering for Sin: These also
he terms his Sheep, and himself the good Shepherd (as well he might) whose own
the Sheep are, and for whom he died, Joh. 10. 15.

And that he might not be taken to intend those only of the Jewish Nation, he
presently adds, And other Sheep I have which are not of this Fold, them also
must I bring in. And chap. 11. the Evangelist says, He should not die for that
Nation only, but for the Children of God which are scattered abroad; this he
expresses by [gathering together] which was the Effect of his Death, according
to Ephesians. 2. 13. where they are said to be made nigh by the Blood of Christ;
and that he reconciled both (i. e. Jews and Gentiles, or the Elect scattered
among both) unto God in one Body by the Cross, according to the Father's
Compact made with him, and recorded in Isa. 49. 6. It also appears by Isa. 53.
that they were [Sheep] whose Iniquities were laid upon Christ; v. 6. For the
Transgression of my People was he stricken. -- Tho all Men were lost, Christ
was not sent but to the [House] of Israel. -- As actual Sanctification is the
fruit and consequent of Redemption, so Election is the Root of them both, 1
Pet. 1, 2. The Apostle in Romans 8. puts Election and Redemption together, as
pertaining to the same Persons; and Justification (which is the next Effect of
Redemption) he makes also an unquestionable Consequent of Election: Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justified, who shall
condemn? It is Christ that died. The Question being put concerning God's Elect,
and the Answer referring to those for whom Christ died, is a plain Implication,
that Redemption and Justification are commensurate with Election; that either
of them concerns only the same Persons; and that neither of them extends to
any but whom the other also takes in. -- Object. The reason why all Men are
not saved, is not because Christ did not die for all, but because they will not
believe. Ans. Christ's Redemption extends to Unbelief: For this purpose was the
Son of God manifested, to destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. of which
Unbelief is the chief. And he gave himself to redeem from [all] Iniquity; Tit.
2. 14. and if from all, then Unbelief (which is the sum and scum of all) cannot
be exempted; for otherwise (scil. if he had redeemed from all but this) that
Redemption would little avail us; it would be as if one should purchase your
Pardon for pilfering Felonies, but let the Guilt of your Treasons lie still
upon you: Or, undertake to cure a Man of his Phrensy, upon condition he will be
sober! What will they do who content themselves with such a Redemption as this?
-- Can we think that Christ shed his Blood for those on whom he will not
sprinkle it? (Match me this gracious Argument) That he died for those to whom
he will not give a little Faith (one grain of Mustard Seed) whereas without
that all that he does besides will not profit them? If any say he would, but
they will not; I answer, This [will not] is their Unbelief, which he is to take
away by [working them willing.] A Will to believe, is believing; and in the day
of his Power they shall find it, Psalm. 110. And for any to say, that a Will to
believe is not purchased by Christ, is a great derogation from the Virtue and
Merit of his Sufferings. Mr. Cole of God's Sovereignty, p. 116, 117, 118, 122,
123, 133.

How could the Father, salva justitia, deal thus with an innocent Person, and
with his own Son too? I answer, Christ had now put himself in the Sinner's
stead, and was become his (...), his Surety, and so obnoxious to whatever the
Sinner had deserved in his own Person; and upon this the Father might without
any Injustice, and actually did for the manifestation of the unsearchable
Riches of his Wisdom and Love, bruise him and put him to Grief. The Lord Jesus
had no Sin in him by inhesion; he was holy, harmless, undefiled, etc. Heb. 7.
26. but he had a great deal of Sin upon him by Imputation. He was made Sin,
etc. 2 Cor. 5. 21. It pleased Christ to put himself thus under the Guilt, and
therefore it pleased the Father thus to bruise him. Morning Exercise Method.
Dr. Jacomb, p. 203.

Christ's Death is a Sacrifice, and a Sin-expiating Sacrifice, if either the
Names or Nature of it may be regarded; for the Names and Titles proper to
Sacrifices they are attributed to it (and God does not give flattering Titles,
not false Names, but such as discover the nature of things) it is called (...),
an Oblation, or offering up himself. -- The inflicting cause it was God's
Displeasure: Nothing more plain than that he had a very deep sense of, and
sharp Conflict with God's Wrath from those dreadful Horrors in the Garden
(where his Soul was excceding sorrowful unto Death; not certainly at the
approach of an ordinary Death, which many Martyrs have undergone with undaunted
Courage, but at the apprehension of his Father's Anger) and upon the Cross,
where he roared out that direful Complaint, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Now then, seeing God being naturally gracious, and perfectly
righteous, cannot, will not be displeased with any without cause, and Christ
had in himself no cause, There was nothing in him, Joh. 14. 13. and (as you
read) he always did those things which pleased him: It remains therefore that
that cause of his Displeasure, and of Christ's Death, was our Sin laid upon
him, and our Peace to be procured by him. Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered (viz.
unto Death) for our Offenses; not only upon occasion of our Sins (as the
Socinians [and the Baxterians] gloss it) but for the Merit of our Sins -- Gal.
3. 13. he underwent that Curse due to us, that Curse from which we are freed,
that Curse which others who receive not Jesus Christ, shall undergo. Ibid. Mr.
Pool, p. 203, 322, 323, 326.

Christ died as the second Adam, and all the Elect died in him, and so his
Death took place for all the Elect that ever were or shall be, by virtue of the
Covenant of God, and the sovereign Imputation of God, immediately after the
Fall; therefore is he said to be a Lamb slain from the foundation of the World:
that is, in respect of Efficacy grounded upon the Imputation of God, who can
call things that are not, as if they were; and so all the Sins of the old World
and the ancient Saints were pardoned, the Sins that were past through the
forbearance of God: and so Christ rose as a public Person, as a second Adam;
and he being justified, all the Elect were justified, tho there be an actual
Justification when they do believe; and so with him we ascend and sit together
with him in Heavenly Places, etc. And as he is made Sin for us, so we are made
the Righteousness of God in him; as our Sins are laid upon him, so his
Righteousness is imputed unto us, and truly accepted for us as our Surety: for
the Debt paid by a Surety is in the esteem of the Law said to be paid by the
Debtor, and he for that cause is acquitted, and so it is in Adoption, etc. Mr.
Strong on the Covenants, p. 118.

We have Redemption as in a common Person in Christ, we have it not only when
it is applied to us, but we have it in him as we had Condemnation in Adam,
before we were born in the World; so we had Redemption in Christ when he died.
Dr. Goodwin on the Ephesians, Part 1. p. 104.

His taking our Law-place was another Condition, not our Nature only, but our
Law-place and Room; that is, to put his Soul in our Souls stead, that the Law
of God might reach him, who otherwise could not be reached by the Law, and that
Divine Justice executing the Curse and Penalty of the Law, might smite him as
the guilty Man, being by his own Consent, and his Bond of Suretiship become
legally the Debtor and Sinner (tho not intrinsecally) Gal. 4. 4. Made under the
Law, and made Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. tho he knew no Sin. -- His acting our
part, not in a scenick, but in a real manner; he came upon the Stage to
represent our Persons, and in our Nature and Law-place he really acted our
part; and this was another Condition required of him, who perfectly obeyed the
Command of the Law, and suffered the threatening thereof for us, even all that
Justice had threatened to inflict upon the Offender and Transgressor of the Law;
Gal. 3. 13. he was made a Curse for us. Isa. 53. 5. The Chastisement of our
Peace was upon him, etc. Ark of the Covenant, p. 91, 92.

Some particular Testimonies evincing the Death of Christ to be a Punishment,
properly so called. -- But as to the Punishment that is threatened in the Law,
in it self considered, Christ underwent the same that the Law threatened, and
which we should have undergone. For, 1. The Law threatened Death, Genesis 3. 15.
Ezekiel. 18. 4. and he tasted Death for us, Heb. 2. 9. Psalm. 22. 7, 8. The
Punishment of the Law is the Curse, Deuteronomy. 27. 29. And he was made a Curse, Gal.
3. 13. The Law threatened loss of the Love and Favor of God, and he lost it,
Psalm. 22. 1. To say that the Death threatened by the Law was one, and that
Christ underwent another, that eternal, this temporal; and so also of the
Curse, and Desertion threatened (besides what shall be said after) would render
the whole of our Salvation unintelligible, as being revealed in Terms
equivocal, no where explained. 2. There is not the least intimation in the
whole Book of God of any change of the Punishment, in reference to the Surety,
from what it was, or should have been, in respect of the Sinner. God made all
our Iniquities to meet on him; that is (as has been declared) the Punishment
due to them. Was it the same Punishment or another? Did we deserve one
Punishment, and Christ undergo another? Was it the Sentence of the Law that was
executed on him, or was it some other thing that he was obnoxious to? It is
said that he was made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. that Sin was condeinned in his
Flesh, Romans 8. 3. that God spared him not, ver. 31. that he tasted Death; that
he was made a Curse; all relating to the Law: that he suffered more or less,
there is no mention. It is strange to me, that we should deserve one
Punishment, and he who is punished for us undergo another; yet both of them be
constantly described by the same Names and Titles. If God laid the Punishment
of our Sins on Christ, certainly it was the Punishment that was due to them.
Mention is every where made of a Commutation of Persons, the Just suffering for
the Unjust, the Sponsor for the Offender, his Name as a Surety being taken into
the Obligation, and the whole Debt required of him; but of a change of
Punishment there is no mention at all: And there is this desperate Consequence
that will be made readily, upon a supposal that any less than the Curse of the
Law, and Death in the nature of it eternal, was inflicted on Christ; namely,
that God indeed is not such a sore Revenger of Sin as in the Scripture he is
proposed to be, but can pass it by in the way of Composition on much easier
terms. 3. The Punishment due to us, that is in the C^se of the Law, 1. Loss, or
Sepation from God. 2. Sense, from the infliction of the Evil threatened; and
both these did our Savior undergo. -- Add but this one Consideration of what
is affirmed of him, that he tasted Death for us, Heb. 2. 9. and this will be
cleared. What Death was it that he tasted? The Death that had the Curse
attending it. Gal. 3. 13. he was made a Curse, and what Death that was he
himself declares, Mat. 25. 41. where calling Men accursed, he cries, Go into
everlasting Fire; you that are obnoxious to the Law, go to the Punishment of
Hell; yea and that Curse which he underwent, Gal. 3. 13. is opposed to the Bl^g
of Abraham, ver. 14. or the Blessing promised him, which was doubtless Life
eternal. And to make it yet more clear, it was by Death that he delivered us
from Death, Heb. 2. 14, 15. And if he died only a Temporal Death, he delivered
us only from temporal Death, as a Punishment. But he shows us what Death he
delivered us from, and consequently what Death he underwent for us, Joh. 8. 51.
He shall never see Death, that is, (...) Death; for every Believer shall see
Death temporal. On these Considerations it is evident, that the Sufferings of
Christ in rel^ to the Law, were the (...) s^ that were threatened to Sinners,
and which we should have undergone, had not our Surety undertaken the Work for
us: Neither was there any difference in reference to G^ the I^g, and the
Sentence of the Law, but only this, that the same Persons who offended, did not
suffer; and that those Consequences of the Punishment inflicted, which attend
the Offenders own suffering, could have no place in him. But this being not the
main of my present Design, I shall no further insist on it: Only I marvel that
any should think to implead this Truth of Christ's suffering the same that we
did, by saying, that Christ's Obligation to Punishment was sponsionis propriae,
ours violatae Legis; as tho it were the manner how Christ came to be obnoxious
to Punishment, and not what Punishment he underwent, that is asserted when we
say, that he underwent the fame that we should have done.

But as to say, that Christ became obnoxious to Punishment the same way that we
do, or did, that is, by Sin of his own, is Blasphemy: So to say he did not upon
his own voluntary undertaking, undergo the same, is little less. It is true,
Christ was made Sin for us, had our Sin imputed to him, not his own; was
obliged to answer for our fault, not his own, but he was obliged to answer what
we should have done. Dr. Owen against Biddle, p. 504, 564, 565, 567. --

The Lamb of God did not only these things for us, but he underwent Torments,
and was punished for us -- taking unto himself the Curse that was due to us:
for what was he but (a Sacrifice for us) a Price of Redemption for our Souls?
In our Person therefore the Oracle speaks. Eusebius brought in by Dr. Owen of
^usti. p. 249. -- One may suffer on the occasion of the Sin of another, that is
no way made his, but he cannot be punished for it; for Punishment is the
Recompense of Sin on the account of its Guilt. -- God laid all our Sins on him,
and in Judgment spared him not, as to what was due to them: And so he suffered
not what was his due on his own account, but what was due to our Sin, which is
Impiety to deny; for if it were not so, he died in vain, and we are still in
our Sin. Ibid. p. 507.

Christ should offer himself to undergo that Punishment which his (viz. the
Father's) Justice had allotted for the Rebels, and should accordingly do it; he
should properly make Satisfaction for their Offense, and in strict Justice they
ought to be pardoned: the Satisfaction of Christ by the Payment of the same
thing that was required in the Obligation, is no way prejudicial to that free
gracious Condonation of Sin, so often mentioned. -- Now from all this, thus
much to clear up the nature of the Satisfaction by Christ appears, viz. it
was a full valuable Compensation made to the Justice of God for all the Sins of
all those for whom he made Satisfaction by undergoing that Punishment, which,
by reason of the Obligation that was upon them, they themselves were bound to
undergo. When I say the same, I mean essentially the same, in weight, pressure,
tho not in all Accidents of Duration, and the like; for it was impossible he
^ould be detained by Death* -- He paid this Price into the hands of the Father;
a Price must be paid to some body in the case of deliverance from Captivity by
it, must be paid to the Judge or ^ailor; that is, to God or the Devil. To say
the latter, were the higest^ Blasphemy. Satan was to be conquered, not
satisfied: for the former the Scripture is clear; it was his Wrath that was on
us, etc. Dr. O. Salus electorum, sanguis Jesu, ^p. 139, 140, 141, 142, 156.

It was the Law which hindered God from showing Mercy, and made Man's Salvation
impossible; then that Law does oblige God to see it fulfilled, or else to grant
no Life to Sinners: and if Christ did not fulfill it, nor was made properly
subject to it, (as they teach) then he could not properly purchase a Covenant
of Life; if he did fulfill it for Sinners, then they must be discharged by his
Satisfaction, without further Conditions imposed on them. -- They say the Law
of Works was neither abolished nor fulfilled by Christ, but relaxed; I suppose
they mean, that God did not insist upon the absolute performance of the Law,
but was pleased to admit of an equivalent Reparation of his Honor, by the
Obedience of Christ to the Law which he should impose on him, wherein should be
comprehended a great part of the Moral Law. I reply, if God did relax the Law,
so as not to require the proper fulfilling of it, then he did lose the
Obligation which was laid upon him to see it fulfilled: The ordinate or
relative Justice of God obliged him to proceed according to that Law; and if he
admitted of another way of reparation to his Honor, he did not proceed in a
way of Justice in all that he laid upon Jesus Christ; and he might as well have
saved Man without the Obedience of Christ as with it, his Justice or Law
allowing that Relaxation no more than a total superceding or laying aside the
Law. By this Purchase therefore they can mean no more, but that Jesus Christ
did so honor the Father by his Obedience and Sufferings, that he might with
decorum to his Majesty give to Sinners terms of Salvation, and would do it; but
this is no Purchase, which transferreth a Legal Right to the Purchaser, if the
Purchase be accepted, but depends merely upon Promise or terms of Honor. It
is also great Presumption for Men to judge what is becoming Divine Majesty; and
what will salve his Honor, other than what is according to his Law or Promise;
whereas here they make him to wave his own declared Law founded in the highest
Reason and Equity. -- Nor in this sense is the Death of Christ a Ransom,
Satisfaction, or Propitiation, A Ransom respects Persons to be redeemed: it
is a Price given for them, not for Laws and Covenants, whoever paid a Ransom
without agreeing to whom it should extend, and that it should take certain
effect? whereas here is nothing purchased but a Covenant or Promise, that all
those that believe and obey the Gospel should be saved, which perhaps might be
none.

Nor was it agreed how long the World should stand, and so what number of Men
should be made, or should need, or be capable of this Redemption. A
Satisfaction to God in this case is a Satisfaction to his Law, whereby the
Sinner must immediately be discharged. A Propitiation is a Sacrifice appeasing
and reconciling God to Man, neither of which is done if only a Promise be
procured to save Men upon their fulfilling the Conditions of a new Law. -- If
Christ only purchased a Covenant of Life, then his Redemption is more
ineffectual to save, than Adam's Fall was to destroy Man. The Apostle, Romans 5.
17, 18. comparing the Death of Christ with Adam's Fall, says, As Sin reigned
to Death, so Grace much more reigns to Life, etc. But where is this much more?
The Obedience of Christ falls far short of Adam's Disobedience in its Effects,
if he only purchased Conditions of Life. Adam in a few moments by one
Transgression procured a Sentence of certain Death upon every individual Person
that should naturally descend from him, as soon as they should have a being:
but Jesus Christ by his transcendent Obedience of thirty four Years, by
enduring the Wrath of God, the Rage of Men and Devils, and a most ignominious
Death, purchased Life for no one certain Man, but only Conditions whereupon
they that should hear of them (not half Mankind) should be saved, if they did
fulfill them; which, for any thing he purchased, or was contained in the
Covenant of Life, was a mere Contingency, viz. whether any should ever believe
and be saved or not. Mr. Troughton Lutherus rediv. Part 2. p. 147, etc.

There was always in him (i. e. God) a great love to the Person of his Son, and
an ineffable Complacency in the Obedience of Christ, espcially that which he
exercised in his suffering. But yet the Curse and Punishment which he underwent
was an Effect of vindictive Justice, and as such did he look upon it, and
conflict with it. -- Whatever was due to us from the Justice of God and
Sentence of the Law, that he underwent and suffered. -- So these things really
wrought in him, Sorrow, Amazement, Anguish, Fear, Dread, with the like penal
Effects of the Pains of Hell; from whence it was that he offered up Prayers and
Supplications with strong Cries and Tears unto him that was able to save him
from Death. Dr. O. on Heb. Vol. 2. p. 367, 368.

This was Pelagius, whose principal Artifice which he used in the introduction
of his Heresy, was in the clouding of his Intentions with general and ambiguous
Expressions, as some would be making use of his very Words and Phrases. Hence,
for a long time, when he was justly charged with his sacrilegious Errors, he
made no Defense of them, but reviled his Adversaries as corrupting his Mind,
and not understanding his Expressions. And by this means, as he got himself
acquitted in the Judgment of some less experienced in the Slights and cunning
Craftiness of them who lie in wait to deceive, and juridically freed in an
Assembly of Bishops: So in all probability he had suddenly infected the whole
Church with the Poison of those Opinions, which the proud and corrupted Nature
of Man is so apt to receive and embrace, if God had not stirred up some few
holy and learned Persons, Austin especially, to discover his Frauds, to refel
his Calumnies, and confute his Sophisms, which they did with indefatigable
Industry and good Success. But yet these Tares being once sown by the envious
One, found such a suitable and fruitful Soil in the darkened Minds and proud
Hearts of Men, that from that day to this they could never be fully extirpated;
but the same bitter Root has still sprung up unto the defiling of many, tho
various new Colors have been put upon its Leaves and Fruit. And although those
who at present amongst us have undertaken the same Cause with Pelagius, do not
equal him either in Learning or Diligence, or an appearance of Piety and
Devotion, yet do they exactly imitate him in declaring their Minds in cloudy
ambiguous Expressions, capable of various Constructions until they are fully
examined, and thereon reproaching (as he did) those that oppose them as not
aright representing their Sentiments, when they judge it their advantage so to
do. -- Dr. O. of the Spirit, p. 176, 177.

That which they seem to aim at and conclude may be reduced unto these Heads.
(1.) That God administers Grace unto all in the Declaration of the Doctrine of
the Law and Gospel. (2.) That the Reception of this Doctrine, the Belief and
Practice of it is enforced by Promises and Threatenings. (3.) That the things
revealed, taught and commanded, are not only good in themselves, but so suited
unto the Reason and Interest of Mankind, as that the Mind cannot but be
disposed and inclined to receive and obey them, unless over-powred by
Prejudices and a course of Sin. (4.) That the Consideration of the Promises and
Threatenings of the Gospel is sufficient to remove these Prejudices, and reform
that course. (5.) That upon a compliance with the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
Obedience thereunto, Men are made partakers of the Spirit, with other
Privileges of the New Testament, and have a right unto all the Promises of the
present and future Life. Now this is a perfect System of Pelagianism, condemned
in the ancient Church as absolutely exclusive of the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ. -- Tho the loose confused Expressions of some be not considered in
particular. Ibid. p. 256.

Thus have I sufficiently (I trust) maintained this ancient Truth concerning
the Efficacy and Benefit of Christ's Death ordained only for the Elect; wherein
(I doubt not) but that they which are somewhat wavering, and not yet settled in
Judgment, may soon be resolved: If on the one side, they do consider the
substantial Grounds and evident Demonstrations of the Truth, and on the other,
the weakness of their Proofs, the diversity of Opinion in themselves, and the
necessary Consequence of so many Absurdities that follow upon the Opinion of
universal or common Grace. Wherefore I wonder that some, heretofore thoroughly
persuaded of the Truth, should now begin to stagger in Opinion: to whom may be
applied that saying of the Apostle, I marvel that ye are so soon removed away
to another Gospel. Again, Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
Truth, to whom Jesus Christ was before described in your sight? Wherefore the
Death of Christ being so evidently described unto us in Scripture to appertain
to the Elect, let us therein rest, and leave all other strange and new Opinions
which may disturb our Peace, and distract simple Minds; let us from henceforth
follow the Truth in Love; which God grant. Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 917, 918.

Head 5. That a proper Representative, etc.
Conformist.
HIS (i. e. Christ's) Satisfaction as he is our Surety, whereby he paid our
Debt, underwent the Curse of our Sins, bare them all in his Body upon the Tree,
became subject to the Law for us in our Nature, and representatively in our
stead, fulfilled all Righteousness in the Law required, both active and
passive, for us. For we must note that there are two things in the Law intended
(i. e. with respect to Christ's Representative Headship) one principal,
Obedience, and another secondary, Malediction, upon supposition of
Disobedience; so that Sin being once committed, there must be a double Act
(Mark it, Reader, not a first and second Justification) to Justification,
suffering the Curse, and the fulfilling of Righteousness anew. Unto a double
apprehension of Justice in God, there must answer a double act of Righteousness
in Man, or his Surety (i. e. Representative) for him: To God's punishing
Justice, a Righteousness passive, whereby a Man is rectus in curia again; and
to God's commanding Justice, a Righteousness active, whereby he is reconciled
and made acceptable to God again. Dr. Reynold's Life of Christ, p. 402.

Christ (viz. as Representative) bare their Person, and stood in their room
upon the Cross, for whom he is a Mediator; and consequently, whatsoever Christ
as a Redeemer, the same did all those in him and with him which are redeemed:
Christ dying, arising again, ascending, and sitting at the right hand of the
Father, they also die with him, rise again, ascend, and sit at the right hand
of God. -- To say that any one of the wicked, which are to perish for ever, is
raised up in Christ rising again, is flat against the Truth; because the
raising up of Christ is (that I may so speak) his actual Absolution from their
Sins for whom he died: for even as the Father by delivering Christ to death,
did in very deed condemn their Sins imputed unto Christ, for whom he died; so
by raising him up from Death, even ipso facto he did absolve Christ from their
Sins, and did withal absolve them in Christ; but being absolved from their Sins
they shall not perish, but be saved. Mr. Perkins of Predestin. p. 18, 19.

Sundry Men, specially Papists, deride the Doctrine of Justification by imputed
Righteousness; thinking it as absurd, that a Man should be just by that
Righteousness which is inherent in the Person of Christ; as if we should say,
that one Man may live by the Soul of another, or be learned by the Learning of
another. So a besotted Baxterian. Mr. D. W. Gospel Truth stated and vindicated,
chapter 7. view the whole, where running down the Doctrine of Justification by
imputation in the faederal change of the Persons of Christ and a Believer, he
tells us, It is ungrounded; I know that it will be objected, that it is so by
Imputation: But the Gospel knows of no Imputation of this kind; we may as well
infer, that we are Omnipotent, and Omniscient, because Christ is so. -- The
very Union in Marriage does not transfer habitual Qualifications from Husband
to Wife: Is a foolish Wife perfectly wife, because her Husband is so? No, tho
she receive benefit by his Wisdom.

But here we may see that it has sufficient foundation: for there is a most
near and strict Union between Christ and all that believe in him; and in this
Union Christ with all his Benefits, according to the tenor of the Covenant of^
^race, is made ours really, and therefore we may stand just before God by his
Righteousness; it being indeed his, because it is in him as in a Subject, yet
so as it is also ours, because it is given unto us of God.

Now there is no such Union between Man and Man, and for that cause one Man
cannot live by the Soul of another, or be learned by the Learning of another.
Mr. Perkins' s Golden Chain, p. 485.

That Christ in himself was the unspotted and undefiled Lamb, it follows not,
but that for us and in our Person, he taking upon him our Sins, stood as guilty
thereof before God. -- Christ was in himself most holy, most pure, most
innocent; hereunto we most willingly subscribe: yet notwithstanding he took
upon him the Burden of our Sins, and made our Debt his own, and so as our
Surety presented himself as indebted for us (which is as a Representative Head)
and in our Person guilty of our Sins: this the Friar denies (and so do our
more modern ones now) -- The Prophet, Isa. 53. 11. He shall bear their
Iniquities. How otherwise could he bear them but by laying them upon himself?

Object. By Sin the Prophet understands the Punishment for Sin which Christ
undertook. Fevard. p. 467, 10.

Contr. St. Peter otherwise expounds the Prophet, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who in his
Body bare our Sins, that we being delivered from Sin, should live in
Righteousness: As he says we are delivered from Sin, so Christ bare our Sins;
but we are delivered not only from the Punishment of Sin, but from Sin it self,
to live in Righteousness: Ergo. Dr. Willet's Synops. Pap. 1126.

Hic docet Apostolus quaenam illa justitia sit, etc. Here the Apostle teaches
us, Phil. 3. 8, 9. what kind of Righteousness that is in which we must be found
clothed before God, doubtless that which is apprehended by Faith, but this is
imputed.

He shows also the cause, why of right it is made ours, viz. because we are
Christ's, and are found in Christ: therefore because we are implanted into his
Body, and coa^esce with him into one Person, therefore his Righteousness is
reputed ours. Dr. Davenant de Justific. Habit. cap. 38.

That Christ was made Sin for us, and in us, to wit, in our Person. -- Jesus
has filthy Raiment put upon him, because he that did no Sin, was made sin for
us. But this filthy Raiment was taken from him when he had cancelled our Sins;
that because he was attired in filthy Raiment, we rising again in him, may
always have white Garments upon us.

That we, as Jacob, being clad in the sweet smelling Robes of our elder Brother
Christ, might be accounted as a Field which the Lord has blessed, and so
receive the Blessing of the Birthright in our elder Brother's name. -- Behold
here a great Mystery: The Son of God, not only in our innocent Nature by
Assumption, but in our guilty Persons by Imputation, stands before Pilate the
Judge, to be sentenced by him. -- Take we this Judgment as proceeding from the
Tribunal of God, and we shall see it to be most just; for in, or with Pilate
God sits upon the Tribunal to judge his own Son. But God and Pilate pass the
same Sentence with a most different respect upon Christ: for Christ here
sustains a twofold Person; his own, which only Pilate looked upon, not knowing
any other; and so Pilate's Sentence of Death was most unjust: but Christ bore
another Person upon him, to wit, our sinful Person, which God looking upon, and
finding him now in our stead a guilty Person by the imputation of our Sin,
being our Surety, he passes the same Sentence of Death upon him that Pilate
did; and yet God's Sentence is most just -- as he stood in our Person -- he
stood there in our Person -- sustaining our Person, standing as our Surety. --
Thus he stood in our stead, judged and condemned in our Persons -- Legally
judged. -- As Christ was legally condemned in our Person, so shall we be before
God's Tribunal acquitted and absolved, as just and righteous in his Person. --
Christ in his own Person innocent, but in ours guilty, was judged and
condemned, even by God's own Judgment. -- He was thus judicially condemned in
our Persons, that so we might stand guiltless before God's Judgment Seat. A
Mystery altogether unknown to Pontifician Spirits: as the Gospel is hid to them
that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Of this sort also is that viperous brood of the
Socinians, who oppugning the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction in our Persons,
are easily confuted and confounded by this very Article of the Creed; whose
Madness is sufficiently discovered by Lubbertus, Ludovicus, Lucius, and others,
so that they need no other Confutation, their Arguments being but mere
argutiae, no less futile than seemingly subtle, which, as the hissings of the
Serpent, are to be hissed and whipped cut of Christ's School. -- He suffering
for us whatever we should have suffered; yea, even eternal Death it self; for
as much as the Eternal suffered the nature of that Death, tho he only tasted
it, as Heb. 2. 9. yet he so tasted of it, as that at once, as it were at one
morsel, he wholly devoured it, and swallowed it up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 5^.
-- Again, I am among you as one that serves, Luke 17. 19. Now for whom was
Christ in the condition of this Life a Servant? For himself? not for himself,
but for us; as himself says, For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they
also might be sanctified through the Truth, Joh. 17. 19. So that the active
Obedience of Christ in his Life, his Holiness, as of a Servant, is also imputed
unto us; for how was he a Servant in our Person, but that he might free us from
the condition of Servants? that as the Passive Obedience of Christ in his Death
removed away from us the Rags of our Sins, the Badg and Band of our Servitude:
so Christ's active Obedience in his Life has put upon us the most glorious
Liberty of our Infranchisement and Freedom, his Death has cleansed us, and his
Life has clothed us. These two therefore are in no sort to be divided, unless
we would be content to have our Deliverance from Hell separated from our
Inheritance in Heaven, and still to be subject to the Punishment of Loss, tho
free from the Punishment of Sense. Mr. Burton' s Bulwark, p. 68, 69, 70, 71,
72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77. O never let Christ's Life and Death be divided, his
active Obedience and his passive let ever go together, lest if we let go the
one, we lose both! Ibid. p. 79.

The Obedience of Christ how comes it to be for our Righteousness, but by
imputation only? he stood before God in the Person of the whole body of his
Elect.

It will appear by scanning the nature of Suretiship, when one Man undertakes
and engages himself for another. Let the case be betwixt Paul and Onesimus:
Onesimus ran away from Philemon his Master, and at his departure (by all
likelihood) took with him some part of his Master's Goods: Paul becomes a
Mediator for him, and for the better furtherance of his Request, he offers to
see the Wrong and Damage which is done, to be discharged: If he has hurt thee,
or owes thee ought, that put on my account. I Paul have written this with my
own hand, I will recompense it; Phil. v. 18, 19. By this means Onesimus is
discharged, and Paul is become Debtor to Philemon, but how? neither has
Onesimus repaid ought, neither has Paul stolen or borrowed ought; it is by
Imputation: By virtue of the undertaken Suretiship, Onesimus his Debt lies upon
Paul, and Paul's freedom from Debt turns to the acquittance of Onesimus. So it
is in this case of Justification; we stood bound to God to perform so many
Duties of Righteousness, and to sustain so much Damage, even the eternal weight
of God's Displeasure, for so many holy Services unperformed. Christ comes
between, and gives himself to God the Father for a full Discharge. Thus is he
now reputed the Debtor, and must pay the Mulct; we adjudged righteous, and must
receive the Reward: and yet neither is he a Debtor by his own private
Transgression, nor we freed by our own personal Justice, but both by
Imputation. This Similitude is very fitting, because as our Sins are called
Debts, so Christ is said to have given himself as a full Price, proportionable
every way to our Debt, and so by his Stripes to have healed us. Mr. Hieron, p.
465.

That Adam and Christ are not to be considered of as other particular Persons
be, but as two Heads or Roots of all Mankind which depend on them.

Justification has two Parts: 1. The forgiveness of Sins. 2. The making of us
just: for as we owed unto God a Satisfaction by Death for the breach of the
Law, so we were bound to perform Subjection to God with all power of Body and
Soul, and all the might of those Powers, even from the time of our being.
Therefore as we needed the Passion of our Lord to discharge the first Debt of
Pain and Punishment, so the other Debt of Homage and Conformity to the Will of
God was answered in the Obedience of his Life, that so we might not only escape
Death, but find an entrance into Life eternal, which without perfect Obedience
to the Commandment might not be granted according to the tenor of the Law, Do
this and live, Levit. 18. 5. -- There must be a Translation of the Law from us
in our Persons unto the Person of our Mediator, who must do every jot for us:
It behooves him to fulfill all Righteousness, Mat. 3. he is the end of the Law
for Righteousness, Romans 10. and has made us just by his Obedience -- And
because subject to the Law, to redeem us which were obnoxious to the Law, Gal.
4. 4, 5. -- He that continues not to do all things contained in the Law is
accursed, Deuteronomy. 27. ult. whereof it follows, that if any will avoid the Curse
of the Law, he stands bound constantly from his Conception till his Death to
keep the Law, which for so much as none can do by himself, therefore all the
Contents of the Law must be accomplished by our Surety, or else no escaping the
Curse.

Besides, if the actual Obedience of Adam made us Sinners, how should we be
just without the actual Obedience of Christ? Wilson on the Romans, p. 331, 332,
333.

Baxterian.
CHrist took the Nature of Man, but not strictly the real or reputative Person
of any Man, but himself (this does absolutely and really make Christ a Sinner)
much less of every Man, or every Believer: I mean, that his Person was not the
natural Person (here is the juggling Box) of any other, nor esteemed of God so
to be; nor yet was he the full and proper Representative or Civil Person of any
Man, much less of all Men; that is, one that the Law allowed us to do and
suffer by; so that in Law-sense his doing and suffering should be reputed ours,
as a Man pays a Debt by his Servant or Substitute, which is morally or
reputatively by his Act and Deed, or accepted in the same sort, and to all the
same Effects and Purposes, as if he had paid it with his own hands.

The Person of the Mediator was not in Lawsense, nor God's account, nor
Christ's undertaking the Person of the Sinner himself: Christ did not fulfill
the Law of Innocence in our several Persons: He did not all those things
materially that Adam was obliged to do, nor which most of us are obliged to do.
We did not reputatively fulfill the Law by him, so as that his Perfection is
taken as ours, in Habit and in Act. Mr. Baxter' s End of Doctr. Controv. chap.
12. Sect. 2. Head 5, 9.

But in strict sense, as representing a Man, or doing it in his Person,
signifies, that Christ so died (and merited) in several Men's Persons, as that
the Law or Lawgiver does take it to have been in sensu civili, their own
suffering, and doing, and meriting, or to all Intents, Purposes and Uses, all
one to them, as if they had so died and merited themselves: thus Christ neither
died nor obeyed for any Man. -- But if the stress of the Controversy be laid on
Christ's personating or representing this Man or that, by that time this (human
invented, ambiguous, unscriptural) Phrase is explained, either we shall be
found to be all of a mind, or else some will run into an intolerable Error
about [Christ's dying and meriting in our civil Person, and our dying and
meriting by his natural Person] or else dispute themselves into a wood of
Uncertainties, and be lost about the sense of a word that cannot be
sufficiently explained. Ibid. chap. 13.. 13, 16.

They heinously err and subvert the Gospel, who say, that Christ's
Righteousness is so imputed to us, as that God reputeth, or judges Christ to
have been perfectly holy and righteous (or obedient) and to have suffered, tho
not in the natural, yet in the legal or civil Person of the Sinner or Believer,
as their strict and proper Representer; and reputeth us to have been perfectly
holy, righteous or obedient in Christ as our Representer, and so to have our
selves fulfilled all Righteousness in and by him, and in him to have satisfied
Justice, and merited eternal Life, and Christ's Righteousness to be ours in the
same sense of Propriety, as it was his own; for his Divine Righteousness is the
Essence of God, and his human Habits, Acts and Relations, which are the
Accidents of his own Person only as the Subject, and cannot be in another. --
Therefore they assert a Contradiction when they say, that we both perfectly
obeyed by and in Christ, and yet suffered or satisfied in or by him for our
Disobedience. Ibid. chap. 22.. 19, 24.

That Christ was made a Subject under a Law peculiar to himself, according to
his peculiar Works. -- If Men will needs impose on us their own word of
Representation, for Peace sake we accept it in a sound sense. -- But he did not
absolutely represent us, he was not our Delegate; our Persons did not in a
Law-sense do in and by Christ what he did, or possess the Habits which he
possessed, suffered what he suffered; nor does God account us to have done, for
that were to mistake. -- And as to that which some call a legal or reputative
personal Union, it must be proved before it is asserted. And as I know no Word
of God that speaks such a thing, as that Christ and we are imputatively one
Person, so I know that they that will assert it of their own heads, presume far
in a tender Point. -- Are we not righteous by being one with Christ, as we are
Sinners by Union with Adam? Answ. We were but seminally and virtually in Adam,
and not personally (as I have opened in my Dispute of original Sin) and so we
were but virtually in Christ when he suffered and obeyed, and we were unborn.
-- That Christ did obey and suffer, merit and satisfy, in so full and strict a
representing and personating every one of the Elect, as that they did and
suffered it in and by Christ, in the sense of the Law of Works, or in God's
account; and that it was not in the third Person of a Mediator, to communicate
the Effects freely as he pleased by another Covenant: And so that God's
imputing Righteousness to us, is his accounting us to have done and suffered in
Law-sense what Christ did. This is the root of all the rest, subverting the
Gospel it self. -- It is a fundamental Fiction leading on many other Errors, to
say that the Law of Innocence as it commanded Adam's Obedience, or as it
threatened Death to him, was fulfilled by Christ for him.

That Law commanded Adam only personal, perfect, perpetual Obedience: It
mentioned or meant no vicarius obedientiae aut poenae; dum alius solvit, aliud
solvitur: Another obeying or suffering was no fulfilling of the Law as it
commanded Adam: The Law commands each Subject distinctly and personally;
Christ fulfilled all the Law as it obliged himself, and that for Adam's
Redemption who had broken it. But the same Law as it obliged Adam was broken by
Adam, and not kept by him, or any for him. -- Many say indeed that Christ
satisfied the Law for us: But, 1. That proves that the Obligation of it on us
was not fulfilled: for Satisfaction is solutio recusabilis tantidem, loco
solutionis ejusdem. 2. But it is an improper Speech to say, that [the Law is
satisfied] and it means no more but that [the end of Government by that Law
is obtained] and it is properly Satisfaction only to the Lawgiver, and not to
the Law; for the Law in its sense admits not of Satisfaction (tho it has
nothing against it) it is only the Subjects Obedience that it commands, and
his Death as Satisfaction for Sin that it demands. It is the Lawgiver as he
is above his own Law, and has power to pardon, that is satisfied: Tho, as
tropically some say, that finis legis est lex, so we will not contend with them
that tropically say, Christ satisfied the Law, while they mean but that he
satisfied the Lawgiver in obtaining the end of the Law. But Christ perfectly
fulfilled the Law as it obliged himself upon his Sponsion: And that Law
justified him, but no Man else; it is only the new Covenant that justifies us.

The second Error to the same purpose is, that tho Christ and Adam were two
natural Persons, yet they were one Person in a* civil, legal, or reputative
sense, in Christ's obeying and suffering; and so that what Christ did and
suffered in his own natural Person, he did and suffered in Adam's, and every
elect Man's civil, legal or reputative Person. This is but the Consequent of
the former Error. He may be called our Representer in a limited sense, in
tantum and ad hoc (for there is no hope of holding our Opposers to
Scripture Phrase) but such a strict, full, personating Representation as is
here described, denies the Substance of the Gospel. -- It cannot be said that
we did it legally by him, else all the forenamed Absurdities would follow; and
especially that legally we never sinned, and never deserved Punishment, nor
need either Pardon or the Sacrifice of Christ for Pardon. It is certain that
Christ never sinned, but obeyed perfectly from first to last; and if we did
this legally by him, we sinned not in Law-sense, that is, not truly at all.
When we show that it was a palpable Contradiction to say, that we were
perfectly obedient in and by Christ, from Birth to Death, and yet that Christ
must suffer for our Sins; it is strange to see how some Men satisfy themselves
with wriggling or huddling out a few insignificant words, unfit to satisfy any
other. -- Either Christ was our legal Person before we were born, or from the
time of our being, or from the time of our believing only. 1. Before we had a
being we were no Sinners, nor bound to obey, and therefore needed not to obey
or suffer by another. 2. When we were born, we were not in Christ, and perhaps
not Believers till old Age: And so the Elect should legally be just while they
are Infidels, and never sin even in their state of Enmity. 3. If only since
believing we were so personated by Christ, then his Righteousness is not
imputed to us for all the time of our Unregeneracy, and then we never sinned in
Law-sense after our believing. -- Besides that, one that is reputed to have
legally fulfilled the Law, must be unjustly corrected by the Punishment of
temporal Affliction or Death, or less of the Spirit and Grace, and has present
right to the Reward of that Covenant, or deliverance from all penal Evil at
least; so that this Doctrine of strict, legal, personating Representation
overthrows the new Covenant and Law of Christ, and all his Kingdom of Grace,
and all Religion. -- It is not then too little, if it must be the idem, and not
the aequivalens: for some of us are bound to the Offices of Parents, and some
of Husbands and Wives, some of Servants, some of Magistrates, some of
Soldiers, some to Actions proper to the sick, to the old, and other Conditions
which Christ was never in. -- It was enough that he undertook all that was fit
for him, and necessary by Equivalency to satisfy, and merit a free Gift of
Grace and Glory for us, and that he performed the undertaken Conditions and
Duties of all the Law which was laid on him, without doing all the same things
which were laid on us. Mr. Baxt. Brev. Just^. Part 1. p. 4, 23, 27, 28, 29, 72,
81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 113, 114.

To this I shall add what Dr. Owen notes of the Socinians, Treatise of
Justisic. p. 389.

Nor are the cavilling Objections of the Socinians, and those that follow them,
of any force against the Truth herein; they tell us that the Righteousness of
Christ can be imputed but to one, if unto any: For who can suppose that the
same Righteousness of one should become the Righteousness of many, even of all
that believe? Besides, he performed not all the Duties that are required of us*
in all our relations, he being never placed in them. These things I say are
both foolish and impious, destructive unto the whole Gospel.

They expose Christianity to the scorn of Infidels, by telling Men that it
consists in that which every Novice in Logic or Reasoning, knows to be
impossible, that one Man's Sins, and one Man's Righteousness should be made
another; not only so far as that others partake of the Effects (Christ of our
Sins in sufferings, and we of the Benefits of his Righteousness) which we all
maintain, but that the thing it self is essentially thus transferred. Mr. Baxt.
Brev. Justif. Part 2. p. 41.

This transacting of the filthiness of our Sins on Christ is blasphemous. --
For if the Filthiness of our Sins is transferred on him, they are as much his
own as if they had been originally his. Mr. D. W. Gospel Truth stated, etc. p.
9, 10. He tells us that this Imputation in a change of Persons by transferring
and transacting of Sin and Righteousness from one to another, is impossible,
ungrounded and absurd, p. 38. Compare with what Dr. O. says of the Socinians,
and other Enemies to this Doctrine of Justification, p. 363.

There is oft-times a wide difference between what is said, and what is proved.
-- 1. It is pleaded impossible on this single ground, namely, that the
Obedience of Christ unto the Law was due from him on his own account, and
performed by him for himself, as a Man made under the Law. Now what was
necessary unto himself, and done for himself, cannot be said to be done for us,
so as to be imputed unto us. 2. It is pretended to be useless from hence,
because all our Sins of Omission and Commission being pardoned in our
Justification on the account of the Death and Satisfaction of Christ, we are
thereby made completely righteous; so as there is not the least necessity for,
or use of the imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto us. 3. Pernicious also
they say it is, as that which takes away the necessity of our own personal
Obedience, introducing Antinomianism, Libertinism, and all manner of Evils.

Whether Christ in our Person did fulfill the Law, and bear our Punishments, and
whether he be judged in a forensick sense to be the Person which sinned? Answ.
A reputed sinning Person (reputed and imputed being the same, as he declares,
with this Author) is a Person reputed evil, hateful, void of God's Image,
clothed with the Devil's Image, to have deserved infernal Damnation without end
or intermission, and to be loathed of all good: but Christ never was any such;
therefore he was not the reputed sinning Person.

There were almost innumerable Persons that have bin Sinners, but Christ was
really and reputatively one only Person; (for God judges not falsely one to be
a thousand) therefore Christ was not really or reputatively the sinning Person.
The Person bearing Punishment is reputed the Sinner, he undergoes Punishments
for his own proper Sins (for if as sinning he is reputed, he is a Sinner; for
Reputation is true, not false) but Christ bore not Punishments by reason of his
proper Sins.

Therefore, etc. he that has given full Satisfaction needs not Forgiveness,
neither ought he to seek Pardon. But we stand in need of Forgiveness and a
Petition of Pardon: Therefore we or our Persons did not fully satisfy; neither
therefore did Christ in our Person. Mr. B. Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 40.
neither is it a Scripture Phrase; for it is not read there, that Sin was
imputed unto Christ. Ibid.

Nonconformist
HE (i. e. Christ) is the Head, and Believers are the Members of that one
Person, as the Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Hence as what he did is
imputed unto them, as if done by them; so what they deserved on the account of
Sin was charged upon him: So is it expressed by a Learned Prelat, Nostram
causam sustinebat, qui nostram sibi carnem aduniverat, and ita nobis arctissimo
vinculo conjunctus, and (...), quae erant nostra facit sua. And again, Quid
mirum si in nostra persona constitutus, nostram carnem indutus, etc. Montacut.
Origin. Ecclesiast. The Ancients speak to the same purpose: Leo sermon. 17. Ideo
se humanae infirmitati virtus divina conseruit, ut dum Deus sua facit esse quae
nostra sunt, nostra faceret esse quae sua sunt. And also Serm^ 16. Caput
nostrum Dominus Jesus Christus omnia in se corporis sui membra transformans,
quod olim in Psalmo eructaverat, id in supplicio crucis sub Redemptorum suorum
voce clamavit. And so speaks Austin ad Honoratum, We hear the Voice of the Body
from the Mouth of the Head. The Church suffered in him, when he suffered for
the Church; as he suffers in the Church when the Church suffers for him. For
as we have heard the Voice of the Church in Christ's suffering, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? so we have heard the Voice of Christ in the Church
suffering, Saul, Saul, why persecut est thou me?

But we may yet look a little backward into the sense of the ancient Church
herein. Christus, says Irenaeus, omnes gentes exinde ab Adam dispersas and
generationem hominum in semet ipso recapitulatus est; unde a Paulo Typus futuri
dictus est ipse Adam; lib. 3. cap. 33. And again, Recapitulans universum
hominum genus in se ab initio usque ad finem recapitulatus est and mortem ejus.
And Cyprian Epist. 63. on bearing about the Administration of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, He bare us, or suffered in our Person, when he bear our Sins;
whence Athanasius affirms of the Voice he used on the Cross, we suffered in
him. Eusebius speaks many things to this purpose, He underwent Torments, and
was punished for us -- taking unto himself the Curse that was due to us; for
what was he but (a Substitute for us) a Price of Redemption for our Souls? In
our Person therefore the Oracle speaks. -- This then I say is the foundation of
the Imputation of the Sins of the Church unto Christ, namely, that he and it
are one Person. -- On the Considerations insisted on, whereby the Lord Christ
became one mystical Person with the Church, or bare the Person of the Church in
what he did as Mediator, in the holy wise Disposal of God as the Author of the
Law, the supreme Rector or Governor of all Mankind, as unto their temporal and
eternal Concernments, and by his own Consent, the Sins of all the Elect were
imputed unto him. This having been the Faith and Language of the Church in all
Ages, and that derived from and founded in express Testimonies of Scripture,
with all the Promises and Presignations of his Exhibition in the Flesh from the
beginning, cannot now with any modesty be expressly denied: Wherefore the
Socinians themselves grant that our Sins may be said to be imputed unto Christ,
and he to undergo the Punishment of them, so far as that all things which befell
him evil and afflictive in this Life, with the Death which he underwent, were
occasioned by our Sins; for had not we sinned, there had been no need of, nor
occasion for his suffering. But notwithstanding this Concession, they expressly
deny his Satisfaction, or that properly he underwent the Punishment due unto
our Sins, wherein they deny all imputation of them unto him. Others say, that
our Sins were imputed unto him, quoad reatum poenae, but not quoad reatum
culpae. But I must acknowledge that unto me this Distinction gives inanem sine
mente sonum. -- Whereas therefore he was neither made Man, nor of the Posterity
of Abraham for himself, but for the Church, namely, to become thereby the
Surety of the Covenant, and Representative of the whole, his Obedience as a Man
unto the Law in general, and as a Son of Abraham unto the Law of Moses, was for
us, and not for himself, so designed, so performed, and without a respect unto
the Church, was of no use unto himself. -- The Lord Christ in his Obedience was
not a private, but a public Person: He obeyed as he was the Surety of the
Covenant, as the Mediator between God and Man. This I suppose will be denied,
he can by no imagination be considered out of that Capacity. But what a public
Person does as a public Person, that is, as a Representative of others, and an
Undertaker for them, whatever may be his own Concernment therein, he does it
not for himself, but for others: And if others were not concerned therein, if
it were not for them, what he does would be of no use or signification: Yea, it
implies a Contradiction that any one should do any thing as a public Person,
and do it for himself only. He who is a public Person, may do that wherein he
alone is concerned, but he cannot do so as he is a public Person: wherefore as
Socinus and those that follow him would have Christ to have offered for
himself, which is to make him a Mediator for himself, his Offering being a
Mediatory Act, which is both foolish and impious; so to affirm his Mediatory
Obedience, as a public Person, to have been for himself, and not for others,
has but less of Impiety in it. -- No Man can assign any other way whereby he
was made Sin, especially his being made so by God, but by God's laying all our
Iniquities upon him, that is, imputing our Sin unto him. How then are we made
the Righteousness of God in him? By the infusion of an habit of Grace, say the
Papists generally; then by the Rule of the Antithesis, he must be made Sin for
us: by the infusion of an habit of Sin, which would be a blasphemous
Imagination: by his meriting, procuring, and purchasing Righteousness for us,
say others; so possibly we might be made righteous by him, but so we cannot be
made righteous in him.

This can only be by his Righteousness, as we are in him, or united unto him;
to be righteous in him, is to be righteous with his Righteousness, as we are
one mystical Person with him. Dr. Owen Justific. p. 246, 247, 248, 249, 276,
371, 375, 508.

Among Men, usually the Sureties Bond and Engagement is for Debt already
contracted at or before the time of the Surety's giving Bond, and usually for
particular Sums specified: but Christ became Surety for his Peoples Debt before
ever it was contracted and drawn on by them; yea, he gave Bond to satisfy the
Law for all the Debt that should be at any time of all their days contracted
and drawn on by them: so universal is his Suretiship, that it reaches all
possible, emergent Transgressions of his People upon whatsoever occasion. Jer.
3. 5. and 31. 37. Heb. 7. 25.

Among Men, usually the broken Debtor's Name stands still in the Bond, even
after the Responsal Surety has intervened: but here Jesus the Surety of the
new Covenant when he put in his own Name, he puts out our Names, that the Law
might reach him, and might not at all reach us (except in so far as it is
annexed to the new Covenant, and established in the hands of a Mediator, which
has no likeness to the old bloody Bond): he wrote himself the Sinner legally,
and wrote us the righteous Persons. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Jer. 50. 20. Ark of the
Covenant, p. 424, 426.

Christ is united to Believers, one with them, their Head, their Surety (who in
conspectu fori, is but one Person with the Debtor) and this by his own
voluntary undertaking, the Debtor's Consent, and the Judg's Approbation;
therefore it is rational, just, equal, that what our Christ, our Head,
Representative, Surety, had done and suffered for us, and that not only bono
nostro, for our good, but loco nostro, in our stead, should by God our Judge be
imputed to us. -- Christ the Believer's Head is risen, risen as their Head,
risen as the second Adam. Mr. Lie Morn. Exer. method. p. 360.

Now to show you the Analogy, wherein Adam did resemble and represent the Lord
Jesus Christ. It was chiefly in this, in regard of his Headship and Influence,
Adam and Christ both stood instead of all that belonged to them. Adam was the
Head of the first Covenant, Jesus Christ is the Head of the second Covenant.
Adam was the Covenant-Root, and Head of all Mankind, a public and common
Person representing them; yea an Undertaker for them. What they say vainly of
the Pope, that he is the Church Representative, may be truly said of Adam; he
was the Representative of the whole World, as a Parliament Man acting in the
name of the Town or County that chose him: He sinning, we sinned in him; he
being condemned, we are condemned in him. So Christ is the Head of the second
Covenant, and of his Elect, who are involved and wrapped up therein: He has
undertaken for them, and presented them to the Father, Ephesians. 2. 16. in one body:
Therefore when he died, we died with him; when Christ was crucified, our Sins
were nailed to his Cross, and crucified and buried as it were in his Grave. If
he arise, we rise with him, to die no more. Mr. Sam. Mather on the Types, p.
82, 83.

That no Person is reconciled to God, who has not a perfect Mediator of his
Reconciliation, and who is not accepted as perfectly righteous in the
Righteousness of Christ his Surety: and so it is true, none but the perfect
Person is reconciled to God; but how? not by his Qualifications (at first an
Enemy, and always carrying about with him [while here] some Wisdom of the Flesh
which is Enmity against God) but as he had on Christ's Cross his Person
represented in Christ his Head, and his Sins not imputed upon the account of
Christ's Righteousness made or reckoned to be his. Mr. Stalham' s Reviler
Rebuked, p. 135.

In reference to the Undertaking of Christ in this Covenant, he is called the
second Adam, becoming a common Head to his People, with this difference, that
Adam was a common Head to all that came of him, necessarily, and, as I may so
say, naturally, and whether he would or no; Christ is so to his voluntarily,
and by his own Consent and undertaking, as has been demonstrated. Now as we
all die in Adam foederally and meritoriously, yet the several Individuals are
not in their Persons actually dead in Sin, and obnoxious to eternal Death,
before they are by natural Generation united to Adam their first Head; so tho
all the Elect be made alive, and saved foederally and meritoriously in the
Death of Christ, wherein also a certain Foundation is laid of that Efficacy
which works all these things in us, and for us, yet we are not viritim made
partakers of the good things mentioned, before we are united to Christ by the
Communication of his Spirit to us. -- This stops the mouth of Socinian Clamor,
concerning the Unrighteousness of one Man's suffering personally for another
Man's Sin. It Is true, it is so, if these Men be not in such relation to one
another, that what one does, or suffers, the other may be accounted to do, or
suffer: but it is no Unrighteousness if the Hand offend that the Head be
smitten; but Christ is our Head, we are his Members. Dr. Owen against Biddle,
p. 580, 581.

Aaron did not transfuse Sin from one subject unto another, but transferred the
Guilt of it from one to another. -- By these means as in all other expiatory
Sacrifices did God instruct the Church in the transferring of the Guilt of Sin
unto him who was to bear all their Iniquities, with their Discharge and
Justification thereby.

He (i. e. Christ) has transferred (says just^n Martyr) unto himself the
filth of my Sins, and communicated unto me his Purity, and made me partaker of
his Beauty. -- That therefore which we affirm herein is, That our Sins were so
transferred on Christ, as that hereby he became Reus, responsible unto God, and
obnoxious unto Punishment in the Justice of God for them. He was alienae culpae
reus. -- So he may be said to be the greatest Debtor in the World, who never
borrowed nor owed one farthing on his own account, if he become Surety for the
greatest Debt of others. -- The Guilt of our Sins was transferred unto him in
an Act of the righteous Judgment of God, accepting and esteeming of him as the
guilty Person, as it is with public Sureties in every case. Dr. O. of
Justificat. p. 39, 40, 42, 281, 282.

By virtue of this Covenant are all those legal Acts in God. In the work of
Redemption there are some Acts spiritually natural, and they are Acts of God
within us, which do imply a real and physical Change, when our Natures and
Principles are changed, and of unholy are made holy: but there are also some
moral Acts, and they are Acts of God upon us; as if a Man be a guilty Person,
or accused as such, and there be an Act of pardoning and accepting, this is a
moral Act, an Act upon him; and if he be a sick Person, and there be a
Physician to cure him, be blind and his Eyes be opened, this is a natural Act
in him: and if a Man be a Captive, and he be made a free Man by a Ransom paid,
this is a change of his State; the one is in Justification, and the other is
Sanctification; the one is mutatio moralis, and the other naturalis. Now the
main Acts of God in this Covenant, and the main of the Covenant consists in
Acts done without us and upon us, as by sovereign Imputation, he does count our
Sins Christ's, and he makes to meet upon him the Iniquities of us all. -- The
first Adam must be the Type of him that was to come; therefore as the first
Adam had a Covenant made with him, and an Image stamped upon him, for himself
and for all his Posterity, so must the second Adam also have, and therefore he
must be the second Adam by Covenant made with him as a public Person, and as a
Representative Head for all his Posterity, that Seed and Generation that should
be born of him. -- Tit. 1. 2. There is a promise of eternal Life, which could
not be but unto our Representative, one that did enter into Covenant. -- This
the Lord has made Christ unto us, that according to all sorts of Laws among
Men our Redemption and Salvation by him might be to declare his Righteousness,
that by all sorts of legal Considerations amongst Men it might hold good in a
way of Justice: And unto these two great Ends, as a double Representative (viz.
Surety and Advocate, or a common Person) of all Men as the second Adam, Christ
was elected, and we in him, as in a common Head. Mr. Strong of the Covenants,
page 118, 129, 130, 134.

Ephesians. 2. 16. That he might reconcile both unto God [in one Body] by the
Cross, having slain the Enmity. The meaning whereof is this, that he did
collect and gather in one Body all the People of God, that is, did sustain
their Persons, stood in their stead, as one common Person in whom they were all
met, representing them equally and alike unto God, and so reconciled them to
God in one Body. As you heard, he bore their Enmities in his Flesh, and so
abolished them; and so withal he bore their Persons considered as one
collective Body, and under that Consideration reconciled them to God. -- Which
Body, as hanging upon the Cross, was clothed upon (when most naked) with this
other Body, which he himself took on him to sustain and represent, and to stand
in their stead, even the whole Body of his Elect, his Body (personally his)
becoming by Representation one with his other Body (mystically his.) In sum, in
the Body of Christ personal, as the Body representing; the whole Body of Christ
mystical, as the Body represented, was met in one before God, and unto God. And
in that one Body of Christ personally were all these Persons (thus represented)
reconciled unto God together, as in one Body, by virtue of this Representation.
Dr. Goodwin on the Ephesians, Part 3. p. 24. Christ a Surety for us, and a
common Person in our stead. 1. A Surety is one that undertakes, and is bound to
do a thing for another: As, to pay a Debt for him, or to bring him safe to such
or such a place, or the like; so as when he has discharged what he undertook
and was bound for, then the Party for whom he undertook is discharged also. 2.
A common Person with, or for another he goes for, is one who represents, and
personates, and acts the part of another, by the allowance and warrant of the
Law; so as what he does (as such a common Person, and in the name of the other)
that other whom he personates, is by the Law reckoned to do: and in like
manner, what is done to him (as being in the others stead and room) is reckoned
as done to the other. Thus by our Law, an Attorney appears for another, and
Moneys received by him, are reckoned as received by him whom it is due unto.
Thus the giving Possession of an Estate, a Re-entry made, and Possession taken
of Land, etc. if done by, and to a Man who is his lawful Attorney, it stands as
good in Law unto a Man, as if in his own Person it had been done. -- Now the
better to express and make sure our Justification in and by Christ, according
to all sorts of Laws (the Equity of all which God usually draws up into his
Dispensation) God did ordain Christ to be a Surety for us, and also a common
Person representing us, and in our stead. That as Christ took all other
Relations for us, as of an Husband, Father, Brother, King, Priest, Captain,
etc. that so the fullness of his Love might be set forth to us, in that what is
defective in any one of these Relations, is supplied and expressed by the
other: even thus did God ordain Christ to take and sustain both these
Relations, of a Surety, and a common Person, in all he did for us, thereby to
make our Justification by him the more full and legal; and Justice (as I may so
speak) our Justification it self, or as justifying of us by all sorts of legal
Considerations whatsoever, -- The word [(...)] is used not only in promising to
pay a Debt for another, but also in becoming a Pledge for another, for to
undergo Death, or a capital Punishment in another's room; as in that famous
Story of two Friends, namely, Euephenus and Eucritus, Eucritus did [(...)]
willingly become a Surety for Euephenus, when condemned to die by Dionysius the
Tyrant. This very word is used by Polyenus, Historian of that Fact. Now such
Surety every way did Christ become unto God for us, both to pay the Debt, by
undergoing Death in our stead, and so satisfy God; and then as the Heir to
execute his Will and Testament: He became a Surety of the whole Covenant, and
every Condition in it, take it in the largest sense. -- Observe, that as he
laid our Sins on Christ, so withal he discharged us in his Compact between
Christ and himself, [not imputing their Trespasses to them] so then all laid
upon Christ, and he was to look to it, or else his Soul was to have gone for
it. -- Adam was reckoned as a common public Person, not standing singly or
alone for himself, but as representing all Mankind to come of him; so as by a
just Law, what he did was reckoned to his Posterity, whom he represented: And
what was by that Law threatened or done to him for what he did, is threatened
against his Posterity also. Now this Man was herein a lively Type of our Lord
Christ, Romans 5. 14. -- Just thus the matter stands in the point of our
Justification and Salvation betwixt Christ and elect Believers; for Adam was
herein his Type. Christ was considered and appointed of God as a common Person,
both in what he did, and in what was done to him: so as by the same Law, what
he did for us is reckoned or imputed to us, as if we our selves had done it;
and what was done to him tending to our Justification and Salvation, is
reckoned as done to us. Thus when Christ died, he died as a common Person, and
God reckons that we died also. When Christ arose, he rose as our Head, and as
a common Person, and so then God accounts that we rose also with him, and by
virtue of that Communion which we had with him in all those Actions of his. Dr.
Goodwin Christ set forth, p. 62, 63, 64, 65, 68, 71, 76, 81, 82.

-- That intimate Conjunction that is between Christ and the Church, whence it
is just and equal in the sight of God, according unto the Rules of his eternal
Righteousness, that what he did and suffered in the discharge of his Office
should be esteemed, reckoned and imputed unto us, as unto all the Fruits and
Benefits of it, as if we had done and suffered the same things our selves. For
this Conjunction of his with us was an Act of his own Mind and Will, wherein he
is ineffably glorious.

The Enemies of the Glory of Christ and of his Cross do take this for granted,
That there ought to be such a Conjunction between the guilty Person and him
that suffers for him, as that in him the guilty Person may be said in some
sense to undergo the Punishment himself.

But then they affirm on the other hand, that there was no such Conjunction
between Christ and Sinners, none at all, but that he was a Man, as they were
Men; and otherwise, that he was at the greatest distance from them all, as it
is possible for one Man to be from another, Socin. de Servat. lib. 3. cap. 3.
The falseness of this latter Assertion, and the gross Ignorance of the
Scripture under a pretense of Subtilty in them that make it, will evidently
appear in our ensuing Discourse.

The Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 2. 24. That in his own self he bare our Sins in
his own Body on the Tree. And Chap. 3. 18. That he suffered for Sin, the Just
for the Unjust, that he might bring us unto God. But this seems somewhat
strange unto Reason; where is the Justice, where is the Equity, that the Just
should suffer for the Unjust? Where is Divine Righteousness herein? For it was
an Act of God, The Lord has laid on him the Iniquities of us all; Isa. 53. 6.
The Equity hereof, with the grounds of it, must be here a little inquired into.

First of all, It is certain that all the Elect, the whole Church of God, fell
in Adam under the Curse due to the Transgression of the Law. It is so also that
in this Curse, Death both temporal and eternal was contained; this Curse none
could undergo and be saved: Nor was it consistent with the Righteousness, or
Holiness, or Truth of God, that Sin should go unpunished: Wherefore there was a
necessity upon a supposition of God's Decree to save his Church, of a
Translation of Punishment, namely, from them who had deserved it, and could not
bear it, unto one who had not deserved it, but could bear it.

A Supposition of this Translation of Punishment by Divine Dispensation, is the
Foundation of Christian Religion, yea of all supernatural Revelation contained
in the Scripture: This was first intimated in the first Promise, and afterward
explained and confirmed in all the Institutions of the Old Testament. For although
in the Sacrifices of the Law there was a revival of the greatest and most
fundamental Principle of the Law of Nature, namely, That God is to be
worshipped with our best, yet the principal end and use of them was to
represent this Translation of Punishment from the Offender unto another, who
was to be a Sacrifice in his stead.

The Reasons of the Equity hereof, and the unspeakable Glory of Christ herein,
is what we now enquire into: And I shall reduce what ought to be spoken
hereunto to the ensuing Heads.

1. It is not contrary unto the nature of Divine Justice, it does not interfere
with the Principles of natural Light in Man, that in sundry cases some Persons
should suffer Punishment for the Sins and Offenses of others.

I shall at present give this Assertion no other Confirmation, but only that
God has often done so, who will, who can do no Iniquity.

So he affirms that he will do, Exodus 20. 5. Visiting the Sins of the Fathers
upon the Children unto the third and fourth Generation. It is no Exception of
weight that they also are Sinners, continuing in their Fathers Sins; for the
worst of Sinners must not be dealt unjustly withal, but they must be so if they
are punished for their Fathers Sins, and it be absolutely unlawful that any one
should be punished for the Sins of another.

So the Church affirms, Our Fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born
their Iniquities, Lam. 5. 7. And so it was: For in the Babylonish Captivity God
punished the Sins of their Forefathers, especially those committed in the days
of Manasses, 2 Kings 23. 26, 27. as afterward in the final Destruction of that
Church and Nation: and God punished in them the Guilt of all bloody Persecutors
from the beginning of the World, Luke 11. 50, 51.

So Canaan was cursed for the Sin of his Father, Genesis 9. 25. Readiness seven Sons
were put to Death for their Fathers bloody Cruelty, 2 Samuel 21. 8, 14. For the
Sin of David seventy thousand of the People were destroyed by an Angel,
concerning whom he said, It is I that have sinned and done evil, these Sheep
what have they done? 2 Samuel 24. 15, 17. See also 1 Kings 21. 29. So was it with
all the Children or Infants that perished in the Flood, or in the Conflagration
of Sodom and Gomorrah. And other Instances of the like nature may be assigned.

It is therefore evident, that there is no inconsistency with the nature of
Divine Justice, nor the Rules of Reason among Men, that in sundry cases the
Sins of some may be punished on others.

2. It is to be observed, that this Administration of Justice is not
promiscuous, that any whatever may be punished for the Sins of any others:
There is always a special Cause and Reason of it, and this is a peculiar
Conjunction between them who sin, and those who are punished for their Sins;
and two things belong unto this Conjunction. (1.) Special Relation. (2.)
Especial mutual Interest.

(1.) There is an especial Relation required unto this Translation of
Punishment, such as that between Parents and Children, as in most of the
Instances before given; or between a King and Subjects, as in the case of
David. Hereby the Person sinning, and those suffering, are constituted one
Body, wherein if one Member offend, another may justly suffer; the Back may
answer for what the Hand takes away.

(2.) It consists in mutual Interest. Those whose Sins are punished in others
have such an Interest in them, as that their being so, is a Punishment unto
themselves: Therefore are such Sinners threatened with the Punishment and Evils
that shall befall their Posterity or Children for their sakes, which is highly
penal unto themselves; Numb. 14. 33. Your Children shall wander in the
Wilderness forty Years, and bear your Whoredoms.

The Punishment due to their Sins is in part transferred unto their Children,
and therein did the Sting of their own Punishment also consist.

3. There is a greater, a more intimate Conjunction, a nearer Relation, an
higher mutual Interest between Christ and the Church, than ever was or can be
between any other Persons or Relations in the World, whereon it became just and
equal in the sight of God, that he should suffer for us, and that what he did
and suffered should be imputed unto us, which is farther to be cleared.

There neither is nor can be any more than a threefold Conjunction between
diverse distinct Persons. The first is natural, the second is moral, whereunto I
refer that which is spiritual or mystical; and the third foederal, by virtue of
mutual Compact. In all these ways is Christ in conjunction with his Church, and
in every one of them, in a way singular and peculiar.

1. The first Conjunction of distinct Persons is natural. God has made all
Mankind of one Blood, Acts 17. 26. whereby there is a Cognation and Alliance
between them all.

Hence every Man is every Man's Brother or Neighbor, unto whom loving kindness
is to be showed, Luke 10. 36. And this Conjunction was between Christ and the
Church, as the Apostle declares, Heb. 2. 14, 15. For as much as the Children
are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same; that through Death he might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that
is, the Devil: And deliver them who through fear of Death were all their
Lifetime subject to Bondage. Hence both he that sanctifies, and they who are
sanctified are all one, ver. 11. His infinite Condescension in coming into this
Communion and Conjunction of Nature with us, was before declared; but it is not
common, like that between all other Men partakers of the same Nature. There are
two things wherein it was peculiar and eminent.

(1.) This Conjunction between him and the Church did not arise from a
necessity of Nature, but from a voluntary Act of his Will.

The Conjunction that is between all others is necessary, every Man is every
Man's Brother whether he will or no, by being a Man. Natural Generation
communicating to every one his Subsistence in the same Nature, prevents all
Acts of their own Will and Choice. With the Lord Christ it was otherwise, as
the Text affirms: For such Reasons as are there expressed, he did by an Act of
his own Will partake of Flesh and Blood, or came into this Conjunction with us;
he did it of his own choice, because the Children did partake of the same; he
would be what the Children were. Wherefore the Conjunction of Christ in human
Nature with the Church, is ineffably distinct from that common Conjunction
which is amongst all others in the same Nature: And therefore although it should
not be meet amongst mere Men, that one should act and suffer in the stead of
others, because they are all thus related to one another as it were whether
they will or no; yet this could not reach the Lord Christ, who in a strange and
wonderful manner came into this Conjunction by a mere Act of his own.

(2.) He came into it on this design, and for this only end, namely, that in
our Nature taken to be his own, he might do and suffer what was to be done and
suffered for the Church: So it is added in the Text, That by Death he might
destroy him who had the power of Death; and deliver them who for fear of Death
were subject to Bondage. This was the only end of his Conjunction in Nature
with the Church: And this puts the case between him and it at a vast distance
from what is or may be between other Men.

It is a foolish thing to argue, that because a mere participation of the same
Nature among Men, is not sufficient to warrant the Righteousness of Punishment
one for another, that therefore the Conjunction in the same Nature betwixt
Christ and the Church, is not a sufficient and just Foundation of his suffering
for us, and in our stead: For by an Act of his own Will and Choice, he did
partake of our Nature, and that for this very end, that therein he might suffer
for us, as the Holy Ghost expressly declares. Amongst others there is not, nor
can be any thing of this nature; and so no Objection from what is equal or
inequal amongst them, can arise against what is equal between Christ and the
Church. And herein is he glorious and precious unto them that believe, as we
shall see immediately.

2. There is a mystical Conjunction between Christ and the Church, which
answers all the most strict real or moral Unions or Conjunctions between other
Persons or Things. Such is the Conjunction between the Head of a Body and its
Members, or the Tree of the Vine and its Branches, which are real; or between
an Husband and Wife, which is moral and real also. That there is such a
Conjunction between Christ and his Church, the Scriptures plentifully declare,
as also that it is the foundation of the Equity of his suffering in its stead.
So speaks the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Husbands love
your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, (that is his Wife, the Bride
the Lamb's Wife) and gave himself for it, etc. being the Head and Husband of
the Church, which was to be sanctified and saved, and could be so no otherwise
but by his Blood and Sufferings, he was both meet so to suffer, and it was
righteous also that what he did and suffered should be imputed unto them for
whom he both did it and suffered. Let the Adversaries of the Glory of Christ
assign any one Instance of such a Conjunction, Union and Relation between any
amongst Mankind, as is between Christ and the Church, and they might give some
countenance unto their Cavils against his Obedience and Sufferings in our
stead, with the imputation of what he did and suffered unto us: But the Glory
of Christ is singular herein, and as such it appears unto them by whom the
Mystery of it is in any measure spiritually apprehended.

But yet it will be said, that this Mystical Conjunction of Christ with his
Church is consequential unto what he did and suffered for it; for it ensues on
the Conversion of Men unto him. For it is by Faith that we are implanted into
him: Until that be actually wrought in us, we have no mystical Conjunction with
him. He is not an Head or an Husband unto unregenerate, unsanctified
Unbelievers, whilst they continue so to be: And such was the state of the whole
Church when Christ suffered for us, Romans 5. 8. Ephesians. 2. 5. There was therefore
no such mystical Conjunction between him and the Church, as to render it meet
and equal that he should suffer in its stead: Wherefore the Church is the
effect of the work of Redemption, that which rose out of it, which was made and
constituted by it, and cannot so be the Object of it, as that which was to be
redeemed by virtue of an antecedent Conjunction with it. I answer,

1. Although this mystical Conjunction is not actually consummate without an
actual Participation of the Spirit of Christ, yet the Church of the Elect was
designed antecedently unto all his Sufferings to be his Spouse and Wife, so as
that he might love her, and suffer for her: So it is said, Hos. 12. 12. Israel
served for a Wife, and for a Wife he kept Sheep. Howbeit she was not his
married Wife until after he had served for her, and thereby purchased her to be
his Wife; yet as he served for her she is called his Wife, because of his Love
unto her, and because she was so designed to be upon his Service. So was the
Church designed to be the Spouse of Christ in the Counsel of God, whereon he
loved her, and gave himself for her.

Hence in the Work of Redemption the Church was the Object of it, as designed
to be the Spouse of Christ, and the Effect of it, inasmuch as that thereby it
was made meet for the full Consummation of that Alliance, as the Apostle
expressly declares, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.

2. Antecedently unto all that the Lord Christ did and suffered for the Church
there was a supreme Act of the Will of God the Father, giving all the Elect
unto him, entrusting them with him to be redeemed, sanctified and saved, as
himself declares, Joh. 17. 6, 9. chap. 10. 14, 15, 16. And on these grounds
this mystical Conjunction between Christ and the Church has its Virtue and
Efficacy before it be actually consummate.

3. There is a foederal Conjunction between distinct Persons; and as it is
various according unto the variety of the Interests and Ends of them that enter
into it, so that is most eminent, where one by the common consent of all that
are concerned, undertakes to be a Sponsor or Surety for others, to do and
answer what on their part is required of them for attaining the Ends of the
Covenant. So did the Lord Christ undertake to be Surety of the new Covenant in
behalf of the Church, Heb. 7. 22. and thereon tendered himself unto God to do
and suffer for them in their stead, and on their behalf, whatever was required,
that they might be sanctified and saved. These things I have treated of at
large elsewhere, as containing a great part of the Mystery of the Wisdom of God
in the Salvation of the Church. Here therefore I do only observe, that this is
that whereby the mystical Conjunction that was between Christ and the Church,
whereon it was meet, just and equal in the sight of God, that what he did and
suffered should be imputed unto us is completed.

These are some of the Foundations of that Mystery of transmitting the Sins of
the Church, as unto the Guilt and Punishment of them, from the Sinners
themselves unto another every way innocent, pure, and righteous in himself,
which is the Life, Soul and Center of all Scripture-Revelations: And herein is
he exceedingly glorious and precious unto them that believe: No Heart can
conceive, no Tongue can express the Glory of Christ herein. Now because his
infinite Condescension and Love herein have been spoken to before, I shall here
only instance its Greatness in some of its Effects.

1. It shines forth in the Exaltation of the Righteousness of God in the
forgiveness of Sins: There is no more adequate Conception of the Divine Nature,
than that of Justice in Rule and Government. Hereunto it belongs to punish Sin
according unto its desert; and herein consists the first Actings of God as
the Governor of the Rational Creation; they did so in the eternal Punishment of
the Angels that sinned, and the casting of Adam out of Paradise, an Emblem also
of everlasting Ruin. Now all the Church, all the Elect of God are Sinners, they
were so in Adam, they have been and are so in themselves. What does become the
Justice of God to do thereon? Shall it dismiss them all unpunished? Where then
is that Justice which spared not the Angels who sinned, nor Adam at the first?
Would this Procedure have any Consonancy thereunto, be reconcilable unto it?
Wherefore the establishment of the Righteousness of God on the one hand, and
the forgiveness of Sin on the other, seem so contradictory, as that many
stumble and fall at it eternally; see Romans 10. 3, 4.

But in this Interposition of Christ in this translation of Punishment from the
Church unto him by virtue of his Conjunction therewith, there is a blessed
Harmony between the Righteousness of God, and the Forgiveness of Sins, the
Exemplification whereof is his eternal Glory. O blessed Change! O sweet
Permutation! as Justin Martyr speaks.

By virtue of his Union with the Church, which of his own accord he entered
into, and his undertaking therein to answer for it in, the sight of God, it was
a righteous thing with God to lay the Punishment of all our Sins upon him, so
as that he might freely and graciously pardon them all, to the Honor and
Exaltation of his Justice, as well as of his Grace and Mercy, Romans 3. 24, 25,
26.

Herein is he glorious in the sight of God, Angels and Men: In him there is at
the same time, in the same Divine Actings, a glorious Resplendency of Justice
and Mercy; of the one in punishing, of the other in pardoning. The appearing
Inconsistency between the Righteousness of God and the Salvation of Sinners,
wherewith the Consciences of convinced Persons are exercised and terrified, and
which is the Rock at which most of them split themselves into eternal Ruin, is
herein removed and taken away. In his Cross were Divine Holiness and vindictive
Justice exercised and manifested; and through his Triumph, Grace and Mercy are
exerted to the utmost. This is that Glory which ravisheth the Hearts, and
satiates the Souls of them that believe; for what can they desire more, what is
farther needful unto the rest and composure of their Souls, than at one view to
behold God eternally well pleased in the declaration of his Righteousness, and
the exercise of his Mercy, in order unto their Salvation? In due apprehensions
hereof let my Soul live, in the Faith hereof let me die, and let the present
Admiration of this Glory make way for the eternal Enjoyment of it in its Beauty
and Fullness.

He is glorious in that the Law of God in its preceptive part, or as unto the
Obedience which it required, was perfectly fulfilled and accomplished: That it
should be so, was absolutely necessary from the Wisdom, Holiness and
Righteousness of him by whom it was given; for what could be more remote from
those Divine Perfections than to give a Law, which never was to be fulfilled in
them unto whom it was given, and who were to have the advantages of it? This
could not be done by us; but through the Obedience of Christ, by virtue of his
mystical Conjunction with the Church, the Law was so fulfilled in us by being
fulfilled for us, as that the Glory of God in the giving of it, and annexing
eternal Rewards unto it, is exceedingly exalted, see Romans 8. 3, 4.

This is that Glory of Christ whereof one view by Faith will scatter all the
Fears, answer all the Objections, and give Relief against all the Despondencies
of poor tempted doubting Souls; and an Anchor it will be unto all Believers,
which they may cast within the Vail to hold them firm and steadfast in all
Trials, Storms, and Temptations in Life and Death. Dr. Owen of the Glory of
Christ, chap. 9.

Head 6. That Personal Justification, etc.
Conformist.
THE New Testament makes up the Testimony of the Law and Prophets fully, 1 Cor.
1. 30. Thus Christ is wholly ours by Imputation. This the same Apostle does
excellently demonstrate and conclude, 2 Cor. 5. 21. where having spoken of our
Reconciliation with God by Jesus Christ, which Reconciliation stands in the
not imputing of our Sins unto us, ver. 19. he adds that reason, ver. 21. For he
has made him to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. Now how are we made the Righteousness of God in
Christ? by any inherent Righteousness in us, although derived from the Merit of
Christ's Righteousness imputed in the Popish sense? Surely we are no otherwise
made the Righteousness of God in Christ, than as Christ was made Sin for us.
How is that? Was Christ made Sin for us by having our Sins inherent in him, or
infused into him? God forbid; for he knew no Sin. But if Sin had been inherent
in him, or infused into him, he had known Sin; yet he was made Sin for us; that
is, by the Imputation of our Sin. Note here also, Christ is not said here
simply to be Sin for us: But to be made Sin for us, and that we simply are not,
but are made the Righteousness of God in him, implying a Passiveness in both,
both of Christ made Sin, and of us made Righteousness: made, that is, not of or
in our selves, but extrinsecally from without, from another. As therefore our
Sins being imputed to Christ, made him become Sin for us; even so are we made
the Righteousness of God in him: that is, by the Imputation of his
Righteousness; which Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, is no more inherent
in us to our Justification, than our Sin imputed to Christ was inherent in him
to his Condemnation. -- This is such an unmovable Rock of Truth, as the Gates
of Hell can never prevail against it. Here all Popish Arguments are put to
silence; no Romish Sophistry, or School-subtilty can invent any Probability, or
seeming Reason, to oppose this clear and invincible Truth.

But perhaps they will find some Gloss upon this Scripture, that shall make
another sense of it. Indeed they want not their Glosses. But mala glossa, quae
corrumpit textum. Indeed the ordinary Gloss upon these words, He was made Sin
for us, understands by Sin either the Sacrifice of Sin, according to the Hebrew
Phrase in the Old Testament, Hos. 4. 8. or else the similitude of sinful Flesh,
Romans 8. 3. so the Gloss is uncertain, it pitcheth upon no sense. But the
Scripture has one prime and proper sense. Now that the Apostle should not
simply mean by Sin, the Sacrifice of Sin, as being an obscure Hebrew Phrase, is
more than probable, because he writes this Epistle not to the Hebrews, to whom
writing, his Epistle is full of legal Types and Terms, a Language which they
well understood; but to the Corinthians, who were not acquainted with the
Lawterms. But the main reason why the Apostle cannot mean here by Sin barely
the Sacrifice of Sin, is in regard of the Antithesis, or relative Opposition
here between Sin and Righteousness; for Sin and Righteousness stand here as
Terms opposite one to the other: look therefore how Righteousness is here
understood, namely, properly, as opposite to Sin; so Sin is to be understood
properly, as opposite to Righteousness. Christ then was so made Sin for us, as
we are made the Righteousness of God in him; and we are so made the
Righteousness of God in him, as he was made Sin for us.

Again, Christ who knew no Sin, was made Sin for us; so are we made the
Righteousness of God in him, even we who knew no Righteousness, that is, who
had no Righteousness of our own; but, as the Apostle elegantly says, were,
while in the state of Sin, free from Righteousness, Romans 6. 20. Christ
therefore was so made Sin for us, as that he was reputed, yea judged as a
Sinner; Isa. 53. says, He was numbered with the Transgressors, and he bare the
Sin of many. Now that Christ is said to be made Sin in the Abstract, and we to
be made Righteousness in the Abstract, not righteous in the Concrete, as
Logicians speak, Lyra says, Ideo in abstracto dicitur justi^ia Dei, ut
essicereinur perfect justi: And that is, we are made just but relatively in
respect to Christ, as he was made Sin but relatively in respect of us; we are
made the Righteousness of God in him, as he was made Sin for us and in us, to
wit, in our Person. -- To teach and believe the Doctrine of an inherent
Righteousness, whereby to attain eternal Life, is even as it were in despite of
God, and of his holy Angels the Cherubims, keeping the way of the Tree of Life,
to revive the old Covenant of Works again, and with the hand of the Body, to
wit, good Works, reach out to take of the Tree of Life: This is a Babylonish
confounding of the Covenants, which stand upon such irreconcilable terms of
difference. Is there no more difference tween, Do this, and live; and, Believe,
and live? between Men's own Righteousness and God's Righteousness, the
establishing of the one being the abolishing of the other? Nor is it to
purpose, that these Babylonians alledg, that they ascribe their inherent
Righteousness to God, as the Author of it, and by whom it is infused into them.
Adam in his purest Naturals could say no less, but that all his inherent
Righteousness was the Gift of God; for what had he that he had not received?
Therefore the main point of difference between the Righteousness of the first
Covenant, and of the second, is in this, That the one was inherent, and within
a Man, and the other imputed, and without a Man: Otherwise what real difference
can be imagined to be between them? the difference chiefly consisting in a
direct Opposition. Mr. Burton's Bulwark, p. 65, 66, 67, 68, 82, 83.

The root of Righteousness does not grow out of Works, but the fruit of Works
out of the root of Righteousness; namely, out of that root of Righteousness
which God does accept for Righteousness without Works. Dr. Usher' s Treatise of
the Religion professed by the ancient Irish, p. 18.

One is said to be just and righteous sundry ways. (1.) Just by Nature, and so
no mere Man ever was since Adam's Fall, Eccles. 7. 22. (2.) Just in Opinion and
Conceit, such Christ meant in that Speech, I am not come to call the righteous.
(3.) Just by Imputation, so was Abraham. (4.) Just in respect of Purpose and
true Endeavor, so was Paul; and he would all that are perfect be so minded,
Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15. The Righteousness by Imputation begets this latter, and
this latter is an undeceiving sign of that. Mr. Hieron, p. 464.

Justification is wrought instrumentally by Faith, Romans 10. 10. efficiently by
Christ his Obedience active, Mat. 3. 15. passive, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

Sanctification is considerable according to its parts, Mortification, denying
our selves, taking up our Cross, Mar. 8. 34. according to its Vivification,
Renovation of the Faculties and Habits, Joh. 3. 3. Tit. 3. 5. its Progress and
Increase in Grace, 2 Pet. 1. 5. and 3. 18. according to its Privileges, Liberty
from the Law, Ceremonial, Gal. 5. 13. and Moral, Romans 10. 4. from Sin, 1 John
5. 18. Privileges of Joy, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Peace, Romans 5. 1. Bp Wilkins
Ecclesiastes, p. 66.

The Apostle gives two excellent Reasons why our Justification should be of
Faith rather than of any other Grace. The first on God's part, that it might be
of Grace. The second on the part of the Promise, that the Promise might be sure
to all the Seed, Romans 4. 16. First, Justification that is by Faith, is of mere
Grace and Favor, no way of Work or Merit; for the Act whereby Faith justifies,
is an Act of Humility and self-dereliction, a holy despair of any thing in our
selves, and a going to Christ, a receiving and looking toward him and his
All Sufficiency: so that as Mary said of her self, so we may say of Faith, The
Lord has respect unto the lowliness of his Grace, which is so far from looking
inward for matter of Justification, that it self as it is a Work of the Heart,
to credere does not justify, but only as it is an apprehension or taking hold
of Christ: for as the hand in the very receiving of a thing must needs make it
self empty (if it be full before, it must let all that go ere it can take hold
on any other thing) so Faith being received of Christ, Joh. 1. 12. must needs
suppose an emptiness in the Soul before; Faith has two Properties (as a Hand)
to work, and to receive; when Faith purifies the Heart, supports the drooping
Spirits, works by Love, carries a Man through Afflictions, and the like,
these are the Works of Faith: when Faith accepts of Righteousness in Christ,
and receives him as the Gift of his Father's Love; when it embraces the
Promises afar off, Heb. 11. 13. and lays hold on eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
this is the receiving Act of Faith. Now Faith justifies not by working (lest
the Effect should not be wholly of Grace, but partly of Grace, and partly of
Work, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. but by bare receiving, and accepting or yielding Consent
to that Righteousness which in regard of working was the Righteousness of
Christ, Romans 5. 18. and in regard of disposing, imputing, appropriating unto
us, was the Righteousness of God, Romans 3. 21. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Phil. 3. 9. --
They say we are justified by Grace, and yet by Works, because Grace enables to
work; we say we are justified freely, not by the Works of Grace, but by the
Grace which bestows our Justification, and therewith our strength of working
unto us: for surely God's free Grace is more magnified in giving us
undeservedly both Righteousness and Works, than in giving us Works to serve our
Righteousness. Dr. Reynold' s Life of Christ, p. 481, 482, 483.

What is Justification? Answ. Justification is the Sentence of God, whereby he
of his Grace for the Righteousness of his Son, by him imputed unto us, and
through Faith apprehended by us, does free us from Sin and Death, and account
us righteous unto Life, Romans 8. 30, 33, 34. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Phil. 3. 9. for
hereby we both have a deliverance from the Guilt and Punishment of all our
Sins, and being accounted righteous in the sight of God by the Righteousness of
our Savior Christ imputed unto us, are restored to a better Righteousness than
ever we had in Adam.

I perceive your Answer needs further explaining. First, Why call you
Justification a Sentence? Answ. That thereby we may be informed, that the word
to justify does not in this place signify to make just by infusing a perfect
Righteousness into our Natures; (that comes under the head of Sanctification
begun here in this Life, which being finished, is Glorification in Heaven) but
here the word signifies to pronounce just, to quit and discharge from Guilt
and Punishment, and so it is a judicial Sentence opposed to Condemnation, Romans
8. 34, 35. Now as to condemn is not the putting any evil into the Nature of the
Party condemned, but the pronouncing of his Person guilty, and the binding him
over unto Punishment; so justifying is the Judges pronouncing the Law to be
satisfied, and the Man discharged and quitted from Guilt and Judgment. Thus God
imputing the Righteousness of Christ to a Sinner, does not account his Sin unto
him, but interests him in a state of as full and perfect freedom and
acceptance, as if he had never sinned, or had himself fully satisfied: for tho
there is a Power purging the Corruption of Sin, which follows upon
Justification, yet it is carefully to be distinguished from it. -- This for the
name of Justification, but now for the thing it self.

What is the Matter first of our Justification?

Answ. The Matter of Justification, or that Righteousness whereby a Sinner
stands justified in God's sight, is not any Righteousness inherent in his own
Person, and performed by him, but a perfect Righteousness inherent in Christ,
and performed for him.

What Righteousness of Christ is it whereby a Sinner is justified?

Answ. Not the essential Righteousness of his Divine Nature; but, 1. The
absolute Integrity of our Human Nature, which in him our Head was without
Guile, Heb. 7. 26. 2. The perfect Obedience which in that Human Nature of ours
he performed unto the whole Law of God, both by doing whatsoever was required
of us, Mat. 3. 15. and by suffering whatsoever was deserved by our Sins, 1 Pet.
2. 24. for he was made Sin and a Curse for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him.

What is the form or being Cause of our Justification, and that which makes
this Righteousness so really ours, that it does justify us? Answ. The gracious
Imputation of God the Father, accounting his Son's Righteousness unto the
Sinner, and by that accounting making it his to all Effects, as if he himself
had performed it.

But how can Christ's Righteousness be accounted ours? Is it not as absurd to
say that we are justified by Christ's Righteousness, as that a Man should be
wise with the Wisdom of another, or live and be in health by the Life and
Health of another?

Answ. No doubtless, because this Righteousness is in Christ, not as in a
Person severed from us, but as in the Head of the Church, the second Adam, from
whom therefore it is communicated unto all; who being united as Members unto
him do lay claim thereto, and apply it unto themselves, Romans 5. 19. chap. 10.
4. For if the Sin of Adam were of force to condemn us all, because we were in
his Loins, he being the Head of our common Nature, Why then should it seem
strange that the Righteousness of our Savior Christ, both God and Man, should
be available to justify those that are interested in him; especially
considering that we have a more strict Conjunction in the Spirit with him, than
ever we had in Nature with Adam? And tho it be not fit to measure heavenly
things by the Yard of Reason, yet it is not unreasonable that a Man owing a
thousand Pound, and not being able to pay it, his Creditor may be satisfied by
one of his Friends.

If Christ have paid our Debt, how then are we freely justified by Grace? Answ.
It is of Grace that Christ is given unto us, and also that his Righteousness
apprehended by Faith is accounted ours: It is true, that the Justification of a
Sinner, considering the case as it is between the Father and Christ, no Man
dare call it free; no, the Price of our Redemption was the deepest Purchase
that the World ever heard of; but whatever it cost Christ, it cost us nothing:
and so to us it is freely of Grace from Christ; yea and to us it is freely
Grace from God the Father too, not because he acquits us without a full
Satisfaction to his Justice, or accepts that for perfect Righteousness which is
not perfect Righteousness; but because he receives full Satisfaction from the
hands of a Surety, that Surety being his own Son; whenas he might have
challenged the uttermost farthing at our hands, which were the Principals, and
then there had been no possibility for us to have been delivered.

What gather you from this Doctrine of Justification by Christ's Righteousness?

Answ. 1. To condemn the proud Opinion of Papists, who seek Justification by
their own Works and Righteousness inherent in themselves; whereas tho being
accepted, we must in thankfulness do all we can for God, yet when all is done,
we must acknowledge our selves unprofitable Servants: the only matter of our joy
and triumph both in Life and Death, must be the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; not our Persons, nor the best Actions of the holiest Men dare
appear in God's Presence, but in his Name and Merit (who consecrates all) the
Lord Jesus.

2. We may here take notice, that there is no Comfort to a Christian Soul like
that which flows from this Well of Salvation, this sweet Doctrine of
Justification. 1. Here we have assurance of the sufficiency of our Redemption;
that Soul must be thoroughly acquitted that is stated in such a Righteousness,
that Debt must be fully discharged that has such a Price laid down for it; our
Sins tho never so great, cannot weigh down his Righteousness and Merit, Romans 8.
33. and God having accepted his Son's Righteousness for us, will not hold us
any longer Trespassers, but he disables his own Justice from making any further
demand. 2. Hence there is nothing comes upon the Saints from God's revenging
Justice, but all our Corrections are medicinal from God's fatherly Love; to
purge out that Sin out of our Nature, which he has already pardoned to our
Persons. 3. Lastly, this Doctrine may be great Comfort to weak Christians in
the midst of their troublesome Imperfections, and sense of their weak measures
of Sanctification: To consider that the Righteousness that is inherent in
themselves, is not the matter of their Justification, or that which must appear
before God's Presence to be pleaded: the Righteousness of Christ is complete
and perfect; that is our main Joy and Crown of rejoicing to be found in Christ,
not having our own Righteousness, but that which is in him, and made ours by
God's gracious account.

But how is this great Benefit of Justification applied unto us, and
apprehended by us?

Answ. This is done on our part by Faith alone, and that not considered as a
Virtue inherent in us, working by Love, but only as an Instrument or Hand of
the Soul stretched forth to lay hold on the Lord our Righteousness, Romans 5. 1.
chap. 10. 10. Jer. 23. 6. so that Faith justifies only relatively in respect
of the Object which it fasteneth on, to wit, the Righteousness of Christ by
which we are justified: Faith being only the Instrument to convey so great a
Benefit unto the Soul, as the Hand of the Beggar receives the Alms.

How does Sanctification differ from the former Grace of Justification?

Answ. In many main and material Differences: As, 1. In the order, not of Time
wherein they go together, Romans 8. 30. nor of Knowledge and Apprehension, wherein
this latter has precedence, 1 Cor. 6. 11. but of Nature, wherein this former
is the ground of this latter, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2. In the Subject, the Righteousness
whereby we are justified being inherent in Christ for us, but this of
Sanctification in our selves from him, Romans 8. 10. 3. In the Cause; our
Justification following from the Merit, our Sanctification from the Efficacy of
the Death and Life of Christ. 4. In the Instrument, Faith, which in
Justification is only as a Hand receiving, in Sanctification is a coworking
Virtue, Acts 15. 19. Gal. 5. 6. 5. In the measure; Justification being in all
Believers at all times alike, but Sanctification wrought differently and by
degrees. 6. In the end; which being in both eternal Life, Romans 6. 23, 24. yet
the one is among the causes of reigning, the other only as the highway unto the
Kingdom.

But when our Sanctification here begun shall be perfected in the World to
come, shall we not then be justified by an inherent Righteousness? Ans. No, but
by the imputed Righteousness of our Savior Christ, which being once given us,
is never taken away from us. Thus ends this holy Man of God, Dr. Usher in his
Body of Divinity, p. 193, 194, 195, 196, 202, 339.

St. Paul searches the Causes of Justification, St. James seeks the Effects,
by which it may be found and proved: Paul treats of Justification before God,
James of that which is before Men. -- The thing for which they be justified,
cannot be their own inherent Justice, Phil. 3. 9. for habitual Righteousness,
or inherent Justice, it is a work of the Law, and sticks in the justified
Person: But what so sticks, and is inherent, cannot be said to be imputed,
which is understood of something without, and which we have not in us -- Such
as be justified by infused Justice, of them it cannot be affirmed that their
Sins are covered, forgiven, and not imputed: for habitual Justice expels and
takes away all Sin, and hides it not; whereas a wicked Man is justified by
hiding and remitting his Sins. Add to this, that inherent Justice is all one
with Sanctification, which may be confounded with Justification. --
Justification before God is not known in all Scripture to be used for the
infusion of the Habit of Justice into the Souls of the Elect at their first
Conversion, of unjust to make them habitually just. This is Popish and rotten
Divinity, which will have Justification to be understood of, and to signify
inherent Justice, as Sanctification signifies inherent Sanctity. --
Sanctification is so necessarily joined unto Justification, as yet it is a
Grace diverse from the Grace of Justification. 1. Justification is an
Absolution of a Sinner from the Guilt of Sin and Death; whereas Sanctification
is an alteration of Qualities from evil to good. 2. Justification consists in
remission of Sins, and imputation of Justice for the Obedience of Christ;
Sanctification is a Renovation of Nature. 3. Justification is perfect in this
Life, so is not Sanctification. 4. Justification is in nature before
Sanctification, but not in order of time. The perfect Purity of Christ's Human
Nature is reckoned unto Believers by free Imputation of Faith, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christ is made unto us Sanctification: This is Sanctification imputed. Mr.
Wilson' s Christian Dictionary.

Our Adversaries have little to reply against these so plain places. Something
they answer, namely, 1. That it cannot be denied but that Justification does
many times bear that sense we stand for: But withal they would have us observe
this Rule.

[Quotiescunque in Scripturis Deus dicitur justificare impios, semper
intelligendum est ex impio facere justum. God cannot declare a Man to be just;
but of unjust he must make him just.] And they give the reason; because the
Judgment of God is according to Truth, Romans 2. 2. we embrace this Rule and the
Reason of it, acknowledging that wherever there is Justification, there must
be Justice some way or other in the Party justified. But the Question stands
still in what manner God makes a Sinner just; whom he in Judgment pronounces
so to be: They say by bestowing on him the Grace of Sanctification and perfect
Righteousness, inherent in his own Person: We affirm, that it is by imputing
unto him the perfect Righteousness of Christ, accepting Christ's Obedience for
him. -- Wherefore, whereas the Popish Doctors fall foul on our Reformed
Writers, charging Calvin and others for denying all inherent Righteousness in
Believers, and maintaining only an imputed Righteousness without them: We tell
them it is a gross Calumny forged by perverse Minds, that list not to understand
Men's plainest Writings: Nor Calvin, nor any that ever maintained the Truth with
him, ever denied the Righteousness of Sanctification. But this he holds, and we
also with the Scriptures, that the Righteousness which justifies us in God's
Judgment is not in our selves, but all in Christ. -- That although by the Grace of
Sanctification infused, God do make him righteous and holy in some measure,
that was before altogether unholy and wicked: Nevertheless we affirm, that by
and for this Holiness the best of Saints living never were nor shall be
justified in God's sight, that is, pronounced just and innocent before the
Tribunal of his Justice. -- The second Error about this Point is of the
Arminians, with whom also the Papists agree. -- It Is this, That we are
justified by Faith sensu proprio; that is, the Act of believing, (...) credere,
is imputed to us for Righteousness; being accepted of God, and accounted unto
us for that whole Righteousness of the Law which we were bound to perform: So
that our very Faith is that Righteousness for which we are justified in the
sight of God; non quidem merito suo, sed propter gratuitam acceptationem Dei,
i. e. not indeed for its own merit, but on the account of the gratuitous
acceptance of God. The Authors of this Opinion are, Faustus Socinus, that
unhappy Heretic, in his most blasphemous Book [de Christo servatore] and
Michael Corvetus, a Spaniard, in his second Book [de Lege and Evangelio] which
Errors are confuted by Calvin in his Opuscula. A stiff Defender of this Opinion
was Christophorus Ostorodius a Polonian, in his Disputations contra Georgium
Tradelii, who for this and other pestilent Errors about the Article of Man's
Redemption, was with his Companion Andreas Vaidonitus, banished the Low
Countries, where he had seated himself, and published his Opinions. Arminius
and his Followers have been chief Promoters of it: Arminius himself, as in
other his Opinions, so in the publishing of this, used much closeness and
cunning conveyance. In his private Disputations [Tit. de Justificatione] he
seems plainly to condemn it, saying, that it is an abuse to say that fides est
causa formalis justificationis, and an Error to affirm [that Christ has
deserved, ut fidei dignitate and merito justificemur.] In his public
Disputations he opens himself somewhat plainly, yet darkly enough [Thes. 19. de
justif. These. 7.] these are his words, [Fidei vero justificatio tribuitur, non
quod illa sit justitia ipsa quae rigido and severo Dei judicio opponi possit,
quamquam Deo grata: sed quod in judicio misericordia triumphans supra judicium,
absolutionem a peccatis obtineat, and gratiose in justitiam imputetur, cujus
rei causa est tum Deus justus and misericors, tum Christus obedientia,
oblatione and intercessione sua secundum Deum in beneplacito and mandato
ipsius.] Here Faith it self is imputed for Righteousness; but it is not in God's
severe Judgment, but in his Judgment of Mercy: Faith in it self is not worthy;
but yet Christ by his Merits has deserved that God will graciously accept of
it. This Opinion published was quickly contradicted; whereupon Arminius makes
known his Mind in plainer terms, In declaratione sententiae ad Ordines Holland.
and Westfrisiae; he confesses in the forenamed Thesis his meaning was, that
[ipsa fides tanquam actus juxta Evangelii mandatum praestitus imputatur coram
Deo in sive ad justitiam, idque in gratia cum non sit ipsamet justitia legis.]
And in his. Responsione ad 31 Artic. Art. 4. he brancheth out his Opinion in
distinct Propositions.

1. Justitia Christi imputatur nobis: Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us.

This he grants.

2. Justitia Christi imputatur in justitiam: Christ's Righteousness is imputed
for Righteousness.

This he denies.

3. To credere imputatur in justitiam: That the Act of believing is imputed for
Righteousness.

This he grants.

Whereas our Adversaries say, that Faith of its own dignity and desert, does
not obtain this Favor of God, to be esteemed for the perfect Righteousness of
the Moral Law; but this comes to pass only by the Merits of Christ, who has
procured this Grace unto us, that God should thus accept our Faith. We answer,
that this is affirmed, but it is not proved.

They speak a little more favorable than the Romanists, who make Faith it self
to merit Justification; these will have it not to merit it, but to be
graciously accepted for Righteousness. -- The word Justification may be taken
either, 1. For the absolution of a Sinner in God's Judgment. 2. For the
declaration of a Man's Righteousness before Men. This distinction is certain,
and has its ground in Scripture, which uses the word justify in both
acceptations, for the quitting of us in God's sight, and for the manifestation
of our Innocence before Men against accusation or suspicion of Faultiness. They
apply this distinction for the reconciling the two Apostles: S. Paul speaks of
Justification (in foro Dei) St. James of Justification (in foro hominis.) A Man
is justified by Faith without Works, says St. Paul; that is, in God's sight, a
Man obtains Remission of Sins, and is reputed just only for his Faith in
Christ, not for his Works sake. A Man is justified by Works, and not by Faith
only, says St. James; that is, in Men's sight we are declared to be just by our
good Works, not by our Faith only: which with other inward and invisible
Graces, are made visible unto Man only in the good Works which they see us
perform. Mr. Pemble of Justification, p. 17, 18, 19, 33, 34, 35, 40, 41, 192,
193.

To this we are exhorted (viz. Sanctification) as a sound Effect of our
Justification, Romans 6. 19, 22. 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4, 7. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13. 1 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Romans 1. 4. Bernard. Thesaur. Bibl.

Abraham by this means was known and declared to be justified; and his Faith
being effectual and fruitful by Works, was thereby known to be a true Faith,
and not a dead Faith: for St. James speaks not of the Causes of
Justification, but by what Effects we may know that a Man is justified. True is
the Distinction therefore even of the Schoolmen themselves: Christ does
justify a Man effective, effectually by working his Justification: Faith does
justify a Man apprehensive, apprehendingly, because it takes hold of Christ,
who is our Justifier: and Works do justify also, but declarative, declaringly,
because they show that a Man is justified. Bp Babington on Genesis, p. 76.

Turn it against the Papist, that so unthankfully joineth Works with Faith, and
Man with God in the matter of our Justification only; that Serpent: and only by
looking, how plain to show that ^nly Christ, and only by ^h in him, we live and
inherit his Heavenly Joys: Tantum creed, absque operibus, non ex operibus, etc.
without Works, not of Works, etc. plentiful is the Scripture in this Point. The
ancient Fathers are agreeable to the same, Ch^s. fecit justum peccatorem. S.
Aug. solus Christus, etc. only Christ without any ill Works, took upon him for
us Punishment, that we by him without any good Works might obtain Grace.
Pighius a learned Papist, Si formaliter, etc. (...) we speak formally and
properly, neither by our Faith nor our Charity are we justified, but only by
the Righteousness of God in Christ, only by the Righteousness of Christ
imparted or imputed unto us. Bellarmine himself ingeniously confesses, propter
incertitudinem, etc. for the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and the fear
of vain Glory, it is most safe to put our whole Trust and Confidence in the
only Mercy and Goodness of God. Lyra also, a Man cleaving to the Church of Rome
in this Point, says, Asserentes, etc. they that affirm that Faith is not
sufficient unto Salvation without the Law, are false Apostles, and so condemn
Christ as unable to save. Cassander again, one, of their own, in the Article of
Justification, says, That the Doctrine of the Protestants, touching
Justification only by Christ, was ever held in the Church. Their Anselmus
lastly most excellently, In hac sola morte, etc. Place thy whole Confidence in
this Death alone, commit thy self. wholly to this Death, shroud thy self
altogether under this Death. If the Lord will enter into Judgment with thee,
say, The Death of Jesus Christ our Lord I set between thee and me, O Lord. --
Good Works ever follow him that is justified, they go not before Justification.
Bp Babington on Numbers, p. 86, 87.

Bitter-sweet.
Ah my dear angry Lord!
Since thou do love, yet strike;
Cast down, yet help afford;
Sure I will do the like.
I will complain, yet praise,
I will bewail, approve;
And all my sowr-sweet days
I will lament and love.
Mr. Herbert's Poems. Q. Whether Repentance go before Faith?

The Papists.
Their Opinion is, that Repentance goes before Justification by Faith, and
that it is a way rather unto Faith and Justification in the remission of Sins:
Poenitentia est. Bellarm. cap. 19.

Argum. Act. 2. 38. Repent, and be baptized in the Name of Christ for the
remission of Sins: Remission of Sins follows Repentance: Ergo, Justification
and Faith follow Repentance. Acts 8. 22. here Forgiveness follows Repentance.

The Protestants.
Answ. 1. This place proves not that remission of Sins follows Repentance,
because Baptism was given after Repentance: For Baptism does not give remission
of Sins, but it is a Seal only and Confirmation of our Faith in the remission
of Sins.

2. Neither is remission of Sins obtained before God by the Act of our
Repentance: but we are already, being once called, justified before God by the
remission of our Sins, and imputation of the Righteousness of Christ; Romans 8.
30. Justification immediately follows our Calling; by Repentance and other
Works that follow, our Calling is made sure, 2 Pet. 1: 10, our Salvation
finished, that is, assured to our selves; Phil. 2. 12. so then fear and
trembling, which works Repentance, begins not our Salvation, but only does
assure us of the same. So we must distinguish, as the Apostle says, between
the beginning of Faith and Justification before God, and the perfection and
assurance thereof to our selves: Faith is the first whereby we are justified,
and our Sins remitted before God; then follows Repentance, whereby our Hearts
are assured to our selves of this Remission.

3. Is It. St. Peter (...) says to Simon that Hypocrite, not that he doubted of
remission of Sins upon true Repentance, but that he doubted of Simon's true
Repentance, as v. 23. I see thou art in the gall of bitterness. 2ly. Or he
says it to show unto Simon how difficult or hard a thing remission of Sin was.
3ly. And tho remission of Sin be already decreed before God, yet it is not felt
in the Heart, nor the Conscience assured thereof, till after effectual
Repentance; as Nathan presently, when David had said I have sinned, says, The
Lord also has put away thy Sins, 2 Samuel 12. 13. This notwithstanding, David
yet felt not the Comfort thereof in his Soul, for the which he prays, Psalm.
51. 12. Therefore when remission of Sins is placed after Repentance, it shows
the assurance thereof made unto our Hearts after Repentance, not the first
Decree or Grant thereof with God, which goes before Repentance.

Argum. 1. Justification goes before Sanctification; for this is the Fruit of
the other: but Repentance is part of our Sanctification, Renovation, or
Regeneration, being called by St. Paul, A walking in newness of Life, Romans 6. 4
Ergo, It follows and comes after our Justification. And seeing without Faith
it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. how should our Repentance be
acceptable to God, unless it proceeded of Faith? Faith then is initiate and
begun in us before. Repentance, which we deny not, by true Repentance and other
fruits of Justification, to be strengthened and increased; as Tertullian says
of Patience, It both goes before Faith, and follows. -- That Grace whereby
we are justified, and made acceptable before God, is not a Quality inherent or
dwelling in us, but we are made just by the imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ: That Righteousness which is in us is imperfect, and not able to justify
us before God.

Argum. 1. St. Paul says, He has made him to be Sin for us that knew no Sin,
that we should be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Out of
this place this Argument may be drawn: As our Sins are made Christ's, so is his
Righteousness made ours; but our Sins are not habitually inherent in him, but
only imputed: Ergo, his Righteousness, and the Grace whereby we are justified,
is not inherent in us, but imputed only.

Arg. 2. If we are justified by Faith only, then this justifying Grace is by
Imputation only, not inherent in us; but Faith only justifies; Ergo. The
Proposition is thus proved: Faith justifies either formally and actually as a
Quality inherent, or instrumentally, or passively, as it apprehends the
Justice of Christ; but it does not justify as it is a Quality or Grace wrought
in us; for the Apostle says, not of Works: Therefore Faith as a Work in us
justifies not; for then other spiritual Graces, as Love, Hope, should justify
as well as Faith. If Faith then only justify instrumentally, as it apprehends
Christ, then does the Proposition follow, that the Grace whereby we are
justified is not inherent in us, but in Christ apprehended.

-- Distinct. 51. When we object that place of St. Paul against the Popish
Doctrine of Merits, We are justified freely by Grace, Romans 3. 24. They answer
by a distinction, there are two Justifications; the first, which is only of
Grace, and the second, wherein we proceed daily by good Works. Rhemist. Annot.
Sect. 3. Contra. The Scripture speaks but of one Justification, which
Glorification follows, Romans 8. 30. Whom he justified; them also he glorified.
If then this one Justification do bring us to Glorification, what need a second?

Again, their second Justification is nothing else but that which the Scripture
calls Sanctification, which issues out from Justification, as the Fruits
thereof: but Christ is both our Righteousness and Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Ergo, He is both our first and second Justification, and so both are of Grace.
Hear what one of the Popes has confessed of this matter.

Qui Christum, etc. he that has Christ by Faith, has the Foundation, beside
which none other can be laid, and upon this Foundation he may build wholesome
Works, etc. There is then but one Justification, because there is but one
Foundation by Faith; that which follows is not another Justification, but a
building upon by good Works.

Distinct. 52. There is Justice imputative, when the Righteousness of Christ is
imputed unto us, and made ours by Faith: Justice inherent is that Justice that
actually abides in us; by this we are justified and truly made just, not by
the other. Rhem. Annot. Romans 2. Sect. 4. Contra. A Justice inherent we grant to
be in faithful Men, but imperfect, it is not able to justify them before God.
-- We acknowledge an inherent Justice in all faithful Men -- wrought in them by
the Spirit of God, being now justified by Faith in Christ; but it is imperfect,
not able to justify them before God; it is no other than Sanctification, which
is a fruit of Justification.

But that Justice whereby we are just before God, not falsely accounted, but
made truly just, is by the Righteousness christ only, which we apprehend by
Faith: And of this our Justification by Christ there are two parts, the clear
Remission of our Sins, and Punishment due thereunto; for in Christ we are freed
from the Law of Sin and Death: the other part is the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ: By the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward
all Men to the Justification of Life. And this is our Righteousness before God,
and no other; it remains now to be proved by Scripture.

Arg. 1. Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness:
And, blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are
covered, and to whom the Lord imputes no Sin, Romans 4. Ergo, the Righteousness
of Man consists not in any actual inherent Justice in himself, but in that
his Sins are forgiven him, and the Righteousness of Christ applied to him by
Faith.

Obj. We grant that Abraham was reputed righteous by his Faith, yet it
follows not, that to have Faith reputed or counted for Righteousness, is to
have the Righteousness of Christ imputed by Faith: for Faith which is imputed
for Righteousness, is not the Righteousness of Christ, but our own
Righteousness. Bellar. cap. 9.

Answ. The Apostle here by Faith understands also the Object apprehended by
Faith; as more plainly in these words, The Righteousness of God by the Faith of
Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 22. so that in Faith here reputed for Righteousness, we
are not to respect the worthiness of the Act of believing in it self, but in
respect of the Object: The Faith (says the Apostle) of Jesus Christ. Dr.
Willet Synop. Pap. p. 721, 722, 926, 1321, 997, 998.

The XII Error.
Infused or inherent Justice, is the formal cause of Justification, whereby Men
are justified in the sight of God.

The Confutation.
We do contrarily hold, that the material cause of Man's Justification, is the
Obedience of Christ in suffering, and fulfilling the Law for us; but as for the
formal Cause that must needs be Imputation, which is an Action of God the
Father accepting the Obedience of Christ for us, as if it were our own. Reason
1. Look by what we are absolved from all our Sins, and by which we obtain
eternal Life, by that alone we are justified: But by Christ's perfect Obedience
imputed unto us we are absolved from all our Sins, and through it we are
accepted of God to eternal Life, the which we cannot do by inherent Holiness:
Therefore by Christ's perfect Obedience imputed unto us we are alone justified.
This will appear to be true in the exercises of Invocation on God's Name, and
also of Repentance: for in Temptation and Conflicts with Sin and Satan, Faith
does not reason thus; Now I have Charity and inherent Grace, and for these God
will accept of me: But Faith does more rightly behold the Son of God, as he was
made a Sacrifice for us, and sits at the Right Hand of his Father, there
making Intercession for us: To him I say does Faith fly, and is assured that
for this his Son, God will forgive us all our Sins, and will also be reconciled
unto us, yea and account us just in his sight, not by any Quality inherent in
us, but rather by the Merit of Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 19. 2. As Christ is made a
Sinner, so by proportion such as believe are made Just: But Christ was by
Imputation only made and accounted a Sinner for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. for he became
a Surety for us, and a Sacrifice for our Sins, upon which all both the
Guiltiness of God's Wrath, and Punishment for us was to be laid. Hence it is
that he is said to become ((...)) a Curse for us, therefore we again are made
just only by Imputation. 3. The contrary to Condemnation is remission of Sins,
and Justification is the opposite of Condemnation. Romans 8. 33. It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? Therefore Justification is the remission of Sin;
now remission of Sins depends only upon this Imputation of Christ's Merits.
4. Albeit infused and inherent Justice may have its due place, it is Praise, and
also Deserts, yet as it is a Work of the Holy Ghost, it is not in this Life
complete, and by reason of the Flesh whereunto it is united, it is both
imperfect, and infected with the dregs of Sin, Isa. 64. 6. Therefore before
God's Judgment Seat it cannot claim this Prerogative, to absolve any from the
Sentence of Condemnation.

The XIII Error.
There is also a second Justification, and that is obtained by Works.

The Confutation.
That Popish Device of a second Justification, is a fantastical Delusion. For,
1. The Word of God does acknowledge no more but one Justification at all, and
that absolute and complete of it self. There is but one Justice, but one
Satisfaction of God being offended; therefore there cannot be a manifold
Justification. 2. If by reason of the increase of inherent Justice,
Justification should be distinguished into several kinds or parts, we might as
well make an hundred kinds or parts of Justifications, as two. 3. That which by
order of Nature does follow after full Justification before God, it cannot be
said to justify: But good Works do by order of Nature follow Man's
Justification, and his Absolution from Sin; because no Work can please God
except the Person it self that works the same do before please him. But no
Man's Person can please God, but such a one as being reconciled to God by the
Merits of Christ, has Peace with him. 4. Such Works as are not agreeable to
the Rule of legal Justice; they, before the Tribunal Seat of God cannot
justify, but rather both in and of themselves, are subject to God's eternal
Curse. Mr. Perk. Golden Chain, p. 156, 167, 158.

That which the Pontificians ascribe to Faith in the work of Justification, is
either, that it is a work of Grace, preparing and disposing a Man to receive
the Grace of Justification, or else that it is a Grace concurring with other
Graces infused and inherent, as Hope and Charity, and such like, by which
jointly a Man comes to be justified: otherwise they allow Faith no hand at all
in Justification. Council. Trid. ses. 5. cap. 8. can. 9, and 11. If any Man
shall say that a Sinner is justified by Faith alone, etc. And if any Man shall
say, that Men are justified either by the only Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, or by the only remission of Sins, excluding Grace and Charity
which is shed abroad in their Hearts by the Holy Ghost, and is inherent in
them; or also that the Grace whereby we are justified is only the Favor of
God, let him be Anathema, or accursed. Mr. Burton's Christian Bulwark, p. 93,
94.

The right distinguishing of things the one from the other, when the nature and
due bounds of every word is declared, would prove some Preservative against
Errors and Heresy which commonly arise upon the ignorance of things while they
are shuffled confusedly together, one thing being taken for another; or
something being taken to be that it is not. I could show this in sundry
Particulars, one instead of all: [Justification] this word not rightly
understood, what Errors has it bred? Whilst some take it to be the making of
our selves just, by infusion of Grace in the Hearts of the Elect; others, to be
nothing else but a making of our Actions to become just and holy; whereas it is
an Absolution of a Sinner from his Guiltiness, and pronouncing him righteous
before God, when he believes in his Son Christ Jesus. Mr. Wilson' s Christian
Dictionary, Pref.

Judgment.
Almighty Judge, how shall poor Wretches brook
Thy dreadful Look,
Able a Heart of Iron to appall,
When thou shall call
For every Man's peculiar Book?
What others mean to do, I know not well
Yet I here tell,
That some will turn thee to some Leaves therein,
So void of Sin,
That they in Merit shall excel.
But I resolve, when thou shall call for mine,
That to decline,
And thrust a Testament into thy hand;
Let that be scanned:
THERE THOU SHALL FIND MY FAULTS ARE THINE.
Herb. Poems, p. 182. Justice.
For where before thou still did call on me,
Now still I touch
And harp on thee,
God's Promises have made thee mine:
Why should I Justice now decline?
Against me there is none, but for me much.
Ibid. p. 135. Baxterian.
ERror 9. (as Mr. Baxter terms it) That Justification is not a making us just,
but a Sentence pronouncing us just. -- Note this Observation, that
Sanctification it self, or the giving us the Spirit, is a great Act (tho I say
not the only) of executive Justification. -- Error 11. (in his Judgment) That
Justification by Faith is perfect at the first instant, tho Sanctification be
imperfect. Contra. Against this Error read Mr. George Hopkins's Book of
Salvation from Sin, showing how Justification and Sanctification are equally
carried on (not unlike the Socinian in Dr. O's Appendix to his Piece against
Mr. Biddle, p. 17. viz. That as the beginning, so the continuance of our
Justification depends on the condition of our Faith, Repentance and Obedience,
which are not Fruits consequent of it, but Conditions antecedent to it; and
therefore in the first place we are to be sollicitous about what is within us,
about our Sanctification, before our Absolution or Justification.) To return to
Mr. Baxt. As our Sanctification is imperfect, so our, Pardon is yet imfect in
many respects. -- Therefore till our Grace be perfect, we are not perfectly
delivered from the penal Fruits of Sin, and therefore not perfectly justified
and pardoned. That Pardon and Justification is not perfect which has so many
Conditions, and of such a nature for its Continuation, as ours now has: As to
say, you shall lose your justified state unless you fight and overcome in
Mortification, Sufferings, Perseverance, etc. He that has a Title to an
Estate, which is held by such a Tenure, and would be lost if he should fail in
such Conditions, has not so perfect a Title, as he that is past all such
Conditions. That Pardon which is only of Sins past, while there are thousands
more hereafter to be pardoned (or else we should yet perish) is not so perfect
as that Pardon and Justification in the Conclusion of our Lives, when all Sin
that ever will be committed is forgiven absolutely. The kind of our present
Justification is imperfect, it being but in Covenant-Title, and some part of
Execution, the full and perfect Sentence and Execution being at the day of
Judgment. I leave them therefore to say [Christ's Righteousness imputed to us
is perfect, therefore we are as perfectly just and justified as Christ] who
know not what Imputation here is, nor that Christ's personal Righteousness is
not given to us as Proprietors, in it self, but in the Effects; and who know
not the difference between believing and blaspheming, and making our selves as
so many Christ's to our selves; and that know not what need they have of Christ,
or of Faith, or Prayer, or of any holy Endeavor for any more Pardon and
Righteousness, or Justification, than they have already: or who think that
David in his Adultery and Murder was as perfectly pardoned and justified as he
will be in Heaven at last: And in a word, who know not the difference between
Earth and Heaven. (But Mr. B. tells us a 14th Error) That the continuance of
our Justification needs no other Conditions to be by us performed, than the
continuance of that Faith on which it was begun. Contra. Where that first Faith
continues, there our Justification does continue; but that Faith never
continues without sincere Obedience to Christ; and that Obedience is part of
the Condition of the continuance or not losing our Justification. -- Error 34.
That Repentance is no Condition of Pardon or Justification, for then it would
be equal therein with Faith. Contra. I have elsewhere at large proved the
contrary from Scripture. -- Error 36. That our own Faith is not at all imputed
to us for Righteousness, but only Christ's Righteousness received by it.
Contra. The Scripture no where says, that Christ or his Righteousness, or his
Obedience, or his Satisfaction is imputed to us; and yet we justly defend it,
as is before explained, and as Mr. Bradshaw and Grotius de Satisfact. have
explained it. And on the other side, the Scripture often says, that Faith is
imputed for Righteousness, and shall be so to all that believe in God that
raised Christ (Romans 4.) And this these Objectors peremptorily deny. But
expounding Scripture amiss, is a much cleanlier pretense for Error than a flat
denial of its Truth: And a true Exposition is better than either. -- We can lay
no Claim to this Righteousness of Christ, till we first prove that we are our
selves inherently righteous, against the charge of being Impenitent
Unbelievers. This false Accusation we must be justified against by our own
Faith and Repentance, that we may be justified by Christ against the true
Accusation of sinning against the Law, and thereby being condemnable by it. Now
as to our Legal Righteousness or prolegal rather, by which this last must be
avoided, it is [only the Merits of Christ given to us in its fruits in the new
Covenant, even the Merits of his Obedience and Sacrifice.] But our Faith it
self is the other Righteousness which must be found in our Persons to entitle
us to this first: And this being it, and being all (in the sense aforesaid)
that is made the Condition of our Pardon by the new Covenant; therefore God is
said to impute it it self to us for a Righteousness, because that Condition
makes it so; and to impute it to us for our Righteousness, that is, as all
that now by this Covenant he requires to be personally done by us, who had
formerly been under a harder Condition, even the fulfilling of the Law by
Innocence, or suffering for Sin; because he that does not fulfill nor satisfy,
as is said, yet if he believe, has a right to the Justification merited by
Christ who did fulfill and satisfy. This is easy to be understood as undoubted
Truth by the willing, and the rest will be most contentious, where they are
most erroneous. Error 37. That sincere Obedience, and all Acts of Love,
Repentance and Faith save one, do justify us only before Men; and of that
speaks St. James, chap. 2. Contr. I must refer the Reader to other Books, in
which I have fully confuted this. How can Men judge of the Acts of Repentance,
Faith, Love, etc. which are in the Heart? And James plainly speaks of God's
imputing Righteousness to Abraham, James 2. 21, 23. And how should Men justify
Abraham for killing his only Son? And how small a matter is Justification by
Men, when we may be saved without it? Sincere Obedience to God in Christ, is
the Condition of the continuance, or not losing our Justification here, and the
secondary part of the Condition of our final, sentential and executive
Justification. Error 57. A Man that trusts to be justified at the day of
Judgment against that Charge of Unbelief, Impenitency and Hypocrisy, by his own
Faith, Repentance and Sincerity, as his particular subordinate Righteousness,
and not by Christ's Righteousness imputed only, sins against free Grace.
Contr. Christ's Righteousness is imputed or given to none, nor shall justify
any that are true Unbelievers, Impenitent or Hypocrites: Therefore if any such
Person trust to be justified by Christ, he deceives him. If the Charge be,
Thou art an Infidel, or impenitent, it is frivolous to say, But Christ obeyed,
suffered, or believed, or repented for me. But he that will then be justified
against that Charge, must say, and say truly, I truly believed, repented and
obeyed. Mr. Baxter's Life of Faith, p. 326, 327, 331, 332, 333, 348, 349, 350,
351, 359.

Neither Pardon nor Justification are perfect before Death: for there are some
correcting Punishments to be yet born, some Sins not fully destroyed, some
Grace yet wanting, more Sins to be forgiven, more Conditions thereof to be
performed. The final and executive Pardon and Justification are only perfect.
Mr. Baxt. End of Doctr. Controv. chap. 21.. 62. That Justification is either
perfect, which is only in the Life of Perfection; or imperfect, which is all
the Justification even of the best in this Life, whatever the unskilful may
grinningly gainsay.

Q. 19. Whether perfect Remission or Justification be given upon first
believing, or in this Life?

Answ. No; neither perfect as to degree or kind; for its Imperfection is
manifest from all these things. 1. All Punishment is not as yet remitted, as it
has been already proved: The Punishment of Death, Sorrows, and of the Earth
cursed to Adam and his Posterity first decreed, has been excepted from Pardon
in this Life, and is inflicted on all. The Favor of God, and the holy Spirit
are not fully restored: many castigatory Punishments abide us Sinners. 2. Many
Sins as yet not committed, are not pardoned; for the Sin that is not, is not
pardoned. 3. The right of Pardon concerning Sin in its futurity, during this
Life, is conditional; neither has the Believer himself a right of future
Impunity or Felicity, but under the Condition of a continued Faith. 4. Yea the
Condition of future Justification and Felicity contains more things than the
Conditions of begun Justification, viz. both more singular Acts of the same
Faith, also Love, and Obedience, with a Victory over not a few Temptations. 5.
Justification of its perfect kind by the Sentence of the Judge, as yet attends
us. 6. Executive Pardon is not yet perfect until the Resurrection and
Glorification. --

Q. 22. Whether Justification and Sanctification are the same, or to justify,
or to pardon Sins be to sanctify?

Answ. 1. Sanctification is a certain particular Justification: who is become
holy, is so far become just: But this in Scripturesense is not to be justified
ex fide, or of Faith, nor yet universal Justification.

2. Justification and Sanctification, as to the formal Reasons of the Names,
are not the same.

3. Sanctification is not the material part either of our constituted
Justification, in which consists the Remission of our Sins, or of Justification
as it is distinguished from Execution by the Sentence. 4. Faith, Repentance, or
the continuance of a federal Condition, is the particular matter of that
subordinate Righteousness, by which first we are become partakers of the
Righteousness of Remission. And, 2. From this he is justified, who is accused
of not performing the Conditions. 5. Sanctification is (not the whole, but) a
great part of executive Pardon, which consists in the removing of
Punishments, or in [a not punishing] (from which Dr. Twiss was wont to define
Pardon) for a Negation of the holy Spirit is the greatest Punishment: Therefore
to impart the holy Spirit, is the greatest executive Pardon of Punishment and
Sin, to wit, of the same Notion materially, not formally. Mr. Baxt. Meth.
Theol. Part 3. p. 303, 339, 340.

The continued Act (i. e. of Justification, as Episcopius) is and abides, so
long as the presence of its requisite Condition abides; but it is always and as
often interrupted, as those things which are inconsistent with true Faith, and
a good Conscience are done. And Arminius himself denies that Justification is
complete in this Life, and that God changes his benevolent Love in Christ,
which he had toward the truly Justified, into Anger and Hatred, which is, that
God changes his Will according to Man's free will, so that God imputes Sin to
day, to morrow he imputes not: And again he imputes them. Rutherf. Apol.
Exerc. p. 40, 41.

In their Description they exclude sentential decisive Justification, which
they had denominated it to be, making it to be only the Donation of Christ's
perfect Righteousness, as in its Essence to be ours, and so joining the
efficient and constitutive Causes, yet leaving out the instrumental Efficient,
which is the Gospel Donation, or Covenant Gift, and calling Faith the
instrumental Cause, which is no efficient Cause, but a moral reception of the
free Gift, and a moral Qualification as a receptive Condition for our Title to
the Possession. And whereas God never judged a Man righteous, till he had made
him righteous; they say, that to justify is not to make righteous, but to judge
righteous, and yet describe judging by making; yea, and exclude the sentential
Justification at the day of Judgment, thinking that it is all perfectly at our
first Justification sentenced. As if God the Father, Christ as King, or
Prophet, (not a word of Priest) the holy Ghost, Covenant of Grace, Faith, had
no hand in our Justification, but Christ's Righteousness imputed only. Mr.
Baxt. Brevi. of Justif. Part 2. p. 17.

(Now Reader, to make no distinction between the Righteousness of God in the
Person of the Mediator, as such, and the Righteousness of God in the Person of
the Spirit as a Spirit of Promise, both as to their nature, use and place; the
first being the personal Obedience of one in the stead, room, and person of
another, unto the Law for Justification; the other being a personal Capacity
wrought in the same by another Person, viz. the Spirit as its efficient, in
order to such a ones sincere and upright walking with God by the same Law: I
say, not to distinguish herein, is rather to bear the Mark of the Beast, than
that of a pretended Protestant reforming Divine.) Mr. Baxt. Method. Theol. Part
3. p. 313. Qui obedientiam eam praestat, quae ex tenore legis, foederis,
promissionis, fit conditio beneficii recipiendi, is vere mereri dicitur, and
ejus praestatio meritum dicendum est. That he that yields to that Obedience,
which from the tenor of the Law, Covenant and Promise, is made the Condition of
a Benefit to be received, may truly be said to merit, and his performance
thereof may be called Merit. The same he asserts, p. 316, 317. Again, Part 2.
p. 416. 13 Q. An ipsa fides? Whether Faith it self! An potius Christi justitia,
or rather the Righteousness of Christ, in textu, Genesis 15. Romans 4. intelligitur
ad justitiam imputata, is understood from Genesis 15. and Romans 4. to be imputed
for Righteousness? Resp. Christi justitia proculdubio causa justificationis
nostrae meritoria est, and eo sensu dici potest causa materialis, id est,
materia seu res promerita. Answ. Doubtless the Righteousness of Christ is the
meritorious cause of our Justification; and in that sense it may be called the
material Cause, i. e. the Matter or promeriting thing. At justificatio per
meritum Christi foedere gratiae nobis donatur; But Justification is given us by
the merit of Christ in the Covenant of Grace: and donum hoc gratuitum fide
accipi dicendum est; and this free Gift is said to be received in Faith: de re
igitur nullus Controversiae locus est, sed tantum de verborum sensu; of the
thing therefore there is no Controversy, but only of the sense of the words: At
proculdubio per [fidem ad justitiam imputatam, seu ut lat. vulg. loquitur,
reputatam] non ipse Christus aut ejus justitia, sed ipsa fides intelligenda
est: But without doubt by Faith imputed unto Righteousness, or, as the vulgar
Latin speaks, reputed, it is not Christ himself, or his Righteousness, but
Faith it self is to be understood: Quae quantum ab ipso Abrahamo requirebatur,
justitia ejus personalis fuit utpote foederis justificatio conditio ab ipso
praestita: Which so far as was required of Abraham himself, was his personal
Righteousness, so as that the Justification of the Covenant was the Condition
performed by himself. See Part 3. p. 321. where he positively asserts in the
sum thereof, that God proceeds as a Judge to pronounce his Sentence of
Justification from the substance and matter of that Righteousness which is in
us, or essentially Faith it self.

It ought therefore carefully to be avoided, lest, as many do this day, we say
that the Holiness and Innocence of our Life be the Effect of our Justification
before God; so we ought diligently to take heed that we believe not that
Holiness and Innocence it self in our Justification before God: neither should
we affirm that it is the efficient or impulsive Cause of our Justification
before God: Sed tantummodo, only that they are the causa sine qua non of the
same. Socin. Synop. Justif. 2. p. 14. which Obedience are these Works from
which the Apostle James affirms we are justified. Socin. These. de Justi. p. 14.
When Paul denies that we are justified by Works, he only considers Works as
meritorious, and by their own strength as justifying a Man, and consequently of
which, if examined according to the Law of God, nothing more deficient: But
James understands that Obedience by the name of Works, without which God will
not hold any Man dear unto himself; or if you rather will, Works of such a
kind, without which he denies that it can be said with any reason that he does
obey God. From this Collation of those two places, and Expressions of Paul and
James, it is manifest, that as a perfect Obedience of all the Commands of God
is not necessarily required to our Justification, so to the same Justification
it is altogether required that we so keep the Commandments of God, that it may
meritoriously be said that we are obedient unto God. Fragm. Faust. p. 122.

But this Covenant gives those Benefits only on condition of Faith and
Repentance; and to perform this Condition is so far to be just; and this
Righteousness which consists in performance of the Condition, is the Condition
of our right to the Benefits of the Covenant: and it is our Conformity to that
part of the Law of Grace, which institutes the Condition of Justification and
Life.

And when any one is accused of final Infidelity and, Impenitency, and of a not
continued performance of the Condition of the thing promised, from the
performance it self, to wit, he is justified by or from that Faith and
Repentance it self, and not by alleging the Righteousness of Christ alone. --
And he that is not justified against the Accusation of final Infidelity and
Impenitency from his own Faith and Repentance it self, shall never be justified
by the Righteousness of Christ against the Accusation of Sins not as yet
remitted, and of eternal Death that is due and adjudged unto him: If the
Covenant or Law of Grace is a true Law, and if it has declared concerning the
Condition of Salvation and Justification, the performance of this Condition
will be the Righteousness very nominis, of the right Name or true Account. Mr.
Baxt. Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 310. and p. 83. That the Righteousness of
Christ is made ours as the cause of our personal Righteousness. When it is said
that Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness, is it Faith indeed that is
meant, or Christ's Righteousness believed on? Answ. A strange and bold
Question; what occasion has the Holy Ghost given us to raise such a suspicion,
that when it is so often said by him that Faith is imputed, or accounted for
Righteousness, Men should make a doubt whether it be Faith indeed that he
means? If it be not, the Context is so far from relieving our Understandings,
that it contributeth to our unavoidable Deceit or Ignorance. Read over the
Texts and put but [Christ's Righteousness] every where instead of the word
[Faith] and see what a scandalous Paraphrase you will make. The Scripture is
not so audaciously to be corrected: It Is wiser to believe God's word than to
contradict it on pretense of expounding it. Mr. Bax. Brev. Justif. Part 1. p.
32.

That Christ is of God made Righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. is least of all
to be spoken in that sense, as if he had fulfilled the Law in our stead, so as
that thence his Righteousness should be imputed unto us, etc. Schlicting. ad
Meisu. disput. pro Socin. p. 277.

The third Error is, that God imputes to them that believe the Innocence and
Righteousness of Christ; not the Innocence, not the Righteousness of Christ
does God impute to them that believe, but he imputes to them their Faith for
Righteousness. Small. Refut. These. Franz. Disput. 4. p. 104.

Mr. D. W. in his Gospel Truth stated, etc. chap. 12. tells us ex professo,
that he had spoken in chap. 7. of justifying Righteousness, which he as fully
as ever any Papist, Arminian or Socinian, resolves into an inherent
Righteousness; for the sake of which Brat, (in a comparative sense) and the
Preservation thereof for his Justification, he vails Bonnet to the MEDIATORIAL
Righteousness of Christ, crying ever and anon, Hail to its slavish Merit, and
drudging Effects (tho not a word of its MATTER, as the Garment of a Sinner, in
which God seeing his Elect, justifies them by its imputed Application, this is
radical and rank Antinomianism) for the excellent Service he expects from
Christ, in that pitiful Office and Place he has so unscripturally assigned unto
it; in whose sense his Notion of Mediator, as may unforcedly be gathered from
his words, is no more than one interposing between two Persons at variance, who
leaving a full satisfactory Power in the hands of the Offended, that he should
suspend an Execution of the Law till he had qualified the Offender by instilled
Dispositions, till at length he appear before him without Spot or Blemish, does
then reassume his Pledge, there being no further need of it -- of the change of
Person between Christ and the Elect, and their being as righteous as he: Truth.
The Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ is so imputed to true Believers, as
that for the sake thereof they are pardoned and accepted unto Life eternal, it
being reckoned to them, and pleadable by them for these uses, as if they had
personally done and suffered what Christ did as Mediator (not Substitute) for
them, whereby they are delivered from the Curse; and no other Atonement nor
meriting Price of saving Benefits can be demanded from them: nevertheless, this
mediatorial Righteousness is not subjectively in them; nor is there a change of
Person between them and Christ, neither are they as righteous as he, but there
remain Spots and Blemishes, until Christ by his Spirit perfect that Holiness
begun in all true Believers, which he will effect before he bring them to
Heaven, p. 31.

That our Justification is our absolution from the Guilt of Sin, and freedom
from Obnoxiousness unto Punishment for it, and nothing else. Our Regeneration
is the Condition of our Absolution, and in them both in several respects is our
Regeneration. Racov. Catech. Schlict. Socin. etc. See Dr. O's Appendix to Mr.
Biddle.

No Man is judged righteous by God, that is not first made righteous: he that
is made righteous, is justifiable in Judgment and virtually justified (in Law.)
To make a Man righteous before God that has sinned, all these things must
concur. 1. He mu^ have a Mediator that must answer the ends of the Law that
condemns him, and so meriteth his Justification. 2. This Savior must make
him a pardoning and justifying Covenant, to convey the right of the purchased
Benefits to him. 3. He himself (by Grace) must perform the Condition of that
Covenant, accepting the free Gift believingly according to its nature and use.
4. Upon this the Covenant (by virtue of the foresaid Merit of the Mediator)
must effectually justify him. Tho we have no Righteousness of our own, that is
so denominated by the Law of Innocence, yet have we a Righteousness to plead
for our Justification from its Sentence, which by our Mediator was performed to
it, by which the Lawgiver has received Satisfaction; and we must have the
personal subordinate Righteousness required by the Covenant of Grace: All that
are made righteous, are esteemed and judged righteous, and used as righteous.
As he died not for the Sins which we were never guilty of, and are no Sins, so
his Righteousness is not instead of that Righteousness which by his Grace we
have, but instead of that which we have not; not instead of our being penitent
Believers, and sanctified before we die, but instead of that perfect Innocence
which we want; not that we are reputed perfect innocent Obeyers, because he was
such, but that our want of it shall not hinder our Justification or Adoption,
Grace or Glory. Christ has done all his part, but he has appointed (lest his
part should fail, and he come off with loss and shame) us a necessary part
which must be done by our selves.

What is it to be judged according to our Works, or what we have done in the
Body?

Ans. To be judged is the genus; to be judged or condemned are the species:
This opens all the Controversy. It is not according to our Works as they are
congruous to the Law of Innocence or Works, but as justified by the Law of
Grace: Therefore it is not the same Works which Paul excluded from
Justification, for we shall not be judged according to them. 2. And according
to them, is as much as James means, when he says, we are justified by them.

It Is all one, that is, the Law of Christ our Redeemer requires sincere
Obedience of all that shall be saved by his Blood and Merits from the
Condemnation of the Law of Innocence; and accordingly Men's right to Christ and
Salvation shall be judged of.

Their right to Life through Christ's Merits and free Gift shall be justified,
who were sincerely penitent believing Obeyers to the end, and no others. --
What is Paul' s drift in all his Disputes about Justification? Answ. 1.
Primarily, to prove the necessity of a Savior's Sacrifice, Righteousness and
Intercession to save and justify us, and that the doing of Moses's Law, how
excellent soever esteemed by the Jews, would not justify without him. 2. To
prove that the Gentiles may be saved by Faith without the Law, as well as the
Jews by Faith with it: and that it binds not the Gentiles, and is abrogated
to the Jews, and that the Law of Christ succeeds it. He confuteth their
trusting to the keeping of their Law instead of Christ's Righteousness, and the
promise of Grace, and their obtruding their Law upon the Gentiles as necessary
to Salvation. -- What is the drift of St. James? That bare believing the Gospel
to be true, will not serve to any Man's Salvation, without obeying Christ's
Commands, nor will justify any Man's Title to Salvation, or prove him
acceptable to God. It is the same Justification before God (and not only in
Conscience or before Men) that Paul and James speak of, and the same instance
of Abraham they bring, But by [Works] they mean not the same thing, as is
before explained. -- That which goes before Pardon (and that as a Condition)
goes before Justification: But Repentance goes before Pardon. -- A radical
Error is, that the Law of Innocence made to Adam is it that justifies us, by
its fac hoc and vives, as fulfilling it in Christ. -- That Christ did obey and
suffer, merit and satisfy, in so full and strict a representing and personating
every one of the Elect, as that they did and suffered it in and by Christ, in
the sense of the Law of Works, or in God's account: and that it was not in the
third Person of a Mediator, to communicate the Effects freely as he pleased by
another Covenant. And so that God's imputing Righteousness to us, is his
accounting us to have done and suffered in Lawsense what Christ did. This is
the root of all the rest, subverting the Gospel it self: And so that God
accounts us to be innocent, and never to have sinned by Omission or
Commission from Birth to Death, and to have all that is required to merit
Heaven, because we did it in Christ; and also to have suffered in Christ for
our Sins, the Curse threatened to us, and (as the last Objector says) eternal
Damnation equivalently; and so we had Sin and no Sin: And Christ must die, and
we must pray for the pardon of that Sin, which in God's account or imputation
we never had. When the Text tells us that [Faith is imputed to us for
Righteousness] and that [Righteousness is imputed to Believers] that is [They
are accounted righteous according to the justifying Covenant of Grace, upon
their believing in Christ for his meritorious Righteousness and Sacrifice,
giving them by the new Covenant their gracious Relation to God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, with right to further Grace and Glory] they tell us that [by
Faith] is not meant [Faith] but [Christ's Righteousness] and by [Righteousness
imputed to us] is meant [God's accounting us to have done all that
Righteousness by Christ which he did for us.] Many more such human Inventions,
corrupting our Faith (at least in notion) too many fight for, as if they were
necessary Truths of God. Mr. Baxt. Brev. Justif. Part 1. p. 7, 35, 49, 51, 68,
71, 72, 73. In the Preface to this Piece Mr. Baxt. tells us, That many worthy
Men published the same Doctrine which I assert, especially Mr. Gibbons of
Blackfriers, in his Sermon in the Morning Lectures at St. Giles. -- See what
Mr. Gibbons says there, p. 389. A Sinner is then actually justified, when he is
constituted or made righteous in Law. Righteousness is a Conformity to the Law,
is righteous in the eye of the Law; he is (...), within the protection of it;
as he that transgresses the Law, is (...), guilty in the eye of the Law, and
without the protection of it. Now the Law of the new Covenant runs thus, He
that believes shall not perish; so that a Believer keeps and fulfils this Law,
and therefore Faith is imputed to him for Righteousness, Romans 4. 22, 23, 24.
because Faith in the keeping of the new Covenant, which therefore is called the
Law of Faith, Romans 3. 27. in opposition to the old Covenant, called there by
the Apostle the Law of Works. As therefore Innocence, or perfect Obedience
would have justified Adam had he stood by virtue of the Law of Works, or old
Covenant, whose tenor is, Obey and live, for then he had fulfilled that Law;
and as his Disobedience actually condemned him by virtue of the same Law --
Disobey and die for it, Genesis 2. 17. so now believing in Christ justifies by
virtue of the Law of Faith; for it is the keeping and fulfilling of the
Gospel Covenant, whose tenor is, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved. And again, Unbelief actually condemns by virtue of the same
Law, He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed
in the Name of the only begotten Son of God; Joh. 3. 18. That is, because the
Unbeliever is (...), without the Protection of the Gospel or Law of Faith, he
comes not up to its Righteousness, he is condemned already, as a Sinner, by
the Law of Works. -- So that Faith justifies us even at the Bar of the Law of
Works, Ratione objecti, as it lays hold on Christ's Satisfaction, which is our
legal Righteousness: it justifies us at the Bar of the Gospel, or Law of
Faith, formaliter, and ratione sui, as it is Covenantkeeping, or a fulfilling
of the Gospel-Law; for he that keeps a Law is righteous, where that Law is
judge; the Lawmakers by his very making of the Law, makes him righteous, and the
Judge that pronounces according to the Law (for a Judge is (...)) will
infallibly pronounce him so. -- Faith justifies vi legis latae, as it is our
Evangelical Righteousness, or our keeping the Gospel-Law; for that Law suspends
Justification upon believing. Faith pretends to no Merit ot Virtue of its own,
but professedly avows its dependence upon the Merits of Christ's Satisfaction
as our legal Righteousness on which it lays hold; nor can it show any other
title to be it self our Evangelical Righteousness, but only God's Sanction, who
chose this Act of Believing to the honor of being the justifying Act, because
it so highly honors Christ; so that, as a most judicious Pen expresses it,
the Act of Believing is as the Silver, but God's Authority (with little regard
to his Attributes it seems with his Author, and his Silver-Pen Friend) in the
Gospel-Sanction is the King's Coin, or Image stamped upon it, which gives it all
its value as to Justification: Without this stamp, it (the Silver Metal of our
material Righteousness) could never have been current, (unless the Authority of
God had not by this Stamp hushed to silence his infinite Righteousness,
Justice, and Holiness, and thereby smothered the Law in all its demands) and if
God had set this stamp on any other Grace, as Love, that then would have been
current, and have justified us as Faith does now. -- Justification is a
judicial Act of God, as Lawgiver and Judge of the World, graciously discharging
a Believer for the sake of Christ's Satisfaction from the Condemnation of the
Law of Works, by the tenor of the Gospel-Law, or new Covenant, which requires
of, accepts from, imputes unto Sinners Faith in Jesus Christ as their
Righteousness. -- I infer against them [i. e. the Antinomians] that they are
dangerously mistaken, in thinking that a Believer is righteous in the sight of
God, with the self-same active and passive Righteousness wherewith Christ was
righteous, (this has a hellish Fallacy in the wording of it, for the Obedience
given by Christ to the Law both in its perceptive and sanction part did not
constitute him righteous, being infinitely so in himself before any such
Obedience, but that this and this only in the full, uncurtail'd,
unsophisticated, and unremote matter thereof, is as such, the Justification of
Believers before God) as tho Believers suffered in Christ, and obeyed in
Christ, and were as righteous in God's esteem as Christ himself, having his
personal Righteousness made personally theirs by Imputation. This is their
fundamental Mistake, and from hence (tanquam ex equo Trojano) issue out a
throng of such false and corrupt Deductions and Consequences as these: That God
sees no Sin in his Children, that Afflictions and Death are not properly
Punishments (were they so, they would be proper Expiations) of Sin to
Believers; that all future Sins are already actually forgiven, as well as past
and present; (If not, then it is not God of his Grace, nor Christ by his Blood,
but Regeneration as a Motive to the former, and as giving Efficacy to the
latter, that blots them out.) That a Believer must not pray for the Pardon of
Sin, but only for the Manifestation of it; (either Prayer gives a being to the
Pardon of Sin in the Heart of God, or it does not; if it does, then the
Purposes of God are not immanent, much less ^ransient, and ratified [which
indeed they are] but unsettled Acts in him, depending upon the lubricous and
uncertain motions of his Creature; if it does not, then Prayer for the Pardon
of Sin is not so properly for the begetting of it in God, but the manifestation
and discovery thereof, which he does in removing the Vail of Unbelief by his
Spirit, creating and maintaining in his People a discerning and applying Faith,
for both which they ought to pray; Mat. 13. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 12, 14. 2 Cor.
3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. chap. 4 3, 4. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20. Luke 17. 5.
comp. Heb. 11. 1. A Prospective Glass gives not a being to that which I cannot
discern without it.) That God loved Noah when drunk, Lot when so, and besides
incestuous; David when acting Adultery and Murder; Peter when he was cursing
and swearing, and denying Christ, with as high a love of Complacency and
Delight, as when conversant in the most spiritual Exercises of Grace, etc. Mr.
Gibbons Morn. Exerc. Method. p. 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395.

And seeing it will be the work of the day, to judge Men as Performers, or
Non-performers of the said Conditions of the Law of Grace, therefore it is that
the Scripture speaks so much of inherent or performed Righteousness, and of
Christ's judging Men according to their Works, that is, their Works which are
the performance of that Condition. To be judged according to our Works, is to
be justified or condemned according to our Works; for to be judged is the
genus, and to be justified or condemned are the species: Judging is justifying
or condemning. That tho our Faith, Repentance and Holiness be no universal
absolute Righteousness, yet they are that on which the judiciary scrutiny must
pass, and will be the Question of the great Day, on which our Life or Death
will depend, as on the Condition or moral Qualification of the Receiver. That
in this sense all Men shall be judged by Justification or Condemnation
according to their Works, or what they have done, that is, as they have
performed the Conditions of that Law of Grace which they were under.

That therefore they that will be justified at last, must trust in Christ that
redeemed them, and be careful to perform the Conditions of this Law of Grace,
and both must concur. That that which is the Righteousness which must justify
us in Judgment, is the same that must now constitute us just. It seems
strange to some, to find the whole Old Testament, and all Christ's Sermons, and
all the other Apostles, inculcating inherent and performed Righteousness, as
that which Men must be judged about to Life or Death, and yet to find Paul so
often pleading against Justification by Works. But if we will take the Scripture
together, and not by incoherent scraps, the Reconciliation is evident. Man is
now sinful, and condemned by the first Law, and is now under a Law of Grace,
that freely gives Pardon and Life through a Redeemer, to those that
believingly accept the Gift according to its nature, and consent by Repentance
to turn to God, and live a holy Life in sincerity. Now God does through all the
Scripture tell us, That no one shall pass with God for a just Man, or be saved,
that will not do this, but shall be condemned further for refusing it: And thus
he that does Righteousness is righteous, and all shall be judged according to
their Works thus required by the Law of Grace. To deny this, is to deny the
scope of the whole Scripture, and the Government of God. But Paul disputed
against those that taught that the Gentiles must be proselyted and keep the Law
of Moses, or else they could not be accounted just Men, nor be saved: And he
proves that the Gentiles being under the Law of Grace, may pass with God for
just Men, and be saved, if they [believingly accept the gift of Grace according
to its nature, and consent by Repentance to turn to God, and live a holy Life
in sincerity] tho they keep not the Jewish Law: yea further, that tho the
Jewish Fathers were obliged to keep that Law, it was as it belonged to the
Covenant of Grace and of Faith; and that before that Law was given, Abraham and
others were just, and saved by Faith, according to the universal Law of Grace;
and that the Task of Works, according to the Mosaical Law, wi^ of it self make
no Man just or valuable, and consequently no other Task of Works, which would
make the Reward to be not of Grace, but of Debt, and is opposed to, or
separated from Redemption, and your free Condonation and Donation of the
Covenant of Grace.] This is the plain drift of Paul. Works of Evangelical
Gratitude, Love and Obedience according to the Law of Grace subordinate to, and
supposing Redemption, and the free gift of Pardon and Life to penitent
believing Accepters, are those that Christ, and James, and all the Scripture
make necessary to Salvation; and our Consent and Covenant so to obey, is
necessary to our first or initial Justification, and our actual Obedience to
the continuance and confirmation of it. I verily think, that were their verbal
and notional Differences discussed, and Men understood themselves and one
another, it will prove, that this aforesaid is the true meaning of almost all
Christians, and that they agree in this sense, while they mischievously contend
about ill or unexplained words. Mr. Baxt. End of Doctr. Controv. chap. 21.. 46,
47, 50. Head 4, 5, 6, 7.. 54, 55, 56.

So, what is meant Romans 4. 6. by imputing Righteousness without Works? Answ.
Plainly, reputing or judging a Man righteous without the Works, which Paul
there means. (O sapientissime!) Whether imputing Christ's Righteousness to us
be a Scripture Phrase? Answ. Not that I can find. Ibid. chap. 22.. 12, 15.

Faith justifies constitutively, so far as it is it self our personal inherent
Righteousness. -- Faith is reputed our subordinate, evangelical, personal
Righteousness; and supposing Christ's Merits and our Redemption by him, this
Gospel-Righteousness is all that is required of us on our parts, instead of all
that perfect Obedience which the Law of Innocence required: So that our Faith
(taken in the Scripture-sense) is our real Righteousness related to the
Condition of the new Covenant, and instead of a more perfect Righteousness of
Innocence; for as much as after Christ's Redemption is required to be performed
by our selves. This no Christians that are sober can deny, as to the thing.

And as to the Name, it is plain to the impartial, that will see that Paul,
Romans 4. 22, 23, 24. and James 2. 23. by Faith mean Faith it self indeed, and
not only Christ the Object of Faith, as some affirm with too great scandal:
Read over the Texts, and try what sense it will be, if you put [Christ] instead
of [Faith] -- And the same Spirit that says, He that believes shall be saved,
says also, He that calls on the Name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.
13. saved by hope, Romans 8. 24. By the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5, and
6. by believing the Articles of the Creed, 1 Cor. 15. 2. Blessed are they that
keep his Commandments, that they might have a right to the Tree of Life (that
right is our Righteousness) and may enter in, etc. Rev. 22. 14. By taking heed
to himself and to Doctrine, Timothy was to save himself and his Hearers, 1 Timothy
4. 16. Many such Texts I have elsewhere cited, which are all true, chap. 23..
14, 28, 29, 35. (I shall return to this Author what King James the First did to
a raw blind. Preacher coming out of his Pulpit, I thank thee Man for thy Text.)

The condition of our continued and consummate Right and full Possession, is
the former Faith and consent continued, Repentance renewed when we knowingly
sin, and sincere Obedience and Perseverance. Ibid. chap.. 5. Head 13.

True Conversion, and the performance of good Works, is a Condition required on
our part before Justification. Filii Armin.

Nonconformist.
THis inherent Righteousness, taking it for that which is habitual and actual,
is the same with our Sanctification; neither is any difference between them,
only they are diverse Names of the same thing; for our Sanctification is the
inherent Renovation of our Natures, exerting and acting it self in Newness of
Life, or Obedience unto God in Christ, and Works of Righteousness. But
Sanctification and Justification are in the Scripture perpetually
distinguished, whatever respect of Causality the one of them may have to the
other: And those who confound them, as the Papists do, do not so much dispute
about the nature of Justification, as endeavor to prove that indeed there is
no such thing as Justification at all: for that which would serve most to
enforce it, namely, the Pardon of Sin, they place it in the exclusion and
extinction of it, by the infusion of inherent Grace, which does not belong unto
Justification. -- By this inherent personal Righteousness we may be said
several ways to be justified. As; (1.) in our Consciences, in as much as it is
an Evidence in us and unto us of our Participation of the Grace of God in Jesus
Christ, and of our acceptance with him, which has no small influence into our
Peace: So speaks the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 12. who yet disclaims any Confidence
therein as unto his Justification before God, 1 Cor. 4. 4. (2.) Hereby may we
be said to be justified before Men; that is, acquitted of Evils laid unto our
charge, and approved as righteous and unblameable. -- (3.) This Righteousness
is pleadable unto our Justification against all the Charges of Satan who is the
greatest Accuser of the Brethren, of all that believe, whether he manage his
Charge privately in the Consciences, which is as it were before God, as he
charged Job, or by his Instruments in all manner of Reproaches and Calumnies,
whereof some in this Age have had Exprience in an eminent manner, this
Righteousness is pleadable unto our Justification. On a supposition of these
things wherein our personal Righteousness is allowed its proper place and use,
I do not understand that there is an Evangelical Justification, whereby
Believers are by and on the account of this personal inherent Righteousness
justified in the sight of God; nor does the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ unto our absolute Justification before him depend thereon. For, 1. None
have this personal Righteousness but they are antecedently justified in the
sight of God. It is wholly the Obedience of Faith proceeding from true and
saving Faith in God by Jesus Christ: for as it was said before, Works before
Faith, are as by general consent excluded from any Interest in our
Justification; and we have proved that they are neither Conditions of it,
Dispositions unto it, nor Preparations for it, properly so called. But every
true Believer is immediately justified on his believing: Nor is there any
moment of time wherein a Man is a true Believer, according as Faith is required
in the Gospel, and yet not be justified. -- Wherefore this personal
Righteousness cannot be the Condition of our Justification before God, seeing
it is consequential thereunto. -- Justification before God is a freedom and
absolution from a Charge before God, at least it is contained therein. And the
Instrument of this Charge must either be the Law or the Gospel: But neither the
Law nor the Gospel do before God, or in the sight of God, charge true Believers
with Unbelief, Hypocrisy, or the like: For who shall lay any thing unto the
charge of God's Elect, who are once justified before him? Such a Charge may be
laid against them by Satan, by the Church sometimes on mistake, by the World,
as it was in the case of Job, against which this Righteousness is pleadable.
But what is charged immediately before God, is charged by God himself, either
by the Law or the Gospel, and the Judgment of God is according unto Truth. If
this Charge be by the Law, by the Law we must be justified: But the Plea of
sincere Obedience will not justify us by the Law; that admits of none in
Satisfaction unto its Demands, but that which is complete and perfect. And
where the Gospel lays any thing unto the charge of any Persons before God,
there can be no Justification before God, unless we shall allow the Gospel to
be the Instrument of a false Charge: For what should justify him whom the
Gospel condemns? And if it be a Justification by the Gospel from the Charge of
the Law, it renders the Death of Christ of no effect: And a Justification
without a Charge is not to be supposed. -- Such a Justification as that
pretended is altogether needless and useless. This may easily be evinced from
what the Scripture asserts unto our Justification in the sight of God by Faith
in the Blood of Christ. -- Let that be considered, and it will quickly appear
that there is no place nor use for this new Justification upon our personal
Righteousness, whether it be supposed antecedent and subordinate thereunto, or
consequential and perfective thereof. This pretended Evangelical Justification
has not the nature of any Justification that is mentioned in the Scripture,
that is, neither that by the Law, nor that provided in the Gospel.
Justification by the Law is this, The Man that does the Works of it shall live
in them: And as unto Evangelical Justification, it is every way contrary unto
it: for herein the Charge against the Person to be justified is true, namely,
that he had sinned, and is come short of the Glory of God. In this it is false,
namely, that a Believer is an Unbeliever; a sincere Person, an Hypocrite; one
fruitful in good Works, altogether barren. And this false Charge is supposed to
be exhibited in the Name of God, and before him; our Acquitment in true
Evangelical Justification is by Absolution, or Pardon of Sin, here by a
Vindication of our own Righteousness. There the Plea of the Person to be
justified is, Guilty, all the World is become guilty before God; but here the
Plea of the Person on his Trial is not guilty: whereon the Proofs and Evidences
of Innocence and Righteousness do ensue; but this is a Plea which the Law will
not admit, and which the Gospel disclaims. -- This personal inherent
Righteousness wherewith we are said to be justified with this Evangelical
Justification, is our own Righteousness. Personal Righteousness and our own
Righteousness are Expressions equivalent; but our own Righteousness is not the
material cause of any Justification before God: For, (1.) It is unmeet so to
be, Isa. 64. 6. (2.) It is directly opposed unto that Righteousness whereby we
are justified, as inconsistent with it unto that end, Phil. 3. 9. Romans 10. 3,
4. None have this Evangelical Righteousness, but those who are in order of
Nature at least, justified before they actually have it; for it is that which
is required of all that do believe, and are justified thereon: And we need not
much enquire how a Man is justified after he is justified -- If we are in any
sense justified hereby in the sight of God, we have whereof to boast before
him; we may not have so absolutely and with respect unto Merit, yet we have so
comparatively, and in respect of others, who cannot make the same Plea for
their Justification.

But all boasting is excluded; and it will not relieve to say, that this
personal Righteousness is of the free Grace and Gift of God to some, and not
unto others; for we must plead it as our Duty, and not as God's Grace. -- I say
therefore that the Evangelical Justification which alone we plead about, is but
one, and is at once completed. -- Justification is such a Work as is at once
completed in all the Causes, and the whole Effect of it, tho not as unto the
full possession of all that it gives right and title unto: for all our Sins
past, present, and to come, were at once imputed unto, and laid upon Jesus
Christ; in what sense we shall afterward enquire. He was wounded for our
Transgressions, etc. Isa. 53. 6, 7. 1 Pet. 2. 24. The Assertions being
indefinite without exception or limitation, are equivalent unto universals. All
our Sins were on him, he bore them all at once, and therefore once died for all
-- at once finished Transgression, etc. Dan. 9. 24. -- At once expiated all our
Sins, Heb. 1. 3. -- by one offering he has perfected (consummated, completed
as to their spiritual state) them that are sanctified, chap. 10. 14. -- From
all which it appears that our Justification is at once complete, it must be so,
or no Man can be justified in this World -- no time can be assigned, nor
measure of Obedience be limited, whereon it may be supposed that any one comes
to be justified before God who is not so on his first believing. -- The
Scripture assigns no such time or measure -- To say that no Man is completely
justified in the sight of God in this Life, is at once to overthrow all that is
taught in the Scripture concerning Justification, and withal all Peace with God
and Comfort of Believers. But a Man acquitted upon his legal Trial, is at once
discharged of all that the Law has against him. -- There is a Justification of
convinced Sinners on their believing: Hereon are their Sins pardoned, their
Persons accepted with God, and a right is given unto them unto the Heavenly
Inheritance. This State they are immediately taken into upon their Faith, or
believing in Jesus Christ: And a state it is of actual Peace with God. These
things at present I take for granted, and they are the Foundation of all that I
shall plead in the present Argument: And I do take notice of them because some
seem to the best of my understanding, to deny any real actual Justification of
Sinners on their believing in this Life: for they make Justification to be only
a general conditional Sentence declared in the Gospel, which as unto its
execution is delayed unto the day of Judgment: For whilst Men are in this
World, the whole Condition of it being not fulfilled, they cannot be partakers
of it, or be actually and absolutely justified. Hereon it follows that indeed
there is no real state of assured Rest and Peace with God by Jesus Christ for
any Person in this Life. The causality of an Instrument we ascribe unto Faith
alone (as justifying) and because we do so, it is pleaded that we ascribe more
in our Justification unto our selves than they do by whom we are opposed: for
we ascribe the Efficiency of an Instrument herein unto our own Faith, when they
say only it is a Condition, or caus^ sine qua non, of our Justification. But I
judge that grave and wise Men ought not to give so much to the defense of the
Cause they have undertaken, seeing they cannot but know indeed the contrary;
for after they have given the specious name of a Condition, and a causa sine
qua non, unto Faith, they immediately take all other Graces and Works of
Obedience into the same state with it, and the same use in Justification: and
after this seeming Gold has been cast for a while into the Fire of
Disputation, there comes out the Calf of a personal inherent Righteousness,
whereby Men are justified before God, virtute foederis Evangelici; for as for
the Righteousness of Christ to be imputed unto us, it is gone into Heaven, and
they know not what is become of it. -- Let the Experience of them that believe
be inquired into, for their Consciences are continually exercised herein: What
is it they betake themselves unto? What is it that they plead with God for the
continuance of the Pardon of their Sins, and the acceptance of their Persons
before him? Is it any thing but sovereign Grace and Mercy through the Blood of
Christ? Dr. O. of Justif. p. 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 189, 199,
201, 315, 144, 206.

That a Sinner may be saved, the Scriptures declare that he must be both
justified and sanctified: the Romanists, as if one of those were but requisite,
call that Justification which in Scripture is Sanctification; and that which in
Scripture is Justification they admit not, as distinct from inherent
Righteousness. The Apostle Paul, who most insists upon the Doctrine of
Justification, delivers these two as distinct things, 1 Cor. 11. and elsewhere.
He ascribes Justification commonly to the Blood of Christ, Romans 5. 8, 9.
Sanctification to the Spirit of Christ, Tit. 3. 5. -- There are these severals
considerable about the imputing this Righteousness: 1. Substitution; Christ
sanctified in our stead, i. e. he tendered that which was due from us. 2.
Acceptance; the Father accepted what Christ performed in our stead, as
performed on our behalf. 3. Participation; we have the sruits and advantages of
his Undertakings, no less than if we our selves had satisfied. -- Thus you may
be justified in their way, if you will but have patience till your inherent
Righteousness in this World be perfect and spotless; or till the lowest degree
of it be absolute Perfection. If you think it impossible to be justified on
such terms, they will tell you there is nothing more easy. Morning Exerc.
against Popery, p. 442, 454, 456. How not Christ's Person simply, but Christ as
dying is the Obj^ct of Faith as justifying? -- We were virtually justified then
in Christ his being justified, as in a common Person. But besides all this,
there is a personal or an actual Justification to be bestowed upon us, that is,
an accounting and bestowing it upon us in our Persons, which is done when we
believe; and it is called (Romans 5. 1.) a being justified by Faith, and (ver.
10.) receiving the Atonement: Now this depends upon Christ's Intercession. --
In that he rose again as a common Person, this assures us yet further, that
there is a formal, legal, and irrevocable Act of Justification of us passed and
enrolled in that Court of Heaven between Christ and God; and that in his being
then justified, we were also justified in him, so that thereby our
Justification is made past recalling. Dr. Goodwin Christ set forth, p. 29, 182,
262. -- Whether through Faith as a Condition or not? I would have this word
laid aside, Perkins upon the Galatians; he will hardly acknowledge it a
Condition: another in a Book called, The Triumph of Faith, says, it is
improperly a Condition. If it be not, why do they use the word? There is a
danger in it. 1. A Condition may be pleaded: I may go and plead this, I have
believed, etc. Will any Man make this a Condition between the Giver and
Receiver, I will give you an Alms, if you will receive it? Is it not a
Condition? 2. All those Expressions, If a Man believes, he shall be saved,
etc. import, that he that does so shall be saved in the Event, which the Elect
only are, to whom he gives Faith. And it is a Phrase that imports a pleading;
a Prisoner is not pardoned unless he plead his Pardon, or has his Pardon read
at the Bar: Will you say this Act of his is the Condition of his being
pardoned? It is that without which he is not legally pardoned, he does not
stand absolved else. Wash and be clean: He could never have been cleansed if he
had not washed; was his washing a Condition? No, he did not stand upon a
Condition with him in it: It was indeed a Duty, it was likewise a means or a
manner by which God did cleanse him. My Brethren, the nature of Faith, it is
modest, it never makes a Plea for it self, it wholly pleads Grace, and
nothing else: The truth is, if it were a Condition, a Man might plead it before
God, as the Apostle says, Romans 4. That it is called the Law of Faith, and
therefore this must be the Condition; it follows not, it is the Duty, and it is
the Command of the Gospel, without which God saves no Man: and is not that
enough? It seems to me to import, as if there were an universal Grace, and that
it is the Condition terminateth it to this Man, and not to that. Then again,
whether it be the Act of Faith that justifies, or that is accounted a Man's
Righteousness when we are said to be saved through Faith? Surely no, for God
might have took Works as well; if he would have took it as an Act, he might
have took any Act, Love it self.

There is this reason lies in the bottom of my Heart against it, besides all
that else the Scripture says against it: That if when I go to God to be
justified, I must present to him my believing, as the matter of my
Righteousness, and only Christ's Death as the MERIT OF IT, what will follow?
Two things clearly to me. 1. That the Heart is taken off from looking upon the
Righteousness of Christ wholly, and diverteth to its own Righteousness in the
very act of believing for Righteousness, and presents that to God which the
Scripture is clear against: I say, it does take the Heart off from the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus, or the eying of that, and causes it to divert
into it self, and presents its own Faith to God. 2. Every Man that will believe
to be justified, and go to God and say, Lord, justify me, he must have an
Evidence that he has Faith; for how else can he present that as the matter of
his own Righteousness? Now millions of Souls cannot do this, they were in a
poor case if they should be put to it. The Apostle says, it was of Faith that
it might be sure. If Justification had been founded on the Act of Faith, it had
been as sure on Works as Faith; for that Faith that draws out an Act of Love,
is as apt to fail as that Act of Love. But here is no uncertainty, while I
believe to be justified by the Righteousness of Christ, but my Faith is
swallowed up there; tho I may doubt of my Faith relying on him, yet I have a
sure Object, I have a sure Matter to represent to God for me: whereas if
believing was that I had to represent to God to be justified by, suppose my
Faith fail me, I have not a sure matter of Righteousness to represent to God:
The very Object Faith believes on is a Contradiction to this, that the Act of
Faith should be the matter of my Justification. I yield this, when God does
justify, he takes notice of the Act in its kind, of the degree of it: Abraham
was strong in Faith, but in the point of Justification he takes notice of
Christ in the Heart. The truth is, boasting would be as much of Faith as of
Works, if I were justified by the Act of Faith; whereas the Apostle says, Not
of Works, lest any Man should boast. Dr. Goodwin on the Ephesians, Part 2. p.
301, 302.

In calling God shows himself to be a God of all Grace, in bestowing on thee
then a Righteousness, and that of Christ's, which had all Obedience in it; and
he bestowed it then on thee wholly, and at once, and not by parcels afterward;
not some of it at one time, and some of it at another, no, but in one entire
single Gift. -- He showed himself the God of all Grace in sanctifying Grace,
which consists of two parts, MORTIFICATION of Sin, and the New Creature that is
wrought in the room of Corruption then mortified. Dr. Goodwin of Election, p.
272.

It is taken also for granted on all other occasions, that when there is an
appearance of Repugnancy or Contradiction in any places of Scripture, if some
or any of them do treat directly, designedly, and largely about the matter
concerning which there is a seeming Repugnancy or Contradiction, and others, or
any other speak of the same things only obiter, occasionally, transiently, in
order unto other ends, the Truth is to be learned, stated and fixed from the
former places. -- He (the Apostle James) does not undertake to declare the
Doctrine of our Justification before God; but having another design in hand, as
we shall see immediately, he vindicates it from the Abuse that some in those
days had put it unto, as other Doctrines of the Grace of God which they turned
into Licentiousness. -- That they (Paul and James) have not the same scope,
design or end in their Discourses; that they do not consider the same Question,
nor state the same Case, nor determine the same Enquiry; and therefore not
speaking ad idem, unto the same thing, do not contradict one another. (2.) That
as Faith is a word of various signification in the Scripture, and does, as we
have before proved, denote that which is of diverse kinds, they speak not of the
same Faith, or Faith of the same kind, and therefore there can be no
Contradiction, in what one ascribes unto it, and the other derogates from it,
seeing they speak not of the same Faith. (3.) That they do not speak of
Justification in the same sense, nor with respect unto the same ends. (4.) That
as unto Works they both intend the same, namely, the Works of Obedience unto
the Moral Law. -- The whole of his (Paul's) Purpose is to declare how a guilty
convinced Sinner comes through Faith in the Blood of Christ to have all his
Sins pardoned, to be accepted with God, and obtain a right unto the heavenly
Inheritance; that is, be acquitted and justified in the sight of God. -- James
does not state the Case how a guilty convinced Sinner, whose Mouth is stopped as
unto any Plea or Excuse for himself, may come to be justified before God, that
is, receive the Pardon of Sins, and the Gift of Righteousness unto Life. To
resolve this Question into our own Works, is to overthrow the whole Gospel: But
he had in hand a business quite of another nature. -- A desirable Estate they
thought they had attained, suited unto all the Interest of the Flesh, whereby
they might live in Sin, and neglect of all Duty of Obedience, and yet be
eternally saved. -- James does not once enquire how a guilty convinced Sinner,
cast and condemned by the Law, may come to be justified before God: and Paul
speaks to nothing else. -- They speak not of Justification in the same sense,
nor unto the same end. It is of our absolute Justification before God, the
Justification of our Persons, our acceptance with him, and the grant of a Right
unto the Heavenly Inheritance, that the Apostle Paul does treat, and thereof
alone. This he declares in all the causes of it, all that on the part of God,
or on our part concurreth thereunto. The Evidence, the Knowledge, the Sense, the
Fruit, the Manifestation of it in our Consciences, in the Church unto others
that profess the Faith, he treats not of, but speaks of them separately as they
occur on other occasions. The Justification he treats of is but one, and at
once accomplished before God, changing the relative state of the Person
justified, and is capable of being evidenced various ways unto the Glory of
God, and the Consolation of them that truly believe: Hereof the Apostle James
does not treat at all, for his whole enquiry is after the nature of that Faith
whereby we are justified, and the only way whereby it may be evidenced to be of
the right kind, such as a Man may safely trust unto; wherefore he treats of
Justification only as to the Evidence and Manifestation of it, nor had he any
occasion to do otherwise. -- There is therefore no appearance of the least
Contradiction between this Apostle and Paul, who professedly asserts, that
Abraham was not justified before God by Works: for James only declares that by
the Works which he performed after he was justified, he was manifested and
declared so to be. Dr. Owen of Justific. p. 558, 560, 562, 564, 565, 569, 579.

There are three great Changes wrought in a Christian at times. 1. One in
Justification, when a guilty Sinner has Sin taken away, that it is not
imputed. 2. In Sanctification, when a Sinner living and wallowing in Sin, has
Sin taken away (the Power of it) that it does not reign. 3. In Glorification,
when the sanctified Person has Sin taken away, (all the Remainders of it) that
it has no being left. Mr. Sheffield Morn. Exerc. method. p. 522.

Genesis 3. 21. Unto Adam also and to his Wife did the Lord God make Coats of
Skins, and clothed them. -- As they were under a double Nakedness both of Soul
and Body; their Souls divested of God's Image, and original Righteousness, and
their Bodies overspread with shame; so the Lord provided a double clothing for
them: He did not clothe their Bodies and leave their Souls naked, but he gave
them both the upper Garment of Justification and imputed Righteousness, and the
inner Garment of Sanctification and Grace inherent. Mr. Mather on the Types, p.
30.

Rev. 7. 9, 13, 14. -- These are they which came out of great Tribulation, and
have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb, that is,
the imputed Righteousness of Christ; it is yet more expressly plain, Rev. 19. 8.
And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and
white; for the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints. 1. There is a
Righteousness in Christ, and imputed to Believers: This is the Righteousness of
Justification. 2. There is a Righteousness inherent in Believers, but derived
from Christ; and this is the Righteousness of Sanctification: Some have called
them the upper Garment of Justification, and the inner Garment of
Sanctification; they are both mentioned Psalm. 45. 13, 14. the meaning is, the
upper Garment of Justification, and the under Garment of Sanctification.
Believers therefore, who are spiritual Priests, they should not clothe
themselves with the filthy Rags of their own Righteousness, nor with the rotten
Garments of counterfeit Graces, as Hypocrites and Justiciaries do; but get on
this Priestly Attire, seek it of Christ, Rev. 3. 18. it is promised, Rev. 3. 4,
5. your Faith should rejoice and triumph in it, Isa. 61. 10. Ibid. p. 630.

1. The matter of our Justification is Christ's Obedience, inherent in himself,
and absolutely perfect, admitting of no degrees; the matter of our
Sanctification is wrought within us, imperfect as to degrees, and admits of
Wanes and Increases. The very Faith whereby we receive Pardon is but a Grain of
Mustard Seed at first, it admits of degrees; but the Object apprehended, Christ
and his Righteousness, is always the same; and as much of Christ's Obedience
(even all) is given to every Believer, to the weak as to the strong; and hence
it is they are once and together perfected in Justification, before they have
all or half the measures of Sanctification, which the Lord will give them in
his time.

2. The form, manner, and way of Justification is by God's free act of
Imputation, reckoning and accounting of Christ's Obedience unto us; the form of
our Sanctification is by infusion of Holiness, by the Spirit of Holiness, from
Christ's fullness into our empty Hearts.

3. Justification causes a relative Change, or it makes a change of Relation:
Sanctification works in us a change of Qualities by the Creation of the new
Divine Nature, and mortifying of our old corrupt Nature.

4. The parts of our Justification are God's not imputing of Sin, through his
imputing of Christ's Sufferings, and his accepting of our Persons as righteous,
by his imputing of Christ's active Obedience. The parts of our Sanctification
are Vivification, or the creating, quickening, and begetting new Divine
Qualities (resembling God's Nature) and Mortification of the old sinful
Dispositions and Seeds of Sin. -- In our Justification, Christ's Obedience
stands only upon account, and all our most sanctified Works and Righteousnesses
stand by as Ciphers, and are to be esteemed as Loss and Dung.

Take Sanctification by it self, it is of great excellency and use: A good Work
done in Faith by a Person justified, is better than all the glorious Deeds of
Pharisees and Hypocrites; but bring it, and all that all the Saints can bring
together before the Tribunal of God's strict Law and Justice for their
Justification in that Court, and they and their Works will be damned to Hell
for their inherent and adherent Imperfections. -- In our Justification we have
that perfect Righteousness in Christ, which as it is his, is the Cause and
Merit of our Salvation, and that gives a just right and title to the Kingdom:
In our Sanctification we have the Cognizance and Badg of such as shall be
saved, and inherit the Kingdom. The former is the ground why, the latter the
Evidence whereby we know we have the Kingdom. -- In Justification we are mere
Patients all along, through the Righteousness put upon us by God's pure Act and
Account: In Sanctification we are after-Agents, i. e. after the first infusion
of the Spirit's newborn Qualities; being acted, we act in the strength of
Jesus Christ. Although too many be willingly ignorant of these Distinctions, yet
they are necessarily useful to deliver People from Popery, and artificial
Babylonish Confusion, in and about this great Fundamental Truth of a believing
Sinner's Justification. Mr. Stalham Reviler rebuked, p. 126, 127, 128.

Regeneration it differs from Conversion. Regeneration is a spiritual Change,
Conversion is a spiritual Motion: In Regeneration there is a Power conferred,
Conversion is the exercise of this Power: In Regeneration there is given us a
Principle to turn, Conversion is our actual turning; that is, the Principle
whereby we are brought out of a state of Nature into a state of Grace; and
Conversion the actual fixing on God, as the terminus ad quem: one gives posse
agere, the other actu agere. -- Conversion is related to Regeneration, as the
Effect to the Cause: Life precedes Motion, and is the cause of Motion. -- In
Regeneration, Man is wholly passive; In Conversion he is active: as a Child in
its formation in the Womb contributes nothing to the first infusion of Life,
but after it has Life, it is active, and its motion natural. -- It differs
from Justification. -- They agree in the term to which, that is, God. By
Justification we are reconciled to God; by Regeneration we are assimilated,
made like to God. -- It differs from Justification in the nature of the Change:
Justification is a relative Change; whereby a Man is brought from a state of
Guilt, to a state of Righteousness; from a state of Slavery, to a state of
Liberty; from the Obligation of the Covenant of Works, to the Privilege of the
Covenant of Grace; from being a Child of Wrath, to be an Heir of the Promise.
Regeneration is a physical Change, and real, as when a dead Man is raised from
Death to Life; it is a filling the Soul with another Nature, Ephesians. 2. 1. The
Translators have inserted those words, has he quickened, because those words
are put in the 5th Verse; but me thinks the words refer better to the 23d Verse
of the first Chapter, speaking of Christ, who fills all in all, and fills you
too with a spiritual Life; or he passes from the Power of God in raising
Christ, to his Power in raising us. It Is a change of Nature, and of that Nature
whereby we are Children of Wrath, not only by the first Sin, but by a
Conversation according to the course of the World: And this quickening respects
the change of that Nature which was prone to a worldly Conversation, and a
fulfilling the desires of the Flesh. The first is a change of a Man's
Condition, this is a change in a Man's Disposition. When a Man is made a
Magistrate, there is a change in his Relation; when a Servant or Slave is made
a Freeman, there is an alteration of his Condition: but neither the ones
Magistracy, nor the others Liberty fills their Hearts with new Principles, or
plants a new frame in their Nature: Relation and Nature are two distinct
things. In Creation there is a Relation of a Creature to God, which results
from the mere being of the Creature; but there is also the Nature of the
Creature in such a rank of being, which is added over and above to its mere
being. The Apostle in the Verses following the Text, speaks of Reconciliation,
or Non-imputation of our Trespasses, as distinct from that change wrought in us
in the new Creation. In Justificaiton we are freed from the Guilt of Sin, and
so have a Title to Life; in Regeneration we are freed from the filth of Sin,
and have the purity of God's Image in part restored to us. -- They differ in
the Cause, and other ways: Justification is the immediate Fruit of the Blood of
Christ. Being justified by his Blood: Regeneration is by the immediate
Operation of the Spirit, therefore called the Sanctification of the Spirit; the
matter of that is without us, the Righteousness of Christ; the matter of the
other within us, a gracious Habit; the form of the one is imputing, the form of
the other is infusing, or putting into us: they differ in the end, one is from
Condemnation to Absolution; the other from Pollution to Communion. In the
immediate Effect, one gives us a right, the other a fitness. In their
Qualities, the Righteousness of one is perfect in our Head and imputed to us.
The Righteousness by Regeneration is actively in us, and aspires to Perfection.
Mr. Charnock, Vol. 2. p. 70, 71, 72.

If thou be in Christ, fear not Sin; for God from everlasting saw all thy
Sins, and yet for all that he continued to accept thee in the Beloved. It
altered his Mind not a whit; he was so much pleased with his Beloved, that tho
in his own Prescience he foresaw what we would be, yet having chosen us in his
Son, he accepts us in him; and so now that we actually exist and sin against
him, he notwithstanding finds so much Contentment at home in his Son (having
him by him) that he can patiently bear with us, and please himself in Christ:
And so, tho he see thee sinful for the present, and foresaw thee sinful from
everlasting, yet he still accepts thee in the Beloved: And ^the reason is,
because Jesus Christ is more beloved of him than Sin is o^ can be hated by him.
If ever Sin should come to have more interest for Hatred in the sight of God,
than Christ has for Love, thou might well fear; but he has accepted thee
in his Beloved, therefore be not thou afraid. Dr. Goodwin on Ephesians. Part 1. p.
95.

Obj. But you will say, this comes nigh to Blasphemy, that God loves his People
in their sinning as well as in strictest Obedience: And if so, who will care to
serve him more, or to walk with him unto well pleasing?

Answ. There are few Truths of Christ, which from some or other have not
received like Entertainment with this.

Terms and Appellations are at the will of every Imposer: things are not at all
varied by them. The Love of God in it self is the eternal Purpose and Act of
his Will.

This is no more changeable than God himself if it were, no Flesh could be
saved: but it changes not, and we are not consumed. What then! Loves he his
People in their sinning? Yes, his People, not their sinning. Alters he not his
Love toward them? not the Purpose of his Will, but the Dispensations of his
Grace. He rebukes them, he chastens them, he hides his Face from them, he
smites them, he fills them with a sense of Indignation; but woe, woe would it be
to us, should he change in his Love, or take away his Kindness from us: Those
very things which seem to be Demonstrations of the change of his Affections
toward his, do as clearly proceed from Love, as those which seem to be the
most genuine Issues thereof. But will not this encourage to sin? He never
tasted of the Love of God, that can seriously make this Objection. The Doctrine
of Grace may be turned into Wantonness, the Principle cannot. -- Detestation of
Sin in any may well consist with the acceptance of their Persons, and
designation to Life eternal. Dr. O. Communion with Father, Son and Spirit, p.
30.

Hence it follows that the Anger of God toward his sinning Elect is not an
Hatred as opposite to Love, with which he before did follow them, but only a
displicency and unchangeable Hatred against Sin, not their Persons, and
sometimes a fatherly Chastisement. Hence God always loved the Elect, and always
hated the Reprobate. Rutherf. Exerc. Apolog. p. 47. --

The Arminians sufficiently detect themselves, who will have the Act of
Justifying, which above they called an immanent Decree in God, to be a
temporary Act coaeval with the Work of Free Will, which is to feign God to be
more mutable than Protheus, who fixes, refixes places, and rescinds hourly and
yearly so many Volitions and De^es. Sins are imputed or expiated in the Blood
of Christ, and for them Satisfaction made to the Anger of God, or not; if so,
then notwithstanding that God should impute Sins, the Elect is in favor with
God, and a true Price paid for Sins imputed. But what Justice is it to impute
that for a Debt which is plainly paid? If not, then the Faith of the Elect
after they believe, causes that God should not impute Sin, for which as yet no
Satisfaction is given to the Displeasure of God, and this were a Remission
without shedding of Blood; or Faith must be the (...), or Price for those Sins,
which is absurd. But this is that the Arminians would have God not to have
obtained a perfect Remission for the Elect, but that it is conditionally at
hand for them if they shall believe, which yet overthrows their own Doctrine;
or that our Faith superaddeth something to the Satisfaction of Christ, by which
it may be complete, as if it were insufficient in it self. Hence it is also
that no one before Death is truly justified; for God will always impute Sins to
be committed, against which the Scripture cries out, which testifies that we
have Peace in this Life from Justification, and access unto God through Christ,
Romans 5. 1, 2. and Remission of Sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 13, 14. Ibid. p. 65,
66.

1 Cor. 1. 30. Who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption.] Having nothing at all of your selves, God has
given you all in Christ, according to the Decree he made, that he should be the
source, and the root of all the spiritual Blessings conferred upon the Church;
which are Wisdom by the Revelation of the Mystery of Salvation, Righteousness
by his Satisfaction and perfect Obedience for our Justification, Sanctification
by the gift of the Spirit of Regeneration, and Redemption both of Body and Soul
from all Evil and Misery by the last and glorious Resurrection in virtue of our
mystical Union with him. -- Phil. 3. 9. Not having mine own Righteousness.]
That is, to be in Christ, to be found not in our own Righteousness, but clothed
with the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us. Assemblies Annotations.

Romans 4. Concerning this Person the Apostle affirms, that is Faith is counted
for Righteousness. -- Some say the meaning of them is, that Faith as an Act, a
Grace, a Duty, or Work of ours, is so imputed; others say, that it is Faith as
it apprehends Christ and his Righteousness, which is properly imputed unto us,
that is intended: So Faith they say justifies, or is counted for Righteousness
relatively, not properly, with respect unto its Object; and so acknowledge a
Trope in the words. -- The sense of the whole with the former, is, Unto him
that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith
and Works are counted to him for Righteousness; which is not only to deny what
the Apostle affirms, but assign unto him a plain Contradiction. -- The design
of the Apostle is, That we are justified by the Righteousness which is of God
by Faith in the Blood of Christ. -- All Works are excluded. -- But Faith
absolutely as a single Grace, Act, and Duty of ours, much more as it includes
Obedience in it, is a Work, and in the latter sense it is all Works. --
Wherefore I shall oppose some Arguments unto this feigned sense of the Apostles
words.

1. To believe absolutely, as Faith is an Act and Duty of ours, and Works are
not opposed; for Faith is a Work, an especial kind of working: But Faith as we
are justified by it, and Works, or to work, are opposed. To him that works
not, but believes: So Gal. 2. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8.

2. It is the Righteousness of God that is imputed unto us: For we are made the
Righteousness of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. The Righteousness of God upon
them that believe, Romans 3. 21, 22. But Faith absolutely considered, is not the
Righteousness of God, God imputes unto us Righteousness without Works; Romans 4.
16. But there is no intimation of a double Imputation of two sorts of
Righteousnesses, of the Righteousness of God, and that which is not so. Now
Faith absolutely considered, is not the Righteousness of God.

1. That whereunto the Righteousness of God is revealed, whereby we believe and
receive it, is not it self the Righteousness of God; for nothing can be the
cause or means of it self: But the Righteousness of God is revealed unto Faith,
Romans 1. 16. and by it is it received, Romans 3. 22. chap. 5. 11.

2. Faith is not the Righteousness of God which is by Faith: But the
Righteousness of God which is imputed unto us, is the Righteousness of God
which is by Faith, Romans 3. 22. Phil. 3. 9.

3. That whereby the Righteousness of God is to be sought, obtained, and
submitted unto, is not that Righteousness it self: But such is Faith, Romans 9.
30, 31. chap. 10. 3.

4. The Righteousness which is imputed unto us is not our own antecedently unto
that Imputation: That I may be found in him, not having my own Righteousness;
Phil. 3. 9. But Faith is a Man's own: Show me thy Faith, I will show thee my
Faith, James 2. 18.

5. God imputes Righteousness unto us, Romans 4. 6. And that Righteousness which
God imputes unto us, is the Righteousness whereby we are justified, for it is
imputed unto us that we may be justified. But we are justified by the Obedience
and Blood of Christ, Romans 5. 19. v. 9. Heb. 9. 26. Isa. 53. 11. But Faith is
neither the Obedience nor the Blood of Christ.

6. Faith, as we said before, is our own; and that which is our own may be
imputed unto us: But the Discourse of the Apostle is about that which is not
our own antecedently unto Imputation, but is made ours thereby, as we have
proved; for it is of Grace. And the Imputation of what is really our own unto
us antecedently unto that Imputation, is not of Grace in the sense of the
Apostle: for what is so imputed, is imputed for what it is, and nothing else:
for that Imputation is but the Judgment of God concerning the thing imputed,
with respect unto them whose it is. So the Fact of Phineas was imputed unto him
for Righteousness: God judges it, and declares it to be a righteous
rewardable Act. Wherefore if our Faith and Obedience be imputed unto us, that
Imputation is only the Judgment of God that we are Believers and obedient. Dr.
Owen of Justif. p. 458, etc.

-- And whereas it is added, that he is blind who sees not, that this
Righteousness of ours is subordinate unto the Righteousness of Christ, I must
acknowledge my self otherwise minded, notwithstanding the severity of this
Censure. It seems to me, that the Righteousness of Christ is subordinate unto
this Righteousness of our own, as here it is stated, and not the contrary; for
the end of all is our acceptance with God as righteous: But according unto
these thoughts, it is our own Righteousnesses whereon we are immediately
accepted with God as righteous, only Christ has deserved by his Righteousness,
that our Righteousness may be so accepted, and is therefore as to the end of
our Justification before God, subordinate thereunto. -- The Papists make them
meritorious of it, at least of our second Justification, as they call it.

This, say some, ought not to be admitted, for it includes boasting; Merit and
boasting are inseparable: wherefore say others, they are only causa sine qua
non, they are the Condition of it; or they are our Evangelical Righteousness
before God, whereon we are evangelically justified; or they are a subordinate
Righteousness, whereon we obtain an Interest in the Righteousness of Christ, or
are comprised in the Condition of the new Covenant, whereby we are justified,
or are included in Faith, being the form of it, or of the Essence of it one way
or other; for herein Men express themselves in great variety. But so long as
our Works are hereby asserted in order unto our Justification, how shall a Man
be certain that they do not include boasting; or that they do express the true
sense of these words, not of Works left any Man should boast? There is some
kind of Ascription unto our selves in this matter, which is boasting.

If any shall say that they know well enough what they do, and know that they
do not boast in what they ascribe unto Works, I must say that in general I
cannot admit it: for the Papists affirm of themselves, that they are most
remote from boasting; yet I am very well satisfied that Boasting and Merit are
inseparable. The Question is not what Men think they do, but what Judgment the
Scripture passes on what they do. Ibid. p. 332, 523, 524.

Q. What is Justification? Answ. Justification is an Act of God's free Grace
unto Sinners, in which he pardons all their Sins, accepts and accounts
their Persons righteous in his sight, not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but only for the perfect Obedience and full Satisfaction of
Christ by God imputed to them, and received by Faith alone.

Q. What is Sanctification? Answ. Sanctification is a Work of God's Grace,
whereby they whom God has before the Foundation of the World chosen to be
holy, are in time, through the powerful Operation of his Spirit applying the
Death and Resurrection of Christ unto them, renewed in their whole Man after
the Image of God, having the Seeds of Repentance unto Life, and of all other
saving Graces put into their Hearts, and those Graces so stirred up, increased
and strengthened, as that they more and more die unto Sin, and rise unto
newness of Life.

Q. Wherein do Justification and Sanctification differ? Answ. Although
Sanctification be inseparably joined with Justification, yet they differ, in
that God in Justification imputes the Righteousness of Christ, in
Sanctification his Spirit infuseth Grace, and enableth to the exercise thereof;
in the former Sin is pardoned, in the other it is subdued: the one does equally
free all Believers from the revenging Wrath of God, and that perfectly in this
Life, that they never fall into Condemnation; the other is neither equal in
all, nor in this Life perfect in any, but growing up to Perfection. Assembl.
larger Catechism.

1. Justice pleads. I arraign before the Tribunal a Rebel, who was the glorious
Work of thy Hands, the Center of thy rich Goodness, and a Counterpart of thy
own Image; he is indeed miserable, whereby to excite thy Compassion; but he is
not miserable, without being criminal: Thou did create him in a state, and
with Ability to be otherwise: The Riches of thy Bounty aggravate the blackness
of his Crime.

He is a Rebel, not by Necessity, but Will; What Constraint was there upon him
to listen to the Counsels of the Enemy of God? What Force could there be upon
him, since it is without the compass of any Creature to work upon, or constrain
the Will? Nothing of Ignorance can excuse him, the Law was not ambiguously
expressed, but in plain words, both as to Precept and Penalty; it was writ in
his Nature in legible Characters. Had he received any disgust from thee after
his Creation, it would not excuse his Apostasy, since, as a Sovereign, thou
were not obliged to thy Creature: Thou had provided all things richly for
him, he was crowned with Glory and Honor: Thy infinite Power had bestowed upon
him an Habitation richly furnished, and varieties of Servants to attend him.
Whatever he viewed without, and whatever he viewed within himself, were several
Marks of thy Divine Bounty, to engage him to Obedience. Had there been some
reason of any disgust, it could not have balanced that Kindness which had so
much reason to oblige him: However, he had received no Courtesy from the fallen
Angel to oblige him to turn into his Camp. Was it not enough that one of thy
Creatures would have stripped thee of the Glory of Heaven, but this also must
deprive thee of thy Glory upon Earth, which was due from him to thee as his
Creator? Can he charge the difficulty of the Command? No: It was rather below
than above his Strength: He might rather complain that it was no higher,
whereby his Obedience and Gratitude might rather have a larger scope, and a
more spacious Field to move in, than a Precept so light, so easy, as to abstain
from one Fruit in the Garden. What Excuse can he have that would prefer the
Liquorishness of his Sense before the Dictates of his Reason, and the
Obligations of his Creation? The Law thou did set him was righteous and
reasonable; and shall Righteousness and Reason be rejected by the supreme and
infallible Reason, because the rebellious Creature has trampled upon it? What!
Must God abrogate his holy Law, because the Creature has slighted it? What
Reflection will this be upon the Wisdom that enacted it, and upon the Equity of
the Command and Sanction of it? Either Man must suffer, or the holy Law be
expunged, and for ever out of date: And is it not better Man should eternally
smart under his Crime, than any dishonorable Reflections of Unrighteousness be
cast upon the Law, and of Folly, and want of a foresight upon the Lawgiver? Not
to punish, would be to approve the Devil's Lie, and justify the Creatures
Revolt. It would be a Condemnation of thy own Law as unrighteous, and a
sentencing thy own Wisdom as imprudent. Better Man should for ever bear the
Punishment of his Offense, than God bear the Dishonor of his Attributes:
better Man should be miserable, than God should be unrighteous, unwise, false,
and tamely bear the denial of his Sovereignty. But what advantage would it be
to gratify Mercy by pardoning the Malefactor? Besides, the irreparable
dishonor to the Law, the falsifying thy Veracity in not executing the
denounced Threatening, he would receive Encouragement by such a Grace to spurn
more at thy Sovereignty, and oppose thy Holiness by running on in a course of
Sin with hopes of Impunity. If the Creature be restored, it cannot be expected
that he that has fared so well after the breach of it, should be very careful
of a future Observance: His easy Readmission would abet him in the repetition
of his Offense, and thou shall soon find him cast off all moral dependence on
thee? Shall he be restored without any Condition or Covenant? he is a Creature
not to be governed without a Law, and a Law is not to be enacted without a
Penalty. What future regard will he have to thy Precept? or what fear will he
have of thy Threatening, if his Crime be so lightly past over? Is it the
stability of thy Word? What reason will he have to give credit to that which he
has found already disregarded by thy self? Thy Truth in future threatenings
will be of no force with him, who has experienced thy laying it aside in the
former. It Is necessary therefore that the rebellious Creature should be
punished, for the preservation of the honor of the Law and the honor of the
Lawgiver, with all those Perfections that are united in the composure of it.

2. Mercy does not want a Plea. It Is true indeed, the Sin of Man wants not its
Aggravations: He has slighted thy Goodness, and accepted thy Enemy as his
Counselor; but it was not a pure Act of his own, as the Devil's Revolt was: He
had a Tempter, and the Devil had none: He had, I acknowledge, an Understanding
to know thy Will, and a Power to obey it; yet he was mutable, and had a
Capacity to fall. It was no difficult Task that was set him, nor a hard Yoke
that was laid upon, yet he had a brutish part as well as a rational, and Sense
as well as Soul; whereas the fallen Angel was a pure intellectual Spirit. Did
God create the World to suffer an, eternal Dishonor, in letting himself be
outwitted by Satan, and his Work wrested out of his hands? Shall the Work of
eternal Counsel presently sink into irreparable Destruction, and the honor of
an Almighty and wise Work be lost in the ruin of the Creature? This would seem
contrary to the nature of thy Goodness, to make Man only to render him
miserable; to design him in his Creation for the Service of the Devil, and not
for the Service of his Creator: What else could be the issue, if the chief Work
of thy Hand, defaced presently after the erecting, should for ever remain in
this marred condition; what can be expected upon the continuance of his Misery,
but a perpetual Hatred and Enmity of thy Creature against thee? Did God in
Creation design his being hated, or his being loved by his Creature? Shall God
make a holy Law, and have no Obedience to that Law from that Creature whom it
was made to govern? Shall the curious Workmanship of God, and the excellent
Engravings of the Law of Nature in his Heart be so soon defaced, and remain in
that blotted condition for ever?

This Fall thou could not but in the Treasures of thy infinite Knowledge
foresee; why had thou Goodness then to create him in an Integrity, if thou
would not have Mercy to pity him in Misery? Shall thy Enemy for ever trample
upon the honor of thy Work, and triumph over the Glory of God, and applaud
himself in the success of his Subtility? Shall thy Creature only passively
glorify thee as an Avenger, and not actively as a Compassionater? Am not I a
Perfection of thy Nature as well as Justice? Shall Justice ingross all, and I
never come into view?

It Is resolved already, that the fallen Angels shall be no Subjects for me to
exercise my self upon; and I have now less reason than before to plead for
them: they fell with a full consent of Will, without any motion from another;
and not content with their own Apostasy they envy Thee, and thy Glory upon
Earth as well as in Heaven, and have drawn into their Party the best part of
the Creation below: Shall Satan plunge the whole Creation in the same
irreparable Ruin with himself? If the Creature be restored, will he contract a
boldness in Sin by Impunity? Have thou not a Grace to render him ingenuous in
Obedience, as well as a Compassion to recover him from Misery? What will hinder
but that such a Grace which has established the standing Angels, may establish
this recovered Creature? If I am utterly excluded from exercising my self on
Men as I have been from Devils, a whole Species is lost; nay, I can never
expect to appear upon the Stage.

If thou will quite ruin him by Justice, and create another World, and another
Man; if he stand, thy Bounty will be eminent, yet there is no room for Mercy to
act, unless by the commission of Sin he exposes himself to Misery; and if Sin
enters into another World, I have little hopes to be heard then, if I am
rejected now. Worlds will be perpetually created by Goodness; Wisdom and Power:
Sin entering into these Worlds, will be perpetually punished by Justice; and
Mercy, which is a Perfection of thy Nature, will for ever be commanded silence,
and lie wrapped up in an eternal Darkness. Take occasion now therefore to expose
me to the knowledge of thy Creature, since without Misery, Mercy can never set
foot into the World.

Mercy pleads, if Man be ruined, the Creation is in vain; Justice pleads, if
Man be not sentenced, the Law is in vain; Truth backs Justice, and Grace abets
Mercy. What shall be done in this seeming Contradiction?

Mercy is not manifested if Man be not pardoned; Justice will complain if Man
be not punished.

3. An Expedient is found out by the Wisdom of God to answer these Demands, and
adjust the Differences between them. The Wisdom of God answers, I will satisfy
your Pleas. The Pleas of Justice shall be satisfied in punishing, and the Pleas
of Mercy shall be received in pardoning. Justice shall not complain for want of
Punishment, nor Mercy for want of Compassion. I will have an infinite Sacrifice
to content Justice; and the Virtue and Fruit of that Sacrifice shall delight
Mercy. Here shall Justice have Punishment to accept, and Mercy shall have
Pardon to bestow. The Rights of both are preserved, and the Demands of both
amicably accorded in Punishment and Pardon, by transferring the Punishment of
our Crimes upon a Surety, exacting a Recompense from his Blood by Justice, and
conferring Life and Salvation upon us by Mercy, without the expense of one drop
of our own. Thus is Justice satisfied in its Severities, and Mercy in its
Indulgencies. The Riches of Grace are twisted with the Terrors of Wrath. The
Bowels of Mercy are wound about the flaming Sword of Justice, and the Sword of
Justice protects and secures the Bowels of Mercy. Thus is God righteous without
being cruel, and merciful without being unjust; his Righteousness inviolable,
and the World recoverable. Thus is a resplendent Mercy brought forth in the
midst of all the Curses, Confusions, and Wrath threatened to the Offender; Romans
3. 24, 25. Mr. Charnock, Vol. 1. p. 381, 382, 383, 384. Now shall follow some
other Arguments out of Scripture to prove the Imputation as well of Christ's
active as passive Obedience. Arg. 1. The Apostle says, who was delivered to
death for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25. Here
Remission of Sins and Justification are made two distinct things, tho in Use
and Fruition never severed; and both of them are imputed unto us by Faith in
Christ: and tho it be here answered, that we have both these by the Death of
Christ, but the perfecting and manifestation thereof is referred to Christ's
Resurrection; yet it remains still, that there is more in Justification than
Remission of Sins, for otherwise the Apostle should commit a Tautology, a
verbal Repetition of the same thing: And if the Resurrection of Christ must
concur to our Justification, then more is required than his Passion only. Arg.
2. Romans 5. 19. As by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Here many are directly said to
be constituted just by Christ's Obedience. It will be answered that the passive
Obedience of Christ is understood, in being obedient unto death. Contra. Yea
the whole Obedience of Christ in his Life and Death, is here insinuated, as may
thus appear. 1. Christ's Obedience is set against Adam's Disobedience, which
was a Transgression of the whole Law; therefore Christ's Obedience must be
understood to be general. 2. The Apostle speaks of the Gift of Righteousness,
ver. 17. but donum Justitiae, the Gift of Righteousness is more than the taking
away of Sins. 3. And the reigning of Righteousness is set against the Reign of
Sin; but for Sin not to reign, and for Righteousness to reign, tho one
necessarily follows the other, yet they are in themselves diverse and
different. 4. The Apostle uses the word (...), constituentur, shall be
constituted Righteous; therefore Justification is a settling or constituting of
Men in the State of Righteousness before God, which is more than the Remission
of Sins, which shows a Privation only, acquittal or riddance of Evil and Sin.
Arg. 3. Add hereunto the place before urged against inherent Justice, that
Christ is our Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption; which place is thus
well interpreted by Mr. Calvin: By Justice or Righteousness he understands
that both Christ does expiate our Sins by his Death, and his Obedience is
imputed to us for Righteousness: for seeing the Justice of Faith consists in
the remission of Sins, and our gracious Acceptance, we obtain both by Christ,
etc. Beside then the remission of Sins, there is the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness that makes us accepted with God. Arg. 4. Even Reason it self
shows, that in Justification there is a Gift of Righteousness, beside
remission of Sins: for in every change and alteration there are two things to
be considered, from what we are changed, and into what, which are called,
terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem; as when a thing is turned from black to
white, there is the privation of Blackness, and the succeeding of Whiteness;
and when in the Air Darkness is expelled, and Light received: so to make a Man
just, there must be a remission of Sin, and a conferring of Righteousness. And
unto Salvation belongs Deliverance from Hell, and the possession of Heaven:
the one we are freed from by the redemption from our Sins, the other is given
us for the acceptance of Christ's Righteousness. We are not only freed from
Condemnation, but we also are made Heirs with God: the Offender being absolved
from the Sentence of the Judge, is not upon that honored and rewarded: so that
it stands with the Law of natural Reason, and Course of Civil Justice, that
two things must concur unto Justification, an Ablation of Sin, and Collation of
Righteousness. Arg. 5. To the perfecting of our Redemption, and setting us in
possestion of Heaven, it was requisite, that both the Law should be fulfilled,
which Man had transgressed, and the Punishment of the Law satisfied, that Man
by his Transgression had deserved. The one Christ did by his Death, the other
he wrought by his Life; and therefore the imputation of both is necessary: so
St. Paul shows this to be one of the ends for the which Christ took upon him
our Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.
4. But if it be here said, that both are not requisite in God's Justice, to
keep the Law, and to pay the Punishment, God's Justice is satisfied, in that
the Punishment is answered for transgressing the Law: Answ. True it is if we
expected to receive no more in Christ than we lost in Adam, which was the loss
of a terrestrial Paradise; to restore us to that we were in Adam, Satisfaction
for the Punishment had sufficed; but to bring us to Heaven, a new Merit by
Christ's perfect Obedience was to be procured, by the which Heaven is
purchased. Arg. 6. If Christ's actual Obedience be not a part of our
Justification, then some of Christ's Works had been superfluous, and not
necessary. But it will here be said, that after Christ became Man, it was
requisite, that he as Man should keep the Law, and as Man he was bound
thereunto. Answ. Christ must not be considered as a particular or private Man,
working for himself, but in the Person of a Redeemer, doing all he did for us:
He says indeed, thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness: but why did
it thus become him? as our Redeemer, to finish the work of our Redemption, for
the which he was sent; as St. Paul directly says, Gal. 4. He was made under
the Law, to redeem them which were under the Law: He was to be obedient to the
Law, and bound unto it, but for our sakes, to redeem us. This matter may be
thus resembled, like as a Prince resolving to go himself into Captivity, to
redeem his Subjects that are taken Captives, when he comes to deliver them,
will carry himself decently as becomes a Prince, yet all this was first
undertaken for his Subjects. So Christ the Prince of Glory, coming into the
World to redeem Man, being come, walks in all Virtue and Holiness, as it
became the Person of the Redeemer; yet all this was undertaken for us: so that
(...), originally Christ became obedient to the Law for us; (...),
consequently, he so was obedient in respect of his Person. Arg. 7. The Death
and Passion of Christ was available, because of the Holiness of his Person: we
were redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled. Christ
could not have redeemed us, if he had not been most holy and innocent: Christ's
Person cannot be severed then from his Obedience, from whence it takes the
value and force; the one being imputed unto us, the other must also. It will be
answered here, that the Holiness and Obedience of Christ was a Preparation and
Disposition unto his Passion; but it follows not, that the one should be
imputed as well as the other. Answ. It follows necessarily. Like as a Prince
should accept of an unspotted Lamb for a Captive; if he bring one that is
blemished and spotted, it will not be accepted: the Captive then is delivered,
because of the spotless Lamb which is offered; the Prisoner then is accepted,
because of the spotless Gift: and so are we accepted of God, for the undefiled
Lamb's sake: it is then his Innocence which makes his Death, and us in his
Death accepted. Arg. 8. The Papists themselves grant so much, that Christ's
Justice is imputed in respect of his Satisfaction; but they utterly refuse
imputative Justice: shall then Protestants join with Papists in overthrowing
one of the greatest Points and Articles, wherein we differ from the Church of
Rome, concerning Justification by the imputative Justice of Christ? We may here
say, as Jeh^ the Prophet to Jehoshaphat, that joined with Ahab in Battle,
Would thou help the Wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
Dr. Willet Synop. Pap. p. 1000, 1001. Let Mr. D. W's Subscribers and Followers
look to this, who with the World ran wondering after the Beast, that had
received his Power from the Dragon; Rev. 13. 3, 4.

Head 7. That inherent Sanctification, etc.
Conformist.
THE Condition of Man after the Fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural Strength and good Works, to Faith and
calling upon God: wherefore we have no Power to do good Works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good Will, and working with us when we have that good Will. Article
10. Church of England. [Mark, Reader, the Soundness of this Article; special
Grace not only from God, but by

spotted or made foul the Heart of Man, with a Stubbornness against and Hatred
of God and the Divine Law; this infused Righteousness softens the Heart,
kindles and enflames it with a love of what is good. Lastly, that (viz.
Original Sin) has infected all the [Dispositions] or Affections, and the
Appetite (or Desire) it self with Rebellion; this restored Holiness does
constrain those disturbed Affections into order, and disarms the rebellious
Concupiscence it self of its Dominion, and brings them as it were under a Yoke.
Dr. Davenant de Justif. Habit. cap. 3.

Regeneration] new Birth after we be once born naturally, to be born again
spiritually: Tit. 3. 5. By the Laver of Regeneration, or by the washing of the
Newbirth. -- Regeneration is commonly put and used by Divines for
Sanctification and Renovation; and then it imports and signifies as much as the
Reformation of a Man; which consists in the mortification of Sin, and newness
of Life: whereas if we speak exactly, and as the thing is, this renewing of our
Nature is but an effect and fruit of our Regeneration, which properly is our
Incorporation and Ingrafting into jesus Christ by Faith, whereby we have our
spiritual Being of Children in the Kingdom of Grace, as by carnal Generation we
have a natural being in the Kingdom of this World; John 1, 12, 13, 14.
Regeneration may therefore thus be defined, it is a Work or Act of God's
wonderful Power, begetting the Elect again to himself by the Ministry of the
Word, through the Spirit, that of the Children of Wrath (by the desert of Sin)
they might be made by Grace, through Faith in Christ, the Sons and Daughters of
God: Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will begat he us by the Word of Truth, Tit. 3. 4,
5, 6. Therefore the confounding of Regeneration with Sanctification, I do take
to be an oversight: but I judge it a gross Error, to think our selves to have
any stroke in our new Birth; so much as to assent to it, till of unwilling we
be made willing.

To be Regenerate] To be born again by the Spirit, that we may be the Children
of God: Joh. 3. 3. Unless a Man be regenerate and born again, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Mr. Wilson's Christian Dictionary.

The Schoolmen do usually speak: Although no Man is able by the Ministry of Men to
know the Nature of Faith, if he never heard any thing of it; yet he may by
God's help, if he live morally according to God's Law

Paul was most sure of God's Grace, and his Justification through Faith; he is
persuaded that nothing can separate him from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.
38. but he does acknowledge, that he is not justified by his faithful Labors in
the Gospel, or any other Works of his own, although he were clear in Conscience.
Dr. Willet Synop. Pap. p. 923.

Hence it appears that it was the judgment of the primitive Church that Men
should believe the Forgiveness of their own Sins -- First of all here comes a
common fault of Men to be rebuked. Every one will say, that he believes the
remission of Sins, yet no Man almost labors for a true and certain
Persuasion hereof in his own Conscience: and for proof thereof propound this
Question to the common Christian; Do thou persuade thy self that God gives
remission of Sins unto his Church? The Answer will be, I know and believe it.
But ask him further: Do thou believe the Pardon of thine own Sins? And then
comes in a blind Answer, I have a good hope to Godward, but I cannot tell, I
think no Man can say so much: for God says to no Man, Thy Sins are pardoned.
But this is to speak flat Contraries, to say they believe, and they cannot
tell: and it bewrays exceeding Negligence in matter of Salvation. Mr. Perkins
on the Creed, p. 507, 508.

Faith is called an Evidence: Hence we learn, that the nature of Faith stands
not in doubting, but in a Certainty and Assurance. The Romish doubting of the
Essence of Faith is as contrary to true Faith, as Darkness to Light. Mr.
Perkins on Heb. 11. 1.

Here I might take occasion to tax the comfortless Doctrine of Popery, which
maintains there can be no other ordinary Knowledge in this particular, touching
the Pardon of Sins, but that which is out of opinion and guess. If any Man (say
Papists) have any other Certainty herein, it is to be imputed to some
extraordinary Revelation, than thought to proceed out of the ordinary and usual
Course which God takes with his Children. Surely, if the Assurance in this
matter be but imagina-(...) Parts of the Earth, had no Affairs with the Jews,
and no Proselytes. And therefore it is false which some affirm, to wit, that
the choosing of the People of Israel was only a kind of greater Courtesy showed
to this Nation, or a more gentle entreating of it, and no peculiar and diverse
Favor, whereby he showed himself to be their Father and Redeemer only.

And to make or maintain a hidden and invisible Church among the Gentiles
before the coming of Christ, is altogether to contend against the Word. God is
only known in Judah, Ps d. 76. The Israelites only are called my People, Hos.
1. And they only were Christ's Sheepfold: because Christ when he came made one
Sheepfold of the Jews and Gentiles, John 10. 10. Ephesians. 2. 14. Mr. Perkins of
Predestination, page 121, 122, 123, 125, 226, 227, 228.

The fourth Defect is the Opinion of universal saving Grace, appertaining to,
all and every Man; which may be fitly termed the School of universal Atheism,
for it pulls down the Pale of the Church, and lays it waste as every common
Field: it breeds a Carelessness in the use of the means of Grace, the Word and
Sacraments; when as Men shall be persuaded that Grace shall be offered to every
one effectually, whether he be of the Church or not, at one time or other,
wheresoever or howsoever he live: as in the like case, if Men should be told
that whether they live in the Market Town or no, there shall be sufficient
Provision brought them, if they will but receive it and accept of it, who would
then come to the Market? Universal Grace has three Parts; universal Election;
universal Redemption; universal Vocation. Universal Election of all and every
Man is a witless Conceit: for if Men universally be appointed to Grace without
exception; then there is no electing or choosing of some out of Mankind to
Grace: and if some alone be appointed to Grace, as it must needs be in
Election, then it is not Grace universal. -- I cannot think that such a
poisoning Cockatrice can lay such good Eggs, or that wild Crab-trees (such as
all Men are in Adam) can bring forth sweet Fruits according to the Will of God,
except God pluck them forth of Adam, and plant them in the Garden of his Mercy,
and stock them, and graft the Spirit of Christ in them. Mr. Perkins's Golden
Chain, p. 477, 478, 624.

Object. That there is an universal or sufficiennt Grace, derived upon all Men
since the Fall of Adam, by virtue of which they may repent, believe, and be
saved, if they will themselves.

Answ. That there is not any such free Will, or universal or sufficient Grace
communicated unto all Men, whereby they may repent, believe, or be saved if
they will themselves; Jer. 10. 23. Psalm. 16. 9. Isa. 26. 12. Joh. 15. 5. chap.
6. 44. Pryn Anti-Armin. p. 50.

This then is the Difference which God's Word teaches us to put betwixt a
regenerate and an unregenerate Man. The one is alive unto God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; Romans 6. 11. and so enabled to yield himself unto God, as one
that is alive from the dead, and his Members as Instruments of Righteousness
unto God, v. 13. having his Fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life,
v. 22. The other is a mere Stranger from the Life of God, dead in Trespasses
and Sins, Ephesians. 4. 18. chapter 2. 1, 5. and so no more able to lead a holy Life
acceptable to God, than a dead Man is to perform the Actions of him that is
alive. He may live indeed the Life of a natural and a moral Man, and so
exercise the freedom of his Will, not only in natural and civil, but also in
moral Actions, so far as concerns external Conformity unto those Notions of
Good and Evil that remain in his Mind: (in respect whereof the very Gentile^,
Romans 2. 14. themselves, which have not the Law, are said to do by nature the
things contained in the Law;) he may have such Fruit, as not only common
Honesty and Civility, but common Gifts of God's Spirit likewise will yield; and
in regard thereof he may obtain of God temporal Rewards appertaining to this
transitory Life, and a lesser measure of Punishment in the World to come: yet
until he be quickened with the Life of Grace, and married to him who is raised
from the dead, Romans 7. 4. he cannot bring forth fruit unto God, nor be accepted
for one of his Servants.

This is the Doctrine of our Savior himself, John 15. 4, 5. Nothing, that is,
nothing truly good and acceptable unto God. This is the (...) that St. Paul
does every where inculcate: Romans 7. 18. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Heb. 11. 6. ^t. 1. 15.
Now ^ing the end of the Commandm^m is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a
good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Seeing the first
beginning from whence every good Action should proceed, is a sanctified Heart,
the last end the seeking of God's Glory, and Faith working by Love must
intercur between both: the moral Works of the unregenerate failing so foully
both in the beginning, middle, and end, are to be accounted Breaches rather of
the Commandment than Observances, Depravations of good Works rather than
Performances. For howsoever these Actions be in their own kind good, and
commanded of God, yet they are marred in the Carriage, that which is bonum (or
good) being done been (or well;) and so tho in regard of their matter they may
be accounted good, yet for the manner they must be esteemed vicious.

The Pelagian Heretics were wont here to object against our Forefathers (as
the Romanists do now adays unto us) both the Examples of the Heathen, who being
Strangers from the Faith, did notwithstanding (as they said) abound with
Virtues: and as Paul's Testimony also concerning them, Romans 2. 14, 15. by which
they labored to prove, that even such as were Strangers from the Faith of
Christ, might yet have a true Righteousness; because that these, as the Apostle
witnessed, naturally did the things of the Law. But will you hear how St.
Augustine took up Julian the Pelagian, for making this Objection: Herein have
thou expressed more evidently that Doctrine of yours, wherein you are Enemies
unto the Grace of God which is given by Jesus Christ our Lord, who takes away
the Sin of the World: bringing in a kind of Men which may please God without
the Faith of Christ, by the Law of Nature. This is it for which the Christian
Church does most of all detest you. And again, be it far from us to think, that
true Virtue should be in any one unless he were righteous, and as far, that one
should be truly righteous, unless he did live by Faith: for the just does live
by Faith. Now which of them that would have themselves accounted Christians,
but the Pelagians alone, or even among them perhaps thou thy self alone, would
say that an Infidel were righteous, would say that an ungodly Man were
righteous, would say that a Man mancipated to the Devil were righteous? Although
he were Fabricius, although he were Fabus, although he were Scipio, although he were
Regulus. And whereas Julian has further demanded: If a Heathen do clothe the
Naked, because it is not of Faith, is it therefore Sin? St. Augustine answers
absolutely, Inasmuch as it is not of Faith, it is Sin: not because the fact
considered in it self, which is to clothe the Naked, is a Sin; but of such a
Work not to glory in the Lord, none but an impious Man will deny to be a Sin.
For howsoever, in it self this natural Compassion be a good Work, yet he uses
this good Work amiss, that uses it unbelievingly, and does this good Work
amiss, that does it unbelievingly; but whosoever does any thing amiss sins
surely. From whence it is to be gathered, that even those good Works which
Unbelievers do, are not theirs, but his who makes good use of evil Men: but
that the Sins are theirs, whereby they do good things amiss; because they do
them not with a faithful, but with an unfaithful, that is, with a foolish and
naughty Will, which kind of Will no Christian doubts to be an evil Tree,
which cannot bring forth but evil Fruits, that is to say, Sin only: for all
that is not of Faith, whether thou will or no, is Sin. Dr. Usher's Answer to
the Jesuits Challenge, p. 516, 517, 518, 519, 520.

The Doctrine of universal Grace, baptizeth Man's natural Freedom with the name
of Grace: for what else is universal Grace, but the very natural Abilities of
Man's Will? If it be Grace in Truth as well as in Name, how then is it derived
unto all Men in the same Geometrical Proportion or Degree; when as all other
Graces are peculiar unto some, and unequally distributed unto most that have
them?

There is not a Text in Scripture, not a Pelagian or Arminian now in Nature,
that can show me either Warrant or Example of any one saving or common Grace,
that was ever yet in the same Equality conferred upon all Men; and shall we
begin to forge such Graces now? But to pass on further, and to search into the
very depth and bottom of this pretended Grace, I would demand of any Arminian
this one Query, Whether this universal sufficient Grace (which I take to be
nothing else but a Power or Faculty in the Will to regenerate and transform the
Soul, or to embrace Christ Jesus, and apply his Merits when the Gospel offers
them) be a native and inherent Faculty of the Will? or only an adventitious,
acquisite, or infused Quality not born, not procured with it? If the former
only, it is verily then no Grace but Nature: If the latter, then it must either
be an acquisite, derivative, or an infused Quality. If acquisite either by Art
or Industry of our own; then it can be neither universal, nor sufficient, it
being proportionably, originally in none; acquisitely in few, since few Men
seek it, fewer purchase it. If derivative, not from our Parents, not from Adam;
for then it were not Grace, but Nature; not from Christ or from his Spirit, for
they derive Grace only to their living and believing Members, not generally
unto all, and that by means which are neither common nor effectual unto all,
not immediately. If by Infusion only without means, I pray what Scripture
proves it? If any, then show it; if none, let none believe it: but if it be
thus generally infused, then tell me how or when; whether with the Soul or
after it? whether in the Embrio, Infancy, Childhood, Youth, or riper Age of
Men? If with it, then certainly as a native Faculty conjoined with the Soul,
undistinct from that whereby it wills all common civil things; and so a natural
Power, not a Grace. If after it, I dare presume no prying Arminian can tell me
how, or when. If in riper years, in Youth, or in Childhood only, then Infants
want it who depart this Life, and so it is not universal. If in the very Womb
or Infancy of all Men, then God bestows it when and where it is but useless,
and so does things in vain: since Infants (specially those that die before
discretion) cannot tell how to act it, or to embrace Salvation by it. If in
neither of all these Reasons, then not at all, and so there is no such Grace.
All which being laid together, will evidently discover this Pelagian, Popish
and Arminian Grace, to be in truth mere Nature, and so unable of it self to
change Men's Hearts, to engender saving Grace, or purchase or embrace Salvation,
as our Arminians, Papists, and Pelagians dream. -- To wind up all in brief, if
there be such a Freedom of Will, or Sufficiency of Grace imparted unto all Men,
whereby they may be saved if they will, why then were not the means of Grace
and Salvation, from the very Creation to this present, alike imparted to all,
without which it was impossible for them to be saved? Yea, why then are not
all, or most Men saved? Is it because they will not, or because they cannot
save, convert or help themselves? If the latter of these two, you then yield up
the Cause; if the former only, because they will not: I answer, there is no Man
whatsoever so desperately prodigal of his own Soul, or so desirous of
Damnation, but he unfeignedly desires to be saved, and would certainly save
himself at last, if his Power to effect were equal to his Will: Therefore it is
not want of Will, but Power, that bereaves them of Salvation. If you believe
not this, believe the Truth himself, who speaks it: Many (says he) shall
strive to enter, and shall not be able. But admit it rests thus merely in Men's
Wills: from whence then springs this Inequality in their Wills, that one Man is
thus unwilling to be saved, when another wills it? Is it because one Man's Will
is naturally more corrupted and depraved than another? This were to deny
either the Universality or the Equality of original Corruption, which is
equally derived unto all Men in the self-same measure, without any difference
of degrees. Is it because there is an Insufficiency or Inequality in the Grace
you speak of, to check and conquer the Obstinacy, the Perverseness of Men's
Wills? then there is no such sufficient universal Grace as you pretend, since
it is not sufficient or alike in all. Certainly if Men's Wills were equal, and
their Graces equal, their Desire, their Accomplishment of eternal Happiness and
Salvation (which is essential and connatural to the Wills of Men) would be
proportionable, since the self-same things in the same degrees, admit no
Equality in their genuine and native Operations: And if so, then all Men by
this Doctrine should be saved, and so God's eternal Justice, Hell and Devils
were in vain. Mr. Prynn Anti-Arminianism, p. 85, 86, 88.

They (the Papists) say not, that a Man by his Free Will only is able to live
well, or to obtain eternal Life: for Bellarmine proves at large, that a Man
has no Power of himself, without the special Assistance of Grace, either to
believe, or to prepare himself to receive Grace, or to love God, or to will any
thing appertaining to Salvation, without the help of God's Grace. This then is
their Opinion, that tho the Will of Man be not able of it self only to do any
thing in spiritual Actions, yet being aided and assisted by Grace, it may: so
that they attribute part to Grace, part to Free Will: the first Motion and
stirring of the Heart, they say, is only of God; and here the Will works
nothing at all; then it is the part of Free Will to apprehend Grace offered, to
give consent unto it, and to work together with it. Trident. Council. Sess. 6.
cap. 5. can. 4.

The Rhemists also thus define the matter; Tho our Election, Calling, first
coming to God, be not wholly or principally upon our Will or Works, yet our
Will or working of any Good to our Salvation, is the secondary Cause: God's
special Motion, Grace, Assistance, is the principal, Romans 9. Sect. 4.

This then is their meaning, that God's Grace and Man's Free Will do work
actively together: as the Rhemists note, The Gentiles, tho they believed
especially by God's Grace and Preordination, yet they believed also by their
own Free Will. Rhem. Act. 13. Sect. 2. Dr. Willet Synop. Pap. p. 956.

It was another Heresy of the Pelagians, that God to this end gave Grace to
Men: That what they are commanded to do by their Free Will, they may more
easily accomplish by Grace. What else now do the Rhemists say, giving this
Note, Man was never without Free Will, but it is made more free by Grace? Rhem.
John 8. Sect. 2. So then Grace in their Judgment helps Man only more
especially, fully, freely, that is, more easily to believe: Whereupon it
follows, that they may believe without Grace, tho not so especially. Ib. p.
959.

Now, Lastly, the Holy Martyrs have sealed this Doctrine with their Blood. That
blessed Man Mr. Bradford confesses Belief only to be God's Gift: whereas Friar
Alphonso, disputing with him, held on the other side, that the Act of Believing
is in Man's Power. Fox, p. 1619. There were diverse Persons, to the number of
twenty, persecuted in the Towns of Winsor and Midlesam in Suffolk, Anno 1556.
for maintaining this Article with others, That Man had no Free Will of himself
unto Good. ^ox, p. 1913. See also for this matter, Arausican. Council. 2. Can.
7. If any Man say, that by the strength of Nature Man can think or choose any
thing that appertains to eternal Life, or consent unto the preaching of
Salvation, without the illumination of the Spirit, he is seduced with the
Spirit of Heresy: for Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing. Ibid. p. 960.

I affirmed, That there was no distinction in Faith, but in the Persons
believing: In which, I confess, I did err; now I freely acknowledge, that
temporary Faith (which, as Bernard witnesses, is therefore feigned, because it
is temporary) is distinguished, and differs from that saving Faith, whereby
Sinners apprehending Christ, are justified before God for ever; not in measure
and degrees, but in the very thing it self. Mr. William Barret's Recantation at
Cambridg, cited by Fuller, in his History of the University of Cambridg, p. 150.

GRACE.
My stock lies dead, and no increase
Does my dull Husbandry improve:
O let thy Graces without cease
Drop from above!
That as special Grace is wholly from above, so its continuance and evidence
must come from above.
If still the Sun should hide his Face,
Thine House would but a Dungeon prove,
Thy Works Nights Captives: O let Grace
Drop from above!
The Dew does every Morning fall,
And shall the Dew outstrip thy Dove?
The Dew, for which Gra^s cannot call,
Drop from above.
Death is still working like a Mole,
And digs my Grave at each remove:
Let Grace work too, and on my Soul
Drop from above.
Sin is still hammering mine Heart
Into an Hardness, void of Love:
Let suppling Grace, to cross his Art,
Drop from above.
O come! for thou do know the way.
Or if to me thou will not move,
Remove me where I need not say,
Drop from above.
Mr. Herbert's Poem, p. 52. The Hold fast.
I threatened to observe the strict decree
Of my dear God with all my Power and Might:
But I was told by one it could not be;
Yet I might trust in God to be my Light.
Then will I trust, said I, in him alone.
Nay, even to trust in him was also his:
We must confess that nothing is our own;
Then I confess that he my Succor is.
But to have naught is ours, not to confess
That we have naught. I stood amazed at this,
Much troubled, till I heard a Friend express
That all things were more ours by being his.
What Adam had, and forfeited for all,
Christ keeps now, who cannot fail or fall.
Ibid. p. 137. Where is my God? what hidden place
Conceals thee still?
What Covert dare eclipse thy Face?
Is it thy Will?
O let not that of any thing:
Let rather Brass,
Or Steel, or Mountains be thy Ring,
And I will pass.
Thy Will such an Intrenching is
As passes Thought:
To it all Strength, all Subtilties
Are things of naught.
Thy Will such a strange distance is,
As that to it
East and West touch, the Poles do kiss,
And Parallels meet.
Since then my Grief must be as large,
As is thy space,
Thy distance from me; see my charge,
Lord, see my case.
O take these bars, these lengths away;
Turn, and restore me;
Be not Almighty, let me say,
Against, but for me.
Ibid. p. 157. Concerning Free Will, as it may peradventure in some case be
admitted, that Men without Grace may do some outward Function of the Law, and
keep some outward Observances or Traditions: so as touching things spiritual
and appertaining to Salvation, the strength of Man being not regenerate by
Grace, is so infirm and impotent, that he can perform nothing neither in doing
well or willing well, who after he be regenerated by Grace, may work and do
well, but yet in such sort, that still remains notwithstanding a great
imperfection of Flesh, and a perpetual Repugnancy between the Flesh and the
Spirit. And thus was the original Church of the ancient Romans first
instructed: From whom see how far this latter Church of Rome has degenerated,
which holds and affirms, that Men without Grace, viz. Regeneration, may
perform the Obedience of the Law, and prepare themselves to Grace by working,
etc. (Here Mr. Baxter' s Habit of Grace must dance attendance as to its
effectual Form, upon our pre-acting of Grace.) Fox' s Acts and Monuments, p. 25.

Another Error also may be noted in the Papists, touching the efficient or
formal Cause of good Works. For albeit they all confess in their Books, that
gratia Dei gratis data, is the chief and principal Cause thereof, and works
in us Justitiam primam (as they call it) yet the good Works after Regeneration,
they refer to other subordinate Causes under God, as to Free Will, or to
Habitum virtutis, or ad integra naturalia, and nothing at all to Faith, whenas
Faith only next under God is the Root and Fountain of all Well-doing: as in the
Fruits of a good Tree; albeit the Planter or the Husbandman be the principal
Agent thereof, and some cause also may be in the good Ground; yet the next and
immediate Cause is the Root that makes the Tree fruitful. In like manner the
Grace of God, in a soft and repentant mollified Heart, (by the aforesaid Grace
made such) planteth the Gift of Faith. Faith as a good Root cannot lie dead or
unoccupied, but springs forth, and makes both the Tree fruitful, and also
the Tree thereof to be good, which otherwise had no acceptance nor goodness in
them, were it not for the goodness of the Root from whence they spring. So
Paul, although he had certain Works in him, such as they were, before his
Conversion; yet had he no good Works before the Grace of Christ had rooted
Faith in him. So Mary Magdalen the Sinner, and Zacheus the Publican, so all the
Nations of the Gentiles began to bring forth Fruit, and especially good Fruit,
when they began to be ingrafted in Christ, and to receive the Root of his
Faith, whose Fruits before that were all damnable and unsavory, etc. Ib. p. 23.

Nature cannot help any thing at all to that which is beside or against Nature;
like as the wild Olive does not prepare it self the better to be planted or
grafted into the right Olive. This then is an evident place, Romans 11. 24. to
convince the Pelagians of these days, the Papists, whereby a Man even before
Grace, may make himself more fit and capable of Grace: but this is contrary to
the saying of our blessed Savior, John 15. 5. where he uses the like
Comparison which the Apostle does here, making himself the Vine, and us the
Branches; Without me ye can do nothing. Dr. Willet on the Romans, p. 527.

Object. That every Promise runs with a Condition: and therefore if I have not
the Condition, how can I believe the Promise? God has promised, Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.
There is a Promise of filling, but it is with a condition of hungering. Blessed
are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are the pure in Heart,
for they shall see God, etc. If I have not the Condition annexed to the
Promise, how dare, or how can I believe the Promise?

Answ. 1. The Condition is not the way to get the Promise, the Promise is the
ground of Faith, and the way to get the Condition; because the Promise is the
Motive Cause that moves the Soul to get the Condition. Now the Mover must be
before the Moved; then if Belief of the Promise move thy Soul to get the
Condition of the Promise, then Belief of the Promise must be before that the
Soul can keep the Condition of the Promise.

Saul made a Promise to David, 1 Samuel 18. that he should be his Son in Law in
one of his two Daughters, upon condition that he should give him an hundred
Fore-skins of the Philistines. Now David did first believe the Promise; and
thereby he was allured to fight valiantly, to keep the Condition, to get an
hundred Foreskins of the Philistines. So Psalm. 116. I believed, and therefore
did I speak. He believed God's Promise, and then he spoke with condition. So we
believe, says the Apostle, and therefore do we speak. First the Soul believes;
and then every Action of a Christian, wherein it moves to the keeping of the
Condition, springs from this Root. Nay Beloved, a Man cannot keep any condition
in the Bible without Faith; he must believe.

2. Faith is the enabling Cause to keep the Condition. Do thou think to get
Weeping, Mourning, and Humiliation for thy Sins, and then thereby to get the
Promise to thy self? Then thou go in thy own Strength; and then i^ God's
account thou do just nothing: (...). 15. 5. (...) me ye can do (...), says
Christ; therefore first lay hold on me; believe in me, abode in me.

What, do you first think to pray, to mourn, to lament, and bewail your Sins,
to do this and that in turning your selves, and sanctifying of your selves?
Indeed you may fumble about these things, but you can never do any of them
indeed and to the purpose: Without me ye can do nothing. I had fainted, says
the Prophet, unless I had believed to see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land
of the Living, Psalm. 27. 13. Mr. Fenner's Discourse of the Nature of prevalent
Prayer, p. 277.

Before effectual calling, a Man was without Christ, and had no Interest in
Christ, no Communion or Fellowship with Christ, he was altogether dead in
Trespasses and Sins, a cursed. Creature, a damned Creature, in the state of Sin
and Condemnation; whatever Parts or Gifts he had, all were no better than may
be in a Reprobate; Ephesians. 2. 12. Before that time you were without Christ, Aliens
and Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel: May be you were civil, but you
had no Union with Christ; tho you were constant Hearers of the Word (which is a
laudable thing) yet you had no Union with Christ; may be you were decked with
admirable Qualities and Jewels, as the Prophet shows; a Man may be decked with
golden Virtues, and afterward turn to Dross; a Man may have admirable things
in him, before he has this: but there was nothing of God in a Man, nothing of
Christ in a Man, no saving Operation of God's Spirit at all in a Man, no Union
with Christ. This is the first Passage of a Man from Death to Life, from Nature
to Grace, from the Devil to God; we are passed from Death to Life (says the
Apostle) This is an allusion to a Man's effectual Calling, afterward a Man
brings forth the Fruits of Life, and is alive to God; but when a Man is first
effectually called, there is his Passage from Death to Life, he was a Man dead
before. Now this effectual Calling therefore is the first Work that is wrought
in a Man, because it is the first Passage of a Man from Death to Life; it is a
transition from Sin, Hell, and Damnation, to be in Christ; therefore mark how
Peter speaks, when he had a hope that his Hearers were effectually called, Acts
8. 40. Save your selves (says he) from this untoward Generation. As who should
say, this is your first parting from the World, the first shaking of hands, and
bidding them farewell, if you be effectually called as you seem to be, come out
from among them, and save your selves from this untoward Generation; this is
the first bursting of the Bonds between you and Sin, the first breaking the
League between you and carnal Company; now save your selves from this untoward
Generation, make it appear you are called: this the Apostle shows, Gal. 1. 13.
that before he was called he had nothing in him at all; you have heard, says
he, how in times past, beyond measure, I persecuted the Church, etc. I confess
I had goodly things in me, and I profited in the Jewish Religion above many my
Equals in my own Nation, being more zealous for the Traditions of my Fathers; I
was marvelous strict and forward, and for the Letter of the Law; I was
marvelous zealous and blameless: there were excellent good things in me; but I
had nothing of Christ all this while, but when it pleased God, who separated me
from my Mother's Womb, and called me by his Grace, etc. As you should say, now
here was the first dawning of that blessed Light in my Heart, now begun that to
appear when God called me by his Grace, and first revealed his Son in me, then
was the Deed done, and never till then: so also he shows that he was a cursed
Creature living in Iniquity; it may be himself, and his Companions, took him to
be as good a Man as any was in all Israel; but see how he casts his own Water,
Tit. 3. 3. We our selves also were sometimes foolish, serving diverse Lusts,
etc. But after that the Kindness and Love of God appeared, etc. From thence he
began to be in the state of Grace, when God called him out of that bad state,
when God made a breach between him and his old Courses; when he made the first
Rent, and Division, and Revoke, then Grace began to appear, from that time
forward I was in Christ: thus you see that effectual calling is the first Work
of God in a Man's Soul, it is the first bringing of a Man to Christ, and the
first making of a Man to put him on. Mr. Fenner's Discourse of effectual
Calling, p. 22, 23.

Baxterian.
ERror 19. That our Natures are so far from being able to believe in Christ, as
from being able to fulfill the Law of Works, and be justified by it; they being
equally impossible to us; and as much help is necessary to one as to the other.

Contr. To be justified by the Law of Works, when we have once broken it, is a
Contradiction, and a natural Impossibility; as it is to be at once a Sinner,
and no Sinner. But so it is not for a Sinner to believe in Christ: the Im-

own, which should have concurred to the Effect, and which he was able without
more help to have performed. That there is such effectual Grace, Acts 9. and
many Scriptures with our great experience tell us. That there is such mere
necessity, uneffectual Grace possible, and something in being (which some call
sufficient Grace) is undeniable in the case of Adam: who sinned not for want of
necessary Grace, (but was it not for want of a Supply of necessary Grace, which
he as a Creature, tho made perfectly holy, did absolutely stand in need of, and
for which in the expectation thereof he had not so much as a Promise according
to the full Tenor and Nature of that Covenant? Whence Luther well concludes,
that he would rather be in Hell with a Promise, than with Adam in Paradise
without one) without which he could not do otherwise. And to deny this,
blotteth out all Christianity and Religion at one dash. By all which it
appears, that the Work of the Spirit is such on Man's Will, as that sometimes
the effect is suspended on our Concurrence; so that tho the Spirit be the Total
of its own (here lies the knack) proper effect, and of the Act of Man, in its
own place and kind of Action; yet not simply a total Cause of Man's Act or
Volition; but Man's Concurrence may be further required to it, and may fail.
Ibid. p. 226.

Omnibus Spiritus sanctus gratia aliquali ipsis adest; qua nisi abutantur,
ipsos regeneraturus est: i. e. The Holy Spirit is with some kind of Grace
present with those, which unless they did abuse, he would regenerate. Mr.
Baxter's Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 7. We nothing doubt but many things which
God wills, or that it pleases him to have done, do yet never come to pass --
We grant that some of God's Desires are never fulfilled. -- It is in the power
of Man to hinder the execution of God's Will. Corvin. It may be objected, that
God fails of his end; this we readily grant. Remonstr. Synod. The Spirit and
Sanctification are promised on condition of Faith and Repentance -- To have
some moral Power to know, and desire, and practice some moral good, it seems
is inseparable from Man in via -- Most frequently I use the words (viz, moral
Power) for such a degree of God's helping or healing Justified ones, but such
as unto him whom he gives the ears of Hearing, or Believing. Mr. Daniel
Williams's Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 63.

That Faith admits of Fears and Doubtings, is charged to be a Doctrine of the
first Reformers, by the Reverend Mr. Lobb, in a late Piece of his, where
Column-wise he opposes it to his own created Antinomian Notions. What sort of
Reformers he means, as to the Reality and Justice of his Charge, unless it be
such as have adhered to the Rhemish Annotations, I am at a loss; but if he
designs herein, the first Protestant Orthodox Reformers, I must needs say, that
he has cast as foul and unjust an Aspersion upon them, as could have dropped from
the Pen of the most adulterating Papist, as equally reflecting thereby upon the
soundness of their Doctrine, as upon their Understanding in its discriminating
Ability to distinguish not only between Truth and Error, but also between
things of a different nature, yea of an essential Enmity one to the other. That
Fears and Doubtings may be where true Faith is, is not to be denied; but that
Faith admits of Doubtings, such Fears as produce Doubtings in the Soul, is
contrary to the Design of God in giving Faith, contrary to the Nature and
Office of Faith in it self and Operations, contrary to the Scripture where we
find the most eminent of the Servants of God met with sharp Reproofs for
entertaining such Fears as are inseparable from Doubtings; and contrary to the
experience of his People in all Generations.

See what Mr. Troughton says of these Baxterians in his Lutherus Redivivus,
Part 1. Assurance of eternal Life is a fruit of Adoption; but this likewise is
rendered impossible. 1. Assurance, by the signs and evidences of true Grace, is
impossible; seeing tho we have true Grace, and are sure we are sanctified, yet
this Grace may be lost, and our inchoate Justification repealed. 2. Assurance,
by the special Testimony, or sealing of the Holy Spirit, is accounted but a
fancy of weak Women, and some few injudicious affectionate. Men: for
Justification, and all the fruits of it, depending wholly upon the condition of
final Perseverance, it is not proper nor probable, that any should have a
special witness of the Spirit that they shall be saved, lest it, should hinder
them in their diligence; nor is it suitable to a conditional Covenant. And if
any should indeed have such a (...) As it was the Soul of their State of
Peculiarity, which was the Reward of Abraham's Faithfulness in the common
Covenant: And their peculiar Promise to Abraham's Seed as the Nation's
Blessing, with their Types and Prophecies, all led them to Christ more plainly
than he was revealed to others. Ibid. chapter 12.. 4. Head 4, 5, 7, 12.

That saving Grace differs in the degree, not specially as to the Essence of it
from common Grace. This Mr. Baxter often urges in his Method. Theolog. Part 1.
p. 52. Part 3. p. 274, etc.

That the Elect are saved from the major Gift of that Grace, or greater
quantity thereof, whereof the Damned have a minor Part; and that as (mere
necessarium seu sufficientem vulgo dictum) what is merely necessary, and as
commonly called sufficient to their Salvation.

Adam after his Fall retained a Power of Believing, and so did all Reprobates
in him: he did not lose (as they speak at the Synod) the Power of performing
that Obedience, which is required in the New Covenant; he lost not a Power of
Believing, nor a Power of forsaking Sin by Repentance: and Faith is called the
Work of God only, because he requires us to do it. Grevinch. ad Ames, fol.
183. Rem. Declar. sent. in Syn. p. 107. Rem. Apolog. cap. 10. p. 112.

Those things which are spoken concerning the infusion of Habits before we can
exercise the Act of Faith, we reject. Epist. ad Wall. fol. 67.

That the internal Principle of Faith required in the Gospel, is a Habit
divinely infused, by the Strength and Efficacy whereof the Will should be
determined, I deny. Grevinch. ad Ames, p. 324.

What matter is it in that, that a Man should make himself differ from others?
there is nothing truer; he that yields Faith to God commanding him, makes
himself differ from him, who will not have Faith when he commands. Rem. Apol.
cap. 14. p. 144.

I make my self differ from another, when I do not resist God and his divine
Predetermination, which I could have resisted; and why may I not boast of this
as mine own? That I could is of God's Mercy; but that I would, when I might
have done otherwise, is of my Power. Grevinch. ad Ames, p. 253.

Sometimes God calls this or that Nation, People, City, or Person, to the
Communion of Evangelical Grace, whom he himself pronounces worthy of it, in
comparison of others. Rem. Declar. sent. Synod. It is said, Acts 18. 10. unto
Paul, that God had much People in Corinth, and they were called so, because
that even then they feared God, and served him with all their Hearts, according
to that Knowledge they had of him, and so were ready to obey the preaching of
St. Paul. Corv. 3. Sect. 27.

That Preparation and Disposition to believe, which Men attain by the Law, and
virtuous Education, etc. Rem. Act. Synod.

That something which is in Sinners, whereby tho they are not justified, yet
they are made worthy of Justification. Grevinch. ad Ames, p. 434.

Herein consists the Liberty of the Will; that all things required to enable
it to will any thing, being accomplished, it still remains indifferent to will
or not. Armin. art. perpend. fol. 11.

There is accompanying the Will of Man, an inseparable Property, which we call
Liberty, from whence the Will is termed a Power, etc. Remon. in Act. Synod.
fol. 16. All unregenerate Men have by virtue of their Freewill a Power of
resisting the holy Spirit, of rejecting the offered Grace of God, of contemning
the Counsel of God concerning themselves, of refusing the Gospel of Grace, of
not opening the Heart to him that knocks. Arm^. Art. perpend. Grant all the
Operations of Grace which God can use in our Conversion, yet Conversion
remains so in our own free Power, that we can be not converted, that is, we
can either turn or not turn our selves. Corv. ad Bog. fol. p. 263.

The Remonstrants do always suppose a free Power of obeying or not obeying, as
well in those who do obey, as in those who do not obey: that he that is
obedient, may therefore be counted obedient, because he obeys, when he could
not obey; and so on the contrary. Rem. Apol. p. 70.

For if a Man should say, that every Man in the World has a Power of Believing
if he will, and of attaining Salvation, and that this Power is settled in his
Nature, what Argument have you to confute him? Armin. Anti-Perk. fol. 272.

Mr. Baxter seemed formerly to acknowledge the Habits did precede Acts of Grace,
which Mr. Durham on the Revelation, p. 107. takes notice of, tho in his latter
pieces he expressly recants the same, saying, that he was once of Mr. Pemble's
Judgment, that Habits went before Acts of Grace, but now was of another Mind,
and has fallen in expressly with Grevinchovius, whom once he condemned. --
However take Mr. Durham before cited in his own words concerning him. --
Learned Baxter, in his excellent Treatise of the Saints everlasting Rest, Part
3. does otherwise express the Doctrine of the difference and trial of saving
and common Grace, than what has been usually rested in among practical
Divines, which does necessitate us some way to insist a little further in the
clearing thereof: he has these Assertions; 1. That it is not the Law but the
Covenant, that can clear the Sincerity of Grace as saving, to wit, as it is
accepted by the Covenant as the fulfilling of the condition thereof. 2. He
says, that God has not in the Covenant promised Justification upon any mere
Act, or Acts, considered without their degree and sutableness to their Object,
etc. 3. There is no Act, considered in its mere nature and kind, which a true
Christian may perform, but one that is unsound may perform it also, etc. From
which he draws, that wicked Men may really rely on Christ, have Recumbency on
him, love God, etc. and that they may have Sin as Sin, and as displeasing to
God. Ibid. 4. He asserts, that the Sincerity of saving Grace as saving, lies
materially, not in the bare nature thereof, but in the degree; not in the
degree considered absolutely in it self, but comparatively as it is prevalent
against its contrary, that is, when Love adhereth more to God than any other
thing, and such like, which he endeavors to show both in the infused Habits,
and in the Acts of saving Grace. And p. 235. does assert, That in loving God
and Christ as Mediator, there is no more than a gradual Difference between the
Regenerate and Unregenerate: and in the end, he does load the common Opinion
with many dangerous Consequents.

Omnes Peccatores sub spe salutis possibilis Deus obligat, ad oficia quaedam
praestanda and Media utenda, in ordine ad fidem and po^itentiam, and inde
salutem suam obtinendam. -- At foedus hoc beneficia illa sub condition fidei
and poenitentiae tantum donat: and conditionem hanc praestare, eatenus justum
esse: and justitia haec quae consistit in conditionis praestatione, est
conditio juris nostri ad foederis beneficia: and est conformitas nostra ad eam
legis gratiae partem, quae conditionem justificationis and vitae instituit. Mr.
Baxter's Method. Theol. Par. 3. p. 217, 310. Compare this with, tenendum est
veram conversionem praestationemque bonorum operum esse conditionem
praerequisitam ante justificationem. Filii Armin. Praefat. ad cap. 7. ad Rem.
i. e. Conversion and the performance of good Works, is in their apprehension a
Condition pre-required to Justification. Which (says Dr. Owen) if it be not an
Expression, not to be paralleled in the Writings of any Christian, I am
something mistaken: the sum of their Doctrine then in this Particular
concerning the Power of Free Will, in the State of Sin and Unregeneration, is,
That every Man having a native inbred Power, believing in Christ, upon the
Revelation of the Gospel, has also an Ability of doing so much good, as shall
procure of God, that the Gospel be preached unto him, to which, without any
internal Assistance of Grace, he can give assent and yield Obedience: the
preparatory Acts of his own Will always proceeding so far, as to make him excel
others, who do not perform them, and are therefore excluded from further Grace.
Which is more gross Pelagianism than Pelagius himself would ever justify:
wherefore we reject all the former Positions, as so many Monsters in Christian
Religion. Dr. O's Display of Arminianism, p. 136. All Mankind was put into a
proper Capacity of Salvation, by the initial Covenant of Grace with Adam and
Noah: But now by reason of the Sins of their following Parents, are rendered
less capable of Salvation, tho not altogether incapable, for they have too much
forfeited and lost the Grace of that Covenant; but notwithstanding the Covenant
is not made null, or abrogated; neither has the whole Grace of the Covenant
ceased unto them: Therefore they yet remain under a more remote Capacity of
Salvation, but not under the nighest -- But whosoever shall hear the Gospel of
Christ incarnate, they are judged by this more perfect Covenant, either as
Contemners of it unto Death, or as faithful unto Life -- But they who never
have heard the Gospel, neither could hear it, if they sincerely perform the
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace made with Adam and Noah, they shall be
saved; but if otherwise, condemned. And th^se things are seen clear to me from
the Word of God -- from the Law of Charity toward God and our Neighbor we are
bound to think, that some of all Nations of the Earth truly perform the
Conditions of the initial Covenant; and thence certainly are saved, because the
performance of that Condition is not made impossible unto them. Mr. Baxter's
Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 22.

It cannot be proved by any Man, that no Man believes by that sufficient
Motion, which does not necessarily determine his Will; seeing many preparatory
Acts are done by such a Motion. And it is probable that it is often so. But the
Certainty of this, or when and how often it is so, no Man can know. But by which
degree of Grace soever the Effect be produced, still God's Will is the chief
Cause of it; which can procure the Effect infallibly, (i. e. if it would I
suppose) when it does not necessitate: yea, and his Premotion or Impress called
sufficient, is incomparably more the cause than Man's Concourse is; tho God
leave some part of the Causation to Man's Free Will. But when the Effect does
not (from the flagging, as I guess, of Man's Causation) that is, when Men
believe not, it is Man's Will by Omission and Resistance that is the chief
Cause, and culpable, and not God's Omission, or non-determination. The same
degree of divine Impress or Motion, which prevails with a Soul predisposed by
common Grace, is not enough to prevail with some others that are ill or
indisposed: Tho God's absolute Will and answerable Operation would prevail with
any, how bad soever. -- Q. Whether sufficient Grace to believe, which gives
the mere Power of Believing, to Infants or Adult be ever lost? Ans. These
Questions suppose that there are these several sorts of Graces disputed of by
Divines: 1. Common Grace. 2. Power to believe and repent. 3. Actual Faith and
Repentance by that called special Vocation. 4. The Habit of Love, and all Grace
called Sanctification (to pass by relative Grace, as Justification, etc.) 5.
Confirmation of these Habits. And we now speak only of the second: And the very
Being of that Grace is controverted, whether God ever give (besides the natural
Power) a moral Power to believe, to any that never do believe? And, 1. It is
certain by Adam's instance, that he gave him a Power to have perfectly obeyed,
when he did not. 2. And therefore no Man can prove that now he gives no Man a
moral Power to believe, that does not. 3. But it seems most probable that he
does, because his Government and Man's Nature are not tota specie changed. 4.
And it is certain that still all Men have Power to do more good than they do.
5. And even the Dominicans grant this Sufficiency of Grace. 6. But yet for my
part, I am not certain of it. But if there be such a Power given, which never
acts Faith (which I think most probable) it is either in the Adult or
Infants: If in the Adult, no doubt it is lost; for they that will not believe
(to the last) retain not still the moral Power in their Rebellion. But in the
case of Infants, I think those of them that die before the use of Reason, lose
it not, nor any of the Elect that live to full Age. But as to others, after
long doubt, How far Infant-Grace is loseable, this seems now the most
probable Solution to me, viz. there is a Grace that reaches but to a moral
Power to repent and believe, before Men have the Act or proper Habit: such
Grace to persevere did put Adam in a present State of Life, or acceptance with
God, this Grace Adam lost: accordingly such Grace that contains but this
moral Power in an Infant's Disposition (with relative Grace of Pardon) is
sufficient to prove his Right to Salvation, if he so die; because he is not
bound to the Act, nor capable of it; and even the Adult upon the Act have right
to acceptance of it; and to the Spirit to cause the Habit, in order of Nature,
before they have the Habit: therefore Infants may be in a state of such Right
and Life before the Habit, tho they shall not possess Glory without it. And yet
the Adult are not in a state of such Right by the mere Power before the Act,
because the Act it self is made necessary to their Justification, but so is it
not to Infants: so that Infants and Adult may receive a mere Power to repent
and believe, and lose it after (at age) by actual Sin, tho this be a loss of a
State of Justification to the one sort (their Sins of Nature being pardoned)
but not to the other (who are not pardoned without the Act) and it follows
not hence, that the Grace of habitual Sanctification is lost in any; Adam had
such a Holiness as might be lost. And why may we not say, that Infants first
Grace is of such a sort or degree? 2. And yet that none are saved without more;
but that upon this first degree they have a Right to Salvation, and that their
further Holiness shall be given them whom God will, as part of their Salvation,
to which they have right at farthest at Death, in the same time and manner as
perfect Holiness and Mortification of Sin is given to Believers that are till
Death imperfect. A loseable degree of Holiness like Adam's, may be the way to
more in all that so die. Mr. Baxter's End of Doctrinal Controversy, chapter 15..
17, 18, 19, 20. chapter 26.. 3, 4, 5, 6. chapter 19.. 22.

In the room therefore of such despised Prayers, I shall supply them (viz.
these Arminians) with an ancient Form that is better suited unto their
Principles, Thou know, O Lord, how holy, how innocent, how pure from all
Deceit and Rapine are the Hands which I stretch forth unto thee; how just, how
unspotted with Evil, how free from lying are those Lips wherewith I po^r forth
Prayers unto thee, that thou would have Mercy on me. This Prayer Pelagius
taught a Widow to make, as it was objected unto him in the Diospolitan Synod,
that is at Lydia in Palestine, cap. 6. only he taught her not to say that she
had no Deceit in her Heart, as one among us does wisely and humbly vaunt that
he knows of none in his: So every way perfect is the Man. And yet although he
taught her so to plead her own Purity, Innocence and Righteousness before God,
yet he does it not, as those whereon she might be absolutely justified, but
only as the condition of her obtaining Mercy. See Dr. Owen's Discourse of the
Spirit, p. 266. compared with his piece of Justification, p. 17, 18. Now let us
set a Knave to catch a Knave, an Arminian Position illustrating the Baxterian.

They (that is the Arminians) are of opinion, that an unregenerate Man has
Power of believing and repenting. The Arminian Conference at the Hague, p. 272.
do affirm, that Conversion does go before Faith, and that Man does help
somewhat to his own Conversion before he has Faith -- they say that the Will
keeps her own Liberty of Believing, or not Believing, of Repenting or not
Repenting. And they will not have the Vivification and reviving of our Will in
our Regeneration, to consist in this, that of being naturally evil, it is made
good by the infusion of some Virtue, but that by the Illumination of the
Understanding and amendment of the Affections, the Will is made able to put
forth that Faculty of willing or nilling, which is ingrafted in it. (Herein
lies the very secret Retiredness of all their seemingly fair, yet rotten
Concessions) The same Men do affirm, that sufficient Grace is given to all Men,
even to unregenerate and Heathen Men, to whom the Name of Christ has not come,
whereby they may obtain Faith, if they will -- they think that God does exact
and require nothing from Man, to the performing whereof he would not give him
sufficient Power; otherwise (say they) God should gather where he has not
scattered: They say therefore, that God is bound to give to all Men the Power
of fulfilling that which he commands, and of believing in Christ. -- He
(Arminius) p. 275. To be able to believe is in Nature, to believe is of Grace:
therefore to be able to believe is not of Grace. There is indeed naturally in
Man a possibility of having or receiving Faith; but it is not in him by Nature
to be able to believe; for th^e things do very much differ. The first notes the
Susceptibility and Possibility of receiving Faith: the other signifies the
active Power and Faculty of Believing, which surely is not in Man by Nature,
but is only from Grace. -- The Arminians will have the efficacy (of Believing)
that is, the efficiency and working Power of it, to depend on Free Will.
Arnoldus against Bogermannus, p. 263, 274. All the Operations of Grace, which
God does use, to work our Conversion, being granted, yet the Conversion it self
does remain so free in our Power, that we may not be converted, that is, that
we may convert, or not convert our selves. Grevinchovius, p. 198. I say, that
the effect of Grace, after the ordinary and usual Rule, does depend on some Act
of Free Will, as on a foregoing Condition, without which it is not.

The same Man, p. 203, 204. does say, that there can no other common Cause be
given of the whole (why this Grace should be effectual, rather in Paul or Peter
than in another) than the Liberty of the Will -- The Arminian Conferrers at the
Hague in the third and fourth Articles, do so speak as if they were of the same
opinion with us: for there they profess, that Man has no saving Faith from
himself, and that the Grace of God is the beginning, the proceeding and the
finishing of all good, and that all good Actions are to be ascribed to the
Grace of God in Christ. But the subtle Men, when they say that a Man has not
from himself, they understand that he has it not from himself alone: And when
they say, that every good Work is to be ascribed to Grace, they are very wary
lest they should say to Grace alone. Then also in the word Grace, they lay a
Snare, and being the Apes of the Pelagians, they feign a certain Grace which is
common to all, which does extend it self as far as Nature: Also they
distinguish Grace from the use of Grace; for indeed they will have Grace to be
from God, but the use of Grace to be in the Power of Man's Free Will. With the
like Craft they say, that the Power of Believing is from Grace: for they
presently draw back what they have reached forth, while they say, that to
believe it self is of Man's Free Will; and that Grace is given to Man to
believe if he will. But whenever they will have a kind of special Grace to
come to that general Grace, they make the use of this special Grace to depend
on Free Will; and they roundly, and without any Circumstances affirm, that the
Efficiency and working Power of Grace does depend upon it. We shall also see,
that that universal and sufficient Grace common to all Men, is natural Gifts
and Notions that are naturally ingrafted, and that they clothe Nature with the
goodly name of Grace, (which thing also Pelagius did) which thing, when they do
with their greatest cunning, yet their dissembling is never so wary, but that
their Pelagian Ears and Errors do appear; and although they do imitate the Speech
of Truth, yet their Vizard does often fall from them unawares, and their Ulcers
being pressed, do presently cast forth stinking Corruption. Yet Vorstius here
does differ from his Master: for when Arminius says, that no Man is converted,
and does believe in Act, by that universal Grace alone, which is common even to
the Reprobates, but that there is also some special Grace required; Vorstius on
the contrary side does affirm, Collat. cum Piscat. p. 57. That some are
converted by universal Grace (which he calls the lesser Mercy) that is,
without special Grace, which he calls more than sufficient and superabounding
Helps: Therefore if this Man be believed, some Men come to Salvation by that
Grace alone which is common to all Heathen Men -- The Arminians, who in the
Question of Grace and Free Will do so dress and trim up Popery, as the Papists
do Pelagianism, do often use that distinction of sufficient and effectual
Grace; but with such a floating Speech, and affected Ambiguity, that it is hard
to know what is effectual Grace with them. -- Arnoldus says, Man if he be not
wanting to himself, may convert himself. The Reader therefore shall mark how
pestilent this Doctrine is (which the Arminians, restrained as it were with
shame, do scarce at any time utter without Ambiguities) That the Grace of God
is effectual (that is) efficient and working, it is to be attributed to
Free Will; and the Efficiency of the Grace of God is subjected to the Will of
Man. By which Speech they mean this, that God does save Man, if Man himself
will, for this it is to depend on Man's Will -- But in the term of sufficient
Grace, they do not only differ one from another, but every one of them
differs from himself: for they will have sufficient Grace to believe, and
Power of Believing to be given to all particular Men: and yet the same Men say,
that no Man can believe in Act, and use well this universal Grace, without
special Grace. O your faithful Stability! can that be called sufficient Grace,
which does never bring forth that effect for which it is given, unless some
other special Grace come to it? Is that a sufficient Cause which does never
work alone? or is it any thing less agreeable to Reason, than with Arminius, to
make one kind of Grace, which is sufficient, by which the Sinner may be
converted, but is not converted; and another which is effectual, by which the
Sinner is converted? Is it not of the same Power and Faculty to be able to do,
and to do? to be able to see, and to see? Surely a Giddiness has seized on
these Men, while they study for Subtilty. -- Arminius against Perkins says, p.
259, 260. The Gentiles while they were made destitute of the Knowledge of God,
yet God has not left them without a Testimony, but even at that time he made
known unto them some Truth concerning his Power and Goodness, he also preserved
the Law engraven in their Minds; which good things if they had rightly used, at
least from their Conscience, he would have given them greater Grace, according
to that saying, To him that has shall be given -- Hear the words of Arnoldus,
p. 105, 106. Although many Nations are destitute of the ordinary preaching of the
Gospel, yet they are not precisely excluded from the Grace of the Gospel, but
always the good things which are offered in the Gospel, do remain equally
propounded to them as to the rest who do enjoy the Privilege of the preaching
of it, so that they perform the Conditions of the Covenant. For he says, that
Salvation is no less propounded to Heathen Men, than to Christians, so that
they fulfill the Conditions of the Covenant. These Conditions are Faith and
Repentance; but how should he believe in Christ, who is ignorant of Christ? how
should he repent, to whom God has not given the Spirit of Regeneration? Thus
is the* Reader openly deluded -- But when they come to explain the Nature of
this universal Grace, they do very little differ from the Pelagians; for
Pelagius, lest he should seem to be an Enemy to Grace, does ascribe to it every
good Work that is done by Men. But by Grace he did understand Nature it self,
because it had been made and created of God. But according to Arminius, Nature
is one thing, universal Grace is another: Nevertheless, he will have sufficient
Grace to be given to all and particular Men, and that Nature is in no Man to
whom God does not give sufficient Grace to obtain Faith, and by Faith
Salvation; whence it comes to pass, that, according to Arminius, sufficient
Grace does extend it self as far as Nature. Pelagius does confound Nature with
Grace; but Arminius does join Nature and Grace together, so that Nature is in
none, to whom Grace is not given, etc. Peter du Moulin's Anatomy of
Arminianis^, p. 254, 255, 256, 257, 260, 261, 312, 314, 315, 319, 320, 321, 322.

Mr. Daniel Williams, in his Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 110, 111. would
persuade us that Man both has many things to do in order to Salvation, and
that he can do them -- his Words are these: Sinners have much to do, in order
to Salvation. There be few Leaves in the Bible but argue this: It Is the Scope
of all the Revelations of God to Men since the Fall. -- What means the Holy
Ghost when he says, In so doing thou shall save thy self, and them that hear
thee? 1 Timothy 4. 16. Sure the Argument is not strong, if it be true, we can
(note that he says can) do nothing for Salvation. -- Does it not (i. e. the
Proceedings of Christ's Tribunal at the day of Judgment) proceed on the
Difference in Men's* Carriage and Tempers? See the Parable of the Talents.

One of Mr. Pool's Continuators in his English Annotations upon Jer. 18. 11.
tells us, that there is no Man but has a Power to do much more than he does
do, and so much as may serve to avert temporal Judgment; and although no Man
without special Grace, beyond the outward means of Grace, has a Power to do
whatever God requires in order to his Salvation, yet he has Power to do so
much, as if he does, no instance can be given of any to whom, so doing, God
denied his special Grace, enabling him to do whatsoever God requires of him in
order to eternal Life. [This is gratis dictum, and as dangerous as false; for
to name no more, the instance of the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. is a pregnant
Testimony against the same, who according to the Scope and Design of the
Parable did to their very utmost, as far as common Grace in its just and
genuine Acceptance might be expected. Against whom nothing was objected, but
the Lord's not knowing of them, and that not in reference to their
Non-improvement of what they had, but their not having of that which was a
requisite inherent Qualification for Communion and Fellowship with the
Bridegroom, viz. special Grace, or Oil in their Lamps: For we find them
reckoned upon as Virgins, and that truly in a sense, as well as the wise, i. e.
pure from the Pollutions of the World, not only morally so, but a religious
Profession and Worship, the word [Virgins] in Scripture figuratively importing
Churches, and consequently Members -- Did they sleep? so did the wise. Did the
wise awaken at the Bridegroom's coming? so did the foolish. Did the wise
prepare by trimming their Lamps to meet their Bridegroom? So did they -- The
Inference of such an Exposition (the Methods of some in their pretended Zeal
for Reformation this day, being duly considered) may be doubly dangerous. As,
1. That where. Endeavors are by the Assistance of common Grace truly improved,
that then "(or therefore which is worse) special Grace shall be communicated;
this lays, tho very insensibly, a Foundation for the Doctrine of Merits at
least interpretatively so, by a disposing Congruity, tho not positively in
terms. 2. That Men upon the using of their utmost Endeavors, may conclude that
they have attained unto special Grace, not knowing indeed what it is: for as
the Light of common Grace is of another kind than that of special Grace, and
cannot discover it; so when discovered by the peculiar Operations of the
Spirit, no greater Enemy against it than this moral Brat, or a Professor
reformed by common Grace, witness the devout Women, and their Carriage toward
the Apostles, Acts 16.

This lays a Foundation for carnal Security; Phil. 3. Sow me two Bushels of
Oats over and over again, with the greatest Industry and Sweat imaginable; I
should be an Ass to expect a Crop, nay, so much as one Grain of Wheat from the
same.]

Whether God does not offer the saving Benefits of the Covenant upon official
terms, as, Believe, and thou shall be saved? This I affirm, and the Doctor
denies.

Whether the beneficial Privileges of the Covenant be not suspended on terms of
Duty? as, Does not God forbear to pardon us till we believe?

This I affirm, and the Doctor denies. Mr. Daniel Williams's Gospel Truth
stated, p. 51. Head 2, 3.

Nonconformist.
TRUE Holiness is that inward, thorough and real Change, wrought in the whole
Man, of a formerly vile Sinner, by the Spirit of God, whereby his Heart is
purged from the Love, and his Life from the Dominion and Practice of former
Sins, and whereby he is in Heart and Life carried out after every Good. I call
it a Change, and so it is, it is not from Nature, Custom, Education; it is not
an Habit, Form, but a Change. Christiani fiunt non nascuntur, creantur non
generantur; and a mighty and manifest Change it makes,

well enough, if he had never read either Moses or the Prophets. And to suppose
that our Lord Jesus Christ proposed unto him the thing which he knew perfectly
well, only under a new Name or Notion which he had never heard of before, so to
take an advantage of charging him with being ignorant of what indeed he full
well knew and understood, is a blasphemous Imagination. How they can free
themselves from the Guilt hereof, who look on Regeneration as no more but a
metaphorical Expression of amendment of Life, I know not. And if it be so, if
there be no more in it, but as they love to speak, becoming a new moral Man, a
thing which all the World, Jews and Gentiles, understood; our Lord Jesus was so
far from bringing it forth more light, and giving it more perspicuity, by what
he teaches concerning Regeneration, the Nature, Manner, Causes and Effects of
it, that he cast it thereby into more Darkness and Obscurity than ever it was
delivered in, either by Jewish Masters, or Gentile Philosophy: for although the
Gospel does really teach all Duties of Morality with more Exactness and
Clearness, and press unto the Obedience of them, on Motives incomparably more
cogent than any thing that otherwise ever befell the Mind of Man to think or
apprehend; yet if it must be supposed to intend nothing else in its Doctrine of
the New Birth or Regeneration, but those moral Duties and their Observance, it
is dark and unintelligible; I say, If there be not a secret mysterious Work of
the Spirit of God, in and upon the Souls of Men in the Writings of the New
Testament, but only a Reformation of Life, and the Improvement of Man's natural
Abilities in the Exercise of moral Virtue, through the application of outward
means unto their Minds and Understandings, conducting and persuading thereunto;
they must be granted to be obscure, beyond those of any other Writers
whatsoever, as some have not feared already to publish unto the World
concerning the Epistles of Paul. But so long as we can obtain an acknowledgment
from Men, that they are true, and in any sense the Word of God, we doubt not
but to evince that the things intended in them are clearly and properly
expressed, so as that they ought to be, and so as they are capable to be
expressed; the Difficulties which seem to be in them arising from the
mysterious Nature of the things themselves contained in them, and the Weakness
of our Minds in of a Mercy. Doubts of losing a Mercy, eat out the Heart: and a
Man in that case is as much troubled with the fear of wanting, as he can be
comforted with the sense of enjoying. -- The first part of that great Blessing
we receive by Christ, consists in our Deliverance from Evil, or in a freedom
from perishing. The second consists in the conveyance of Good to us, as Pardon
of Sin, Grace, and Glory. But the third (which is the height of all) consists
in our everlasting assurance to enjoy all this. Adam had a good Estate, but he
was not assured of it; the Blessings we have by Christ are built upon a
Foundation, which can never be shaken. Mr. Caryl on Job, chapter 5. v. 24.

So we may answer these places; Prove. 28. 14. Blessed is the Man that fears
always. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling. These
seem to call Christians to live in a doubtful Condition, or in a state of
Trepidation, always fearing: but their intendment is, not to keep the Soul from
being settled by Faith in Christ, but from being highflown in any opinion of
our selves: or the Spirit speaks thus, not to put us upon doubts of our
standing, but to preserve us from falling. For these Cautions are so far from
opposing Assurance, that they strengthen it.

The way not to be afraid is thus to fear; nor are any so sure as they who thus
tremble. They that are working out their Salvation with fear and trembling, may
know without fear and trembling that they shall be saved: And they that thus
fear always, may be assured that they shall be above fear for ever. But say
some, the Preacher speaks out against this Knowledge, Eccles. 9. 1. No Man
knows Love or Hatred. It is true, not by all that is before him: We cannot
know Love and Hatred from the Works of God without us; but we may know Love and
Hatred by the Work of God upon us, or by the workings of God within us. We
cannot fetch an Evidence that God loves us out of our Chests and Money-bags;
nor can we read any Assurance or a Conveyance for Heaven, in the Assurances and
Conveyances of our Lands: but we may fetch this Evidence, and read this
Conveyance from, and in the Covenant of Grace, received by Faith, witnessed and
sealed to our Hearts by the Holy Spirit. Mr. Caryl on Job 13. 18.

Because of the Immutability of God's eternal Purpose in our Predestination,
and his effectual gracious Operations in the pursuit, and for the execution
thereof, the Elect of God shall infallibly be carried through all, even the
most dreadful Oppositi-

troductive of Atheism, before they are confident of their Success. If there be
in, and required unto Regeneration, the infusion of a new real-spiritual
Principle into the Soul and its Faculties, of spiritual Life, Light, Holiness,
and Righteousness, disposed unto and suited for the Destruction or Expulsion of
a contrary inbred habitual Principle of Sin and Enmity against God, enabling
unto all Acts of Holy Obedience, and so in order of Nature antecedent unto
them; then it does not consist in a mere Reformation of Life and moral Virtue,
be they never so exact or accurate. Three things are to be observed for the
clearing of this Assertion, before we come to the Proof and Confirmation of it.
As, 1. That this Reformation of Life which we say is not Regeneration, or that
Regeneration does not consist therein, is a necessary Duty indispensably
required of all Men. For we should take it here for the whole course of actual
Obedience unto God, and that according to the Gospel. Those indeed by whom it
is urged and pressed in the room of Regeneration, or as that wherein
Regeneration does consist, do give such an Account and Description of it, as
that it is, or at least may be foreign unto true Gospel-Obedience, and so not
contain in it one acceptable Duty unto God, as shall afterward be declared. 2.
That the Principle before described, wherein Regeneration as passively
considered, or as wrought in us consists, does always certainly and infallibly
produce the Reformation of Life intended. In some it does it more completely,
in others more imperfectly, in all sincerely. For the same Grace in nature and
kind is communicated unto several Persons in various degrees, and is by them
used and improved with more or less Care and Diligence. In those therefore that
are adult, these things are inseparable. Therefore, 3. The difference in this
matter comes unto this Head; we say and believe that Regeneration consists in
spirituali Renovatione naturae, in a spiritual Renovation of our Nature; our
modern Socinians, that it does so in morali Reformatione vitae, in a moral
Reformation of Life. Now as we grant that this spiritual Renovation of Nature
will infallibly produce a moral Reformation of Life; so if they will grant that
this moral Reformation of Life does proceed from a spiritual Renovation of our
Nature, this difference will be at an end. And this is that which the Ancients
intend by first receiving the Holy Ghost, and then all Graces with him. However
if they only design to speak ambiguously, improperly, and unscriptural;
confounding Effects and their Causes, Habits, and Actions, Faculties or Powers,
and occasional Acts, infused Principles, and acquired Habits, spiritual and
moral, Grace and Nature, that they may take an opportunity to rail at others
for want of better advantage, I shall not contend with them. For allow a new
spiritual Principle, an infused Habit of Grace, or gracious Abilities to be
required in and unto Regeneration, or to be the Product or the Work of the
Spirit therein, that which is born of the Spirit being Spirit; and this part of
the Nature of this Work is sufficiently cleared. Now this the Scripture
abundantly testifies unto: 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature. This new Creature is that which is intended, that which was before
described, which being born of the Spirit is Spirit. This is produced in the
Souls of Men by a creating Act of the Power of God, or it is not a Creature;
and it is superinduced into the essential Faculties of our Souls, or it is not
a new Creature; for whatever is in the Soul of Power, Disposition, Ability, or
Inclination unto God, or for any moral Actions by Nature, it belongs unto the
old Creation, it is no new Creature. And it must be somewhat that has a being
and subsistence of its own in the Soul, or it can be neither new nor a
Creature. And by our Apostle it is opposed to all outward Privileges; Gal. 5.
6. chapter 6. 15. That the Production of it also is by a creating Act of Almighty
Power, the Scripture testifies; Psalm. 51. 10. Ephesians. 2. 10. And this can
denote nothing but a new spiritual Principle, or Nature wrought in us by the
Spirit of God. No, say some, a new Creature is no more but a changed Man. It is
true, but then this Change is internal also; yes in the Purposes, Designs and
Inclinations of the Mind. But is it by a real infusion of a new Principle of
spiritual Life and Holiness? No, it denotes no more but a new Course of
Conversation; only the Expression is m^taphorical, a new Creature is a moral
Man that has changed his course or way. For if he were always a moral Man,
then he was never in any vicious way or course, as it was with him, Mat. 19.
18, 19, 20. then he was always a new Creature.

This is good Gospel at once, to overthrow original Sin, and the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ. This Doctrine I am sure was not learned from the Fathers,
whereof some used to host: Nay, it is much more fulsom than any thing ever
taught by Pelagius himself, who indeed ascribed more unto Grace than these Men
do, although he denied this Creation of a new Principle of Grace in us, antecedent
unto Acts of Obedience. And this turning all Scripture Expressions of spiritual
things into Metaphors, is but a way to turn the whole into a Fable, or at least
to render the Gospel the most obscure and improper way of teaching the Truth of
things that ever was made use of in the World. Dr. Owen's Discourse of the
Spirit, p. 175, 176, 181, 182, 183.

Morality is not this new Creature Change. That is moral Honesty, Freedom from
gross Vices, etc. I have before spoken something about it, showing it
insufficient, when I handled the necessity of Regeneration; we cannot speak too
much against it, it being a soft Pillow from whence many slide insensibly into
Destruction. How many upon this account think themselves new Creatures, who are
yet deeply under the Image of Satan; and tho they have blown off some dust from
the Law of Nature, yet never had a Syllable of the Law of Grace writ in their
Hearts? Nay, the Image of the Devil may be more deeply engraven in a Soul,
whose Life is free from an outward taint. Profane Men express more of the
Beast; a civil and moral Conversation may have more of the Devil and Serpent
within, in spiritualized Wickedness. (1.) Yet Morality is to be valued. It Is a
comely thing among Men, a Beauty to humane Societies, Satisfaction to natural
Conscience, Security to the Body, Example to others; Men are to be applauded
for it, and encouraged in it. It Is a Fruit of Christ's Mediation, left for the
preservation of humane Societies, without which the World would be a mere
Bedlam and Shambles: The Works of Kindness, Justice, Mercy, Love, Pity, etc.
are useful and commendable. It Is a thing which our Savior loved, yet not with
such a Love as eternally to reward it; he looked upon the young Man with some
Affection, Mark 10. 21. but scarce upon the Pharisees without Anger and
Disdain. (2.) Yet we must not set the Crown belonging to Grace upon the head of
it, and place it in a Throne equal to that of the new Creation. It Is too
amiable for Men to be beaten off from it; yet with just Reason we may persuade
them to arise to a higher elevation. It Is a curious Plant, a delightful
Picture, an useful Artifice, but not a vital Principle; a Glowworm is a lovely
Light, yet it is not a Star. We prels not Men to throw off Morality, but to
advance it, to exchange for Christ, that their moral Virtues may commence
Christian Graces. It Is an elevation near the Kingdom of God, not a Translation
into the Kingdom of God: It Is Nature improved, Nature renewed; it is a well
colored Picture without a Principle of Life; an outward Resemblance, not an
inward Power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. a form of Godliness. As a change is made upon Cloth
in the draught of a Picture, but no change in it by the conveyance of Life --
You may have Adam's Morality with Adam's Corruption; a freedom from gross
Vices, with a heap of spiritual Sins in your Hearts, as Adam had; but not a
true Righteousness without the new Adam, the quickening Spirit. Therefore the
highest Morality without a new Creation is but Flesh: all Men out of Christ
agree in a fleshly Nature. It Is the highest thing in the rank of Flesh, but it
is not yet mounted to Spirit. Water heated to the highest pitch is but Water
still; and Morality in the greatest elevation of it, is but refined Flesh; an
old Nature in an higher form. A profane Man reduced to a philosophical
Morality, is purified Flesh reduced to some Sweetness, endued with a fresh
Color, but wanting Life as much as before: It is an old Nature new mended, (or
vampt) but a new Creature is Christ formed in the Soul. Moral Virtue colors
the Skin, renewing Grace enlivens the Heart: that changes the outward Actions,
this the inward Affections: that paints the Man, this quickens him: that is a
change indeed in the Flesh, not of the Flesh into Spirit; it is a new Action,
not a new Creation. -- It must needs be differenced from the new Creature,
because its Birth is different. Moral Virtue is gained by humane Industry,
natural Strength, frequent Exercises: It Is made up of Habits, engendered by
frequent Acts (Mr. Baxter's new Creature) But Regeneration is a Habit infused,
which grows not upon the stock of Nature, nor is it brought forth by the
strength of Nature: for Man being Flesh, cannot prepare himself to it. That may
be the Fruit of Education, Example, Philosophy; this of the Spirit: that is a
Fruit of God's common Grace, this of his special Grace: that grows upon the
stock of Self-love, not from the Root of Faith, and a divine Affection: that is
like a wild Flower in the Field, brought forth by the strength of Nature; this
like a Flower in the Garden, transplanted from Heaven, derived from Christ, set
and watered by the Spirit. And therefore the other being but the work of
Nature, cannor bear the Characters of that Excellency which the Affections
planted by the Spirit do: that is the Product of Reason, this of the Spirit:
that is the awakening of natural Light, this the breaking out of spiritual
Light and Love upon it: that is the excitation of an old Principle, this the
infusion of a new: that arising from Sleep by the jog of Conscience, this
arising from Death by the breath of the Spirit, working a deep Contrition, and
making all new -- It differs from the new Creature, in the immediate Principle
of it and its tendency. That is a cleansing the outward Flesh in the fear of
Man, out of Reverence to Superiors (as it is said of Jehoash, he did that which
was right, while he was under the awful Instructions of Jehoiada, 2 Kings 12.
2.) This is a perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. That is an
outward Reformation from the hearing of the Word; some Acts materially
performed from the newness of the thing, John 5. 35. This from a judicious and
hearty Approbation of the Law and Will of God. That arises from a natural Love
to Reason, Justice, Equity; This consists of Love to God. That avoids some
Sins, because they are loathsome; this because they are sinful: That tends not
to God for himself, but for something extraneous to him: It Is an acting for
self, not for the Praise of God.

The Actions of unregenerate Morality, as well as loathsome Profaneness, are to
gratify the Flesh in some part of it: They all meet in that point; as the
clearest Brooks as well as the most rapid and muddy Streams run to feed the
Sea. -- That Restraints are not this new Creature. Restraining Grace, and
renewing Grace, are two different things; the one is a withholding, Genesis 20. 6.
I withheld thee from sining against me. The other an enlivening with a free
Spirit against it. -- A serious fit of Melancholy, or a sudden start of
Affection, is not this Work of the new Creature. It Is an Habit, a Law writ in
the Heart; not a transient Pang, or a sudden Affection; not a skipping of
Fancy, or a quick sparkling of Passion, but a new Creature, a divine Frame
spreading it self over every Faculty: Knowing God in our Understandings,
complying with him by our Wills, aspiring to him by a settled and perpetual
flame of our Affections rising Heaven-wards, like the Fire upon the Altar,
conforming our selves to him in the whole Man, a denial of whole self for God.

It Is not a working of the Imagination, or a melancholy Vapor, which may
quickly be removed, or a flash of Joy and Love; but a serious Humility, a
constant Grief under the Remainder of Corruption yet unextirpated; a perpetual
Recourse to God, and Delight in him through Jesus Christ. Mr. Charnock, Vol. 2.
p. 106, 107, 108, 109, 110.

Peter tells of some that escaped the Pollutions of the World through the
Knowledge of Christ* It is an Expression of Men that fall away, whom he calls
afterward Swine and Dogs, unchanged for all this. Nature remains corrupt; yet
through the knowledge of Christ, through the Dictates of the Holy Commands of
Christ they leave these Sins, refrain from what they have a mind to. Yea, when
they are thus sick, they have no mind to their Sins, that is more; yet it is but
Nature improved still. For if you should be sick in Body, or in old Age, you
will say of all your Pleasures, We have no pleasure in them, Eccl. 12. 1. So
when a Man is sick in his Conscience, he is dead to all the Pleasures in the
World, and yet this is not Mortification, the Lusts are not killed; for when he
grows well again, his Lusis grow well with him, and gather up their crumbs. --
In doing a Man shall have a great deal of Joy: for as the Heathens in doing
according to the Light of their natural Conscience, had Peace, they had an
excusing; so it is said, Romans 2. 14. So if a Man in this case shall do good
Duties, and reform his Life, the Holy Ghost will give him Joy. No Man shall do
any thing for God, but he shall have a Reward, Joy to encourage him. You know
the stony Ground, they received the Word with Joy. Now then all Nature being
thus wrought upon, a Man falling thus a doing and reforming, and find ing
himself thus kindly used to encourage him, Self-flattery in a Man makes up a
Conclusion, that he is in a State of Grace. And the Principles of Nature being
thus wrought upon by the Holy Ghost, thus does a Man to be a Professor of
Religion, lancheth forth, walks on strongly; and yet all is but the
Principles of Nature improved, and but an Underwork of the Spirit, that which
indeed is the Point in hand. If there be such Principles in Nature which the
Holy Ghost works with, raises and elevateth so as he need not put in new
Principles, but only stir Nature; the Holy Ghost begins indeed, but Flesh
ends. Then, my Brethren, such a Work as this does not hold proportion with
what the Text here speaks of, wherein a Man is raised up from Death to Life, as
Jesus Christ was; Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. or whereby he is made a Workmanship,
created to good Works, as chapter 2. 10. for in all this working (if you mark it)
there is but an artificial kind of working in comparison. As for example, to
express the difference to you between one and the other; Go take an old piece
of Cloth, by dressing of it you may raise a new tust upon it out of the old
Piece, and it will seem new; but yet it is but the same Principle newly raised
up. But come to the Work of Regeneration, what is it? It is not a dressing of
the old Garment, but it is a putting off the old Man, and putting on the new,
that is the Expression, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. To dress the old Garment, to
dress old Nature, and make it seem new; here is not a work now proportionable
to the Creation. Here is but raising up the Principles there already; but to
put it off, and to put on the new Man in all holy and gracious Dispositions
suited to the spiritual part of the Word, this is by Creation, to put on the new
Man which after God is created, etc. Go, take any Man that has had never so
high a Work, where only the Principles of Nature have been wrought upon and
improved, wound up to the highest; if God turn this Man truly to him, there
needs as much Power yet to do it, after all this that I have mentioned, as to
create a World, as to raise up Christ from the Dead. Dr. Goodwin on Ephesians. Part
1. p. 353, 354, 356.

Faith and Repentance are the principal converting Graces, and said to be the
principal Conditions of Justification, and to be (at least in Habit) antecedent
to it: Hence it must follow that Man has a Power of his own to repent and
believe; both because the Law of Grace cannot require him to perform those
Conditions of Justification which are impossible to him, and which it self does
not promise shall be* wrought in him, and also because the continuance of these
Graces, and the reviving them when decayed, yea recovering them when lost, all
depend upon Man's own diligence altogether, being the complete condition of
Life. And there is the same reason that the beginning as well as the progress
of Grace should be from our selves, and more, seeing it is harder to begin a
good Principle and Practice, than to improve and continue it. Moreover, the
late plausible opinion of the Sameness of special and common Grace being the
same in their physical Nature, differing only morally, is directed to be
subservient to this Doctrine. By common Grace we understand those Inclinations
or Dispositions in Men toward God before Conversion, before they can prevail
with themselves to give up themselves to God. By special Grace we mean those
efficacious Dispositions whereby a Man is fully determined to love and please
God. Now to say these are the same in their physical Nature, or in specie
physica, is to say, they are the self-same Quality both in kind and number (in
the same Subject) which was before Conversion, and is after; and that they
differ morally, or specie morali. This only is meant, that it is not accounted
or accepted with God for saving Grace for any part of the Condition of the
New Covenant, till it wholly turn and engage the Heart to God, tho before it
was a truly gracious Qualification not arising to that acceptable degree. Now
then I demand, whether Man by his own Power does ripen this common Grace to be
effectual, and so saving, or not? If it does (which surely these Authors
intend) then he has Power to convert himself; if he has not, but God works
that saving degree in him, then the same Quality numerically is partly natural,
wrought by Man's natural Power, and partly supernatural, wrought by the divine
extraordinary Power. One part is within the reach and compass of Nature, and so
natural; the other is beyond the reach of Nature, and so supernatural. But this
is absurd, for that which is properly natural, and that which is supernatural,
do certainly differ, not only morally but physically, yea not only specie but
genere physico. Mr. Troughton's Lutherus Redivivus, p. 55, 56, 57.

It could not stand with God's holy Wisdom, to leave those he was pleased to
choose unto Salvation to the Conduct of their own Understanding and Will, with
such other Helps as they have in common with other Men; and thereon to hang the
whole of his great Delign: for by such a Course it would not only be
frustrable, but certainly defeated. -- That whatever things are requisite to
Salvation, are given of God freely to all the Elect; and wrought effectually by
the divine Power, as the necessary means of that Salvation, to which he has
appointed them. -- Our Assertion is, That the new Creature is God's Workmanship
entirely and alone. This the Scripture seems evident for: But being a Truth
unacceptable to Nature; and there being some, who owning the Name deny the
Thing; we must the more intently look to the proof of it: And our Argument for
it is this; That the new Creature must be wrought either by a divine Power, or
by a natural Power, or by the Concurrence of both together. It cannot be
wrought by a natural Power; 1. Because it is a Creature; and of all Creatures
the noblest and most excellent. All the Virtuosi in the World are not able to
make an Atom: They may refine and sublimate things that are, but cannot give
the least being to that which is not. How then should the natural Man give
being to the new Creation? To suppose such a thing, would be a degrading to the
Divine Nature, a setting the Image of the heavenly below that of the earthly:
for he that builds is worthy of more Honor than the thing that is built by
him. 2. Nothing can afford [that] it has not in it self: Now every Soul in
Nature is Darkness, and possessed with an habitual aversion from God: And Light
is not brought out of Darkness, nor a clean thing out of an unclean: No Man
will expect Grapes from Thorns: the Product will be according to that of which
it is produced, Mat. 7. 18. John 3. 6. Therefore the new Creature being a
divine thing, cannot be educed of natural Principles. 3. The natural Man is not
only void of all Virtue and Property that tends to Regeneration, but is
opposite thereto. To be grafted into the true Olive Tree, is contrary to
Nature: He is Enmity against God: and Enmity being a Principle incapable of
Reconcilement, it cannot be supposed it will help to destroy it self. They will
not so much as seek after God, nor take him into their Thoughts. Satan they
follow with natural Motion. But as for the Word of the Lord, they profess
stoutly, they will not hearken unto it; so desperately wicked are the Hearts of
Men: Psalm. 10. 4. John 8. 44. Jer. 44. 16. chapter 2. 25. chapter 17. 9. They are even
made up of fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul, and whatever has respect
to its happy Restorement. This Enmity is maintained and animated by the
Darkness that is in them, which all Men in Nature are filled with, or with
false Lights, which are equally pernicious and obstructive to this Work: By
reason whereof the most glorious Objects, tho just before them, are hid from
their Eyes; they do not, nor they cannot discern the things which are of God, 1
Cor. 2. 14. They have false Conceptions of every thing; call good evil, and
evil good; put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light: and the most
excellent things are commonly farthest off from their Approbation. It Is a known
Experiment, that the more spiritual any Truth is, the more will carnal Reason
object* against it; How can these things be? John 3. 9. and how can this Man
give us of his Flesh to eat? chapter 6. 52. By all the Understanding that Men have
before Conversion, they are but more strongly prejudiced against the Truth:
Acts 17. 18. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. This Enmity is further confirmed and
fixed by the Naturality of it. If it were an adventitious Quality, it might
possibly be separated. And that it is natural, appears, in that the
Universality of Mankind is infected with it: It is not here and there one; but
all and every one: Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin: Romans 3. 9 -- 18. Genesis
6. 13. Jer. 10. 14. Ps. 51. 3. It also grows up with them, Psalm. 58. 5. and the
longer it lives the worse it is, and the more impregnable; Romans 8. 7. And tho
at times they look another way (like Bullets of Stone or Lead, which acted by a
foreign Power, are mounted into the Air) their upward Motion quickly cease,
because it was not natural; they come again to their Center of their own
accord, and there they will live and die: As was verified in Saul, Ahab,
Agrippa, and others. The new Creature cannot be the Product of natural Power,
because every thing is received and improved according to the nature of that
which receives it. Plants and other Creatures turn all their Nourishment into
their own Species and Property. A Vine and a Thistle both planted in one Soil,
have the same Sun, Dew, Air, and other Influences common to both; yet, each one
converts the whole of that it receives into its own Substance and Kind. You may
plant and prune, and dig and dung an evil Tree, bestow what cost and pains you
will upon it, it does all but enable the more pregnant Production of evil
Fruit: Just so does the natural Man, even turn the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, Jude 4. Tit. 1. 15. Psalm. 119. 67. 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. Good Josiah
his Heart melts at the preaching of the Law, he humbles himself, and falls to
Reforming, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27, 31. but wicked Jehoiakim, he cuts the Roll in
pieces, and burns it, Jer. 36. 23. Thus Sin (i. e. corrupt Nature) works Death
by that which is good, Romans 7. 8, 10. -- The new Creature is not wrought by the
Concurrence of divine and natural Power [together] for the Holy Ghost needs no
assistance in his Work: who and where is he that stood, up for his help, when
he moved on the Waters, and brought forth this World into a Form? Job 38. 4.
When he weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance? Isa. 40.
12, 13, 14, 15. He that made all things of nothing, cannot be supposed to need
the aid of any. As Man had nothing to do in the Conception of Christ's humane
Nature, but the Power of the most High was alone in that Work, so also it is in
forming Christ in us. Why should he call in the aid of another, unless
deficient of himself? And he must greatly be straightened that takes in the help
of an Enemy -- If the Holy Ghost had need of Help, the Flesh affords not the
least, for the natural Man is without Strength.

The best natured Man in the World, until regenerated, is but Flesh; and all
Flesh is Grass, and the Glory of it as the Flower of Grass, which fades in a
Moment: It is an Arm that has no Strength. And it is not only so in* it self,
but it renders weak and impotent whatever relies upon it, or may be used by it,
for any spiritual end. A Straw in the hand of a Giant will make no deeper
Impression, than if in the hand of a Stripling. The Law it self, which was
ordained to Life, is made weak through the Flesh, Romans 8. 3. -- If we should
suppose the Flesh able, in any respect, to give assistance in this Work, the
Holy Ghost would none of it: suppose a possibility of Conjunction, what would
be the issue of it? When the Sons of God went in to the Daughters of Men,
Giants were born of them, Genesis 6. 4. If Creatures of several kinds should
couple together, what can be produced, but a Monster in Nature? Such Monsters
(in Spirituals) are Hypocrites and temporary Believers; in whom there is
something begotten on the Will of Man, by the common striving and inlightnings
of the Spirit, which attains to a kind of Formality, but proves in the end a
lump of dead Flesh; it never comes to a new Creature; as you see in Herod and
Agrippa. An Owl's Egg, tho hatched by a Dove or Eagle, will prove but a
Night-bird: The Seed of the Bondwoman will be carnal, tho Abraham himself be
the Father of it. -- That the new Creature is the Product of Divine Power
alone, John 1. 12. (1.) It is born not of Blood; it belongs not to, nor is
brought forth in, any as they are Men, made of Flesh and Blood; nor as they are
Abraham's Seed according to the Flesh, Romans 9. 7. Nor, (2.) is it born of the
Will of the Flesh, the carnal or sensual Affections have nothing to do in the
spiritual Birth: Nor, (3.) of the Will of Man. The rational Faculties, by which
Men are set above the rank of other Creatures; these do not contribute toward
our divine Sonship: But, (4.) It is of God, i. e. it is his Work alone; and the
natural Man has nothing to do in that Birth, he is perfectly unactive in it,
even as dry Bones in causing themselves to live; Ezekiel. 37. 5, 9, 14. or as
Lazarus in reviving himself; of whom it is said, he that was dead came forth
bound hand and foot, John 11. 44. which was such a demonstration of divine
Power, that the Pharisees themselves acknowledge, If they now let him alone, all
Men will believe in him, v. 48. (And if it were not so, the Lord alone should
not be exalted) And with this falls in that other beloved Disciple James, chapter
1. 18. Of his own Will begat he us, i. e. by his own divine Power, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
He forms and brings forth the new Creation, without any assistance from the
old, or cooperation of it. Peter he also tells us, It is born of incorruptible
Seed, 1. Pet. 1. 23. And John again, that it is born of the Spirit, John 3. 8.
which is plainly, to be of the Offspring of God. Of like tenor is that of the
Prophet, Thou have wrought all our Works in us, Isa. 26. 12. and that of Paul,
We are his Workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10. As also that of the Psalmist, It is he
that has made us (and not we our selves) his People, Psalm. 100. 2. We find it
here, and in John expressly, both negatively and positively; as purposely and
for ever to exclude whatever is in Man, from being so much as thought
contributary to the new Creation; and that the whole Work might be fathered
upon God only: which is indeed the natural result of all those Scriptures which
speak of his Work under the Notion of a Creature; which necessarily implies,
that the whole of it, both Matter and Form, is from the Creator: (for in truth
a Creature's Foundation is nothing besides the good pleasure of God.) It may
further be noted, that in James, the Father of Lights is said to beget it; and
in the Galatians, Jerusalem which is above, is said to be the Mother of it: And
in John (as before) that it is born of the Spirit: And if Father and Mother,
Begetter and Bringer forth, are both in Heaven; what shall the Man of Earth
found his Pretensions upon, as to the Parentage of the new Creature? And
further, it is worthy of Remark. 1. What sort of Instruments were mostly used
in this Work; not the learned but illiterate Men: And of these, such most
eminently, as had neither Elegancy of Speech, nor majestic Presence: And the
end of this was, that it might appear, and Men might be convinced, that their
Faith stood not in (was neither made nor maintained by) the Wisdom of Men, but
the Power of God; 2 Cor. 10. 10. 1 Cor. 2. 3, 4, 5. 2. The natural Unaptness of
the Persons (commonly) wrought upon, to receive those highborn Principles: not
many of the wise and noble; but the poor, base, and follish, (i. e. in
comparison of others) And why these? Truly, it was to make good the Truth
that is here asserted, viz. That no Flesh might glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1.
26. 27. And yet likewise take notice, that the wise and noble were not
excluded; witness the Wife of Herod's Steward, Joseph, Nicodemus, and Sergius
Paulus, Acts 13. 7. a prudent Man: which further illustrates the Power of God,
in that he did, by those weak and contemptible means, bring in also such as
these. 3. The Scriptures so emphatically ascribing the Work unto God: which
kind of Ascription were very improper, if Faith and Holiness were things so
common, and easily attained; and the natural Man so able and virtuous an Engine
in that Work, as most Men imagine. Paul styles it, The Faith of the Operation
of God, Col. 2. 12. Isaiah makes it dependant on the Arm of the Lord [revealed]
i. e. made bare, and put forth to the utmost: our Savior, he attributes to God
the Father as [Lord of Heaven and Earth] and Paul again, to the exceeding
Greatness of his mighty Power, even the same by which he raised Jesus Christ
from the dead; even then when the Sins of all his People lay upon him; and all
the Malice, Strength, and Subtilty of the Powers of Darkness, were up in Arms
against it; which was indeed the highest Indication of divine Power that ever
was put forth, or shall be -- The Soul is not turned to God by a Twine-thread;
nor does the Lord content himself with wishing and woulding that it might be
so, after the manner of Men, who either are indifferent in the thing, or have
not wherewith to effect their Desires: Nor merely by propounding, moving and
striving, by moral Suasions, Instructions, Threatenings, and the like (which are
of little avail with a dark Understanding, and fixed Enmity, which every
natural Man is acted by) but by the putting forth of a Power invincible, a
Power that will not be said nay; but what it wills, that it will do; what it
undertakes, it goes through with. To do a thing effectually, is to do it
perfectly, thoroughly, successfully: that is, so to use and apply the means,
that the end designed is surely brought to pass: And this notwithstanding all
the Weakness, Aversness, and Repugnancy of the carnal Mind against it. Mr.
Cole's practical Discourse of God's Sovereignty, p. 150, 155, 156, 157, 158,
159, 161, 162, 163, 171.

I know all Men will pretend that Holiness is from God, it was never denied by
Pelagius himself. But many with him would have it to be from God in a way of
Nature, and not in a way of special Grace. -- I can and do commend moral
Virtues and Honesty as much as any Man ought to do, and am sure enough there is
no Grace where they are not; yet to make any thing to be our Holiness that is
not derived from Jesus Christ, I know not what I do more abhor. An Imagination
hereof dethrones Christ from his Glory, and overthrows the whole Gospel. But we
have a sort of Men who plead that Heathens may be eternally saved, so large and
indulgent is their Charity, etc. Dr. Owen's Discourse of the Spirit, p. 322,
363.

That all those previous Dispositions wherewith our Hearts are prepared by
Virtue of common Grace, do not at all enable us to concur by any vital
Operation, with that powerful blessed renewing Grace of Regeneration, whereby
we become the Sons, of God. Neither is there any Disposition unto Grace so
remote, as that possibly it can proceed from a mere Faculty of Nature, for
every such Disposition must be of the same Order with the Form that is to be
introduced, but Nature in respect of Grace, is a thing of an inferior Allay,
between which there is no Proportion: A good use of Gifts may have a Promise of
an Addition of more, provided it be in the same kind.

There is no Rule, Law, or Promise, that should make Grace due, upon the good
use of natural Endowments. I. O. D. D.

That there is a vast and great internal Difference between those that are
sincere indeed, and the closest Hypocrites; or, there are certain
Qualifications within, and Operations of God upon the Souls of the faithful,
which make a very great difference between them and the closest Hypocrites. 1.
That the Lord does make this inward difference; Ephesians. 5. 8. You were Darkness,
now are Light. Chapter 2. 1. You were dead, now are alive. 2. It Is sogreat, that
the Faithful do see it: 1 John 5. 18, 19. Tit. 3. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Col. 1.
12, 13. 3. It Is so great, that others cannot receive it when it is offered, they
are so far from having it in them, or counterfeiting, or making this inward
Work, that they cannot receive it; no not when the Spirit it self comes to work
it; John 14. 17. The Spirit of Truth which the World cannot receive: it does
receive prophetical Gifts, and common Graces; but there is a higher and more
divine Work which they cannot receive; Romans 8. 7. It Is not subject, nor can be
subject to the Law of God, where the Holiness of God appears. 4. It Is so great,
that they cannot understand it what it is spiritually, only in fancy; 1 Cor. 2.
14. Neither can he know them: and hence Men lie groping all their Life for
Grace, and ask and have not, because they know not the thing that they would
have: John 4. 10. If thou knew thou would ask, and he would give. A Beast
cannot conceive what Life a Man leads. -- Use 1. Of Confutation to the Papists,
who in their Writings seek to shame the Churches of Christ, saying, that they
deny all inherent Righteousness or Graces, making a Man just by the
Righteousness of Christ, and in the mean while to remain like a Carcass or
Ghost, or a Sepulcher full of Rottenness within. Three or four of these Archers
that have shot these Arrows I have met with, whereby they wound the Heart of
Profession, and keep the People in a professed Enmity and Opposition against
the ways of God's Grace: Now we do not only deny this, but we profess that the
Lord does not only of the Riches of his Grace accept us in Christ, but out of
the same Love sends down the Spirit of Grace, not only to make us civil and
moral, or hypocritical, but that the Lord works thereby such a change as is not
to be found in the most refined Hypocrites breathing. And we profess, tho our
Justification does not consist in this, yet whoever has not this, is not
justified (whatever he may imagine) in the sight of God. And the Lord grant the
Churches of the Lord Jesus may never open the Mouths of those Elasphemers of
his Name, in denying all Righteousness in our selves at all; deny it to
justify, deny it not altogether. Use 2. Of Confutation of an old Arminian
Error; for they hold and maintain an inherent Righteousness, but that there is
no difference between the Graces of Believers and Hypocrites, only in their
continuance, and that that is by chance too, and doubtful, viz. if they hold
on; and for this purpose cite many Scriptures, three especially, that of Ezekiel.
18. 24. If the righteous Man forsake, etc. which is spoken of rotten
pharisaical Hypocrites falling far short of what the Saints have. And the
Parable of the Seed, Mat. 13. They all sprang up: where it is manifest the Soil
was naught, out of which they that fell away did grow. And Heb. 10. 29. Blood
wherewith they were sanctified, which is meant of such as had some inward
enlightening, and lasting, and external Profession really, not in appearance
only in them, yet not any saving and effectual Work: but thus by making Grace
common they make it vile, and under a color of making all Men watchful, they
destroy all Faith in God's Faithfulness and Promise, especially until a Man
come to die. Divines have many strong Arguments against them, and show however
there may be Decays and Relapses, Winter-Seasons of the Saints, yet ever there
remains in them the Seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. John 4. 14. The main ground of
this their Conceit has been double. 1. False Observation, in beholding many
fall off that were not Stars, but Snuffs, glorious Professors for a time. -- 2.
A great mistake of the Work of Grace, together with their own experience; for
they conceiving Grace to be but a mean thing, and not understanding it, because
they never felt it in themselves, hence make no difference between one Man and
another, and hence maintain Apostasy from Grace. -- I grant indeed a Man may
fall away from Grace, considering Grace without Christ to keep it. -- Use 3.
Hence we see the difference between the Graces of Hypocrites and Saints does
not only lie in the efficient Cause, viz. the Spirit of Christ barely
considered in it self, for then there should be no difference at all; for there
are not two Spirits, and the same Spirit that works in the faithful, the same
Spirit is in the faithful to work many strange Works in them, 1 Cor. 12. 3, 4.
neither does supernatural Power of the Spirit distinguish (I mean that which is
above the strength of Nature, nor that which is above the use of Nature, for
Nature crooks all God's Works to it self) for the Gifts of Prophecy and common
Joy are above the strength of mere Nature, but the difference lies in the Work
it self. As it is in Creation, the least Spire of Grass has the same Power to
make it, that made Heaven and Angels; is there no difference then? Yes, it lies
in the very Work or Effect of that Power. And as it is in a Cedar and a Fly,
there is more Excellency in the former in some respects, but the latter has
another Life, which the other has not: so the meanest Believer is better than
the most glorious Hypocrite. And look how it was with Saul, when he was
anointed King, there was a new Spirit come upon him, the Spirit of a King,
which common Subjects had not: So when God makes us Kings and Priests unto
Christ, there comes another Spirit upon us, which common Men have not. I know
there is the Spirit it self in the Saints, as it is not in other Men; but how is
it there? I know it is there by Faith, but not only by this, but by certain
peculiar Effects which are not in other Men. As it is with the Soul, it is in the
Body, hence works a Life which is not in any brute Creature, so it is here. And
hence it is said, The World cannot receive him, John 14. 17. Mal. 3. 2, 3. Who
is able to bear his coming, because he comes to purify, etc. yet still the
Spirit, barely considered in it self, puts no difference, unless it be in
respect of the Work it self. O therefore look to it, do not say, I have now the
Spirit and Christ. But what does Christ work there? John 15. 1, 2. There are
but two sorts of Branches there, fruitless and fruitful; the difference is in
the very Fruits of them, etc. Use 4. O then Terror to them that content
themselves with common Works, and so think their Estates good. You have been
terrified, confessed, and repented; Judas did so. You have reformed many
things, and take delight to draw nigh to God in Ordinances; those Hypocrites
did so, in Isa. 58. You have seen nothing in your selves, the Devils do so. You
have had great Ravishments, and seen the Glory of Heaven, of Saints; Balaam did
so. You have beheld and seen the Lord Jesus, as if present on Earth: many saw
him, heard him, and were lifted up to Heaven by him, and shall see him at last
in Glory indeed. O but my Desires are good! many shall seek, and shall not
enter. O therefore consider of your State, and tremble, and set before thee all
the Mercy the Lord embraces his People with! and say, O that Mercy for me! and
follow him till he has done it. Mr. Shephard of N. E. Parable of the ten
Virgins, Part 1. p. 131, 132, 134, 135, 136.

What was the intention of the Maintainers of these strange Assertions amongst
us, I know not: Whether the Efficacy of Error prevailed really with them, or
no; or whether it were the better to comply with Popery, and thereby to draw us
back again unto Egypt: but this I have heard, that it was affirmed on knowledge
in a former Parliament, that the Introduction of Arminianism amongst us, was
the issue of a Spanish Consultation. It is a strange Story that learned
Zanchius tells us, how upon the death of the Cardinal of Lorrain, there was
found in his Study a Note of the Names of diverse German Doctors and Ministers,
being Lutherans, to whom was paid an annual Pension, by the assignment of the
Cardinal, that they might take pains to oppose the Calvinists, and so by
cherishing Dissension, reduce the People again to Popery. Dr. Owen's Preface to
his Display of Arminianism. Not far unlike the private pensioning of some
little Emissaries this day, whose leather-stretch'd Consciences have rendered
them devoted and proselyted Creatures for the Work.

Head 8. That the Doctrine of Assurance, etc.
Conformist.
THERE is a twofold Assurance: 1. A Sunshine; 2. A Moonshine Assurance. The
first is that full Assurance in Heb. 10. 22. The Moonshine is that of the Word,
to the which we do well that we take heed, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 18. The
first is given but to few, and that but seldom; and that either upon some great
Duty to be performed, or some new Condition of Life to be entered into, or upon
some great Sufferings to be undergone; of which one says, The hour it comes is
but seldom, and the stay of it is short. The second is that we must trust to, a
relying upon the sure Word of God, by the Faith of Adherence, when we want the
other, the Spirit of full Assurance. Mr. Dod's first Sheet, Head 22.

He gives this Reason why many of God's People lived uncomfortably, because
they shut their Ears against what God said, and they opened their Ear to what
carnal Reason, Satan and the World said, where they should shut it: but (said
he) the Psalmist was wiser, Psalm. 85. 8. he would hear none of them all, I will
hear what the Lord will speak. Mr. Dod's second Sheet, Head 14. He used to say,
that the Knowledge of two things would make one willing to suffer or die, viz.
what Heaven is, and that it is mine. Yes said one, if a Man were sure; to whom
he answered, Truly Assurance is to be had, and what have we been doing all this
while? He used to say, they that hope to go to Heaven (as most do) and have not
Evidence for it, were like to a Man, that passing by some great House and
^tate, would say, This is mine. But being bid to show his Title, would say some
body must have it, and why not I? such is most Men's Title to Heaven. He would
often say in his Sickness, I am not afraid to look death in the face, I can
say, Death where is thy Sting? Death cannot ^urt me, etc. Heads 34, 35, 40.

Those that are effectually called, tho they be uncertain, yet they believe
they shall be certain; and they follow hard after God, till he give them
assurance, and they build upon it, that they shall have it one day, and this
builds them up: as it was with Mr. Moore of Norwich, a Reverend Divine, in all
his Sermons for the most part, he would in one Passage or other move his People
to get assurance: in the end he sickned himself, and called for all the good
People in his Parish, and told them, You know what Doctrine I have delivered to
you; and amongst the rest this was one that I frequently beat upon, that you
would labor to be assured: now I must tell you, that I never had assurance to
my self, but I did ever look for it, and now by the Mercy of God I have it; and
as I preached this Doctrine to you when I was living, so now I say unto you,
being a dying Man, labor to get Assurance: so that he did verily believe that
he should have it in the end, tho as yet he had it not; and this stayed his
Soul to go on in all his ways: as David when he was cast down, and had much ado
to keep his hold, and had no Assurance at that time; Why art thou cast down, O
my Soul? Why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet
praise him, who is the health of my Countenance, and my God, Psalm. 42. 11. tho
he were cast down and dejected, this was his stay, I shall yet praise him, etc.
he did verily believe he should rejoice in his holy Name, and overcome those
Distresses, and have the Lord's Mercy sealed to his Soul, and have his Mouth
filled with his Praises, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? I shall yet rejoice
in his holy Name; I shall yet show forth his Praises; I shall yet be able to
apply his Promises, and be able to say he is my God and my Redeemer. Mr. Fenner
of effectual Calling, p. 19.

It is the first Extract of Election, and Predestination unto eternal Life;
Romans 8. 30. Rev. 17. 14. The King of Kings, Lord of Lords: and they that are
with him are called and chosen, he puts them both together; what a mavelous
Comfort (^and consequently ground of Assurance) is this to those that know they
are effectually called of God! Election and Vocation are individual Companions,
and cannot be separated one from the other, etc. Ibid. p. 25.

Assurance] That infallible Certainty which an elect Soul has by Faith of her
own Salvation, and of the Promise of Grace, that it is true, and belongs to
her self; Heb. 10. 22. Draw near in assurance of Faith, Romans 4. 21. The Papists
are Enemies to this Assurance: they grant a probable and conjectural, but deny
infallible Assurance: because Man's Will (say they) is mutable; whereas our
Assurance depends upon the unchangeable Will of God. -- Full Assurance] a
certain and strong Persuasion of our own Salvation by Christ; Romans 4. 21. Being
fully assured, Col. 2. 1. A Speech borrowed from Ships which be carried with
full Sails. Mr. Wilson's Christian Dictionary.

That in every true Faith there is an Assurance and Persuasion of that which it
believes, but not a full Assurance, for this is proper to a strong Faith. 2.
That weak Christians should not be discouraged because they be not fully
assured, so as they strive toward it: for the measure of true Faith is
differing, and God looks not to the Quantity, but to the Truth of Faith. Mr.
Wilson on Romans, p. 253.

Paul was most sure of God's Grace, and his Justification through Faith; he is
persuaded that nothing can separate him from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.
38. but he does acknowledge, that he is not justified by his faithful Labors in
the Gospel, or any other Works of his own, although he were clear in Conscience.
Dr. Willet Synop. Pap. p. 923.

Hence it appears that it was the judgment of the primitive Church that Men
should believe the Forgiveness of their own Sins -- First of all here comes a
common fault of Men to be rebuked. Every one will say, that he believes the
remission of Sins, yet no Man almost labors for a true and certain
Persuasion hereof in his own Conscience: and for proof thereof propound this
Question to the common Christian; Do thou persuade thy self that God gives
remission of Sins unto his Church? The Answer will be, I know and believe it.
But ask him further: Do thou believe the Pardon of thine own Sins? And then
comes in a blind Answer, I have a good hope to Godward, but I cannot tell, I
think no Man can say so much: for God says to no Man, Thy Sins are pardoned.
But this is to speak flat Contraries, to say they believe, and they cannot
tell: and it bewrays exceeding Negligence in matter of Salvation. Mr. Perkins
on the Creed, p. 507, 508.

Faith is called an Evidence: Hence we learn, that the nature of Faith stands
not in doubting, but in a Certainty and Assurance. The Romish doubting of the
Essence of Faith is as contrary to true Faith, as Darkness to Light. Mr.
Perkins on Heb. 11. 1.

Here I might take occasion to tax the comfortless Doctrine of Popery, which
maintains there can be no other ordinary Knowledge in this particular, touching
the Pardon of Sins, but that which is out of opinion and guess. If any Man (say
Papists) have any other Certainty herein, it is to be imputed to some
extraordinary Revelation, than thought to proceed out of the ordinary and usual
Course which God takes with his Children. Surely, if the Assurance in this
matter be but imaginary, the Joy that follows it, can be no better than a
mere conceit: and it were strange to think that David prayed to have his Fancy
fed with a Supposition. If David could by his Prayer obtain no more than a
superficial refreshing, proceeding out of an opinion that he was purged; surely
he should have been more vexed with the fear of mistaking, than it was possible
for him to be confirmed with the strength of his Conceit.

This is one of the grand Abominations of Popery, that it brings up the Souls
of Men in a kind of continual Suspense. It can never bring a Man to that Joy
and Gladness which David here did pray for. The main grounds of it do put the
Heart quite out of heart in seeking to enjoy it. Happily it will give thee leave
to wish it, but it will give thee no hope at all to obtain it. Mr. Hieron on
Psalm. 51. p. 194, 195.

I said, that no Man in this transitory World is so strongly underpropp'd, at
least by the Certainty of Faith, that is, unless (as I afterward expounded it)
by Revelation, that he ought to be assured of his own Salvation. But now I
protest before God, and acknowledge in my own Conscience, that they which are
justified by Faith, have Peace toward God, that is, have Reconciliation with
God, and do stand in that Grace by Faith; therefore that they ought to be
certain, and assured of their own Salvation even by the Certainty of Faith it
self. -- I added, that Forgiveness of Sins is an Article of Faith, but not
particular, neither belonging to this Man nor that Man; that is (as I expounded
it) that no true faithful Man either can or ought certainly to believe that his
Sins are forgiven: But now I am of another mind, and do freely confess, that
every true faithful Man is bound by this Article of Faith, (to wit, I believe
the Forgiveness of Sins) certainly to believe that his own particular Sins are
freely forgiven him: neither does it follow hereupon, that that Petition of the
Lord's Prayer (to wit, Forgive us our Trespasses) is needless; for in that
Petition we ask not only the Gift, but also the increase of Faith. Mr. Fuller's
History of the University of Cambridg, p. 150, 151.

This Recantation was by the Doctors peremptorily enjoined Mr. Barret, that on
May the 10th, 37th Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Annoque Domini 1595.
immediately after the Clerum, he should go up into the Pulpit of St. Mary's
(where he had published these Errors) and there openly in the face of the
University, read and make this Recantation; which by him was done accordingly,
but not with that Remorse and Humility as was expected: for after the reading
thereof, he concluded thus, Haec dixi, as if all had been oral rather than
cordial: yea, soon after he departed the University, got beyond Sea, turned a
Papist, returned into England, where he led a Lay-man's Life until the day of
his Death. Ibid.

Romans 10. 6. Say not in thine Heart, Who shall ascend, etc. 1. The Apostle
shows the contrary effects of the Law and Gospel: they which depend upon the
Righteousness of the Law are continually in doubt, how they shall come to
Heaven, and how they shall escape Hell: but the Righteousness of Faith removes
all these Doubts; because their Faith is grounded upon the Word of God, which
teaches them, that Christ ascended into Heaven for them, and that he died for
them, they need none other to ascend to prepare them a way into Heaven, nor to
descend to suffer Death, and deliver them from Hell. 2. There is not then any
Question remaining in the Faithful of their Salvation, either by doubting how
they shall go to Heaven, or in being afraid of Hell: but because our Faith is
not here perfect, there may be some strife and wrestling in the Soul between
the Assurance of Faith and carnal Infirmity: sometime the Faithful may make
question, in wrestling and striving against carnal Distrust, saying, If God be
with us, who can be against us? But at length Faith prevails and triumphs,
resolving thus with the Apostle, who shall separate us? 3. But here we must
make a difference of Fear: Faith expels not all Fear, but only the slavish
and servile fear of Hell and Damnation, joined with Distrust and Torment of
Conscience: yet a filial Fear and reverent Awe of God remains in the Servants
of God, etc. -- A faithful Man must be considered, as consisting both of a
spiritual and regenerate part, and of a carnal: then as in respect of the
Goodness of God, apprehended by Faith, in our inward Man, we have Assurance not
to fall; yet the Flesh continually suggesteth doubtful Thoughts, and our carnal
Infirmity puts us in fear, which notwithstanding is subdued by the strength
of Faith: like as when one is set in the top of an high Tower, and looks
downward, he cannot but fear, but yet considering the place where he stands,
which keeps him from falling, he recovereth himself, and overcomes his Fear:
So Faith does prevail against carnal Infirmity, and makes us in the end to be
out of doubt of our Salvation. Dr. Willet on the Romans, p. 476, 526.

They (who endeavor after this Assurance) are upholden in the time of
Affliction: I should have fainted (says David) unless I had believed to see
the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living. They can with Confidence
and Faith in Jesus Christ resist the Temptations of the Devil. They strive to
walk worthy of this Assurance. They overcome the World, and vilify the things
of this Life. -- It Is not enough for us to have the name of Christians, and a
general Knowledge of Redemption by Christ Jesus, unless we find a particular
Assurance of our Election and Vocation. -- For Reprehension unto such as think
it impossible to be assured of ones Salvation, contrary to Job's, I know, and
St. Paul's, we know. -- We may know it: By the Persuasion God's Spirit does not
simply say, that we are the Children of God, but does persuade us unto the
same, resolving all Objections, which we being scrupulous or doubting, can
alledg: By the manner of this Persuasion, which is not drawn from our own Works
or Worthiness, (as in the Devil's Suggestions) but from the alone Love of God
in Christ Jesus. Whereunto we may add the effects of this Persuasion, we rely
upon God, calling upon him, as adopted Children, Abba Father. We hate Sin, we
endeavor to perform God's Will, we labor to go on in Godliness; not as
mercenary Subjects, hired Servants or rectoraliz'd Slaves. Mr. A. Sympson on
the 2d of Peter, p. 105, 107.

Baxterian.
-- IF we may conjecture upon Probabilities, it seems to me most likely, that
there is such a sufficient Grace or Power to repent and believe savingly in
some that use it not, but perish -- no Man has perfect Assurance, that is the
highest degree in this Life: for if all our Graces be imperfect, our Assurance
must needs be imperfect. -- More have true hopes of Salvation, than have
assurance of it, or of their Title to it, for hope may be exercised upon
Probabilities, and most usually it is so. Mr. Baxter's end of Doctrinal
Controversy, chapter 13.. 43. chapter 24.. 8, 11.

Faith is not an Assurance or inward Persuasion that Christ is ours, and our
Sins are pardoned. Men may have this Persuasion (mark the word, Reader, this
Persuasion; that which Dr. Crisp speaks of, is a Persuasion from God) who do
not savingly believe; they in Mat. 7. 22. had this (what, this Persuasion from
God which the Doctor speaks of, and this confident Author vilifies!) when they
cried, Lord, Lord, open to us! (It is much that upon the grounds of our
Author's Divinity they were not opened unto, for to my knowledge they pleaded
the performance of more splendid Conditions than I think our Author will be
ever able to produce, if it were but the casting out of Devils, unless he begin
impartially at home first) neither did the foolish Virgins seem without it,
Mat. 25. 1, 2. (as relying upon their pre-requisite Preparations, short of an
Union with Christ, and a Reception of the Unction of the Holy One, the
Anointings of the Spirit of Christ, the true Oil of that Olive Tree, or special
Grace) yea, it is what (i. e. this Persuasion or Assurance from God) the most
profligate Sinners grow secure by, to their own Destruction; and this
(particular Assurance and special Persuasion the Doctor speaks of) upon the
general Word of Grace. 2. Many true Believers have not this Persuasion (it is
true such as renders the most profligate Sinners secure) let common Experience
be consulted. 3. Such as have had assurance do (by the Doctor's Opinion) fall
into the Sin of damning Unbelief, and especially if they conclude that they
have not this Interest: (All the actings of Unbelief in Believers themselves
are of a damning Nature, for they tend to make God a Liar, tho their personal
State and Interest be safe and unalterable: Therefore says Christ unto Peter,
when under the prevalency of carnal Reasonings, Get thee behind me Satan) a sad
doom on many pious Souls (especially such who have been at the expense of two
hundred Pounds a Year for pious Uses, out of other Men's Purses). 4. This
Persuasion (as coming from God, which the Doctor still asserts) should suppose
an Interest in Christ (and this it effectually does, My Beloved is mine, and I
am his) and does not give it (that is true, because it was from Eternity, and in
time revealed from Faith to Faith) it is a false Conclusion, that Christ is mine
before he is so (and it is an eternal Truth, that if he be not mine before I
come to be persuaded of it, he never will be) and must the great term of Life
be a Lie? (which must by this Author certainly be, if we offer to conclude from
God's own Persuasion that Christ is ours) We are to examine our selves whether
we be in the Faith, (by our predisposing Qualifications hammered out upon the
Anvil of a naturally enlightened Conscience, enforced by the maul of a Pelagian,
Arminian, and Socinian compounded Matter, commonly and artificially called, a
causa sine qua non) and so whether Christ be in us, (i. e. before he be ours as
precedent to our Union with him, or we united unto him as antecedent unto his
being formed in us) before we assure our selves that he is in us, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
(i. e. that we make sure of his Image in us, by adapting Conditionalities,
before ever we have actually applied our selves unto, or experimentally
received him, either or jointly by his Spirit, Word, and Grace) And where has
God made this Proposition, My Sins are laid upon Christ, to be the Object of
saving Faith? (He has made it in Zech. 12. 10. They shall look upon me whom
they have pierced) This Proposition is not God, nor Christ, nor any part of
Scripture, unless you suppose a general Redemption, and that to the actual
pardon of every Sinner: (It is the Language of the Father, Son, Spirit,
Scripture, and all the Redeemed of God, (...) by one Offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified, even the unborn Elect, who were
particularly, personally, nominally upon the Breast and Shoulders of this
blessed High Priest, when he made his Soul an Offering for them, in their
stead, and for their Sins, as lying charged with the same, Heb. 10. 14. and
therefore said to be complete in him, Col. 2. 10. This was an actual
Redemption, Price, and consequently Pardon in the sight of God, for them, and
not spun out in its Essence or Matter, Being or Time; or dependant [unless
manifestatively] upon our Believing, Repenting, etc.) And as the word of Grace
promises Pardon to none but a Believer (who by believing sees he was pardoned,
and that his Faith is a Fruit of his State in the sight and judgment of God; as
to you that believe Christ is precious, not essentially in himself, or
officially as to what he had done, or is in doing, but manifestatively and
experimentally so, to them that believe he is the Power and Wisdom of God) so
the Spirit speaks it to none but to the Believer, as a Believer. It is by
Faith, as the Doctor speaks, that this Persuasion and Assurance comes in; the
Spirit speaks not this Language to the Elect, Redeemed, and Justified ones, but
such as unto him whom he gives the ears of Hearing, or Believing. Mr. Daniel
Williams's Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 63.

That Faith admits of Fears and Doubtings, is charged to be a Doctrine of the
first Reformers, by the Reverend Mr. Lobb, in a late Piece of his, where
Column-wise he opposes it to his own created Antinomian Notions. What sort of
Reformers he means, as to the Reality and Justice of his Charge, unless it be
such as have adhered to the Rhemish Annotations, I am at a loss; but if he
designs herein, the first Protestant Orthodox Reformers, I must needs say, that
he has cast as foul and unjust an Aspersion upon them, as could have dropped from
the Pen of the most adulterating Papist, as equally reflecting thereby upon the
soundness of their Doctrine, as upon their Understanding in its discriminating
Ability to distinguish not only between Truth and Error, but also between
things of a different nature, yea of an essential Enmity one to the other. That
Fears and Doubtings may be where true Faith is, is not to be denied; but that
Faith admits of Doubtings, such Fears as produce Doubtings in the Soul, is
contrary to the Design of God in giving Faith, contrary to the Nature and
Office of Faith in it self and Operations, contrary to the Scripture where we
find the most eminent of the Servants of God met with sharp Reproofs for
entertaining such Fears as are inseparable from Doubtings; and contrary to the
experience of his People in all Generations.

See what Mr. Troughton says of these Baxterians in his Lutherus Redivivus,
Part 1. Assurance of eternal Life is a fruit of Adoption; but this likewise is
rendered impossible. 1. Assurance, by the signs and evidences of true Grace, is
impossible; seeing tho we have true Grace, and are sure we are sanctified, yet
this Grace may be lost, and our inchoate Justification repealed. 2. Assurance,
by the special Testimony, or sealing of the Holy Spirit, is accounted but a
fancy of weak Women, and some few injudicious affectionate. Men: for
Justification, and all the fruits of it, depending wholly upon the condition of
final Perseverance, it is not proper nor probable, that any should have a
special witness of the Spirit that they shall be saved, lest it should hinder
them in their diligence; nor is it suitable to a conditional Covenant. And if
any should indeed have such a Testimony, it is a prophetical, extraordinary
Revelation, not to be accounted an ordinary fruit of Faith, as says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. When you believed you were sealed with that holy
Spirit of Promise, who is the earnest of our Inheritance, etc. It is pretended
by some, that the sealing of the Spirit is no more than his Image, or
Resemblance wrought upon the Soul in sanctifying Grace, as the Wax carries the
resemblance of the Seal: If so, this Sealing could not be the earnest of our
Inheritance, being so mutable a thing as Grace is supposed to be in this Life
by these Authors. Nor could the Spirit be said to seal us to the day of
Redemption, when he only gives us an Impress of his own Likeness, which may be
lost before the day of Redemption come. Besides, they do but strain the
Allusion of a Seal; for tho every Seal makes some Impression, yet every Seal is
not an Image or Resemblance of him that uses it; nor is every Image a Seal.
The proper nature of a Seal is to be something that may give an authentic
Confirmation to our Word or Promise: it is not the Impression, but the
Institution of the Seal, for such an use it is to be regarded; and therefore if
the Testimony of the Spirit be excluded from being an authentic Seal and Token
of our Right to Life, it is excluded from being a Seal at all. Ibid. p. 69, 70,
71. See Mr. Chauncy against Mr. Dan. Williams, Debate 15. Of the way to attain
Assurance, p. 317. As follows:

Neonom. But when a Believer is examining his Heart and Life by the Word, the
Holy Spirit enlightens the Mind there to discern Faith and Love, and such other
Qualifications, which the Gospel declares to be the infallible signs of
Regeneration: and he adds such Power to the Testimony of Conscience for the
Truth and In-being of these Graces, as begets in a Soul a joyful sense of its
comfortable State, and some comfortable Freedom from those Fears which
accompany a doubting Christian: And according to the Evidence of these Graces,
Assurance is ordinarily strong or weak.

Antinom. I observe now, tho you would let the Spirit have no hand in the
Evidence of Faith, yet you need its help to enlighten about Signs and
Qualifications: I pray, how does the Spirit enlighten here? Is it by any
objective Revelation, or by any inward Dictate or Intimation? And cannot the
Spirit as well enlighten the Mind to behold Christ in the Promise by an Act of
Faith, as to behold Faith and Love in our selves? 2. You will not admit the
Declaration of the Gospel received and embraced by Faith to Evidence, but that
it seems the Heart and Life must be examined by the Word as a Rule. So that
Assurance must be wrought by the Word as a Law, not as a Gospel, so far as you
are come up to a Conformity to the Rule, not a Testimony of your Interest in
the Grace of the Gospel. 3. You had need have the light of the Spirit to find
an infallible sign in you too, tho they be declared in the Gospel. Hypocrites
pretend to them, and you cannot tell whether you are any better than a
Hypocrite, without an infallible Voice of the Spirit, (according to your
Doctrine) for you must know that you shall persevere in those Qualifications,
and it is impossible for a Man to be assured till Death, or can be assured of
his Perseverance till then, (all other signs will signify nothing) without an
infallible Witness. 4. You must have a Power added by the Spirit to the
Testimony of Conscience, that it may witness the Truth and In-being of Graces.
What Is the Reason it cannot witness the Truth of our In-being in Christ, and
add a Power to our Faith to believe even unto Assurance. 5. All this
Examination, Illumination of the Spirit, Gospel Declaration, etc. may at last
beget a joyful sense of a reconciled State, you say; but according to you it
cannot be Assurance, because you cannot yet try by Perseverance; the Soul is in
a little hopes it is in a probable way to Salvation, but cannot be assured he is
in a sure State, or shall certainly be saved, because he must continue his
justified State by his Works: and therefore it is impossible for him to try and
find so far as to Assurance. Because he has not persevered, you will say, it may
be, he must believe his Perseverance, and be assured of it by Faith; then, I
say, there is as much ground to believe and be assured by Faith of our
Salvation. 6. You speak not of an Assurance in all you have said, but of some
comfortable Freedom from Doubtings, i. e. upon some probable grounds. This
amounts to more than Opinion at last, the only judgment of a contingent Axiom;
and you tell us elsewhere our State here is but of Trial, not decided,
therefore there can be no Assurance at all in this Life. 7. You do well to add
at last, that according to the Evidence of these Graces, Assurance is
ordinarily strong or weak: And may not that Assurance be so, which we call the
Assurance of Faith? May it not be strong or weak, according to the Evidence
that Faith gives in being strong or weak Faith? But now go on to your Whethers
and Neithers. Mr. Chauncy against Mr. D. Williams, Debate 15. of the way to
attain Assurance, p. 317, 318.

Neonom. A Testimony of the Spirit, giving an Evidence of Pardon without any
Evidence of Grace, is not according to the Word of Grace: For the Word of Grace
never declares any Sinners are pardoned, but believing penitent Sinners; it is
not as mere Sinners the word Pardons, but it flatly condemns and leaves
Guilt on all impenitent Unbelievers, as I have proved.

Antinom. I marvel a Divine should speak at such a rate; as if an Evidence of
Pardon were not an Evidence of Grace: Is not Pardon the highest degree of
Grace? Is not the Word of Grace therefore so, because it is a Word of Pardon to
Sinners? And if you mean inherent Grace, why may not the Spirit give Evidence
of Pardon to a Sinner's Evidence of it in an Act of Believing, before there be
any Fruits of Faith? Was it not so with the Thief upon the Cross, and many that
God pardons just upon the last Moment of their Lives? And is it not so with
many of God's Children that can see no Evidences in themselves? The Spirit
strips them of all grounds in themselves, and that gives a full Satisfaction in
objective Grace, with the full Assurance of Faith, that the Creature may be
laid low, and Christ may be glorified. I must tell you, that a mere Sinner is
the Object of Pardon, and not a Sinner, considered under any holy
Qualification: The whole need not the Physician: Christ finds and pardons lost
Sinners, and there is no Sinner applies Pardon aright, but as a mere Sinner, tho
he has Faith. Mr. Chauncy's Neonomianism unmasked, Part 2. Debate ult. p. 327.

Nonconformist.
THE immediate end of the Exercise of this Diligence is, that we may attain to
the full assurance of hope. -- The Hope here intended is a certain assured
Expectation of good things promised, through the accomplishment of those
Promises, accompanied with a Love, Desire and Valuation of them. Faith respects
the Promise, Hope the thing promised; wherefore it is a Fruit and Effect of
Faith; it being the proper acting of the Soul toward things believed as good,
absent, and certain. Wherefore where our Faith begets no Hope, it is to be
feared it is not genuine; and where our Hope, the Evidence or Assurance of our
Faith, it is but Presumption. Now this Hope concerns things absent and future,
for as our Apostle says, If we already enjoy any thing, why do we hope for it?
And this is the order of these things. God has in his Promises declared his
Goodness, Purpose and Grace, in the great things he will do unto all Eternity
for Believers; namely, that they shall be perfectly delivered from every thing
that is grievous or evil in Sin or Trouble, and be brought into the full
enjoyment of everlasting Glory with himself. In these Promises Faith rests on
the Veracity and Power of God. Hereon the Soul considers those good, things
which are so promised, and now secured by Faith, as yet absent and unenjoyed.
And the actings of the Soul toward them in Desire, Love, Valuation, and
certain Expectation of them as believed; is this Hope. There may be a pretense
of great Hope where there is no Faith, as it is with the most. And there may be
a profession of great Faith, where there is no true Hope, as it is with many.
But in themselves these things are inseparable and proportionable. It is
impossible we should believe the Promises aright, but that we shall hope for
the things promised. Nor can we hope for the things promised, unless we believe
the Promises. And this discards most of that pretended Hope that is in the
World. (As the hope of such that arises from such a Faith of Christ, as
absolutely overthrows the whole design of God by him) it does not proceed from,
it is not resolved into Faith in the Promises, and therefore is Presumption.

Yea none have greater Hopes for the most part than such as have no Faith at
all. The great Use, Benefit and Advantage which Believers have by this Grace,
is the supporting of their Souls under the Troubles and Difficulties which they
meet withal upon the account of the Profession of what they do believe, Romans 5.
4, 5. 1 Cor 15. 19. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Hence in our Christian Armor it is called
the Helmet, Ephesians. 6. 17. The Helmet of Salvation, that is, the Hope of
Salvation, as it is expounded, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Wherefore an assured Expectation
of these things so infinitely above and beyond what they (the Hebrews) lost or
underwent at present, was absolutely necessary as to their Supportment, so to
their encouragement unto a continuance in their profession -- There is the full
assurance of this Hope. Hope has its degrees, as Faith has also. There is a
weak or a little Faith, and a strong or great Faith. So there is an imperfect
and a more perfect Hope. This full Assurance is not of the nature or essence of
it, but an especial degree of it in its Improvement -- There is such a degree
attainable as is always victorious, which will give the Soul Peace at all
times, and sometimes fill it with Joy. This therefore is the assurance of Hope
here intended: Such a fixed, constant, prevailing Persuasion proceeding from
Faith in the Promises, concerning the good things promised, our Interest in
them, and certain enjoyment of them, as will support us and carry us
comfortably through all the Difficulties and Troubles we have to conflict
withal. And without this it is not possible that we should carry on our
Profession to the Glory of God and the Gospel in the times of Affliction and
Persecution; for although the least degree of sincere Hope will preserve from
utter Apostasy, yet unless it be confirmed and fortified, and so wrought up
unto this full Assurance, it cannot be, but that great and sore Trials,
Temptations and Persecutions will at one time or another make such Impressions
on our Minds, as to cause a manifold failing in the Duties of Profession,
either as to matter, or to manner; as it has fallen out with not a few sincere
Believers in all Ages. Object. 1. Whereas there are degrees in spiritual saving
Graces and their Operations, we ought continually to press toward the most
perfect of them. Not only are we to have Hope, but we are to labor for the
assurance of Hope. It is one of the best evidences that any Grace is true and
saving in its nature and kind; when we labor to thrive and grow in it, or to
have it do so in us. This the Nature of the new Creature, whereof it is a part,
inclines unto; this is the end of all the Ordinances and Institutions of the
Gospel, Ephesians. 4. 13. Hereby alone do we bring Glory to God, adorn the Gospel;
grow up into Conformity with Christ, and secure our own eternal Welfare.

Obsery. 2. Hope being improved by the due Exercise of Faith and Love, will
grow up into such an assurance of Rest, Life, Immortality and Glory, as shall
outweigh all the Troubles and Persecutions that in this World may befall us, on
the account of our Profession or otherways. There is nothing in the World so
vain as that common Hope, whereby Men living in their Sins do make a reserve of
Heaven when they can continue here no longer. The more it thrives in the Minds
of any, the more desperate is their Condition; it being only an endless Spring
of Encouragements unto Sin. Its beginnings are usually indeed but small and
weak; but when it has been so far cherished as to be able to defeat the Power
of Convictions, it quickly grows up into Presumption and Security. But this
Hope which is the Daughter, Sister, and Companion of Faith, the more it grows
up, and is strengthened, the more useful it is unto the Soul, as being a living
Spring of encouragements unto Stability in Obedience. For it being once
confirmed, it will on every occasion of Trial or Temptation give such a present
Existence in the Mind unto future certain Glories, as shall deliver it from
Snares and Fears, and confirm it in its Duty. Dr. Owen on the Hebrews, chapter 6.
p. 120, 121, 122.

To be assured of a Mercy, is better than the enjoyment of a Mercy. Doubts of
losing a Mercy, eat out the Heart: and a Man in that case is as much troubled
with the fear of wanting, as he can be comforted with the sense of enjoying. --
The first part of that great Blessing we receive by Christ, consists in our
Deliverance from Evil, or in a freedom from perishing. The second consists in
the conveyance of Good to us, as Pardon of Sin, Grace, and Glory. But the third
(which is the height of all) consists in our everlasting assurance to enjoy all
this. Adam had a good Estate, but he was not assured of it; the Blessings we
have by Christ are built upon a Foundation, which can never be shaken. Mr.
Caryl on Job, chapter 5. v. 24.

So we may answer these places; Prove. 28. 14. Blessed is the Man that fears
always. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling. These
seem to call Christians to live in a doubtful Condition, or in a state of
Trepidation, always fearing: but their intendment is, not to keep the Soul from
being settled by Faith in Christ, but from being highflown in any opinion of
our selves: or the Spirit speaks thus, not to put us upon doubts of our
standing, but to preserve us from falling. For these Cautions are so far from
opposing Assurance, that they strengthen it.

The way not to be afraid is thus to fear; nor are any so sure as they who thus
tremble. They that are working out their Salvation with fear and trembling, may
know without fear and trembling that they shall be saved: And they that thus
fear always, may be assured that they shall be above fear for ever. But say
some, the Preacher speaks out against this Knowledge, Eccles. 9. 1. No Man
knows Love or Hatred. It is true, not by all that is before him: We cannot
know Love and Hatred from the Works of God without us; but we may know Love and
Hatred by the Work of God upon us, or by the workings of God within us. We
cannot fetch an Evidence that God loves us out of our Chests and Money-bags;
nor can we read any Assurance or a Conveyance for Heaven, in the Assurances and
Conveyances of our Lands: but we may fetch this Evidence, and read this
Conveyance from, and in the Covenant of Grace, received by Faith, witnessed and
sealed to our Hearts by the Holy Spirit. Mr. Caryl on Job 13. 18.

Because of the Immutability of God's eternal Purpose in our Predestination,
and his effectual gracious Operations in the pursuit, and for the execution
thereof, the Elect of God shall infallibly be carried through all, even the
most dreadful Oppositions that are made against them, and be at last safely
landed in Glory. And there is no greater Encouragement to grow and persist in
Holiness, than what is administered by this Assurance of a blessed end and issue
of it. -- Those who have had experience of that spiritual Slumber and Sloth
which Unbelief will cast us under, of these Weaknesses, Discouragements and
Despondencies, which Uncertainties, Doubts, Fears, and Perplexities, of what
will be the issue of things at last with them, do cast upon the Souls of Men,
how Duties are discouraged, spiritual Endeavors, and Diligence impaired,
Delight in God weakened, and Love cooled by them, will be able to make a right
Judgment of the Truth of this Assertion. Some think that this Apprehension of
the Immutability of God's purpose of Election, and the Infallibility of the
Salvation of Believers on that account, tends only to Carelessness and Security
in Sin; and that to be always in Fear, Dread, and Uncertainty of the end, is
the only means to make us watchful unto Duties of Holiness. It is very sad,
that any Man should so far proclaim his Inexperience and Unacquaintedness with
the nature of Gospel Grace, the Genius and Inclination of the New Creature, and
the proper Workings of Faith, as to be able thus to argue, without a check put
upon him by himself, and from his own Experience. It is true, were there no
difference between Faith and Presumption, no difference between the Spirit of
Liberty under the Covenant of Grace, and that of Bondage under the old
Covenant; no Spirit of Adoption given unto Believers, no filial genuine Delight
in and Adherence unto God, ingenerated in them thereby, there might be
something in this Objection. But if the Nature of Faith, and of the new
Creature, the Operations of the one, and the Disposition of the other, are such
as they are declared to be in the Gospel, and as Believers have experience of
them in their own Hearts; Men do but bewray their Ignorance, whilst they
contend, that the Assurance of God's unchangeable Love in Christ, flowing from
the Immutability of his Counsel in Election, does any way impeach, or does not
effectually promote the Industry of Believers in all Duties of Obedience. --
Suppose a Man that is on a Journey knows himself to be in his right way, and
that passing on therein, he shall certainly and infallibly come to his Journeys
end, especially if he will a little quicken his speed, as occasion shall
require: Will you say, that this is enough to make such a Man careless and
negligent, and that it would be much more to his advantage to be lost and
bewildred in uncertain Paths and Ways, not knowing whither he goes, nor whether
he shall ever arrive at his Journeys end? Common Experience declares the
contrary, as also how momentary and useless are those violent Fits and Gusts of
Endeavors, which proceed from Fear and Uncertainty, both in things spiritual
and temporal, or civil; whilst Men are under the power of actual Impression
from such Fears, they will convert to God, yea that they will momento turbinis,
and perfect Holiness in an instant. But so soon as that Impression wears off,
(as it will do on every occasion, and upon none at all) such Persons are as
dead and cold toward God, as the Lead or Iron which ran but now in a fiery
Stream, is when the Heat is departed from it. It is that Soul alone ordinarily,
which has a comfortable Assurance of God's eternal immutable electing Love,
and thence of the blessed End of its own Course of Obedience, who goes on
constantly and evenly in a course of Holiness, quickening his Course, and
doubling his speed as he has occasion from Trials or Opportunities. And this
is the very design of our Apostle, to explain and confirm, Heb. 6. from the
10th Verse unto the end of the Chapter, as is declared elsewhere. -- ^t appears
from what has been discoursed, that the electing Love of God is a powerful
constraining Motive unto Holiness, and that which proves invincibly the
necessity of it in all who intend the eternal Enjoyment of God. But it will be
said, That if it be supposed or granted, that those who are actually Believers,
and have a sense of their Interest herein, may make the use of it that is
pleaded; yet as for those who are unconverted, or are otherwise uncertain of
their spiritual State and Condition, nothing can be so discouraging unto them
as this Doctrine of eternal Election. Can they make any other Conclusion from
it, but that, If they are not elected, all care and pains in and about Duties
of Obedience are vain: If they are, they are needless? -- 1. We have showed
already, that this Doctrine is revealed and proposed in the Scripture, and
principally to acquaint Believers with their Privilege, Safety, and Fountain of
their Comforts. -- But I shall show moreover, that it has its proper Benefit
and Advantage toward others also. For, 2. Suppose the Doctrine of personal
Election be preached unto Men, together with the other s^red Truths of the
Gospel: Two Conclusions, it is possible, may by sundry Persons be made from it.
(1.) That whereas this is a matter of great and eternal Moment unto our Souls,
and there is no way to secure our Interest in it, but by the possession of its
Fruits and Effects, which are saving Faith and Holiness; we will, we must, it
is our duty to use our utmost Endeavors, by attaining of them, and growth in
them, to make our Election sure. And herein, if we be sincere and diligent, we
shall not fail. Others, (2.) may conclude, that if it be so indeed, that those
who shall be saved are chosen thereunto, before the Foundation of the World.
Then it is to no purpose to go about to believe or obey, seeing all things must
fall out at last according as they were foreordained. Now I ask, which of
these Conclusions is (I will not say most suited unto the Mind and Will of God,
with that Subjection of Soul and Conscience which we owe to his sovereign
Wisdom and Authority, but whether of them is) the most rational, and most
suitable to the Principles of sober Love of our selves, and Care of our immortal
Condition? Nothing is more certain than that the latter Resolution will be
infallibly destructive (if pursued) of all the everlasting Concernments of our
Souls; Death and eternal Condemnation are the unavoidable Issues of it. No Man
giving himself up to the Conduct of that Conclusion, shall ever come to the
enjoyment of God. But in the other way, it is possible at least, that a Man may
be found to be the Object of God's electing Love, and so be saved. But why do I
say it is possible? There is nothing more infallibly certain, than that he who
pursues sincerely and diligently the ways of Faith and Obedience, which are, as
we have often said, the fruits of Election, shall obtain in the end,
everlasting Blessedness, and ordinarily shall have in this World a comfortable
Evidence of his own personal Election. This therefore on all accounts, and
toward all sorts of Persons, is an invincible Argument of the necessity of
Holiness, and a mighty Motive thereunto. Dr. Owen of the Spirit, p. 529, 530,
531, 532.

The Doctrine of effectual Calling is further confirmed from the Office of
Christ as a Redeemer, which was not only to purchase, but to put us in actual
Possession of the good things he purchased for us. Redemption and
Reconciliation are Relates commensurate, and inseparable. It is not only a
reconcilable State that Redemption puts us into, but a state of actual
Reconcilement; It s^ays the Enmity, makes an end of Sin, and brings in
everlasting Righteousness. Mr. Cole of God's Sovereignty, etc. p. 174.

The Hebrews have three special Words, whereby they express the nature of true
justifying Faith, as touching the certainty of it. One is Emun, which
signifies Faith, the Root whereof is Aman, which signifies to nourish: To
which David alludes, Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou
dwell in the Land, and thou shall be in (in the Original, fed by Faith) word
for word as Tremellius renders it. And John 6. the Lord joineth believing on
him, and feeding on him, together, as both one: Now this word which the Hebrews
use for Faith, signifies also Truth, or that which is firm, stable or settled.
And what can be more firm or certain than Truth? The Prophet, Isa. 7. 9. has a
very elegant Exposition of this word: If ye believe not, ye shall not be
established: To believe and to be established, both coming of the same Root in
the Original. Hence also comes the word Amen, used in all Languages, which is
a Note of Believing, and assenting to the Truth, and as it were sealing it unto
us: 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the Promises of God in Christ are Yea, and in him
Amen, etc. that is most true and certain. Faith therefore is no doubtful
Conjecture, or wavering Hope, but a most certain Belief, firm as Truth it self.
-- Another word used by the Hebrews for Faith is Be^ach, which signifies
Trust, Security, Confidence and Affiance. -- As Isa. 32. 17. where speaking of
the full Revelation of the Gospel in the coming of Christ in the Flesh, he
says, Then the Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of
Righteousness, Quietness, and Assurance, and Security for ever, as the vulgar
Latin renders it. Note here, that the effect of the Righteousness of God's
Saints is Assurance and Security in Believing. -- The third word used in the
Old Testament for Believing is Chassah, which signifies so to believe, trust
or confide in God, as to make him our sure Sanctuary and Resting Place, under
whose Protection the Believer is safe and secure, as the Chicken under the Wing
of the Hen; as we read this word used in Ruth 2. 13. (the words of Boaz to
Ruth) The Lord recompense thy Work, and a full Reward be given thee of the Lord
God of Israel, under whose Wings thou art come to trust; Hebr. Lachasoth. And
David uses the same word in the same Phrase of Speech, Psalm. 36. 7. As the
Lord uses the same comparison to the unbelieving Jews, Mat. 23. 37. Thus we
see the true nature of Faith, as it is expressed by significant Words in the
Old Testament; all of them setting forth the Certainty and Assurance of Faith
in God. -- Come we to the new Testament: where let us begin with that excellent
Description, which the Apostle makes of saving and justifying Faith, peculiar
to the Saints of God, of whom he sets down an ample Catalogue in Heb. 11. 1.
Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not
seen. The Greek Text is very emphatical and significant. 1. Therefore to acquit
this Faith from being that which the Pontificians would have it to be, to wit,
a mere historical Faith, common with Reprobates and Devils, the Apostle shows
the Object of it to be, things hoped for, things not seen: such as he means,
1 Cor. 2. 9. which fall not within the reach of that Faith, which is common to
the wicked, who are altogether hopeless, and love not the Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore the Faith he described, is the Faith of God's Elect alone, who only
have the hope of eternal Life. 2. This Faith is called the Substance (as also
the Vulgar Latin has it) or Substance of things hoped for: that is, Faith
makes those things that are hoped for to be sure and certain, as if they were
already in our Possession; or Substance is as much as an under-prop or Basis,
supporting and sustaining us with constant Patience, in the assured expectation
of those things hoped for, as yet unseen. So that it signifies a most steadfast
Unmoveableness of Faith. As, 1 Cor. 15. 58. It is called also an Evidence,
Demonstration or Argument (as the vulgar Latin) of things not seen. Now what is
more sure and certain than an Evidence or plain Demonstration? Whereupon
Chrysotom upon these words says, O what an admirable word he uses, saying the
Argument of things not seen! For an Argument or Demonstration is in things most
manifest. Therefore Faith is a Vision of things not appearing, and it brings us
to the same Certainty to the which we are brought by the things which are seen.
So that neither about the Object of things, which are seen, can it be called
Credulity or Incredulity: Nor again can it be called Faith, but when a Man has
Certainty concerning these things which are not seen, more than concerning
those things which are seen. For because those things which are yet in hope are
reputed as yet without Substance or Subsistence, and Faith gives unto them
their Substance; not that it adds any thing unto them, but it self is the
Substance or Subsistence of them: for the purpose, the Resurrection is not yet
fulfilled, nor yet present or subsistent, but Faith makes it to subsist in our
Souls: this is that which the Apostle calls Substance, so Chrysostom. Yea,
this word Substance, as it imports a subsisting, signifies also ani^um
praesentem, a Confidence of full Assurance of the Mind. And it is sometimes
used in Authors for a fastening or close-joining together, as a Joint, (...), a
fast juncture. And such is Faith, which joineth the Object and the Subject
together, making the things hoped for to be as it were in our present
possession. It is also the Evidence of things not seen, presenting them visibly
and sensibly before us; like a most clear perspective Glass, which presents and
attracts as it were the most remote Objects nearer to the eye, for the clearer
view of it. Thus Abraham and those other Saints of the Old Testament, saw these
invisible things afar off with the eye of Faith, Heb. 11. 13. and were
persuaded of them, and embraced them. -- Thus if saving and justifying Faith be
the Substance, the Subsistence, the Assurance, the Confidence, the Coherence of
things hoped for; if the Evidence, the Argument and Demonstration of things not
seen, prepared for such as love God, and revealed to us by the Spirit: How then
is not this Faith most sure and certain of Justification and eternal Salvation?
See further into this worthy Author Mr. Burton's Christian Bulwark, p. 262,
263, 264, 265.

Head 9. That true Grace, etc. has the Promise of Perseverance, etc.
Conformist.
-- SO that the strength of Faith takes in the strength of Christ, because it
puts Christ into a Man, who by his Spirit dwells and lives in us. And here
it is worth our observing, that the Reason why the House in the Parable did
stand firm against all Tempests, was because it was founded upon a Rock. Why!
may not a weak Superstruction of rotten and inconsistent Materials be built
upon a sound Foundation? As a strong House falls from a weak Foundation, may
not in like manner a weak House by a Tempest fall from a strong Foundation?
Surely in Christ's Temple it is not as in ordinary material Buildings. In these
tho the whole Frame stand upon the Foundation, yet it stands together by the
strength of the Parts amongst themselves, and therefore their mutual Weakness
and Failings do prejudice the stability of the whole. But in the Church, the
strength of Christ the Foundation is not an immanent, personal, fixed thing;
but a derivative and an effused Strength, which runs through the whole Building:
Because the Foundation being a vital Foundation, is able to shed forth and
transfuse its Stability into the whole Structure. Whatever the Materials are of
themselves, tho never so frail, yet being once incorporated in the Building,
they are presently transformed into the Nature and Firmness of their
Foundation. To whom coming as unto a living Stone, says St. Peter, ye also as
lively Stones are built up a spiritual House; to note unto us the
Transformation and Uniformity of the Saints with Christ, both in their
spiritual Nature, and in the firmness and stability of the same. -- God's
Promise flowing from his Love and Grace. An everlasting Covenant will I make,
says God, Jer. 32. 40. And observe how it comes to be everlasting, and not
frustrated or made temporary by us: I will not turn away from them, says the
Lord, to do them good. True, Lord, we know thou do not repent thee of thy
Love; but tho thou turn not from us, O how frail, how apt are we to turn away
from thee, and so to nullify this thy Covenant of Mercy unto our selves? Nay,
says the Lord, I will put my fear into their Hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. So elsewhere the Lord tells us, that his Covenant shall be as
the Waters of Noah, Isa. 54. 9, 10. The Sins of Men can no more utterly cancel
or reverse God's Covenant of Mercy toward them, than they can bring back
Noah's Flood into the World again: tho for a moment he may be angry, and hide
his face, yet his Mercy in the main is great and everlasting. The Promises of
God, as they have Truth, so they have Power in them; they do not depend upon
our Resolutions, whether they shall be executed or no; but by Faith
apprehending them, and by Hope waiting upon God in them, they frame and
accommodate the Heart to those Conditions which introduce their Execution. God
makes us to do the things which he commands, we do not make him to do the
things which he promises; 2 Pet. 1. 15. 1 Corinthians. 2. 5. John 6. 45. Mal. 3.
6. It is nothing in or from our selves, but only the Immutability of my Grace
and Promises, which preserves you from being consumed. -- Christ's Victories
are ours: He overcame the World, John 16. 33. and Temptations, Heb. 4. 15. Mat.
4. 11. and Enemies, Col. 2. 15. Luke 11. 22. and Sins for us, Col. 2. 13, 14.
And therefore they shall not be able to overcome him in us, Heb. 2. 18. He who
once overcame them for us, will certainly subdue them in us: he that will
overcome the last Enemy, will overcome all that are before; 1 Cor. 15. 26. For
if any be left, the last is not overcome. -- We have the benefit of Christ's
Intercession: I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. It is spoken of
a saving Faith, as the Learned prove at large. And I have showed before that
particular Promises in Scriptures are universally appliable to any Man whose
Case is parallel to that particular. -- The sum of all is this, since we stand
not, like Adam, upon our own bottom, but are Branches of such a Vine as never
withers, Members of such a Head as never dies, Sharers in such a Spirit as
cleanses, heals, and purifieth the Heart, Partakers of such Promises as are
sealed with the Oath of God: since we live not by our own Life, but by the Life
of Christ; are not led or sealed by our own Spirit, but by the Spirit of
Christ; do not obtain Mercy by our own Prayers, but by the Intercession of
Christ; stand not reconciled unto God by our own Endeavors, but by the
Propitiation wrought by Christ; who loved us when we were Enemies and in our
Blood, who is both willing and able to save us to the uttermost, and to
preserve his own Mercies in us; to whose Office it belongs to take order that
none who are given unto him be lost; undoubtedly that Life of Christ in us,
which is thus under-propp'd, tho it be not priviledg'd from Temptations, no not
from Backslidings, yet is an abiding Life: He who raised our Soul from Death,
will either preserve our feet from falling; or, if we do fall, will heal our
Backslidings, and will save us freely. Dr. Reynolds's Life of Christ, p. 443,
444, 448, 449, 453, 454.

Perseverance] The continuing in Grace unto the end. Perseverance may stand
with many deep falls, but it keeps from falling away. -- It is an Error to
hold, that true Believers may fall from saving Grace, either wholly for a time,
or for ever. Mr. Wilson's Christian Dictionary.

Dr. Owen of the Saints Perseverance, a Piece writ against Mr. John Goodwin,
cites several of the eminent Reformers of the Church of England, who defended
that Doctrine. -- The time when first head was made against the Truth we
profess, and Criminations like those managed by Mr. Goodwin, hatched and
contrived to assault it withal, was, when it had been eminently delivered to
the Saints of this Nation, and all the Churches of Christ, by Reynolds,
Whitakers, Greenham, and others like to them, their Fellow Laborers in the
Lord's Vineyard. -- He that shall provide an Apology for them, affirming that
they understood not the State, Nature, Consequences, and Tendencies of the
Doctrines they received, defended, preached, contended for, will scarce be able
by any following Defensative, to vindicate his own Credit, for so doing -- Who
are they in whose Writings Mr. Goodwin has found such a Spirit of Holiness,
breathing with Authority, as is not to be found out, nor perceived in the
Writings of them that assert the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints?
Calvin, Zanchius, Beza, etc. (and to consine our selves home) Reynolds,
Whitaker, Perkins, Greenham, Dod, Preston, Boulton, Sibbs, Rogers, Culverwell,
Cotton, etc. whose Fame upon this very account, of the eminent and effectual
Breathing of a Spirit of Holiness in their Writings, is gone out into all the
Nations about us, and their Remembrance is blessed at home and abroad. -- The
truth is, those among them, as there were many among them, both Bishops, and
Men (as they speak and think) of inferior Orders, who were solidly learned,
especially in the Writings of the Ancients (of whom many are yet alive, and
some are fallen asleep) were universally, almost to a Man, of the same Judgment
with Calvin, in the Heads of our Religion under Consideration; Jewel, Abbot,
Morton, Usher, Hall, Davenant, and Prideaux, (great Names among the World of
learned Men) with a considerable Retinue of Men of Repute for Literature and
Devotion, (with whom on no account whatever the Arminianizing Party of the
Prelates and their Followers are to be named the same day) have sufficiently
testified their Thoughts in this matter to all the World. From what Ambiguity
of Expression it is, that any Sentence is stolen from Austine, and others of the
Ancients, seeming to countenance the Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy, has been
elsewhere discovered, and may further be manifested as occasion shall be
administered; and without pretense to any great Skill in the Old Learning, this
I dare assert (whereof I have given some account in the Preface to the Reader)
that not one of the Ancients (much less Austine) did ever maintain such an
Apostasy of Saints, and such a Perseverance as that which Mr. Goodwin
contendeth for. Dr. Owen of Perseverance, p. 305, 308, 316.

But as great a Benefit as it is, that they (the People of God) shall continue
to the end; yet if the Lord would hide it from them, and keep them from the
Knowledge of it, it should be much lesser: and therefore this is further to be
added, that they which know themselves to be the Lord's, may also know, that
they shall be preserved and kept safe against all adversary Power of the Devil
and his Instruments, and so persevere unto Death. For although it seems to be a
Mystery and a Secret, that the determinate Will and Counsel of God concerning
this Matter should be known; yet it is a Secret unto such only as lie in
Darkness and in the Shadow of Death, which through Unbelief are not able to fee
into it, because it is a Mystery: but the Secret of the Lord is not hidden from
his own Servants, but shall in time be revealed unto them, whom because he
calls his Friends, therefore he shows them his Will and Mind in the most
precious Secrets which it is expedient for them to know; 2 Cor. 4. 3. Psalm. 25.
14. John 15. 15. for by often hearing the Doctrine of Perseverance plainly
preached unto them, God draws their Hearts to believe it: that as they hear
the Lord will perfect the good Work which he has begun in his People, and
withal as they do know themselves to be his People, so they hold this in
Persuasion, tho they see not how by any thing in themselves, that he will
continue his favor toward them unto their end. For they which know that they
shall have eternal Life, must needs also know that they shall be kept by God in
this present World from all Power of the Devil which might hinder them from it;
1 Pet. 1. 4, 5. But all Believers may and ought to know, that they shall have
eternal Life; as 1 John 5. 13. I write unto you that believe, that ye may know
that ye have eternal Life. Therefore they may know, that they shall be kept to
the end, that they may also enjoy the same. -- Furthermore, to persuade this
Point more strongly to God's Children (of whom many are long held in doubting
of the same) and for that it is flatly denied by the Church of Rome, we ought
not to doubt of this, but that as God has been with other of his Servants, in
all Ages; Josh. 1. 5. so he will be with us that are his in this Age, or which
shall be his hereafter. -- When God's Children set a deep and due Consideration
of the mighty Power of God against their own Timorousness and Frailty, and
against the strength of the Devil and World: Again, when they weigh the force
of God's Promise, who has warranted a good end unto them, and the many helps
by which God has provided to bring them well home; they rest quietly, cast
their Care upon him, and trust that he which has said it, will also do the
same. The which Persuasion when they have once fastened upon (and the ofter they
think on it the more surely they shall hold it) it is hard to say, how it
reviveth and gladneth their Hearts: It is a Treasure invaluable, when they once
soundly know it (as they can best tell the price and value of it, who have
sometimes doubted of it, and have felt extreme Anguish thereby) who, if they
might have been assured of it in some former Fears and Distress, would have
preferred it before the greatest Commodities. These therefore, when they once
know and believe it, receiving it with such Joy, as I have said, do not (as
carnal Men imagine they will) abuse this precious Liberty to Looseness and
Licentiousness, little regarding what they do, or how carelessly they look to
themselves, seeing they have a Promise from God, that they shall persevere in
his Favor and in a godly Life unto their end. They do not, I say, by this
occasion wax slothful, worldly, idle, vain, or any other way seek to shake off
the Lord's Yoke, as weary of the same: (and yet I deny not, but that this
Doctrine is thus abused of many) but as they know that Perseverance comes not
but by daily good Proceeding, so they gather Strength and Encouragement from
thence to go forward more cheerfully; yea they go about all Duties which they
know to pertain to them, and the means also which help thereto, much more
willingly and readily, because they are persuaded they shall not lose their
Labor, being assured that God has ordained the variety of Helps that they
should grow thereby. Mr. Rogers's seven Treatises, p. 593, 594, 595. -- When
you were effectually called, then was the first knowing of the Grace of God to
do a Man good: it is the first beginning of all the Goodness of God toward a
Man, as Phil. 1. 6. being consident in this, that he which has begun a good
Work in you, will perform it to the day of Jesus Christ: that is, he that did
effectually call you, as he did, begin a good Work in you, and did begin to put
forth his eternal good Will and Pleasure in you, and poor forth the beginning
of his Mercy, and Grace, and Favor into your Souls: Now he that has done
this, will never leave it till he has brought it to perfection. Mr. Fenner of
effectual Calling, p. 22.

The Perseverance of God's Children is most certain: so long as there is Power
in God or Glory, they cannot fall away by losing their Happiness. This Point
has abundant and apparent Confirmation out of the Old Testament, Psalm. 145.
10, 13, 14. Isa. 42. 3. Ezekiel. 36. 24, 25, 26, 27. Jer. 32. 40. Hos. 2. 19. out
of the Gospels, Mat. 16. 18. chapter 24. 25. John 4. 14. chapter 5. 24. chapter (...) 39.
chapter 10. 28, 29. chapter 13. 1. out of the Epistles also, Romans 6. 8, 9, 10, 11. chapter
8. 30. chapter 11. 29. Ephesians. 4. 12, 17. Phil. 1. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Heb. 7. 16. 1 John
2. 19. chapter 3. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 5, 13, 18, 20, 23. Mr. Byfield on Col. chapter 1. p. 93.

Q. Cannot such perish as at some time or other feel these spiritual Motions
within themselves? Answ. It is not possible that they should: for as God's
Purpose is not changeable, so he repents not of the Gifts and Graces of his
Adoption; neither does he cast off those whom he has once received.

Q. Why then should we pray by the Example of David, that he cast us not off
from his face, and that he take not his holy Spirit from us? Answ. In so
praying, we make protestation of the weakness of Flesh, which moves us to
doubt: yet should not we have Courage to ask, if we were not assured that God
will give according to his Purpose and Promise, that which we require.

Q. Do the Children of God feel the Motions aforesaid always alike? No truly,
for God sometimes to prove his, seems to leave them in such a sort, that the
Flesh overcomes the Spirit, whereof arises Trouble of Conscience for the
time: yet the Spirit of Adoption is never taken from them that have once
received it; else might they perish. But as in many Diseases of the Body, the
Powers of the bodily Life are let, so in some Assaults the Motions of
spiritual Life are not perceived, because they lie hidden in our manifold
Infirmities, as the Fire covered with Ashes: Yet as after Sickness comes
Health, and after Clouds the Sun shines clear; so the Powers of spiritual Life
will more or less be felt and perceived in the Children of God. Certain
Questions and Answers printed by Robert Barker, Anno 1607. bound up and sold
with our English Bibles.

That the Elect and truly Regenerate (who alone are endued with true justifying
and saving Faith) do constantly persevere unto the end, and tho they sometimes
fall into grievous Sins, yet they never fall finally nor totally from the
Habits, Seeds, and State of Grace. Mr. Prynn's Anti-Arminianism, p. 51.

I affirmed tha^ the Faith of Peter could not fail, but that other Men's may,
for (as I then said) our Lord prayed not for the Faith of every particular Man.
But now being of a better and more sound Judgment (according to that which
Christ teaches in plain words; John 17. 20. I pray not for those alone (that
is, the Apostles) but for them also that shall believe in me through their
word) I acknowledge that Christ did pray for the Faith of every particular
Believer; and that by the Virtue of that Prayer of Christ, every Believer is so
stayed up, that his Faith cannot fail.

Touching Perseverance unto the end, I said, That that Certainty concerning the
Time to come, is proud, forasmuch as it is in his own Nature contingent, of
what kind the Perseverance of every Man is; neither did I affirm it to be proud
only, but to be most wicked. But now I freely protest that the true and
justifying Faith (whereby the Faithful are most nearly united unto Christ) so
firm, as also for the time so certain, that it can never be rooted out of the
Minds of the Faithful, by any Tentation of the Flesh, the World, or the Devil
himself, so that he that has this Faith once, shall ever have it: for by the
benefit of justifying Faith Christ dwells in us, and we in Christ; therefore
it cannot be but increased (Christ growing in us daily) as also Perseverance
unto the end, because God does give Constancy. Barret's Recantation at
Cambridg. Fuller's History of Cambridg, p. 150.

Dr. Willet says, Let us adjoin the Consent and Testimony of the holy Martyrs;
and having enumerated several, concludes, All these holy Martyrs, with many
other, both were assured themselves of their Salvation by Faith in Christ, and
in confirmation of this Doctrine, gave their most, precious Lives. Such a Seal
of their Doctrine our Adversaries are never able to show. Dr. Willet's Synop.
Papism. p. 1008.

That the Faithful are sure of their Perseverance and Continuance to the end,
and so are without doubt and fear of Salvation, it is thus made manifest out of
Scripture.

1. The Gifts of God are without Repentance; Romans 11. 31. But Faith is the Gift
of God; therefore God repents him not, to whom soever he gives Faith: Faith
then remains to the end. If it be said, that God repents him not, in taking
away Faith; but Man is casting away Faith: I answer, that none cast away Faith,
but those that are forsaken of the Grace of God; but the Elect are never
forsaken totally or finally: Heb. 13. 5.

2. God's Love is immutable and unchangeable; Jer. 31. 3. John 13. 1. but they
which are thus beloved of God, cannot fall, they are sure to persevere.

3. That which God upholdeth is sure to stand; but God upholdeth the Faithful;
1 Pet. 1. 5. Psalm. 37. 24.

4. The Prayer of Christ is effectual, he is always heard of his Father: but he
prays that his Servants be kept from Evil; John 17. 15. 2 Timothy 4. 18.

5. If the Spirit be an earnest until we have possession of our Inheritance,
then are the Faithful sure to continue to the end; Ephesians. 1. 14.

6. He that falls from Faith, sins unto Death: but the Faithful are born
of God, and cannot sin unto Death, because their Seed remains in them, 1 John
3. 9. they therefore cannot fall finally from the Faith.

7. The Lord has promised, that the Faithful shall not be tempted above that
they are able, but he will give an Issue together with the Temptation; 1 Cor.
10. 13. therefore the Faithful are sure, that their Faith shall not be overcome
of Temptation. Dr. Willet on the Romans, p. 526, 527.

There be five Ties by which the God of Heaven has bound himself to be the
Saints Lifeguard against the Power of Darkness. 1. His Relation to them as
Father. 2. His Love to them, they being the Birth of his everlasting Counsel,
and Partakers of his own Likeness. 3. The price of his Son's Blood, and his
Covenant with them. 4. Their Dependence upon him, and expectation from him in
all their streights; Psalm. 9. 18. 5. Christ's present Employment in Heaven is
to see all things carried fairly between God and them. Mr. Dod's first Sheet,
Head 41.

But perchance your Wisdoms will object, that by intermedling with these nice
Arminian Controversies, I have incurred the danger of his Majesty's Declaration
prefixed to the late reprinted Articles: therefore I must only expect an
High Commission Censure from your Lordships, not an Approbation or friendly
Entertainment of this untimely Treatise, which may chance to prove distasteful
unto some. To this I answer:

1. For the Truth of it I appeal unto your Lordships, by whose Advice this
Declaration was at first contrived, that it was never his Majesty's (nor I
think your Lordships) Intention, to silence or suppress, but rather to advance
by this Declaration, the ancient, positive, established, and resolved Doctrines
of the Church of England (especially those which were professed and ratified in
the days of Edward the Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King James of happy Memory,
as these Anti-Arminian Positions, as is clear by the express Words of his
Majesty's last Declaration to all his loving Subjects, which well explains the
former. But all these dogmatical Anti-Arminian Conclusions which I have
published or justified in this A^thesis, are but the ancient, positive,
established and received Doctrine of the Church of England, as the Book it self
(together with two reverend Prelates of our Church, who have lately in two
printed Letters expressly averred, That the Arminian Errors condemnd in the
Synod of Dort, cannot stand with the Doctrine of the Church of England: And
that none can embrace Arminianism in the Doctrine of Predestination and Grace,
but he must first desert the Articles agreed upon by the Church of England; nor
in the point of Perseverance, but he must vary from the common Tenet and
received Opinion of our best approved Doctors in the English Church. Bishop
Hall, Bishop Davenant in their Letters annexed to Bishop Hall's Reconciler, p.
75, 84, 85.) will justify against all Opposers: Therefore it is not within the
Intent or Limits (and so not within the danger) of his Majesty's Declaration,
which I would not wilfully oppose.

2. I conceive that this Declaration prohibits nothing, but unnecessary and
curious Disputes upon bare Conjectures on, or strained Collections from our
Articles. But in this Antithesis you have only a bare historical Recital in
nature of a Catalogue of those scattered Records and Writers of our Church,
which have constantly oppugned these new Arminian Errors, from the beginning of
Reformation to this present: It comes not therefore within the Sphere of this
Declaration.

3. His Majesty's Declaration was chiefly, to suppress all Innovations in
Religion, together with such unnecessary Controversies, as might disturb the
Peace and settled Doctrines of our Church: But this Antithesis serves only to
suppress the Innovations in Religion, and to allay all modern Arminian
Controversies which interrupt our Churches Peace and Doctrines, by disproving
Arminianism to be the Doctrine of our Church, in such an apparent manner, that
none can contradict it. Therefore it is wholly with this Declaration, not
against it.

Lastly, His Majesty's Declaration prohibits principally unnecessary Disputes
about curious, nice and needless School-points, of which Men may be ignorant
without great danger: But I take it under Correction, that our Anti-Arminian
Tenets (on which the whole Fabric of our Salvation, the whole Doctrine and
Structure both of Man's Fall and Corruption, of Grace and Glory, of Election,
Reprobation, Predestination, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification,
Perseverance and Glorification, are suspended) are no superfluous, nice or
curious Speculations, unfit, unneedful to be taught or published, but most
necessary, essential, comfortable, and fundamental Truths, in which the whole
Pith and Marrow of Divinity, the whole Doctrine of Grace and Man's Salvation
are included. This all the ancient Councils and voluminous Treatises of the
Fathers in the primitive Church, this all the modern Synods, Articles,
Confessions, Resolutions, and Writings, both of our own and other Churches,
against Pelagius, Arminius, and their Followers, as the professed Enemies of
the Grace and Gospel of God, as Atheistical Sectaries, yea wicked, pestilent,
and blasphemous Heretics (as our late Sovereign has rightly styled them) do
abundantly testify: All which would never questionless have waged such fierce,
such perpetual and implacable Wars against these Pelagian and Arminian
Heresies, were they such innoxious or trivial Differences; such unnecessary,
such curious Speculations, as some of their Abettors (who then methinks should
be ashamed contentiously to foment them, to the great disturbance of our
Churches Peace) would seem to make them, because they would more easily induce
Men to neglect them till they had gotten Strength, and then to embrace them, to
their eternal Ruin. Since therefore these Anti-Arminians Tenets (which I here
only vindicate to be the ancient, genuine and undoubted Doctrine of the Church
of England) are Points of highest consequence, of greatest weight and use;
whence they have been more abundantly patronized, propagated, and propugned;
(not only in the primitive Church, but likewise in most modern Protestant
Churches, and in the Church of England) than any other substantial Points of
Divinity whatsoever; as is most apparently evident. Since their opposite
Arminian Errors (which are in truth mere Popery and Semi-Pelagianism, at least
a Bridge, a Way, a Portal to them both) have been most constantly oppugned, both
in the primitive, our own and other reformed Churches, as a dangerous and
Grace-nullifying Heresy. And since Prosper himself has expressly recorded it
long ago; That St. Augustine has constantly, piously, and abundantly proved,
that Predestination in which there is the Preparation of Grace; and Grace in
which there is the effect of Predestination; and the Prescience of God, by
which he foreknew before all Worlds on whom he would bestow his Gifts of Grace,
ought to be preached to the Church, of the preaching of which, says he, (I
pray observe his Words, and mark them well) whosoever is an Impugner, he is a
most apparent Furtherer of Pelagian Pride: (which I dare presume is far from
his Majesty's royal Thoughts to be) I may safely (as I hope) conclude on all
these Premises:

That this my Antithesis (which I have divulged only for the Peace and Benefit
of our English Church, and the stopping of all Arminian Mouths, who now must
either hold their Peace, and yield their Cause, or else perjuriously,
sacrilegiously, renounce their Mother Church, and these her Doctrines, which
have subscribed, if not sworn to) is clearly without the Verge and Danger of
his Majesty's Declaration; who never did intend so far to countenance, to grace
an Heresy, so branded, censured and condemned by the primitive Church, by
foreign Protestant Churches, by the whole Church of England, with all her
learned Writers, from her first Reformation to this present; and more
particularly by his Royal Father, whose Faith, whose Steps he means to follow;
as for its sake, its growth, and greater safety, to put these established and
professed Anti-Arminian Doctrines of our Church to silence: which is almost the
highest Dignity, the greatest Conquest that Arminianism can or would aspire to.
Part of Mr. Prynn's Dedication of his Piece called A^ti-Arminianism, to the
Archbishops and Bishops of the Church of England.

Baxterian.
DIstinguish of Holiness, and of the reason of it. 1. Infants have not actual
Faith, nor necessarily a proper Habit, which is a Disposition to facile acting
that same Act: But Semen a Seed (as Amesius rather calls it than a Habit at
first even in the Adult) and Calvin says, that some Men, Semen fidei
qualecunque perdunt. Adam had such a Holiness as might be lost: And why may we
not say, that Infants first Grace is of such a sort or degree? 2. And yet that
none are saved without more (i. e. of that which is loseable) but that upon
this first degree they have a Right to Salvation, and that their further
Holiness shall be given them to whom God will, as part of their Salvation; to
which they have Right: At furthest at Death, in the same time and manner as
perfect Holiness and Mortification of Sin is given to Believers that are till
Death imperfect. A loseable degree of Holiness, like Adam's, may be the way to
more in all that so die. -- Now some hold all these loseable: some hold only
the last not loseable; and almost all hold the first loseable. Now, 1. What if
we think that Infants first Holiness, besides relative (Pardon, and jus ad
impunitatem and regnum) is but of the first degree? Tho a mere moral Power to
believe be not enough to the Adult, because the Act is necessary to them, yet
say Protestants, the Habit is not necessary to their first Covenant-Right, but
is given by the Spirit in Sanctification as a Covenant-Benefit. And why may not
Infants be in a pardoned State, that at first have but that Grace which gives
a moral Power to believe when they come to age? Consider of the matter. I have
so fully elsewhere proved, That Infants Church Membership was instituted both
in the Covenant of Innocence, in the first Edition of the Covenant of Grace, in
the Covenant of Peculiarity with Abraham, and in the last Edition of the
Covenant of Grace by Christ, and also that God never had a Church on Earth, of
which Infants were not Members: If the adult Members had Infants (and so both
Fathers and Children, even the Church of Christ in all Generations, if they
made not use of this their moral Power, might be damned with their saving
Graces) Mr. B's end of Doct. Controv. chapter 19. 22, 24, 25. But if there be such
a Power given, which never acts Faith (which I think most probable) it is
either in the Adult or Infants: If in the Adult, no doubt it is lost; for they
that will not believe (to the last) retain not still the moral Power in their
Rebellion. But in the case of Infants, I think those of them that die before
the use of Reason lose it not, nor any of the Elect that live to full Age: But
as to others, after long doubt, How far Infant-Grace is loseable, this seems
now the most probable Solution to me, viz. There is a Grace that reaches but
to a moral Power to repent and believe, before Men have the Act or proper
Habit: Such Grace to persevere, did put Adam in a present state of Life, or
Acceptance with God, this Adam lost: accordingly such Grace that contains
but this moral Power in an Infant's Disposition (with relative Grace of Pardon)
is sufficient to prove his Right to Salvation, if he so die; because he is not
bound to the Act, nor capable of it; and even the Adult upon the Act have Right
to Acceptance, and to the Spirit, to cause the Habit, in order of Nature,
before they have the Habit. Therefore Infants may be in a state of such Right
and Life before the Habit, tho they shall not possess Glory without it: And yet
the Adult are not in a state of such Right by the mere Power, before the Act,
because the Act it self is made necessary to their Justification; but so it is
not to Infants: so that Infants and Adult may receive a more Power to repent
and believe, and lose it after (at age) by actual Sin, tho this be a loss of a
state of Justification to the one sort (their Sins of Nature being pardoned)
but not to the other (who are not pardoned without the Act) and yet it
follows not hence, that the Grace of habitual Sanctification is lost in any.
-- Others say only that Men may sin, and may lose acquired Grace, but no degree
of that which is infused. But we have small Reason to think that our increased
degrees are not as much infused as the first degree was: And yet Experience
proves, that such added degrees may be lost. -- Are all or most Christians
certain that they shall persevere? No, for, 1. Most Christians in the World
hold, that Perseverance is uncertain to the godly; and how can they be certain
of it to themselves? 2. Most that hold otherwise, hold it but as uncertain, and
are not themselves certain that it is true, tho they call it certain: I am
uncertain; and I find not by other signs that the most have more Knowledge than
my self: And he that is not certain of the Premises, is not by them certain of
the Conclusion -- that most Christians have not the Comfort of their own
certain Perseverance, for want of the Certainty of their Sincerity, if not of
the Doctrine it self. -- That Thousands and Millions of Christians live and die
in Peace and Comfort, that have not a proper Certainty of Salvation. Much more
may such live in Joy that are sure of their present state of Grace, tho not of
their Perseverance. -- For Experience tells us, that tho^ most of the
Christian World are against the Doctrine of certain Perseverance of all true
Believers, yet many of them live and die in Comfort -- and Church History and
the Ancients Writings tell us, That tho for many hundred years the Christian
Doctors commonly held, that some lose true justifying Faith, and perish, yet
multitudes lived and died in Joy, and went with boldness through the Flames. --
We see among Men no Wife is certain one day or night that her Husband will not
forsake or murder her; no Child is certain that his Father will not kill him,
nor any one of his dearest Friends: And yet we can have Love, Peace, and
Comfort in our Relations, with such Certainty: for it is melancholy Folly to
live in fears of things utterly unlikely, and to cast away the Comforts of
great Probability. -- Yea, no godly Man is certain that he shall not fall into
such heinous Sin as Noah, Lot, David, Peter did; or that he shall not kill his
dearest Friend, or himself: and yet when a Man is conscious that his Nature,
his Reason, his Experience, and his Resolution, do all make him hate such a
wicked Act, and that there is no probable Cause to move him to it, and when we
know God is ready with his Grace to help us, how few lose the Comfort, etc. --
And the Doctrine of Perseverance has its Difficulties too, as to Man's
Comfort: for he that holds, that no Man falls from a State of Grace, and
sees many, that to all possible humane Judgment, were once excellent Persons,
fall quite away, can himself have no Assurance that he is so much as justified
at the present, unless he be sure that he is better than the best of all those
Persons ever were, which doubt the other side are not cast upon. Ibid. chapter 26..
4, 5, 6, 11, 18, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29.

I shall lay before thee for the notable weight that is in it, a Question this
Author puts in the same Chapter,. 13. and leave thee to his Book for its
Solution, Whether it be possible to lose that Holiness which never will be
lost? Further,. 30. Whether the Doctrine of Apostasy infer any Mutability in
God? No, there is no show of it, unless you hold, that his absolutely Elect fall
away. (This has as much of hellish Subtilty in it, as can be imagined, by what
follows) says he, It was no change in God when he gave us Grace, and justified
us; and it would be no more if he cease, than it was to begin. It was no change
in God when I was born, and it will be no more when I die: The Change is only
in Man, and his receptive Disposition. Even the Law of the Land, without any
Diversity or Change, does virtually condemn a thousand Malefactors, and justify
the Just; and will cease to justify them, and begin to condemn them, if they
cease to be just, and begin to be Offenders. The Changes that God himself
makes in all the World, are made without any change in him: Therefore what Man
does or undoth cannot change him. (This is so grand a piece of Sophistry
interwoven with Blasphemy, and so notorious that it needs no Descant.)

Q. An vere fidelibus and sanctis, Spiritus sanctus ad finem usque, seu
perseverantiam promittitur, absolute, an sub aliqua condition?

Resp. Sub condition contin^aturus promittitur, scilicet, si in consensu sed
faederali practico perseveramus* (non tamen sine ejus auxilio, sine quo ne
primo quidem credebamus) the sum of which is, whether the Holy Spirit be
promised to the truly faithful and holy ones, for their final Perseverance,
absolutely, or upon some condition; he grants that the Spirit is promised, as
one that is about to continue, upon condition, to wit, if we persevere in a
practical federal Consent, and that not without his help, without whom we could
not at first believe: which is no more, than that if we persevere, we shall
persevere, and shall have the Spirit's Help in the same; but if he sees we do
not persevere, we shall not have his Assistance to persevere. Mr. Baxter's
Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 218.

Should they that are united to Christ apostatize from Faith, they would
thereby forfeit and lose this Union. If any cease to be Believers, they would
cease to be Members of Christ; this is the scope (says this blasphemous
Impostor) of John 15. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

And is it not (says he) apparent, that Apostasy sinks a Man into more Unbelief
than what prevailed before he believed at all? (so that they which were once
Members of Christ as really united unto him by Faith, may so apostatize as to
become Members of the Devil, and perish for want of a further degree of that
one and the self-same Faith in and for which others are saved; the old Arminian
Motto, A Child of God to day, and to morrow a Child of the Devil.) Mr. Daniel
Williams's Gospel Truth palliated and sophisticated, p. 80. -- I appeal to
thee, 1. Whether God does require any more of any Sinners for Salvation, than
that they believe in Christ, repent of Sin, persevere in true Holiness, sincere
Obedience, or good Works internal and external; and if [WE] do so, can we
perish? Has not Christ provided all else? (i. e. He is put to no further an
expense, than to accept of us, and bring us to Glory; only our provision is
believing in him, repenting of our Sins, persevering in true Holiness, sincere
Obedience, or good Works internal and external, which if we bring, Christ will
do all the rest for us) and does not the Promise secure Life upon doing these?
(And does not the Credit and Force of the Promise, together with the Reputation
of Christ in the faithful discharge of his Office, altogether depend on this
our doing of these?) 2. If any Sinner believe not, and repent not, has Christ
ever promised to save him? (But has Christ promised to save any Sinner unto
whom he not only gives, but in whom he also irrevocably creates and maintains
Faith and Repentance unto Glory?) will any Decree, or the Merits of Christ
secure him? (Shall any be secured out of the personal Decree of God, or that is
not individually included in the Merits of Christ?) Again, if any penitent
Believer shall apostatize, prove ungodly and unfruitful, hate God, or neglect
to love God and his Neighbor wholly, etc. shall this Man be saved? (and shall
not our Author and I catch a prodigious number of Larks, when the Sky falls?
and would it not vex a Dog to see a Pudding creep? which never yet was known,
unless by the assistance of such engendered Maggots, as in another Sense do nest
in our Author's Locustical Doctrines) has not Christ determined the contrary?
(yea certainly quite contrary to our Author's Determination) will his first
Faith save him? (that or no other, if it be a true Faith, otherwise it is but a
conjectural Strumpet ^fer'd one by our Author o^ of the Romish Vatican or
Lavinian Shows) A Resolution of these two things, according to the very scope
of the Word, will decide the main of this Controversy (so it will, and that to
the uttermost, witness instead of many more, that of the 17th of John, I pray
not (says Christ) for the World, but for those thou have given me out of the
World) These assert the Rule of Christ's rectoral Distributions, and the Decree
comes not in opposition to the Methods of his Government, by which we are to
govern our Hopes and Fears (i. e. When we have perseveringly and finally so
governed our selves by our Hopes and Fears, according to the Methods of that
Government upon which God's Decree is determined, then we may safely expect and
demand the Benefits of Christ's rectoral Distributions.) Ibid. Mr. D. W. p.
124, 125.

Whether according to the Gospel-Rule, if a Believer should yield up himself to
the Dominion of Sin, he should perish? This I affirm; (There is no such
Gospel-Rule, Romans 6. 14. nor Example, Psalm. 51. Luke 22. 31, 32. And what our
Author affirms herein, is neither more nor less than the very Doctrine of
Devils) p. 157.

What was the Judgment of the ancient Churches of this Point? (viz.
Perseverance) Answ. Vossius in his Pelagian History has truly told you, and
copiously proved it in the main: Before Augustine's time that it was taken
commonly as granted, that Men might fall away from a state of Grace, and that
many did; but the case was not curiously discussed: But some thought that
confirmed Christians never fell: But upon Pelagius his Disputes, Augustine
defending the Honor of Free Grace, laid all upon Election, and maintained,
that tho the Non-elect did fall away from the Love of God and Justification,
and a state in which they had been saved, had they died; yet none of the Elect
did fall so as to perish, but that the Preservation of Grace in Perseverance
was the fruit of Election. Thus Prosper, Fulgentius, after him; and some
Passages in him and Macarius, and some others, intimate that they thought there
was a confirmed Degree of Grace, which was never lost; but they all took it for
granted, that some fell from a state of Justification, and perished. And I
remember not one Writer that I have read and noted, to be of the contrary Mind
for a thousand years after the writing of the Scriptures, nor any mention of
any Christian that was so. -- What use is to be made of this, I leave to
others; but it beseems no good Man to deprave or deny the Truth of such
History: And some great Divines are to be blamed for reproaching Vossius for a
true historical Report, when they neither can confute him, nor attempt it. Two
or three Sentences out of Austin are cited by some, but merely mistaken, as if
they spoke that of all the Justified, which he speaks only of the Elect. Mr.
Baxter's end of doct. Controv. chapter 26.. 22, 33.

Thus the Justified in Mr. Baxter's judgment and false Representation of
Arstin, may be damned, but the Elect shall not; his Reason is plain from the
whole Current of his Writings, for that Sanctification is Justification, and
Perseverance to the end is the completing of Justification, upon which it is
that Election is determined. But to this I shall subjoin what Dr. Owen in the
Preface to his Saints Perseverance notes against Mr. John Goodwin's like
dealing with Austin. -- I doubt not but the learned Reader will easily perceive
it to be no other than that which is now agitated between me and Mr. John
Goodwin: the Controversy indeed in the matter between Austin and the Pelagians
was reduced to three Heads. 1. As to the Foundation of it, which Austin
concluded to be the Decree of Predestination, which they denied: the impulsive
Cause of it, he proved to be the Free Grace of God, and the measure of quality
of that Grace to be such, as that whoever received it, did persevere, it being
Perseverance which was given, both which they denied. About the kind of Faith,
which temporary Professors might have, and fall from it, which were never
elected, there was between them no Contest at all. That Perseverance is a Gift
of God, and that no Man either did, or could persevere in Faith and Obedience
upon the strength of any Grace received, but that the whole was from his Grace.
-- This is the Foundation that he lays of the Doctrine of the Perseverance of
Saints: that it is a Gift of God, and that such a Gift as he effectually and
actually works in him on whom he does bestow it. -- You have not chosen me, but
I have chosen you, and ordained you to bear Fruit. Eis (says he) non solum
justitiam, verum aliam in illa perseverantiam dedisse monstravit. Christo enim
sic eos ponente ut eant, and fructum afferant, and fructus eorum manent quis
audeat dicere forsitan non manebunt? Tho they dare say so, who also dare to
pretend his Authority for what they say! How falsely, how unjustly, is evident
to all serious Observers of his Mind and Spirit, in and about the things of the
Grace of God. -- He further constantly taught this Gift and Grace to be a fruit
of Predestination or Election, and to be bestowed on all and only elected
Believers. -- And unto these Elect, predestinate Believers, he concluded still,
that Perseverance was so given in and for Christ, so proceeding from the
immutable Will of God wrought by such an Efficacy of Grace, that it was
impossible that they should not persevere. -- In this Persuasion he had not
only the Consent of all the sound and orthodox Doctors in his time, as was
before manifested; but he is followed also by the Schoolmen of all Ages, and
not forsaken of some of the Jesuits themselves. -- There are in Austin, and
those that either joined with him, or followed immediately after him, sundry
Expressions commonly urged by the Adversaries of the Truth in hand, granting
many who were Saints, believing and regenerate, to fall away and perish for
ever. I need not instance in any of their Sayings to this purpose: The Reader
knows where to find them together to his hand, in Vossius, Grotius, and Mr.
John Goodwin from them. The seeming Contradiction that is amongst themselves in
the delivery of this Doctrine, will easily admit of a Reconciliation, may they
be allowed the common Courtefy of being Interpreters of their own meaning. What
weight in those days was laid upon the Participation of the sacramental Figures
of Grace, and what Expressions are commonly used concerning them who had
obtained that Privilege, is known to all. Hence all baptized Persons continuing
in the Profession of the Faith, and Communion of the Church, they called,
counted, esteemed truly regenerate and justified, and spoke so of them; such as
these they constantly affirm, might fall away into everlasting Destruction: but
yet what their Judgment was, concerning their present. State indeed, even then
when they so termed them Regenerate and Believers, in respect to the Sacraments
of those Graces, Austin in sundry places clearly delivers his Thoughts, to the
undeceiving of all that are willing to be free. This he especially handles in
his Book de Corr^p. and Great. cap. 9. also de Doct. Christiana, l. 3. c. 32.
These are the Persons which Austin, and those of the same Judgment with him, do
grant that they may fall away, such as upon the account of their baptismal
entrance into the Church, their pious devout Lives, their Profession of the
Faith of the Gospel, they called and accounted regenerate Believers, whom yet
they tell you upon a through search into the Nature and Causes of Holiness,
Grace, and walking with God, that they would be found not to be truly and
really in that State and Condition, that they were esteemed to be in; of which
they thought this a sufficient Demonstration, even because they did not
persevere: which undeniably on the other hand (with the Testimonies foregoing,
and the like innumerable that might be produced) evinces, that their constant
Judgment was, that all who are truly, really, and in the sight of God
Believers, ingrafted into Christ, and adopted into his Family, should certainly
persevere: and that all the Passages usually cited out of this holy and learned
Man, to persuade us that he never cast an eye toward the Doctrine of, the
Apostasy of the Saints, may particularly be referred to this Head, and
manifested that they do not at all concern those whom he esteemed Saints
indeed. -- That Prosper, Hilary, Fulgentius, and the Men of Renown in the
Congregation of God at the end of that Age, did fall in with their Judgments to
that which Austin had delivered, I suppose will be easily confessed. -- There
is so much of the ancient candid Truth in opposition to the Pelagians and
Semipelagians, preserved and asserted in the Writings of the Dominican Friars,
as will rise up in Judgment against those of our days, who enjoying greater.
Light and Advantages, do yet close in with those, and are long since cursed
Enemies of the Grace of God. Dr. Owen, ut supra.

Reader, from the whole note, what probably may not be a disadvantage unto
thee, that this old Maxim taken in its full latitude, ever did and ever will
hold to be true, viz. Res nol^nt male administrari, i. e. That Truth and Error
are not only so in themselves, but they will not in semetipsis, admit of any
Maleadministration, either as to their Nature or Essence from the Quality of
their predisposed Subjects; neither will their Efficacy depend upon the bare
notional discursive Apprehension of them in their occasional or floating
Retention, so as to give a just Denomination unto Persons, that they are what
they profess, but by and from their transforming Energy. Hence it is that he
that thinks a Papist cannot be saved nominally as such, subscribes Protestant;
and he that is but nominally a Protestant, upon some emergent Trials turns
Papist, and extinguishes in a papal Snuff. It is not what a Papist or
Protestant hold in their Judgment, or what may drop from their Mouths and Pens,
that is either here or there; but what it is that vitally and internally
constitute both the one and the other.

The Gifts and Calling of God may be said to be without Repentance, because let
Men continue the same Persons which they were when the Donation or Collation of
any Gift was first made by God unto them, he never changes or alters his
Dispensations toward them, unless it be for the better, or in order to their
further Good, in which case he cannot be said to repent of what he had given:
but in case Men shall change and alter from what they were when God first dealt
graciously with them, especially if they shall notoriously degenerate or cast
away the Principles, or divest themselves of that very Qualification on which
as it were God grafted his Benefit or Gift, in this case tho he recall his Gift,
he cannot be said to repent of his giving it, because the terms on which he
gave it please him still, only the Persons to whom he gave it, and who pleased
him when he gave it them, have now rendered themselves unpleasing to him. Mr. I.
Goodwin's Redemption Redeemed, c. 8.. 86.

If the Apostle should frame this Series or Chain of Divine Acts, Romans 8. 30.
with an intent to show or teach the Uninterruptibleness of it, in what case or
cases soever he should fight against his general and main scope or design in
that part of the Chapter, which lies from ver. 17. which clearly is this, to
encourage them to Constancy and Perseverance in suffering Afflictions. For to
suggest any such thing, as that being called and justified, nothing could
hinder them from being glorified, were to furnish them with a ground, on which
to neglect his Exhortation; for who will be persuaded to suffer Tribulation for
the obtaining of that which they have sufficient Assurance given, that they
shall obtain, whether they suffer such things or no? therefore certainly the
Apostle did not intend here to teach the Certainty of Perseverance in those
that are justified. And, Lastly, this demonstrates the same thing yet further.
If God should justify all without exception whom he calls, and that against
all bars of Wickedness and Unbelief, possible to be laid in his way by those
who are called, then might ungodly and unbelieving Persons inherit the Kingdom
of God: the reason of the Connection is evident, it being a known Truth, that
the Persons justified are in a condition or present capacity of inheriting the
Kingdom of God. Ibid.. 44.

It has not been proved by any Man, nor I believe never will be, that the
Calling here spoken of imports any such Act or Work of God, whereby the Called
are irresistibly necessitated savingly to believe. If it import no such thing
as this, what hinders but that the Persons mentioned might have been called by
that very kind of Calling here spoken of? Suppose it be granted, that the
Calling here spoken of is that kind of Calling which is always accompanied with
a saving Answer of Faith, yet neither does this prove, but that even such
Called ones may obstruct and prevent by Wickedness and Unbelief their final
Justification, and consequently their Glorification: If so, then that Chain of
Divine Acts or Decrees here framed by the Apostle, is not indissolvable in any
such Sense, which imports an Infallibility, and universal Exertion or Execution
of the latter, whenever the former has taken place. Ibid.. 45.

But some it may be will further object against the Interpretation given, and
plead, that the Contexture between these two links of this Chain,
Predestination to a Conformity with Christ, and Calling, is simply and
absolutely indissolvable, so that whoever is so predestined, never fails of
being called. 2. That it is altogether unlikely, that in one and the same
Series of divine Actions, there should not be the same Fixedness or Certainty
of Coherence between all the Parts. Ibid.. 46.

By a Demur upon the former of these Pleas, which was that the Connection
between the Predestination of God mentioned, and his Calling, is
uninterruptible. Somewhat doubtful to me it is, whether a Person, who by means
of the Love of God, which is in him at present, falls under his Decree of
Predestination, may not possibly, before the time appointed by God for his
Calling, be changed in that his Affection, and consequently pass from under
that Decree of Predestination, and fall under another Decree of God opposite
thereunto, and so never come to be called. Ib.

Nonconformist.
THAT Faith and Holiness do inseparably follow Election, is shown before: our
business now is to show that Faith and Holiness are of an abiding nature, and
shall never be lost: And this is that we call PERSEVERANCE. -- That all and
every one of God's Elect, being once regenerate and believing, are and shall
invincibly be carried on, to the perfect obtainment of Blessedness and Glory.
-- For the final Perseverance of Believers, a principal Argument is fetched
from the sovereign Decree of Election. -- It was not any loveliness in elect
Persons which moved God to love them at first; so neither shall their unlovely
Backslidings deprive them of it, (tho it may be eclipsed, by their own Default,
to the breaking of their bones.) The Lord chose them for that blessed Image of
his own which he would afterward imprint upon them, and this he still
prosecutes through all Dispensations. -- If a Man once believing cannot lose his
Faith, why is it said, Let him that stands take heed lest he fall? And look
to your selves, that we lose not the things we have wrought? If ^o possibility
of losing, what need such Cautions and so great Circumspection? -- It is
evident, that a righteous Man may fall; and as evident it is, that he cannot
fall finally: for tho he falls seven times in a day, as often does he rise
again, Prove. 24. 26. And this because the Lord upholdeth him with his hand,
Psalm. 37. 24. Psalm. 145. -- The absolute Promise cannot be nulled or
discertain'd by, cautionary Words elsewhere delivered, Gal. 3. 17. -- There are
Considerations enough, and of great weight, why Believers should take heed of
falling, without supposing a total Loss of their Faith (the breaking of a Man's
Bones, is ground sufficient for such a Caution, although he be sure that his Neck
shall be safe) the Dishonor done to his Father; the shame that is put upon
Christ; grieving the Comforter; scandalizing the good ways of God; stumbling
the weak; strengthening the Wicked; the unfitting of him for his Duty;
interrupting his Peace and Communion with God, etc. Every of which will weigh
deep with a Soul that is born of God. -- A righteous Man may turn away from his
Righteousness; and that so, that he shall die for it, Ezekiel. 18. 24. There is a
twofold Righteousness. 1. Moral; such as Paul had before his Conversion: This a
Man may continue in to the last, and yet not be saved. 2. There is a
Gospel-Righteousness: (1.) Imputed; This is the Righteousness of Christ, by
which we are justified. (2.) Infused; This is the divine Nature communicated by
the Spirit of Christ, whereby we are sanctified: These two go inseparably, and
can never be lost. But the Righteousness spoken of in the place objected, seems
to be of the former sort, viz. moral or outward Righteousness: for outward
Conformity to the Law was their condition of possessing the Land of Canaan,
with long Life and Prosperity in it. -- The Promise of Perseverance is not made
to Faith, that that shall not fail: but in reference to the Favor of God, viz.
That if Men go on to believe, they shall abide in his Love? Thus to give the
sense of the Promise, is, 1. To enervate it, to make it speak but according to
the Covenant of Works: It bereaves it wholly of that Betterness the Scripture
ascribes to it, Heb. 8. 6. 2. It renders the Promise as speaking fallaciously;
as making show of that it intends not: It would be but as if he had said, you
shall keep the favor of God, if you do not lose it. 3. Faith is the Soul's
coming to God; Unbelief, its departing from him: The Promise (therefore) that
secures against departing from God, secures your continuance in believing: He
that undertakes you shall be crowned, does virtually undertake for your holding
out to the end of your race. Mr. Cole of the Sovereignty of God, p. 209, 211,
239, 250, 251, 255, 256.

If he (i. e. Christ) takes thee once into his Prayers, he will never leave
thee out, but prevail for thee, whatever thy case be, or whatever thou fallest
into. -- You read at the Creation, God said no more, but Let there be Light,
and there was Light: Christ in Heaven is able through his Interest to speak the
same Language, and at no less rate does he speak, Father I will, etc. John 17.
24. And then it is so, and is effected. I assure you his Word in Heaven is
taken for a greater matter, than delivering thy Soul out of Temptation. For his
[I will] there in that place was that Heaven-gates should be set open, to let
in those he intercedes for: so it follows; Father, I will that they also whom
thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory, which
thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World: And
if his [I. will] thus easily, and with a word, breaks open Heaven-gates, then
certainly it will avail against Hell-gates, that they shall never prevail
against thee. Dr. Goodwin of Election, p. 321, 322.

The stability of a gracious Soul depends upon the Wisdom as well as the Power
of God. It would be a Disrepute to the Almightiness of God, if that should be
totally vanquished, which was introduced by his mighty Arm, and rooted in the
Soul by an irreversible Grace. It would speak a want of Strength to maintain
it, or a change of Resolution, and so would be no Honor to the Wisdom of his
first Design. It Is no part of the Wisdom of an Artificer, to let a Work wherein
he determined to show the Greatness of his Skill, to be dashed in pieces, when
he has power to preserve it. God designed every gracious Soul for a piece of
his Workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10.

What, to have the Skill of his Grace defeated; If any Soul which he has
graciously conquered should be wrested from him, what could be thought, but
that his Power is enfeebled? If deserted by him, what could be imagined, but
that he repented of his Labor, and altered his Counsel, as if rashly
undertaken? -- It Is at God's hand we must seek our Fixedness and Establishment,
and act Faith upon these two Attributes of God. Power is no ground to expect
Stability, without Wisdom interesting the Agent in it, and finding out and
applying the means for it. Wisdom is naked without Power to act, and Power is
useless without Wisdom to direct: They are these two Excellencies of the Deity,
the Apostle here pitches the Hope and Faith of the converted Romans upon their
Stability, Romans 16. 25, 26, 27. Perseverance of Believers in Grace is a
Gospel-Doctrine. According to my Gospel -- from this Infiniteness of Power in
God we have ground of Assurance for Perseverance. Since Conversion is resembled
to the Works of Creation and Resurrection, two great Marks of his Strength, he
does not surely employ himself in the first Work of changing the Heart, to let
any created Strength baffle that Power which he began, and intends to glorify.
It was this Might that struck off the Chain, and expelled that strong one that
possessed you. What if you are too weak to keep him out of his lost Possession,
will God lose the Glory of his first Strength, by suffering his foiled
Adversary to make a Re-entry, and regain his former Usurpation? Mr. Charnock,
Vol. 1. p. 341, 492, 493.

This Oath (as we before observed out of the Apostles Interpretation of it, Genesis
17. comp. Gal. 4. 22, etc.) was intended of the spiritual Seed, the Heirs of
Promise, such as Isaac was, the declared Son of Promise; and this Oath declared
how that Promise proceeded from God's immutable Counsel, as the Apostle
interprets it, which is Election, that sure Foundation, the Lord knows who are
his, and knew well what he did in so Swearing. And shall we think that God's
Oath and irrevocable Promise was built and founded upon the Immutability of
Isaac's Free-will-Grace, and such Helps (as he should by Free Will use them)
which he should for the future have in Abraham's Family, in common with
Ishmael? Isaac was yet to live a long while in the World, and might, according
to the Principles of Free-will-Grace, have fallen away and proved unregenerate;
and God could have no such sure and certain Assurance of him, as to venture (as
I may so say) an Oath upon him, with a peremptory irreversible Blessing of him.
What, and establish his everlasting Covenant with him upon the uncertain
fickleness and mutability of Free Will, no otherwise? Nay, would God have
pawned by Oath his own self, By my Self have I sworn, so as to cease to be God,
if Isaac and Abraham both should cease to persevere in Faith to the end of
their Lives (for it was Abraham's case also according to their Position to have
been assisted, but according to the Rule of Free-will-Graces Assistance) as
surely as God said, Surely, etc. The Foundation of this Oath lay deeper in
God's own Heart, it lay in the Immutability of his own Counsel, which he
purposed within himself, wherewith he invincibly resumed and undertook to carry
on Isaac and Abraham's Wills to the end, not in the Stability of what he
foresaw was within themselves. Dr. Goodwin of Election, p. 32.

The Continuance and Perseverance of Faith are from above: Christ causes our
Faith not to fail, and we are kept by God's mighty Power through Faith unto
Salvation, and Faith is by the same preserved: the faithful God, that
effectually calls, will safely keep, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24. in Jesus Christ, Jude
8. and confirm to the end, 1 Cor. 1. 8. For this is the desire of the Son unto
the Father, John 17. 11, 12, 24. and Will of the Father concerning the Son,
John 6. 39. -- True and saving Faith is abiding and perseverant, and this upon
supposition of Temptations and Assaults; for otherwise a mock-Faith may have a
continuance, and Men die in a pleasing Dream of ungrounded presumptuous
Confidence. Now it must be such, or cannot be saving; for as it is said, He
that believes shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. So he that endures to the end
shall be saved, Mat. 24. 13. They that have true Faith, have the Seed of God
abiding in them, the Prayer of Christ for them, are kept by the Power of God;
for he that has begun a good Work will finish it, his Gifts being without
Repentance. Believing and Sealing for Security are conjoined: The true Believer
is the wise Man that built on the Rock, his House therefore stood; the good
Ground that has depth of Earth, that what springs may not wither. The Just
shall live by Faith; continue therein, and so believe to the saving of his
Soul, being rooted and established therein through Christ. Morn. Exerc. Method.
Mr. Parson, p. 431, 444.

We say that the Habits of Grace are never lost, or wholly eradicated; and we
say that those Acts of Grace which were interrupted do abide in their
Principle, and will again exert themselves when Opportunity is afforded: it is
one thing, semel receder^ a pietatis tramite, to take a step away from the Path
of Holiness; Another thing, semper discedere a pietatis via, to forsake the
ways of God wholly: A Believer may be guilty of the first, not the second.
Again, we distinguish between a show of Grace, and true Grace; there are
several instances in the Word of God of Persons falling from a show of Grace,
Demas, Judas, Saul, Hymeneus, fell from Hypocrisy into open Profaneness and
Impiety: but no sincere Person ever fell from true Grace. Paint may be soon
washed off, when a healthful beautiful Complexion will abide: a Bristol-stone
is soon broken, but a true Diamond will abide the smartest stroke. Many
Professors have suffered Shipwreck as to Faith, and others have lost their
first Love; but it is such Faith as had no Root, like that of the Stony-ground,
and such Love as had no Principle 'twas only a Passion and Transport, and such
a hot Love may be soon cold. Common Fire is soon extinct, but the Fire of the
Sanctuary never went out. A true Believer's Perseverance is from the nature of
God's Covenant. Perseverance is one Article of the New Covenant that God has
made with the Elect, the terms of which are these, Jer. 32. 40. God has
absolutely engaged that elect Believers shall not depart from him, that is, not
finally, because in an effectual Call he will put his Fear into their Hearts;
they may wander, but not depart; they may in some Acts deviate, but they shall
not be Backsliders in Heart; and the reason is, because tho there may be a
tendency in them to turn away from God, yet God stands engaged not to turn away
from them. Hence that Expression of God to the Prophet, Jer. 3. 1. God will not
permit that to be done by Men, which he may do himself in this case; and the
reason is, because God can purge an adulterous Heart, which is not in the Power
of Man to do; rather than the Marriage-Covenant between Christ and a Believer
shall be dissolved, God will put forth his mighty Po^, to make and keep the
Hearts of Believers faithful and loyal to him. What a clear and full Promise of
Perseverance is it in John 10. 27. -- Now this was one Promise which the Father
made unto the Redeemer, viz. that he should not die in vain, but that he should
see of the Travail of his Soul, and should be satisfied, Isa. 53. 10. Now
should true Believers finally fall, Jesus Christ should not attain that
Satisfaction which is here promised. The Mother is not satisfied with an
abortive Birth. -- The end of Christ's Sufferings was not only to bring forth
Sons unto God, but also to bring those Sons unto Glory: Now should Christ fall
short in this latter Work; first, he could not (according to the Author to the
Hebrews) be a perfect Captain of Salvation, Heb. 2. 10. Secondly, Christ could
not be able in the day of Judgment to say as it follows, v. 13. But Christ is a
perfect Savior, and will at that great day say to God as he does in John 17.
6, 12. In which words there is not only intimated a Covenant and an Agreement
between the Father and the Son, about the Redemption of the Elect, but there is
also expressed in them the faithful Discharge of the mutual Agreement on both
sides; so that not one of those that were God's by Election, and entrusted in
Christ's hand by Donation, shall be lost; Judas was therefore a Son of
Perdition, because given only externally and not eternally into Christ's hand.
-- If Christ did pray while he was on Earth, and does now intercede in Heaven,
that all the Elect (who are effectually called) may persevere; then they shall
persevere, the ground of this Argument you have in John 11. 42. where Christ
tells us, that the Father did hear him always: so that if I prove that Christ
has prayed for the perseverance of Believers, I shall thereby prove their
certain Perseverance. Christ expressly tells us, John 17. 9. that he did pray
for all the Elect, and for them only: and ver. 1^. he tells us, that
Perseverance was the very matter of the Petition which he put up: -- and ver.
15. he explains how he would have them kept, namely, from the Evil, or from all
Evil; and lest any one should say that this Prayer was made only for some few,
see ver. 20. -- My last Argument for the Saints Perseverance shall be taken
from the constant Inhabitation and powerful Inoperation of the Spirit of God in
and upon the Hearts of true Believers; they are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
and God lives in them, and walks in them. The first infuses Grace, and he also
actuates Grace in them, and this preserves and keeps them from falling: Not the
Grace wrought, but the Spirit working Grace, does preserve Grace. Every prudent
Person will secure the place of Habitation; the Spirit of God dwelling in
Believers, etc. does superintend their Minds by a constant Inspection over
them. -- Possession is the best assurance, it is eleven Points: Now by the
Spirit's indwelling in Believers, they have a kind of Prepossession of Glory.
Morning Exercise against Popery, p. 653, 656, 657, 658, 659.

As they who join Works with Grace, make Grace to be no Grace; so do they who
say, the Work of Grace may be lost; or that Grace may for ever lose its
working: The work of Grace may be clouded, but Grace is no Cloud; the working
of Grace may decline, but Grace cannot die. Mr. Caryl on Job, chapter 17. v. 9.

By Christ's Suretiship we have our Perseverance and Stability in this
Covenant-State: I say not our being only, but our continuing in this blessed
State, that we do not depart from God, and utterly forsake him in a
Divorcement, even when we go a whoring from him, and yet he does not cast us
off, and discovenant us for all that we have done: this advantage we have by
Christ's Suretiship, that there can be no reversing, annulling, or repealing of
God's Covenant with his People: and if it were not for that, a Divorce should
follow upon the Whorings and treacherous Dealings of our Hearts every day;
Psalm. 89. 30, 33, 34, 35. Jer. 3. 1, 14, 22. chapter 31. 37. chapter 32. 39, 40. --
Christ's Suretiship is a Confirmation of the Perseverance of the Saints, and of
the Certainty of the Salvation of all the Elect: for if their Perseverance and
Believing to the end be undertaken for by him, how can it be uncertain? If our
Heaven and Happiness be in a surer hand than our own, even in the keeping of
Christ, how can it be but well kept? 1 Pet. 1. 5. Jer. 32. 39, 40. Luke 22. 32.
It is the Suretiship of Christ which holds the Covenant fast with us, and makes
firm our Covenantstate, that upon no Breaches on our part it can be
disannulled: Psalm. 89. 30, 34, 35. Jer. 31. 37. Ark of the Covenant, p. 428,
429, 436.

Object. Did not Adam fall from all his Grace?

Answ. Yes, because he had neither the Covenant of Grace, nor the Spirit of
Grace, nor Power of Grace to support and keep him; but it is God's Covenant now
to write his Law, to put his fear in the Heart, never to depart, and to give
the Spirit of Christ, who is now risen from the dead; John 14. 19. Because I
live you shall live also. And 1 Pet. 1. 5. Power to keep us. So that tho it is
Christ that keeps a Man from falling, yet the Truth is, he that does fall from
Grace, as tho it was a common fading thing, or does fall from Christ, he never
had Christ at all; John 4. 14. The Water that I shall give, shall be a Spring
of living Water, not of dead Graces, yet quickened, by the Spirit, and helped
continually. And it is kept till Life of Glory comes, where it is swallowed up in
the Ocean of Perfection. -- Let that Opinion, that the Graces of Saints are
fading and moral, rot and die, and be had in everlasting Detestation of them
that know the Lord.

Object. But we see how many fall off and fall back, and I have found it by
Experience so.

Answ. The Seed that is cast into the Earth first dies, and then lives and
grows; so no sooner does the Lord fill his Saints, but there is much
Self-confidence on it, and resting in it; hence it dies, yet it lives and grows
again. And hence the Lord keeps his People poor and sensible of their own
Weakness as long as they live; but if it quite dies and withers, they were
never the Lord's, nor never had one dram of Grace, 1 John 2. 19. If it be taken
away, he did but seem to have it. All fleshly Excellencies in Man, as common
Gifts be, do wither, Isa. 40. 6, 7. but Plants in God's Orchard never lose
their Greenness, tho Plants and Flowers in the Field may, Psalm. 1. 3.

Object. But this may make Men secure, say the Arminians.

1. Nothing puts more Life in the Saints. It would sink them else, if it were
not thus; as when the Lord told. Joshua, wheresoever thou set thy Foot,
thou shall prosper, not a Man able to stand against thee, this puts Life into
him.

2. Tho they cannot fall quite away, yet they may fall so as to lose the
Sweetness of Grace, and Presence of God. If a Man should eat too much, and ever
be sick, tho not die after it; or if one should fall and break his bones, tho
he does not lose his Life: Is this any gap for any to rejoice?

3. Tho they cannot wholly drive away nor beat out the Breath of the Spirit,
yet they may grieve the Spirit by which they are sealed, Ephesians. 4. 30. which is
more sad to a holy Heart than all Evils in the World beside. But therefore let
this Conceit die and perish, which is raised up by Satan to disgrace the Image
of God and Spirit of Grace in the Hearts of the Faithful; for who will make Men
seek after perishing things, under a color of making Men seek for the Spirit?
it is to resist and quench the Spirit of God in them. Mr. Tho. Shepherd of N.
E. Parable of the ten Virgins, Part 1. p. 135, 230.

Now this State, with the Qualifications of it, is a State, 1. Of Death, John
5. 25. Christ speaks to them who are dead, and so they live. 2. Of Darkness,
Acts 25. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 9. a state of Ignorance and Alienation from God, Ephesians. 4.
18.

The Grace of Vocation or effectual Calling, finding Men in a state of Enmity
to God, and Alienation from him. If they may be prevailed withal to continue
such still, this Gift shall never be recalled, nor repented of. But perhaps the
Gift and Grace of Sanctification finds Men in a better condition, in a State
wherein if they abide, then that also shall abide with them for ever. The
Scripture abounds in the Description of this State, that we shall not hesitate
about it; Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. Quickening and renewing Grace is given to Persons dead
in Sins; and is so far from depending, as to its Unchangeableness, upon their
continuance in the State wherein it finds them, that it consists in a real
Change, and Translation of them from that State and Condition; Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5.
Is the case any other as to Justification? Does not God justify the Ungodly?
Romans 4. 5. Are we not in filthy Robes when he comes to clothe us with Robes of
Righteousness? Zech. 3. 3. Are we not reconciled to God when alienated by
wicked Works? Col. 1. 13. These are the Qualifications on which it seems God
grafts his Gifts and Graces; and whose abode in the Persons, in whom they are,
is the condition whereon the Irrecoverableness of those Gifts and Graces does
depend. Who would have thought they had been of such reckoning and esteem with
the Lord? Dr. Owen of Perseverance, p. 35.

Suppose that be the scope of the foregoing Verses, Romans 8. 30. what is there
in the Theses insisted on, and the Sense embraced by us, opposite thereunto?
Why to suggest any such thing to them, as that being called, and justified,
nothing could possibly interpose to hinder them from being glorified, (that is,
that God by his Grace will preserve them from departing wilfully from him, and
will in Jesus Christ establish his Love to them for ever) was to furnish them
with a Motive to neglect his Exhortations: Yea, but this kind of Arguing we
call here Petitio Principll, and it is accounted with us nothing valid, the
thing in question is produced as the Medium to argue by. We affirm there is no
stronger Motive possible to encourage them to Perseverance, than this proposed.
It is otherwise, says Mr. Goodwin; and its being otherwise in his Opinion, is
the Medium whereby he disproves not only that, but another Truth, which he also
opposes. But he adds this Reason, for who would be persuaded to suffer, etc.
that is, it is impossible for any one industriously and carefully to use the
means for the attainment of any end, if he has assurance of the end by these
means to be obtained: what need Hezekiah make use of Food or other means of
sustaining his Life, when he was assured that he should live fifteen Years? The
Perseverance of the Saints is not in the Scripture, nor by any of those whom
Mr. Goodwin has chosen to oppose, held out on any such ridiculous terms, as
whether they use means, or use them not, carry themselves well, or wickedly
miscarry themselves, but is asserted upon the account of God's effectual Grace,
preserving them in the use of the means, and from all such Miscarriages as
should make a total Separation between God and their Souls. -- The whole
strength of it lies in a Supposal, that those who are so called, as here is
intimated in the Text, called according to the purpose of God, called to answer
the design of God, to make them like to Jesus Christ, so called as to be
hereupon justified, may yet lay such bars of Wickedness and Unbelief in their
own way, when they are so called, as not to be justified, when that Calling of
theirs consists in the effectual Removal of all those bars of Wickedness and
Unbelief, which might hinder their free and gracious Acceptance with God.
Ibid. p. 71.

It is known what Mr. Goodwin aims at in that Expression [irresistibly
necessitated savingly to believe] we will not contend about Words: Neither of
the two first terms mentioned are either willingly used by us, or can be
properly used by any, in reference to the Work of Conversion or Calling; what
we own in them relates as to the first term [irresistibly] to the Grace of God
calling or converting: and in the latter (necessitatingly) to the Event of the
Call it self. If by irresistibly you intend the manner of Operation of that
effectual Grace of God (not which conquers by Re-action, which properly may be
termed so, but) which really, and therefore certainly (for unumquodque quod
est, dum est, necessario est) produces its effect, not by forcing the Will, but
(being as intimate to it as it self) making it willing, etc. we own it. And if
by necessitating they understand only the Event of things, that is, it is of
necessity as to the Event that they shall savingly believe, who are effectually
called without the least straitning, or necessitating their Wills in their
Conversion (which are still acted sutably to their native Liberty) we close
with that term also, and affirm, that the Calling here mentioned imports such
an Act of God's Grace, as whereby they who are called, are effectually and
infallibly brought to believe, and so consequentially, that the Persons whose
Wickedness and Unbelief abides upon them, were never called with this Calling
here contended about: they who are not predestined a part ante, nor
glorified a part post, are not Partakers of this Calling. Ibid. p. 72. I
confess this Demur outruns my Understanding equis albis; neither can I by any
means overtake it, to pin any tolerable Sense upon it, tho I would allow it to
be suited only to Mr. Goodwin's Principles, and calculated for the Meridian of
Arminianism: for who (I pray) are they, in any Sense (in Mr. Goodwin's) that do
so love God, as to fall under, as he speaks, that pendulous Decree of
Predestination, and to whom this Promise here is made? Are they not Believers?
Are any others predestined in our Author's Judgment, but those who are
actually so? Is not the Decree of Predestination God's Decree or Purpose of
saving by Jesus Christ? or can any love God to Acceptance, without Believing?
If then they are Believers, can they alter that Condition before they are
called? We supposed that Faith had been by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of
God, Romans 10. 17. and that it is of necessity (in order of Nature) that Calling
should precede Believing: What are Men called to? Is it not to believe? Here is
then a new sort of Men discovered, that believe, and fall from Faith, love God
and forsake him, all antecedently to their Vocation and Calling. -- This is the
sum of Mr. Goodwin's Answer, If I can invert a Series of Decrees, and a
Concatenation of Divine Acts, tho indeed there be no such thing, neither can I
give any color to it without laying down, and taking for granted many false
and absurd Supposals; and tho it be not of the same nature with that here
proposed by the Apostle, nor any where held out in the Scripture for any such
end and purpose as this is; neither can I assign any absolute determinate end
in this Series of mine, whose Accomplishment God ingages himself to bring about
(as the case stands in the place of Scripture under Consideration) then it is
meet and equitable, that laying aside all Inforcements from the Text, Context,
Nature of God, the thing treated on all compelling us to close with another
Sense and Interpretation, that we regulate the Mind of the Holy Ghost herein,
to the Rule, Proportion and Analogy of the case as formerly proposed. This
being the Sum of that which Mr. Goodwin calls his Answer made naked, I presume
to its Shame, Val^at quantam valere potest. Dr. Owen of Perseverance, p. 74, 75.

We have hitherto spoken of the Person and of the Presence of Christ;
Participation is of that mutual inward hold which Christ has of us, and we of
him, in such sort that each possesses other by way of special Interest,
Property and inherent Copulation. -- We are by Nature the Sons of Adam. When
God created Adam, he created us; and as many as are descended from Adam, have
in themselves the Root out of which they spring. The Sons of God we neither are
all, nor any of us, otherwise than only by Grace and Favor. The Sons of God
have God's own natural Son as a second Adam from Heaven, whose Race and Progeny
they are by spiritual and heavenly Birth: God therefore loving eternally his
Son, he must needs eternally in him have loved and preferred before all others,
them which are spiritually sithence descended and sprung out of him. These are
in God as in their Savior, and not as in their Creator only. It was the
purpose of his saving Goodness, his saving Power, and his saving Wisdom, which
inclined it self toward them. They which thus are in God eternally, by their
intended Admission to Life, have by Vocation or Adoption, God actually now in
them, as the Artificer is in that Work which his Hand does presently frame.
Life, as all other Gifts and Benefits, grows originally from the Father, and
comes not to us but by the Son, nor by the Son to any of us in particular, but
through the Spirit. For this cause the Apostle wishes to the Church of Corinth
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost; which three St. Peter comprehends in one, the Participation
of the Divine Nature. We are therefore in God through Christ eternally,
according to that intent and purpose whereby we are chosen to be made his in
this present World, before the World it self was made. We were in God through
the Knowledge which is had of us, and the Love which is born toward us from
everlasting. But in God we actually are no longer than only from the time of
our actual Adoption into the Body of his true Church, into the Fellowship of
his Children; for his Church he knows and loves, so that they that are in
the Church are thereby known to be in him. Our being in Christ by eternal
Fore-knowledg saves us not, without our actual and real Adoption into the
Fellowship of his Saints in this present World; for in him we actually are by
our actual Incorporation into that Society which has him for their Head, and
does make together with him one Body (he and they in that respect having one
Name) for which cause, by virtue of this mystical Conjunction, we are of him,
and in him, even as tho our very Flesh and Bones should be made continuate with
his. We are in Christ because he knows and loves us even as Parts of
himself. No Man is actually in him, but they in whom he actually is: for he
which has not the Son of God, has not Life. I am the Vine, and you are the
Branches: He which abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
Fruit; but the Branch severed from the Vine withers: we are therefore adopted
Sons of God to eternal Life, by Participation of the only Son of God, whose
Life is the Wellspring and Cause of ours. It is too cold an Interpretation,
whereby some Men expound our being in Christ, to import nothing else but only
that the self-same Nature which makes us to be Men, is in him, and makes him
Man as we are. For what Man is there in the World which has not so far forth
Communion with Jesus Christ? It is not this can sustain the weight of such
Sentences as speak of the Mystery of our Coherence with Jesus Christ. The
Church is in Christ, as Eve was in Adam; yea by Grace we are every of us in
Christ, and in his Church, as by Nature we are in those our first Parents. God
made Eve of the Rib of Adam, and his Church he formed out of the very Flesh,
the very Wound and bleeding Side of the Son of Man: His Body crucified, and his
Blood shed for the Life of the World, were the true Elements of that heavenly
Being which makes us such as himself is, of whom we come. For which cause the
Words of Adam may be fully the Words of Christ concerning his Church, Flesh of
my Flesh, and Bone of my Bones, a true native Extract out of mine own Body. So
that in him, even according to his Manhood, we according to our heavenly Being
are as Branches in that Root out of which they grow. To all things he is Life,
and to Men Light as the Son of God; to the Church both Life and Light eternal,
by being made the Son of Man for us, and by being in us a Savior, whether we
respect him as God or as Man. Adam is in us as an original Cause of our Nature,
and of that Corruption of Nature which causes Death: Christ as the Cause
original of Restoration to Life. The Person of Adam is not in us, but his
Nature, and the Corruption of his Nature derived into all Men by Propagation.
Christ having Adam's Nature, as we have, but Incorrupt, deriveth not Nature but
Incorruption, and that immediately from his own Person into all that belong
unto him. As therefore we are really Partakers of the Body of Sin and Death,
received from Adam, so except we be truly Partakers of Christ, and as really
possessed of his Spirit, all we speak of eternal Life is but a Dream. That
which quickneth us is the Spirit of the Second Adam, and his Flesh that
wherewith he quickneth. That which in him made our Nature incorrupt, was the
Union of his Deity with our Nature. And in that respect the Sentence of Death
and Condemnation, which only takes hold upon sinful Flesh, could no way
possibly extend unto him. This caused his voluntary Death for others, to
prevail with God, and to have the force of an expiatory Sacrifice. The Blood of
Christ, as the Apostle witnesses, does therefore take away Sin, because
through the eternal Spirit he offered himself unto God without spot; as that
which sanctified our Nature in Christ, that which made it a Sacrifice available
to take away Sin, is the same which quickneth it, raised it out of the Grave
after Death, and exalts it unto Glory. Seeing therefore Christ is in us as a
quickening Spirit, the first degree of Communion with Christ must needs consist
in the Participation of his Spirit, which Cyprian in that respect well terms
Germanissimam Societatem, the highest and truest Society that can be between
Man and him, which is both God and Man in one. These things Cyril duly
considering, reproves their Speeches, who taught that only the Deity of Christ
is the Vine, whereupon we by Faith do depend as Branches; and that neither his
Flesh, nor our Body, are comprised in this Resemblance: For does any Man doubt
but that even from the Flesh of Christ our very Bodies do receive that Life
which shall make them glorious at the latter day, and for which they are
already accounted Parts of his blessed Body? Our corruptible Bodies could never
live the Life they shall live, were it not that here they were joined with his
Body, which is incorruptible, and that his is in ours as a cause of
Immortality, a cause by removing through the Death and Merit of his own Flesh,
that which hindered the Life of ours. Christ is therefore both as God and as
Man, that true Vine whereof we both spiritually and corporally are Branches.
The mixture of his bodily Substance with ours is a thing which the ancient
Fathers disclaim. Yet the mixture of his Flesh with ours they speak, to signify
what our very Bodies through mystical Conjunction do receive from that vital
Efficacy which we know to be in his; and from bodily Mixtures they borrow
diverse Similitudes rather to declare the Truth than the manner of Coherence
between his sacred and the sanctified Bodies of Saints. Thus much no Christian
Man will deny, that when Christ sanctified his own Flesh, giving as God, and
taking as Man, the holy Ghost, he did not this for himself only, but for our
sakes, that the Grace of Sanctification and Life, which was first received in
him, might pass from him to his whole Race, as Malediction came from Adam unto
all Mankind. Howbeit, because the Work of his Spirit to those Effects is in us
prevented by Sin and Death possessing us before, it is of necessity that as
well our present Sanctification unto newness of Life, as the future Restoration
of our Bodies, should presuppose a Participation of the Grace, Efficacy, Merit
or Virtue of his Body and Blood, without which Foundation first laid, there is
no place for those other Operations of the Spirit of Christ to ensue. So that
Christ imparteth plainly himself by degrees. It pleases him in Mercy to
account himself incomplete and maimed without us. But most assured we are, that
we all receive of his Fullness, because he is in us as a moving and working
Cause, from which many blessed Effects are really found to ensue: And that in
sundry both kinds and degrees, all tending to eternal Happiness. It must be
confessed, that of Christ working as Creator and as Governor of the World by
Providence, all are Partakers, not all Partakers of that Grace whereby he
inhabiteth whom he saves. Again, as he dwells not by Grace in all, so
neither does he equally work in all them in whom he dwells. Whence is it
(says St. Augustine) that some be holier than others are, but because God does
dwell in some more plentifully than in others? And because the divine Substance
of Christ is equally in all, his humane Substance equally distinct from all, it
appears that the Participation of Christ, wherein there are many degrees and
differences, must needs consist in such Effects, as being derived from both
Natures of Christ really into us, are made our own; and we by having them in
us, are truly said to have him from whom they come; Christ also more or less to
inhabit or impart himself, as the Graces are fewer or more, greater or smaller,
which really flow into us from Christ. Christ is whole with the whole Church,
and whole with every part of the Church, as touching his Person, which can no
way divide it self, or be possessed by Degrees and Portions. But the
Participation of Christ imports, besides the Presence of Christ's Person, and
besides the mystical Copulation thereof with the Parts and Members of his whole
Church, a true actual Influence of Grace, whereby the Life which we live
according to Godline^s is his, and from him we receive those Perfections
wherein our eternal Happiness consists. Thus we participate Christ partly by
Imputation, as when those things which he did and suffered for us are imputed
unto us for Righteousness; partly by habitual and real Infusion, as when Grace
is inwardly bestowed while we are on Earth, and afterward more fully, both our
Souls and Bodies made like unto him in Glory. The first thing of his so infused
into our Hearts in this Life is the Spirit of Christ, whereupon because the
rest of what kind soever do all both necessarily depend and infallibly also
ensue, therefore the Apostles term it sometimes the Seed of God, sometimes the
Pledge of our heavenly Inheritance, sometimes the handsel or earnest of that
which is to come. From hence it is that they which belong to the mystical Body
of our Savior Christ, and be in number as the Stars in Heaven, divided
successively by reason of their mortal Condition into many Generations, are
notwithstanding coupled every one to Christ their Head, and all unto every
particular Person among themselves, inasmuch as the same Spirit which anointed
the blessed Soul of our Savior Christ, does so formalize, unite and actuate
his whole Race, as if both he and they were so many Limbs compacted into one
Body, by being all with one and the same Soul quickened. That wherein we are
Partakers of Jesus Christ by Imputation, are each equally unto all that have
it. For it consists in such Acts and Deeds of his, as could not have longer
continuance than while they were in doing, nor at that time belong unto any
other but to him from whom they came; and therefore how Men either then or
before, or since, should be made Partakers of them, there can be no way
imagined but only Imputation. Again, a Deed must either not be imputed to any,
but rest altogether in him whose it is; or if at all it be imputed, they which
have it by Imputation, must have it such as it is, whole. So that degrees being
neither in the personal Presence of Christ, nor in the Participation of those
Effects which are ours by Imputation only, it rests that we wholly apply them
to the Participation of Christ's infused Grace: although even in this kind also
the first beginning of Life, the Seed of God, the first Fruits of Christ's
Spirit, be without Latitude. For we have hereby only the Being of the Sons of
God, in which number, how far soever one may seem to excel another, yet
touching this, that all are Sons, they are all Equals, some happily better Sons
than the rest are, but none any more a Son than another. Thus therefore we see
how the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father; how both are in all
things, and all in them; what Communion Christ has with his Church; how his
Church, and every Member thereof, is in him by original Derivation, and he
personally in them by way of mystical Association, wrought through the Gift of
the Holy Ghost, which they that are his receive from him, and together with the
same, what benefit soever the vital force of his Body and Blood may yield, yea
by steps and degrees, they receive the complete measure of all such divine
Grace as does sanctify the same throughout, till the day of their final
Exaltation to a State of Fellowship in Glory with him, whose Partakers they now
are in those things that tend to Glory. Mr. Richard Hooker's Ecclesiastical
Polity, lib. 5. Para. 56.

Thou see, Reader, with what Perspicuity of Judgment, Simplicity of Speech,
Soundness of Argument, analogical Coherence of Scripture, and Savor of Spirit,
these two side-column-Witnesses (though in some other things differing)
conjointly lay before thee the most fundamental Truths of the Protestant
Religion, whilst the Baxterian, one while with his Labyrinth-windings to evade
thy full view of him, another while with his more plainly, and apparently
asserted rotten and corrupt Dogmas, to outface (if possible) Truth it self;
and, Thirdly, with his dreadfully supposed enforced Inferences and Conclusions
to scare his innocent Reader from an Inquisition after Truth, runs the Gantlet
between them, as uneasy of their Society, into such among whom he may have
elbow-room enough, as being more consorted to one of his Complexion; and such
are the Papists and Quakers. Only by the way note, what Sentiments they have of
each other; There are (says Mr. Baxter) five several degrees of Peace which lie
before us to be attempted between the Roman and Reformed Churches: We shall
begin with the highest, and upon supposition of the failing of our Designs for
that, come down to the next, and so to the lowest. 1. The first degree of Peace
to be intended and desired is, That we may so far agree, as that we may hold
personal Communion in the same Assemblies, in the Worship of God, and live
under the same particular Pastors. 2. If that cannot be attained, the next
degree desirable is, That we may hold a Catholic Christian Communion in
several Assemblies, under several Pastors, acknowledging each other the true
Churches of Christ, and joining in Synods when there is need, or at least,
giving each other, as Christian Brethren, the right hand of Fellowship. 3. If
that may not be attained, the next degree desirable is, That we may take one
another for Christians and Churches of Christ, tho under such Corruptions as we
think we are bound to disown by denying the present Exercise of Communion: as
we do with particular Offenders, whom we only suspend, but not condemn. 4. If
thus much may not be had, but we will needs excommunicate each other
absolutely, the next degree of Peace desirable is, That we may at least so far
regard the common Truths that we are agreed upon, and the Souls of the People,
as to consult on certain terms on which we may most peaceably manage our
Differences, with the least Hatred and Violence, and Disturbance of the Peace
of Christendom, and with the least impediment to the general Success of those
common Truths that we are all agreed in. 5. If this may not be attained, the
lowest degree desirable is, That at least we may take each other for more
tolerable Adversaries than Mahometans and Infidels are, and therefore may make
a common Agreement to cease our Wars and Bloodshed, and turn all our Arms
against the great and common Enemy of the Christian Name. Mr. Baxter's Key for
Catholics, p. 451, 452. -- I had never troubled the World about so much as I
have done, (says Mr. Baxter) had I not found too many Protestants scandalize
the Papists, by laying too much on the Notion of Instrumentality, ill
explained. But the Judicious are all in Sense of the same mind. Mr. Baxter's
end of Doctrinal Controversy, chapter 23.. 21. Besides all this, his countenancing
of an Image Worship is that which is not only abominable in it self, but
manifests what Spirit he was of. See his Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 164.

But Dr. Preston was of another Judgment of making Peace with Rome. -- Those
(says Dr. Preston) Cassandrians that think by Wit and Policy to reconcile us,
attempt a thing impossible; for of what Materials shall any middle Course be
framed, when neither side can spare the smallest piece of Timber in their
Building? They (viz. the Papists) cannot, because thereby they should be argued
of erring formerly; we (viz. the Protestants) cannot, for true Religion is of a
brittle nature, break it you may, bend it you cannot, no not in the least
degree, it cannot be accommodated to Interests and Respects of Policy and
serving turns; it cannot be mixed with Error, no more than Oil with Water, Iron
and Steel with Clay: Dan. 2. 43. They shall mingle themselves with the Seed of
Men, but they shall not cleave one to another, even as Iron is not mixed with
Clay; or as the Elements when once they are mingled in a compound Body, do lose
their proper Forms, even so Religions, when made Ingredients and compounding
Parts of any other, do lose their Forms, and cease to be Religions in God's
account, 2 Kings 17. 33. -- God will not own his own commanded Worship when
mingled and compounded with another. -- So Isa. 21. 22. How is the faithful
City become an Harlot? But how proves he that? Thy Silver is become Dross, thy
Wine is mixed with Water. He denies not but they had Silver and Wine amongst
them; but as Silver mixed with baser Metal becomes Dross, and is no longer
accounted Silver, so Wine when it is mixed with Water, leaves off to be
accounted Wine; Jer. 23. 28. -- Whatsoever of our own we offer to annex to the
Word of God in God's account, is as if we added Chaff to Wheat, by which
addition the Wheat can be no Gainer. They that go about to mix true and false
Religions, are like those that take too big a grasp, and so let what they meant
to have sustained fall and break, as we see in Jeroboam, who mingled Truth and
Falsehood. Dr. Preston's Sermons preached before King James: the first Sermon
entitled, The Pillar and Ground of Truth, p. 15, 16, 17.

Estius, upon 1 Cor. 6. 11. says, Lest Christian Righteousness should be
thought to consist in the Washing alone, that is, in the remission of Sins, he
adds the other degree or part [but ye are sanctified] that is, ye have
attained to Purity, so that now ye are truly holy before God. Lastly,
expressing the sum of the Benefit received in one word, which includes both the
Parts, [but ye are justified] the Apostle adds, [in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ] that is, by his Merits, [and in the Spirit of our God] that is the holy
Spirit proceeding from God, and communicated to us by Christ. And, Lastly,
Richard Baxter, a famous English Preacher, who yet lives, in his Book called
Aphorisms of Justification, p. 80. says, That some ignorant Wretches g^ash
their Teeth at this Doctrine, as if it were flat Popery, not understanding the
nature of the Righteousness of the New Covenant, which is all out of Christ in
our selves, tho wrought by the Power of the Spirit of Christ in us. -- We are
far from thinking or believing that Man merits any thing by his Works from God,
all being of Free Grace, and therefore do we and always have denied that Popish
Notion of Meritum ex condigno; nevertheless we cannot deny but that God out of
his infinite Goodness, wherewith he has loved Mankind, after he communicates
to him his holy Grace and Spirit, does according to his own Will recompense and
reward the good Works of his Children: and therefore this Merit of Congruity or
Reward, in so far as the Scripture is plain and positive for it, we may not
deny, neither wholly reject the Word, in so far as the Scripture makes use of
it. For the same Greek (...), which signifies [Merit] is also in those places
where the Translators express it Worth or Worthy, as Mat. 3. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
12. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 8. concerning which Richard Baxter says, in the above cited
Book, p. 8. But in a larger Sense, as Promise is an Obligation, and the thing
promised is said to be Debt, so the Performers of the Conditions are called
worthy, and that which they perform Merit, although properly all be of Grace, and
not of Debt. Mr. Robert Barclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity, a
Scotch Quaker, in his seventh Proposition of Justification, p. 159, 167. Here
thou see the Quaker linking the Papist and Baxterian together, and himself
with both, in the great Doctrine of Justification.

An EPITAPH.
Baxter farewell! Romish Faith.
Hen-Fydd's Epitome,
Rome's Vatican and Conclave fell in thee;
St. Omers mourn! for they Disciples will
By this ^ind lesser Grist come to thy Mill.
To say no more, write on his Tomb, Here lies
The Mirror of Self-Inconsistencies:
Or rather thus, Papal Conformity,
Hid under Reformation here does lie.
Babylon's Doom and Fall.
This Neonomian ranting Scheme;
This Garment of the Whore;
This Pharisee's fond empty Dream;
This House on sandy floor,
Will with its Elements dissolve,
Its Nakedness appear,
When Wisdom Visions shall resolve,
And all Foundations clear.
View Scripture Scheme, what Clothing is,
For standing hopes therein;
Lest a pretended Holiness,
In Judgment pass for Sin.
This the grand Altar must decide,
Not Flesh but as the Door;
The Vail of Entrance for the Bride,
To this and far much more:
Tho on his Deity the worth
Of what Christ did does lie;
Yet in our Nature he is held forth
A Sacrifice to die:
And that a proper one, as charged
With his Elect ones Sin,
Whose utmost Farthing he discharged
Without and from within.
In Soul and Body Sufferings,
The Wrath of God he bore;
Which b'ing Theandrical, it brings
Acquitment of their score.
Whence their effectual Calling flows
In its essential kind,
Whose gradual Perseverance grows
Into (...) Author's Mind.
All of Election is the Fruit,
Each keep their proper place,
Yet as conjointly in one pursuit,
Till Glory springs from Grace.
Reader, Because the Eternity of the Covenant of Grace, asserted under the
second Head, did not fall so directly under the Consideration of either Papist
or Quaker, as to be noted here apart, I shall therefore join it with the first
Head, which speaks of Election; for they being so inseparate, the one from the
other, as to their eternal Origination, he that denies the purpose of God in
his personal Election of any before the Foundation of the World, must of course
deny the personal transacting of a Covenant of Grace between the Person of the
Father, and the Person of the Son, concerning those Persons so and then elected.

Heads 1, and 2. That Predestination, etc. That the Covenant of Grace, etc.
Papist.
BEllarmine affirms, that God only suffered Adam to be tempted, and so to
fall, and that God no way willed or decreed it: De stat. Peccat. lib. 3. cap.
2. Argument. 2. 1 Pet. 3. 9. God would have none perish, but to come to
Repentance. Therefore God no way willed or decreed the Fall of Man. Again, the
Apostle says, we must not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3. 8. Ergo,
God would not Adam's Fall, that he might afterward be saved by Christ. Dr.
Willet's Quotation, Synop. Pap. p. 859.

Bellarmine thus defines Predestination: Predestinatio est Providentia Dei,
etc. Predestination is a certain Providence or Foreknowledg of God, whereby
certain Men elected, are by infallible means and ways directed unto Life
eternal. Bellarm. lib. 2. de great. and liber. arb. cap. 9. In this definition
we find a double fault: First, because Bellarmine defines Predestination to be
Foreknowledg or Prescience. 2. For that he affirms it to be only of the
Elect. But of the latter fault more shall be said in the next Part. As for the
first, Bellarmine makes Predestination to be a Species, a kind or part of
God's Providence: and further says, that Predestination partly belongs to
the Will of God, partly to his Knowledge and Understanding, but most principally
to his Knowledge: Ubi (says he) Predestinationis ratio and essentia consistit:
Wherein consists the very Essence of Predestination. See Dr. Willet's Syn.
Pap. p. 880.

Some other held that God ordained Grace and Mercy for all, and was not any way
the cause of the Reprobation of Men: This was the Heresy of the Pelagians,
every where confuted by Augustine in his learned Works written against the
Pelagians: And I am afraid it has too many Favorites and Friends in these
days. The third opinion is of the Papists, who deny not but that Reprobation
does proceed in some respect from the Will and Decree of God, but that it is
not so properly God's Act as Election is. -- The fourth Opinion is ours, that
Predestination is both of the Elect to Salvation, and of the Reprobate to
Damnation. Against two of these Opinions we will deal briefly at this time:
first against the Papists, then against the Error of the Pelagians. See ibid.
p. 881.

God intends no Man's Damnation, say they, directly or absolutely, but in
respect of their Demerits: Rhemist. Annotat. Romans 9.. 9. And again, God is not
the Cause of any Man's Reprobation or Damnation. Ibid.. 1.

Of the same Opinion is Bellarmine, who although he simply denies not
Reprobation, as afterward we shall see; yet makes God far otherwise the Author
of it than of Election: yea he excludes it out of the definition of
Predestination; which he defines to be the Providence of God only to direct
those that are elected to eternal Life. Lib. de Great. cap. 9. Their Argument 1.
God would have all Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth: God
would have no Man to perish, but would have all Men come to Repentance; God
will not the Death of a Sinner. Ergo, the Death and Damnation of Men stands
not properly with the Will of God. See Ibid. p. 882.

Object. But why should God save some and not others, seeing they are all his
Creatures and Workmanship? How is not God unjust or partial in so doing, and an
Accepter of Persons? Snecan. p. 480. de Predest.

Object. If it be so, that God has cast Lots over every Man, and has already
decreed concerning their Salvation or Damnation, then all Exhortation and
Preaching, and all Endeavor to live a godly Life, is in vain: for de unoquoque
fiet ut predestinatus est: It shall befall every Man, as he is predestinate. So
the Pelagians objected de Persever. lib. 2, 15. Answ. 1. The Doctrine of
Predestination does no more hinder godly Endeavor and Exhortation, than the
Doctrine of God's Prescience and Fore-knowledg. Sicut non deterremur (says
Augustine) a confi^enda praescientia Dei, etc. As we are not terrified or
frayed from confessing God's Prescience, because whether Men live well or evil,
tales erunt, quales praescivit Deus, they shall be none other than God foresaw
they should be: so, says he, we ought not for this Cause to be driven from
confessing Predestination. August. ibid. 2. Augustine also in another place
puts this Example: As (says he) tho the Apostle confess, that God works
in us both the Will and the Deed, yet he cease not every where to exhort us,
both to will and work those things that please God: our Savior Christ also
bids us to believe in him; John 14. 1. And yet it is true which our Savior
says, That no Man can come unto him, unless his Father draw him: for Faith is
the Gift of God. So Men notwithstanding ought to endeavor themselves to walk
in Obedience before God, although they be predestinate thereunto. De Persever.
lib. 2. cap. 14.

Object. The Doctrine of Predestination, say some, is a Doctrine of Despair:
for if it be so, that God has decreed some to Damnation from the beginning,
what Comfort now remains to those that are in Despair and Distress of
Conscience, if we cannot assure them, that the Mercy and Grace of God is free
for all Men, and not denied to any? I will conclude with Augustine, who
thinks this Doctrine of Predestination to be a Doctrine not of Despair and
Distrust, but of Comfort and Confidence; Absit a vobis, etc. God forbid that
you should despair of your selves, because ye are willed to put your Trust in
God, and not in your selves. Is it to be feared, lest Man should then despair
of himself, when he is taught to place his Hope and Trust in God? De Persev.
lib. 2. c. 22.

Huberus answers, that there is a general Election, and special; the general
Election is of all which are called to the Kingdom of God, and outwardly
profess Obedience: the special Election is of those which do obey their
Calling, and indeed persevere and continue in the Faith to the end. These. 734.
So then his meaning is, that few are elected, not in respect of any Election
and Separation made in the Counsel and Decree of God, but because some amongst
many persevere to the end. See Dr. Willet Synop. Pap. p. 896.

Huberus answers, that all Men are elected and adopted in Christ, These. 748.
And that God gives Faith, converteth the Heart, illuminateth, works
effectually in all that are so elected, and made the Vessels of Mercy, These.
867. But yet so that the Vessels of Honor thus prepared of God, may be made
the Vessels of Dishonor, These. 903. So the same Vessels are prepared of God to
Honor, of themselves and Satan to Destruction, These. 870. Huberus says also,
that all are elected in Christ, and written in the Book of Life, but with a
condition, so that they believe and continue in Faith; whereupon it comes to
pass that they which believe not do lose their Salvation, and so are not
written in that Book, but are rased out of it, These. 917. See Dr. Willet.
Synop. Pap. p. 896, 897.

The second Inconvenience that issues out of this Doctrine of universal
Election, is this, that God's Election arises ex praevisa fide, from the
foresight of their Faith, which shall be saved. Huberus, These. 786. Deus
Electionem suam non absolute st^tuit, etc. God has not absolutely made any
Election, but he has founded it in Christ, that they which believe in him
should be saved, they that believe not should be damned. Ibid. p. 903.
Snecanus. Tho we understand here eternal Electi^n, whereby some were given unto
Christ, yet it implies not a special Exception and Choice of some Persons, but
that all indifferently were given unto Christ that should believe in him. Ibid.
p. 897. Snecanus says, That none absolutely before God are appointed to be
Vessels of Honor or Dishonor, but conditionally in Christ, p. 686. that is,
as they should believe or not believe in him. Ibid. p. 906. Absurd. 3. The
Patrons of universal Grace, who affirm that God conditionally has appointed
all Men to Salvation, if they will believe, and that he would have all Men to
believe, Heming. de universal Great. p. 58. and that if all believe not, it is
not for any defect of Grace, but through their own fault, Snecan. de liber.
arbit. p. 408. They thus holding are driven to confess, that to believe Man
has Power of himself by his Free Will. For God offers Grace and Faith to
all, and it is in Man's Power to receive or refuse it. Ibid. p. 908. See Dr.
Willet's Synop. Papis. where the Reader may find abundant Satisfaction in this
Point, that the Baxterian and Papist agree in this Doctrine.

They are deceived which here do understand this Fore-knowledg of God of the
Foresight of their Faith, which should believe, as Haymo. -- As we make not
God's Prescience here the Cause of Predestination, so neither with Cajetan do
we make Predestination the Cause of God's Prescience. -- Neither here do we
admit of their Distinction, who would have the Fore-knowledg of God only to
concern the Reprobate, and Predestination the Elect. -- Wherefore by Prescience
here, we understand not simply the Knowledge of God, but his fore-acknowledging,
which is a Knowledge with Approbation: the word is not (...), he knew before,
but (...), praecognovit, he acknowledged before, that is, loved, approved, for
they had no good Works which the Lord did foresee -- It signifies then
Knowledge of Approbation -- so then here the Apostle sets forth these three
mystical Acts of the blessed Trinity before the World was created; the Purpose
of God, which is general to save some, and condemn others: then the
Fore-knowledg and Approbation of God, in electing of some, and refusing of
others. Thirdly, Predestination, in appointing unto the Elect, both the end of
eternal Life, to the which he decreed to bring them, and in ordaining the way
and means through Faith in Christ to atchieve that end. See Willet on Romans 8.
29. -- And further he tells us, that the Rhemists say, that Christ has not
appointed Men by his absolute Election, etc. without any condition or respect
of their Works; Heb. 5.. 7. Now that which is God's Work in Man, is no Cause in
Man's behalf why he should be elected: but Faith and to believe is the Work of
God; John 6. 29. Ephesians. 2. 8. Therefore the Foresight of Faith is not the Cause
of Election. -- That which is the effect of Predestination is not the cause:
but Faith and good Works are the Fruit and Effect, Acts 13. 48. Ephesians. 1. 4. p.
398. This Doctor charge upon the Papists and Arminians what follows as an
absurdum; in affirming that Christ died universally for all that should
believe, and not for any special elected sort, they consequently do hold, that
God specially and particularly elected none unto Salvation, but only in general
and indifferently all that should believe. And thus in effect they take away
Predestination, making it to be a confused and conditional Decree of God to
save whomsoever: This we are then to prove, that God's Election is certain and
definite, and that he knows and decrees the number of the Chosen. See Dr.
Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 899.

Baxterian.
GOD damneth none but Sinners (says Mr. Baxter, with respect unto Reprobation,
as the Title of his Chapter manifests) therefore he decreed to damn none but
Sinners: Therefore a Man only as a Sinner is the Object of the Decree of
Damnation, or Punishment, seeing the Decree is denominated from the Effect. It
is not a Sinner, merely as a Sinner, that God will damn: else all Sinners
should be damned. But it is only a certain sort of Sinners, who prevalently and
finally reject remedying Means and Mercy. Therefore it is only such that are
the Objects of the particular Decree of Damnation. (So that none were
particularly and personally under the decree of Reprobation, until they brought
themselves under the Sentence of Damnation by their personal and final
Obstinacy, amounting to such and such a degree, against the conditional Offers
of a Pensylvanian or new-found-Gospel Treaty, upon the reception or refusal
whereof, the eternal personally stated Purposes of God, and Salvation or
Damnation of Man do depend.] Mr. B^xter's end of Doctrinal Controversy, chapter 6..
9, 10.

Having delivered that in this great Question, (viz. Of the State of Heathens
and others, that have not the Gospel) Which seems to me agreeable to God's
Word, I advise those that use to assault such things with Reproach, which they
find reproached by their Party, to remember, that God is Love, and Christ is
the Savior of the World, and the pharisaical Appropriators of Mercy and
Salvation do seldom know what Spirit they are of. Mr. Baxter's end of Doct.
Controv. chapter 16. Sect. 37. Note here that all those that assert that none are
taken into Covenant with Christ but the Elect, and that it is by the Preaching
of the Gospel only that Salvation comes, are by this confident Author termed
Pharisaical Appropriators of Mercy, etc.

They feign God to have made an eternal Covenant with his Son, that is, God
imposing on God, the Law of Mediation. They that feign Christ to have
personated us in his first Covenant of Redemption, make us by him to have
covenanted to redeem our selves, and to do the Mediator-work. They confound
God's Covenant with Christ as Mediator, imposing on him his mediatorial Part,
and the Covenant of the Father and the Son with fallen Man, imposing on them the
terms of Recovery and Life. Mr. Baxter's Brev. of Justification, Part 2. p. 8,
10, 11.

The Covenant, tho conditional, is a disposition of Grace; there is Grace in
giving ability to perform the Conditions, as well as in bestowing the Benefits:
God's injoining one in order to the other, makes not the benefit to be less of
Grace, but it is a Display of God's Wisdom (to attend in his disposing of the
Benefit, which is Christ the first Gift, till the Condition be performed by us
through the help of the Spirit) in conferring the Benefit sutably to the Nature
and State of Men in this Life, whose eternal Condition is not eternally
decided, but are in a State of Trial; yea the Conditions are but a Meetness to
receive the Blessing. Mr. Williams's Man made righteous by the Obedience of
Christ; or rather Christ made a complete Savior by Man's conditional
Righteousness, p. 237. If Men have nothing to do for Salvation, then Christ
has no Rule to judge them who lived under the Gospel. I hope none will say the
judicial Sentence will pass on Men as elected or not elected. Does it agree
with the Proceedings of that Tribunal at that day, to say, Thou shall be
damned, because thou were not elected? Is this the account the Scripture gives?
Does it not proceed on the difference in Man's Carriage and Tempers? See the
parable of the Talents, they who improved their Talents were saved, he that hid
it in a Napkin was therefore damned; Mat. 25. 21, 24, 28. Consider any
Description of the last day, and you will find God saves and damns with a respect
to Men's Neglects and Compliance with this Gospel. Mr. Dan. Williams's Gospel
Truth (not Scripture) stated and vindicated, p. 111. Our Author's Expositors
are on each hand to him, before the Reader's face, as he will find in these
Columns successively. Let him grin and mince the Matter as he pleases.

Mr. Baxter in his Method. Theol. Part 1. p. 278. has this Query, Whether the
Will of Adam in the Act of Sinning was predeterminated of God from a physical,
immediate, efficacious, irresistible Premotion unto the Act comparatively
considered, and with all its Circumstances? Or first whether it is necessary
unto the Being of every Act, to wit, of the Agent, as either free or natural,
that the Agent be with a physical, efficacious, immediate, irresistible
Premotion, predetermined unto it of God as the total first Cause? It Is denied.
And in p. 280. he brings in Acts 17. 28. as an Objection, see his So^n which is
abominably ridiculous; and in (...) ^1. Object. But if they say (which alone
remains to be spoken) that God cannot make a Creature, which may with this
Predetermination be moved, or move it self, then it must be said further, that
this comes about either because God wants Wisdom or sufficient Power (which
open Blasphemy by no Christian will be uttered) or because it implies a
Contradiction, and that it is impossible to be, so that there is no need of
Power. But this can no way be proved unto that that they object [that the
Creature otherwise would be made God, that is the first or independent Cause]
among other Objections shall be answered afterward. To me truly it seems an
Arrogance not to be tolerated, that blind Mortals in this terrene Darkness
should pretend so great a Knowledge in the tremendous Mysteries concerning the
Mode of divine Concourse, that they dare assert that the Almighty God cannot
make some Creature which may be moved some way or other, than by this opposed
Predetermination, to wit, neither by Causation or universal Concourse, neither
by sustaining the Natures, Powers, Inclinations of the Creatures, the Objects,
Mediums and Helps, etc. and by removing the Impediments; neither by a
Concourse, not necessarily determining, etc. nor in some other way known to
divine Omnisciency, but unknown to Mortals. They who say that the Almighty
cannot make a Stone, which if cast from the top of a Tower, may with its own
weight descend (Mediums being supposed, and convenient Circumstances and divine
Providence sustaining the nature of all things without a divine efficient
physical Premotion specially predetermining) I confess they exceed me in
Confidence by many degrees. -- He proceeds, Argum. 2. That Doctrine which
makes God the Author or the principal Cause of Sin, is not true; but such is
the Doctrine concerning Predetermination rejected -- And p. 306. Arg. 12. That
Doctrine which feigneth God to torment Men and Devils in Hell continually,
because they do not that which was impossible to the most innocent Angels, or
equally natural to Adam, as to make a World, is false; but such is the Doctrine
of the necessity of this Determination unto all Acts of the Creatures,
therefore it is false. See also p. 302. Arg. 16. I confess without blushing,
that I cannot easily believe, if Rocks in the Air should be feigned to hang by
a Thread or Chain, that the Thread or Chain being cut and broken, yet could not
fall, nor be moved downwards without an immediate physical efficacious
predetermining Premotion; if its Gravity and the Nature of the Earth, Air, etc.
be continued, and all impediments be removed. Ibid. p. 313. That Doctrine is
false and injurious to God which feigneth him to deal far harder with Men, than
if he should compel them, being unwilling to sin, or should damn the Innocent;
but such is the Doctrine now opposed: Ibid. p. 308. Argum. 18. The Reason why
we use the word Condition, is because it best suits with Man's Relation to God,
in his present Dealings with us, as his Subjects in Trial for Eternity --
Whether the Elect have an actual Interest in the saving Benefits of the
Covenant of Grace, while they live in Unbelief: This I deny. -- It cannot be
inferred from this Scheme of the new Covenant that God does not require any
Duty as the condition of the Benefits which he promises to give: for Jer. 31.
31. here is God's Law written in the Heart before our Relation to him as his
People, or the Pardon of Sins; and tho this Text includes the Effects and
Materials of the Covenant, yet it does not describe the whole Form of the
Covenant, for in other places God requires the new Heart as a condition of
Life; Ezekiel. 18. 31. Jer. 7. 23. -- Because the Covenant is everlasting (as to
future) therefore he judged there can be no Condition on Man's part, not
remembering that the Covenant secures our Perseverance in performing those
Conditions. -- The divine Being, and all the Methods of Grace, are strangely
exposed by Conceits so sordid. He calls us to fear, Heb. 4. 1. Romans 11. 20.
Phil. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 10. Romans 8. 24. What are all these, if our State be in
no suspense as to what we shall be or do? -- But yet that the case of no Hearer
is made so desperate by this Election of some, as that if he do repent and
believe, he shall not be saved, for God will judge all of us by his revealed
Will, and not by his Decrees. -- Our personal Claim depends on the
Gospel Covenant, whereof Christ is the Mediator. This Gospel-Sanction determins
as certain a Rule of Happiness and Misery as the Law of Works did, tho it be
not the same: for while it promises Pardon to all believing repenting Sinners,
and declares a Bar to Pardon to the impenitent Rejecters of Christ and
Gospel Grace, it fixes true Repentance and Faith unfeigned to be the terms of
Pardon: so when it promises Heaven to the sincerely holy persevering Believer,
it fixes sincere Holiness and Perseverance in Faith, as the terms of
possessing Heaven. -- God in the dispensing of Gospel-promised Blessings, does
judicially determine a Conformity to this Rule of the Promise: when he
forgives, he judicially declares a Man has true Faith; when he admits into
Heaven, he judicially declares a Man sincerely holy and persevering. -- Can any
think that forgiving, adopting, glorifying, or the conveyance of every other
promised Benefit given on God's terms, are not judicial Acts of God, as Rector?
If so, does he dispense these blindly and promiscuously, without any regard to
our being Believers, etc. or no? or whether our Faith be true or no? Any one
would blush to affirm it. -- To suppose the Covenant to be the sole Act of God,
and an Act that is merely absolute, renders all these Phrases impertinent and
impossible: can we be said to make or keep the Covenant which is only God's
absolute Grant? It was his Act to appoint this Covenant, and to enable us to
make and keep it: It Is his Act to restipulate on his part; but to deny it to be
conditional, as to the very Benefits, is to make God to be the sole Party
covenanting, etc. -- These Conditions are our Duty by God's Command; and not
less so by being terms of the Benefit in the divine Grant. -- The non-elect are
in the same case with Devils, there being no serious Offers to them; nay their
case is worse than Devils, for these Offers are made to them for no other
design but to increase their Condemnation: nay every Sin of theirs is the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, that is, every Sin is alike, the unpardonable Sin, and
not only that Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. To say no more, Christ has no
Rule of distributive Justice but his own eternal Purpose, and Men's regards to
his promised Benefits, are all forbidden, even when our respect to them is that
which subserves his Government, and is supposed in all the Methods of it. Mr.
D. W's Gospel Truth, etc. p. 46, 51, 57, 60, 116, 180. Preface, 53, 54, 134,
135.

Quaker.
AS for that Doctrine which these Prpositions chiefly strike at, to wit,
absolute Reprobation; according to which some are not afraid to assert, that
God by an eternal and immutable Decree has predestined to eternal Damnation,
the far greater part of Mankind, not considered as made, much less as fallen,
without any respect to their Disobedience or Sin, but only for the
demonstrating of the Glory of his Justice: and that for the bringing this
about, he has appointed miserable Souls necessarily to walk in their wicked
ways, that so his Justice may lay hold on them: and that God does therefore not
only suffer them to be liable to this Misery in many Parts of the World, by
withholding from them the preaching of the Gospel, and knowledge of Christ, but
even in those places where the Gospel is preached, and Salvation by Christ is
offered: whom tho he publicly invite them, yet he justly condemns for
Disobedience, albeit he has withheld from them all Grace, by which they could
have laid hold on the Gospel, viz. because he has by a secret Will, unknown to
all Men, ordained and decreed (without any respect had to their Disobedience or
Sin) that they shall not obey, and that the Offer of the Gospel shall never
prove effectual for their Salvation, but only serve to aggravate and occasion
their greater Condemnation: I say, as to this horrible and blasphemous
Doctrine, our Cause is common with many others, who have both wisely and
learnedly, according to Scripture, Reason and Antiquity, refuted it. -- First
we may safely call this Doctrine a Novelty. -- It is highly injurious to God,
because it makes him the Author of Sin, which of all things is most contrary to
his Nature. I confess the Assertors of this Principle deny this Consequence;
but that is but a pure Illusion, seeing it so naturally follows from their
Doctrine, and is equally ridiculous, as if a Man should pertinaciously deny
that one and two makes three. For if God has decreed that the reprobate ones
shall perish without all respect to their evil Deeds, but only of his own
Pleasure; and if he has also decreed, long before they were in being, or in
any capacity to do good or evil, that they should walk in those wicked ways, by
which, as by a secondary means, they are led to that end; who, I pray, is the
first Author and Cause thereof, but God, who so willed and decreed? (But
Friend! Friend! if the Light that is within thee be Darkness, how great is that
Darkness? Romans 9. 18. Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and
whom he will he hardens [Is this an Illusion?] ver. 19. Thou will say then
unto me, Why does he yet find fault? [He having hardened before, will he now
find fault] for who has resisted his Will? v. 20. Nay but, O Man, who art thou
that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
Why have thou made me thus? ver. 21. Has not the Potter Power over the Clay,
of the same Lump to make one Vessel unto Honor, and another unto Dishonor?
ver. 22. What if God willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known,
endured with much Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction?
ver. 23. And that he might make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of
Mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory. Jude v. 4. There are certain Men
crept in, who were before of old ordained to this Condemnation -- Even before
they had a being. Mr. Barclay's Confidence springing from a Light opposed to
the Light of the Word, I suppose must give way to this, when he asserts, that
for the first 400 years after Christ, there is no mention made of this
Doctrine.) Mr. Barclay's Apology for the Quakers, p. 74, 75.

This Author having recited the Savings of several, such as Calvin, Beza,
Zanchy, Pareus, Martyr, Zuinglius, and Piscator, in defense of this Doctrine of
Predestination, which he would oppose, proceeds. -- If these Sayings do not
plainly and evidently import that God is the Author of Sin, we must not then
seek these Men's Opinions from their Words, but some way else: it seems as if
they had assumed to themselves that monstrous and twofold Will they feign of
God, one by which they declare their Minds openly, and another more secret and
hidden, which is quite contrary to the other. Nor does it at all help them, to
say, that Man sins willingly, since that Willingness, Proclivity and Propensity
to Evil, is according to their Judgment so necessarily imposed upon him, that
cannot but be willing, because God has willed and decreed him to be so. Which
shift is just as if I should take a Child incapable to resist me, and throw it
down from a great Precipice; the weight of the Child's Body indeed makes it go
readily down, and the Violence of the Fall upon some Rock or Stone, beats out
its Brains, and kills it. Now then I pray, tho the Body of the Child goes
willingly down, (for I suppose it as to its Mind is incapable of any Will) and
the weight of its Body, and not any immediate stroke of my hand, who perhaps am
at a great distance, makes it die, whether is the Child or I the proper Cause
of its Death? Let any Man of Reason judge, if God's part be (with them) as
great, yea more immediate, in the Sins of Men, (as by the Testimonies above
brought does appear) whether does not this make him not only the Author of Sin,
but more unjust than the unjustest Act of Men? -- This Doctrine is injurious to
God, because it makes him delight in the Death of Sinners, yea and to will many
to die in their Sins, contrary to these Scriptures; Ezekiel. 33. 11. 1 Timothy 2. 3.
2 Pet. 3. 9. For if he has created Men only for this very end, that he might
show forth his Justice and Power in them, as these Men affirm, and for
effecting thereof has not only withheld from them the means of doing good, but
also predestined the Evil that they might fall into it, and that he inclines
and fo^ces them into great Sins, certainly he must necessarily delight in their
Death, and will them to die, seeing against his own Will he neither does, nor
can do any thing. It is highly injurious to Christ our Mediator, and to the
Efficacy and Excellency of his Gospel: for it renders his Mediation
ineffectual, as if he had not by his Sufferings thoroughly broken down the
middle Wall, nor yet removed the Wrath of God, or purchased the Love of God
toward all Mankind; if it was before decreed, that it should be of no service
to the far greater part of Mankind. It is to no purpose to alledg that the
Death of Christ was of Efficacy enough to have saved all Mankind, if in effect
its Virtue be not so far extended as to put all Mankind into a capacity of
Salvation. -- This Doctrine is highly injurious to Mankind: for it renders them
in a far worse condition than the Devils in Hell. For these were sometimes in a
capacity to have stood, and do suffer only for their own Guilt, whereas many
Millions of Men are for ever tormented, according to them, for Adam's Sin,
which they neither knew of, nor ever were accessory to. It renders them worse
than the Beasts of the Field, of whom the Master requires not more than they
are able to perform; and if they be killed, Death to them is the end of Sorrow:
whereas Man is for ever tormented for not doing that which he never was able to
do. Ibid. p. 76, 77, 78. Again, p. 68. he makes this Doctrine a fancy, says he,
for the most of Protestants that hold this, having as they fancy the absolute
decree of Election. -- Further, p. 104. The second is drawn from those Places
wherein God seems to have ordained some wicked Persons to Destruction. -- And
p. 157. from 2 Cor. 13. 5. he tells us, that the Apostle here makes the Cause
of Reprobation, or not Justification, the want of Christ thus revealed and
known in the Soul. And herein was the Blessing and the Curse placed (concerning
the Fall of Man) the Life and the Death, the Obedience and Disobedience,
Election and Reprobation. James Naylor's Love to the Lost, p. 1 -- The Seed he
had lost, wherein the Election, the Wisdom, the Authority, and all Happiness,
present and eternal, did consist, p. 2. For tho there be many Works, as to the
Creatures Obedience and Measures, yet they all complete but this one Work of
the Creatures Redemption, and God's Praise therein, the beginning and end of
all. -- And I deny all of that Spirit who would foolishly charge God to have
concluded the Condemnation of some Persons before they come into the World; and
tho they seek after God, yet they cannot be saved, because God has purposed
the contrary. And on the contrary, some are concluded to Salvation, tho they
live and die in their Sins. And this is the Spirit of the World, which knows
not the Secrets of God revealed in Spirit, and therefore judges from the
Letter. -- But none knows the Purpose of God but who comes to the beg^ing: for
in the beginning was the Election and Reprobation established by an eternal
Decree unalterable in the two Seeds, that after the Flesh, and that after the
Spirit; and he that can judge of these two, he knows the two Vessels ordained to
Honor and Dishonor; and as every one is found in these, so is God's Purpose
touching them. -- And so here is the Election and Reprobation, they that are
after the Spirit, and they that are after the Flesh: and they that are after
the Flesh are not the Seed, but they that are after the Spirit are accounted
for the Seed; and these have obtained, but the rest are hardened. -- So read
your Condemnation, you vain Bablers, who spend your time with disputing about
Election with your reprobate Minds. Ibid. p. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60.

Tho it be granted that by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin;
and so Death passed upon all Men, for all have sinned, even over them that had
not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, who is the Figure of
him that was to come, Romans 5. 12, 14. yet this does not prove the Lord to be
partial in his Love toward his Creatures, as to choose some, but leave the
greatest part of Mankind in the fallen State, without affording them any
Benefit by Christ, or a measure of his Grace and Spirit: for want of which, and
being so past by of God (as some have asserted) they become under a necessity
of Sinning, and a necessity of Dying. O harsh Doctrine! and so I must confess I
often thought it, whilst I was industriously striving to work my self into a
Belief of it: but now from a certain experimental Knowledge, and in full
assurance of Faith can I testify for God, he is no Respecter of Persons, but in
every Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted of him:
for tho all have sinned and come short of the Glory of God, wherefore he has
concluded all under Sin, it is that he might have Mercy upon all, not willing
that any should perish in Sin, but that all might come to Repentance. Moreover
than this, the Scriptures do abundantly speak forth the Extent and Benefit of
Christ's Death for all Mankind, upon condition of Faith and Repentance, joined
with new and continued Obedience, which are the Gospel-terms on which he is
offered to them: for Christ Jesus gave himself a Ransom for all, he tasted
Death for every Man; so says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 2. 9. so that it
is a certain Truth, all that are or shall be saved are elected only in Christ
Jesus, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life. There is no Pre-exception or absolute Fore-appointment as partially
designed in relation to Persons, but upon Man's Disobedience. Truth's
Vindication in defense of the Quakers, by Mrs. E. Bathurst, p. 26, 27, 28.

Election and Reprobation, how it is of two Seeds only, absolutely and of
Persons, only conditionally as born of, and growing up (respectively) into the
Image of those several Seeds; Perfection, as to freedom from sinning in this
Life; and such other, for which we are as unjustly as uncessantly assaulted, --
because we talk of an universal Redemption by Christ's Coming intentionally to
save all Men, tho (through their own default) all are not, but few only
actually saved, they pitifully propound us as denying God's eternal
unchangeable Decree, and his Predestination, Election, Reprobation, and such
like. Whereas how the Universality of his Grace appearing, and bringing
Salvation truly and intentionally to all, but that most put it from themselves,
as the Jews did, Acts 13. is no way inconsistent with, but rather establishing
God's everlasting immutable Counsel concerning Man, as to Salvation and
Condemnation, it is most clearly demonstrated in the fourth Exercitation -- as
concerning your denial of the Universality and Sufficiency to save such as heed
it, of the Light and Grace of God in all Men's Hearts, of modern, immediate,
divine Inspiration, of Perfection, as to the purging away of Sin in this Life,
and as concerning your Dream of a peremptory Election and Reprobation of
Persons unborn, viz. of very few to Life, and of many to one as unchangeably to
Damnation, without respect to their doing good or evil in their Life: About all
which, as occasion is, I must have in a few words a round reckoning with you.
-- A false Faith about personal Election and Reprobation, about All Is
signifying some Men only, and every Man only a few, being framed in John
Calvin's fancy upon his miserable Mistakes and Misinterpretations of the
Scripture (scilicet) ever since all Scripture must be interpreted according to
the Analogy of that false Faith. -- God's Decree I deny not to be unalterable,
but blind Priests mistake that unchangeable Decree of his, which is to be
toward Men, as they toward him, merciful to the Upright, wrathful to the
Froward and Wicked, to show himself in his Love as a Friend, Father, Forgiver
for ever, even unalterably, unchangeably, world without end, to the Penitent
that turn to him, and come to him by Christ, in his Light, keeping his
Commandments; and as unalterably, unchangeably, without Variation or shadow of
turning, that immutable Mind and Will of his, to show himself in his Wrath
everlastingly, eternally, to the finally impenitent Sinners, who are found
living and dying in that Seed which is unchangeably reprobated from him: so
whom he loves he loves to the end, and whom he hates he hates to the end, that
is, for ever; but those whom from Eternity he has thus immutably decreed to
love, and own, and honor to Eternity, are the righteous ones that honor him,
the godly in all ages, whoever they are, which are those only that he chooses to
himself, Psalm. 4. (whether foreseen who they will be in time by him, or not,
that is nothing to the purpose) and whom he thus as immutably from all Eternity
decrees to disregard, hate, and reject to Eternity, are the Seed of evil Doers,
that lightly despise him, who are never to be renowned: so whatever Changes
fall out among Men, who are sometimes better, sometimes worse, and among their
States, which are some good, some bad, there is no Change in the Mind of God;
whatever the Thoughts of Men's Hearts are, his unchangeable Counsel stands the
same, his Purpose and Decree the same, which is from Eternity, to own the good
and refuse the bad, to justify the Walkers in his Light, Christ Jesus, and judge
all that rebel against it: so he does not change his Will, but his unchangeable
Will to Persons is, to be unchangeably affected to them in either Love or
Hatred respectively, as they respectively are found at any time the Subjects of
Sin or not, and so consequently Objects of either the one Affection mutually,
or the other; as if a King decrees after the manner of the Medes and Persians,
inalterably, that his People shall have as they do, he that does well shall be
beloved, and he that does ill and repents not from it, shall be hated, hanged.
One and the same Person may (at different times) be under the two different
Affections, viz. now under the Favor, and now under the Displeasure of the
King, as he does well or ill, and by and by loved and in his favor again, as
he repents; or else as not repenting, be so under his Hatred, as to be hanged;
yet the King's Mind, Will and Decree, stands the same, unchangeable as ever it
did. (I shall in a Parenthesis add to this what Mr. Baxter says in his End of
Doctrinal Controversies, chapter 26.. 30, 31. Q. Whether the Doctrine of Apostasy
infer any Mutability in God? Answ. No; there is no show of it, unless you hold,
that his absolutely Elect fall away. It was no change in God when he gave us
Grace, and justified us; and it would be no more if he cease, than it was to
begin. It was no change in God when I was born, and it will be no more if I
die: The Change is only in Man, and his receptive Disposition. Even the Law of
the Land, without any Diversity or Change, does virtually condemn a thousand
Malefactors, and justify the Just; and will cease to justify them, and begin to
condemn them, if they cease to be just, and begin to be Offenders. The Changes
that God himself makes in all the World, are made without any Change in him.
Therefore what Man does, or undoth, cannot change him. Q. Why did God leave
this Case so dark? Answ. It is not fit for us to call for any Reason of his
doing, but what he has given us: But while he has made it sure to us, that he
will cause all his Elect to persevere, and will deny his Grace to none that
faithfully seek it, and will save all that do not wilfully and finally reject
it, and gives us no cause to distrust his Mercy, his holy ends (mark this
Reader) are by this attained in his Peoples Uprightness and Peace. And he
seems by leaving the rest so obscure, to tell us, that it is not a matter of
so great use to us, as some imagine, and that it is not a Point fit for to be
the measure of our Communion or Peace.) But to return -- The Jews thought they
had the fullest Freedom that Men could have in this World, because they were
the visible. Church, Abraham's Seed. -- But Christ learns them another Lesson,
viz. that they had none of that true Gospel-Freedom that the saving Knowledge of
the Truth gives, and which he makes such as continue in his Words, and so are
his Disciples indeed, and not in word only as ye are, free withal, which is a
full Freedom in deed and truth, and not half of one, or by the halves, such as
that is ye talk of, who upon the account of some private Patent, alias
particular personal Election thereto from everlasting, prattle to your selves
of freedom from Guilt; ye remain in your filth, and of a general Justification
and Pardon for all Sins past, present, and to come in this World, expecting
your Purging or Justification, as to Sanctification from Sin and Uncleanness,
not in this World, but that to come. -- They say, that he (viz. God) condemns
the Just; that here the best Works and personal Performances of Believers and
Saints themselves, are imperfect, Sin, Iniquity, Dung, Lo^s, unclean, filthy
Rags (tho done by Christ in them) and yet (to go round again) that God accepts,
alias, is well pleased, delights and takes pleasure in both these Believers and
their wicked Works: witness the Supralapsarian, Predestination Preachers, who
represent God as loving a few only, as Jacob, hating most Men personally with
Esau (qua sic) as Men, the Creatures of his own Creation, to show his Wrath,
Power, Sovereignty over them, as the Potter over the Clay, of the same Lump
(the Mysteries of which Matters of Jacob and Esau, their mere Man's Wisdom sees
no more into, than a Mole's Eye into a Millstone) not only before they had done
either, but without reference to either Good or Evil foreseen to be done in
time by either Adam (their supposed Representative) or themselves: and the
Sublapsarians also, who represent God as (by Preterition at least) rejecting
most on the account merely of Adam's single Act, without a respect to any
personal Actions of their own. -- In like manner does the Prophet Isaiah affirm
Christ to be given of God for a Covenant to the Gospel, for a Light to the
Nations, to open the blind Eyes, and to bring out of Prison them that sit in
Darkness, even the blind which have Eyes and see not: and after him Paul
testifies, that Christ was set (...) a Light to the Nations, that he might be
the Lord's Salvation, to the ends of the Earth. Simcon also speaking by the
holy Spirit of the Child Jesus, calls him that Salvation of his which the Lord
had prepared before the face of all People, to be a Light. -- Inasmuch
therefore as Christ is the Light of the World, he is the Savior of the World;
and so far only are Men saved by him, as they believe in him, wh^ is the Light,
and in that Light wherewith he does enlighten every Man in his own Conscience,
and set themselves to walk after it, which leads no Man into Iniquity, and so
far forth are all Men liable to Condemnation before God, as they walk not in
this, which is in them: Howbeit, not consenting to any, but testifying against
all Iniquity, even the least, and also reproving and condemning it, even in
them who are not in it, but walking contrary to it, in the Darkness. The
Testimony of Truth exalted, by the collected Labors of Samuel Fisher, p. 30,
36, 62, 652, 657, 712, 739, 778.

Head 3. That Original Sin, etc.
Papist.
THE Jesuit defines original Sin to be nothing else but privatio seu carentia,
etc. A Privation or wanting of the Gift of original Justice, or an habitual
Aversion or turning away of the Mind from God: but he denies that reatus
culpae or poenae, that the Guilt of the Offense of our first Parents, or of the
Punishment, is any part of Original Sin. His Reason is, because to be guilty of
the Offense or of the Punishment, are the Effect or Sequel of Sin, rather than
any Sin it self: and therefore it is no part of original Sin, which has veram
and propriam peccati rationem, the true and proper nature and condition of Sin.
Bellarm. de amiss. great. lib. 5. cap. 19.. reatus culpae, etc. The Jesuit
defines Original Sin, Habitualem aversionem a Deo, an habitual forsaking or
turning aside from God, cap. 19. as tho it were only in Habit, nothing in Act,
and did but give a Promptness or Inclination to Evil only.

Bellarmine in flat words denies, that the Corruption of Nature, or
Concupiscence which remains in the Regenerate after Baptism, is original Sin,
nor yet any Sin of it self, nor yet does make them guilty, in whom it is found:
Bellarm. lib. 5. de stat. peccat. cap. 7. The like also the Rhemists affirm,
that Concupiscence remaining after Baptism is not properly a Sin, nor forbidden
by Commandment; it is called Sin, because it is the Matter, Effect, and
Occasion of Sin. Rhem. Romans 6.. 6.

Bellarmine (speaking of Romans 7. 17, 20. where Paul calls it a Sin dwelling
in him) answers: 1. It is a Sin improperly so called, not because it is a Sin
indeed, but either the Cause or the Effect of Sin: for the Apostle says, that
this Sin dwells in his Flesh, but the Flesh is not the Seat or Place of Sin.
-- Again, that it is an Evil, but no Sin. Bellarm. lib. 5. cap. 10. Respons. ad
Object. 1.

Baxterian.
WE were seminally or virtually in Adam when he sinned: which is but that he
had that virtus generativa from which we naturally sprang in time; but to be
virtually in him, is not to be personally in him, but potentially, it being as
to Existence, terminus diminuens. (A personal federal Charge by Imputation, is
here absolutely denied.) Mr. Baxter's end of Doct. Controv. chapter 10.. 5.

I think this would not warrant their Baptism, nor give us any certain hope of
any ones Salvation. God has but one Covenant of Grace, which gives us Christ
and Life; and God has ordained no Baptism but what is for the remission of
Sin, and making us Members of Christ, if we have the Conditions of Right to
Baptism. The Adult profess Faith and Repentance. If they have them in
Sincerity, and consent with the Heart as well as the Tongue, they are certainly
pardoned. If they are Hypocrites, and consent only with the Lips, they have
notoriously the Qualification which the Church must require, and so are
received to outward Communion, but not that which God requires to Remission
and Salvation. But if an Infant be the Child of a true Believer, he has all
that God and the Church require. And therefore if he be baptized, he is
certainly put into a State of Life, because no condition is wanting on his
part. Ibid. chapter 19.. 14. Non pereunt Ethnici, etc. The Heathens perish not
either for the original alone Sin of Adam, or only for the violated Laws of
perfect Nature; but because they either with Negligence or Contempt reject some
certain gracious Remedies of a Mediator. Mr. Baxter's Method. Theolog. Part 3.
p. 67.

Quaker.
ALL Adam's Posterity (or Mankind) both Jews and Gentiles, as to the first Adam
(or earthly Man) is fallen, degenerated, and dead, deprived of the Sensation
(or Feeling) of this inward Testimony or Seed of God, and is subject unto the
Power, Nature and Seed of the Serpent, which he sows in Men's Hearts while
they abide in this natural and corrupted State: from whence it comes that not
only their Words and Deeds, but all their Imaginations are evil perpetually in
the sight of God, as proceeding from this depraved and wicked Seed. Man
therefore as he is in this State, can know nothing aright; yea his Thoughts and
Conceptions concerning God, and things spiritual (until he be disjoined from
this evil Seed, and united to the divine Light) are unprofitable both to
himself and others. Hence are rejected the Socinian and Pelagian Errors in
exalting a natural Light, as also the Papists, and most of Protestants, who
affirm, that Man without the true Grace of God, may be a true Minister of the
Gospel. Nevertheless this Seed is not imputed to Infants, until by
Transgression they actually join themselves therewith, for they are by Nature
the Children of Wrath, who walk according to the Power of the Prince of the
Air, and the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience, having
their Conversation in the Lusts, fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh and of the
Mind, Ephesians. 2. Barclay's Apology, p. 61, 62. That God does not impute this
Evil to Infants, until they actually join with it. Ibid. So that tho we do not
ascribe any whit of Adam's Guilt to Men until they make it theirs by the like
Acts of Disobedience, yet we cannot suppose that Men who are come of Adam
naturally can have any good thing in their Nature, as belonging to it, which
he, from whom they derive their Nature, had not himself to communicate unto
them. If then we may affirm, that Adam did not retain in his Nature, as
belonging thereunto, any Will or Light capable to give him knowledge in
spiritual things, then neither can his Posterity. For whatsoever real Good any
Man does, it proceeds not from his Nature, as he is Man, or the Son of Adam;
but from the Seed of God in him, as a new Visitation of Life, in order to bring
him out of his natural Condition. So that tho it be in him, yet it is not of
him; and this the Lord himself witnessed, Genesis 6. 5. which words as they are
very positive, so are they very comprehensive: observe the Emphasis of them. 1.
There is every Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart, so that this admits of
no exception of any Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart, etc. -- That the
Gentiles do by Nature the things contained in the Law, and so consequently do
by nature that which is good and acceptable in the sight of God. This Nature
must not, neither can be understood of Man's own Nature, which is corrupt and
fallen, but of that spiritual Nature which proceeds from the Seed of God in
Man, as it receives a new Visitation of God's Love, and is quickened by it,
which clearly appears by the following words, where he says, These not having
a Law (id est, outwardly) are a Law unto themselves, which show the Work of the
Law written in their Hearts. These Acts of theirs then, are an Effect of the
Law written in their Hearts, but the Scripture declares that the writing of
the Law in the Heart is a part, yea and a great part too of the New Covenant
Dispensation, and so no consequence nor part of Man's Nature. Ibid. p. 63, 64,
65. Ephesians. 2. Here the Apostle gives their evil Walking, and not any thing that
is not reduced to act, as a Reason of their being Children of Wrath: and this
is suitable to the whole strain of the Gospel, where no Man is ever threatened or
judged for what Iniquity he has not actually wrought. -- They say, Adam was a
public Person, and therefore all Men sinned in him, as being in his Loins. For
this they alledg Romans 5. 12. These last Words, say they, may be translated, in
whom all have sinned. To this I answer, That Adam is a public Person is not
denied, and that through him there is a Seed of Sin propagated to all Men, (Mr.
Baxter directly) which in its own nature is sinful, and inclines Men to
Iniquity; yet will it not follow from thence, that Infants who join not with
this Seed (so that there is an universal saving Grace that every Man is born
with, which if he live not to oppose, he shall be saved) are guilty. As for
those words in the Romans, the reason of the Guilt there alleged is, for that
all have sinned. Now no Man is said to sin, unless he actually sin in his own
Person; for the Greek words, (...), may very well relate to (...), which is the
nearest Antecedent; so that they hold forth, how that Adam, by his Sin, gave an
entrance to Sin in the World, and so Death entered by Sin, (...), i. e. upon
which [viz. Occasion] or in which [viz. Death] all others have sinned, that is,
actually, in their own Persons, to wit, all that were capable of sinning, of
which number that Infants could not be, the Apostle clearly shows by the
following Verse, Sin is not imputed where there is no Law: and since, as is
above proved, there is no Law to Infants, they cannot be here included. Ibid.
p. 68, 60, 70. -- It is by the Obedience of that one that the free Gift is come
upon all unto Justification; for we affirm, that as all Men partake of the
Fruit of Adam's Fall, in that, by reason of that evil Seed, which through him
is communicated unto them, they are prone and inclined unto Evil, tho thousands
of thousands be ignorant of Adam's Fall, neither ever knew of the eating of the
forbidden Fruit: so also many may come to feel the influence of this Holy and
Divine Seed, and Light, and be turned from Evil to Good by it, tho they knew
nothing of Christ's Coming in the Flesh, through whose Obedience and Sufferings
it is purchased unto them. Ibid. p. 96, 97. So as the Creature by Faith
partakes of that one Obedience in the second Adam, he is made righteous, and no
further, even as all are made Sinners as they partake of the Disobedience of
the first Adam, and no further. James Naylor's Love to the Lost, p. 51.

Head 4. That peculiar Redemption, etc.
Papist.
BEllarmine answers, that Christ died for all Men, even Turks, Jews,
Insidels; and by this reason, if his Blood should be given to all, for whom it
was shed, even Turks and Jews also should be admitted unto the Communion. For
the Proof of the first part he alleges 1 Cor. 15. 22. Col. 1. 20. 1 John 2.
Willet's Syn. Pap. p. 645.

The Sacrifice of the Cross was offered for all, the Sacrifice of the Mass is a
Representation of the Cross: Ergo, It may be offered for all. Bellarm. cap. 6.
-- The Sacrifice of Christ was not offered for all Men in general, but only for
the Children of God; John 11. 52. Christ died to gather together in one the
Children of God which were scattered. And if Christ prayed not for the World,
John 17. 9. much less would he die for the World. Ibid. p. 673. It was the
Error of the Pelagians, as Augustine notes, that the Grace of God was not only
in respect of the outward means generally offered to all, but in God's eternal
Decree and Purpose ordained for all if they would receive it: for thus they
affirmed, Quoniam ad Deum, etc. On God's behalf they say, Life eternal is
prepared for all, because God will have all Men saved; and as for the Freedom
of the Will, so many apprehend or lay hold of eternal Life, as of their own
accord do believe in God: it follows upon this opinion, that Christ also died
in the purpose and intention of God for all Men generally, and not for
Believers only, such as are ordained to Life. -- That all Men, and every one by
the universal Grace of God the Father in Christ, are saved, yet not without
respect had to their Faith. -- That this Faith in God is naturally given unto
all. -- So that in effect they affirm the same thing which the other do, that
by Nature all Men are actually saved by Christ's Death, if they do not
afterward wilfully reject this Grace. Ibid. p. 884. -- A little to behold the
Vanity of their poor Satisfaction, i. e. the Papists, observe the innumerable
Testimonies of Scripture ascribing the remission of Sin, only to the Mercy of
God in Christ crucified: That Christ has born our Sins, 1 Pet. 2. 24. His
Blood has purged us of all Sin, Heb. 1. 3. His Death redeemed us from all
Iniquity, Tit. 2. 24. His Stripes heal^d us, Isa. 53. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 24. That he
has paid the (...), or Price of our Ransom, 1 Timothy 2. 6. That God for his sake
has forgiven us our Trespasses, Col. 2. 13. Blotted out our Sins, ibid. v. 14.
Cast them behind his Back, Isa. 38. 7. Forgotten them, Jer. 31. 34. with store
of the like Sayings, ascribing the doing away of all Sins to the Grace of God,
through the Satisfaction of Christ, without limiting it to any Sin, or
mentioning any satisfactory Works of ours. Now what say our Adversaries to
this? By a shift they turn off all Scriptures tending to this purpose. Thus
Christ has satisfied for the fault of our Sins, and so reconciled us unto God,
and for the Eternity of the Punishment: but he satisfied not for temporal
Punishment; we must endure Torments, tho but for a while. Mr. Pemble of
Justification, p. 241. Here now Christ's Satisfaction comes in again, by whose
Merits alone, they grant, we are delivered from the Eternity of the Punishment
of Sin: which must be noted, that Christ's Satisfaction has not eased us of
the Substance of the Punishment it self, but only in the continuance of it.
Temporal, to endure only for a time, one in this Life, as namely all Calamities
and Afflictions upon the Body, Soul, Name, Goods, etc. together with Death, the
last and greatest of Evils. All which are inflicted upon Man, as Punishments of
Sin. Of these some come upon us inevitably, as Death upon all Men, or as Death
in the Wilderness on the Children of Israel, with the like Punishments,
certainly and irrevocably denounced. Now here is no Remedy but Patience, and
that is an excellent Remedy too. Ibid. p. 229, 230.

Fevardentius, that cavilling Friar, having nothing to object against this
Position of Calvin, Oportuit Christum sisti ad Dei tribunal ut cunctorum
nostrorum Maleficiorum reum; it was behooful that Christ should stand before
God's Tribunal as guilty of all our Sins, Institut. l. 2. c. 16. Sect. 12. he
inverteth, or rather perverteth the Question, and propounds to himself to
prove, that Christ was not re ipsa Peccator, was not indeed a Sinner: confuting
that which no Man affirms. I answer the Friar as Augustine did Petilian the
Donatist, who impudently charged him with a clean contrary Matter: Quemadmodum
si ^hi diceres, etc. like as if you should say to me, that I am Petilian. I
could not find how to refute you; but either to laugh at your Folly, or to
grieve for your Phrensy; so I must do at this time, but because the Friar
jesteth not, but is in good earnest, you know what remains: cont. Petilian,
chapter 38. Thus deals the Friar with Calvin (as Mr. Dan. Williams and others do
with Dr. Crisp) charging him with that he never held, as if he should say to
him, that he was Fevardentius, not Calvin. Augustine would have judged this
either to be Foolishness or Madness in him. -- But all this being confessed and
granted, that Christ in himself was the unspotted undefiled Lamb, it follows
not, but that for us and in our Person he taking upon him our Sins, stood as
guilty thereof before God. -- -- We do not then say, that Christ was polluted
or defiled with our Sins; but only reputed and taken for us, and in our Person
as a Sinner. Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 1125, 1126.

Fevardentius thus objecteth and reasons. If Christ were truly forsaken of
God, it would follow that the Hypostatical Union was dissolved, and that Christ
was personally separated from God, for otherwise he could not be forsaken.
Fevardentius, p. 473. Consut. 1. The Centurion, notwithstanding Christ so
complained and cried out, yet confesses thus of him, This truly was the Son of
God, he was a righteous May, Mat. 27. Far off was he from imagining Christ to
be forsaken of God. Fevardentius, p. 474. lin. 17. Christ was always most holy,
innocent, just, and therefore acceptable unto God, he was not then rejected or
forsaken. Fevard. p. 474. Confut. 3. out of Fulgentius, Divinitas Christi
animam in inferno non deseruit: Christ's Divinity did not leave his Soul in
Hell. Ergo, his Soul was not forsaken. Fevard. p. 474. lin. 32. If Christ had
verily been forsaken, then he so crying out should have despaired, which were
horrible Blasphemy to affirm. Bellarm. Arg. 6. Fevard. p. 485. Confut. 6. Ibid.
p. 1140.

They do affirm, that it may stand with the Justice of God to forgive the Sin
committed, and yet reserve the Punishment. Council. Triden. Sess. 14. can. 14.
Bellarmine says, that Death is the Punishment of original Sin, and yet although
that Sin be forgiven us, Death notwithstanding follows. Ergo, The Punishment
remains after the Sin remitted. -- Bellarmine answers, that God is said not
to remember Sin, to cover it, to blot it out, tho he does temporally punish for
it, because he does not remember it unto everlasting Punishment. -- Again, that
Christ has immediately satisfied for our Sin and eternal Death, but for
temporal Punishment mediately only, giving us Power by his Death to satisfy for
them. Lib. 4. de Penitent. cap. 15. Respons. ad Argum. 4. See Willet, p. 743,
744, 745.

Huberus objecteth thus: If it be so that Christ died not for all, but only for
some, then all Comfort and Consolation is taken away: as if a Man should thus
reason; Some Men are elected unto Salvation in Christ, I am a Man: Ergo, I
shall be saved. This were a weak Argument of Comfort, concluding only upon
Particulars. Ibid. 893.

If God do offer Christ outwardly to all, and yet all be not thereby called, he
should seem to mock and dissemble with Men. Puck. Ration. 57. Dr. Willet's
Synop. Pap. p. 886. To this I shall subjoin what my Countryman Mr. Daniel
Williams says: If the Covenant be not conditional, as to the disposing of these
Benefits, it would follow, that all to whom the Offers are made, have an
Interest in them, or it is not a serious Offer, no nor a true Offer, as not
containing a real and mutual Connection between the Benefit and the Duty.
Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 52, 53.

Bellarm. If Christ suffered the Punishment of the Damned, then he simply
despaired: for the Pains of the Damned do essentially include Desperation. --
Despair is not of the Essence of infernal Punishments: Poena est hominis
passio, desperatio est hominis actio; Punishment is the Passion or Suffering of
Man: Desperation or Despair is the Action or Work of Man. Ames. Bellarm. enerv.
Tom. 1. p. 91.

We suffered not Damnation (i. e. the Curse of the Law, and Wrath of God, tho
the word is subtly put in) at all in Christ. -- It is not denied that part of
Sin is born by the Elect themselves, and therefore that Pardon is not
absolutely perfect at first (till we in our Persons have undergone some part of
our Damnation, he must needs mean) Death and divine Denials of the Spirit and
Grace, are such Penalties. And Christ died not (nor obeyed) to save us from
that which we are not to be saved from, but was excepted from Pardon. Mr.
Baxter's Breviat of Justification, Part 1. p. 66.

Bellarmine on 2 Cor. 5. 19. says; But how can Men be reconciled, unless they
make their case known, and confess their Sins? Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 734.

They (the Papists) object such places of Scripture, where it is directly
affirmed, that Christ died for all Men: As that God will that all Men shall be
saved; Christ gave himself a Ransom for all Men, etc. That it is a vain
distinction of Sufficiency and Efficacy, for there can be no Sufficiency,
unless the same be effectual. Pucs. Ration. 2.

Their second general Argument is drawn from such places of Scripture, where
mention is made of the whole World, in the benefit of Redemption; John 1. 29.
chapter 6. 51. chapter 12. 47. 2 Cor. 5. 19. These places are alleged by Hemingius,
lib. de universal. great. Huber. lib. These. Pucksius Ration. 60, 91. to prove
the Universality of the Benefit of Christ's Death to all.

Bellarmine upon 2 Cor. 5. 21. says, 1. Christ is said to be made Sin for us,
not that our Sins are imputed to him, otherwise than for that he satisfied for
our Sins, and was an Offering for Sin: so the Justice of Christ is imputed to
us, in respect of his Satisfaction: by the which notwithstanding we cannot be
counted just. Or, 2. Thus we may understand the Apostle: As Christ is made Sin
for us, that is, being the Head, he counts the Sins of his Members as his
own, so we are the Righteousness of God in him: that is, the Divine Justice
which is in Christ our Head is communicated to his Members. Dr. Willet's Synop.
Papism. p. 998, 999.

Baxterian.
OBject. But Christ first put on our Person, and thence assumed our Sins or
Relations; and so is the same Subject of the same Relation.

Answ. This is afterward in its proper place to be confuted: Christ is not
made our Person either naturally or reputatively. And if it were otherwise, it
would follow, either that the whole World is that only Person, or that Christ
should be so many Persons, as ever there should be Sinners in the World for
whom he died; and it would follow, that Christ had formally and indeed his own
Sins, and was a Sinner, although from Acts committed by us: for when he himself is
become the Subject of Relation, he is now the Relation of it, and so the Sin of
it; and hence it would follow, that Christ himself was indeed hated of God, and
had the Image of the Devil, which is Blasphemy. Mr. Baxter's Method. Theol.
Part 3. p. 40.

There is a threefold honorary Relation that arises from the universal
Redemption of Christ. 1. That of Benefactor, whence he has a Right unto the
Faith, Gratitude, and Love of the whole World. 2. That of Lord or Proprietor,
whence he has a Right of disposing all, and all things to their ends as he
pleases. 3. That of Rector, whence a Right of governing and judging the humane
World. This threefold Right is new, from the Foundation of Redemption, besides
the old Right that sprang from Creation. They therefore that deny universal
Redemption, the Foundation being denied in like manner, they deny this
threefold relation of Christ as Redeemer of the World, to wit, that of
Benefactor, Lord, and Rector. But the State of the Church is to be bewailed,
when either out of Ignorance, or of the prevalency of the private opinion of
some, that this is not looked upon to be a Sin in some truly godly, or an
injury to Christ. -- All are under the Law of Grace, either of the former or
latter Edition: All are made Partakers of some medicinal Grace: and Cain
himself, if he would have done well, he heard the Promise of Acceptance from
God himself. Job was no less beloved of God than the Israelites: and Abraham
thought that in Sodom there were fifty faithful or righteous ones. And in every
Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted with God,
Acts 10. Ibid. p. 67.

The Sacrifice, Merit, Holiness and habitual or actual personal Righteousness
of Christ himself, are not given or offered to God for us; neither were they
the Bequest it self, but the procuring Causes of the Testament or Donation; and
in like manner the Causes of all Legacies or Bequests. Ibid. p. 81.

Q. Whether some Pardon of Sin is given as absolute, that is, without Condition?

Answ. 1. I affirm, viz. 1. Whilst God has promised and given Christ a
Redeemer of the World, and out of his Grace has removed the demerited
Punishment of eternal Death, not only by a deferring Sentence or Verdict, but
altogether remits under condition: whilst he gives many good things to
Infidels, a Right of which they had lost, and deals with none according to
their Demerits; whilst he grants a new Covenant, justifying all upon
condition of Faith, even to Infidels, and commands his Ministers to preach
that, and by them beseeches both Infidels and impenitent ones, that they would
be reconciled to God; whilst he gives some certain common Grace of the holy
Spirit to many, and special for the working of Faith, efficacious to the Elect
even undeserving, and deserving things contrary: All these things are some
executive Pardon of Sin, whilst some degree of Punishment is remitted: And all
these things are absolutely given to the Infidels. 2. But there is no such
Remission absolutely given to any one which infers a Right of eternal Life, or
by a Right of Impunity frees from infernal Punishment. Ibid. p. 342.

And likewise some Punishments are not remitted to any of the Faithful; among
others he mentions, Mors temporalis, the temporal Death of the Godly, as being
part of the Curse, and so overthrows the Proprietory of Christ's Sacrifice, and
the idem of his Sufferings. See p. 307. and the like he says in p. 28. and in
p. 49. runs to the Popish Evasion, that Christ could not suffer the idem, that
those for whom he died should suffer, for then he must lose the Spirit, be
tormented in Conscience, despair and be hated of God, which are not only the
Popish Cavils, but artificial blinds to stave off poor Sinners from looking
unto or after Christ under such a consideration as having born our Sins and the
Punishments due unto them. Sin in a proper Sense is imputed to Christ, not
ours, but his own, not by God but by Men, not good but bad Men, not truly but
falsely.

Object. 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he made him sin for us who knew not Sin, that we
should be made the Righteousness of God in him. Therefore God himself did
impute Sin unto Christ. Answ. The name Imputation afterward must be spoken of.
As to the thing I say, Christ is made of God Sin, two ways, both of which are
contained in the Sense of the Text. 1. Because he permitted the wicked by
Calumnies to esteem Christ a Sinner, and to crucify him as a Sinner, and to
inscribe upon the Cross the Accusation and Fault of Sin. 2. Because by that
permission he is made a Sacrifice for Sins, and that by a divine Decree, and
his own consent. Ibid. p. 41. and p. 19. he affirms that God is not only
appeased toward the whole World, as that their Sins are pardonable, but
pardoned. A Law of Grace or Grant of Pardon and eternal Life is made to the
corrupt Mass, i. e. Man a Sinner, upon condition, i. e. that eternal Punishment
is remitted, and eternal Life given under a condition. Ibid. Part 1. p. 61.

Mr. Gibbon speaking of the Antinomian, falsely so charged, Errors, at the
fashionable precarious rate of some this day, proceeds; Now (says he) to pluck
up these desperate Consequences (like a Thraso or mighty Gollah) by the root,
there needs no more (by the help of Bellarmine's weeding Tongs) than a right
understanding of the true and proper notion and manner of Christ's redeeming
us; it is not by way of Solution but of Satisfaction (as some squintey'd
Jacobites would render our lawful Sovereign King de facto, but not de jure)
clearly thus, our case to God is not properly that of Debtors, but that of
criminal Subjects. -- God's Aspect to us wards, is not properly that of a
Creditor, but that of a Rector and Judge: The Person Christ sustained, and the
Part he acted not in a strict Sense that of a Surety, paying the very Debt in
kind, and so discharging a Bond; but that of a Mediator expiating our Guilt,
and making Reparations to divine Justice another way than by the execution of
the Law: And indeed the very nature of a Law is such, as it is quite impossible
that the Obligation either of its Threatening or Command, should in a proper
Sense be fulfilled by any other than the Person threatened and commanded, alius
here makes aliud. If another suffer the Penalty, the Threatening is not
fulfilled: nor if another performs the Duty, the Command; for the Obligation as
to Punishment lies on the Person threatened (noxa caput sequitur) and that to
Duty on the Person commanded: it cannot be fulfilled in kind by another, but it
ceases to be the same thing, and becomes another thing from that in the
Obligation; yet it may (for fear of the worst put in, Sir) be such another
thing (and Christ's Righteousness both active and passive really is such) as
the Rector or Judge may accept of with Honor, and be satisfied with, as if the
very same thing had been suffered and done just in the same manner as the Law
threatened and commanded it. That Christ has paid not the idem, but tantundem,
i. e. not fulfilled the Law (as for us) in kind, but satisfied (i. e. bribed or
gagged it) for us, is most evident (ly false). For, 1. The Law obliged the
Sinner's Person to suffer: Christ was no Sinner. 2. All Men to suffer,
forasmuch as all had sinned; Christ was but one Man. 3. The Punishment due by
Law was eternal, Christ suffered but for a season, and is entered into his
Glory; thus Christ paid not the same thing that was in the Obligation, but
something equivalent thereunto. Morning-Exerc. Method. p. 395, 396.

To transact our very Sins on Christ as opposed to Guilt, is impossible; for it
would argue either a Mistake in the divine Mind, to account him the Committer
of our Sins, (prettily begged, and as knavishly designed) or a Propagation of
our corrupt Qualities to him, which is as impossible; and any other way to
transact Sin on him, besides imputing the Guilt, there is none (boldly said) it
is needless to the ends for which our Sins were laid on Christ. Sins were laid
on Christ that he might make Atonement by suffering for them, and so release us
who had transgressed. Now Christ by submitting to the Guilt (of an uncharged
Sin to be sure) as an Obligation to Punishment (i. e. for nothing laid to his
Charge, but the Guilt of nothing charged) according to the Terms of the
Covenant of Redemption (whose Efficacy depends upon Man's both pre and co-
Operation) was sufficient to this end, and all that was needful (lest we should
lay too much upon him either by contaminating or over-loading him). All that
endangered us was the Threatening of the Law; (but that is vacated as to its
matter for a justifying Righteousness, and it is to be feared as to its Rule
for a sanctifying one) that which was destructive to the Offender, was the
Punishment included in that Threat (so that we may sleep in a whole Skin).
Hence Christ by the Father's Appointment obliging himself to suffer, (nothing
for nothing charged) and actually suffering what he was (metaphorically)
obliged to; and this upon an Agreement (about neither Persons nor Things) that
for his Sufferings we should be released (whose Persons he neither represented,
nor Sins as a matter of Fact did bear) where is the need of more? (Since he
has freed us from that Punishment demanded by such a Law that could not exact
a Punishment from us). The Obliquity of the Fact as against the Precept shall
not hurt, (now the Punishment is removed, more to be feared than that Obliquity
that is in us) where the Sanction of the Law is answered (by an Obedience to
another Law than that whereunto the Sanction was annexed) and he that suffers
as Sponsor for another, need not sustain in himself the Filthiness of the
Crime, to make him capable of giving Satisfaction. (For this Filthiness we can
bear with very well, so that by Satisfaction we be saved from the Gallows,
apage nugas!) Mr. Daniel Williams's Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 8, 9.

Quaker.
AND this, that Christ died for all Men, without exception, and God in him
intends Salvation to all, as truly willing they should have it, rather than not
(if in their own obstinate Wills they withstand it not by refusing to turn when
he draws them) as he truly tenders it to them; and has of his own free Love
and Grace empowered them as well to receive it, if they will, as to reject it
if they will, and vouchsafed them all some measure, tho not the same measure of
the true Light, which is sufficient to guide all that follow on to know him in
it to that saving Knowledge of himself and Christ, which is Life eternal, is
from the whole scope of Scripture as certain (to him who is not blinded with
that Sorcerer that could not see the Sun) as it is that I. O. says (falsely) the
contrary is certain from innumerable Places in it. Mr. Sam. Fisher's Testimony
of Truth, p. 623. I grant that Christ's Obedience to Death was in order to make
Men righteous, because it was in the nature of a Sacrifice (Mark it Reader, a
Baxterian quodammodo Sacrifice) in which Sense the Just suffered for the
Unjust^; and whilst we were Sinners Christ died for us, and he justified the
Ungodly, that is, upon Repentance; still Repentance brought home the general
Pardon promulgated in and by that holy Offering (did thou ever read a more
exact Baxterian Phraseology?) Thus by the Obedience of one, even to the Death,
many ^me to be made righteous, that is, justified from many Offenses. William
Penn's Reason against Railing, p. 72, 73.

For tho there be many Works, as to the Creatures Obedience and Measures, yet
they all complete but this one Work of the Creatures Redemption, (which is
indeed no more than Sanctification) and God's Praise therein, the beginning and
end of all. James Naylor's Love to the Lost, p. 55, 56. But all who know the
Redemption of Christ by his precious Blood, are redeemed from the vain
Conversation received by Tradition, into the holy Conversation of him that has
called them, (not a word of a proper Ransom, Price or material Satisfaction) to
be holy as he is holy, and not vain as the World is vain: And this is the true
Redemption to all that know it, whereby this Seed has received Redemption for
us, who were Transgressors, even to purge the Conscience from dead Works to
serve the living God. And for this end he gave himself for us, to redeem us
from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good
Works; who has redeemed us to God by his Blood, out of Kindreds, Tongues and
Fashions, from amongst Men, to follow the Lamb and not the Lust. And all whose
Redemption leads not out of this World, will fail you when you look for
another, and this all that are redeemed know. Ibid. p. 86. -- Having finished
the Work of Redemption, given him of the Father to do, and for which he was
begotten, he ascended far above all Heavens to prepare a Place for all that
follow him by Faith in his Light: and that from thence all such as wait for
him, may see his Appearance as a Savior, and only such know him for their
Redeemer, who know him for their Judge and Lawgiver, who love him and keep his
Commands. Ibid. p. 97. We do not hereby intend any ways to lessen or derogate
from the Atonement and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ: But on the contrary, do
magnify and exalt it. For, as we believe all those things to have been
certainly transacted which are recorded in the holy Scriptures concerning the
Birth, Life, Miracles, Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ; so we
do also believe, that it is the Duty of every one to believe it to whom it
pleases God to reveal the same, and to bring to them the Knowledge of it: yea,
we believe it were damnable Unbelief not to believe when so declared, but to
resist the holy Seed, which indeed would lead and incline every one to believe
it, and it is offered unto them: tho it reveals not in every one the
outwardly and explicit Knowledge of it, nevertheless it always assenteth to it,
ubi declaratur, where it is declared: nevertheless as we firmly believe it was
necessary, that Christ should come, that by his Death and Sufferings he might
offer up himself a Sacrifice to God for our Sins, who his own self bore our
Sins in his own Body on the Tree; so we believe that the Remission of Sins,
which any partake of, is only in and by virtue of the most satisfactory
Sacrifice, and no otherwise: For it is by the Obedience of that one that the
free Gift is come upon all unto Justification; for we affirm, that as all Men
partake of the Fruit of Adam's Fall, in that, by reason of that evil Seed which
through him is communicated unto them, they are prone and inclined unto evil,
tho thousands of thousands be ignorant of Adam's Fall, neither ever knew of the
eating of the forbidden Fruit; so also many may come to feel the Influence of
this holy and divine Seed and Light, and be turned from Evil to Good by it, tho
they knew nothing of Christ's coming in the Flesh, through whose Obedience and
Sufferings it is purchased unto them. And as we affirm it is absolutely
needful, that those do believe the History of Christ's outward Appearance, whom
it pleased God to bring to the Knowledge of it, so we do freely confess that
even that outward Knowledge is very comfortable to such as are subject to, and
led by the inward Seed and Light; for not only does the Sense of Christ's Love
and Sufferings tend to humble them, but they are thereby also strengthened in
their Faith, and encouraged to follow that excellent Pattern which he has left
us, who suffered for us, as says Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Leaving us an
Example, that we should follow his steps: and many times we are greatly edified
and refreshed with the gracious Sayings, which proceed out of his Mouth. The
History then is profitable and comfortable, with the Mystery, and never without
it; but the Mystery is and may be profitable without the explicit and outward
Knowledge of the History. Mr. Barclay's Apology for the Quakers, p. 96, 97.
Forasmuch as all Men who have come to Man's Estate (the Man Jesus only
excepted) have sinned, therefore all have need of this Savior to remove the
Wrath of God from them, due to their Offenses: in this respect, he is truly
said to have born the Iniquity of us all in his Body on the Tree; and therefore
is the only Mediator, having qualified the Wrath of God toward us, so that our
former Sins stand not in our way, being by virtue of his most satisfactory
Sacrifice, removed and pardoned (but it seems our after-Sins, or Sins after
Calling, are removed both in their Charge and Guilt by Regeneration and
Sanctification) neither do we think that Remission of Sin is to be expected,
sought or obtained any other way, or by any Works or Sacrifice whatsoever (tho,
as has been said formerly, they may come to partake of this Remission, that are
ignorant of the History) so then Christ by his Death and Sufferings has
reconciled us to God (but whether God be thereby irreversibly reconciled unto
us is the Debate) even while we are Enemies; that is, he offers Reconciliation
unto us, we are put into a capacity of being reconciled, God is willing to
forgive us our Iniquity, and to accept us, as is well expressed by the Apostle,
2 Cor. 5. 19. therefore in the next Verses he entreats them in Christ's stead
to be reconciled to God, intimating, that the Wrath of God being removed by the
Obedience of Christ Jesus, he is willing to be reconciled unto them, and ready
to remit the Sins that are past, if they repent. Ibid. p. 141. The first is the
Redemption performed and accomplished by Christ for us, in his crucified Body,
without us (i. e. universally of all Mankind alike) the other is the Redemption
wrought by Christ in us, which no less properly is called and accounted a
Redemption than the former. The first then is that whereby Man, as he stands in
the Fall, is put into a Capacity of Salvation, and has conveyed unto him a
measure of that Power, Virtue, Spirit, Life and Grace, that was in Christ
Jesus: Which, as the free Gift of God, is able to counter-balance, overcome and
root out the evil Seed, wherewith we are naturally, as in the Fall, leavened.
Ibid. p. 142. It is highly injurious to Christ our Mediator, and to the
Efficacy and Excellency of his Gospel: for it renders his Mediation
ineffectual, as if he had not by his Sufferings thoroughly broken down the
Middle-wall, nor yet removed the Wrath of God, or purchased the Love of God
toward all Mankind, if it was before decreed, that it should be of no Service
to the far greater part of Mankind. It is to no purpose to alledg, that the
Death of Christ was of Efficacy enough to have saved all Mankind, if, in
effect, its Virtue be not so far extended, as to put all Mankind into a
Capacity of Salvation. Ibid. p. 77. That it is by this Light, Seed or Grace,
that God works the Salvation of all Men, and many come to partake of the
Benefit of Christ's Death and Salvation purchased by him. By the inward and
effectual Operation of which as many Heathens have come to be Partakers of the
Promises, who were not of the Seed of Abraham after the Flesh, so may some now,
to whom God has rendered the Knowledge of the History impossible, come to be
saved by Christ. Having already proved that Christ died for all, that there is
a day of Visitation given to all, during which Salvation is possible unto them.
-- Ibid. p. 120. Christ has tasted Death for every Man, not only for all kind
of Men, as some vainly talk, but for every Man of all kinds; the Benefit of
whose Offering is not only extended to such who have the distinct outward
Knowledge of his Death and Sufferings, as the same is declared in the
Scriptures, but even unto those who are necessarily excluded from the Benefit
of this Knowledge, by some inevitable Accident: which Knowledge we willingly
confess to be very profitable and comfortable; but not absolutely needful unto
such from whom God himself has withheld it; yet they may be Partakers of the
Mystery of his Death (tho ignorant of the History) if they suffer his Seed and
Light (inlightning their Hearts) to take place (in which Light Communion with
the Father and the Son is enjoyed) so as of wicked Men to become holy, etc.
Ibid. p. 73.

They infer from (...) Cor. 5. 18, 19. that Christ fully perfected the Work of
Reconciliation while he was on Earth. I answer, if by [Reconciliation] be
understood the removing of Wrath, and the purchase of that Grace by which we
may come to be reconciled, we agree to it: but that that place speaks no more,
appears from the place it self; for when the Apostle speaks in the perfect
time, saying, he has reconciled us, he speaks of himself and the Saints, who
having received the Grace of God purchased by Christ, were, through Faith in
him, actually recon^ed. But as to the World, he says [reconciling] not
[reconciled] which Reconciling, tho it denotate a time somewhat past, yet it is
by the imperfect time, denoting that the thing begun was not perfected. For
this Work Christ began toward all, in the days of his Flesh, yea and long
before: for he was the Mediator from the beginning, and the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World. But in his Flesh after he had perfectly fulfilled the
Law, and the Righteousness thereof, and rent the Vail, and made way for the
more clear and universal Revelation of the Gospel to all, both Jew and Gentile,
he gave up himself a most satisfactory Sacrifice for Sin, which becomes
effectual to as many as receive him in his inward Appearance, in his Light in
the Heart. Mr. Barclay's Apology for the Quakers, p. 148.

Must the most on the account of no Savior's dying for them, but for a very
few only, never see the Lord's Salvation, and yet be always called upon to look
to him for it, and told that Christ died for them, have the Salvation tendered
to them in the name of God, and be injoined to believe he died for them, for
whom (on their Principle of Christ dying not for all, but the Elect only, which
with these Men are but very few, one of a thousand in the World) it is a
thousand to one whether they be of that small number he died for, yea or no?
And yet for not believing that, viz. each Person that he died for him, when he
died but for some, all must be condemned, even because they believe not on him,
for that is the cause of all Judgment and Condemnation to the World that
perishes for Sin, John 3, and 16. Even because they believe not in me, (says
he) who enlightens all that come into it. Must the Glad-tidings of great Joy,
that a Savior is born, be proclaimed as Glad-tidings to all People, when he is
intentionally sent to save but some few, and all the rest must hear the sad
Tidings of a certain sorer Condemnation, than if he had never come into the
World at all, because they believe not in him still, that he died for them, for
whom yet he died not, if he died for none but such a few as these Men call the
Elect? What a strange uncouth Representation of God and Christ in their great
Goodness, multitudinous Mercy, inconceivable Kindness, large Love, rich Grace,
good Will, tender Bowels, incomparable Compassion to the whole World, is this
of these Men? What a most grievous kind of Glad-tidings of great Joy concerning
a Savior to all People is this, that he died to save one of a thousand, but a
thousand to one are remedilesly, and more inexcusably, irrecoverably,
unavoidably, incontroulably and intolerably destroyed, by occasion of his dying
for every Man, than if he had never died for any Man at all? Tell me, O ye
n^rrow-mouth'd old Bottles, that v^nt so much of the old Wine of your own
Wisdom, and scent so sparingly of the new; Suppose a thousand of you were
sentenced to die, were it a way to show the Mercy of the King to be matchlesly
more than his Severity? And would you count him gracious to you all, and deem
it Glad-tidings of great Joy, that is so truly to you all, to have a Pardon
tendered to you all on terms impossible by you to be performed, but intended
really but to one of you; so that the Benefit of it shall effectually extend to
but one, and that in such a way as shall occasion the more severe execution of
all the rest, when it is in the King's Power, if he minded to show the Riches of
his Mercy to be beyond his Severity, to save 999, and execute but one as an
Example? Were the other a common Salvation to them all? But I say the Salvation
of God is common to all and every Man, whatever these Men say, and even
intended as truly as it is tendered and proclaimed to all; or else God, who
cannot lie, would never so proclaim it, nor his Spirit style it a common
Salvation, as he does, Jude, ver. 2, 3. -- If Christ died not for the whole
World, and for all and every Man in it, but for a sew only: and God gave him
not a l ight to be his Salvation (as it is said, Isa. 49. 6.) to all the ends
of the Earth, All which also he calls to look to him, and be saved, Isa. 45.
22. To hear him that their Souls may live; to come to him, even whoever will,
that they may find Rest, and have of the Water of Life freely, Isa. 55. 1. Mat.
11. 28. Rev. 22. Then the World and most Men who generally are damned for this
very Sin, even because they believe not in, hear not, look not, come not to
Christ Jesus, John 3. 18. John 16. 8, 9. are damned for not looking to, coming
to, nor believing in their Savior, when yet they had no Savior of theirs to
look at, or come to, or believe in. But all Men have a Savior to believe in,
and look to, and come to, which for not hearing, looking, nor coming to, nor
believing in, they are damned (yea, this is the World's Condemnation, that
Light is come into it, yet the World comes not to the Light) otherwise as it is
sottish Absurdity and lamentable Mockage, to call all to look and come to, and
believe in him; so such inconceivable Cruelty, as (absit Blasphemia, far be it
from us to think there is in God) to damn them, upon the account of not coming,
or non-believing in him. Therefore he is given a Light, a Ransom, a Savior for
All and every Man. Mr. S. Fisher's Tes^imony of Truth exalted, p. 630, 653.

Head 5. That a proper representative Headship, etc.
Papist.
IF the Justice of Christ be truly imputed unto us, so that thereby we are
verily and truly counted just, as if it were our own proper Righteousness, we
should then be accounted no less just and righteous than Christ himself, and so
consequently be counted Redeemers and Saviors of the World as well as he.
Bellarm. cap. 7. Arg. 5. See Dr. Willet's Synop. Papism. p. 995.

Sundry Men, especially Papists, deride the Doctrine of Justification by
imputed Righteousness: thinking it as absurd, that a Man should be just by that
Righteousness which is inherent in the Person of Christ; as if we should say,
that one Man may live by the Soul of another, or be learned by the Learning of
another. See the account Mr. Perkins in his Golden Chain gives of the Popish
Doctrine, p. 485.

Ezekiel. 18. 20. From this place Bellarmine infers, iniquum esse, etc. That it
is unjust that one Man should be punished for another, Tom. 3. p. 152. Ergo, It
was not just that Christ, tho our Surety, should be put to Death for us, (i. e.
as our Representative) Christ died for us of Love, and most willingly without
Constraint, he laid down his Life for us: No Man takes it away from me, John
10. Fevard. p. 477. l. 6. That which then Christ did of Love, he was not forced
unto by Law (Therefore no proper Representative) Christ must not be considered
only as a faithful Servant, but as coequal unto God, etc. Such an one was our
Mediator. Fevard. p. 376. Cons. 3. lin. 13, 24. If Christ then as a Servant or
Surety were bound by the Law to die, how could he be our Mediator? Christ's
Satisfaction was plusquam sufficiens, more than sufficient. Fevard. p. 382.
Conf. 3. lin. 7. Therefore he was not bound unto it by Law. (All denying a
proper representative Headship) See Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 1130. and much
to the same in p. 1145. as if Christ stood accursed for us (i. e. as our
Representative) in his Soul before God, then there would follow a Dissolution
of his Person from the Unity of the Godhead. (But the Friar forgot that his
humane Nature was never a Person) But Christ always without any Robbery or
Injury to God, took himself to be equal to him. -- Christ was always beloved of
God, and in his favor: Ergo, not accursed. If he were accursed, then also he
despaired, and was damned (which must all be implied if Christ were a proper
representative Head, according to the Friar's Serse) ^evard. p. 471. (...). 6.
p. 470. Consut. 4. p. 446. Consut. 5. l. 5, 11. To this take the Answer from
Dr. Willet. 1. That there is no more fear of the Dissolution of Christ's
Person, for the spiritual Curse lying upon his Soul, than for the external,
showed in the Death of his Body. 2. Neither is the eternal Love of God hereby
discontinued or interrupted: for as (...) showed, this Dereliction or Curse was
not total but partial, temporal not eternal: and Christ for his own Innocence
and Holiness was always beloved of God, but stood accursed for our Sins. 3.
Neither upon the admitting of this Curse shall either Damnation or Desperation
follow in the Soul of Christ; tho it were spiritual, yet was it not eternal:
tho there were a Dereliction, yet no Desperation; tho Desolation for a time,
yet no Damnation: it was painful, yet not sinful: Christ's Soul was perplexed,
yet his Faith not perverted: he was not only upon the Cross, but under God's
Curse for us: Damnation and Desperation are the inseparable Companions of
eternal and total Malediction. -- The Execration of his Soul does no more
enforce Damnation and Desperation, than the Malediction of his Body, which is
granted: Jeremy felt himself under God's Wrath and Curse, when he said, Woe is
me, chapter 15. 10. Thou have filled me with Indignation, v. 17. My Plague is
desperate, why art thou to me as a Liar? ver. 18. Cursed be the day wherein I
was born, chapter 20. 14. Yet Jeremy was neither damned nor despaired. We doubt not
to ascribe all our Temptations to Christ, but without Sin; therefore he must be
freed from Damnation and Desperation. Synop. Pap. p. 1145.

Christ may be said to be a Curse, that is, Maledictionis remissio, because he
remitted or released the Curse. Fevard. p. 377. Confut. 2. lin. 18. He was
accursed only in respect of his ignominious Death, as Psalm. 22. 6. I am a shame
of Men, and the Contempt of the People. Fevard. p. 470. Confut. 3. lin. 11. See
Dr. Willet's Refutation of this, Contra. 1. The first Answer the Apostle
removes, when he says, Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
when he was made a Curse for us: to be made a Curse, and to redeem us from the
Curse, are not all one; but the remitting of the Curse, is all one with the
redeeming from the Curse. Ergo, The remitting of the Curse is not to be made a
Curse. 2. Again, the Apostle proves Christ to be cursed, because he hanged on
a Tree, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree, that is,
he is indeed accursed, not the Curse only remitted. 3. The receiving of the
Curse is one thing, the remitting another. -- That this Curse wherewith Christ
was accursed for us, cannot be reserred to the external Death upon the Cross,
it appears; as Jerome says, non quienque, not every one that hangs upon a
Tree is cursed before God, but he that hangs there for his Sins. Like as if
Haman had prevailed against Mordecai, and hanged him upon the Gallows which he
had made for him, Mordecai in his Innocence notwithstanding that ignominious
Death should not have stood accursed: wherefore it was not the Death of the
Cross, but our Sins hanging upon the Cross, that derived this Curse upon
Christ. This also is evident out of Moses, that not the kind of Death, but the
desert of Death made it ignominious, Deuteronomy. 21. 22. If a Man have committed a
Trespass worthy of Death, and be put to death, and thou hang him on a Tree,
etc. we see then that our Sins hanging with Christ upon the Cross, made the
same an accursed Death. -- Christ was made that Curse which he redeemed us
from. -- He remitteth that Curse unto us, which he received in himself. Dr.
Willet's Syn. Pap. p. 1145, 1146.

Baxterian.
THere is not a change of Person betwixt Christ and the Elect: for Christ was
the Savior, and never ceased to be so: we are the saved, and not the Saviors;
Christ was still the Redeemer, and never the Redeemed; we are the Redeemed, and
never the Redeemers. Christ was he, who by his own Merits forgives us, but
never was forgiven; we are forgiven, and never had Merits of our own to forgive
our selves or others; Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. It Is profane Arrogance for us to
pretend to his Prerogatives; and it is Blasphemy to debase him among their
Number, who were Enemies without Strength, and Sinners, for whom he was the
dying Sacrifice, Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. It Is enough, that he reserving the Peculiars
of a Redeemer, should agree to suffer for our Sins: It Is enough that we are
pardoned and adopted for his sake, when we deserved endless Woe, and are never
capable of making the least Atonement. Mr. D. Williams's Gospel Truth stated,
etc. p. 34, 35. Christ is denominated righteous on the account of what he
personally did, and suffered; he derived not Righteousness from another (what a
blundering diverting Circumference this is) but possessed it as originally his
own, he is eminently the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1. whereas we are reputed
righteous for the sake of what Christ did, and not for the Merit of what we
have done. Is it not unagreeable to hear a redeemed Sinner say, I am as worthy
as he that paid the Ransom? or a pardoned Worm say, I am as righteous as he who
merited my Pardon? Christ was so righteous as to merit the Forgiveness of all
his Seed: he is so righteous as to make many righteous or safe from the Threat,
and entitled to the Reward according to the Gospel-Rule. But we cannot justify
one other Person by our being righteous: We are not righteous enough to save a
Brother. Ibid. p. 38.

But no Union will make us righteous and personally happy by another's
Righteousness and Happiness, unless it were a personal Union (natural or legal
at least as to relative Rights.) The Question then is, whether every Believer
be one Person with Christ? And if so, whether one natural Person or one legal
(as a lawful Vicarius is). They that hold the first, plead that the same Spirit
that is in Christ, is the same divine Nature, and makes us one natural Person.
But where does the Scripture say so? The Sun is not one Individual with every
Plant that it quickneth, nor every Plant with it. A Nettle or Rose is not the
Sun, nor is it the Illuminator of the World that makes day, etc. But they have
so much from the Sun as it communicates, and no more. So we are not Christ,
nor the eternal and natural Son of God. -- And as to that which some call a
legal reputative personal Union, it must be proved before it be afferted. And
as I know no word of God that speaks such a thing, as that Christ and we are
imputatively one Person, so I know that they that will assert of their own
heads, presume far in a tender Point. Mr. Baxter's Brev. of Justis. Par. 1. p.
27, 28. There is a Guilt of Fact, and a Guilt of Crime, and a Guilt of
Punishment; Christ undertook the last, but neither of the former, as in
themselves considered, unless as by Connotation relatively he may be said to be
guilty of the Sin, merely because he undertook to suffer for it, which is
improper Speech. -- It Is a sad case that Partiality can so much prevail, as
that they that cry out of some doubtful words as damnable Heresies, do yet
think it tolerable Language to say, that by imputation of the very Sin it self
to Christ as his Sin, (this is the constant precarious and foisting Treachery
of this Author; for if it were his Sin indeed, it could not properly be said to
be imputed.) He was the greatest Sinner -- I beseech you abstain from such
Words till you find them in Scripture. Christ never was reputed of God a
Sinner, who did so much to show his Hatred of it: Nor ever took our Sin unto
him, any further than to suffer for it to expiate it: And if this be the
Similitude by which we must understand how his Holiness and Righteousness is
made ours, it will make all very plain. It is ours, or imputed to us, so far as
to be reputed the true Cause of our Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
and Glory, as our Sin was the Cause of his Suffering and Death. Ibid. p. 31, 32.

If Christ and the Elect be one and the same Person, then Christ sins
whenever they sin: and Christ suffered for his own Sin, even that which he by
them committed: and then he pardons his own Sin (or who pardons him). But
all this is false. And it would follow, that a^ the Elect are Mediators to
themselves, and died for their own Sins, and pardon their own Sins, and justify
themselves, and believe in themselves, and save themselves. Ibid. Part 2.
Postscript to the Reader, Head 3, 4.

Christ neither was a Sinner, nor reputed a Sinner by God: And his being made
Sin for us, signifies, 1. That he was made a Sacrifice for Sin, and was taken
and used by God as one that undertook to suffer for our Sins, in our stead, tho
not in our Person. 2. And that he was really accounted a Sinner by those that
crucified him, and used as such. If any will use the word [Person] in a
private, narrow and improper Sense, and say, that [he who undertook in the
Person of a Mediator to obey and merit for our Justification, and to suffer in
our stead to save us from deferved Suffering, may therefore be called, the
Person of every one that he merited and suffered for: tho I will not so presume
to thrust Phrases on the Church which Scripture never used, when their obvious
Sense is pernicious, yet if that Man will by Explication of the word Person (or
Representative) notify to the World that he takes it in a sound Sense, I will
not quarrel about an unfit Word, while Religion is safe, (i. e. if we like
Children will have a Horse, we shall have one; provided we be contented to
mount and ride a Stick, it shall bear the name of a Horse) Mr. Baxter's end of
Doct. Controv. chapter 12.. 2. Head 8, 12. The Atonement made by Christ by the
Appointment of God, is that for which alone the Elect are pardoned, when it is
applied to them. But the Elect are not immediately pardoned upon Christ's being
appointed to suffer for them, nor as soon as the Atonement was made; nor is
that Act of laying Sins on Christ, God's Forgiving-Act, by which we are
personally discharged. Mr. Dan. Williams's Gospel Truth ^ated, etc. p. 12.

Quaker.
ELse how easily might they see that God, Christ and Spirit, mean as they say,
and do not mean by [all] [but a few] nor by [in] [out] nor here by [in us] [in
another] or [not in us] and if this may pass for a current Answer, to say, God
by [yea] means not [yea] but [nay] which he that has his Fingers in the Fire,
and will not pull them out at the hearing of, it is almost pity but he should be
burnt. This is an easier way to put off Truth by, than the common Creephole of
all the Clergy, when they are crowded up into a Corner, viz. in aliquo sensu it
a est, in alio sensu non; in one Sense it is so, in another not: which may serve
not T. D. only, who has more Senses to one Scripture than every one has, or
he should have, tho not enough to serve his turn, but also the veriest duncical
Disputant in the World; yea at this rate, when Paul tells us, that if Christ be
not in us, we are Reprobates, and it is Christ in us only who is the hope of
Glory, if I were minded not to admit of such a troublesome Guest (absit
Blasphemia) in my Heart, as Christ is to all such Sinner-like Saints as T. D's
Saints are, I could easily turn him out into the Stable, as they did of old
that could afford him no room at all in the Inn, and excuse my self in it well
enough too, by telling him in T. D's distinction, that by [in us] Paul means
not (in us) but [in Christ] and so tell Christ he is (in us) enough to our
Justification, if he be but in himself. (Here is a parcel of fordid Blasphemy.)

And as this last sense or senseless meaning of T. D. who says by (in us) is
meant (not in us) but (in another) as also that the Righteousness that is in
another, i. e. Christ, is in a Sense too (as good as Nonsense) i. e. by
Imputation, ours and (in us) (for that which is fulfilled not in our Persons,
but in Christ, is according to T. D. in that Scripture, Romans 8. said to be
fulfilled (in us) as if it had been inherent in our selves.) I say, as that
distinction of T. D. concerning in us, not meant (in our Persons) but (in
Christ) and by (in Christ) when fulfilling the Righteousness of the Law is
spoken of, Ministers Latitude, and Liberty enough to our Ministers, whereby to
fence off and save themselves from Truth; so it lends Liberty and License more
than enough to their Priest-like People, to save themselves in their Sin: for
what will many care what they do themselves, if the Law be not to be fulfilled
in themselves by Christ? but it is enough in themselves fufilled to their
Justification, if in Christ for them, and as well as if it were inherent in
them: so tho the Priests often preach thus, viz. he that made us without our
selves will not save us without our selves; yet since they, to the
contradiction of themselves, as often unpreach it again, saying, he that made us
without our selves will save us without our selves, by another's fulfilling the
Law, not in us, but in himself for us, their People will quickly cry, hang
Sorrow and Care, and of their two self-confuting Doctrines cleave to that
that is next to them, and easiest and most fitting their turns, and fall a
preaching presently in their Works, the pleasing things their Priests, who
docero facienda faciendo, do preach both in Words and Deeds, he that made us
will save us, and show us Mercy without any Goodness of our own. Mr. Sam.
Fisher's Testimony of Truth, p. 183, 184.

Tho Christ bare our Sins, and suffered for us, and was among Men accounted a
Sinner, and numbered among Transgressors, yet that God reputed him a Sinner, is
no where proved: for it is said, he was found before him holy, harmless, and
undefiled, neither was there sound any Guile in his Mouth, That we deserved
these things, and much more for our Sins, (not a Farthing more, Friend! than
what he underwent) which he endured in obedience to the Father, and according
to his Counsel, is true, but that ever God reputed him a Sinner is denied:
neither did he ever die, that we should be reputed righteous, tho no more
really such, than he was a Sinner. For indeed, if this Argument hold, it might
be str^hed that length, as to become very pleasing to wicked Men, that love to
abide in their Sins: for, if we be made righteous as Christ was made a Sinner,
merely by Imputation, then, as there was no Sin, not in the least, in Christ,
so it would follow, that there needed no more Righteousness, no more Holiness,
no more inward Sanctification in us, than there was Sin in him. So then, by his
[being made Sin for us] must be understood his suffering for our Sins, (not as
standing in our slead by any means, unless in an improper, representative
Sense, as the Baxterian, which is the Socinian Judgment of the Impropriety of
the Sacrifice of Christ) that we might be made Partakers of the Grace purchased
by him, by the working whereof we are made the Righteousness of God in him. For
that the Apostle understood here a being made really righteous, and merely a
being reputed such, appears by what follows, seeing in the 14th, 15th, and 16th
Verses of the following Chapter, he argues largely against any supposed
agreement of Light and Darkness, Righteousness and Unrighteousness; which must
needs be admitted, if Men be to be reckoned ingrafted in Christ, and real
Members of him, merely by an imputative Righteousness, wholly without them,
while they themselves are actually unrighteous. Mr. Barclay's Apology, p. 149.

Let it be well weighed, how the Apostle when he says God made him Sin for us,
uses the word (...), which is of a far more shallow and slender Signification
than that he uses, when he says that we may be made the Right eousness of God
in him (viz.) (...), which is a word of deeper die; for howbeit they both are
rendered by this term (made) in the English Text, yet do sound forth two
different sorts of makings, whereof the one is not so real and substantial as
the other: for the words (...) and (...), tho they do signify a true making
sometimes, and may truly be translated facio, efficio, and (passrve) efficior,
yet are at most but a making of a more (as I may so say) sligh^y, external and
accidental kind than the other, and sometimes such alone as amounts to no more
than a mere accounting or reckoning a matter to be so or so as it is thereby
said to be made; whereupon they are sometimes rendered not only in many other
secondary senses, as by afficio ((...), afficio te malis) also by causo, pono,
propono, reddo, colloco, sometimes simul, and when one is said to be made a
Child and Heir that is not so born, by adopto; but used also sometimes to
express existimo, and to signify the making of a thing no otherwise than by
mere Estimation and Computation; and so God is said here to make Christ Sin for
us, who knew and did no Sin in himself: but the word (...) signifies such a
solid sort of making as gives the thing not a mere notional and accountative,
but a real, and no less than a true natural being so or so, as it is thereby
denominated to be made; for (if more can be) it is more than fio, factus sum, I
am made, even no less than nasoor, gignor, natus, genitus sum, I am so or so
born, so by Birth, so by Nature, not by some mere external Fabrication, or
Faction, as a dead painted Picture, that has the Show, Shadow and Name, and
not the Life and Being of what it represents; much less by mere Fiction,
Imagination, or bare empty Computation only, but by a real infusion,
impartition, and conveyance of the Nature of the Efficient it self into the
Effect; so that it is according to the measure thereof as truly inherent and
resident in the one as in the other, as the nature of the Vine in the Branches.
Mr. Samuel Fisher' s Testimony of Truth, p. 181. We thank our Author for this
Criticism, such as it is, however it may pass for a Papargun Argument; and tho
I must confess it is (I mean the change of the words in the original, when
speaking of the same thing) that which I never observed before, yet all this is
so far from weakening our Cause, which is the Truth, that indeed it is the more
confirmed by it, even that which more fully in the Letter thereof stops the
Mouths of our Cavillers than any one place I know of in Scripture; for there is
infinite Wisdom in altering the Terms from (...) speaking of Christ, to (...)
speaking of the Sinner, (tho infernal Policy would pervert the intent thereof)
since that if Christ had been said to be made Sin, or a Sinner, by the word
(...) in its full extensive latitude and dilated use, then he must not only be
so by Imputation, but also by Inhesion; and if the Sinner must be made
righteous by an (...) only, without any consequential Effect thereupon, then
the Doctrine of Justification which is by Imputation, must have been a Doctrine
of Licentiousness: besides, (...) is an improper word to be applied in this
case to the Sinner in the full sense of the word, and the meaning of the holy
Spirit thereby, as (...) is to Christ; for (...) not only signifies a being
made this or that, as (...) also does, but a being so made (as our Author
acknowledges, as by Collocation to stand in the person, room, place or stead
of another, which cannot be said of the Sinner, that he was so made the
Righteousness of God as that he stood in the room or place of Christ: but as by
this diversity of words, principally here holding forth a material
transimputation of Sin and Righteousness as an external forensick Act, the
grand Doctrine of Justification is not only clearly but impregnably manifested
(for (...) and (...) do equally signify fio, sum, existo, or a being
constituted, or being reckoned upon as this or that, and that singly or a part,
without any infusion of Qualities or Dispositions) from whatever other
deductive Inferences, or customary Uses may be annexed unto them; so also by a
peculiar appropriating of differing Terms, all manner of evil Consequences in
the least supposition of the same is removed, for Christ is so made Sin, and so
stood in the Sinners stead, as not to be inherently infected with the same, and
the Sinner so made righteous and justified, as that he neither stood in the
room or stead of Christ, nor is yet left to stand under the Dominion of Sin but
of Grace.

Head 6. That personal Justification, etc.
Papist.
HActenus nullum, etc. Hitherto they (i. e. the Protestants) can find no place
altogether, where it may be read that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed
unto us for Righteousness, or, that we are just by the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us. Bellar. de Justif. lib. 2. cap. 7. See Dr. Willet, We are born
in hand, that there can be no place found in the Scriptures or Fathers which
affirm Christ's Righteousness, imputari nobis ad justitiam, to be imputed unto
us for Righteousness: So Bellarm. lib. 2. de Justificat. cap. 7. Sect. 1. The
same Objection is made by others, which deny the Imputation of Christ's active
Righteousness and Obedience.

Mr. Burton in his Christian Bulwark gives us an account of the various
Distinctions that Vega, a great Leader in the Council of Trent, had laid down,
as justitia Christiana and Mosaica: Politica and Oeconomica; legalis, moralis,
particularis; actualis, habitualis; acquisita and infusa; inhaerens and
imputata; externa and interna; fidei and operum; practica and theologica;
Pharisaica, sincera; Philosophica, supernaturalis; and so in infinitum: i. e.
There is a Christian Righteousness and a Mosaical, a Political and Oeconomical;
Legal, Moral, particular; actual, habitual; acquisite, and infused; inherent
and imputed, external and internal, a Righteousness of Faith and of Works,
practical and theological, pharisaical and sincere, philosophical,
supernatural, and so without end, p. 48. Again, Hanc dispositionem sen
praeparationem, etc. After this Disposition or Preparation does follow
Justification it self, which is not only the remission of Sins, but also
Sanctification and Renovation of the inner Man, by a voluntary receiving of
Grace and of Gifts; whence a Man of unjust is made just, and of an Enemy a
Friend, that he may be an Heir according to the hope of eternal Life. -- If any
Man shall say, that Men are justified either by the only imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, or by the only remission of Sins, excluding Grace and Charity,
which is shed abroad in their Hearts by the Holy Ghost, and is inherent in
them, or else that the Grace whereby we are justified, is only the Favor of
God, let him be Anathema. Ibid. p. 43, 44. Again, Soto makes a threefold
Justification; The prime and proper Notion of this word Justification (says
he) is an acquisition of Righteousness, namely, of unjust to be made just. As
^alefaction or heating, of cold to be made hot, according to the Text of the
Council, which says, Thus the unjust Man is made just, so they take
justificare; to be as much as justum facere to make just. The second Notion,
and next to this is, that it signifies an augmentation of Righteousness. --
The third place, the Name of Justification signifies the absolving of a guilty
Person in Judgment, and pronouncing of him to be quit: This Signification,
says Soto, is no where in Paul, nor in the Scripture where any mention is made
of our Justification by Christ. Ibid. p. 45, 46.

Vega also, another Champion in this Council, he speaks the same Language of
Babylon, and says, there is a twofold Justification; the first, when a Man of
unjust is made just: The second, when of just a Man becomes more just. -- The
words of the Council. -- The only formal Cause of Justification is the
Righteousousness of God, not that whereby himself is just, but that whereby he
makes us just; namely, wherewith he having endowed us, we are renewed in the
spirit of our Mind, and are not only reputed, but nominated, and are really
just, receiving Righteousness in our selves each acording to his measure, which
the Holy Ghost divides to every one, even as he will, and according to every
Man's Disposition and Cooperation: For although no Man can be just, but he to
whom the Merits of the Passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ are
communicated; yet that is wrought in this Justification of a Sinner, while by
the Merit of the same holy Passion, the Love of God is by the Holy Ghost shed
abroad in the Hearts of those who are justified, and is inherent in them, etc.
Ibid. p. 50. Again, says Vega, it is superfluous and abhorring from all
Philosophy to put any other Righteousness for a formal cause of Righteousness,
as the imputative Righteousness of Christ. -- But yet the same Author
afterward seems to shake Imputation by the hand, and to be good friends with
it, where he says, Non est adeo invisum, etc. This word Imputation is not so
odious unto us, as that I think we may never use it well to this purpose; for
we may truly, and soothly, and in plain terms say, that unto Satisfaction and
Merit the Righteousness of Christ in his Passion is imputed to Mankind, and is
continually imputed to all Men that are justified, and do satisfy for their
Sins, and by their good Works do merit eternal Life. -- Christ's Righteousness
does not really pass from him into those that are justified, nor by it are we
formally justified: But Imputation is of God, which joins the Merits of Christ
unto us, and makes them ours after a sort, in as much as for his Merits sake he
gives us Righteousness, whereby we are righteous. Ibid. p. 52.

As it is explained by the Papists, it is exceedingly derogatory to the Merit
of Christ; for it leaves it no Effect toward us, but only the infusion of an
habit of Charity. When that is done, all that remains with respect unto our
Salvation is to be wrought by our selves: Christ has only merited the first
Grace for us, that we therewith and thereby may merit Life eternal. The Merit
of Christ being confined in its Effect unto the first Justification, it has no
immediate influence into any Grace, Privilege, Mercy, or Glory that follow
thereon; but they are all Effects of that second Justification, which is purely
by Works. -- And those who allow of a secondary, if not of a second
Justification by our own inherent personal Righteousness, are also guilty
hereof, tho not in the same degree with them: for whereas they ascribe unto it
our acquitment from all charges of Sin after the first Justification, and
Righteousness accepted in Judgment, in the Judgment of God, as if it were
complete and perfect, whereon depends our final Absolution and Reward, it is
evident that the immediate efficacy of the Satisfaction and Merit of Christ
has its bounds assigned unto it in the first Justification. Dr. Owen of
Justif. p. 193, 194.

Others, as the Socinians, utterly disclaim all merit in our Works; only some,
out of Reverence I suppose unto the Antiquity of the word, and under the
shelter of the ambiguity of its Signification, have faintly attempted an
Accommodation with it: But in the substance of what they assent unto to this
purpose, to the best of my understanding they are all agreed: for what the
Papists call justitia operum, the Righteousness of Works, they call a personal,
inherent and evangelical Righteousness, whereof we have spoken before. And
whereas the Papists say, that this Righteousness of Works is not absolutely
perfect, nor in it self able to justify us in the sight of God, but owes all
its worth and dignity unto this purpose to the Merit of Christ; they affirm
that this Evangelical Righteousness is the Condition whereon we enjoy the
benefits of the Righteousness of Christ in the pardon of our Sins, and the
acceptance of our Persons before God. But as unto those who will acknowledge no
other Righteousness wherewith we are justified before God; the meaning is the
same, whether we say that on the condition of this Righteousness we are made
partakers of the Benefits of the Righteousness of Christ, or that it is the
Righteousness of Christ which makes this Righteousness of ours accepted with
God. Ibid. p. 292, 293. Christ is said to be our Righteousness because he has
satisfied God for us; and this Satisfaction is imparted to us when we are
justified in such sort, that it may be called our Satisfaction, and our
Righteousness: for although we are truly just by our inherent Justice, yet thereby
we cannot satisfy God for our Sins, and the Punishment thereof; but it is an
Effect of Christ's Satisfaction, which is conferred and applied to us in our
Justification: And so we may safely say, that Christ's Righteousness, and his
Merits are imputed to us, when they are so applied unto us, as if we our selves
had satisfied; so that we confess also an inherent Justice whereby we are truly
just. Bellarm. cap. 10. Respons. ad Argum. 1.

It Is very absurd, as the Jesuit here sets it down, that we should be
justified by our inherent Justice, and yet thereby are not able to satisfy for
our Sins: that only has power to justify us, that is able to redeem us, and
satisfy for us, Romans 3. 24. Our inherent Justice is not able to satisfy for us
by the Jesuit's confession: Ergo, Not to justify us. We may thus reason also
out of the Jesuit's words: That cannot be a cause of our Justification which is
an Effect thereof; but our inherent Justice is an Effect of the Satisfaction
applied unto us, which is nothing else but our justification: Ergo. That
Righteousness, whereby being applied unto us we are just, as if in our own
Person we had satisfied for our Sins, is that Righteousness whereby we are
justified: But this does the Righteousness and Merits of Christ applied and
imputed to us, as the Jesuit here acknowledges: Ergo. Bellarmine speaks
Contradictories, and joineth together Impossibilities; he says that the
Justice of God is imputed to us in as effectual manner, as if we had satisfied
our selves, and yet he says besides, justitiam inhaerentem, etc. That Justice
inherent is a true and absolute Justice. How can this be an absolute Justice,
and that together which is imputed? There cannot be a double absolute Justice;
for that is absolute which is perfect and entire of it self; but Christ's
Justice imputed is an absolute Justice, which has satisfied for us as fully,
as if we our selves had done, but the inherent Justice does not satisfy for us;
all this is by the Jesuit confessed: Ergo, it is not an absolute Justice. Does
not the Jesuit now in joining the Justice of Christ and our Justice together,
make two formal Causes of our Justification? which notwithstanding he instantly
denied before, affirming this to be the Judgment of the Tridentine Chapter,
that we are not justified not only, but not at all by the Justice of Christ,
cap. 2. but here he says, that by Christ's Justice applied, we do satisfy the
Wrath of God; What now is this else but by the Justice of Christ truly to be
justified? Dr. Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 998.

Christ was made Sin for us, that is, he took upon him the similitude of sinful
Flesh, and we are Righteousness, that is, do take the similitude of the Justice
of God. As Christ then verily, not imputatively, took our Flesh, and was a
Sacrifice for Sin; so we verily, not imputatively, are partakers of this
Justice. First, By preaching of remission of Sins, is not only understood the
Condonation of the Fault, but the succeeding also of inward Justice, whereof
Christ is the efficient Cause, but yet Christ's Justice is not the formal Cause
thereof. Secondly, The Publican prays not only for Forgiveness, but for
perfect Reconciliation, which requires also an infusion of Justice. Bellarm.
See Dr. Willet, ibid. p. 999, 1000.

The Papists Opinion is, that Repentance goes before Justification by Faith,
and that it is a way rather unto Faith and Justification in the remission of
Sins; poenitentia est via ad remissionem peccatorum; at prior justificatione.
Bellarm. cap. 10.

To this answers Dr. Willet. -- Remission of Sins is not obtained before God by
the Act of our Repentance; but we are already, being once called, justified
before God by the remission of our Sins, and Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, Romans 8. 30. -- We must distinguish between the beginning of Faith and
Justification before God, and the perfection and assurance thereof to our
selves: Faith is first, whereby we are justified, and our Sins remitted before
God; then follows Repentance, whereby our Hearts are assured to our selves of
this Remission. -- Therefore when remission of Sins is placed after Repentance,
it shows the assurance thereof made unto our Hearts after Repentance, not the
first Decree or Grant thereof with God, which goes before Repentance. --
Justification goes before Sanctification; for this is the fruit of the other:
but Repentance is part of our Sanctification, Renovation, or Regeneration,
being called by St. Paul, A walking in newness of Life, Romans 6. 4. Ergo, it
follows and comes after our Justification. Dr. Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 721,
722.

The Papists affirm, that Contrition is a necessary mean unto Justification,
and that a Man cannot be justified, till he have been truly contrite for his
Sins. Bellarm. lib. 2. de poenitentia, cap. 8. which he pleads from Luke 13. 3.
It follows not without Repentance and true Contrition there is no
Justification: Ergo, Repentance is a mean unto Justification; for Faith cannot
be without Works, yet Works are no mean unto Faith: So Repentance and
Contrition are the fruits of Justification, not a mean thereunto. -- Bellarmine
answers, First, That we are justified freely, tho it be by the merit of
Contrition, because Contrition is the Gift of God. 2. Contrition meriteth not
ex condigno, of Condignity or Worthiness, but ex congruo, of Congruity; which
kind of Merit is founded not in God's Justice, but in his Benignity and Bounty.
Bellarm. cap. 12. Contra. This is the very Answer, 1. Of the old Pelagians, who
did in like manner affirm, that the good Will of Man was of God, because it
could not be in a Man, unless Man were; but for a Man to be is of God: for if
therefore remission of Sins be of Grace, and the Gift of God, because
Contrition whereby it is merited, is the Gift of God, then say also that we may
be saved by Nature, and yet by the Gift of God, because the Nature of Man is
the Work and Gift of God. 2. But the Apostle confuteth this Gloss, in saying
further, We are justified freely, etc. through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ: If through Redemption, then not through Contrition. 3. And again, Men
first must be reconciled unto God, and of Enemies be made Friends, before he
give them Gifts; as the Apostle says, Christ first led Captivity Captive, that
is, subdueth and removes Sin that led us Captive, and then gave Gifts unto
Men, Ephesians. 4. 8. Then must we first be reconciled unto God, which consists
in the forgiveness of our Sins, Romans 3. 25. before we can have the Gift of
Contrition. Dr. Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 728, 729.

These places of Scripture do plentifully testify against Merits, ascribing all
to the Mercy of God. Psalm. 103. 4. Which crowns thee in Mercy and Compassion.
Dan. 9. 18. We do not present our Supplications before thee for our own
Righteousness, but for thy great Mercies. Luke 17. 10. When ye have done all,
say, ye are unprofitable Servants. Romans 6. 23. The Wages of Sin is Death, but
Life eternal is the Grace of God through Christ. Life eternal then is not so
the Wages of good Works, as eternal Death is of evil. Romans 8. 18. The
Afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the Glory which shall be
revealed. Romans 3. 27. Your rejoicing is excluded by the Law of Faith: Ergo,
Works merit not, for then we might rejoice in them. But says Bellarmine
(according to the Language of our new Schematists) the Crown is said to be of
Mercy, because the Merits which deserve the Crown, are given unto us of Mercy,
or God's Mercy is seen in pardoning our venial Sins, while he gives the Crown
to our good Works. Bellarm. cap. 5. Respons. ad Argum. 1.

Contra. This is like the Answer of the Pelagians, that granted that Free Will
was of Grace, because it was God's Grace and Gift in giving Free Will to Man at
the first, as here he says it is God's Mercy in giving us Merits. Dr. Willet,
Ibid. p. 1038.

Eternal Life is said to be the Grace of God, because our Merits whereby
eternal Life is procured, are of Grace; for otherwise eternal Life is as well
the stipend of Justice, as Death is the stipend of Sin. Bellarm. Resp. ad loc.
4. To this says Dr. Willet, this is a most corrupt Gloss, by Grace to expound
Works; for the Apostle, Romans 11. 6. makes a Disjunction and Opposition between
Works and Grace: and if it be answered, he means Works of Nature, and not of
Grace; the Apostle says again, Not by the Works of Righteousness, but by his
Mercy he saved us; Tit. 3. 5. Here even Works of Justice and Grace are opposed
to Mercy and Grace: wherefore Grace and Works being so diverse, the one cannot
be contained in the other. Ibid. p. 1039.

Faith is not the only cause of our Justification, but there are other also, as
Hope, Charity, Alms-deeds, and other Virtues. Rhem. annot. Romans 8. Sect. 6.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Justif. cap. 13. Yea Works are more principal than Faith in
the matter of Justification. Rhem. James 2. Sect. 7. Whosoever therefore says,
that a Man is justified only by Faith, and that nothing else is required to
Justification, we pronounce him accursed. Trident. Council. sess. 6. can. 9. We
are saved by Hope, Romans 8. 24. Ergo, Not only by Faith, Rhem. annot. in hunc
locum. Charity justifyeth: Ergo, Not Faith only. The Antecedent is thus proved,
Many Sins are forgiven her, for she loved much; Luke 7. 47, 50. Her Love is the
cause that her Sins are forgiven. So 1 John 3. 14. We know we are translated
from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. Love then is the cause why we
are translated from Death to Life. Bellarm, Ibid.

Fear does justify as well as Faith, Prove. 1. 7. chapter 14. 27. Ergo, Faith only
does not justify or give Life. Bellarm. cap. 13. dispos. 2. If Faith alone do
justify, and the other Virtues as of Hope, Charity, do not help any thing to
Justification; then Faith may as well justify when those Virtues are absent, as
when they are present: But Faith separated from Hope and Charity, justifies
not: Ergo, Faith alone does not justify. Bellarm. cap. 14. See Dr. Willet' s
Synop. Pap. p. 984, 985. where this is excellently refuted. Bellarm. against
Romans 3. 28. chap. 4. 2. Ephesians. 2. 9. Phil. 3. 9. answers, that the Apostle
excludes not all Works, for then Faith it self should be excluded from
Justification, because it is a Work: And if justifying Faith do except every
Law, then the Law of Faith also should be excepted. Bellarm. cap. 16. Such
Works therefore only are excluded which go before Faith, which are done, sola
cognitione legis, by the knowledge only of the Law, or by the strength only of
Free Will without Grace, not such Works as are of Faith, and proceed from
Grace; cap. 19. Again, the Apostle could in no wise understand his Works done
after his calling, to judge them as Dung, because he says, that for such Works
there was laid up a Crown of Righteousness, nunquid Deus coronaret stercora,
should God crown Dung? Bellarm. Ibid. See Dr. Willet, p. 986.

We are said to be justified by Faith, because Faith is the beginning only, the
foundation and root of Justification. Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 8. The
same also is the opinion of Bellarmine, Fidem esse initium, etc. That Faith is
the beginning of our Justification. Lib. 1. de Justif. cap. 13. They deny
instantly that Men are justified by the only imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, or by the remission of Sins. Trident. Council. sess. 6. can. 11. or that
we are formally made just by the Righteousness of Christ: can. 10. but hold
them accursed that so affirm and teach. This then is their Sentence, that unica
formalis, etc. The only formal Cause of our Justification is the Justice of
God, whereby we are not reputed just, but are made just indeed. This is that
Justice which every Man has within himself, and is inherent in him: Sess. 6.
cap. 7. Sic Rhemist. annot. Romans 2. Sect. 4. Bellarmine also consents; Lib.
2. de Justificat. cap. 2. See Dr. Willet, ibid. p. 991, 993.

If the Justice of Christ be truly imputed unto us, so that thereby we are
verily and truly counted just, as if it were our own proper Righteousness, we
should then be counted no less just and righteous than Christ himself, and so
consequently be counted Redeemers and Saviors of the World, as well as he:
Bellarm. cap. 7. Argum. 5.

If we by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us are truly counted just
before God, and are become the Sons of God, by the same reason Christ by the
imputation of our Sins, may be truly counted a Sinner, and so also the Child of
the Devil; which were a most horrible Blasphemy. But if Christ notwithstanding
the imputation of our Sins, be righteous and just still, we also, tho the
Righteousness of Christ be imputed, should remain unrighteous and unjust still,
and therefore not thereby justified. Bellarm. Ibid. Dr. Willet, p. 995.

Whereas we distin^ the Law and the ^ospel chiefly in these two respects:
First, That the Law engend^ Te^r and Fear, the (...) Peace. Secondly, The law
requires Obedience of the Commandments thereby to be justified; the Gospel
commands only Faith. Bellarmine refuteth these two Differences between the
Law and the Gospel, and thus bends his force to overthrow them. -- That the
Gospel works Fear as well as the Law, he would prove it by these Menacings
and Threatenings which are denounced in the Gospel, as Mat. 7. 19. Every Tree
that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, etc. Romans 1. 16. I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, etc. Then he shows the Fruits and Effects of
the Gospel; First, The Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith.
Secondly, The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness: The
Gospel then reveals the Wrath of God: Ergo, it works Fear. -- Bellarmine
also proves, that the Gospel requires the Condition of Obedience as well as
the Law; as Christ says to the young Man, If thou will enter into Life, keep
the Commandments, Mat. 19. 17. Hence he infers, that the Gospel also
injoineth Obedience, and not only Faith: And the Council of Trent. sess. 6.
cap. 7. do call this verbum Fidei, and verbum Christi; the word of Faith, and
the word of Christ, to be obeyed and followed of all Christians, which Christ
here uttered to the young Man. Ib. p. 1013, 1014.

Bellarmine's Opinion then is this, That by the liberty of the Gospel we are
altogether freed from Sin, so that it is thoroughly dead, and not only not
imputed, but not alive, or having any being in the righteous. Cap. 6. Now we
are delivered from the Law, being dead unto it, that we should serve in newness
of the Spirit. If Sin be dead in us, and we unto it, then has it no Life at
all. -- If any Man say, that the Precepts and Commandments of God unto a Man
justified, and in the state of Grace, are impossible to be kept, let him be
accursed. Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 18. Romans 8. 4. That the Righteousness
of the Law may be fulfilled in us: Ergo, say they, the Law of God by the G^e of
Christ may be kept, and the keeping thereof is our Justice. Christ also says,
My Yoke is easy, and my Burden light: Ergo, his Commandments are possible to be
kept. -- He that loves his Neighbor has kept the whole Law: but it is
possible to love our Neighbor: Ergo, to keep the Law. Bellarm. cap. 11. --
That it is possible to keep the Law, they would enforce further by these
Testimonies of Scripture, Josh. 11. 15. Joshuah left nothing undone of all that
the Lord had commanded Moses. Acts 13. 22. I have found David a Man after mine
own Heart, which will do all things that I will. 2 Kings 23. 25. Like unto
Josiah was there no King, that turned unto the Lord with all his Heart, with
all his Soul, with all his Might, according to all the Law of Moses. Luke 1. 6.
Both were just before God (that is, Zechariah and Elizabeth) and walked in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord without reproof. John 17. 6. Thine
they were, thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word. Romans 7. 19. The
Evil that I would not, that do I: now, if I do that I would not, it is no more
I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me. Ver. 25. I my self in my Mind serve
the Law of God. Then Paul sinned not, for Sin cannot be but in the Mind;
Bellarm. de Justif. lib. 4. cap. 11. -- The old Pelagians, who held the same,
or very like Position to the Papists, objected thus, Si impossibilia sunt
mandata, etc. If the Commandments be impossible, the fault is not in them that
received them, but in him that gave them. Hieron. ad Ctesiphont.

St. Peter speaks Acts 15. 10. of the Ceremonial Law, which being added to
the Moral Law, made it importable; but now the Ceremonial Law being abolished,
the Moral Law is portable. Bellarm. cap. 14. resp. ad loc.

1. The Apostle Romans 7. 7, 10. speaks of the Act of Concupiscence, which is
no Sin. Bellarm. respons. ad object. 3. -- From Gal. 3. 10, 12. he further
says that they are accursed which think to keep the Law by their own Strength,
without Grace, which indeed it is impossible to do, but possible by Grace.
Resp. ad loc. 2. See Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 1015, 1016, 1017, 1018. Men
ought to do good in respect and for Reward and Recompense in Heaven for their
good Works. The Apostle says of Moses, Heb. 11. 26. He had respect to the
Recompense of Reward. Rhem. Ibid.

Their (i. e. the Papists) Opinion is, that good Works are not only necessary
to Salvation, necessitate praesentiae, because they must be necessarily
present, and we cannot be without them; but necessitate essicientiae, they are
necessary as efficient Causes together with Faith, of our Salvation. Work out
your Salvation with fear and trembling; Phil. 2. 12.

Our light Affliction causes unto us a more excellent weight of Glory: Ergo,
Our Works and Sufferings are the cause of Salvation. Bellarm. lib. 6. de
Justificat.

Bellarmine answers, that St. Paul speaks of the first Justification, which
is without Works; St. James of the second Justification, whereby a Man is made
more just, and this caused by good Works. -- He further opposes for
Justification by Works these places of Scripture, Romans 6. 19. As you have given
your Members Servants to Uncleanness, and Iniquity to commit Iniquity; so now
give your Members Servants to Justice or Righteousness, to Sanctification. By
Sanctification here Justification is signified, being opposed to Iniquity. 2
Cor. 7. 1. Having these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the Flesh and Spirit, and grow up unto Sanctification in the fear of the
Lord. We must grow up every day to more Justice and Sanctification. Chap. 9.
10. He will multiply your Seed, and increase the fruits of your Justice: By
Alms then our Justification is increased. Joh. 14. 23. If any Man love me, he
will keep my Words, and my Father will love him. This keeping of the
Commandments does procure the Love of God, and consequently Justification. Rev.
22. 11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still; he that is just,
justificetur adhuc, let him be justified still: Ergo, by good Works a Man has
increase of Justification.

But answers Dr. Willet, We deny not but that we must continually grow and
increase in the Works of Sanctification, which the Apostle affirms; but
Justification is one thing, Sanctification another; we must first be justified
by Faith in the Promises of Christ, of the which Promises also the Apostle here
makes mention, then follows as an Effect and Fruit thereof, our
Sanctification and Holiness, with the Works thereof.

Their (i. e. the Papists) Opinion is, that a just Man in his good Works does
not sin so much as venially. Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 25. But that their
Works are truly just, without any spot or blemish of Sin. Job 1. 22. In all
this did not Job sin, nor charge God foolishly. Psalm. 7. 6. Judge me according
to my Righteousness. David would not have stood upon his Righteousness before
God, if it had been defiled with Sin. Bellarm. cap. 15. God gives as well
everlasting Life and Glory to Men, for and according to their Works, as he
gives Damnation for the contrary Works. -- And Men by their Works proceeding
of Grace do deserve or merit Heaven, and the more or less Joy in the same.
Rhem. Romans 2. Sect. 2. 1 Cor. 3. Sect. 2. See Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 1021,
1023, 1024, 1025, 1026, 1035. The Jesuit sets down this distinction of
Grace: There is gratia gratis, etc. Grace freely given, and they are such
spiritual Gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Utterance, and such like, which are given
rather for the benefit of others: there is also Grace, whereby we are made
acceptable to God, the Grace of Justification; which Grace Bellarmine defends
to be qualitatem per modum, etc. a Quality in manner of an Habit, resiant and
permanent in Man: De great. lib. 1. cap. 3. The Apostle says, Romans 5. 19. As by
one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of one,
shall many be made righteous But we are made Sinners, not by the imputation of
Adam's Unrighteousness, but by Sin inherent and permanent in us: Ergo, we are
justified, not by the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, but by Justice
of Righteousness inherent in us. Bellarm. cap. 4. Bellarmine would bear us in
hand, that the name of Merit is either contained in Scripture, or collected
from the same. Lib. 5. de Justificat. cap. 2.

Argum. The places of Scripture which he pretends for proof hereof are these:

1. Ecclesiast. 16. 12. He judges a Man according to the Merits of his Works.

2. Heb. 13. 16. With such Sacrifices, promeretur Deus, God is merited.

3. The Scripture makes mention of Dignity or Worthiness, which is the same
that Merit is: That you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God; 2 Thessalonians.
1. 5. They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy; Rev. 3. 4.

4. There is often also mention found in Scripture of Reward; Mat. 5. 12. 1
Cor. 3. 8. Genesis 15. 1. But where there is a Reward, there Merit goes before.
Ibid. p. 925, 1041.

S. de Clara, as Mr. Chauncy cites it in his Rejoinder to Mr. Dan. Williams, p.
7. tells us, that Merit is a free Action, accepted to some Reward.

Merit of Meetness is a free Action, which by reason of some Congruity for
fitness is accepted to a Reward.

Merit of Worthiness is a free Action of a Man performed in Grace, which from
Justice is accepted to a Reward.

Inherent (which they call justifying) Grace, and count it (after the Council
of Trent) unanimously the formal Cause of Justification, by their Doctrine,
falls under Merit. They mince it indeed, calling it Merit of Congruity; but it
is big enough, how small soever they would have it seem, to bid defiance to the
Grace of God in the Text, (Romans 3. 24.) There are some preparatory Works which
(they say) must go before Justification, as dogmatical Faith, some sorrow for
Sin, Fear, Hope, etc. to which justifying is due in Congruity, tho not in
Justice; and this dueness they express in the definition of congruous Merit. It
is, says Navar. (after Aquinas and their common Gloss) a good human Act of one
without the Grace of God, to which spiritual or temporal Reward is in some
respect and congruity due. Now if justifying Grace be due on our account,
before the Lord vouchsafe it, he gives it not freely, but only pays what he
owes, and is before obliged by us to let us have; and Bellarmine says this
Merit is not founded on the Promise of God, but in the Worth and Dignity of the
Work. -- I need bring no particular Testimonies to show, that by their
Doctrine, Pardon of Sin falls under this sort of Merit: for Pardon and inherent
Grace are by them involved together, and made one and the same Notion (this is
perfectly the Baxterian Notion, that as we are sanctified, so are we pardoned.)
-- They tell you, to be justified is to be sanctified. -- Thus you may be
justified in their way, if you will but have patience till your inherent
Righteousness in this World be perfect and spotless, or till the lowest degree
of it be absolute Perfection. If you think it impossible to be justified upon
such terms, they will tell you there is nothing more easy. Morning Exercise
against Popery, p. 448, 449, 456.

Bellarm. Tribus in rebus ab haereticis Catholici dissentiunt, 1. In objecto
fidei justificantis, quod haeretici restringunt ad solam promissionem
misericordiae specialis: Catholici tam late patere volunt, quam late patet
verbum Dei.

In three things the Catholics dissent from Heretics: 1. In the Object of
justifying Faith, which the Heretics restrain or confine unto a bare Promise,
or promise alone of special Mercy. Ames. Bell. Enerv. Tom. 4. p. 92.

Bellarm. Non omnes illi revera credunt, qui arbitrantur se credere.

Protest. Neque sciunt aut vident aliquid omnes qui putant se scire aut videre:
qui tamen revera sciunt, aut vident, certi possunt esse, quod sciant, and
videant. An quia Haeretici arbitrantur se rectissime credere (ut Bellarm.
objicit) idcirco Bellarm. cum caeteris Pontificiis arbitrantur tantum opinione
fallaci, suam fidem esse certam?

Bellarm. Quis est qui certo affirmare queat, se toto cord^, atque ut oportet
credere, and fidem habere vivam, and cum charitate conjunctam?

Protest. Quoad gradum, nemo credat in hac vita, toto cord, sicut oportet: sed
quoad veritatem fideles qui sentiunt se a spiritu sancto obsignatos ad vitam
aeternam, queunt haec certo affirmare, and Deum eo nomine glorificare. Ibid. p.
101.

Bellarm. All they do not truly believe, who think they do believe.

Protest. Neither do all know, or see something which they (only) think they
know, or see: but they that truly know or see, may be certain that they do know
and see. Is it because the Heretics think most rightly that they believe (as
Bellarmine objects) that therefore Bellarmine's, with the rest of the
Pontificians Faith is right, which they only think with a false Opinion to be
so?

Bellarm. Who is he that can certainly affirm, that he believes with his whole
Heart as he ought to do, and that he has a living Faith conjoined with Charity?

Protest. As to degree no one in this Life believes, with his whole Heart, as
he ought to do; but as to truth (or reality) the faithful that experience
themselves sealed by the holy Spirit unto Life eternal, may certainly affirm
these things, and glorify God on that account.

Bellarm. Si certo atque ex fide credere debeo, mihi peccata remissa esse per
Christum, quomodo possum petere remissionem peccatorum?

Protest. Eo saltem modo, quo Christus Joh. 17. 1, 15. petiit ut Deus ipsum
glorificaret, de quo certissimus and debuit esse and fuit, petimus
continuationem, certiorationem majorem, and particularem applicationem
remissionis concessae. Ibid. p. 103.

Bellarm. If I ought certainly and of Faith to believe that my Sins are
remitted me through Christ, how can I ask the remission of Sin?

Protest. At least after that manner, in which Christ Joh. 17. 1, 5. prayed
that God would glorify him, of which he ought to have been, and was most
certain: We beg the continuance, a greater assuredness, and particular
application of Pardon (already) granted.

Bellarm. Romans 3. 14. Justificantur per gratiam, id est, per justitiam ab illo
donatam and infusam; haec est causa formalis justificationis nostrae. Ibid. p.
128. We are justified by Grace, that is, by a Righteousness given from him, and
infused; this is the formal Cause of our Justification.

Bellarm. Nullus omnino locus Scripturae invenitur, ubi legitur, Christi
justitiam nobis imputari ad justitiam: vel nos justos esse, per Christi
justitiam nobis imputatam.

Protest. Quamvis totidem verbis hoc non legeretur, non inde tamen sequeretur
sententiam ipsam in scripturis non contineri. Sic Bellarm. paulo post: si solum
vellent, nobis imputari Christi merita, etc. certa esset eorum sententia,
quamvis modus loquendi in Scripturis and Patribus, aut nunquam, aut rarissime
inveniatur. Ibid. p. 134.

Bellarm. There is no place altogether of Scripture found, where it is read,
that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us for Righteousness; or that we
are just by the Righteousness of Christ infused to us.

Protest. Although this in so many words is not read, yet it does not thence
follow, that the Sentence (or thing) it self is not contained in the
Scriptures. So Bellarmine a little after: If they would only have, that the
Merits of Christ are imputed unto us, etc. their Sentence or Judgment would be
right, although the mode of speaking is either never, or most rarely found in
Scriptures and Fathers.

Bellarm. Nulla necessitas ejusmodi imputationis adferri potest; nam si
necessaria esset imputatio ista, ideo potissimum necessaria esset, quod homo
post remissionem peccati, adhuc sit vere peccator. (Here lies the Baxterian
Quibble.) Hoc autem est falsum. Ergo -- Justitia inhaerens, fides, spes,
charitas, etiam in hac vita potest esse perfecta. (Here lies the Quakeristical
presumptive Foundation.) Imputatio igitur justitiae non est necessaria. Ibid.

There can be no necessity of such an Imputation (or the like) to be brought
(or alleged) for if Imputation were necessary, it should therefore be
specially (or principally) necessary, because Man after the remission of Sin,
is yet truly a Sinner. Therefore -- Inherent Righteousness, Faith, Hope,
Charity, even in this Life may be perfect: Therefore the imputation of
Righteousness is not necessary.

Bellarm. Fieri non potest, ut Christi justitia nobis imputatur, eo sensu, ut
per eum formaliter justi nominemur, and simus; quamvis verum sit, imputari
nobis Christi merita, quia nobis donata sunt, and possumus ea Deo offerre, pro
peccatis nostris, quoniam Christus suscepit super se onus satisfaciendi pro
nobis, nosque Deo Patri reconciliandi. Ibid. p. 135. It cannot be that the
Righteousness of Christ should be imputed unto us, in that sense that we should
by it be named, and are formally just; although it be true, that the Merits of
Christ are imputed unto us, because they are given to us, and we may offer them
to God the Father for our Sins, because Christ himself undertook the Burden of
satisfying for us, and of reconciling us unto God the Father.

Bellarm. Si vere nobis imputaretur Christi justitia, ut per eam justi
haberemur, ac censeremur, perinde ac si propria nostra esset intrinseca (this
is directly the Baxterian precarious supposititious Scarecrow) formalisque
justitia, profecto non minus justi haberi censerique deberemus, quam ipse
Christus proinde deberemus dici, atque haberi Redemptores and Salvatores mundi,
etc. quod est absurdissimum. Ibid. p. 137. If the Righteousness of Christ
should be truly imputed unto us, so that we by it should be accounted and
esteemed just; and likewise if it should be our proper intrinsecal and formal
Righteousness, doubtless we ought to be accounted and esteemed no less just
than Christ himself: therefore we ought to be called (or said to be) and
accounted the Redeemers and Saviors of the World, etc. which is most absurd.

Bellarm. Christus id nobis restituit quod perdideramus in Adamo. At in Adam
non perdidimus justitiam imputatam, sed inhaerentem; igitur in Christo non
extrinsecam tantum imputatam recipimus. -- -- Si per justitiam Christi, nobis
imputatam, vere possumus dici justi, and filii Dei: Ergo poterit etiam Christus
per injustitiam nostram sibi imputatam dici vere peccator, and quod horret
animus cogitare, filius diaboli. Ibid. p. 138. Christ restores that unto us
which we lost in Adam. But in Adam we lost not an imputed but inherent
Righteousness: Therefore we receive not in Christ an extrinsecal only and an
imputed one. -- If by the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, we may truly
be said to be just (or righteous) and the Sons of God, then also Christ by our
Unrighteousness imputed unto him, may be truly called a Sinner, and what the
Mind dreads, (or trembles at) a Son (or Child) of the Devil.

Protest. Romans 4. 5. Fides imputatur ad justitiam: Faith is imputed for
Righteousness.

Bellarm. Fides ipsa imputatur; fides autem non est justitia Christi, sed
nostra. Faith it self is imputed; but Faith is not the Righteousness of Christ,
but ours.

Protest. Fides imputatur ad justitiam, ver. 5. idem est cum eo quod dicitur,
ver. 6. Deus imputat justitiam absque operibus, and remittit peccata, ver. 7.
Fides autem ipsa, absolute considerata, neque est justitia sine opere, neque
remissio peccatorum: necesse est igitur ut fides imputata relative involvat
suum objectum, id est, Christum fide apprehensum. Faith is imputed for
Righteousness, ver. 5. it is the same with that is said ver. 6. That God
imputes Righteousness without Works, and remitteth Sins, v. 7. But Faith
alone, absolutely considered, neither is Righteousness without Works, nor
Remission of Sins: Therefore of necessity it is that Faith imputed, relatively
involves (or includes) its Object, that is to say, Christ imputed by Faith.

Bellarm. Imputare non significat nudam existimationem, sed existimationem cui
veritas in re ipsa respondeat. To impute signifies not a naked existimation
(or reckoning) but an existimation to whom the truth in the thing it self does
answer.

Protest. Quasi veritas hujus sententiae divinae (imputo tibi Christum fide
apprehensum pro justitia in conspectu meo) non possit in re ipsa constare, nisi
inhaerens nostra justitia imputetur. Res ipsa in illa sententia non est
qualitas nostra inhaerens, sed actus Dei judicialis. Ibid. p. 140, 141.

As if the truth of this Divine Sentence or Determination (I impute unto thee
Christ apprehended by Faith for Righteousness before me, or in my sight) could
not consist in the thing it self, unless our inherent Righteousness be imputed.
The very thing it self in that Sentence is not our inherent quality, but a
judicial Act of God.

Bellarm. de Meritis: Non desunt Testimonia sacrae scripturae, ubi ejusmodi
nomen vel aperte contineatur, vel unde facili negotio deducatur. Bellarm.

There want not Testimonies of holy Scripture, where the Name of the thing it
self is either openly contained, or whence with little pains it may be deduced.
Ibid. p. 199.

Bellarm. Propriissime dicimuslatine, unum apud alterum mereri, and cum sibi
obstringere, qui facit aliquid quod ei placeat, eumque delectet.

Protest. Hoc est manifest falsum, nam solutio debiti, etiam dimidiata (si
nomen sit dubi^m) placet creditori, nihil tamen apud eum meretur. Gratiarum
actio quatenus agnoscit beneficium, placet benefactori, sed nihil apud eum
meretur. Ibid. p. 200.

Bellarm. We most properly say in Latin, that one may merit at another, and he
be bounden unto him who does something that pleases and delights him.

Protest. This is manifestly false; for the solution of a Debt, yea the half
part (if the thing be doubtful) pleases the Creditor, yet it deserves nothing
from him. An Act of Thanks as far as it acknowledges a Benefit, pleases the
Benefactor, but deserves nothing at him.

Bellarm. Plurima sunt testimonia scripturae quae disertis verbis continent
nomen mercedis. At merces and merita relativa sunt. Ibid. There are many
Testimonies of Scripture which in pertinent words contain the name of a Reward;
but a Reward and Merits are Relatives.

But here our Adversaries cry out with open mouth, that we maintain monstrous
Propositions, namely, That there is no inherent Holiness in a Man that is
justified; that after Justification Man still remains a Sinner, and unjust.
That in Justification Sin is not abolished, but only covered with Christ's
Mantle. Thence they fall to their Rhetoric, that all Calvinists are but
painted Sepulchers, fair without, full of rotteness within: Like foolish
Virgins that have no Oil of their own, but think to be supplied by that of
other folks: Like Wolves in a Lamb's Skin, which hides, but takes not away
their ravening and fierce Nature: Like a leprous Person in fine Clothes, that
looks to be favored and embraced by his King, because he is well apparelled:
for this is (say they) to teach, That a Man justified is yet a Sinner in
himself; That Corruption, Filthiness, and Uncleanness remain in him, when yet
in God's sight he is accounted pure and clean, because he has hid himself
under the Cloak of Christ's Righteousness. Whence also they tell us it will
follow, We make Christ's Body monstrous, a holy beautiful Head joined to filthy
leprous Members, Christ's Marriage polluted, a most holy and fair Bridegroom
coupled to a foul deformed Spouse. To this we say, Truth is modest, yet she
will not be outfac'd with big words: Their Eloquence has slandered partly us,
partly the Truth: Us, in that they affirm we deny all inherent Righteousness in
a Person justified, which is an impudent Calumny: The Truth, in condemning that
for an Error, which is sacred Verity, taught us by God in the Scriptures, viz.
That a Person justified, is yet after that in himself in part sinful. This we
shall teach and maintain for a Truth, firm as the Foundation of the Earth, that
cannot be shaken. Mr. Pemble of Justif. p. 74, 75.

Bellarmin's Opinion is this, That by the liberty of the Gospel we are
altogether freed from Sin, so that it is thoroughly dead, and not only not
imputed, but not alive, or having any being in the Righteous. Romans 7. 6. Now we
are delivered from the Law, being dead to it, that we should serve in newness
of the Spirit. If Sin be dead in us, and we unto it, then has it no Life at
all. See Dr. Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 1015, 1016.

Protest. Isa. 64. 6. All our Rightcousness is as a stained Clout: Ergo, the
best Works which we do are somewhat defiled with our Corruptions.

Bellarmine answers, 1. That the Prophet speaks of the wicked Men with whom
God was angry, not of the Righteous.

Protest. Yea, even of the Righteous, which say, Isa. 65. 5. We shall be saved:
and ver. 8. Thou art our Father, and we are the Work of thy Hands. The Wicked
cannot say thus.

Bellarmine. 2. The Prophet understands only their Ceremonial Righteousness,
in bringing Sacrifices, observing their New Moons, and such like. Dr. Willet' s
Synop. Pap. p. 1028.

Bellarmine denies the Assumption, that we are justified formally by the
Righteousness of Christ, but by our own Righteousness inherent in us. Resp. ad
Argum. 4.

Protest. This is a great Blasphemy, and contrary to the Apostle, who says,
that I might be found, not having mine own Righteousness, which is by the Law,
but the Righteousness of God through Faith, Phil. 3. 9. The Righteousness of
God by Faith is not our own Righteousness, but we are justified by the
Righteousness of God. Ergo. Ibid. p. 580.

Protest. If Men were justified without Works, then Justification is only by
Faith. But the first is true, as it may appear by Testimonies of Scripture:
Romans 3. 28. chapter 4. 2. Ephesians. 2. 9. Phil. 3. 9. Ergo, Faith only justifies.

Bellarmine answers, that the Apostle excludes not all Works, for then Faith
it self should be excluded from Justification, because it is a Work: And if
justifying Faith do except every Law, then the Law of Faith also should be
excepted. Bell. cap. 16. Such Works therefore only are excluded which go before
Faith, which are done, sola cognitione legis, vel solis viribus liberi arbitrii
sine gratia. By the knowledge only of the Law, or by the strength only of
Freewill, without Grace, not such Works as are of Faith, and proceed of Grace,
cap. 19. -- Further, that the Apostle could in no wise understand his Works
after his calling, to judge them as Dung, Phil. 3. 8. because he says, 2 Timothy
4. 1. that for such Works there was laid up a Crown of Righteousness; nunquid
Deus coronaret stercora? Should God crown Dung? Bellarm. cap. 19. See Dr.
Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 986.

Bellarmine considers this Testimony (Phil. 3. 8, 9.) in three places, Lib.
1. cap. 18. Lib. 1. cap. 19. Lib. 5. cap. 5. de Justificat. And he returns
three Answers unto it, which contain the substance of all that is pleaded by
others unto the same purpose.

1. He says, That the Righteousness which is by the Law, and which is opposed
unto the Righteousness which is by Faith, is not the Righteousness written in
the Law, or which the Law requires, but a Righteousness wrought without the aid
of Grace, by the knowledge of the Law alone. 2. That the Righteousness which is
by the Faith of Christ are opera nostra justa facta ex fide, our own righteous
Works wrought in Faith, which others call our Evangelical Works. 3. That it is
blasphemous to call the Duties of inherent Righteousness (...), loss and dung.
But he labors (says Dr. Owen) in the Fire with all his Sophistry. For as to
the first, (1.) That by the Righteousness which is by the Law, the
Righteousness which the Law requires is not intended, is a bold Assertion, and
expressly contradictory unto the Apostle, Romans 9. 31. chap. 10. 5. in both
places he declares the Righteousness of the Law to be the Righteousness that
the Law requires. (2.) The Works which he excludes, he calls the Works of
Righteousness that we have done, Tit. 3. 5. which are the Works that the Law
requires. Unto the second, I say, (1.) That the substance of it is, That the
Apostle should profess, that I desire to be found in Christ, not having mine
own Righteousness, but having my own Righteousness; for Evangelical inherent
Righteousness was properly his own. And I am sorry that some should apprehend
that the Apostle in these words, did desire to be found in his own
Righteousness in the presence of God in order unto Justification: For nothing
can be more contrary, not only unto the perpetual tenor and design of all his
Discourses on this Subject, but also unto the Testimony of all other holy Men
in the Scripture to the same purpose, as we have proved before. And I suppose
there are very few true Believers at present, whom they will find to comply and
join with them in this desire of being found in their own Personal Evangelical
Righteousness, or the Works of Righteousness which they have done, in their
trial before God, as unto their Justification. We should do well to read our
own Hearts, as well as the Books of others in this matter. (2.) The
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, is not our own Obedience or
Righteousness, but that which is opposed unto it, that which God imputes unto
us, Romans 4. 6. that which we receive by way of Gift, Romans 5. 17. (3.) That by
the Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ Jesus our own inherent
Righteousness is not intended, is evident from hence, that the Apostle excludes
all his own Righteousness, as and when he was found in Christ, that is,
whatever he had done as a Believer. And if there be not an opposition in these
words, between a Righteousness that is our own, and that which is not our own,
I know not in what words it can be expressed. Unto the third I say, (1.) The
Apostle does not, nor do we say that he does call our inherent Righteousness
Dung, but only that he accounts it so. (2.) He does not account it so
absolutely, which he is most from, but only in comparison with Christ. (3.) He
does not esteem it so in it self, but only as unto his trust into it, with
respect unto one special end, namely, our Justification before God. (4.) The
Prophet Isaiah in the same respect terms all our Righteousness filthy Rags,
chap. 64. 6. And (...) is an Expression of as much Contempt as (...). See Dr.
Owen of Justif. p. 536, 537, 538.

Bellarmine uses several Arguments to prove that the Faith here intended by
James is justifying Faith considered in it self; but they are all weak to
Contempt, as being built on this Supposition, That true justifying Faith is
nothing but a real Assent unto the Catholic Doctrine, or Divine Revelation. De
Justif. lib. 1. cap. 15. His first is, That James calls it Faith absolutely,
whereby always in the Scripture true Faith is intended. Answ. (1.) James calls
it a dead Faith, the Faith of Devils, and casts all manner of Reproach upon
it, which he would not have done on any Duty or Grace truly Evangelical. (2.)
Every Faith that is true as unto the reality of Assent which is given by it
unto the Truth, is neither living, justifying, nor saving, as has been proved.
(3.) They never had that Faith which is true and saving; Joh. 2. 23. Act. 8.
13. He urges that in the same place and Chapter he treats of the Faith of
Abraham, and affirms that it wrought with his Works, v. 22, 23. But this a vain
shadow of Faith does not do; it was therefore true Faith, and that which is
most properly called so, that the Apostle intends. Answ. This Pretense is
indeed ridiculous; for the Apostle does not give the Faith of Abraham as an
instance of that Faith which he treated with so much severity, but of that
which is directly contrary unto it, and whereby he designed to prove that the
other Faith which he had reflected on, was of no use and advantage unto them
that had it: For this Faith of Abraham produced good Works, which the other was
wholly without. Thirdly, He urges v. 24. You see then how that by Works a Man
is justified, and not by Faith only: for the Faith that James speaks of
justifies with Works, but a false Faith, the shadow of a Faith does not so; it
is therefore true saving Faith whereof the Apostle speaks. Ans. 1. He is
utterly mistaken; for the Apostle does not ascribe Justification partly to
Works, and partly to Faith, but he ascribes Justification in the sense by him
intended, wholly to Works in opposition to that Faith concerning which he
treats: for there is a plain Antithesis in the words between Works and Faith,
as unto Justification in the sense by him intended. A dead Faith, a Faith
without Works, the Faith of Devils is excluded from having any influence into
Justification. Fourthly, He adds, that the Apostle compares this Faith without
Works unto a rich Man that gives nothing unto the Poor, v. 16. and a Body
without a Spirit, ver. 26. Wherefore as that Knowledge whereby a rich Man knows
the Wants of the Poor is true and real, and a dead Body is a Body; so is Faith
without Works true Faith also, and as such is considered by Saint James. Ans.
These things do evidently destroy what they are produced in the Confirmation
of, only the Cardinal helps them out with a little Sophistry: For whereas the
Apostle compares this Faith unto the Charity of a Man that gives nothing to the
Poor, he suggests in the room thereof his knowledge of their Poverty: And his
knowledge may be true, and the more true and certain it is, the more false and
feigned is the Charity which he pretends in these words, Go and be fed or
clothed; such is the Faith the Apostle speaks of, etc. Dr. Owen of
Justification, p. 567, 568.

Romans 1. 17. The Justice of God is revealed -- The Rhemists apply this place
against imputative Justice, alleging out of Augustine, how it must be
understood of that Justice, not which God has in himself, sed qua induit
hominem, but wherewith he endueth Man when he justi^eth him.

Contra 1. They do not well translate the word induit, which signifies here
not to endue, but to clothe with: and so Man being justified by Faith is
clothed with Christ's Righteousness: he is not justified by any inherent
Righteousness in himself, but by an imputed Righteousness, Romans 4. 6. 2. And
the Apostle does expound himself, Romans 3. 22. -- showing that the Justice of
God is by the Faith of Jesus: and Phil. 3. 9. the Apostle renounceth his own
Righteousness, that he might have the Righteousness of God through Faith. Dr.
Willet on the Romans, p. 92.

Costerus Enchirid. 170. says that these words, the Just shall live by Faith,
have no other meaning but this, justum secundum fidei normam vitam dirigere,
that the Just does direct his Life according to the Rule of Faith.

The Rhemists have this shift, that Faith together with Works, must be here
understood to justify: The Apostle says not, the Just shall live by Faith
only; to this purpose also Bellarmine lib 1. de Justif. cap. 20.

Pererius her flies to their old distinction of Justification: the first which
is by Faith, the second is perfected by Works: So Faith is said to justify a
Man, because it is exordium, fundamentum radix justificationis, the beginning,
foundation and root of Justification. Perer. disput. 8. in 1. ad Roman. Sect.
46. -- Bellarmine has another device, he makes this the meaning, the Just
shall live by Faith, that is, ex fide patienter expectare, quae Deus promisit;
by Faith he does patiently expect those things which God has promised: so he
would have it understood rather of patient waiting and expecting, than of
justifying. Lib. 2. de effect. Sacram. cap. 9.

Contra. This patient expecting of God's Promises is indeed a Fruit of
justifying Faith, for it is the ground of things hoped for; and he that is
justified by Faith has this Grace of patient Expectation; but to lively Faith
comprehends more. 2. And that by this Phrase, to live by Faith, the Apostle
understands to be justified by Faith, is evident Gal. 2. 20. And whereas
Bellarmine further objecteth, that the Prophet's meaning, from whom the Apostle
takes this Saying, is none other, but to note their Patience that waited for
the Lord's Promises: It has been showed before, Quest. 44. that the Apostle
keeps the Prophets sense, and does most fitly apply this Sentence to
Justification by Faith. -- But the Romanists against Justification by Faith
only thus object. 1. It seems a very absurd thing to make Men believe that
they shall be justified by Faith only, without either Satisfaction for their
Sins, or the Works of Righteousness; by this means nothing could be easier than
by Faith to be saved. (This Mr. Baxter holds, making nothing of believing, and
flouting those that assert, tho by Scripture-Warrant, that the same Power that
raised up Jesus Christ, must work a sound saving Faith.) 2. And this Doctrine
will make Men presumptuous, that they will care for no good Works; and so there
should be no more use either of Precepts to exhort them to the Works of Piety,
nor of Threanings to terrify them from Sin. (This is Mr. Dan. Williams exactly)
Romans 1. 16. -- The Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation to every one that
believes. -- This and such like places, which ascribe Justification and
Salvation to Faith, as Joh. 3. 16. Acts 13. 39. Bellarmine would thus elude: 1.
He says, that these Scriptures must be understood negatively, that without
Faith none are justified; not that only by Faith they are justified. 2. Then by
all are understood, all Nations, that there is no difference between Jew and
Gentile, but that one common way of Salvation is propounded to them all. 3. And
it being applied to every particular Man, the meaning is, that not Faith of it
self alone, but with other things, as Hope, Charity, justifies. Bellarm. lib.
1. de Justif. cap. 22. --

Bellarmine from Romans 1. 18. (according to our Baxterian Schematists)
infers, that Comminations and Terrors, are as proper and peculiar to the
Gospel as to the Law, Lib. 4. de Justif. cap. 2. Dr. Willet on the Romans, p.
93, 94.

Whereas the Apostle says, Romans 2. 2. We know that the Judgment of God is
according to Truth: Bellarmine hence thus reasons against Imputative Justice;
God's Judgment is according to Truth, but so is not imputed* Justice, it is not
verily and indeed, and according to Truth; but the habitual, infused, and
inherent Justice is according to Truth. Lib. 2. de Justificat. cap. 3.

Contra 1. Bellarmine does mistake the Apostle's meaning; for according to the
Truth, is not secundum realem existentiam, according to the real Existence of a
thing, but secundum aequitatem, but according to Equity. 2. So then the Justice
of Christ imputed by Faith, is according to Truth, that is, the Rule of
Justice, because thereby full Satisfaction is made for Sin by Faith in Christ;
but the habitual and inherent Justice is not according to the Rule of Justice,
because it is imperfect, and thereby God's Justice cannot be satisfied.
Paraeus. See Willet, ibid. p. 133. Romans 2. 6. Who will reward every Man
according to his Works. Out of this place the Romanists contend for the Merit
of good Works: the Rhemists upon this place affirm, that Life everlasting is
given for, and according to their good Works: (this is the Baxterian Doctrine
in the full substance thereof; for if our Justification before God, not only
originally depends upon our Faith and Repentance, etc. but also abides as to
its continuance upon the very terms of our so continuing to believe and repent,
etc. then not only the free Grace of God in our Justification is founded in
Works, but it is their Congruousness in Nature (tho wrought by the Spirit) and
their Condignity in Permanency that gives a prevalent efficacious Merit unto
the Righteousness of Christ for their Justification.) --

The Romanists do hold, that some Works of the Righteous are so perfect, that
they do not sin so much as venially in them; they have no blemish at all.
Council. Trident. cap. 25. de Justificat. -- But that there is some Blemish,
Imperfection, and Desert, even in the best Works of the Saints (tho we affirm
not, as Pererius slandereth Luther, that all the Works of the Regenerate are
Sin) it is thus made evident out of the Scripture. -- The Prophet Isaiah says,
chap. 64. 6. All our Righteousness is as stained Clouts, even their best
Actions were defiled and polluted. To this place diverse Answers are found: 1.
Pererius out of Augustine thus interprets, that justitia nostra divinae
comparata, etc. our Righteousness being compared to the divine Justice, is like
unto a filthy and menstruous Cloth; this is then spoken comparatively: to this
purpose August. sermon. 43. Contra. And we herein concur with Augustine, that
although the Work of the Saints seem very perfect and excellent before Men, yet
in regard of that Perfection which God requires of us, they are found to come
far short: so that if they be compared with the Justice of God, not which he
has in himself, but that which he commands and requires of us, our best
Works will appear to be imperfect and full of Wants. 2. He urges Jerome's
Exposition, who applies this place to the incredulous Jews after the coming of
the Messiah, whose feigned legal Holiness was as an unclean thing in the sight
of God, because they believed not in Christ exhibited to the World. -- Contra.
It is evident by the Text it self, that the Prophet speaks of that Age then
present, v. 10. Zion is a Wilderness, Jerusalem is a Desert. 3. Therefore
Pererius insisteth upon this third Interpretation, that the Prophet speaks of
the Hypocrites among the Jews, and of their Legal Righteousness, which was an
unclean thing, being not sanctified by the Spirit of God; and the Prophet
speaks in the first Person, as including himself, as the manner of the
Prophets is, for Humility sake condescending unto the Infirmity of the People,
and therein also showing his charitable Affection and Compassion toward them.
--

Contra. It is evident, 1. That the Prophet speaks not only of their Legal
Observations, but of all their Moral Obedience whatsoever; for the words are
general, All our Righteousness is as a stained Clout. 2. Neither does he mean
the Hypocrites only, but he comprehends all the People, excluding no not the
better sort, as he says, ver. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father: and
ver. 9. Lo, we beseech thee, behold, we are all thy People* but the Wicked and
Hypocrites are not alone God's People, neither is God said to be their Father;
for the Godly and Faithful sake among them they may be so counted, but not
alone by themselves. Ibib. p. 134, 135, 136.

Whereas the Apostle, Romans 5. 5. says, The Love of God is shed abroad in our
Hearts, etc. Pererius understanding the Apostle to speak here of that Love and
Charity which is infused as an Habit into the Mind, whereby we love God,
sets down here certain Positions concerning this inherent Charity.

1. He affirms, that this Charity is that Justice, whereby we are formally
made just and righteous before God. Disput. 2. numer. 10.

2. This Charity, whereby we are justified, he affirms, esse donum omnium
donorum maximum, to be a Gift far exceeding all other Gifts.

3. This Charity, re non distingui a gratia gratum faciente, is not indeed
distinguished from Grace making us acceptable unto God.

4. Against the Opinion of Cajetan, Scotus, Gabriel, he holds, that there is
in those that are justified, the Habit of Charity permanent and remaining when
the Act cease, (so far right, but now with the Baxterian all is thrown down)
whereby they are formally made just before God; otherwise they should not be
held to be just before God in their sleep, or when they cease to work. Disput.
3. numer. 17, 18.

Contra. An inherent Righteousness and infused Charity in the Faithful we deny
not; but not such as whereby we are formally made righteous, and justified
before God: both because all our Righteousness is as a stained Cloth, Isa. 64.
it is imperfect and weak, and therefore not able to justify us, and for that
the Scripture testifies that it is the Righteousness of Christ which is
applied by Faith, whereby we are justified before God, as the Apostle calls it,
the Righteousness of God through the Faith of Christ, Romans 3. 22. Phil. 3. 9.
-- But we deny, that by any such inherent Habit we are made formally just; they
are not Causes of our Justification, but rather Fruits and Effects: we have the
Habit of Faith because the Spirit of God works in us Belief: and we love God
because he loved us first, and gave us his Spirit, which works this Love in
us, Faius. So then the Faithful even in their sleep are justified, not by an
inherent Habit, but because they accepted of God in Christ, as the Apostle
says, Christ died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him. Ibid. p. 267, 268. Add to this the Socinian Doctrine as
recited by Dr. Willet upon the Romans, which is as follows.

Whereas the Apostle here says, Romans 5. 8. That Christ died for us, we
according to the Scriptures so understand it, that he offered a Sacrifice for
Sins, Heb. 10. 12. that he as our High Priest offered himself for our
Redemption, Heb. 7. 27. that he was our Surety, and paid our Ransom for us,
Heb. 7. 22. and saved us from our Sins in bearing the Punishment due unto the
same; and so he died for us, that is, in our place and stead, and so purchased
our Redemption: yet wicked Socinus thus wresteth and misconstrueth these words,
that Christ died no otherwise for us than for our Profit and Benefit, in
confirming by his Death his Doctrine and Example of Life; by the which he says
he brought Salvation unto the World, and not by dying for us, as in our stead,
or to pay by his Death our Ransom. His wicked Objections are these.

Object. 1. The Apostle says, 1 John 3. 16. He laid down his Life for us, and
we ought to lay down our Lives for the Brethren: Christ died for us, as we must
die for our Brethren, which is not to die in their stead, but only to profit
them by our Example.

Answ. The Apostle does not simply compare the Death of Christ, and of the
faithful dying for their Brethren together; but only in this, that in both Love
is expressed to the Brethren, tho not in the like measure: But Christ's Death
does not only by the Example thereof profit the Church, as the Death of the
Martyrs did; but thereby Man's Salvation and Redemption also was wrought.

Object. 2. St. Paul says that he suffered for the Colossians, Col. 1. 24.
which was not to satisfy for them; or he suffered in their stead, but only to
confirm their Faith, and so to edify him.

Answ. There is great difference between the Sufferings of Christ for his
Church, which was to redeem it, and the Sufferings of Paul for his Brethren,
which only was to edify them.

Object. 3. As Christ is said to have died for us, so likewise the Scripture
says he died for our Sins, Gal. 1. 4. the meaning is not, instead or in place
of our Sins, but because of our Sins; in the same sense he died for us, that
is, for our cause, not in our stead.

Answ. This is a childish Cavil; for the Scripture shows a manifest
difference between these two Phrases, to die for us, that is, to save us, and
to die for our Sins, not to save them, but to purge them, and take them away.

Object. 4. That which no Law or Custom ever allowed, is not to be affirmed of
Christ; but one to die for another, is warranted by no Law nor Custom: indeed
one may pay another's pecuniary Mulct or Debt, because ones Money may become
another's; but the Death of one cannot be another's.

Answ. 1. The Assumption is not true, for even among the Romans there were some
found that did offer themselves to present Destruction for their Country, as
Decius the Consul, and Curtius; these Examples are far unlike unto Christ's,
yet they show, that it is not against all Use and Custom one to die for another.

2. The Proposition fails diversely. 1. Christ's Example is singular, the like
Precedent cannot be found, as the Apostle shows, ver. 7. that he died for his
Enemies, which never any did, therefore we must not seek for Law or Custom to
measure this singular Act of Christ by. 2. It is also false, that no Law nor
Rule can be found for this; for it is revealed in the Evangelical Law, that God
gave his Son to die for the World: the Law of Moses indeed required that the
same Person that sinned should die: but that which was impossible to the Law is
fulfilled in Christ, Romans 8. 2. Yea, the blind High Priest spoke the Truth
unwillingly, Joh. 11. 50. That it was expedient, that one die for the People,
that the whole Nation perish not: he little thought that Christ should redeem
the People from everlasting Death, yet ignorantly uttered that which the Lord
intended.

Object. 5. It is a great Cruelty and Injustice to punish him that is innocent,
and to let go unpunished the Offenders; they then accuse God of Cruelty and
Injustice, in delivering up his innocent Son to Death for us Sinners.

Answ. 1. God's Acts are not to be measured according to the Rules of human
Proceedings; for the like Temper of Justice and Mercy cannot be found among
Men: neither have any the like absolute Power as God has, to dispose of all
things according to his Will and Pleasure; who if he should, as he made the
World of nothing, so bring it of a sudden to nothing again, should not
therefore show himself either cruel or unjust.

Answ. 2. Neither is it unjust for the Innocent to suffer Punishment for the
Offenders upon these Conditions: 1. If both of them be of the same nature. 2.
If the innocent Party do willingly offer himself. 3. If he can by his own
strength overcome the Punishment. 4. And if thereby he can effectually procure
the Salvation of others, all which do concur in Christ's voluntary suffering
for us.

Object. 6. The Scripture says, the same Soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel.
18. it was therefore unjust that Christ should die that had not sinned, and
those escape that had sinned.

Answ. These legal Sentences show what God might, according to the Justice of
the Law, have required of every one; they are no Rules of God's Proceedings in
Mercy with his Children according to the Promise of the Gospel.

Object. 7. God might if it had pleased him, have freely forgiven Men their
Trespasses; therefore Christ needed not to have died for them.

Answ. 1. First, it is no good Argument, a posse ad esse, from that which may
be, to that which is; God might do it, therefore he did it, or would do it, is
no good Consequent. 2. Neither is it true, that God could otherwise have
forgiven Men, than by the Death of Christ, his Justice being presupposed: for
God cannot deny himself, seeing the Sentence was past, that they should die the
Death, if they transgressed; this Decree must stand, and the Death deserved
must be satisfied for: neither is this any want or defect in God's Power, but
an Argument of the Perfection of his Nature, that he cannot lie, neither is
mutable.

Object. 8. It is perfect Mercy to forgive freely, and perfect Justice that the
Offender should be punished only; but in God is perfect Mercy and Justice.

Answ. 1. It is true, that perfect Mercy and perfect Justice considered apart,
and by themselves, have these Effects and Properties; but so can they not be
incident into one and the same Subject: therefore seeing God's Mercy and
Justice are tempered together, they must be so considered as the one destroy
not the other. 2. Indeed the rigor of the Law requires perfect Justice, etc.
(and this let me add to what the Doctor asserts ut supra, passed fully upon
Christ.)

Object. 9. One Man can but redeem one; and therefore either there must be
found out an infinite sort of Redeemers for all Men, or Christ redeemed but one.

Answ. The Antecedent is false; for many times for one Captive Prince a
thousand common Prisoners are set at liberty: much more available for all (the
Elect) was the Redemption purchased by Christ, the Prince of our Salvation. Ex
Paraeo Dr. Willet, Ibid. p. 268, 269.

Romans 5. 18. By the justifying of one, the Benefit abounded toward all Men,
etc. Hence of late Huberus, and before him the Pelagians, would prove, that the
Benefit of Justification is as universal toward all, even Infidels and
Unbelievers, as the Condemnation that came in by Adam; for the Apostle on both
sides names all, for otherwise the Benefit by Christ should be inferior unto
the Loss in Adam which redounded generally upon all.

Contra. 1. This term of Universality (all) must be restrained to the nature of
the Subject: As Adam transfused his Sin unto all which were his Offspring, so
Christ also justified all his, that is, all which believe in him: so by all the
Apostle understands the universal company of the Faithful. 2. The
pre-eminence of the Benefit consists not in the equality of the Number, that
Christ should save as many as are lost in Adam; for then there should be only
an Equality, but not a Superiority. 3. But herein is the Prerogative of Grace
seen. (1.) In the excellency of the Effect; for Life is a more excellent thing
than Death, and Righteousness than Sin. (2.) In the powerfulness of the Work,
it shows a greater Power to save, than to destroy; to justify, than to
condemn: for it is an easier matter to destroy than to save, to pull down than
to build up, to mortify than to revive and raise to Life. (3.) The Pre-eminence
is in the amplitude and largeness of Grace, in that we are justified not only
from one, but all kind of Sins, as well actual as original, whereas original
Sin is only derived from Adam. -- Ver. 19. So by the Obedience of one shall
many be made righteous, etc. The Romanists, as Bellarm. lib. 2. de Justificat.
cap. 1. Pererius Disputat. 17. do much urge this Argument against imputative
Justice, that we are not justified by the Righteousness of Christ imputed by
Faith, but by an inherent Righteousness wrought in us by Christ, whereby we are
formally made just; because we are so made righteous and just in Christ, as we
became Sinners in Adam: but that was not by Imputation of Adam's Sin, but by
Sin dwelling in them, whereby they are formally made Sinners; therefore we are
formally made righteous by an inherent Justice remaining in us, and not imputed
only. Pererius further urges the Phrase justi constituentur, many shall be
made just, which is not all one as to be reputed just, or to be just by
Imputation, but to be just indeed. See Dr. Willet, ibid. p. 280, 281. and his
Refutation of this Pa-Bax-Quakeristical Notion.

Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law. -- Here Chrysostom well notes,
that if Christ be the end of-the Law, it follows that, Qui Christum non
habet, etsi legis justitiam habere videatur, eam tamen non habeat; he which
has not Christ, tho he seem to have the Righteousness of the Law, yet he has
it not, etc. Without Christ then, and Faith in him, there is no true
Righteousness before God: for without Faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11. 6. What is become then of the Popish Works of Preparation which should
go before Justification? as tho a Man having not Faith, yet by his Works --
might prepare and make himself fit for Justification following: for all such
Works which come before Faith, and so are not sanctified in Christ, are before
God no better than Sins. Ibid. p. 475.

Baxterian.
Q. WHether we are justified by Christ's Righteousness imputed unto us: and
whether the Scripture say so?

Answ. The Scripture often says, that Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness,
and that is Faith in Christ: And it says, that Righteousness is imputed, or
reckoned to us, that is, we are reckoned, or reputed righteous, Romans 4, 6, 11,
22. And that Sin is not imputed, that is, not charged on us to Punishment, or
Damnation, Romans 5. 13. and 4. 8. Psalm. 32. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 20. The words of
imputing Christ's Righteousness to us I find not in God's Word, and therefore
think them not necessary to the Church's Peace or Safety. But as for the sense
of those words no doubt but it may be good, and the Papists themselves own them
in the same sense as many Protestant Divines profess to use them, as I have
proved. Mr. Baxter's Breviat of Justif. Part 1. p. 22.

We must first agree what Righteousness is; Righteousness is formally a
Relation, and therefore must have the definition of a Relation; I need not tell
Scholars what it is, The subject of this Relation is, first, Man's Actions and
Habits, and their Titles and Rights, and then their Persons as the subject of
these. Righteousness is a relation to the Rule or Law, and is an agreeableness
thereto: If it be God's Law, it is Righteousness before God; if but Man's, it
is but human Righteousness. As a Law has two parts, the Precept and the
Retribution of Reward and Punishment, so there are two sorts of Unrighteousness
and Righteousness: as to the Precept, Obedience is Righteousness, and Sin is
Unrighteousness: As to the Retribution, right to Impunity and to the promised
Reward is the Person's Righteousness; and so contrary, Righteousness materially
is either particular, in some one Cause, or few Causes, or universal and
perfect in all Causes: Righteousness particular is either in some small matter
that we are not made happy by; or in some great Cause which our Happiness
depends on. Mr. Baxt. Brev. of Justif. Part 1. p. 1.

Justification is a word of many senses; sometimes it signifies [making us
righteous] sometimes the Law or Covenant's virtual judging us righteous, it
being the Rule of Judgment: sometimes God's esteeming us righteous in his own
mind; sometimes for a justifying by Evidence or Witness, sometimes by Apology
of an Advocate, sometimes by the Sentence of the Judge, and sometimes for the
Execution of that Sentence; but the notable special sorts are three, making
just, judging just, and using us as just: And they that will dispute of
Justification, and not tell in what sense they take the word, do but abuse
their Time and Talk. Ibid. p. 6.

Contra. Is not Christ's Righteousness ours, as our Sins were his, by
Imputation?

Answ. Yes, as much at least, or more; but take heed of marring Christ's Gospel
by your mending it, and of making him no Christ, while you would make him more
merciful according to your own Conceits; I know it is said once that he was
made Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of
God in him. But as we are not properly righteous, much less God's
Righteousness, but are made righteous, and so the instances or demonstrations
of the Righteousness of God: So Expositors commonly agree, that by Sin is meant
a Sacrifice for Sin; or by being [made Sin] is meant being used as if he had
been a Sinner. Undoubtedly if God imputed or accounted Christ a Sinner, and if
he were truly so by any Means, Practice or Translation, he must be by Sin
hateful to the most holy God (even to himself) and would have in him so great a
part of Hell and Divine Desertion, as is not consistent with his Personal
Perfection, or the Hypostatical Union, as far as we can conceive: And if indeed
God imputed to him the Sins of all the Elect, so as first to make the very Sins
themselves to become Christ's own Sins by Imputation, then Christ suffered for
his own Sins, and must be more odious to God than any ordinary Sinner; and all
good Men that knew it by him must have judged accordingly; for Sin, and
especially the Sins of so many Millions and so great, must needs render him
whose own they are, really sinful, hateful and miserable: Any of which to say
of Christ is Blasphemy. Ibid. p. 30.

Object. This is like the Papists, who say, That Christ merited to make our
Actions meritorious: So you say, That Christ's Righteousness purchased a
Personal Evangelical Righteousness for us, by which we are justified.

Answ. Yes; by which we are justified, 1. Against the charge of Infidelity,
Impenitency, and Insincerity, and final Ungodliness. And, 2. By which our Title
to Christ and his Righteousness, and purchased Benefits must be justified, as
by the condition of the free Gift: And to deny this is to deny or subvert the
whole Gospel. As to the talk of Popish Merits, I will not be so vain as to
divert on that occasion: He is no true Christian that really denies that
Christ's Righteousness has procured a personal Righteousness in and of us,
consisting in our Conformity to the conditional mode of the Promise of Christ
and Life. We may differ in words while we mean the same thing: But as for him
that denies the thing, I know that he can be no better than profane. Ibid. p.
56. To the tenor or mode of the promising and penal part of the Law of Christ,
which gives Pardon and Life on condition of penitent believing, acceptance and
consent, and continues it on condition also of sincere Obedience to Christ our
Redeemer, and God in him; and so we shall be judged, and either justified or
damned, as we have or have not this personal Righteousness. Christ in Judgment
is not to try his own part, but ours: He that is not thus justified shall be
damned. And as to the Libertine or Antinomian Error, (that this performing of
the Condition of the Promise is no Righteousness, but only Christ's imputed is
Righteousness, because it answers not the perfect Precept, tho it answer the
imposed Condition of the Promise; and that it is not to be called
Righteousness, nor we so far as is aforesaid to be justified by it) I appeal to
Scripture and the reason of the thing. The words Just, Justice, Righteous and
Righteousness, Justify and Justification, being viewed in the Concordance and
examined, will show you, that God in Scripture many score or hundred times
gives such Names to our personal Qualities and Acts: And what is that Man that
dares deny this constant Language of Scripture? Ibid. p. 57.

They talk of Justification in mere ignorant Confusion, not knowing the various
senses of the Word, or the diverse parts of the Work: They denied those
Distinctions which no reason can deny; they confound justifying efficiently,
justifying constitutively, justifying virtually by the Gospel-Gift or Law of
Grace, justifying by Evidence, justifying by Witness, justifying by Plea and
Advocate, justifying by judicial Sentence, and by Execution. They set the
Causes against each others, as if it were a thing that had but one cause; when
they meet with the word used for sentential Justification by decisive Judgment,
they exclude all the included and supposed Acts, that is, making Men just
efficiently, constitutive Matter and Form, or Subject and Relation, the Gospel
Donation and Condonation, and all such previous Acts: And when they have done,
not knowing what they affirm or deny, they only cry up the Name of Christ's
Rightcousness imputed, not knowing what Imputation is, nor what sort of Cause
Christ's Righteousness is, whether efficient, or material, or formal by
Constitution, and think its true meritorious Causality is too little: And in
their description they exclude sentential decisive Justification, which they
had denominated it to be, making it to be only the Donation of Christ's perfect
Righteousness as in its Essence to be ours; and so joining the efficient and
constitutive Causes, yet leavng out the instrumental Efficient, which is the
Gospel Donation, or Covenant-Gift; and calling Faith the instrumental Cause,
which is no efficient Cause, but a moral Reception of the free Gift, and a
moral Qualification as a receptive Condition for our Title to the Possession.
And whereas God never judged a Man righteous till he had made him righteous;
they say, that to justify is not to make righteous, but to judge righteous, and
yet describe judging by making: yea, and exclude the sentential Justification
at the day of Judgment, thinking that it is all perfectly at our first
Justification sentenced: As if God the Father, Christ as King or Prophet, the
Holy Ghost, the Covenant of Grace, Faith, (together with my Directions in my
Life of Faith, and Mothodus Theologiae) had no hand in our Justification, but
Christ's Righteousness imputed only. Mr. Bax. Breviat. of Justif. Part 2. Head
51. p. 17. They say, all Sins past, present and to come are pardoned, even that
not committed (that is no Sin.) -- They err as grossly, saying, that [by Faith
imputed for Righteousness] and [our being justified by Faith] is not meant the
Act or Habit of Faith, but the Object, Christ's Righteousness; not sticking
thereby to turn all such Texts into worse than nonsense, put Christ's
Righteousness instead of the word [Faith] in all those Texts, and try how it
will run. And why is Faith named if it have no part in the sense? They say that
it justifies not as a Work: I say, it justifies not efficiently (here is a
comeoff) at all, much less as a Work in Paul's sense, that makes the Reward to
be not of Grace, but of Debt; nor does it justify as an Act in genere; for then
a quatenus ad omne, every Act would justify; nor yet as a mere good Act or
Work; for then every good Act would justify as it does. But we are justified
by, 1. This Faith in specie, which is our fiducial reception of Christ. 2. And
that as it is formally made by God the Condition of our participation of the
Gift, which is Christ and his Justifying meritorious Righteousness. Christ is
not instead of Faith, and Faith is not instead of Christ: It is Christ believed
in, and received, and not Christ without Belief and Reception. Ibid. p. 12, 18,
19. To receive Justification, Sanctification, Adoption physically, is nothing
but justificari, sanctificari, etc. to be justified, sanctified, adopted. --
They expose Christianity to the scorn of Infidels, by telling Men, that it
consists in that which every Novice in Logic or Reasoning knows to be
impossible, that one Man's Sins and one Man's Righteousness should be made
another; not only so far as that others partake of the Effects (Christ of our
Sins in Sufferings, and we of the Benefits of his Righteousness) which we all
maintain; but that the thing it self is essentially thus transferred; and so
the Accidents do transire a subjecto in subjectum: (Impudence upon Impudence in
lying, the old Prophet of Bethel directly.) And whereas Sin and Righteousness
are Accidents in the three Predicaments of Habit (or Privation) Acts and
Relation, they feign the Habits, Acts and Relations of odious Deformity of all
the Elect, to become in themselves the Habits, Acts and Relations of Christ:
And the Habits; Acts and Relations of perfect Righteousness in Christ, to
become essentially the very Habits, Acts and Relations of every Person elect.
-- They read in Scripture above six hundred Texts that speak of inherent and
acted personal Righteousness joined with the Promises of Life and God's
acceptance, and Threatenings to them that have it not; and yet they by putid
Contradiction say, it is a Righteousness that makes no Man righteous, tho but
in tantum subordinate to the meritorious perfect Righteousness of Christ. And
so it is, as Learning that makes not learned, or Likeness that makes not like,
etc. that is, it is Righteousness and no Righteosness. -- By all this they
would make, 1. The Concord of Christians impossible, as if they must first
agree in all this Error. 2. They harden Papists in contempt and scorn of
Protestants. And, 3. They notoriously militate for the Kingdom of Satan. And
now tell me, whether there were ever damnable Heretics in the World, if these
be none? Ibid. p. 23, 41, 42, 43.

Tho we have no Righteousness of our own that is so denominated by the Law of
Innocence, yet have we a Righteousness to plead for our Justification from its
Sentence, which by our Mediator was performed to it, by which the Lawgiver has
received Satisfaction, and we must have the personal subordinate Righteousness
required by the Covenant of Grace. -- All that are made righteous, are esteemed
and judged righteous, and used as righteous. Ibid. Part 1. p. 7. At foedus hoc
beneficia illa sub condition fidei and penitentiae tantum donat: and justitia
haec quae consistit in conditionis praestatione, ^st conditio juris nostri ad
foederis beneficia; and est conformitas nostra ad eam legis gratiae partem,
quae conditionem justificationis and vitae instituit. Et quando quis accusatur,
de infidelitate and impenitentia finali, and de non praestita promissi
condition, ex ipsa praestatione, scilicet ex ipsa fide and penitentia
justificandus est, and non solam Christi justitiam allegando. Mr. Baxter's
Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 310. -- The sum and substance of which stuff is, That
the benefits of the Covenant of Grace in the Communication of them, our
reception of them, and our continuance so to do to our Justification, do depend
upon our Faith and Repentance, and that against the charge of Infidelity and
Impenitency, and not our alleging the Righteousness of Christ alone. Again,
Ita and Christi justitia etiam fit nostra, ut causa nostrae personalis
justitiae, non Deum aut Christum nos constituens de ejus modo, sed nostro, nos
justos vere faciens. Ibid. p. 83.

The Righteousness of Christ is so made ours, as that it is the cause of our
personal Righteousness; not constituting us as a God or Christ righteous after
their manner, but our own making us truly just or righteous. And p. 318.
speaking of Justification, tells us, That none of the fallen Progeny of Adam
were constituted just. At evangelice quosdam justos fieri patet. But it is
clear that some were made evangelically just or righteous.

Peccata futura, quia non sunt peccata, neque remissione egent, neque ejus sunt
capacia: Non igitur foederatione prima remittuntur, sed sicut conditio
fundamentalis tunc praestatur, ita remissionis futurae fundamentum tunc
ponitur: ex quo suo tempore, infirmitatum remissio immediate oritur; peccatorum
autem notorum and majorum remissio, renovatam supponit resipiscentiam. Ibid.
Part 2. p. 398.

Whether all Sins past, present, and to come, are actually pardoned at once?
This the Doctor affirms, and I deny. -- God does see and charge a Believer with
his new Enormities, as his Sins, and not Christ's. -- New Transgressions need
renewed Pardon, and all Sins are not pardoned at once. Mr. Dan. Williams' s
Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 150, 151.

In opposition to the Doctrine of Justification by the imputed application of
the material Righteousness of Christ, Mr. Dan. Williams cries up the Beauty of
sincere Holiness, and charges this as an Error upon Dr. Crisp: The greatest
Holiness in Believers, tho wrought in them by the Holy Ghost, is mere Dung and
Rottenness, and Filthiness, as in them (which is so in spite of his Heart,
either as to our Justification before, or acceptance with God, in which respect
it is that the Doctor so terms it; and from hence our Author flies to the
Popish and Quakeristical Method of crying up Holiness jointly for the same
end.) The Truth confirmed. Consider, that whatever is spoken of Holiness in any
mere Man on Earth since the Fall, is spoken of sincere Holiness, for perfect
Holiness none had. Is that Dung which is the effect of Regeneration in the Soul
and Actings? (Yes that it is, as to our Justification, either immediately or
subordinately.) Is that Dung which is so often honored with the name of the
Spirit it self, called the Spirit of Love, Prayer, etc.? (Yes that it is, the
Spirit himself tells us so, by the Mouth of Paul, Phil. 3.) Is not that more
lovely which is called the Divine Nature? (Yes that it is, but not to be
compared to the Righteousness of Christ in which the Elect stand materially
clothed before ever they receive the Impression of the Divine Nature.) How
amiable must that be which is the new Man after God's Image? Ephesians. 4. 24. The
new Heart, Ezekiel. 18. 31. The Law of God in the Heart, and the Grace of God? Are
those Works Dung to which we are created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. and
enabled by the Spirit? Or, is that Filthiness which renders Saints the
excellent of the Earth? Psalm. 16. 3. the Imitators of Christ? (i. e. Their own
Saviors, in their own Righteousness standing materially justified before God
by the Merits of another.) Was not this it for which Caleb was said to have
another Spirit? (Was this his Justification in a foederal sense before God?)
And upon account whereof we must love the godly, as begotten of God? (but is it
upon the account of this that God loves them, or rather is not this a fruit of
his Love in Election, and their materially and actually being justified,
precedent unto this?) Is it not pleasing to God, to which he has made so many
Promises, for which he so commends Moses, David, and all the Saints, calling
such a peculiar People, etc.? (Is it for this they became a peculiar People?
Let the Scripture decide it, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7. 8. compare Josh. 24. 2, 3.) It Is no
small thing with which Christ is so pleased in his Spouse, as you see in the
Song of Solomon (but the Church tells us there, that notwithstanding all her
Graces she was black, and yet comely, from a Covering, as a Tent or a Curtain,
Cant. 1. 5. compare. Ezekiel. 16. 14.) Can that be Dung which is a Meetness for
Glory, an Honor to God, and Credit to Religion? (It will be cast out as Dung,
if it offer to lift up the Gates of Glory.) How can it be acceptable to God
through Christ, if it be Filthiness, and changed into the nature of our Flesh
and Corruption? (It is an Abomination unto God, and will be rejected by Christ,
unless it flow from an Union with him, and a pre-justified state.) Wickedness
will never be accepted with God for Christ's sake, tho imperfect Goodness
shall. [No Goodness whether perfect or imperfect, either in this World or in
the World to come, will be accepted of God even for Christ his sake, but from
the immaculately perfect, and most righteously justified ones (without respect
to their good or bad Works) of God in and not by Christ Jesus.] Ibid. p. 168,
170, 171.

Truth. Tho neither Holiness, sincere Obedience, or good Works, do make any
Atonement for Sin, or are in the least the meritorious Righteousness whereby
Salvation is caused, or for which this or any Blessing becomes due to us as of
Debt, yet as the Spirit of christ freely works all Holiness in the Soul, and
enableth us to sincere Obedience and good Works; so the Lord Jesus has of
Grace, and for his own Merits, promised to bring to Heaven such as are
partakers of true Holiness, perform this sincere Obedience, and do these good
Works perseveringly, and appoints these as the way and means of a Believer's
obtaining Salvation, and several other Blessings, requiring these as
indispensible Duties and Qualifications of all such whom he will so save and
bless, and excluding all that want or neglect them, or live under the Power of
what is contrary thereto, viz. Profaneness, Rebellion, and utter Unfruitfulness
-- (and especially such as make a vigorous Plea for Holiness, as a Cover for
their Deceitfulness and Filthiness, or such as rely upon a prerequisite
Condition unto either a Justification by the matter purely as such, or merely
the remote Merit of the Righteousness of another.) Ibid. p. 102.

The real difference. Whether Faith and Repentance be indispensibly required of
us, that we may be justified for the sake of Christ's Righteousness. This I
affirm, and the Doctor denies, of which I have treated, chap. 12. Whether
Holiness, and sincere Obedience, and perseverance are the way to Heaven, and
are required of the Elect as the Conditions of their obtaining Salvation; or is
Heaven promised to them, if they persevere in Holiness and sincere Obedience;
and the loss of Heaven threatened in case they continue wicked and disobedient,
or after Grace turn Apostates. This the Doctor denies, and I affirm. -- Whether
the good Works of a Believer are rewardable of Grace for Christ's sake. This I
affirm, and the Doctor denies. Ibid. p. 107.

The Points are too many to admit Enlargement, and most of them carry that
Evidence, that the whole scope of the Bible must be forgotten, when they are
denied. Can two or three wrested Texts overturn the constant Language of the
Scriptures? And is it not strange that all Religion, and the human Nature it
self in a state of Trial should be fully struck at from a gross Conceit, that
the infinite God cannot foresee, and purpose Events unless it must null his
Government over reasonable Subjects, and prevent his distribution of Rewards
and Punishments by a stated Rule? What a Reflection is it on the Divine Wisdom,
and the glorious Platform of the Redeemer's Work and Kingdom, that he cannot
purchase Benefits for Sinners unless he forbear to use them as Motives to
Obedience? Yea, the whole of his serious pleadings with Men must be a Mockery,
rather than he must be allowed to bestow his Blessings in a rectoral way. He
shall merit nothing as a Priest if he dispense it as a King, nor be esteemed to
enable Sinners to act, if ^e appoint them any thing to do in order to a Reward.
Ibid. p. 109.

Sinners have much to do in order to Salvation: There be few lines in the Bible
but argue this; it is the scope of all the Revelations of God to Men since the
Fall. It Is true, we have nothing to do in a way of Atonement or Purchase; but
it is as true, we have much to do in order to our participation of what Christ
has purchased: we must repent that our Sins may be blotted out, Acts 3. 19. We
must believe that we may be saved, etc. Our Lord is express, If you know these
things, happy are you if you do them, John 13. 17. All Gospel-discoveries are
made known for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26. And Christ will take
Vengeance on all them that obey not the Gospel; neither Christ nor Gospel will
secure them, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. The Revelations of God to Men are not a bare
description of Duty and Benefits, but an injunction of Duty in a connection with
Benefits, Romans 10. 9. If thou confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and
believe with thy Heart, thou shall be saved. I could show there is no one
saving Benefit granted to a Sinner, but on supposition of his doing: See much
of this, chap. 8. 10, 11, 12. and chap. 21. 22. Christ never intended the
application of his Merits for our Privileges, without ordering them as Motives
to Duty on our part. The influences of the Spirit of God, and God's
Institutions, have no causality in our Salvation, if Men have nothing to do in
order to be saved. It Is plain, that Salvation is ascribed to the Spirit, and
also to the means of Grace: neither of them are the Atonement or Price of
Salvation (tho the Atonement and Price as to their Acceptance and Efficacy it
seems depends thereupon) therefore they must save as they operate on the Soul
in order to its actings, Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 21. And this must be as it
answers the way appointed for our participation of Life. -- On what account is
it said that we believe to the saving of our Souls? Heb. 10. 39. And Repentance
to Salvation is the Expression of the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 7. 10. What sense
can be affixed to these and the like Phrases, as they are opposed to their
Contraries as destructive, if Men do nothing toward their Salvation? See James
2. 14. Can Faith save him? Yea, and I may ask, What means the Holy Ghost when
he says, In so doing thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee? 1 Timothy
4. 16. Sure the Argument is not strong, if it be true, we can do nothing for
our Salvation. -- The Destruction of Sinners under the Gospel, is still laid on
not doing, they are condemned by the Law, (A performance of the Condition of
one Covenant of Works saves them from the Condemnation of another Covenant of
Works) but they remain condemned, and their Ruin is fixed (and so they are
twice dead) for want of doing somewhat. Ye will not come to me that you might
have Life, John 5. 40. How often is the ruin of Souls laid on not turning, not
repenting, etc.? If Men have nothing to do for Salvation, then Christ has no
Rule to judge them who lived under the Gospel. I hope none will say the judicial
Sentence will pass on Men as elected, or not elected. Does it agree to the
proceedings of that Tribunal at that day, to say, Thou shall be damned, because
thou were not elected? Is this the account the Scripture gives? Does it not
proceed on the difference in Men's Carriage and Tempers? See the Parable of the
Talents; they who improved their Talents were saved, he that hid it in a Napkin
was therefore damned, Mat. 25. 21, 24, 28.

Consider any Description of the last day, and you will find God saves and damns
with a respect to Men's neglects and compliance with his Gospel. I could easily
demonstrate, that if Men have nothing to do in order to Salvation, the Ministry
of Christ and his Apostles, the Ministry most apt and most blessed to Souls to
this very day, is all a Vanity and Falsehood, they are cold pleadings with
Sinners (mercenary Converts) that are not backed with Life and Death: (and yet
love to a Lust would make our Author double diligent in crossing Land and Sea
to espouse the Object of it.) Remove saving Benefits and undoing Dangers from
being Arguments to compliance with the Will of Christ, and any may read the
success of such a Ministry; and to use these Arguments to persuade Men to
repent and believe, if we have nothing to do for Heaven, is a manifest falsehood
and trifling. It Is awful to consider, how inconsistent some Men's Application is
with their Doctrine, tho it is well their Uses to the unconverted have so much
Truth in them. -- True Holiness, sincere Obedience, or good Works, and
Perseverance are the way to Heaven, and so necessary to the Salvation of a
Believer, that without them he cannot be saved, and continuing in them he shall
be saved. -- This might be evidenced by many Reasons. 1. It is not saving Faith
(which is not, he should have said, the conjoint fruit of a state of Salvation)
which is not operative to these Effects: It cease to be true (tho once so)
whenever it wholly fails of purifying the Heart, and working by Love. Many
affirm, that all Graces are seminally in Faith, as in their Principle: Such
must grant, that as Faith justifies us at first in receiving and relying on
Christ; so it continues to justify us, by continuing those Acts, (not a word
all this while of God's justifying us, he must be forced to stay to the last;
and when we have made our selves finally meet for it, then he must do it, as
not being able to avoid it) and exerting it self in those other Operations,
(Hold there Countryman, I see these bold Britains if they can get but an inch
they will take an ^ll) which are essential to its nature (I thought there was
nothing of the Essence of Faith but Faith it self, nor any thing essential with
its nature, as justifying, but Faith alone.) And thus some expound James 2. 20,
24. Obedience, good Works, and Perseverance, preserve us from those contrary
Evils which do subject Men to Condemnation. I keep my Body under, lest by any
means when I have preached to others, I my self be a castaway; 1 Cor. 9. 23.
3. The Gospel-Constitution does by its Promises and Threatenings make
persevering Holiness, Obedience or good Works, the necessary way to Heaven.
(Not a word of Christ's being our way to them, or that he is the first Gift;
this savours too much of Dr. Crisp, and so of Antinomianism.) These are not
only a natural, (that is to avoid Pelagianism if he can) but a moral Meetness
for Heaven. (Here he is sunk over head and ears into it, and Heathenism as
civilized to boot; for what is a moral Me^tness for Heaven, but a refining or
new brushing up of Nature? Unless he means in a juridical sense, and that
Christ only is in his own personal representative Obedience unto the Moral Law
for us, which is not an infused Righteousness, but an imputatively applied one,
in which all his Elect stand morally, legally, juridically, righteously, and
irrevocably meet for Heaven and Glory; but sanctifyingly meet, or a meetness
for Fellowship, Communion with, and Enjoyment of God is another thing, as lying
in the constant Renovation of our Natures, and depending upon the former both
in its original and continuance: Hence it is that Christ as our High Priest
acts morally for us with God, performing the part of an Advocate, pleading in
Righteousness for his People, as to what he in his Person had done for them;
but as a Prophet and King he exerts himself physically toward them in
scattering their Darkness, and subduing their Obstinacy; the Efficacy of the
latter, even in Christ's Engagement for them, depending upon his success in the
former.) But to return to our Author. -- 1. The Gospel-Constitution contains
Promises and Threatenings, which affect all of us, as a Rule of Happiness and
Misery: By these God governs Men, and Men's Hopes and Fears should be directed
by these as their Rule. (So does a King govern his Subjects, Judges and
Justices of the Peace a Country; and thus God by the common Acts of his
Providence, either directly or indirectly governs the World.) Dr. Crisp not
observing this, has run into those Mistakes which open a door to all
Licentiousness (let such as brand the Doctrine of free Grace with its being a
Doctrine of Licentiousness, beware lest God in his just Judgment give them up
thereunto; for it is usual as well as righteous with him, to signalize the
nature of the Offense from the kind of the Punishment they fall under; Judge. 1.
7.) tho he intended it not: (this is a pitiful Salvo, or our Author's glavering
Plaster, after his injurious wounding of him.) His whole Scheme implies, that
Christ does not distribute Blessings or Punishments by any Rule that refers to
the Actings of Men. (He did well therein, for he knew what Christ had said,
that without him we can do nothing.) -- Most of the Promises and Threatenings in
the Bible that refer to the state of Souls, are Evangelical Promises and
Threats; they are not the Sanction of the Law of Innocence, but of
Gospel Grace: Who can doubt this if they consider, that the Covenant of
Innocence promised Life to nothing below sinless and perfect Obedience? The
Threatenings of the Covenant of Innocence admitted no Repentance or after-relief
to the guilty: They did fix the Curse irrevocably in case of any Transgression.
No overture of Life, or Door of Hope, or Argument to Conversion with hopes of
acceptance could be framed out of those legal Threats or Promises to any Man
that is a Sinner. Turn ye, turn ye, Why will you die? was not the Language of
that Covenant: No, if a Man is once a Sinner, the Law could speak no lower than
this, Thou art undone whether thou turn or no. Things being thus, I would
entreat thee to consider all the Calls of God in Christ to Men since the Fall;
weigh the Promises and Threats wherewith God strengthens those Calls; see if
any one of the Calls to Faith, or Repentance, or Holiness, thus backed with
Promises and Threats, be not Evangelical. Does God in those Calls promise Life
to nothing below sinless, perfect Obedience, or does he threaten eternal Death
in those Calls against whatever is short of perfect Obedience? (So the
rack-rent of the former broken Covenant is cancelled, provided we bring in the
Pepper-corn Payment of the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace.) Do the
Threats annexed to those Calls exclude all after Repentance? (Not at all,
according to our Author, for that may well be the prevalent Condition of our
Re-entry, that was the previous Motive to our first Title and Possession.) See
Ezekiel. 18. 21. Are not these Calls with the Promises and Threats directed to
Sinners for their Conversion and Recovery? Is it not to Sinners God speaks in
them? and is it not for their Healing and Salvation? Are not the Promises an
offer of Relief? Are not the Threatenings intended to awe and warn Sinners
against refusal of these Offers? They be not uttered to bind the Curse, but to
deliver from it, by urging our compliance with the Commands of a Redeemer; Heb.
3. 7, 8. chap. 4. 7. Every Threatening used by God as an Argument to Conversion,
is a Gospel-threatning. -- What kind of Government can Men assign to Christ, if
there be no Sanction to his Precepts? Dr. Crisp often tells us, that the Sanction
of the Law of Works is removed, the Curse is gone as to the Elect. This is
true, if he mean, that sinless Obedience is not now the way to Life; (but a
venial imperfect Obedience is) and that all below it shall not bind Death upon
us so as to hinder our Relief by the Gospel (so we be sure of bringing in our
conditional Pepper-corn Rent.) But what then, has the Redeemer no Promises and
Threatenings to rule Man by? And is their Obedience or Disobedience an
indifferent thing as to their Happiness or Misery? Must he save all or damn
all, or else be a Respector of Persons in his Judicial Distributions? (So that
our Justification depends upon our Works or Doings, and we instigated thereunto
from a moral attendance unto the Promises and Threatenings of the Covenant of
Grace, as the Sanction thereof, and Christ's Boundaries in the discharge of his
Rectoral Office.) Is this the Language of God to Sinners since the Fall? Did
Christ preach at this rate when on Earth? Or, does he so speak now from Heaven?
Heb. 12. 25. chap. 2. 3. Our Lord assures us, Men's Sins are aggravated, and
their Damnation grows greater by a rejection of his Call to Sinners, through
Impenitence and Unbelief; Joh. 8. 24. Heb. 10. 29.

It Is a precarious Dominion that Christ exercises, if he has neither Rewards
nor Punishments to induce Men's regards to his Authority. Read the Scripture, or
wait the Judgment-day, and you will find it otherwise. -- (So that if a Man
cannot then make it appear that he has wrought out an Obedience suited to the
nature of the Promises and Threatenings of the Covenant of Grace, he must fall
in Judgment.) How unsuitable is it to the present state of Mankind, that Christ
should govern us without Promises and Threatenings? He is a King, and we are his
Subjects. (Now Allegiance comes in for a subordinate Righteousness, what a
distended reach our Author has? like a longslang of a Schoolboy Dunce, of whom
his Master said, he knew not what he was good for, unless to reach down
Puddings from an high Shelf.) And we are, 1. Subjects in a State of trial for
another World. (So that God cannot individually determine upon the Persons
elected, tho he has Election in store for them, nor Christ for whom he
particularly died, nor the Spirit whom he has effectually called, till this
state of Trial be over.) -- By this Gospel-Constitution, persevering Holiness,
sincere Obedience, or good Works, are necessary to Salvation. He that made
Faith necessary to Justification, has made Obedience necessary to Salvation:
He has as well promised Heaven to the godly Man, as Pardon to the Believer:
And our perseverance in Holiness and Obedience, is as truly our way to Glory as
the Scriptures can describe it: (One of the truest words he ever spoke, but the
Scriptures tell us that Christ is the way, we must be first implanted into him,
then we are in our way unto Holiness, Obedience, Perseverance and Glory.)
Nothing of these merit Heaven: (The word merit is not in fashion, and therefore
it is dangerous to own it; like K. James, by some disaffected Persons not
publicly acknowledged, tho secretly beloved and wished back again.) But he
that merited Heaven, has peremptorily appointed these to bring us thither;
Heb. 6. 10, 11, 12. -- Salvation is promised to Perseverance, true Holiness,
sincere Obedience, or good Works; and the accomplishment of these Promises to
these, is called an Act of Righteousness. These are Gospel-Promises, because
Salvation is promised on terms so below Perfection. The Texts are innumerable
that include these Promises; Rev. 2. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Romans 8. 13. Heb. 6.
10. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. The Righteousness refers to the truth of the Promise, not
the proportion of the Work. -- Object. These describe the Men whom God will
save. Answ. True, but not as mere natural Signs, but as moral instituted Signs:
(i. e. the very substance and matter indeed of our Justification:) They are
Qualifications which God appoints as Prerequisites to the Blessings: They are
not meritorious, (no, that is left to the Righteousness of Christ, unto which
this blasphemous Wretch assigns that meritorious Office, of presenting us
justified in our own Righteousness) but they are made by the Promise necessary
to our partaking of these Gifts, and the neglect of them would exclude our
Interest in the Blessing. -- Consider the respect to Glory which our good Works
have in Scripture-dialect. They are as Seed to the Harvest, Gal. 6. 7, 8, 9. as
a Way to ones proposed Place, Ephesians. 2. 10. as Means to an End, Mat. 5. 8. as
Work to ones Wages, Mat. 20. 1, 7. Foundation to a Building, 1 Timothy 6. 19, etc.
The Gospel declares no less a Connection between good Works and Glory, tho they
merit nothing. -- Reader, lay these things to Heart, and can thou account
persevering Holiness and Obedience useless things? Are they so indifferent to
Happiness as the Doctor represents them? (Yes, that they are in our
Justification, either as the conditional, material, or persevering part
thereof, for which it is that the Doctor and every sound Believer do perfectly
abhor them.) How much of the Bible must be expunged e're his Opinion deserves
Credit? Tho I know our corrupt part too well likes a Dispensation from striving
to enter in at the strait Gate. (Strait indeed, if this sophistically revived
Covenant of Works be the way to Glory.) Object. It Is for Christ's Incense these
are accepted. Answ. But Christ's Incense will not be applied to our Sins, but
to our Graces and Duties, and that shows they are more pleasing to God than our
Sins be. And again, they are these Graces and Duties which are accepted for the
sake of Christ: (speak out thou familiar Spirit, and whisper not thus in the
Dust, Isa. 29. 4. Is it not for their material Justification that all this is
meant?) His Incense will not be denied to them, (now they produce the Matter of
their Justification and Discharge) and thereby they are well pleasing to the
Lord, and tend to render us so (Test Bellarmino.) Reader, to sum up all, I
appeal to thee, 1. Whether God does not require any more of any Sinner for
Salvation than that they believe in Christ, repent of Sin, persevere in true
Holiness, sincere Obedience, or good Works internal and external; and if we do
so, can we perish? Has not Christ provided all else? (i. e. all besides that
which is necessary to save us.) And does not the Promise secure Life upon doing
these? (So that let us be sure of doing our part, and if Christ thereupon comes
not in to do his part, i. e. mere saving us, if we perish, of consequence the
fault must not be ours but his.) 2. If any Sinner believe not, and repent not,
has Christ ever promised to save him? Will any Decree, or the Merits of Christ
secure him? (An open black-mouthed Devil, without limitation! for are they not
by the Decree and Merits of Christ, even all the Elect infallibly brought in
viritim to believe, repent, and persevere therein unto Glory? No, says our
Author.) Again, if any penitent Believer shall apostatize, prove ungodly, and
unfruitful, hate God, or neglect to love God and his Neighbor wholly, etc.
shall this Man be saved? Has not Christ determined the contrary? Will his
first Faith save him? A Resolution of these two things, according to the very
scope of the Word, will decide the main of this Controversy. These assert the
Rule of Christ's rectoral Distributions, and the Decree comes not in opposition
to the Methods of his Government, by which we are to govern our Hopes and
Fears. Mr. Dan. Williams' s Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 108, 109, 110, 111,
112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 123, 124, 125.

Now, Reader! observe diligently this 13th Chapter of Mr. Dan. Williams, whence
most of this thou have read was taken, and thou will find, that notwithstanding
his subtle Precaution (as a token of his pretended Innocence, which indeed is
but a Blind) to the Reader in the very entrance of the Chapter, yet his main
drift is, as appears from the very scope thereof, together with what he takes
out of Dr. Crisp's Works, to engage against, and for what and to what end it
was that the Doctor used those very Sentences which he recites here and
embattles; I say, do but observe this, and thou will find that his main and
only drift is to set up Works (under a pretense of Holiness) as both the
preparative, material and persevering Condition of our Justification, or
justified state before God, directly as the Papist and Quaker, even to a hair's
breadth, tho managed with more Impudence and Deceitfulness, tho sottishly
enough, by him: And let me tell thee, that a Protestant, and especially a
Protestant-Dissenter in disguise, is worse than the rankest Papist or Quaker,
and more to be abhorred than the vilest of Devils. -- But still our Author
calls upon us to view a new Piece of his. -- Obj. Christ was made under the
Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption
of Sons; Gal. 4. 4, 5. Answ. 1. I might show how the Context does confine to
the following sense, viz. Christ was made under the Jewish Law as delivered
four hundred Years after the Promise, which could not give Life, nor the
Spirit; under which Law the Jewish Believers were shut up, and it their
Schoolmaster, and they as Servants in Bondage under the Elements of this World,
i. e. the Ceremonies, and far from the designed Liberty of adopted Sons. But
Christ was made under this Law to redeem and rescue those Jewish Belivers from
this Bondage, and to bring the Gentiles as well as they, and at one instant
with them, to the Gospel Freedom and Liberty, called the Adoption of Sons; even
a Liberty from the Jewish Yoke and Bondage, which many were still fond of.
Consult chap. 3. and 4. In this sense it is not the Law of Innocence as a proper
Covenant of Works, that is meant by the Law under which (a pretty Evasion if it
would hold) Christ was made. The Law of Innocence or Works had not in it these
Ceremonies, Ordinances, and the like.

2. I grant that Christ in taking our Nature became a Servant, and subject to
the Law of Innocence, to its Precepts and its Punishments, as a Mediator,
according to the terms adjusted in the Covenant of Redemption: (i. e. So far
forth as that he might fully vacate it, and bring in a new Law.)

3. But how follows it, that because he obliged himself in the Covenant of
Redemption, that he would be in our Nature subject to the Law for our
Redemption, that therefore he was such a Surety in what he did, as that we
legally did what (...) did, and that in the estimate and sentence of that Law
as a Law of Works? It Is so far from concluding this, that it concludes the
contrary; we did it not because he did it, he did it to redeem us, we were to
do it to prevent the need of Redemption, and had we done it, there had been no
room for his doing of it: and obeying alone would have served our turn before
Sin, and neither our obeying nor suffering have served the turn after Sin.

Further, 4. Christ did not then become a Surety, or undertake to die for us by
being made under the Law; but he was made under the Law, because he had
undertaken to die for us: His very being made under the Law of Works, was but a
performance of a previous Engagement to the Lawgiver; this being one Article in
the Covenant of Redemption, that he should take our Nature, be a Servant under
the Law, and make his Soul an Offering for Sin, Heb. 10. 9. Isa. 53. Can any
infer then, that because Christ was made under the Law in performance of his
prior Engagement to redeem lost Sinners, to which Engagement these Sinners were
never obliged, (then they were redeemed from that which held them not in
Bondage) that therefore these Sinners did truly do and suffer whatever Christ
did, and suffered to redeem and save them? It Is true, but for Sinners, and the
Law, and Divine Justice, Christ needed not to enter into any Obligation that he
would be under the Law, and die for Sinners, and obey to make the Law
honorable. But what i^ this to make us Principals in that Bond whereby he
became obliged to come under the Law to die for us? The Law is honored (that
never was dishonored) and Justice satisfied (by an Obedience given to that Law
that was never broken, and consequently no Satisfaction could be demanded) but
not by us (tho by the head of the Members) tho for us (rather in our stead)
because he stood alone obliged by his Bond to honor the Law and satisfy
Justice. It was not from any Obligation the Law of Works had upon him, that he
became obliged to be a Subject; or if he became a Subject, that he must die
whilst he was an innocent Person; nor was it the Law of Works that gave him a
right to his Reward: if he should obey and die, this Law never promised his
Death would be a Ransom for all, (no, nor for any, since none was any way
concerned in it, for ought I can perceive, but Christ himself) and he be
glorious, as (or, as it were a perhaps Redeemer) a Redeemer: (a wonderful mock
Redeemer does this fellow make of the blessed Jesus, who has laid down a Ransom
that does not identically answer the State and Law of their Captivity:) the Law
of Works has nothing of this; (nor, as it seems, any Obedience unto it, either
by Christ or our selves) Christ had to do with an higher Law before he
submitted to this; a Law wherein he was the Principal, transacting without us
tho for our recovery. I Will give you an Instance, There is a Law made, that he
that commits High Treason shall die; a thousand Persons commit High Treason in
various degrees, and are condemned: But the Lawgiver, or absolute supreme
Ruler, makes a Law, that if such a great Monarch will become his Subject, and
die to expiate this Treason, those condemned Traitors shall be forgiven, and
released in such a time and way as is agreed between the Lawgiver and this
Monarch: This Monarch becomes a Subject, and dies to expiate the Treason, and
deliver the Traitors: Now here the Lawgiver is satisfied, the end of the Law
is answered, the Monarch dies in the stead and place of the Traitors, and they
in a fit time and way are released. But yet they cannot be said to die, or pay
a Ransom for their Lives, much less to say, that they paid as much as the
Monarch. Mr. Dan. Williams's Man made righteous by Christ's Obedience, p. 109,
110, 111, 112. (This is pitiful stuff indeed, and a through Indication of the
Ebness of our Author's Cause; was it ever known that any Suffering could be an
Expiation of that Treason or Rebellion, that is not identically the very same
with that which the Law as equally constitutes to be Treason, and requires the
idem also of Satisfaction for? It is the Law that calls for Justice, that must
be satisfied, otherwise the Lawgiver that is offended by its breach can never
be satisfied.)

Mr. Troughton, giving an account of the Baxterian Notion, tells us, The
Covenant that justifies as a Law, is a Covenant of Works: A Law requires Works
or Obedience to it, and thereupon promises a Reward, and threatens Punishment
to Disobedience; a Covenant that is a Law requiring such things to be done, and
promising Life to the doing of them, and threatening Death for the neglect of
them, is a Covenant of Works: Now such is the Gospel Covenant according to this
Opinion; for we are told, that we are not justified by trusting in the
Righteousness of Christ, as that which can give us an immediate Title to Life;
nor is justifying Faith a trust or reliance on Christ for the Promise made
through him; nor does Faith justify as an Instrument or Means of apprehending
or applying Christ to our selves; nor indeed does Faith justify at all more
than any other Grace, saving that it is the first in order of Nature, and so
does set other Graces on work. But that Faith, Repentance, and the whole course
of new Obedience do justify as the Condition of the new Covenant, that is to
say, by the Death of Christ God releaseth Man from the Obligation to perfect
Obedience, as the Condition of Life required in the old Law, and has
established a new, that if they will believe in his Son, repent of their Sins,
and serve him as well as they can for the future, they shall be saved. What
then is the Gospel but a new Law? and it does justify as a Law, giving the
Reward to Obedience, or the fulfilling of it.

Moreover, we are told, that Faith taken in its full latitude is nothing else
but universal Obedience, and that so it is to be understood, when it said that
Faith alone justifies, viz. Faith and all other Graces with it in habit and
exercise to the end. Aph. 65. (a new way of being alone in company) What is
this but Obedience to Commands, a fulfilling of the Law, and thereby to be
justified? Lutherus Redivivus, Part 1. p. 33, 34.

Reader, do thou not find God justifies none but whom he calls? Romans 8. 30.
Would there be such Joy in Heaven at the Conversion of a Sinner, Luke 15. 7,
10. if they be pardoned and safe before? (Our Author supposes that the Angels
must be privy to the individually personal Election of some by God, and their
peculiar Redemption, if such a thing were: no such matter Friend! they come
only to know it in their Conversion, and that by the Church, Ephesians. 3. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11.)

How much is our Ministry or Concern for Souls debased, if all that we can
prevail with are not actually pardoned? Who can reconcile to this Notion the
Pleadings of God with Sinners? He speaks to them as wounded, undone and
miserable -- Look to me and be saved; why will you die? Turn to me and live,
Ezekiel. 33. 11. lest they should be converted, and I should heal them, and the
like. These sound strange, if matters are so perfected before they be born. Mr.
Dan. Williams' s Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 4, 5.

The Doctor mistakes the nature of God's Decree, because a Decree ascertains a
thing shall be in time, therefore he thinks a Decree gives a thing a present
subjective Being.

To which Mr. Chauncy replies, The Decree of God gives an objective Being to
the thing decreed; for the Will willing, and the thing willed, are relata. All
things in time are present with God, looking upon them in one eternal Act;
there is neither time past or to come, or succession, that his Decrees are
measured by, his Decree is himself. But if we consider the Objects of the
Decree in Execution, they are in time, and measured by succession; but yet
things thus standing, are the Objects of the Decree, they have their first
cause in his Divine Idea, and have their unchangeable fixation, as to their
Nature and Order, in the present or future being and working, either as
necessary or contingent Agents.

Because Jacob was an elect Person, or the Object of electing Love in the Womb,
therefore he was then actually a pardoned and adopted Person.

To which Mr. Chauncy replies: Nay, there was more in it than that; for mark
the Text, v. 11, 12. 1. It does not tell us Jacob was elected, but that it was
published and declared to Rebecca, Jacob have I loved. If God should tell my
Wife when with Child, I have elected, and do love this Child that is in thy
Womb, I should look upon this as a Justification of this Child, it being a
declared Sentence of God concerning its standing in his Favor and unchangeable
Love. 2. The Text is particular in the Reason of this Declaration to Rebecca,
ver. 11. that we may see that God accomplished his purpose of Election in the
applying of the Grace thereof without Works, not so much as upon the account of
Faith as a Work, because the Children were not capable of doing good or evil,
the application of his distinguishing Love could not be upon that account, viz.
of any condition found in them; nor could the foresight of any such thing in
them be the cause of God's Purpose in Election, and shows it is one and the same
Righteousess that an Infant and Adult Person is justified by.

Because an eldest Son is an Heir in the Womb, therefore an elect Person who is
in time to be adopted, is an Heir in the Womb.

To which Mr. Chauncy replies; There Is a difference between an Heir and
Adoption. If you know there is an elect Person in the Womb, as Rebecca did, he
is a more sure Heir to Heaven than ever any great Man's Son was to an outward
Estate. And as to Adoption, that may not be till some time after; for that is
the Grace of Sonship. It Is one thing to be a Son, and another thing to have the
Grace of Sonship. And is the calling them the Sons of God, manifestly taking
them into the number, and endowing them with the Privileges of the Sons of God?
The relation of an Heir, and the state of Adoption admit of different
Considerations. The state of Adoption is the grown state of an Elect Person; he
is put into possession of the Estate, and all Privileges, sits together with
Christ in heavenly Places as a Coheir. And thus we are the Children of God by
Faith, Gal. 3. 26. The Spirit bearing witness with our Spirit that we are the
Children of God, and so Heirs ex abundanti, joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.
17. See Dr. Chauncy's Neonomianism unmasked, Part 2. p. 10, 11.

In quantum sincere, etc. So far as any ones Obedience is sincere, so far he
sins not; and so far as he sins not, so far he neither needs, or is
capable of Remission: And therefore so far the Righteousness of Christ is not
imputed unto him for remission of Sin. Mr. Baxt. Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 307.

His (i. e. Christ's) Righteousness imputed, is the Cause for which we are
justified and saved when we do answer the Gospel-Rule. And I exclude not this
Righteousness, when I affirm, that the Righteousness of God, Phil. 3. 9.
principally intends the Gospel-Holiness of a Person justified by Christ's
Righteousness, both which by Faith in Christ, all his Members shall be perfect
in. Mr. Dan. Williams' s Gospel Truth stated, etc. Preface.

The Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ is not subjectively in us. I do not
speak now of our inherent Righteousness, of which he is not only the Pattern,
but also is the Cause and Worker, Phil. 3. 9. The Discourse is only of that
Righteousness which belongs to the Person of Christ, on the account of his
fulfilling the Law of his Mediation, and his Title to the Rewards promised to
him as Mediator for fulfilling that Law, which he did to every iota. This
Righteousness is accounted to be for us; and to deliver all the Elect, was the
end of all his Undertakings. Nevertheless it is not subjectively in us, because
it is inconsistent with the nature of Gospel-imputation. To impute to one what
is suffered by another, is to esteem the one undertaken for in the Sufferings
of the other, and to deal with him as if himself had suffered the same things,
yea, and had never deserved to suffer; but it is not to judge that he did in his
own Person suffer, for that were false, and a derogation to the Honor of him
who endured the Sufferings, especially if he freely suffered in another's room,
and for his advantage, as our Lord did, Heb. 9. 15. Gal. 1. 4. much less is
Imputation an infusion of Christ's Righteousness into us, or a putting it
subjectively in us. Ibid. p. 35.

Because our Goodness extends not to God for his Profit, therefore he regards
it no more than Dung and Filthiness: Because we are, after all our Obedience,
unprofitable Servants to God, and less profitable Servants than we should be,
therefore our Holiness is as unpleasing to him as Dung: Because God abhorred
the New Moons and Sabbaths of the Hypocrites, therefore he loathes the sincere
Obedience of the upright.

Obj. Does not Israel say, Isa. 64. 6. all our Righteousnesses are as filthy
Rags? Answ. But that is spoken of Persons, and not of real Holiness.

It Is the same as Micah 7. 4. The best of them is a Brier. And Isa. 1. 6. From
the crown of the Head to the sole of the Foot we are putrefying Sores.
Corruption had invaded the very Priests, and the generality of the best
Professors, who seemed the most righteous: And that the sense of the place
refers to Persons, see the Verse before, Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and
works Righteousness, etc. Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned; q. d.
Were we Workers of Righteousness, thou would meet us, and we should rejoice;
but because we are not so, but have sinned, thou art wroth, see ver. 7. There
is none that calls on thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold on
thee, q. d. We are all remiss, the best of us are prayerless, see the 6th Verse
it self; we are all as unclean things, our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags,
we all fade as a Leaf, q. d. There is a general Apostasy and Degeneracy among
us; but allow that it were spoken of Righteousness as a quality, will it
follow, that because the dead shadow of Righteousness in so backsliding and
defiled a People, was Rags, that therefore the lively actings of Grace, through
the influence of the Spirit, must be menstruous Clothes or Rags?

Object. The Apostle says Phil. 3. 8. For whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them Dung, that I may win Christ, and be found, etc.

Answ. 1. If this place speaks of Gospel-Righteousness, as his own things which
he counted Dung, it does not prove that Holiness is Dung; all that it can
infer, is, that in comparison with winning Christ it was esteemed as Dung: And
who must not own, that compared with gaining Christ, the best thing in us is
vile, yea, compared with his Righteousness? but yet it must not be vile in it
self; as Rivals with Christ we must hate Father and Mother, but does it follow
that Father and Mother are hateful, absolutely considered? No, we are bound to
love them when not compared with Christ. I need add no more in Answer to the
Doctor's Reason; but tho I own the imputed Righteousness of Christ for our
Justification, yet I think to ground it on this place is a damage to the Truth:
And therefore I add, Answ. 2. Gospel-Holiness or Righteousness is not here
intended by Dung, the (...) was that Dogs-meat which he renounced, and left to
those Dogs (which term they gave the Gentiles, ver. 2.) to glory in. Who were
those he calls Dogs? They were the Concision (alluding to Baal's Priests) or
the Jews that reject Christ, by an Opinion of more Excellency in Jewish
Observations, and an abuse of the Mosaic Frame. What were the things he
counted Dung? I answer, They were the Jewish Privileges, and that conceited
Christless Righteousness, which he once valued, as those Dogs at present did;
but it was not that Gospel-Holiness which by the Grace of Christ he was now
partaker of.

Object. How do both these appear?

I answer plainly, From the whole scope of the Chapter. 1. They were his
Christless Privileges and Righteousness which he calls Dung. For, (1.) His
Discourse is a warning against the Jewish Perverters and Opposers of the
Gospel. Ver. 2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil Workers, beware of the
Concision. (2.) He states a Comparison, wherein he opposes them, and includes
a great part of Gospel-Holiness in that Opposition. Ver. 3. For we are the
Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, viz. not carnally, and with
beggarly Elements, as they do, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, q. d. we feel a
true and solid Joy in and by Christ, whom they refusing to accept, are without.
-- (3.) He enumerates these Jewish Pretensions, which he had as much right to
glory in as these boasting Enemies; ver. 4, 5, 6. He was a Jew by Birth, and
not a mere Proselyte, circumcised as soon as any, of the strictest Sect, as
fiery zealous against Christ as they, and as ceremonious as the best, touching
the Righteousness which is in the Law blameless: He intends not sinless
Obedience, nor Gospelsincerity, but a Life not to be blamed by the Rule of the
Jewish Pedagogy, i. e. in the judgment of strict Observers. (4.) Of these he
professes a Renunciation when converted to Christ, ver. 7, and 8. Yea
doubtless, etc. -- I have not only quitted those Jewish things, but I have
suffered the loss of all things -- and do count them but Dung, that I may win
Christ. What these Jews do so boast of, and the World so esteem, even all are
to me but Dogs Meat, etc. that I may fully possess Christ, and the full Effects
of his Undertakings in perfect Peace, Holiness and Glory, somewhat of which are
already begun in me. -- It was not Gospel-Holiness which he accounted Dung or
Loss: for this was not his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, as opposed
to that which is by the Faith of Christ (here lies the Sophistry) nay, this is
by the Faith of Christ, our Hearts are purified by Faith, Acts 15. 9. This
Holiness instead of renouncing, or suffering the loss of it, he earnestly
presses after, and expects to obtain, etc.

Object. But ver. 8. Paul speaks in the Present Tense, I do count all things
loss, and therefore it was not his former Jewish Privileges. Answ. It was his
present Act toward an Object past, q. d. I even now still account them all
vain; yea, and it may extend to present secular Advantages also, as Life Honor
and Estate, etc. -- This Righteousness, which is of God by Faith, is that
eminent Holiness he waited for, and if he could be found in Christ by an
abiding Union he knew he should arrive at. Mr. Dan. Williams, ibid. p. 172,
etc. Some are ready to gather from Christ's Propitiation, (says Mr. Baxter in
an Ishmael scoffing manner) that God is now more reconcilable to Sin, and so
they blaspheme him as if he were unholy, as if he made a smaller matter of our
misdoings, since he is satisfied for them by a Mediator: And they are ready to
gather, that God can now take Complacency in Man, tho he have no inherent
Holiness at all, because of the Righteousness of Christ imputed to him. And
some take God's Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, to be a reputing us
to be the Persons who our selves fulfilled the Law in or by Christ; so that his
very Attributes of Wisdom, and Love, and Holiness, and Justice, and Mercy, etc.
which Christ came purposely to declare, are by some denied, blasphemed or
abused, on pretense of extolling Christ and our Redemption, as if we might sin
that Grace may abound, Romans 6. 1, 2. Gal. 2. 17. -- It is most ordinary to
reduce all the Office of Christ to the Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly part
(for it is more proper (no doubt but it is in our Author's designs about
Justification) to call them three parts of one Office, than three Offices.) But
it is hard to reduce his Incarnation, or his Infant Humiliation, and his whole
course of Obedience, and fulfilling the Law, to any one, or all of these
totally: Tho in some respect as it is his Example, it is teaching, and as it is
part of his Humiliation, it may be called a part of his Sacrifice; yet as it is
meritorious-Obedience and Perfection, it belongs indeed to our High Priest,
but not formally to his Priesthood, no nor yet as he himself is the Sacrifice
for Sin: for it is not an Act of Priesthood to be himself a Sacrifice. But yet
I think the common Distribution intimates to us that sense, which contains
the Truth which we enquire after: For the word Priesthood is applied to Christ
in a peculiar Notion, so as it is never applied to any other, and therefore is
taken more comprehensively, as including all that Good which he does for us (as
good) by the way of Mediation with the Father, and all his Acts of Mediation
with God, etc. (so that he neither offered here upon Earth a proper Sacrifice
for the Elect, nor was he himself in Soul and Body that Sacrifice which he did
offer, all which is rank Socinianism) Mr. Baxter' s Life of Faith, p. 190, 191.
(See Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 343. where Mr. Baxter, as has been before
quoted, gives the same account of the Faith that James speaks of as to our
Justification before God, with the Papist and the Quaker.)

Whether we are justified before we believe? This the Doctor affirms, and I
deny. Whether the use of Faith in Justification be only to manifest our
Justification which we personally had before? This the Doctor affirms, and I
deny, and add, That Faith justifies us by receiving Christ (this is pretty
fair) and therein answers the Ordination of God, (but what this Ordination is
he tells us) who has promised to justify the Believer by the application of
Christ's Righteousness in this gracious Effect of it upon the guilty Soul.
(When a Sinner brings his Faith, then Christ's Righteousness shall be his, but
how? in its gracious Effect, as it merits his Reception for Justification in
the Righteousness of his Faith.) Mr. Williams's Gospel Truth stated, p. 89. --
This may lead the Reader to understand him the better in the following
Quotations -- as -- because they that truly come to Christ, shall have an
Interest in Christ, (as if they had it not before, and as if their discerning
Interest upon coming in him did not at all and absolutely depend upon their
previous actual, tho inexperienced and undiscovered Interest in him, unto their
coming by believing, or believing by coming) therefore he thinks, whoever can
persuade himself that he has an Interest in Christ, does come to him. -- But
his greatest cause of mistake is, that he thinks the worst Sinners, if elect,
have as much Interest in Christ as the greatest Saint. Ibid. p. 75. -- Unbelief
is the cause why Men are barred from Justification, (it is false, for tho the
Reprobate Hearers of the Gospel shall be damned for Unbelief, yet none of the
Elect shall be justified either for or in their Faith, neither does their
Justification before God wait for their believing) and remain obnoxious to
Misery: Joh. 5. 40. Ye will not come to me, that ye may have Life. (Compare our
Author's Quotation with chap. 6. 64, 65. But there are some of you that believe
not; for Jesus knew from the beginning, who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him. [Mark that word, who they were that believed not; it is
not said that he knew them by their not believing, but he knew them viritim,
personally, who they were from the beginning, that then should not believe,
adding the reason thereof.] And he said, therefore said I unto you, no Man can
come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father.) What undid the Jews,
Heb. 3. 18, 19. they could not enter in because of Unbelief; chap. 4. 6, 7.
ver. 1, 2, 3. (Compare what our Author cites even out of the Scripture for
false ends, with Romans 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. chap. 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10.) -- How easily might I argue this from the nature of Justification,
as it is a judicial Act of God, by a Gospel-Rule supposing (absit blasphemia)
Christ's Satisfaction? Ibid. p. 91.

Because Christ alone justifies, as he whose Satisfaction and Merits are the
only Righteousness for which we are justified, therefore he thinks there is
nothing else present in our Justification, not considering that God justifies,
the Spirit justifies, the Gospel Promise justifies, in senses distinct from
Christ; (who in the Baxterian blasphemous sense stands aside, and when all
things are ready done, then Christ comes in to justify us meritoriously) and so
does Faith, tho not as what meriteth, (not by any means, lest it should too
openly appear to be put in the room of that which does indeed merit) yet as
what the Promise requires in all whom God will justify for the sake of
Christ's Merits. -- Because Faith is the Evidence of invisible Realities still
remaining invisible, therefore its whole use is to manifest our Pardon before
our Pardon has a being. Ibid. p. 93.

Repentance is a Grace to which Pardon is promised, and upon the working of it,
Forgiveness is given; and Impenitency continues Guilt wherever it reigns. How
much of the Bible must I transcribe, if I quote all places that prove these? p.
97. It is very unsuitable to the Nature and Government of God to pardon a Sinner
that resolves to rebel, and not to return: This seems too low a Provision for
his Honor, etc. (Now either this Babylonish Brat, or the God of all Truth,
which is impossible, must lie; see Isa. 43. 25. chap. 57. 17, 18, 19.) --

Whether all Sins past, present, and to come, are actually pardoned at once?
This the Doctor affirms, and I deny. -- New Transgressions need renewed Pardon,
and all Sins are not pardoned at once. Ibid. p. 99, 150, 151. Reader, take
special notice of what follows, as quoted out of Mr. Williams, where thou will
find that to divert Sinners from any hopes of a Justification before God by the
material. Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, as of one who stood in the
Elects stead both in living and dying Obedience, he runs it down in the direct
method of the Papists and Quakers deluding Cant.)

The S^ul in all actings of Faith on Christ's Righteousness, ought to look at
this Righteousness, as in Christ, and not in himself, who believes, 2 Pet. 1.
1. 1 John 2. 12. Would it not be strange Language, to say, I trust for new
Pardon or Comfort to the Righteousness that was once in Christ, but is now in
me? In me is the meritorious Cause of my Pardon: In me is the Fountain, to
which I must look for washing and healing; not as it is in Christ, to whom I am
united, but as it inheres in me as the mediate Subject of it: But the Gospel
directs to look to him and be saved, Isa. 45. 22. Faith owns the foundation of
our Plea to be in Christ, from whom are derived to us that Pardon, and right to
Life, which are the Effects of his Righteousness: For this (but not in this) we
are justified, for that Righteousness which is in Christ we are acquitted and
adopted. The efficient Merit is in him, the Effect of the judicial Absolution
for that Merit is in us.

The Righteousness is still in Christ, for the sake whereof we are absolved or
justified. God has for Christ's sake forgiven us, but not for the sake of what
is in our selves, Ephesians. 4. 32. Had not he obeyed and suffered for us, we could
not have been absolved for the sake of his Obedience and Sufferings: And now
being absolved or made righteous in a ((...)) Law-sense, we have as much matter
of glorying in him, as absolved acquitted Sinners can have: we are justified by
his Righteousness (provided he divests not himself of it by clothing poor
Sinners with it) that is, for it we are forgiven, and also entitled to Life,
which we had forfeited our selves, but we are not made innocent nor so
esteemed, (lest Christ be made the nocent, and imputed Sinner, for this would
quite spoil our Scheme) we are not accounted them who made the Atonement. We
still take hold of (or [rather lest the matter thereof should stick unto us]
acknowledge and approve, with reliance on it and submission to the Terms of its
application) Christ's Righteousness, that we by it (not in it) may be forgiven;
and this is our Blessedness, Romans 4. 7. and our Gospel-Righteousness, which all
such refuse who reject redeeming Love from a conceit of their own Merits, or
refuse the Terms of the Gospel, which by the Promise do make us capable of
being justified and saved for the Merits of Christ. (Christ it seems shall have
the name of Merits, but we the substance of it in our Capability) Yet these
still remain his Merits, (when by the Merits of our Capa^ lity [or the Popish
Congruity] we have made room for his Righteousness to exert its Merits, and
indeed to become meritorious) tho thus beneficial unto us (and to him also,
otherwise they would have lain as a dormant Drug in him) in their application,
as the procuring Cause of all our Good. -- If the Mediatorial (this is perfect
Sophistry) Righteousness be subjectively in us (mediatorial and subjectively
are the two Baxterian blinding words; the Papists and the Quakers outstrip them
by far, tho equally and identica^ as rotten the one as the other, in their just
Representation of their Adversaries Positions) we must grant all those
Absurdities which the Enemies of Gospel-imputation object, and the Orthodox.
(Ah! old brazen face, with a patched Whore's Forehead.)

If it be in us, then we may be as truly Intercessors as Christ, and in the
same sense, viz. in the virtue of Merits made personally ours; we have a
Righteousness in us which is able to save the World, and capable of being
imputed to their Justification; we need no Forgiveness, but are saved by the
Covenant of Works as claiming Life by its Sanction immediately, which is
inconsistent with all Remission; yea, or imputation of Christ's Righteousness
(that is right, as this Author^ falsely represents it; for if it be subjectively
in us, it is infused, and therefore cannot be imputed) which did no way consist
in Forgiveness, but in a full Satisfaction. This would denominate us Saviors
from the moment we were justified, if not before: Whereas we still need Pardon,
and continue justified by the Efficacy of the Righteousness of another, and
must look to Christ as the only Subject of it all our days. Our justified State
is a continuance of the blessed Effects of the Righteousness of Christ from
first to last: That Cause is still productive of Supplies, [mark, for our
Justification by Sanctification] as our Guilt returns, or Necessities and
Capacities renew or grow, but Redemption is ever in Christ, Romans 3. 24. --

That we are as righteous as Christ, is not a proper or safe Speech. (If the
Righteousness of Christ wrought out by his personal Representative Obedience
unto the Preceptive and Sanction part of that Law which Man had broke, be
imputed unto elect Sinners for their Justification before God, not in its
remotely appropriated Effects, but immediate substantial Matter, then in that
sense they are as righteous as Christ, the Head and Members being invested with
the self-same Garment: But the former is asserted by Scripture; Ergo, the
latter by consequence is true.) It Is true indeed, our Pardon and Acceptance is
firm and lasting, and will no more fail us than the Righteousness of Christ
will fail, it being the meritorious Cause and Security thereof; and the
Benefits can abate to none who answer the Gospel-rule of its Application. (Thus
our Faith and Repentance, and all other Gospel-rule Qualifications, give Life
and Efficacy to the Righteousness of Christ, which lies by us as a dormant
Drug, till our Obedience render it of use.) But we are not as righteous as
Christ, we are not so as to Sanctification, (here is both the Loop-hole and
Trap-door too) he being perfectly holy, we being imperfectly so, tho really
holy. And it is to be noted, That Believers are said to be righteous in the
common sense of Scripture, (but he should have told us what the special sense
of being righteous is) on the account of Sanctification, 1 John 3. 7. And to
suppose the Elect to be as sanctified as Christ, even while they wallow in the
Mire, (a pretty Serpentine-winding from the Cause in hand) is a strange
Position: But suppose the Phrase refers to Justification, yet it is not proper:
For -- Tho Christ be perfectly holy, yet his Holiness is not so imputed to us,
as that we are therefore perfectly holy. (Thus the Baxterian together with the
Papist and Quaker do constantly, to blind their Readers, confound Justification
and Sanctification in their Matter, Use and Order) Mr. D. Williams' s Gospel
Truth stated, etc. p. 35, 36, 37, 38.

He goes on like Mr. Fisher the Quaker, mocking at Imputation -- It Is
ungrounded, (says he) I know that it will be objected, that it is so by
Imputation; but the Gospel knows no Imputation of this kind; we may as well
infer, that we are Omnipotent, and Omniscient, because Christ is so. I
understand that the Promise gives to the imperfectly holy, Impunity, and right
to Life, on the account of Christ's Merits: But where has God said he will
esteem the imperfect to be perfect, as to what he deelares them imperfect in?
Or, has God ever said we are thus perfect? He may deal with a sincere
Christian (who is called perfect in comparison of others) as if he were
perfect, having provided for his Justice and Honor in doing thus by the
Satisfaction of Christ; but he cannot account him perfectly holy. The very
Union in Marriage does not transfer habitual Qualifications (here is the
Jesuitical Subterfuge) from Husband to Wife: (but I hope there is a mutual
Interest both in Immunities and Debts transferred.) Is a foolish Wife perfectly
wise, because her Husband is so? (Tho I am positively certain by this way of
arguing, that unless our Author has a wise Wife, there is an exceeding foolish
Couple) No, tho she receive benefit by his Wisdom. -- It Is absurd: Our restored
Holiness (What Is this to Justification?) is through the Operations of the
Spirit, and not by Transfusion. If the very Holiness of Christ's Person be in
us, it is his increated Holiness, or created; if his increated, then we are
Gods, and not Men, for there is nothing increated but God; if the created
Holiness of Christ's Human Nature be in us, it must depart from him, or cease
to be in him, as far as it is derived to us; for the same individual Quality
cannot be in two Subjects at once, tho the same for kind may. If we are as holy
as Christ, what hinders us to be entitled to the same degrees of Glory and
Honor as he? And all this being founded on the change of Person between Christ
and us, we may well say we are Christ's, even every elect Person severally. And
if our perfect Holiness should be surmised from the Union between Christ and
Believers, that indeed would not be a change of Person, but the making of
Christ and us one natural Person. (Here he strikes at the mystical Person of
Christ, which consists in their Membership Union with, and Relation unto him as
their Head.) And then on the same ground as we can say we are as holy as Christ
is, we may say we are as much Gods as Christ, as wise as Christ, as entitled
to Worship as Christ; we do all that Christ does in Heaven and Earth, and he
does all as we Sinners do, we give what he gives, and he receives what we
receive; distinction of Persons is gone, Christ and we do nothing, are nothing
as distinct Persons. A thousand such things are unavoidable Consequences. Mr.
Dan. Williams, ibid. p. 39, 40.

Each of the benefits of the Covenant are offered to Men on condition, and not
absolutely in relation to God, as his People is, Levit. 26. 3, 12. That this
refers to the New Covenant Relation, is plain by 2 Cor. 6. 16. so is Union to
Christ, with a Communion in the Benefits proceeding therefrom, Mat. 22. 2, 3,
9, 10, 11. They must come to the Wedding-Supper, or have no share in it: So is
it of Pardon of Sin, acceptance to Life, Adoption and Salvation; Romans 10. 9.
chap. 4. 25. Gal. 3. 7. And note, that it is Injustice to add new terms of any
of these Benefits, if they be ours by the Covenant as absolute before. Ibid. p.
52.

It is a great advantage to the Papists that many Protestants wholly disclaim
the Word, and simply deny the Merit of Gospel-Obedience; for hereupon the
Teachers show their Scholars, that all the Fathers speak for Merits, and so
tell them, that the Protestants Doctrine is new and heretical, as being
contrary to all the ancient Doctors: And when their Scholars see it with their
Eyes, no wonder if they believe it, to our Dishonor. -- All Orthodox Christians
hold the foredescribed Doctrine of Merit in sense, tho not in words; for they
that deny Merit, confess the [Rewardableness] of our Obedience, and confess
that the Scripture uses the term [worthy] and that (...) and (...) may be
translated meriting and Merit, as well as worthy and Worthiness; and we think
it fitter to expound such Scripture-words, than to accuse and reject them: And
they all confess, that Man's Duty has God's promise of Reward, and that
Holiness in its nature is suitable to the End or Reward, as disposing us to
enjoy it, and is pleasing unto God, and glorifieth him: And this is all the
same thing in other words which the ancient Christians meant by Merit. And to
hear many godly Persons at the same time most earnestly extol Holiness, and
desire that Preachers should convince the People that the Righteous is more
excellent than his Neighbor, and yet denying all Merit, and reviling all that
assert it, this does but show that they understand not the word, and think
others also misunderstand it: And so we are reproaching one another when we are
agreed and know it not; like the Woman that turned away her Servant upon the
Controversy, whether the House should be swept with a Broom or with a Besom; or
the Physicians that let the Patient die, because they could not agree whether
he should take a Potion or a Draught, a Bit or a Morsel, or take Amber, or
Electrum, or Succinum, or Carabe. -- And the partial Teachers are the cause of
all this, while instead of opening the Doctrine truly to the People, in what
sense we have or have not any Worthiness or Merit, they without distinction cry
down Merit, and reproach those that do otherwise: And if they do but say [su^h
a Man, or such a Book speaks for Merit and Free-will] they have sufficiently
rendered him odious, or much suspected with their Followers, when yet all sober
Christians in all Ages have been for Merit and Free Will in a sound sense: And
is not this to be Incendiaries and Adversaries to Truth, and Love and Peace? --
I have formerly thought that tho we agree in the thing, it is best to omit the
Name, because the Papist have abused it; and I think so still, as in such
Companies and Cases where the use of it not understood will scandalize Men, and
do more harm than good: (for why should I use words against Men's Edification?)
but in other cases I now think it better to keep the word, 1. Lest we seem to
the ignorant, to be of another Religion than all the ancient Churches were. 2.
Lest we harden Papists, Greeks and others, by denying sound Doctrine in terms,
which they will think we deny in sense. 3. Because our Penury of words is such,
as for my part, I remember no other-word so fit to substitute instead of
[Merit] or [Desert] or [Worthiness.] The word [rewardable] is long and often
harsh; and what other have we? and it is nothing else that we mean. -- Some
Papists are against the very word [Merit] also, some own the word, but differ
not from the Protestants about the Doctrine; some of them ignorantly drive the
poor People by ill preaching into carnal Conceits of their own Works, and to
trust an hundred Fopperies for Salvation: But he that reads most of their
School-Doctors, must either confess that they differ from us about the
Meritoriousness of true Gospel-Obedience, rather in words than in deed (this is
directly the Quaker as well as Papist) and that we really mean the same thing,
or else he must see with better or worser Eyes than I do (I speak not this of
them all) -- And the Romans who prate of Merit in point of commutative Justice,
disclaimed by the rest (and some such other ignorant Scriblers) are not to be
taken for the Index of their Doctrine, nor yet their superstitious abusive
Application, no more than our Deniers of all Merit are the Index of ours, nor
the profane ones abuse of it, who are ready, when we persuade them to a holy
Life, to tell us, That God saves not Men for their Holiness or Works, and that
ours deserve no more than theirs; but he will have Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy, and it is not of him that wills and runs. -- Not only Waldensis,
Contarenus, Arminensis, and many others expressly say as much against Merits as
we: But Medina, and many of the Thomists say the same in sense; and the
Scotists, and many others say, that Merit arises but ex pacto, from God's
Promise; and to be meritorious, is no more than to be a Work which God has
promised a Reward to. And do any of us deny this? -- That holy Obedience in the
very nature of it is so pleasing to the most holy God, as renders it apt to be
the matter of that Condition on which his Covenant promises to reward us, the
Imperfection being pardoned, and we and our Works accepted, upon the Redemption
wrought by the Merits of Christ, and upon his Intercession, and presenting them
to God. Mr. Baxter's End of Doctrinal Controversies, chap. 25.. 52, 53, 54, 55,
56, 57, 58, 59.

Error 9. Justification is not a making us just, but a Sentence pronouncing us
just.

Contra. Justification is a word of so many significations, that he that does
not first tell what he means by it, will not be capable of giving or
receiving Satisfaction. And here once for all, I must entreat the Reader that
loves not Confusion and Error (to run a little with me into all the Errors and
Confusions imaginable that he may avoid them; for it is an old saying, that
Heat extracts Heat) to distinguish of these several sorts of Justification, as
the chief we are to note. Justification is either public, by a Governor, or
private, by an Equal, or mere Discerner: Justification is by God, or by Man:
Justification by God is either as he is a Lawgiver, and above Laws, or as he is
a Judge, according to his Laws: In the first way God makes us just by his Act
of Oblivion, or pardoning Law, or Covenant of Grace. In the second respect God
does two ways justify and forgive: 1. As a determining Judge. 2. As the
Executioner of his Judgment. In the former respect God does two ways justify
us: 1. By esteeming us just. 2. By public sentencing us just. As Executioner,
he uses us as just, and as so judged. -- I pass by here all Christ's
Justification of us by way of Apology or Plea, and all Justification by
Witnesses and Evidences, etc. and all the constitutive Causes of our
Righteousness, lest I hinder them whom I would help, by using more Distinctions
(than indeed I can make good, as having no Scripture, but Brain-Conceptions
warrant for the same) than they are willing to learn: But these few are
necessary; 1. It is one thing for God to make us righteous, by forgiving all
our Sins of Commission and Omission* for the sake of Christ's Satisfaction and
Obedience. 2. It is another thing for God to esteem us to be so righteous when
he has first made us so. 3. It is another for God to sentence us righteous as
the public Judge, by Jesus Christ. 4. And it is another thing for God to take
off all Penalties and Evils, and to give us all the Good which belong to the
Righteous, and so execute his own Laws and Sentence. And he that will not
distinguish of these senses or sorts of Justification, shall not dispute with
me. And while I am now upon this, I will give the Reader these two Remarks and
Counsels: 1. That he will not in disputing about Justification with any Sect,
begin the Dispute of the thing, till he has first determined and agreed of
their sense of the word; and that he will not confound the Controversies de
nomine about the Word, with those de re, about the Matter: And that he will
remember in citing Texts of Scripture, that Beza, and many of our Expositors,
do grant to the Papists (as I heard Bishop Usher also do) that some Texts of
Scripture do take the word [justify] as they do, for Pardon and Sanctification
conjunctly; as Tit. 3. 7. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Romans 8. 30. three famous Texts, of
which see Le Blank at large in his Theses. de non. justif. If the Controversy
be only of the Sense of a Text, handle it accordingly; if of the Matter, turn
it not to words. 2. Note this Observation, That Sanctification it self, or the
giving us the Spirit, is a great Act (tho, I say, not the only) [because God
upon the Spirit's finishing his Operations, is to pronounce the Sentence] of
executive Justification. -- Note therefore, that thus far no Protestant can
deny to the Papists, nor will do, that Sanctification and Justification are all
one; that is, that God having pardoned us de jure, does pardon us executively,
by giving us his forfeited Spirit and Grace, and by all the Communion which we
have after with him, and the Comfort which we have from him. Mr. Baxter' s Life
of Faith, p. 326, 327, 328.

We shall divert a little to the account Mr. Troughton (one that Mr. Baxter
says he knew, and scornfully commiserates, as a poor blind Boy that never saw
or read a Letter) gives of the Baxterian Notion as to Justification, and his
Remarks thereupon.

Object. But it is acknowledged that these Conditions must be wrought in us by
the Spirit.

Answ. But how? upon what Condition will Jesus Christ work Grace and Sincerity
in us? If upon any preceding Condition, then we are where we were before; are
we united to him, and shall we receive Strength from him upon condition that we
are sincere, or some such like Condition before? Or will Christ work these
Conditions absolutely and infallibly in his Elect? then nothing can be required
of them to receive these Conditions, but accepting and trusting in Christ, that
he would make us sincerely obedient; and if this Faith be sufficient to unite
us to Christ, that so we may receive Grace from him, why is it not sufficient
to give us a right to Glory also, when by his Grace we are made fit for it?

Evasion. But Christ must work all these Conditions in us by his Spirit.

Answ. It is very doubtful, whether by the Spirit and Grace of Christ they mean
no more than Pelagius did, viz. The outward means of Grace, and the common
assistance of our natural Faculties in the use of those Means, without any
supernatural Grace or Qualities put into the Soul; but if they do, I demand
whether there be any certainty that these Conditions shall be wrought in us? If
there be, then the Obedience and Perseverance of a Believer is certain, which
they will not grant, nor can that be the proper legal Condition of the Benefit
of any Law, which is absolutely promised in the Law it self: if it be
absolutely uncertain, whether Christ will work in us the Conditions of Life,
then is our Case no better, nor any more of Grace than that of the holy Angels,
who were kept in their Integrity, and that according to Election, yet having no
Promise that appears to depend on, they stand by their own Obedience, not
properly by Grace. (Tho with submission to better Judgments, I would add, that
as they stand by the Grace of Election, so it includes all manner of gracious
Supplies even unto Angels for their standing, they themselves being but
Creatures.) If Adam had stood, it must have been by Divine Assistance (for a
Creature cannot be independent) and yet he was under a Covenant of Works, Works
being the condition, and assistance uncertain. But if they say, it is certain
that Christ will work the Conditions in us if we do our part, i. e. if we
believe and obey, we shall have some help in it, then is our believing and
beginning to obey antecedent to the Grace of Christ, and the condition of more
Grace and Perseverance; and so Grace and all the Conditions of Life, as well as
Life it self, depend upon the Condition of our Obedience and Diligence, and so
the Covenant is still a Covenant of Works, for all that assistance we are like
to have in the performance of it. Lutherus Redivivus, p. 28, 29, 41, 42.

There is no Guilt on them that are in Christ, so far as they walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit, nor no proper Condemnation by Sentence or
Execution at all, because their Pardon is renewed by Christ, as they renew
their Sins of Infirmity; but not because he preventeth their need of any
further Pardon. -- The kind of our present Justification is imperfect, it being
but in Covenanttitle, and some part of Execution; the full and perfect Sentence
and Execution being at the day of Judgment. -- I leave them therefore to say
[Christ's Righteousness imputed to us is perfect, therefore we are perfectly
just and justified as Christ] who know not what Imputation here is; nor that
Christ's personal Righteousness is not given to us as Proprietors in it self,
but in the Effects; and who know not the difference between believing and
blaspheming, and making our selves as so many Christ's to our selves, and that
know not what need they have of Christ, or of Faith, or Prayer, or of any holy
endeavor for any more Pardon, and Righteousness or Justification, than they
have already; (q. d. unless I shall be justified in my own Righteousness for
the sake of the Righteousness of Christ, I am resolved I Will neither esteem
Christ, as seeing I have any need of him, unless he will support me for that,
and in my own Righteousness, especially as being wrought by his Spirit; for,
who but a mad Man would trouble himself with believing, praying, and go to all
that pains and cost of using holy Endeavors for any more Pardon and
Righteousness for their Justification, if all this must be renounced and thrown
away, as being neither the formal, material, or conditional Cause thereof, and
all from an Antinomian forsooth feigned Conception of our being pre-justified
in the sight of God, in the material Righteousness of another unto any Act of
ours, tho acknowledged even by our illogical ignorant Adversaries themselves to
be wrought by the Spirit of God) or who think that David in his Adultery and
Murder was as perfectly pardoned and justified as he will be in Heaven at last;
and in a word, who know not the difference between Earth and Heaven.

Error 12. That Christ justifies us only as a Priest; or (say others) only as
obeying and satisfying.

Contra. Christ merited our Justification in his state of Humiliation, as the
Mediator subjected to the Law, and perfectly obeying it, and as (not truly) a
Sacrifice for Sin: But this is not justifying us. Christ offered that Sacrifice
as the High Priest of the Church or World: But this was not justifying us.
Christ made us the New Covenant as our King, and as the great Prophet of the
Father or Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. and this Covenant gives us our
Pardon and Title to Impunity, and to Life eternal; and Christ as our King and
Judge, does justify us by a judiciary Sentence, and also by the Execution of
that Sentence, so that the Relations most eminently appearing in our
Justification, are all excluded by the foresaid Error. Baxter' s Life of Faith,
p. 196, 332.

There is a certain Baxterian, who ever he be, that Dr. Owen quotes in his
Piece of his Justification, whose sayings follow. -- But we are now told by
one, that if we should affirm it an hundred times, (viz. that we own an
inherent Righteousness) he could not scarce believe us. -- And first, he says,
That inherent Righteousness can on no other account be said to be ours, than
that by it we are made righteous, that is the Condition of our Justification
required in the new Covenant. This being denied, all inherent Righteousness is
denied. -- It is added, that all Righteousness respects a Law-and a Rule, by
which he is to be tried: And he is righteous who has done all these things
which that Law requires by whose Rule he is to be judged, -- But then it will
be said, that if it does not answer that Law and Rule whereby we are to be
judged, then it is no Righteousness, for all Righteousness must answer the Law
whereby it is required. And I say it is most true, it is no perfect
Righteousness, it does not so answer the Rule and Law, as that we can be
justified by it, or safely judged on it. But so far as it answers the Law, it
is a Righteousness, that is, imperfectly so, and therefore is an imperfect
Righteousness, which yet gives the denomination of righteous unto them that
have it, both absolutely and comparatively. It is said therefore, that it is
the Law of Grace, or the Gospel from whence we are denominated righteous with
this Righteousness. But that we are by the Gospel denominated righteous from
any Righteousness that is not required by the Moral Law, will not be proved. --
And that the Gospel requires all these things entirely and equally, as the
Condition of our Justification before God, and so antecedently thereunto, is
not yet proved, nor ever will be. It is hence concluded, That this is our
Righteousness, according to the Evangelical Law which requires it; by this we
are made righteous, that is, not guilty of the nonperformance of the Condition
required in that Law: And these things are said to be very plain, so no doubt
they seemed unto the Author, unto us they are intricate and perplexed. However,
I wholly deny that our Faith, Obedience, and Righteousness considered as ours,
as wrought by us, although they are all accepted with God through Jesus Christ,
according to the Grace declared in the Gospel, do perfectly answer the Commands
of the Gospel, requiring them of us, as to matter, manner, and degree; and that
therefore it is utterly impossible that they should be the Cause or Condition
of our Justification before God: Yet in the Explanation of these things it is
added by the same Author, that our maimed and imperfect Righteousness is
accepted unto Salvation, as if it were every way absolute and perfect, for that
so it should be Christ has merited by his most perfect Righteousness. But it
is Justification and not Salvation that alone we discourse about; and that the
Works of Obedience or Righteousness have another respect unto Salvation than
they have unto Justification, is too plainly and too often expressed in the
Scripture, to be modestly denied. And if this weak and imperfect Righteousness
of ours be esteemed and accepted as every way perfect before God, then either
it is because God judges it to be perfect, and so declares us to be most just,
and justified thereon in his sight, or he judges it not to be complete and
perfect, yet declares us to be perfectly righteous in his sight thereby;
neither of these I suppose can well be granted: It will therefore be said it is
neither of them, but Christ has obtained by his complete and perfect
Righteousness and Obedience, that this lame and imperfect Righteousness of ours
should be accepted as every way perfect. Dr. Owen of Justification, p. 327,
328, 329, 330, 331. --

Hence it appears how little force there is in that Argument which some pretend
to be of so great weight in this Cause. As every one (say they) shall be judged
of God at the last day, in the same way and manner, or on the same grounds is
he justified of God in this Life: But by Works and not by Faith alone every one
shall be judged at the last day; wherefore by Works, and not by Faith alone
every one is justified before God in this Life.

For, 1. It is no where said that we shall be judged at the last day, ex
operibus; but only that God will render unto Men secundum opera: But God does
not justify any in this Life secundum opera, being justified freely by his
Grace, and not according to the Works of Righteousness which we have done. And
we are every where said to be justified in this Life, ex fide, per fidem, but
no where propter fidem; or that God justifies us secundum fidem, by Faith, but
not for our Faith, nor according to our Faith: And we are not to depart from
the Expressions of the Scripture where such a difference is constantly
observed. 2. It is somewhat strange that a Man should be judged at the last
day, and justified in this Life just in the same way and manner, that is, with
respect unto Faith and Works, when the Scripture does constantly ascribe our
Justification before God to Faith without Works, and the Judgment at the last
day is said to be according unto Works, without any mention of Faith. Ibid. p.
224. We are said to be justified by Faith, which imports, that Repentance is
but a disposing Condition, and Faith the receiving Condition: Repentance
without Faith is unavailable, as Faith without Repentance is impossible: Faith
seems to complete all, and in a manner comprehend all. -- If you take it (viz.
Jer. 31. 31, etc.) in this sense (viz. of the natural Jews) yet here (viz. in
Jer. 31. 31, etc.) is a Law written in the Heart, which includes Faith in order
to God's being their God, and the remission of their Sins. -- -- Reader, Note,
1. There is a Righteousness for which a Man is justified; this is only Christ's
Righteousness, this is the Foundation of the Promise, and the Merit of the
Blessing promised: nothing can add to it, or mingle with it; it is sufficient,
and alone sufficient to satisfy Justice alone for Guilt, and merit Acceptance
and Life. 2. There Is to be considered, what the condition of the Person is whom
this is promised to: he is one that has this Grace of true Faith, and exerts
it into act. This Grace is also required and commanded as indispensibly
necessary to the participation of Forgiveness; Christ's Righteousness shall not
be imputed to this use, unless we believe: And nothing shall hinder our Title
to this Benefit if we do believe in Christ, for the Promise is inviolable: And
this Faith being a Conformity to the Rule of the Promise, some call it a
subordinate Righteousness, not meaning any Righteousness for which Sin is
forgiven, for it is Christ's Righteousness alone for which God justifies us; but
it is our answering that Rule by which Christ applies his Righteousness for our
Remission, and a right to Life; and his Promise is the ground of our Title. Mr.
Dan. Williams' s Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 96, 56, 86, 87.

Faith and Repentance are Acts of Man, and pre-requisite to Justification:
Therefore as Acts and Works' are words of the same sense, so Works, even Works
of special Grace, are prerequisite to Justification.

Obj. But not as Acts, but for the Object.

Ans. That Is a Contradiction, Christ is Christ whether we believe in him or
not; and it is one thing to say Christ is necessary, and another thing to say,
believing in him is necessary: it is not necessary merely as an Act in genere,
but as this Act in specie; and it is specified (as is aforesaid) by its Object;
not only Christ believed in, but believing in Christ is prerequisite as a Moral
Disposition to Justification; and in that sense a Work or Act of Man. -- Final
Justification and Glorification are the Rewards of Evangelical Obedience: and
the Reason rendered of Christ's justifying Sentence, Mat. 25. (and passim) is
from such Acts of Man, as qualify them for the free Gift of God. Mr. Baxter' s
End of Doctrinal Controversies, chap. 25.. 33, 39.

By this it is very plain how far a Man must be justified in Judgment by his
own Personal Righteousness, and also how to understand Mat. 25. and all the
Descriptions of the last Judgment, and the Reasons there assigned of the
Sentence, and what it is to be justified or condemned by our Words, and to be
judged according to our Works, or what we have done in obedience or
disobedience to the Law of Grace, and what is meant in James by being justified
by Works, and not by Faith alone: For tho Christ's Righteousness is to be then
honored, it is not his part but ours, that is by him to be examined and
judged: And it is the Law of Grace by which we must be judged, which prescribed
us the Conditions of Pardon and Salvation: The performance of which must
therefore be the Cause of the day to be examined and judged. -- To justify a
Man's right to Salvation, is to justify the Man when his Right is the thing
tried: Therefore the Causes of our right to Salvation are necessary Causes of
our Justification. Mr. Baxt. Breviat of Justificat. p. 8, 9.

Object. But it is said also that Righteousness is imputed; and that must be
either Christ's Righteousness or our own: but not our own, therefore Christ's.

Answ. We are not now questioning whether Christ's Righteousness be imputed to
us: Tho it be not the Phrase of the Scripture, I have showed you that it is
true in a sound sense. But the Question is, Whether Faith be imputed for
Righteousness? And what is the meaning of all such Texts? To have Righteousness
imputed to us, plainly signifies to be reckoned, accounted, reputed or judged
righteous; and it is strange that it must not be our own Righteousness that is
imputed or reckoned to us as our own. If it were never so well proved, that the
very Habits and Acts of Christ are by Gift or Union made our own in themselves,
and not only as the Causes of their Effects, yet still our own they would be,
and the Righteousness given by them our own, in order of Nature before they are
imputed, accounted or reckoned to us as our own: Some way that Righteousness
which is reckoned to constitute us righteous is surely made our own. Ibid. p.
32, 33.

Are not Works of Man meritorious?

Answ. Not in point of commutative Justice, that gives one thing for another
to the Commodity of each, as buying and selling. 2. Nor yet in distributative
governing Justice, as making any good due to us by the Law of Innocence or
Works. 3. But as God has freely given us Christ, and Life by a Law of Grace,
on condition of suitable acceptance and use; so he that performs this
Condition is called worthy, and the contrary unworthy in the Gospel; and did
not Men abuse it, they might with all the ancient Churches use the word Merit
in the same sense as Worthiness. Ibid. p. 45, 46.

Is future Sin pardoned before hand? Future Sin is not Sin, and therefore not
capable of Pardon, nor the Person for it; but it may be pardoned virtually, tho
not actually: A general Grant of Pardon may be given, which is conditional and
virtual, and shall actually pardon it when it is. Ibid. p. 47.

Whether Christ's being the end of the Law for Righteousness, does signify that
he so fulfilled Adam' s Law in our stead, as that it justifies us by fac hoc
and vives.

Answ. 1. The Affirmers quite mistake Moses and Paul, in thinking that it is
the Law of Innocence which the words cited by Paul describe, when indeed it was
Moses's Law of Works, which had Sacrifices and Promises of Pardon, which the
other had not. 2. Christ is there said to be the end of all the Law as to its
Shadows, Types and conjunct Promises. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and
Truth (that is, the things promised and typified) came by Jesus Christ. The
confounding of these Laws confounds many in these Controversies. Ibid. p. 63.

It seems strange to some, to find the whole Old Testament, and all Christ's
Sermons, and all the other Apostles, inculcating inherent and performed
Righteousness as that which must be judged about to Life or Death, and yet to
find Paul so often pleading against Justification by Works: But if we will take
the Scripture together, and not by incoherent scraps, the Reconciliation is
evident. -- Man is now sinful and condemned by the first Law, and is now under
a Law of Grace that freely gives Pardon and Life through a Redeemer, to those
that believingly accept the Gift according to its nature, and consent by
Repentance to turn to God, and live an holy Life in sincerity. Now God does
through all the Scripture tell us, That no one shall pass with God for a just
Man, or be saved, that will not do this, but shall be condemned further for
refusing it: And thus he that does Righteousness is righteous, and all shall be
judged according to their Works, thus required by the Law of Grace. To deny
this, is to deny the scope of the whole Scripture, and the Government of God:
But Paul disputed against those that taught that the Gentiles must be
proselyted, and keep the Law of Moses, or else they could not be accounted just
Men, nor be saved: And he proves, that the Gentiles being under the Law of
Grace, may pass with God for just Men, and be saved, if they [believingly
accept the Gift of Grace according to its nature, and consent by Repentance to
turn to God, and live a holy Life in sincerity] tho they keep not the Jewish
Law: Yea, further, that tho the Jewish Fathers were obliged to keep that Law,
it was as it belonged to the Covenant of Grace and of Faith; and that before
that Law was, Abraham and others were just, and saved by Faith, according to
the universal Law of Grace; and that the Task of Works according to the
Mosaical Law, will of it self make no Man just or salvable, and consequently no
other Task of Works, which would make the Reward to be not of Grace, but of
Debt, and is opposed to, or separated from Redemption and the free Condonation
and Donation of the Covenant of Grace.] This is the plain drift of Paul. --

Works of Evangelical Gratitude, Love, and Obedience, according to the Law of
Grace, subordinate to, and supposing Redemption and the free Gift of Pardon and
Life to penitent believing Accepters, are those that Christ and James and all
the Scripture make necessary to Salvation; and our Consent and Covenant so to
obey is necessary to our first or initial Justification, and our actual
Obedience to the continuance and confirmation of it.

Mr. Baxter' s End of Doctrinal Controversies, chap. 21. the Title of which
Chapter is, Of the nature of Righteousness, Justification and Pardon.

Quaker.
MR. Barclay, a Scotch Quaker, speaking of Justification by an imputed
Righteousness, says, Indeed it may be thought strange how some Men have made
this so fundamental an Article of their Faith, which is so contrary to the
whole strain of the Gospel: A thing Christ in none of all his Sermons and
gracious Speeches ever willed any to rely upon, always recommending to us
Works, as instrumental in our Justification; and the more it is to be admired
at, because that that Sentence or Term (so frequent in their Mouths, and so
often pressed by them as the very Basis of their Hope and Confidence) to wit,
the imputed Righteousness of Christ, is not to be found in all the Bible, at
least to my observation. P. 149. of his Apology for the Quakers.

That Justification by the Righteousness of Christ without us, is not
Scripture Language. George Whitehead's Apol. p. 37.

If any think he is Christ's, or any other Men are Christ's so far as to stand
justified before God in him, before he be sanctified, or while he is guilty of
such gross Evils as David was defiled with, while he was walking in the mire of
the matter of Uriah, as T. D. guesses David and all Saints are (by which Name
he paints them out as well while they are in such a nasty pickle, as when they
are washed) or impute the Righteousness of Christ without him to himself, or
count upon it that God imputes it so as to compute him or any righteous, holy,
good, etc. upon that mere account of his own so counting on it, and confident
believing it so to be before he find and feel that by his Faith in Christ's
Light, (which such Fanciers as I. O. T. D. and most Divines and their
Disciples, are far from Faith in, while they fight against it as Fiction) it be
revealed and wrought in himself, and imparted to him, to the making of him
righteous as Christ is, and to the purifying of him (in fieri) till he come (in
facto esse) to be pure as Christ is pure -- I say, if any Man thus believe,
trust and hope as aforesaid, his hope is but vain, etc. Mr. Samuel Fisher's
Testimony of Truth, p. 160.

As many as resist not this Light, but receive the same, it becomes in them a
holy, pure and spiritual Birth, bringing forth Holiness, Righteousness, Purity,
and all those other blessed Fruits which are acceptable to God: By which holy
Birth, to wit, Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his Works in us, as
we are sanctified, so are we justified in the sight of God, according to the
Apostle's words; But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Therefore it is not by our Works wrought in our Will, nor yet by good Works,
considered as of themselves, but by Christ, who is both the Gift and the Giver,
and the Cause producing the Effects in us, who, as he has reconciled us while
we were Enemies, does also in his Wisdom save us and justify us, after this
manner, as says the same Apostle elsewhere, according to his Mercy he has
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Tit. 3. 5. Mr. Barclay' s Apology, p. 136.

The Wisdom of Men in the Fall finding these several words (Justification,
Sanctification, Mortification) in Scripture, has in their Imaginations run
them into Divisions, and separated that which is in one, and cannot be divided
in the Possession; for it is one that works all these where he is present
according to the measure received: And this is the just One, who by Faith lives
in the Creature, and the Creature in him; and so becomes the Justifier and
Sanctifier of all that believe, and the Mortifier of that Nature which is out
of the Faith; and one of these is not alone without the rest: For that which
sanctifies that mortifies, and the same justifies; and all that know what it is
to have these in the Life, know this. I know there are a People who have a
desire to Heaven more than to Holiness; and they, lest they should spoil their
carnal Delights, have in their Brain-imagination conceited a Justification
without Sanctification or Mortification, wresting those Scriptures which
condemn the Works of the Law, and therewith they would exclude the
Righteousness of Faith also. And because the Scripture says, God justifies the
Ungodly through Faith, therefore they conclude themselves justified in their
Ungodliness by a fancy which they call Faith, but are without in Christ: for
that Faith which lays not hold upon God's Righteousness is not the Faith of
Christ, but a dead thing: for so far as any has the Faith of Christ, so far it
reveals God's Righteousness without the Law, from Faith to Faith; by which
Righteousness of God, the just live, and the unjust die, and so justified, as
they are sanctified and mortified, and no further; even as the Righteousness of
God without the Law is manifest, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets,
even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all that believe, without respect of Persons -- for the Blood of Christ it
washes away the Filth, and so puts off the old Man, and mortifies the deeds of
that Body, and so sanctifies and justifies. -- This is true Justification,
where there is no Condemnation, where the Deeds of the Flesh are mortified, and
the Creature walks no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: for the
Condemnation is to him that walks after the Flesh, but he that walks in the
Spirit is justified. -- In the second Man's state, the Law is fulfilled through
Mortification, Sanctification, Justification of the Spirit. James Naylor Love
to the Lost, p. 87, 88, 89, 90.

So comes Man to be reconciled (...) his Maker, in the eternal Unity beyond
what is to be expressed: The Wisdom and Power received from above, whereby the
Heart is set free from Corruption, and made able to escape the Pollutions of
the World, and to run the pure ways with delight, which is the glorious Liberty
of the Sons of God, the Resurrection from the dead, and the entrance into the
everlasting Rest. Ibid. p. 4.

There may be many talkers of this Righteousness, but none inherit it further
than by Faith they receive the Son of Righteousness, and with him his
Righteousness is freely imputed, or put into the Creature a free Gift from the
Father; and with this Righteousness is the Creature made righteous, even as he
is righteous, even as the measure of Christ is received, and no further. Ibid.
p. 10. But this Righteousness is wrought into the Creature in that Obedience
which is contrary to the Will of the Flesh, and in the Faith, by the eternal
Spirit, is the new begetting both of the Will and Deed. -- So you that say your
Righteousness is as filthy Rags; Why do you abide in that? God's Righteousness
is not so. -- But this is Blasphemy in your own Eyes, who have made Christ's
Righteousness a Cover for you^ Abominations. What Wickedness is so vile now in
these Nations, but the Righteousness of Christ is made a Cover? and Men bless
themselves therewith in the greatest Abomination. -- As it saves you out of
Sin, so will it save you out of Condemnation, and no further. And this, that in
your Conscience will witness, if you take Counsel at it, no further than you
find the Power of his Righteousness working in you, and you owning it in
Obedience and Subjection, and joining to it against all Unrighteousness, no
more of it you can inherit, nor be made the Righteousness of God in him. Ibid.
p. 11, 12. -- Your Ministers tell you your Righteousness is not perfect, yet
they call for Righteousness, and yet say, your best is but filthy Rags. -- But
whose Work is wrought in God with the Light is justified -- who have therein
received the Faith of the Gospel, and the end of that Faith, even God's
Righteousness revealed from Faith to Faith, whereby the pure Law of God is
fulfilled in many, and fulfilling in many others who abide in their measure of
Faith which God has dealt to them, walking in the Light, not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit: And so by the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is in
Christ Jesus, see themselves set free from the Law of Sin and Death. Ibid. p.
42, 61, 96.

The strength of Sin which is the Law, which is not taken away but where it is
fulfilled, there only Grace reigns through Righteousness; and this I found to
be Truth, as the Truth is found in Jesus, as I came to learn him, and put him
on by Faith, which I had believed; and I see the folly of such as would make
void the Law by talking of Faith and Grace, where Sin is yet standing, and the
Soul taken captive therewith (it seems Paul was an old Antinomian in the sense
of Naylor, and Mr. Dan. Williams, who though brought into Captivity, yet could
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and his Interest in him, Romans 7. 23, 24, 25.) which I
had often sought Peace therein to my self, but could not inherit Liberty to my
Soul any other way but as it came to be purified in Obedience through the
Spirit. I have found the ground, and rise, and deceits of that Faith that
believes Christ to have taken away the Sins of Believers past, present, and to
come, with which many at this day make merry over the Witness of God. James
Naylor Possession of the living Faith, p. 13, 23, 24. Suitable to this is Mr.
Dan. Williams's Charge against Mr. Mather. It must be his Judgment, that all
our Sins are pardoned at once, even past, present, and to come. Man made
righteous, etc. p. 224.

Thou art unredeemed from thy vain Conversation, and so art not justified, nor
ever shall be: And by the same that the Saints are justified thou art condemned
into the Lake for ever (i. e. if thou trustest to any other Righteousness from
without thee than what is inherently wrought in thee by the Spirit.) Edw.
Burrough's Works in Folio, p. 32, 33. Obedience to Justification ought to be as
personally extensive, as was Man's Disobedience to Condemnation, in which real
(not imputative) sense those various terms of Sanctification, Righteousness,
Resurrection, Life, Redemption, Justification, etc. are most infallibly
understood: for impute or imputing signifies no more in Scripture, but to
express Men really and personally to be that which is imputed to them, whether
as guilty or remitted. For any to be justified from the imputation of another's
Righteousness, is both ridiculous and dangerous; whence came that usual saying
amongst many Professors of Religion, That God looks not upon them as they are
in themselves, but as they are in Christ. Mr. William Penn's Sandy Foundation,
p. 31, 32.

Justification by the Righteousness which Christ fulfilled for us in his own
Person wholly without us; we boldly affirm it to be a Doctrine of Devils, and
an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which does now deluge the World. Penn's Apol.
p. 148.

Thou, to whom the Plagues of God are due, and upon whom the Wrath of God must
be accomplished, who would have another Righteousness than that which Christ
works in the Saints. Edward Burroughs's Works, p. 32.

Justification is not from the imputation of another's Righteousness, but from
the actual performing and keeping of God's righteous Statutes. -- It is a great
Abomination to say, God should condemn and punish his innocent Son, that he
having satisfied for our Sins, we might be justified by the imputation of his
perfect Righteousness. (...) why should this horrible thing be contended for by
Christians? Penn' s Sandy Foundation, p. 25, 30. That the Consequences of such
a Doctrine are both irreligious and irrational. Ibid. p. 16.

Christ fulfilled the Law only as our Pattern or Example. Christ is so far from
telling us of such a way of being justified, as that he informs us the reason
why he abode in his Father's Love, was his Obedience; he is so far from telling
us of being justified by virtue of his Obedience imputed, that unless we keep
the Commands, and obey for our selves; in all which Christ is but our Example.
Penn Ibid. p. 26.

I do say Abraham had not the Imputation of another's Righteousness to him, his
personal Obedience was the ground of that just Imputation. -- I do maintain,
that good Works may be said to procure, deserve or obtain; in which sense,
without good Works, there is no acceptance with God: And Abraham' s personal
offering was the ground of that just Imputation. Penn' s Sandy Foundation, p.
30. Art thou of them that imagine a Justification without Sanctification, who,
because the Scripture says God justifies the ungodly through Faith, they
therefore conclude themselves justified in their Ungodliness, by a fancy which
they call Faith? James Naylor' s Love to the lost, p. 50, 51. Justification
goes not before, but is consequential to the mortifying of Lusts, and the
Sanctification of the Soul. Again, impute or imputing signifies no more in
Scripture, but to express Men really and personally to be what is imputed to
them. -- I further tell thee, that Justification by an imputed Righteousness,
is both irrational, irreligious, ridiculous and dangerous. Penn' s Sandy Found.
p. 27, 29, 30, 31. My Reasons are these, that to be justified by the
Righteousness of Christ, is a Sin-pleasing and dangerous Notion. 1. No Man is
justified without Faith, no Man has Faith without Works; therefore the Works
of Righteousness by the Spirit are necessary to our Justification. -- If Men
are justified whilst impure, then God acquits the guilty, which is contrary to
plain Scripture, which cannot be, I mean whilst in a rebellious state. Penn' s
Reason against Rail. p. 69. Death came in by actual Sin, not imputative;
therefore Justification comes by actual Righteousness, not imputative. -- This
speaks Peace to the wicked, whilst wicked; but there is no Peace to the wicked.
-- By this Doctrine Men are dead and alive at the same time, that is, dead in
Sin, and alive in another's Righteousness, not inherent; consequently Men may
be damned actually, yet saved imputatively. -- Men are to reap what they do
sow, every Man shall be rewarded according to his Works: none are justified but
the Children of God: None are the Children of God but they who are led by the
Spirit. It Is not the Oil in another's Lamp, but in our own that will serve our
turns.

The rejoicing must be in our selves, not in another's, tho to Christ's holy
Power alone we do ascribe it. Ibid. p. 69, 70.

It Is wicked and erroneous in them who not from Scripture-Evidences, but their
dark Conjectures and Interpretations would frame a Doctrine inconsistent with
God's pure and equal Nature, making to condemn the righteous to Death, and
justify the wicked to Life, from the imputation of another's Righteousness.
Ibid. p. 71. from Ezekiel. 18. 20, 26, 27, 28. That the Justification of Persons
is not from the imputation of another's Righteousness, but the actual
performing or keeping God's righteous Statutes, otherwise God's ways were not
equal. -- Romans 5. 19. This Chapter dered is no more than this, that as Adam as
Representative of Mankind, was he by whom Sin entered into the World; so Christ
was he by whose coming and Obedience Righteousness had an entrance to the
Justification of many. -- Christ's Work was twofold, 1. To remit, forgive, or
justify from the imputation of Sins past, such as truly repent and believe. 2.
By his Power and Spirit working in the Hearts of such, to destroy and remove
the very nature of Sin, to make an end of it, to finish Transgression present
and to come; the first removes the Guilt, the second the Cause of it. -- I
grant that Christ's Obedience to Death, was in order to make Men righteous,
because it was in the nature of a Sacrifice: In which sense the Just suffered
for the Unjust, and whilst we were Sinners Christ died for us. And he justified
the Ungodly, that is, upon Repentance; still Repentance brought home the
general Pardon promulgated in and by that holy Offering: thus by the Obedience
of one, even to the Death, many come to be made righteous, that is, justified
from many Offenses. Ibid. p. 70, 71, 72,

Tho Christ died for the ungodly, yet they are not thereby justified whilst
unrepentant. Peter says, Repent and receive the remission of Sins. How is this
Repentance wrought, by which as a Condition any come to be entrusted in that
great Pardon? Is the Spirit unconcerned in this? Are we not by Nature the
Children of Wrath? Is not this confessed by the Professors of Religion in our
times, and the most affected piece of their Righteousness too? If then
Repentance be a Condition, and this cannot be without the Spirit of Christ work
it, then something must be done within of the nature of inward Righteousness,
before any Benefit can be received from Christ's Death and Sufferings; this is
close to the Point. Ibid. p. 74.

Was not Abraham justified by Works? we must not conceive that his offering
personally was not a justifying Righteousness, but that God was pleased to
account it so, nor was there any imputation of another's Righteousness to
Abraham; but on the contrary, his personal Obedience was the ground of that
just Imputation: therefore that any should be justified from the Imputation of
another's Righteousness, not inherent in him, is both ridiculous and dangerous.
Ibid. p. 80.

Mr. Stalham in his Reviler rebuked, speaking against the Quakers, cites them,
saying, -- For by Christ such as are so born, and believe, are justified, etc.
and so Christ is their Justification, who are sanctified, and from Sin by him
redeemed. See how blind thou art: Was Judas in a state of Justification when he
denied Christ and betrayed him? No more than Peter was when Christ called him
Satan. -- But after Peter had repented of his denial of Christ, and wept
bitterly; upon his return, and after he was united to the Faith, then Christ
prayed for him. -- With much Impudence (says Mr. Stalham) James Naylor had
said, The Man of Sin is discovered in them, who say, Believers are pure, and
spotless too, by reason of Imputation, or Covering of Christ's Righteousness,
p. 120, 128, 129.

Because we assert the good Works of Christ in his Saints to be necessary to
their Justification, who cannot be justified by any of their own; they not only
charge us as joining with Jesuits and Papists, but ofttimes also (as far as
they dare in such a thing as they have no Proof of) they downrightly pronounce
us to be such: Whereas how near of kin they are in their own, and how none are
more contrary than our Tenants to the Pope (not Popery, but the Pope, because
he monopolizes and annexes that Infallibility unto his own Chair, which we
assert to be in every Man's Light within, even above Scripture it self.) And
because we make mention of Christ in us, and the Righteousness of the Law, as
necessary in order to Salvation, to be performed and fulfilled in our own
Persons, as Paul does, Romans 8. 4. Tho we mean no other Righteousness than the
same that is in Christ, and is wrought in us by no other Power than that of
Christ, and that same Christ too of whom the Scripture speaks, that to him give
all the Prophets witness, Acts 10. That in his Name, and through Faith in his
Name alone, who e're believes, shall receive remission of Sins; than which
Christ and his Name, there is no other under Heaven given among Men, whereby
they must be saved. They belie us both to God and Men, as deniers of Christ and
of his Righteousness, and of Justification by Christ alone, witness one
Ackworth of Rochester, who was once heard by the Writer hereof deprecating and
declaring against the Quakers, in these words to God himself in his public
Prayers, viz. Above all things Lord, (quoth he) deliver this poor City from the
Quakers; they are a People, Lord, that deny God, deny Christ, deny the
Righteousness of Christ, deny Justification by Christ alone. Whereas as it was
at that time by this Author profferred (tho not permitted) to be presently and
publicly proved to his face, on behalf of that People whom he told Lies on to
the Lord himself, that they own God, own Christ, own Christ's Righteousness,
and own Justification by Christ alone, (Here is a Baxterian ad unguem, with
sufficient impudent Reserves) so against all the Priests, who in their several
Parishes misrepresent us, as going about to establish our own Righteousness
only (this word only is the Scorpion at the Locusts Tail) and not Christ's to
our Justification, (among whom T. Danson is in that Point the most gross false
Accuser of us) as it was (clearly enough to Men not minded to be blind) by word
of Mouth at the Disputes at Sandwich, and has been since by George Whitehead's
printed Replies to Thomas Danson's printed Misrelations of us in that matter,
so is it abundantly proved more at large in the latter part of the first
Exercitation, that there is no People do more fully or so truly disclaim their
own as filthy Rags, and establish Christ's Righteousness alone (which, as
wrought by Christ in his Saints, T. Danson makes no better than Dung, Loss and
filthy Rags) to both the Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation of sinful
Men from all their Sins, than the Quakers do, who are by the Parish Peoples
blind Leaders most abominably belied to them as deniers of it. Mr. Fisher' s
Testimony of Truth exalted, p. 32.

Thus then stands this case between me and thy self, T. D. thou arraignest me
openly at the Bar before the World, p. 14. as a rank Papist, as saying in these
terms, that [OUR good Works] are the meritorious Cause of our Justification: at
which Indictment, I pleading not guilty of saying [OUR good Works] but [good
Works] are the Cause, etc. Ibid. p. 136.

That then I affirmed good Works to deserve Justification, I own, and still
affirm the same; but I deny that I there affirmed, and here I affirm that I
then did and still do deny the Papists best Works (so does the Baxterian, tho
he hold the same thing) which are not good, what e're they call them, to
deserve Justification, or OUR own best Works either, who know no good Works
that we have, but what Christ, who works no evil Works, by his Power works in
and by us, which, as they are done by him in us, are not ours, but
distinctively from ours, 2 Timothy 1. 7. Tit. 3. 5. called his, and as they are
done by us, through his Power in us, are called our Works, Isa. 26. 12. for as
he does them in us, Mat. 10. 20. 2 Cor. 13. 3. 1 Cor. 14. 25. and works in us
both to will and to do them, they are truly his; and as we work them in and by
that Power he gives, may (yet in such sense as what we do of our selves) be
called our own, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Yea, if we speak of what good Works Christ did
in that Person only, in which he appeared at Jerusalem, while we witness not
the same done by him in our selves, we cannot call those Works OURS to
Justification more truly than Papists can, who believe as well as Protestants
what he there did, tho they never look to do the like. -- Quae non fecimus
ipsi, non ea nostra voco.

What he did in that Person, and not OURS, is his only yet, and not OURS; but
if we speak of what we do not only in our own Persons, but our own Wills,
Power, and Wisdom, abstract from him, and the Leadings of his Light and Spirit,
I say, Quae sic fecimus ipsi, haec ego nostra voco, these I call truly and only
OURS, and so does the Scripture, Romans 10. 3, 4. Phil. 3. 9. and as for what OUR
Persons do in his Light according to his Will in the true movings of his
Spirit, and by no other but his own Power, Quae nos fecimus ipsi sic, ea nostra
voco; these being partly ours, tho principally his, I have a liberty from the
Lord truly enough to denominate by that Name of OURS: yet as it is ^it he should
have the pre-eminence as to the Name, who is not the chief Actor, but the only
Author of them; I rather choose mostly to call them his, tho done in and by us;
and so again, Quae nos fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco. So there are, 1. Good
Works, which are only Christ's, and not OURS, and by these he deservedly stood
justified in the sight of God, in his own Person, which if he had not done (and
had he sinned he could not have done) he could never have been a High Priest
able to justify others, or sufficient to save to the uttermost, such as come to
God by him; for such a High Priest it became us to have, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, and separate from Sinners himself, or else he could never separate
Sin from us; Heb. 7. 26, 27, 28. 2. Again, there are good Works (so called)
which are only OURS, and not Christ's, and such are all the best that we work
without him of our selves, even all our own Righteousness and Righteousnesses,
which are as an unclean thing, as a menstruous Rag, Isa. 64. 6. as Dung and
Loss, not Gain, nor any way profitable to save or deliver, Isa. 57. 12, 13.
Phil. 3. 4. and by these, tho done in Man's willings and runnings in a way of
outward Conformity to the letter of the Law shall no Flesh ever be justified
any more than Paul was; for these are not Christ's, all whose Works are
meritorious and acceptable to God, and deserving no Condemnation that I know
of, and consequently deserving Justification before God: but Man's own
Righteousness, as that of the Jews was, Romans 9. 32. chap. 10. 3. and Paul's
was, till he came to the Light (tho for want of coming to the Light, T. D. in
his dark Mind says Paul had no Righteousness that was not Christ's, p. 22.) is
meritorious of no more acceptance than Cain's Sacrifice had, which was justly
and deservedly rejected, because it is the evil Doer still, that does that Good
which God (what e're the Sinner calls it) accounts Evil. 3. Again, there are
good Works which in different respects are called (truly enough) both Christ's
and OURS (viz.) OURS, as done in and by our Persons; Christ's, as done only by
his Power in us: and by these last (call them as ye will) Christ's, as done by
him in OUR Persons, or OURS, as done by us in his Power, is the Justification
of all that ever were or shall be justified, both deserved and effected, and
not by what he did without them in that single Person that once lived and died
at Jerusalem, while the same Righteousness was and is not by that same Power of
his fulfilled within themselves; and so first detesting all that as rotten Rags
that is done by mere Man without Christ, and disowning it utterly, as giving no
influence to Man's Justification, both honoring and duly owning all that
Righteousness that was wrought by Christ without Man, as perfect, precious,
glorious, acceptable to God, unspeakably useful to us, and truly meritorious at
least to his own Justification, that he might become (as else he could not) a
meet Mediator for Man. This third and last I own as the meritorious and
perfectly effectual Cause of Man's Justification; and howbeit T. D. is so blind
as to deny our Satisfaction by that Righteousness whereof Christ is the Author,
p. 23. and to believe that he that holds Justification by this Righteousness of
Christ that is wrought in the Sai^s by his Spirit, cannot be saved, p. 38. for
he owns this Sentence there for truth (viz.) That any Man that holds that
Principle of being justified by a Righteousness within us, living and dying in
that Principle cannot be saved: Yet I not only say, but see so much, and hope
(as great a Malefactor as T. D. p. 54. makes me for it) to make any (save such
as seeing will not see) to see the same, that he cannot be saved who holds it
not, but looks for Salvation in that Gospel, which T. D. preaches of a
Justification by a Christ only without him; and that he may fill up his
flouting at it, and complete his cursing of it, in the same Phrase he
scoffingly renders my speaking this Truth in at the Dispute, p. 28. I say again
to all People, that Gospel which T. D. and his Fellows preach of Salvation by
Christ without them, without the Revelation of Christ and his Righteousness
within them, will not bring Men to Heaven: Indeed People, it will not. And this
that I am to have the second talking with T. D. about, before I come again to
I. O. (viz.) this Point of Justification, whether it which we say is by
Christ's Righteousness and good Works alone, and not any thing that is done by
us, simply as of our selves, be by the Righteousness of Christ without us only
(as T. D. says it is) or by that which he performs in us also by the same
Power, as we affirm it. Ibid. p. 137, 138, 139.

Having hewed my way to it through those craggy Contradictions of T. D. to
himself about it, and dispersed and vanquished some of the dark Vapors wherewith
he had veiled that Question that lies between us, I shall now vent my Verdict
on it in a more plain open view: and having negatively declared whose
Righteousness and good Works, Justification and Life is not given upon, and
discarded all those of mere Man's own, as Dung, Loss, Rags, imperfect, and
(whatever T. D. falsely charges on us, as affirming it, or affirms himself of
Life given upon imperfect Obedience, and meetness to inherit it by Pa^'s own,
which he renounced) of no worth, to give any influence into these matters; I
shall show whom and whose good Works and Righteousness Life comes by, and is
given upon: yea, I here positively affirm, that by none but Christ alone
Justification unto Life can come; nor is there either Title to the Inheritance,
or Fitness (these are but convertible terms with our Author, Title and Fitness)
to possess it, by any other good Works or Righteousness save those of the Lord
Jesus only, whose only and all, whose Works, even in the very least degree
thereof, when or wherever wrought, are perfectly good. -- Now much if not most
of this is in general granted and asserted by all, (viz.) that Justification to
Life and Salvation is by none but Christ, and by no other Righteousness but
that which is most peculiarly and properly called his, and not Man's. But still
the question about which sub judice^is est, (viz.) what Christ it is, (for T.
D. makes two at least, if not more, viz. a Christ within, and a Christ without)
and what Righteousness of Christ it is (for T. D. makes two Righteousnesses of
Christ also, viz. one within us, and another in him without us) by whom, and
upon which the Title to Justification, and the Inheritance comes. -- And as I
own no other Christ but that one, by whom Life comes to all that believe in his
Light; so I own the Life to come by that one Christ, not as without us, but as
coming within us; and contrarily to T. D. at the Dispute, who (as he truly
relates it, to his own further shame, p. 22.) being asked by G. W. Whether we
are not justified by Christ within us? answered, No, but by Christ without us;
which Christ (to make but one of him still, whom T. D. by his Metonymy
metamorphosies into two things expressed by that one Name, his Person and
Operations) as without or while without, and not come into them, is no more to
them, who when he comes in them are his Saints, than he is to all them who are
without him in the World, whose Condemnation he is by his Light, because they
yet believe not in it, that he in whom is Life, whose Life is the Light of Men,
by it might come into them, and make them partakers of Life; John 12. But as he
comes in (and Men behold he now comes (...), in Myriads of his holy Ones, Jude
14. To convince all the ungodly of their ungodly Deeds, and the hard Speeches
that ungodly Sinners have spoken against him) So is he made not only their
Sanctification to cleanse, and make them meet for the pure Lord to look upon
them with delight, as Vessels of Honor fitted for him to take pleasure in, but
also even so, and no otherwise than so, as within, and bringing forth his own
Image and Righteousness within them, is he their Righteousness to
Justification, so as to enright and entitle them to the gracious acceptance in
the sight of the Lord, which by his own holy Presence, and holy Spirit, and
holy Operations in them, he has first fitted them for: And as by himself, not
as without us, but as within us; so by that Obedience, and those good Works of
Righteousness both active and passive of himself, not as without us only (as is
blindly believed by our blind Guides and their Believers) but as within us
wrought and performed, does he really become our Righteousness to the
Justification of us in God's sight, and an Entitler of us to the Inheritance,
and a Sanctifier and fitter of us for it, and also we the Righteousness of God
in him: for tho whatever he did and endured without, in that Body that lived
and died at Jerusalem, was as truly meritorious of perfect Obedience, (here is
our Baxterian Jackpudding Doctrine to a hair's breadth) as to the ends, in
order to which it was yielded, being the fulfilling of the Law, and of all the
Types, Shadows and Sacrifices that went before him, and that whereby he left us
an Example that we should follow his steps, etc. yet if the Blood of that
immaculate Lamb, and the suffering, and the Sacrifice of himself, by which he
purges away Sin, and that Righteousness, and those perfect good Works, and holy
spiritual Operations of his be not witnessed nearer to us in time and place,
than 1600 Years since at Jerusalem, (viz.) within us now, as 1 John 1. 7. it
avails us not to our Salvation. -- And howbeit this true Transposition of
purifying before pardoning, of Men's forgoing Sin by Christ's Power in them
before God's forgiving and forgetting it, runs in a clear cross line to your
(...), of the Cart before the Horse, who set Justification from the Guilt,
before Sanctification from the filth of Sin, expecting and accounting among
your selves (without the Lord while he is silent, and before the Bill of your
Accounts be brought in by him) ye are just, and pure, and holy, and good in the
sight of God, when it is nothing less upon the account of somewhat done by
another, that never knew the Workers of Iniquity so well as to entitle them to
an entrance into God's Bosom in their Iniquities, as if all scores were quitted
between God and you, and your Sin blotted out 1600 Years at least, before they
were by you done: And by his Witness in you, as with a Pen of Iron, and a Point
of a Diamond written by Christ, and the Works of his Spirit within; yet I
absolutely assert, that he can be no further justified than in such measure as
ye are sanctified before God, nor yet any sooner in order of either Time or
Nature as you speak. I am not ignorant of your ordinary School-Distinctions and
Positions, namely, that bona opera non praecedunt justificandum sed sequuntur
justificatum, and dant non jus ad regnum, but only aptitudinem regnandi, etc.
that good Works go not before in the Person that is to be justified, but follow
only in Persons already justified, and give no right to the Kingdom, but only a
fitness for entrance into it, to such as have actual right before ever they do
any good by the Power of Christ: and T. D. by implicit Faith treads in the same
common beaten Track, telling us, p. 6. that surely the leading of the Spirit,
or Sanctification is a Fruit and Effect, and not a meritorious Cause of not
being obliged to the Penalty of the Law; yet all this is but tittle tattle of
those whom Christ and Righteousness serves to talk and make a trade on: Tell
not me T. D. of Thomas, of Jo. Duns the Scot, and other Scepticks, Schoolmen
and Casuists that make Religion a matter of Dispute more than Practice; for I
say (and yet no more than what the Sctipture proves to any, but such as take
more care by their innumerable Distinctions, Senses and Meanings upon it, to
defend themselves in their Sins, than to live the Life of it) that the good
Works that are the Gift of Christ, and the Fruits of the Spirit of Christ in
us, and that Righteousness which is of his working in us, who works in us
both to will and to do what e're we do, that is of worth before God, are those
by which our Salvation is wrought out, Phil. 2. 13. and are not the Fruit and
Effect of, but go before Justification from Guilt, and acquitting from the
Penalty and condemning Power of the Law, which is the Fruit and Effect of the
other: and the same that gives the aptitude and meetness for the Kingdom, the
self same Righteousness of Christ within us wrought and imparted to us, gives
to us the jus or rig^t to inherit it, and not another without us, only imputed;
for as is commonly said, quae supra nos, and so may it be truly said in this
matter, quae extra nos nihil ad nos, etc. What good Works and Righteousness of
Christ are done by him without us, whatever they are intentionally and
conditionally, yet are actually and absolutely nothing to us, but as we come to
see and feel the same, by that same Power that wrought in him working mightily
in us, performed within our selves. -- Neither are the good Works and
Righteousness of Christ, which are the Fruits of his Spirits leading us
thereto, subsequent as Effects of his not being under the Law's Curse in a
Person before justified (as T. D. and the Scholastic Doctors, of whom he
learns it, indoctrinates) but are precedent as Causes of it in order to their
Peace; for as it is said Isa. 31. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. of the inherent
Righteousness, that resides and remains in the Hearts of Saints, which is the
Fruit and Effect of the Spirit of God, making them of a Wilderness a fruitful
Field, by the pourings out of the Spirit upon them from on high, so it is in
truth that the Work of that Righteousness is the Peace, and the Effect or Fruit
of that Righteousness is Quietness and assurance for ever: yea, that People who
of a barren Forest become a fruitful Field to the Lord, bring forth Fruits of
Righteousness by Christ in them to the Praise of God, are they only, that when
the Hail of God's Wrath, Indignation, and Torment comes down by right on the
fruitless Forest, have (even eatenus, or thereupon) a due Right and Title to
the dwelling in the peaceable Habitation and sure Dwelling, and quiet resting
Places of the Father's Love, and Abraham' s Bosom, as well as a fitness for it;
which fitness and meetness is first, and ever goes before the actual, absolute
and immediate Right thereto come, for whatever remote and conditional right all
Men have to the Justification, Life and Peace of God in Christ. Mediante fide,
justitia, pietate, sanctitate, etc. on terms of that precedent Faith,
Righteousness, Godliness and Holiness wrought in them by Christ, which makes
them meet for it; yea, a positive and immediate right thereto can no Man have,
till he be thus made meet to enter it, any more than he that was unmeet for the
Marriagesupper, for want of his Wedding Garment, who had as true a remote right
as any that were there, conditionally he had suited (i. e.) clothed himself
accordingly, had in his old Suit the rotten Rags of his own Righteousness, and
not Christ's, a real and immediate right to intrude himself into so holy a
Presence, who was with shame thrust forth for his Labor. Ibid. p. 153, 154,
155. Justification in God's sight of a Sinner is, say the Priests, before any
Sanctification is at all in him; but neither the Sinner can know that there is
any such matter as Pardon of his Sin, or that he stands just in God's sight
appears not at all to himself, nor yet is it evident to us, who tell him it is
so, neither can we know it any more than he, till Sanctification appear in him,
from which, as that which goes before it ever in our Eyes, we come to the sight
of it: yet if he will believe us (who speak of a thing we know not, and talk we
know not what) and if he will take our words for it, that his Justification is
before he be sanctified (who have no other Evidence of it our selves, or
whereby to make it evident to him of this) or his Sanctification, which is
evermore that which goes before the other, for ought we see or can discern; and
if he will trust us implicitly at a venture he may, but if he will not (say I)
he may safely choose (A pretty come-off; the Question is, Whether a Sinner be
justified in the sight of God before he be sanctified? The Answer is, No; for
no one can come to know it but by Sanctification; whereas indeed, as this
Author fully discovers, it is our Sanctification that is the very matter of our
Justification) -- And as to that Speech out of D^odatus, I dare say it was not
a Deo datus concerning good Works justifying a Man declaratively, and serving
in James's sense to approve a Believer in the sight of men; for there is not
Truth in it, if meant so only, and exclusively of their use to justify formally,
and absolve a Sinner in the sight of God (as it must be if it serve that turn
at all to which thou usest it) yea, I contrarily affirm (yet not denying, but
that they do declare before Men the Faith of him that professes to believe in
Christ, to be true and not hypocritical) that they also tend as well as that
true Faith they flow from, to justify formally (the Papist and Baxterian
directly) and absolve Sinners in the sight of God. And tho Paul, Romans 3. 27.
concludes that a Man is justified by Faith before God without the Deeds of the
Law; yet he never concluded, as you cloudy Expositors of him conclude of his
words, which ye wrest, beside his right to your wrong meanings, any such matter
as that a Man is justified before God without the good Works of the Gospel
(here is the Neonomian Law) between which of Christ's in his Saints, and these
of the Law, which are Men's own done without Christ of themselves, yet never
distinguishing, run so far into confusion as ye do: which Deeds of the Law done
in Man's own Thoughts, Willings and Runnings, and not in the Light and Spirit of
Christ the Power of God, never reach the thing that is run after (that is) the
fulfilling of it, without which there is no Life: for the Law requires Brick,
but affords no Straw; good Works, but it gives no Strength to weak Man in the
Flesh, and Fall, wherewith to perform; so the Letter only kills, and only the
Spirit gives the Life. So both Paul and James, and we as much as Di^date and T.
D. do for ever shut out them; yea, and so much more, than any of you do: we
deny the Deeds of the Law (so done) as to the doing us any good toward our
A^solution before God, by how much we do both in our Life and Doctrine
establish only the Deeds of the Gospel, while you, who doctrinally exclude the
Law's Deeds, do yet practically establish them to your Justification; (this is
positively the Baxterian, who says that they that hold Justification in the
Righteousness of Christ, arising from his Obedience unto the Law, nostro loco,
do thereby plead a Justification by the Deeds of the Law) for howbeit in words
ye establish Faith, as that by which ye stand justified formally before God,
yet that Faith ye act, who believe God accepts your Persons and Performances
with his Righteousness inherent in your selves, and while ye are yet unpurged,
and not so much as believing, you can or must be purged from your Sins, is far
from the true Faith of the Gospel, being no other than the false Faith, or true
Fancy of those who were of Moses and the Law, that trusted in lying Words that
could not profit them: Jer. 7. Isa. 1. Isa. 58. 3. who thought God did them
wrong, if he justified and accepted them not in their Fastings and Services,
tho they never fasted from their Iniquities, nor loosed the Bands of
Wickedness, as if when they had been at their formal Humiliations, etc. Mr.
Fisher ibid. p. 166, 167.

Tho therefore you dream pleasantly while ye are awake, and bless your selves,
saying, A ha, I am warm, I have seen the Fire, because in the Letter, where ye
read by the halves, singling out of it what best suits with, and serves your
sinful Desires, and leaving out what serves to the crossing of your carnal Lust
and corrupt Affections, you have been flashily, and more shallowy than solidly
read of a Declaration, of a Righteousness and good Works of another, even
Christ, whereby only Men can possibly come to be saved, never heeding at all
that this Righteousness of that other is to be wrought in the Saints by him,
who wrought it first in his own Person, before ever they can be justified by
it, and their Salvation truly wrought out by it, which we confess is to be
wrought out by it alone, and not by any that is merely Man's own; yet when ye
come to see what a mere painted Paradise ye have been led into by that false
flash of your justifying Faith without Works concurrent, which is but the fruit
of your affectionate Fancy, which would fain have it so, that you might be
saved by Christ, and yet serve your selves, you will find that you and your
whiffling Faith have in all this been but as ignis fatuus going before, and
ignoramus fatuatus following after. And tho (to ring back a little to you here
to the Tune of I. O's Talk, mutatis mutandis) about this matter of this
Atonement by the Blood of Christ, p. 125, 126, 127, 128. of his English
Pamphlet, you ring a Requiem to your Souls, saying with him, in Luke 12. Soul,
thou have been disquieted, perplexed, and entangled about these Considerations
(as all Men are more or less without exception) how thou may be reconciled,
and at Peace with God, or have an Atonement for that Guilt which (super)
naturally thou art sensible of; and how thou may attain to true Blessedness,
and come to the enjoyment of God; and thou have miserably grooped up and down
in the dark, not able to come to any Satisfaction, what will become of thee in
time to come; and no way able to stand against the uncontrollable Convictions
of thy own self-condemning Conscience: Yet now, Soul, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, there is Merit enough in store laid up in the
Righteousness that Christ wrought in that single Body of his, that long since
lived and died at Jerusalem for the Sins of many years past, present, and to
come; so that there is no need of any Righteousness to be wrought (as in order
to thy Justification and Peace with God) in that sinful Body of thine own, it
must and may safely (since the Righteousness by which thou stand justified in
thy Sin (as T. D. says David did in his Murder and Adultery) resides without
thee in another Person) sin as long as it lives: let the Popish Merit-mongers
run, when they have no good Works of their own, to the Treasury of the Saints
meritorious good Works, the Merit of which they buy of the Pope for Money, and
by which they have Indulgence and Pardon for all Sin for many years to come;
and let the Quakers run to that Righteousness they talk of, which is to be
wrought by Christ in the Persons of Men, before ever they can be justified with
God; here is that which shall administer to all and every one of us Satisfaction
as to all these things, as plenipotentiary to the quieting and calming of our
Spirits, and cut off any further Enquiries after such a thing as Goodness,
Righteousness, Holiness, tho that of Christ's own working (as the Quakers say)
in our selves in order to our Peace with God; here is that that gives us wherein
to acquiesce, and wherein we will be satiated, (viz.) the Doctrine of the
Scripture, which gives as glorious incontroulable a Conviction of Peace with
God by Christ's Righteousness without us (not within us, as the Quakers prate)
as that Light in our Consciences they tell us of, gives uncontrollable
Convictions of our Sins; there it is revealed (to those, say I, the Eyes of
whose Understandings are blinded by the God of this World) that it is Christ
without, and not Christ in us (or else the Devil and his Doctors are blind say
I) which is the hope of the Glory, and upon which we are looked upon as no
Reprobates; so that, O Soul, I would not have thee to cry out of Wrath and Woe,
nor sing to thy self of Judgment, but of Mercy to the Lord do thou sing: Yea, I
must needs cry out (...), I have found an easy broad way to Life, by applying
the Good of another to my self as mine, as truly as if it were in me inherent,
so that I need not turmoil my self as some do, and as the Quakers, who cannot
believe that what Christ has is theirs, till they see it conveyed and derived
from him by way of participation to themselves. We can believe that all that
Christ has is ours, tho all that we have is our own, and need not be forsaken
for his sake. I have found that without me, which in vain the Quakers seek
elsewhere as within them, waxing foolish in their Imaginations, viz. the
business of Atonement, Reconciliation and acceptance with God, which they are
contriving to find by Christ within them, to the producing of such horrible
Effects and Fruits as tedious doing good, and enduring evil for their Tenets,
as we are loath to expose our selves to, What have not they done? What have not
they suffered? What Miseries, excitusque infelices have not the Quakers pulled
upon themselves, ubivis gentium quo impelluntur fanatici, by their Faith and
Doctrines of Devils? (So J. O. of Quakers Doctrines, Ex. 3.. 35, 36. and T. D.
and T. Rumsey of perfect Holiness in this Life) Let them meditate Terror, and
dream of Dread, and bring themselves into Bondage, we will cast these
troublesome things far away from our thoughts, tho we do sin, and he that
commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin (as they tell us) yet whatever Bondage we
are in to Sin, we will not be under the Spirit of Bondage so far as to fear
Wrath, or dread any danger so long as with such a glorious Soulappeasing Light
(which, say I, is the Devil transformed into an Angel of Light in you) the
Doctrine of Satisfaction and Atonement by the Blood of Christ, the Son of God,
comes in upon us. This is that that astonisheth us another way, so that we
cannot be astonished nor afraid of any Amazement about the matter of our Sins:
this conquereth all the Qualms of Conscience, this ravisheth and satiateth our
Souls, that the we may, yea, must sin while we live, yet they have been already
reckoned for with one that is our Righteousness without us, tho his Image is
not formed, nor his Righteousness wrought in our selves. This is the design of
the Apostle's Discourse to the Romans, to prove Justification by Faith without
Works of ours by Christ's Righteousness imputed to us as ours, to Justification
before it be infused to our Sanctification; (when the Devil is blind say I.) O
with what Glory and Beauty (to them that see so much as we do in the World's
Glory, and the Lust thereof) with what full and ample Satisfaction this
Doctrine breaks out! this is that we looked for, this is that we were sick for
want of the knowledge of (being wounded by the Light of God in our Consciences
for our Sins, and withal in such love to them, as to be loath to leave them, or
depart from them) to hear of a way or Savior whereby to be saved in them, and
that as we have now found, and tho we once cried out (...), and were at our
Wits ends, feeling our selves sinking to Hell, yet this Christ (without us,
without whom we also are feeling neither him in us, nor our selves in him)
this, and not in the imaginary Christ of the Quakers within them, is the Stone
by which we will stay our Minds in as perfect Peace as we can, by putting away
the sense of Sin, and the evil Day far from us, Ex. 2.. 28. dicat quod quisque
valet ex hac opinione non dimovebimus. Ibid. p. 170, 171, 172.

Our Doctrine of perfect purging from Sin in this Life, is no inlet to it,
(viz. Popery) for the Papists are far enough (as ye are.) from the belief of
that, upon the non-belief of which in this Life they build that piece of
Baggage, viz. a Purgatory in the Life to come, which tho we cry out of as
Popish, yet while you hold with them against us, no perfect purging from Sin in
this World, and say worse than they do in defiance of that holy Truth which we
stand in defense of, (for so ye do while ye call it a Doctrine of Devils) ye
unavoidably usher in that of Purgatory in the World to come, etc. Ibid. p. 124.

I own all good Works such that are Christ's, and there T. D. dissents, as not
owning all Christ's own good Works such, but some only (namely, such as he did
at Jerusalem) and some, even of Christ's own good Works (as namely, all such as
he works in his Saints, who works all their good Works in them, Isa. 26. 12.)
as no better than Dung, Loss and filthy Rags, witness his blind blending of
these two distinct businesses into one and the same, viz. the Righteousness
wrought by Men without Christ, and the Righteousness wrought in Men by Christ,
or our good Works, alias, Man's own Righteousness wrought only by Men in their
own Wills, Wisdom, Strength, according to their Thoughts, Imaginations,
Conceits, Traditions, etc. without Christ's Light and Spirit (which is that
only the Spirit calls ours, that is as an unclean thing, as filthy Rags. Isa.
64. 6. which God speaking to Israel, that being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, went about to establish their own, Romans 10. 3.) calls thy
Righteousness thy Works, which cannot profit nor deliver, Isa. 57. 12, 13. (and
which Paul, Phil. 3. 9. styles his own Righteousness, which was of the Law, as
in opposition to that of God and Christ) and those good Works of Christ in our
Persons, in performing whereof the Righteousness of the Law is said (tho by
Christ's Power only) to be fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4. or that Righteousness
which is, tho in the Saints, yet of God alone through their Faith in Christ
Jesus the Light, Phil. 3. 9. -- Again, if Man's, Paul' s, the Saints own
Righteousness, may be said (as it truly is, Isa. 57. 12. 13. chap 64. 6. Phil.
3. 9.) to be unprofitable, unclean, Dung, loss and filthy Rags, than the self
same which Paul and other Saints (their own Righteousness being no other than
Christ's, than what they receive from him, and he works in them for their
Sanctification) some of Christ's own Righteousness, yea, even that too which
serves for the Saints Sanctification, and to make the Saints meet for that
Possession where no unclean thing must enter, must be unprofitable, unclean,
Dung, loss and filthy Rags, which is no less than point blank Blasphemy: Yea,
in express terms, page 23. I deny our Justification by Christ in us (quoth he,
T. D.) by that Righteousness in us, whereof Christ is the Author; as if that
Christ in us, and that Righteousness of his i^ us, which is the same with that
without us, deserved nothing. Ibid. p. 737, 738.

Thou falsely chargest us with the Guilt of the Sin of the Jews, Romans 10. 3, 4.
(viz.) making our own Righteousness our Justification. -- Thou relatest G. W.
clearing us of that, saying, that we do not make our own Righteousness our
Justification, but the Righteousness of God is that we testify, being made
manifest in us according to the Scripture, Phil. 3. 9. Not our own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, (that is) any personal Con^rmity to the Law
in that outward Letter, that we can make by any Ability of ours without the
Power of Christ, such was that of the Jews, and Paul's establing to himself, as
his Gain and Righteousness before his Conversion to that of Christ's; for that
and no other is it which Paul calls his own, and the Jews own, and not that
which Christ wrought in him, and clothed him with, and enabled him to perform
(as thou blasphemously boltest it out) but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; to which tho thou seem
to assent in these words (viz.) the Apostle by his own Righteousness
understands [his] personal Conformity to the Law, and by Christ's
Righteousness, that which is of Christ made his by Faith; by which term (His)
if thou intendest (His) as abstract from Christ, his weak striving in his own
strength to keep the Law, and not that personal ^nformity to it, he was at last
enabled by the Spirit and Power of Christ, intimated Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. thou
fallest in with us, who make that genuine distinction between all mere Man's
Righteousness and all that Righteousness that is of Christ. -- But now, as if
thine Eyes were grown too dim to discern that distinction, thou blindly
blendest these two together again into one, putting no difference at all
between OUR good Works, or mere Man's Righteousness, which in his own Will,
Wisdom, Strength, and vain Imagination, he works besides the Light, and out of
Christ, and those good Works, or that Righteousness which is of God alone,
which by the pure Power and Spirit of Christ is wrought in and by them, and
which they by him are enabled to perform, which is specifically one and the
very same with that in Christ himself, from whom it is of God through the Faith
of Christ made theirs, or made over to them, that is not merely an imaginarily
(as the Priesthood prates) accounted and imputed, but really and truly derived
and imparted to them, and revealed (as it is said to be, Romans 1. 17.) from Faith
to Faith in the Light of the Gospel to them that believe therein, so that of
the fullness of that Righteousness of God that dwells in him, they all receive
Grace for Grace to the true washing, Justification, Sanctification, and
Salvation of them from all that Unrighteousness by which they became guilty
before God, while they stood in no other Righteousness but their own: Yea, that
Righteousness of Christ in his Saints, which is in kind the self-fame with that
in himself, thou both deniest to avail one jot to Justification, and also
confoundest into one and the self-same with that of mere Man's own working,
which from God is for ever to be confounded, -- witness thy own words, who
say thus, T. D. I deny Justification by Christ within us -- We deny our
Justification by that Righteousness in us, whereof Christ is the Author. -- Two
things are indeed meant by the Name of Christ, his Person, and his Operations
in us; and I deny the latter, but assert the former for our Righteousness to
Justification. Rep. O gross, horrid, hideous and sordid! Are not the
Righteousness and the Operations of Christ in his Saints the same that were in
his own Flesh? Are they not of the same Worth, and Validity, and Desert, being
his own still, whether done in himself, or in us, and as truly and perfectly
good, being done by Christ, who can work nothing but that which is truly good
and perfect, whether in his Saints or himself? And suppose every Tittle of thy
Tattle were true, that thou tellest us, p. 15. viz. That those Works that merit
must not be due, and his good Works, who owes none (tho who that is that owes
none to God, and from whom to God none are due, I know not; and whether it
became not Christ to be holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners; and
whether he ought not in all things to be like his Brethren, I Will not stand here
to dispute, but leave to Heb. 7. 26. chap. 2. 17. to determine) and yet whether
all that he does in what Person so e're he does it in, does not merit, I need
not prove to a wise Man, for he will not put me to it. -- I say, is not that
everlasting Righteousness of his working in the Saints, and bringing near to
them, Isa. 46. 13. as everlasting, as infinite as of old, and of as infinite
Value every where as it is any where? in that Body of his whereof he is the
Head, as in that Person which was the Head of his Body? Yet Thomas Danson
denies it to be any worth to justify, and affirms it to be but Man's own
Righteousness, which is Dung, Loss and Rags, procuring no more to him by desert
than his Wickedness, which merits no more than Condemnation. Mr. Fisher, ibid.
p. 143, 144, 145.

The third thing proposed to be considered is, concerning good Works their
necessity to Justification. I suppose there is enough said before to clear us
from any Imputation of being Popish in this matter: But if it be required,
Whether we have not said, or will not affirm, That a Man is justified by Works?
I answer, I hope none need, neither ought to take offense, if in this matter we
use the plain Language of holy Scripture, which says expressly in answer
hereunto, Jam. 2. 24. Ye see then how that by Works a Man is justified, and not
by Faith only. I shall not offer to prove the truth of this saying, since what
is said in this Chapter by the Apostle, is sufficient to convince any Man that
will read and believe it; I only from this derive this one Argument. -- If no
Man can be justified without Faith, and no Faith be living, nor yet available
to Justification without Works, then Works are necessary to Justification: But
the first is true, therefore also the last. For this Truth is so apparent and
evident in the Scriptures, that, for the proof of it we might transcribe most
of the Precepts of the Gospel. I shall instance a few, which of themselves do
so clearly assert the thing in question, that they need no Commentary, nor
further Demonstration: And then I shall answer the Objections made to this,
which indeed are the Arguments used for the contrary Opinion, Heb. 12. 14. Mat.
7. 21. Joh. 13. 17. 1 Cor. 7. 19. Rev. 22. 14. and many more that might be
instanced; from all which I thus argue. -- If those only can enter into the
Kingdom that do the Will of the Father; if those be accounted only the wise
Builders and happy that do the Sayings of Christ, if no Observations avail but
only the keeping of the Commandments, and if they be blessed that do the
Commandments, and thereby have right to the Tree of Life, and entrance through
the Gate into the City, then Works are absolutely necessary to Salvation and
Justification. -- But the first is true; and therefore also the last. The
Consequence of the Antecedent is so clear and evident, that I think no Man of
sound Reason will call for a proof of it. -- But they object that Works are not
necessary to Justification: First, because of that saying of Christ, Luke 17.
10. When ye shall have done all these things that are commanded you, say, We
are unprofitable Servants, etc.

Ans. As to God we are indeed unprofitable, for he needs nothing, neither can
we add any thing unto him; but as to our selves, we are not unprofitable, else
it might be said, that it is not profitable for a Man to keep God's
Commandments, which is most absurd, and would contradict Christ's Doctrine
throughout. Does not Christ, Mat. 5. through all those Beatitudes pronounce Men
blessed for their Purity, for their Meekness, for their Peaceableness, etc? And
is not then that for which Christ pronounces Men blessed, profitable to them?
Moreover, Mat. 25. 21, 23. does not Christ pronounce the Men good and faithful
Servants, that improved their Talents? Was not their doing of that then
profitable unto them? And ver. 30. it is said of him that hid his Talent and
did not improve it, Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter Darkness. If
then their not improving of the Talent made the Man unprofitable, and he was
therefore cast into utter Darkness, it will follow by the Rule of Contraries,
so far at least, that the improving made the other profitable, seeing if our
Adversaries will allow us to believe Christ's words, this is made a Reason, and
so at least a Cause instrumental of their acceptance, Well done good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, etc. --

2. They object those Sayings of the Apostle, where he excludes the Deeds of
the Law from Justification, as first, Romans 3. 20, 28. --

Answ. We have shown already what place we give to Works, even to the best of
^orks, in Justification, and how we ascribe its immediate and formal Cause to
the Worker brought forth in us, but not to the Works. But in Answer to this
Objection, I say, there is a great difference betwixt the Works of the Law, and
those of Grace, or of the Gospel. The first are excluded, the second not, but
are necessary: The first are those which are performed in Man's own Will, and
by his Strength, in a conformity to the outward Law and Letter, and therefore
are Man's own imperfect Works, or Works of the Law, which makes nothing
perfect: And to this belong all the Ceremonies, Purifications, Washings, and
Traditions of the Jews. The second are the Works of the Spirit of Grace in the
Heart wrought in conformity to the inward and spiritual Law; which Works are
not wrought in Man's Will, nor by his Power and Ability, but in and by the
Power and Spirit of Christ in us, and therefore are pure and perfect in their
kind, may be called Christ's Works, for that he is the immediate Author and
Worker of them: Such Works we affirm absolutely necessary to Justification, so
that a Man cannot be justified without them, and all Faith without them is dead
and useless, as the Apostle James says. Now that such a distinction is to be
admitted, and that the words excluded by the Apostle in the matter of
Justification are of the first kind, will appear, if we consider the occasion
of the Apostle mentioning this, as well here as throughout in his Epistle to
the Galatians, where he speaks of this matter, and to this purpose at large;
which was this, that whereas many of the Gentiles, that were not of the Race
nor Seed of Abraham as concerning the Flesh, were come to be converted to the
Christian Faith, and believe in him; some of those that were of the Jewish
Proselytes thought to subject the faithful and believing Gentiles to the Legal
Ceremonies and Observations as necessary to their Justification. This gave the
Apostle Paul occasion at length in his Epistles to the Romans, Galatians, and
elsewhere, to show the use and tendency of the Law, and of its Works, and to
contradistinguish them from the Faith of Christ and Righteousness thereof;
showing how the former was ceased and became ineffectual, the other remaining,
and yet necessary; and that the Works excluded by the Apostle are of this kind
of Works of the Law, appears by the whole strain of his Epistle to the
Galatians, chapter 1, 2, 3, 4. for after in the 4th Chapter he upbraideth them for
their returning unto the observation of Days and Times; and in the beginning of
the fifth Chapter he shows them their Folly, and the evil Consequence of
adhering to the Ceremonies of Circumcision; then he adds, v. 6. For in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails, but Faith which works
by Love; and thus he concludes again, chapter 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. From which
places appears that distinction of Works aforementioned, whereof the one is
excluded, the other necessary to Justification. -- Here are then the Works
which are excluded, by which no Man is justified; but Faith which works by
Love, but the New Creature, this is that which avails, which is absolutely
necessary, for Faith that works by Love cannot be without Works; for, as is
said in the same fifth Chapter, v. 22. Love is a work of the Spirit. Again, the
Apostle intends no ways to exclude good Works (as to our Justification) and
that very plainly, chap. 6, 7, 8, 9. Does it not hereby appear, 1. How he
esteemed Works -- How much he ascribes to them, by which he affirms Life
everlasting is reaped. -- I shall instance another Saying, -- which our
Adversaries also in the blindness of their Minds make use of against us -- Tit.
3. 5. It is generally granted by all, that [saved] is here all one as if it had
been said [justified] -- The first the Works of Righteousness which we have
wrought, that is, which we in our first fallen Nature, by our own Strength have
wrought, our own legal Performances, and therefore may be truly and properly
called ours. -- And that it must needs and ought to be understood, does appear
from the other part, but by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost; seeing Regeneration is a Work comprehensive of many good Works,
even of all those which are called the fruits of the Spirit.

Object. These may also be called ours, because wrought in us, and also by us
many times, as Instruments.

Answ. It is far otherwise than the former: in the first we are yet alive in
our natural state, unrenewed, working of our selves, seeking to save our selves
by imitating and endeavoring a Conformity to the outward Letter of the Law,
and so wrestling and striving in the carnal Mind that is Enmity to God, and in
the cursed Will not yet subdued: But in this second we are crucified with
Christ, we are dead with him, have partaken of the Fellowship of his
Sufferings, are made conformable to his Death; and our first Man, our old Man
with all his Deeds, as well the openly wicked, as the seemingly righteous, our
legal Endeavors and foolish Wrestlings are all buried and nailed to the Cross
of Christ, and so it is no more we, but Christ alive in us, the Worker in us:
so that tho it be we in a sense, yet it is according to that of the Apostle,
Gal. 2. 20. These Works are especially to be ascribed to the Spirit of Christ*
and Grace of God in us, as being immediately thereby acted and led in them, and
enabled in them: And this manner of Speech is not strained, but familiar to the
Apostles, Gal. 2. 8. Phil. 2. 13. So that it appears by this place, that, since
the washing of Regeneration is necessary to Justification, and that
Regeneration comprehends Works, Works are necessary; and that these Works of
the Law that are excluded, are different from these that are necessary and
admitted. --

Thirdly, They object, that no Works, yea not the Works of Christ in us can
have place in Justification, because nothing that is impure can be useful in
it, and all the Works wrought in us are impure: for this they alledg that
saying of the Prophet, Isa. 64. 6. All our Righteousness are as filthy Rags,
adding this reason, that, seeing we are impure, so must our Works be, which,
tho good in themselves, yet as performed by us, they receive a tincture of
Impurity, even as a clean Water passing through an unclean Pipe is defiled.
Answ. That no impure Works are useful to Justification is confessed, but that
all the Works wrought in the Saints are such, is denied. And for Answer to this
the former distinction will serve; we confess that the first sort of Works
above mentioned are impure, but not the second; because the first are wrought
in the unrenewed state, but not the other. And as for that of Isaiah, it must
relate to the first kind; for, tho he says all our Righteousness are as filthy
Rags, yet that will not comprehend the Righteousness of Christ in us, but only
that which we work of and by our selves: should we so conclude, then it would
follow that we should throw away all Holiness and Righteousness, since that
which is filthy Rags, and as a menstruous Garment, ought to be thrown away;
yea, it would follow, that all the fruits of the Spirit mentioned, Gal. 4. were
as filthy Rags; whereas on the contrary, some of the Works of the Saints are
said to have a sweet savor in the Nostrils of the Lord, are said to be an
Ornament of great Price in the sight of God, are said to prevail with him, and
to be acceptable to him, which filthy Rags and a menstruous Garment cannot be.
-- As to the other part, that seeing the best of Men are still impure and
imperfect, therefore their Works must be so; it is to beg the Question, and
depends upon a Proposition denied. -- But, tho we should suppose a Man not
thoroughly perfect in all respects, yet will not that hinder, but good and
perfect Works in their kind may be brought forth in them by the Spirit of
Christ; neither does the Example of Water going through an unclean Pipe hit the
matter, because, tho Water may be capable to be tinctured with Uncleanness, yet
the Spirit of God cannot, whom we assert to be the immediate Author of those
Works that avail in Justification; and therefore Jesus Christ his Works in his
Children are pure and perfect, and he works in and through that pure thing of
his own forming and creating in them. Mr. Barclay's Apology, p. 159, 160, 161,
162, 163, 164, 165.

For who but such as either cannot see, or, which is worse, may see and will
not, can choose but understand that whether OUR good Works (at least in that
sottish and sordid sense, wherein the Papists hold it) do justify? is one
Question, and, whether good Works do justify? is another; in which first sense
of the Papists, when they say OUR good Works, whose good Works (as they call
them) are no better than other Men's own are, whose own merely are all stark
naught, I neither do, nor ever did affirm our Justification to come; but in the
latter, viz. that good Works (meaning only those of. Christ's own working in
and for us, by the same Power and Spirit by which he did good Works in that
Person in which he lived and died at Jerusalem, than whom I know no other that
can) without his Power work any good, I confess I both then did affirm and own,
and as I then did in the Power of Christ, so I ever both shall affirm, evince
and maintain. Mr. Sam. Fisher' s Testimony of Truth exalted, p. 135, 136.

I muse what great difference there is [but that they who where they should not
make two into one (as T. D. does Paul's own Righteousness, and that of Christ
in him) love as much when they need not, to make one into two] between the
matter of Merit, and the matter of Meetness, that our Divines can digest it
exceeding well, to have it said the fruits of the Spirit, and Christ' s good
Works and Righteousness within his Saints, only make them meet to inherit, but
cannot digest it at any hand to have it said that these of Christ and his
Spirit in them do merit the Inheritance, or make worthy of it: does not the
same that makes meet and fit for, merit or make worthy of it, and enright to it
in some sort, and in Scripture-sense at least? The whole course of which tells
you not only (as you tell one another often, but that you often untel it again,
when you tell that of necessity Men must sin while they live) that no Sinners,
nor unrighteous ones of any sort, have in any wise any right to Inheritance in
the Kingdom, or are either meet or worthy to be any where but without the holy
City together, as fearful, unbelieving, Dogs, and abominable in the Lake of
Fire, but tells you also verbatim in many places, of all their and only their
right and worthiness to enter who by Christ's Power, do the same Will of God he
did, and have and work the same Righteousness that he did in himself, within
themselves, 1 Thessalonians. 1. They that suffered for the Kingdom were worthy of it,
Mat. 21. 8. not only they that came not when bidden to the Marriage were
unworthy, but such also as took themselves to be entitled upon bare bidding,
and so (as you do) ran in all haste, and thrust themselves in as those that had
the only right: and who but they the worthy Guests, that thought there was no
need (I speak after the manner of Men) of the Gloves and Ribbons, I mean the
Wedding Robes of Christ's Righteousness to clothe their own Persons, as if what
he only wore was counted his, and theirs too, so far as to enright them
thither, were (for all their more haste than good speed) thrust out at last as
unworthy to be there, where had they been as well suited as they were willing to
have the good Cheer, might thereupon deservedly enough, since the Invitation
was free; and tho a Gift, yet what more free than Gift, have staid there among
the rest as worthy? And the few Names in Sardis that had not defiled their
Garments had right by Promise; and so ex debito (if Promise ought to be kept
when made) tho gratis too, because the Promise was freely made to walk with
Christ in white, for they were worthy, Rev. 3. 4. I say worthy, ex been
placito; for as much as nothing but the free good will and pleasure of God made
him oblige himself to give a right to such, and yet (to confound that nice and
needless distinction of critical Scholastiks which has confounded most Divines
in Christendom into Darkness) ex condigno also, for as much as by Christ's
Power and Gift to will and to do, they both will and do what is required, as
the terms and condition on which the thing is promised; which Consistency that
I make between ex condigno and ex beneplacito, ex debito and ex dono, ex
operibus and ex gratia, which T. D. and most Divines deem to be (...), or
inconsistent together in the matter of Man's Justification, being a Knot that
few of them can get over, a mere Gnat at which they that in other things can
swallow Camels, cannot but strain, I am made free a little more to untie. -- T.
D. thinks he has half knocked the Quakers for ever down into their dumps with
his deep-drawn Argument from Romans 11. 6. T. D. If by Grace, then it is no more
of Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace: But if it be of Works, then it is
no more of Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work. Whence (quoth he, p. 20.) if
Justification be of Works, as you assert, then Grace is excluded from having
any hand in our Justification, which is contrary to Scripture, which says we
are justified by Grace: our Justification cannot be a Debt and a free Gift, I
mean not both in respect of us. Now as to his Argument it self, somewhat may be
replied; And, Is It, If considered as in conjunction with its fellow that follows
it so close at the heels, p. 21. from Romans 10. 3, 4. and bears such a broad
show of backing it, it is not so big, nor amounting to such a bulky Bulwark,
but that one may easily put them both in a Bag, if no more be said but this,
that in both Scriptures, as also Phil. 3. (whereas inconsistent he opposes his
own, while a Pharisee to that of Christ within him, when converted and a Saint,
and Tit. 3. where he opposes the Works of Righteousness we have wrought to our
being renewed by the holy Spirit, and makes Grace and renewing by the Spirit
all one, as well he might; for if we be not renewed by the Spirit, and saved
from the Sin, then I say Grace is no more Grace; for what use is it of to us,
if we be left in, and unpurged from the Sin which Christ came to save his
People from first, and so from the Wrath to come? which will come unavoidably
on all that are disobedient and unrighteous) Paul opposes the Gift of Grace,
God's Righteousness, to Man's mere own Works, which are not good, tho so
thought by himself, and Man's own literal Righteousness of the Law wrought in
Man's Will and Imagination only, out of Christ, the Light and Faith in him, and
the leadings and movings of his Spirit; and does not oppose Grace to the
Righteousness of Christ in his Saints, or Sanctification and Holiness that is
of God, by Faith in the Light, revealed in and received by every one that
believes as inconsistent; for those are not only Concomitants but consistent
and concurrent together to Justification, as Grace and our Works only are not,
for these two do tollere se invicem, I confess; so that if Justification and
Life be of Grace, it cannot be of our Works; and retro, if of our Works, not of
Grace; but Grace and God's Righteousness, Grace and those good Works wrought in
us by Christ, and for the doing of which we receive the Grace, or Gift of
Ability from Christ, these are indeed one and the same, and so homogeneous, or
of one kind, that they may be synonymous also, and bear both to be called
mutually by the same name of either Grace or good Works, and so are they
throughout the Scripture as one thing promiscuously denominated, sometimes by
the term of Grace, sometimes the Gift of God in Christ, the Gift of
Righteousness, Holiness, etc. for all this is Grace and free Gift, and yet it is
inherent in us too, as the same that was in Christ; and being Christ's as
meritorious, making not only meet but worthy also, in such measure as it is
received in, as it was in a higher measure in himself, whether it be a Gift to
do, or a Gift to believe, or a Gift to suffer, as 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. compared with
Phil. 1. 27. To you it is given, not only to believe, but also to suffer for
his sake; and then to whom this Grace was given, were by God counted worthy of
the Kingdom for which they suffered; and so Paul, who labored abundantly in
preaching the Gospel, says, This Work was the Grace which was given him by
Christ in him, by which Grace also he was what e're he was, that was worth any
thing, having nothing but what he had received, that made him differ from
another; by which Grace or Gift all boasting and glorying in self was
continually excluded, and the Glory of all to be given still to God, and not
Flesh, Man and Self: so that while Judas could blame none but himself for being
damned, so Paul and the rest, tho they wrought out their own Salvation, yet
could bless none but God, who wrought in them of his good pleasure to work,
will, and do, for their being saved by his Grace, 1 Cor. 4. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Ephesians. 2. 8. chap. 3. 8. Phil. 1. 12, 13. so that all along the Gift of both
Faith and good Works are both called Grace; yea, Grace is no Grace yet to
Salvation from Sin, while Men remain in their Sins, and unsaved by it, and
while the Grace or Gift of God's Righteousness remains only in Christ without
them, save only that they are in a possibility to be saved, and while they yet
witness not him, and it by him within themselves to the destroying of the Works
and Image of the Devil; which when they do, then and not before (let them prate
of Grace as they will) they know the Grace of God in Jesus Christ, and then
all is Grace, and by Grace and not of Works, or themselves, or any Righteousness
of their own that they can thank for it, whatever they work in the Light and
leadings of it, in Preaching, Prayer, Service, Worship, and what e're they
have, are, enjoy, act, believe, endure or suffer for his Name. -- And so Grace
and Works, Grace and the Righteousness of Christ within us (when a Man's own,
which ye yet are only in, and establishing your selves by, who hate the Light
and are out of it, is denied as Rags, as it is by us) do not destruere, but
ponere se invicem, so well stand together in the matter of our Justification,
that indeed neither of them can stand in it without the other: Neither is Grace
at all excluded, as T. D. injudiciously judges, from any hand in Justification,
by our asserting it to be of Works of this nature, and establishing this
inherent Righteousness of Christ in us thereunto, but by this alone is Grace
perfectly established: neither are these in opposition each to other (as T. D.
says they are) as immediate Contraries, as Men's evil Works and these good Works
of Christ in Man, were by me affirmed to be, but rather individually the same.
And whereas T. D. says, our Justification cannot be a Debt and a free Gift
both in respect of us, to what was said above, which might serve to answer
this; I add my denial of that Position of his, with my grounds thereof; for
howbeit with respect of the same time it cannot be a Debt and a free Gift too,
yet in respect of the same Persons, with reference to different Times and
Seasons, it may: for as it was nothing but mere Mercy to lost Man, and free
Grace, Gift and Goodness to Man on God's part, and not any Debt or Desert from
God on Man's part, that first engaged or moved God to give his Son, and so make
Promises in the Gospel to give his free Gift of Life eternal, and to make
Christ the Author of it to all them that obey him, and the mere Grace of Christ
to us, to come into the World a Light, and give himself a Ransom for all, and
to promise to give Life to all that come unto him, and to God by him, that they
might have Life and Salvation to the utmost; yet seeing (as I may so say) God
and Christ have by free Grace, that moved them to make it, thus put themselves
freely into Man's Debt on terms of their Obedience, they are (Man performing
the Conditions on his part) since then in Justice bound to perform it: and so
the same Subject, Mankind, from whom God at first was altogether free, and to
whom he was rich in Mercy, and infinitely free in giving Christ and making
Promises; he is since on account of his Truth engaged, if Man be not wanting to
himself, to make it good: and as it is in the like cases among Men, that
Promise which Pity, mere Mercy moves to make, Piety and Equity require its
making good; so it is here, and it is no such News but to such as are Novices in
the Faith, to understand that which to the same Persons was Grace and free Gift
at first, becoming a matter of Desert and due Debt at last: so that tho Glory
be to the Grace and Mercy of God which only moved him to say, When the wicked
turns from his Wickedness, and does what is lawful and right he shall not
die, his Iniquity shall not at all be mentioned unto him, yet the wicked
turning, God's Ways are not so equal as he pleads they are, Ezekiel. 18. against
Man, whose Ways and Thoughts are all crooked and unequal, if he does not now
justify and forgive the reforming Evil-doer: and having in his free Favor said
it, that he that confesses and forsakes his Sin, shall find Mercy, Prove. 1 John 1. 8. If we now confess our Sins, not, God is gracious and merciful, tho
that be originally the ground of all, and to be magnified over all his Works,
and is often expressed to the wicked repenting, as the grand cause of God's
remitting: Isa. 55. Let him forsake his Way and Thoughts, and turn to the Lord,
for he is gracious: but says John, God is faithful and just to forgive us our
Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. -- I proceed to show how the
Scripture ascribes the Inheritance as not only meet for them that are meet for
it, but their due de jure that do his Commandments. Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are
they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to eat of the Tree of
Life, and to enter through the Gates into the City; but without are Dogs, etc.
(1.) Without the City, and without right to it, as well as without meetness for
it, who if they were other, 1. Doint the Commands, they should have both
meetness, worthiness and right, and (jure haereditario, by right of Heirship,
according to the Promises made in that behalf) should both duly, and (keeping
the Condition) no otherwise than deservely inherit it; as he that having a
Promise of the Inheritance of a City in case he will adventure to storm, and
overcome, and win it, fighting and overcoming accordingly (tho the promise of
it at first on such terms was a Gift) may then claim it for his Inheritance as
of Debt, and Desert, which it is not only fit and meet he should have, as on
terms of Promise on another's part, and performance of the terms required on
his own; whoever helped him in it, he is worthy as the right Heir, one that has
due Title to it accordingly to enjoy and inherit it. And indeed the very word
inherit, which is so often used both in the negative, when the Wicked are
excluded, as no unrighteous one shall ever inherit; and on the positive, and
promissive hand, where the Righteous are included, as he that overcomes shall
inherit all things, does (if Men were not prepossessed with Prejudice against
the Truth, and with blind Principles, which (as it is harder to knock an old Peg
out of its hole than to knock a new one in when that is out) there is more ado to
drive out of them, dispossess them, and draw them from, (like Mr. Baxter' s and
Mr. Dan. Williams' s unstudied, illogical, and blockish Divines) than would be
to draw them to own the plain Truth, if the Darkness were once dispelled)
import no less than an entailing the Title of the Kingdom to the good Works and
fruits of the Spirit in us, which are the terms on which it is promised, on any
name or thing abstract from these, which yet T. D. is so absurd, as his Fellow
A B C Darians in the School of Christ are, as to make in no wise a Cause, but
only an Effect of our Justification, and of our standing entitled to it on
things without us, that are nothing to us abstract from these: whereas if that
be true (as it is in their own Schools) that quo posito ponitur, quo sublato
tollitur effectus, etc. that upon the being of which the Effect ever is, upon
the not being of which the Effect can never be, must needs be the Cause of that
Effect: it is most uncontroulably true, that the good Works and the Fruits of
the Spirit in us, are not the Fruits and Effects, but the Causes of some kind
or other of our Justification; and as the Cause of every sort, if it be but
causa sine qua non (as they speak) the Cause that gives no Influence, but only
is a mere hang by, yet necessarily too, as a Cipher is, in order of Nature
evermore before the Effect, so is our Sanctification so antecedent to our
Justification even in the sight of God, that, contrary to our School-mens
Figments, who say Justification is first of the two; so that God looks on us as
just while unjust, before he makes us just: I say, till our Sanctification is,
our being counted holy in God's ^ight (here lies the diverting Cheat, like our
Neonomians, from Righteousness to justify to Holiness in Sanctification) can
never possibly be. Mr. Fisher, ibid. p. 161, 162, 163, 164.

Object. And tho it is said he justifies the ungodly.

Resp. I say, yea, Justification is ever of ungodly ones, yet never in, but
from their Ungodliness as Sanctification and Salvation of Sinners, but not in,
but ever from their Iniquities; he clears the guilty, but by no Means, no not
Christ's Blood, so Exodus 34. 7. as to clear the guilty while in their Sins, or
hold them guiltless, as T. D. dreams he did David, while they are guilty of
Adultery and Murder, and while they are taking his Name in vain, crying, Lord,
Lord, but not doing what he says, naming his Name, but not departing from
Iniquity: he makes Christ to such as believe in his Light, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redempion, but (what e're some count) he in
no wise counts him so to any, any further than he does so make him: he sees no
Sin in Jacob, nor Transgression in Israel; but it is because there it is away
and remitted, not by Pardon without purging, but so as not to be committed any
more; or if it be, there is new Guilt contracted, and the Sin imputed till again
remitted on returning: but this Israel to whom he is so truly good, are them
that are of a clean Heart, Psalm. 73. Ibid. p. 164.

T. D. Does not the Apostle oppose Faith and Works? Faith is opposed to it self
as a Work in the business of Justification, p. 24. 1 Pamph.

Resp. Faith is neither opposed (as thou frivolously supposest) to good Works
in the Gospel, nor yet to it self as a Work in the business of Justification;
but both it self and all the good Works that are done only in it, which
together with it are the Gift of God to us in Christ Jesus, who is this Author,
Worker and Finisher of them in us, are altogether as the one good Work or
Righteousness of God and Christ in the Gospel, by which we stand justified
before them, opposed to Man's mere Righteousness and Works of the Law, by which
no Flesh living can be justified: and tho Paul, when he says, To him that
works is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; but to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is
counted to him for Righteousness, does oppose Faith and our Works, the Gospel
and the Law, which is not of Faith; yet when thou look with clearer Eyes,
who can now see with no better than thou have, thou will see that he never
opposes Grace and Gospel, good Works, Faith, and the Works of Christ in us,
Faith and the Fruits of the Spirit, of which Faith is one; much less (as thou
fainest Faith in it self is a Work, but joins all these in one, as God and
Christ's single and singular Gift of Grace to us under the Gospel, as that one
perfect and Personal Righteousness, by which, as a cause thereof, we are made
meet or worthy to be justified in his sight, by which Works, and that of Faith
together with them, justifying us as a Work, as well as an Instrument to
receive Christ, and his other Operations wrought in us by it, all boasting (as
blind as thou art not to see it) is eternally excluded, for as much as both it
and the rest are a Gift, as well as Works given to us by him to perform, for
which the Glory belongs only to the Giver, and not to the Receiver at any hand
(tho a great deal of Thanks even to a Debt for his improvement of it, without
which the Purpose of God, the Obedience and Death of Christ would have proved
all in vain.)

T. D. Thou say, as p. 25. 1 Pamph. The Scriptures attribute our
Justification to the Righteousness of Christ in the same sense that they deny
it unto Works.

Rep. That Is true, if by the Righteousness of Christ thou intend the
Righteousness of his working in us, and by Works, those Works of our working
without him; but utterly false, if by his Righteousness thou meanst what he
works without us, and by Works, what Works we work only in him, for the
Scripture attributes our Justification to this latter; as to the former it
attributes his own, of both which he being the only Author, Unto us (O Lord)
not unto us at all, but to thy Name only be the Praise; who do not as thy
supposed Ministers suppose merely that thou do, but far be it from thee so to
do: Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? first count Men just, that
are unjust in this World, and not make them so till the World to come; but
first justify the ungodly from their Ungodliness, and make them godly, and then
countest them to be such as thou have made them. Mr. S. Fisher, Ibid. p. 169.

And hence is one ground of your so miserable a Mistake, in that ye take (as ye
confess your selves) Justification in its mere foreign, and not in its near and
proper signification (viz.) a counting, and not a making of them just, who are
not so; whereas justificare and justificari is justum facere, and justum fieri,
to make and to be made just, properly and primarily, and then consequently, and
secondarily, to think and to be thought so; but you fleeing a far off in this
and many more Points from proper Names into foreign acceptance, that you may
be as far as may be from such Truths as most torment you, will needs (in this
World at least) have the words to justify and be justified, sanctify and be
sanctified, to import and sound forth no more than injustum and improbum
justum, and tantum putare, and putari, and justificare, and sanctificare, and
ri in no wise to be ex injusto, and improbo justum, and sanctum facere and
fieri; as if in this Life God having somewhat else to do, could not well have
while to make People just and holy, and therefore (they being also well
contented so to be left) did agree to leave them to the liberty of their Lusts
under some certain toleration to live in them, and yet to think them just and
holy in the mean while notwithstanding; and then hereafter, when Men are more
willing to it, and himself a little better and more at leisure to do it, to
make them just and holy by some Popish Purgatory in the Life to come. Mr.
Fisher, ibid. p. 170.

And indeed all your Grace is one part of it as well as another by such outward
application and mere computation only, and not by any true real internal
application of Christ's Righteousness, Sufferings, and Blood to your Souls and
Consciences, to the purging of them from dead Works to the true serving of the
living God: your Justification is by Imputation and outward Applications, your
Washings, Regenerations, Sanctifications, Holiness, Renovations, and all you
have is by such a mere imputation and application of what is far off you in
Christ's Person to your selves; so that whatever he is, in whom is no Sin, you
will deem and dream that God deems you so to be, upon nothing but a mere blind
Confidence and Conceit that swim in your Brain that it is so, when it is no such
thing God knows: and so as one, that being at the North of Scotland hungry and
naked, should in his thoughts only apply a Garment or a mess of Meat to
himself, that is as far off him as the South of England, must needs perish for
want on it, if it be brought and applied no nearer to him than so; so in all
your applications of Christ, and whatever is in him, who is as far off as
Heaven, whilst you are but on Earth, far enough from thence the Lord knows,
must necessarily faint, famish, perish, pine and starve, till ye come to
witness Christ, and the Robes of his Righteousness and Holiness within your
selves, and eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, and put him on a little more
effectually than ye do, by all your dead Faith, and your eatings and drinkings
of Bread and Wine; for all your imagined Spirits, Applyings, and Imputings, by
which that the whole World, which does already, may, and you together with it,
lie still in Wickedness, ye are ever dispelling and disputing all true inherent
Holiness out of doors: And so being but in a mere airy talk, and vain thought
of things, that ye are in them when ye are out of them, and not ^oers your
selves of what ye hear Christ has done for you before, as an Ensample (a
direct Socinian) that ye should by his Power in the leadings of his Light and
Spirit do the same, ye do but deceive your own Souls: and as both Paul and
James, who both agree, and we with them against you in this, do truly tell you,
as righteous and religious as ye seem to be to your selves, and each to other,
all your Religion is but vain; and your hopes, that ye are this and that in the
account of God, that ye are just and pure, when really ye are nothing so, will
prove abortive, and as that of the Hypocrite, when the Lord takes away his
Soul, no other than the giving up the Ghost: for Gal. 6. 3, 4. if any Man think
himself to be something, and that he is thought of God for that Holiness which
is in another without him, to be something when he is nothing, and witnesses
neither that other, nor his Holiness within himself, he deceives himself: but
let every Man prove his own Work, and what he does by the Spirit of Christ
within himself of the Will of God, and then shall he have rejoicing within
himself alone, or at least also, and not in another Person without him only;
and he that glories, will glory in the Lord, Christ in him the hope of Glory,
in the Lord in himself, in whom the Seed of Israel finds Righteousness and
Strength, and Salvation from the Sin, is justified, and shall glory, Isa. 45.
21 -- 25. or not every one that commends himself as justified by Christ, will
appear approved at last, but he whom the Lord commends, which is no Man of
Sin that I know of, which David himself stood condemned in, 2 Cor. 10. 17, 18.
Ibid.

Then it seems Justification must go look its Efficient somewhere else, and
must have no share with washing and Sanctification in the Spirit's holy
workings in the Saints; it must be in the Name of God only, and the other only
by the Spirit, as if the Name and Spirit of God were such heterogeneous
Matters, that what is done by the one cannot be said to be done by the other, and
as if Paul had mistook himself in the placing of his words, and had been by the
infallible Spirit misguided, misplacing of them so, that when he should have
said, Ye are justified only in the Name of the Lord, and only washed and
sanctified by the Spirit of God, confusedly crowds these Effects all under one
Cause, and says, Ye are not only washed and sanctified, but ye are justified
also in the Name of the Lord, and by the Spirit of our God. Mr. Fisher, ibid.
p. 189, 190.

Whether our good Works are the meritorious Cause of our Justification? which I
hold in the Affirmative no further, than as by our good Works are meant the
good Works of God and Christ's own working in us by his Spirit, which (tho most
truly his) are by the Spirit it self vouchsafed that Name of ours, witness 2.
-- speaking to the same Question -- I affirm it to this very day, and ever
shall to the faces of any of you (as occasion is) yet owning no Works to be
truly good but what are done by the Believers in Christ, and his Light, and
done by Christ and his Power and Spirit, whether in their Persons or his own.
Ibid. Mr. Fisher, p. 595.

I shall be larger in my Quotations here in this that runs cross the Columns,
because it fully presents before thee the Baxterian Latitude in, as well as
manner of the Justification of a Sinner unto Salvation before God.

We understand not by this Justification by Christ, barely the good Works even
as wrought by the Spirit of Christ, for they, as Protestants truly affirm, are
rather an Effect of Justification, than the Cause of it: But we understand the
formation of Christ in us, Christ born and brought forth in us, from which good
Works as naturally proceed as Fruit from a fruitful Tree. (Reader, note it, i.
e. It is Regeneration, the new Birth, or Change of our Nature which is our
Righteousness for Justification before God, and not so much its result in
Sanctification and good Works.) It is (says he) this inward Birth in us
bringing forth Righteousness and Holiness in us that does justify us, which
having removed and done away the contrary Nature and Spirit that did bear Rule,
and bring Condemnation, now is in Dominion over all in our Hearts.

Those then that come to know Christ thus formed in them, do enjoy him wholly
and undivided, who is The LORD our RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23. 6. This is to be
clothed with Christ, and to have put him on, whom God therefore truly accounted
righteous and just. -- Tho we place remission of Sins in the Righteousness and
Obedience of Christ performed by him in the Flesh, as to what pertains to the
remote procuring Cause, -- and that we hold our selves formally justified by
Christ Jesus formed and brought forth in us, yet can we not (as some
Protestants have unwarily done) exclude Works from Justification: for, tho
properly we be not justified for them, yet are we justified in them, and they
are necessary even as causa sine qua non, i. e. the Cause without which none
are justified; for the denying of this, as it is contrary to the Scriptures
Testimony, so it has brought a great Scandal (here is the Baxterian directly ut
supra) to the Protestant Religion, opened the Mouths of Papists, and made many
too secure, while they have believed to be justified without good Works.

Moreover, tho it be not so safe to say they are meritorious, yet, seeing they
are rewarded, many of those called the Fathers, have not spared to use the word
[Merit] which some of us have perhaps also done in a qualified sense, but no
ways to infer the Popish Abuses above mentioned.

If we had that Notion of good Works which most Protestants have, we could
freely agree to make them not only not necessary, but reject them as hurtful,
viz. that the best Works, even of the Saints, are defiled and polluted: for tho
we judge so of the best Works performed by Man, endeavoring a Conformity to the
outward Law by his own Strength, and in his own Will, yet we believe that such
Works as naturally proceed from this spiritual Birth and formation of Christ in
us, are pure and holy, even as the Root from which they come, and therefore God
accepts them, justifies us in them, and rewards for them of his own free Grace.
-- These following Positions do hence arise. -- 1. That the Obedience,
Sufferings, and Death of Christ is that by which the Soul obtains remission of
Sins, and is the procuring Cause of that Grace, by whose inward workings Christ
comes to be formed inwardly, and the Soul to be made conformable unto him, and
so just and justified. And that therefore in respect of this Capacity and Offer
of Grace, God is said to be reconciled, not as if he were actually reconciled,
or did actually justify, or account any just, so long as they remain in their
Sins, really impure and unjust. 2. That it is by this inward Birth of Christ in
Man that Man is made just, and therefore so accounted by God: wherefore to be
plain, we are thereby, and not till that be brought forth in us, formally (if
we must use that word) justified in the sight of God; because Justification is
both more properly and frequently in Scripture taken in its proper
signification for making one just, and not reputing one merely such, and is all
one with Sanctification. 3. That since good Works as naturally follow from this
Birth as Heat from Fire, therefore are they of absolute necessity to
Justification, as causa sine qua non, i. e. tho not as the Cause for which, yet
as that in which we are, and without which we cannot be justified. And tho they
be not meritorious and draw no Debt upon God, yet he cannot but accept and
reward them; for it is contrary to his Nature to deny his own; since they may
be perfect in their kind, as proceeding from a pure holy Birth and Root:
wherefore their Judgment is false, and against the Truth, that say, that the
holiest Works of the Saints are defiled and sinful in the sight of God; for
these good Works are not the Works of the Law excluded by the Apostle from
Justification. Barclay, ibid. p. 143, 144, 145.

This would make void the whole practical Doctrine of the Gospel, and make
Faith it self needless; for, if Faith and Repentance, and the other Conditions
called for throughout the Gospel, be a Qualification upon our part necessary to
be performed, then, before this be performed by us, we are either fully
reconciled to God, or but in a Capacity of being reconciled to God; he being
ready to reconcile and justify us, as these Conditions are performed, which
latter, if granted, is according to the Truth we profess: (Here Is a Direction
for Mr. Dan. Williams where to find out Subscribers against his next Piece come
forth) and if we are already perfectly reconciled and justified before these
Conditions are performed, (which Conditions are of that nature that they cannot
be performed at one time, but are to be done all ones lifetime) then can they
not be said to be absolutely needful, which is contrary to the express
Testimony of Scripture, which is acknowledged by all Christians; for without
Faith it is impossible to please God. They that believe not are condemned
already, because they believe not in the only begotten Son of God. Except ye
repent ye cannot be saved; for if ye live after the Flesh ye shall die. And of
those that were converted, I will remove your Candlestick from you, unless ye
repent. Should I mention all the Scriptures that positively and evidently prove
this, I might transcribe much of all the doctrinal part of the Bible. (So says
Mr. Baxter and Mr. Dan. Williams in reference to the same point in hand) for
since Christ said, It is finished, and did finish his Work 1600 Years ago, and
upwards, if he so fully perfected Redemption then, and did then actually
reconcile every one that is to be saved, not simply opening a door of Mercy for
them, offering the Sacrifice of his Body, by which they may obtain remission of
their Sins, when they repent, and communicating unto them a measure of his
Grace, by which they may see their Sins, and be able to repent; but really make
them to be reputed as just, either before they believe (as say the Antinomians)
or after they have assented to the Truth of the History of Christ, or are
sprinkled with the Baptism of Water, while nevertheless they are actually
unjust, so that no part of their Redemption is to be wrought by him now, as to
their Reconciliation and Justification, then the whole doctrinal part of the
Bible is useless and of no profit: in vain were the Apostles sent forth to
preach Repentance and remission of Sins, and in vain do all the Preachers
bestow their Labor, spend their Lungs, and give forth Writings; yea, much more
in vain do the People spend their Money which they give them for preaching,
seeing it is all but Actum agere, but a vain and uneffectual Essay to do that
which is already done without them.

To pretermit their human Labors, as not worthy the disputing whether they be
needful or not, since (as we shall hereafter show) themselves confess the best
of them is sinful; this also makes void the present Intercession of Christ for
Men. What shall become of that great Article of Faith, by which we affirm that
he sits at the right hand of God, daily making Intercession for us, and for
which end the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered? for Christ makes not Intercession for those that are not in
a possibility of Salvation, that is absurd. Our Adversaries will not admit that
he prayed for the World at all: And to pray for those that are already
reconciled, and perfectly justified, is to no purpose: to pray for remission of
Sins is yet more needless, if all be remitted, past, present and to come. (But
Friend! hug not a Snake in your Bosom, it is because they were reconciled,
perfectly justified, and all their Sins, both past, present, and to come,
remitted, that therefore Christ intercedes for the discovery thereof, who came
not to do his own, but the Will of him that sent him; which Reconciliation,
Justification and Remission was from all Eternity irreversibly fixed in the
Purpose of his Will toward them, and present with him for them; for it is not
the Prayers of the Saints, nor the utmost of the Intercession of Christ, can
alter the Mind of God toward a People, whether elect or reprobate, or change
their station; therefore Christ is called a Door, by which these eternal
Privileges are held and brought forth, and herein he is not only called
essentially the Image of the Father, but manifestatively the express Character
of his Person, whence also he is called the Word.) Indeed there is not any
solid solving of this, but by acknowledging according to the Truth, that Christ
by his Death removed the Wrath of God, so far as to obtain remission of Sins
for as many as receive that Grace and Light that he communicates unto them, and
has purchased for them by his Blood; which, as they believe in, they come to
know remission of Sins past, and Power to save them from Sin, and to wipe it
away so often as they may fall into it by Unwatchfulness or Weakness, if,
applying themselves to this Grace, they truly repent: for to as many as
received him, he gives Power to become the Sons of God. So none are Sons, none
are justified, none reconciled until they thus receive him in that little Seed
in their Hearts: And Life eternal is offered to those who by patient
continuance in well-doing seek Glory, Honor and Immortality: For if the
righteous Man depart from his Righteousness, his Righteousness shall be
remembered no more; and therefore on the other part, none are longer Sons of
God, and justified, than they patiently continue in Righteousness and
well-doing: And therefore Christ lives always making Intercession, during the
day of every Man's Visitation, that they may be converted; and, when Men are in
some measure converted, he makes Intercession that they may continue and, go on
and not faint, nor go back again. Mr. Barclay, ibid. p. 146, 147.

1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. First, this [justified] here understood must needs be a
being really made just, and not a being merely imputed such; else [sanctified]
and [washed] might be reputed a being esteemed so, and not a being really so,
and then it overturns the whole intent of the Context: for the Apostle showing
them in the preceding Verses, how the unrighteous cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God; and descending to the several species of Wickedness, subsumes, that they
were sometimes such, but now are not any more such: Wherefore as they are now
washed and sanctified, so are they justified; for if this Justification were
not real, then it might be alleged that the Corinthians had not forsaken these
Evils, but were, tho still they continued in them, notwithstanding justified:
which, as in it self it is most absurd, so it luculently overturneth the very
Import and Intent of the place; as if the Corinthians turning Christians had
not wrought any real Change in them, but had only been a belief of some barren
Notions which had wrought no alteration in their Affections, Will, or manner of
Life. For my own part, I neither see any thing, nor could ever yet hear or read
any thing, that with any color of Reason did evince [justified] in this place
to be understood any other ways than in its proper and genuine Interpretation
of being made just. And for the more clear understanding hereof let it be
considered, that this word [justify] is derived either from the Substantive
Justice, or the Adjective just; both which words import the Substantive, that
true and real Virtue in the Soul, as it is in it self, to wit, it signifies
really, and not suppositively, that excellent Quality expressed and understood
among Men by the word [Justice] and the Adjective [just] as applied signifies a
Man or Woman who is just, that is, in whom this quality of Justice is stated;
for it would not be only great Impropriety, but also manifest Falsity to call a
Man just, merely by supposition, especially if he were really unjust. Now this
word [justify] formed, or from Justice, or just, does beyond all question
signify a making just, it being nothing else but a Composition of the word
facio and the Adjective justus, which is nothing else than justifico, i. e.
justum facio, to make just, and [justified] of justus and fio, as justus fio,
and justificatus, i. e. justus factus, I am made just. Thus also is it with
Verbs of this kind, as sanctifico, from sanctus holy, and facio, honorifico
from honos and facio, sacrifico from sacer and facio; all which are still
understood of the Subject really and truly endued with that Virtue and Quality
from which the Verb is derived: Therefore as none are said to be sanctified
that are really unholy, while they are such, so neither can any be truly said
to be justified, while they actually remain unjust. Ibid. p. 150, 151.

Tit. 3. 5. here the Apostle clearly ascribes the immediate Cause of
Justification to this inward Work of Regeneration, which is Jesus Christ
revealed in the Soul, as being that which formally states us in a Capacity of
being reconciled with God (this is the Baxterian Placabilis, or that God is
reconcilable) the washing or Regeneration being that inward Power and Virtue,
whereby the Soul is cleansed and clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, so
as to be made fit to appear before God. -- This Doctrine is manifest from 2
Cor. 13. 5. Examine your own selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own
selves: know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be Reprobates? First, It appears here how earnest the Apostle was that they
should know Christ in them; so that he presses this Exhortation upon them, and
inculcates it three times. 2. He makes the Cause of Reprobation or
not-Justification the want of Christ thus revealed and known in the Soul:
whereby it necessarily follows by the Rule of Contraries, where the Parity is
alike (as in this case it is evident) that where Christ is inwardly known,
there the Persons subjected to him are approved and justified: For there can be
nothing more plain than this, that if we must know Christ in us, except we be
Reprobates or unjustified Persons, that, if we know him in us, we are not
Reprobates, and consequently justified ones. Like unto this is that of the
Apostle, Gal. 4. 19. My little Children, of whom I travel in Birth again until
Christ be formed in you; and therefore the Apostle terms this Christ within the
hope of Glory, Col. 1. 27, 28. Now that which is the hope of Glory can be no
other, than that which we immediately and most nearly rely upon for our
Justification, and that whereby we are really and truly made just. And as we do
not hereby deny, but the original and fundamental Cause of our Justification,
is the Love of God manifested in the appearance of Jesus Christ in the Flesh,
who by his Life, Death, Sufferings and Obedience made a way for our
Reconciliation, and became a Sacrifice for the remission of Sins that are past,
and purchased unto us this Seed and Grace, from which this Birth arises, and in
which Jesus Christ is inwardly received, formed and brought forth in us, in his
own pure and holy Image of Righteousness, by which our Souls live unto God, and
are clothed with him, and have put him on, even as the Scripture speaks, Ephesians.
4. 23, 24. Gal. 3. 27. Romans 3. 24. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 7. So again,
reciprocally we are hereby made partakers of the fullness of his Merits, and his
cleansing Blood is near to wash away every Sin and Infirmity, and to heal all
our Backslidings, as often as we turn toward him by unfeigned Repentance, and
become renewed by his Spirit. Mr. Barclay, ibid. p. 156, 157.

This Doctrine Luther and the Protestants then had good reason to deny and
oppose, tho many of them ran into another Extreme, so as to deny good Works to
be necessary to Justification, and to preach up not only remission of Sins, but
Justification by Faith alone, without all. Works however good, so that Men do
not obtain their Justification according as they are inwardly sanctified and
renewed, but are justified merely by believing that Christ died for them; and
so some may perfectly be justified tho they be lying in gross Wickedness, as
appears by the Example of David, whom they say was fully and perfectly
justified while he was lying in the gross Sins of Murder and Adultery.

Also Richard Baxter in the Book cited p. 155. says, that we are justified by
Works in the same kind of Causality, as by Faith, to wit, as being both Causes
sine qua non, or Conditions of the new Covenant on our part requisite to
Justification. And p. 195. he says, It is needless to teach any Scholar who
has read the Writings of Papists, how this Doctrine differs from them. Mr.
Barclay, ibid. p. 139, 166.

This has made them strain and wrest the Scriptures for an imputative
Righteousness wholly without them, to cover their Impurities; and this has
made them imagine an acceptance with God possible, tho they suppose it
impossible ever to obey Christ's Commands. Ibid. p. 177.

It may easily be answered by a Retortion to those that press this, from the
words of the Lord's-prayer, forgive us our Debts; that this militates no less
against perfect Justification, than against perfect Sanctification: for, if all
the Saints, the least as well as the greatest, be perfectly justified in that
very hour wherein they are converted, as our Adversaries will have it, then
they have remission of Sins long before they die; may it not then be said unto
them, What need have ye to pray for remission of Sin, who are already
justified, whose Sins are long ago forgiven, both past and to come? Mr.
Barclay, ibid. p. 183. To this Society let me bring in my Countryman. -- How
strange is it, that from Christ's being a Surety of the New Covenant or
Testament, Men should conclude that Christ is a Money-surety of the Covenant of
Works, and as such paid all our Covenant-Debts as Debts, and that altogether in
kind, and so as we are accounted to pay that Debt, and merit Life by that very
Covenant, yea, and damn all that will not say as they say, tho to say so, makes
either Christ's Obedience or his Sufferings needless, all Forgiveness
impossible, all Gospel-terms of application of Christ's Merits unjust, etc. Mr.
Dan. Williams' s Man made righteous by Christ's Obedience, p. 106. I shall
conclude with Mr. Samuel Fisher. -- What a mess of graceless Grace is here of
T. D's making; here is Grace with a witness, almost all manner of Grace
mentioned as material, and of moment in the matter of Justification, but one,
which is of so much use, that all the rest are in a manner useless till it come
in, and which makes all the rest Grace, so that (to say no more than truth)
they are no Grace to us before it, or without it, and that (viz.)
Sanctification, while others are included, is only and alone excluded. (This
remember, Reader, all along refers unto our material Justification before God)
-- Poor Sanctification! it is set aside, it is thrust out still from entering the
Lines of Communication among its Fellows. T. D. stands against the door, so
that if he may rule the roast, Men shall be in favor with God, and (contrary
to what Divines commonly say, when they say, as they do all, that
Sanctification manifests Justification, and the favor of God) have it
manifested too in the Donation of his Son to them, the imputation of his
Righteousness, and acceptance of them as righteous in him, and so consequently
a Title to the Inheritance, the Kingdom, Glory, and all the Good that Heaven
affords to all Eternity; but Washing, Regeneration, Sanctification, Renovation
by the Spirit, and Salvation from their Sins, which Sins deserve the Wrath, the
Curse, and the Condemnation, which Salvation from the Sins (alias)
Sanctification must be before any well-grounded hope of escaping the
Condemnation, Curse and Wrath to come can be had: this latter sort of Grace is
shut out for a Wrangler by the wrangling Contenders against the Truth, who had
rather obey Unrighteousness than it, and their Lusts than him they call their
Lord and Savior, and must be none of the Ingredients among the company of
Causes of Men's acceptance with God, and being accounted righteous by him; but
if they be not righteous and holy, must be counted to be so without it, and if
they be so, must be counted so by that which resides in another Person, by
which, till it come into themselves, they are not made so, and without it, by
the being of which, as in themselves, and not as in another, they can only
(...), be truly made and really become righteous and holy; and so that Grace,
which mainly, if not only (as it is a Gift) gives the proper name and nature of
Grace to all the other Grace, may say of it self, cum nemo extrudi potest itur
ad me, when none ought to be excluded as not meant, where every Grace of God is
mentioned in the Gospel, I only am left out alone, and they seek my Life also.
Mr. Samuel Fisher' s Testimony of Truth exalted, p. 187, 188.

That Justification follows this Preparation, which is not only a remission
of Sins, but Sanctification also, and has five Causes: the Final, the Glory of
God, and eternal Life; the Efficient, God; the Meritory, Christ; the
Instrumental, the Sacraments; and the formal, Justice, given by God, received
according to the good pleasure of the Holy Ghost, and according to the
Disposition of the Receiver, receiving together remission of Sins, Faith, Hope
and Charity. The Council of Trent, p. 210. Of the glorious Boastings and
precious Virtues of the Works of our own Righteousness, and of the Law, taken
out of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians.



He (said Luther) that will be justified before God by the Law, and by his own
Works, the same,

1. Turns himself from Christ's Grace, whereunto he is called. 2. He
departs from the true Gospel, and receives another. 3. He confuseth the
Hearts of the Faithful. 4. He perverteth the Gospel of Christ. 5. He is
accursed. 6. His Preaching tends to please Men. 7. He seeks the Praise of
Men, not of God. 8. He is not the Servant of Christ. 9. He preaches human
things, not by Jesus Christ's Revelation. 10. He is nothing profited by the
highest and best Righteousness of the Law. 11. He disturbeth God's Assembly and
the Christian Church. 12. He undertaketh to be justified by impossible means,
namely, by the Law. 13. He makes again them to be Sinners which are justified
in Christ. 14. He makes Christ again an Offering for Sins. 15. He builds up
Sin again, which before was broken down. 16. He makes himself a Malefactor.
17. He rejects the Grace of God. 18. He holds that Christ died in vain. 19.
He is a foolish Galatian. 20. He is bewitched. 21. He hearkneth not to the
Truth. 22. He crucifieth Christ. 23. He holds the Holy Ghost is received by
Works. 24. He forsakes the Spirit, and cleaves to the Flesh. 25. He is under
the Curse. 26. He makes an addition to God's Testament, and rejects God's
Ordinances. 27. He makes Sins greater. 28. He remains included under Sin.
29. He serves the weak laws. 30. The Gospel to him is preached in vain. 31.
His Actions and Sufferings are all in vain. 32. He is a Servant and a Son of
the Bondwoman. 33. He is thrust out with the Bondwoman from the Inheritance.
34. He makes Christ unprofitable unto him. 35. He is bound to fulfill the whole
Law. 36. He has forsaken Christ. 37. He is fallen from Grace. 38. He suffers
himself to be seduced from the Truth. 39. He is induced to believe that which
is not Divine and Godly. 40. He permits himself to be leavened with the
Leaven of Destruction. 41. He is damned in teaching the same. 42. He biteth
himself with others, and with them will be utterly devoured. 43. His Doings are
altogether Works of the Flesh. 44. He valuerh himself much, whenas there is
nothing in him. 45. He boasts himself without God. 46. He makes himself
acceptable according to the Flesh by those which are carnally minded. 47. He is
an Enemy to the Cross of Christ, and to Persecution. 48. He fulfilleth nothing
less than the Law. 49. He only extolleth the Doctrine of the Flesh. 50. All is
lost in and on him, what he is, has, knows, or can, is nothing worth, etc.
Luther. Colloquia Mensalia, chap. 14. p. 237, 238.

Head 7. That inherent Sanctification, etc.
Papist.
IT was the Error of the (...), as Augustine notes, that the Grace of God was
not only in respect o^ the outward means generally offered to all, but in God's
eternal Decree and Purpose ordained for all, if they would receive it, for thus
they affirmed: ^tum ad Deum omnibus (...) esse vit^m aeternam, quia vult omnes
salvos fi^ri; quantum ad arbitrii libertatem attinet, ab ^is eam apprehendi qui
sponte Deo (...): on God's behalf, they say, Life eternal is prepared for all,
because God will have all Men saved: and as for the freedom of the Will, so
many apprehend or lay hold of eternal Life, as of their own accord do believe
in God. Dr. Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 884.

This is the true Light that lighteneth every Man which comes into the World:
Ergo, the Light of Grace is common to all. Pucks^ration. 55. on Joh. 1. 9.

The Papist.

Tho they dare not altogether justify the Works of the Heathen and Infidels,
yet they do excuse them, and do blame us for saying, that Infidels do sin in
honoring their Parents, in fighting for their Country, and such like; they
therefore do discharge the Heathen of Sin in these Works of theirs. Rhem. Romans
14.. 4.

The Protestants.

These Works are not Sin in themselves, but in Infidels they are, because they
proceed of Infidelity.

Argum. It is the Rule of the Gospel, that a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth
good Fruit: But all Infidels are corrupt Trees, being without Faith: Ergo, they
can bring forth no good Fruit.

The Pelagians thought to have posed Augustine with the same Question which the
Papist propound to us: Was it Sin in the Heathens (say they) to clothe the
Naked? Augustine answers, Non per seipsum factum peccatum est -- sed de tali
opere non in domino gloriare, solus impius negat esse peccatum: the Fact it
self is not Sin, but in doing any such thing not to rejoice in the Lord, none
but wicked Men will deny it to be Sin, etc. I may therefore say unto these
Patrons of Ethnic Virtues, as Bernard in the like case: Dum multum sudat
quomodo Platonem faciat Christianum, se probat Ethnicum: while he labors to
make Plato a Christian, he shows himself an Ethnic. Epist. 191. Dr. Willet
Synop. Pap. p. 1033.

Huberus says that all Men are God's Sheep and Inheritance, who if afterward
they stray away from the Lord's Sheepfold the fault is in themselves. These.
1069. Dr. Willet, ibid. p. 893.

The meaning is, not that God in his eternal Decree had ordained Knowledge unto
some, and denied it to others, but that the Ministry of the Word being offered
to all, some through their Incredulity refused the same, and so their Hearts
were justly hardened, as the Apostle says elsewhere, That they did put away
from them the Word of God, which it was necessary should have been first spoken
unto them, and so judged themselves unworthy of everlasting Life, Acts 13. 46.
The rest which did not abuse their natural Gifts of hearing and understanding,
but willingly gave ear unto Christ, had Power to believe in Christ, and to
continue therein: Sic Huber. These. 826. Snecan. p. 522.

Answ. 1. That they which love not the Truth are justly given over of God to a
reprobate sense, we grant, as St. Paul shows; Because they would not receive
the love of the Truth, God shall send them strong Delusions, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
10. 2. Yet Men are not so the cause to themselves of their Belief, as they are
of their Incredulity; but the cause and beginning is of God, as our Savior
testifies, It is so, O Father, because thy good Pleasure was such, Mat. 11.
26. The Cause then why some understand the Mystery of the Kingdom, is not in
their Willingness, but in the good Pleasure of God: it is not a Gift equally
offered to all, which all may receive if they will; it is given to you, says
Christ, it is not given to them. Ibid. p. 894.

Bellarmine: Man's Freewill and God's Grace do work together; like as without
the Light a Man cannot see, yet the Light being present, it is in a Man's power
to open his Eyes and see, or to shut his Eyes and not see; so the Grace of God
presupposed, yet it is in Man's Will to choose or refuse. Bellarm. cap. 12.
Observe. 2. Ibid. p. 941.

Without Christ we can do no good Work tending to Salvation, but moral good
Works we can: Bellarm. Resp. ad loc. 9.

Man, even as it now stands with him in the state of Corruption, has
free will in moral Duties to choose the Good and refuse the Evil; that is, to
embrace the Virtue, and eschew Vice. Bellarm. lib. 5. cap. 14.

We will first examine their Arguments, whereby they urge certain Absurdities
and Impossibilities which would follow, as they think, if there should be no
free will, and then we will answer their Allegations out of Scripture.

Argum. 1. Sin is either necessary, or voluntary: If the first, it cannot be
avoided, and so consequently is no Sin; if the second, it may be avoided: Ergo,
Man has Free Will, he may avoid Sin if he will. Bellarm. cap. 14.

Answ. This was the very same Objection which the Pelagians and Free-will-men
urged Augustine withal many years ago: si peccata caveri non possunt, peccata
non sunt: if Sins cannot be avoided, they are no Sins. And again, Injuste
judicarentur homines, si ea non faciunt, quae jubentur impossibilia: Men should
be unjustly condemned if they do not these things which are commanded, being
impossible. See Dr. Willet' s Answers, ibid. p. 947, 948.

Argum. 2. If there were not in Man Free Will, there should be no place left
for Reward or Punishment; for if a Man do Evil of necessity, he deserves no
Punishment; and if he do well unwillingly, he is worthy of no Reward. Bellarm.
cap. 15.

Answ. The very same Objection was moved to Augustine, ubi necessitas, ibi non
est corona; where there is necessity there is no Crown or Reward. He answers,
In certe faciendo ideo nullum est vinculum necessitatis, quia libertas est
charitatis, quae diffusa est in cordibus nostris per spiritum sanctum. In well
doing there is ^o Bond of necessity, because Freedom or Liberty comes of Love
which is shed abroad in our Hearts by the holy Spirit. Aug. de not. and great.
cap. 65. Also Punishment is due unto Sin, tho Men by Nature cannot choose but
sin, etc. -- If there be no Free Will, then all Men should either be good or
evil; and if they be good, none should be better than other; if they be evil,
none should be worse than other: whereof then is this difference, that some are
good, some evil, and some are evil in the mean, some in the extreme, but from
the liberty of Man's Will? God's Election is not the Cause, for without
Free Will Election makes none good, for then Infants and mad Men might be good
by Election without Free Will. Bellarm. cap. 16.

The Scripture offers diverse Promises under certain Conditions: as if ye
consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the Land: If thou will enter
into Life, keep the Commandments. If it be in our power to perform these
Conditions, then have we Free Will; if not, to what end are they propounded?
Bellarm. cap. 19.

The Jesuit is driven to borrow an Answer from the old Heretics the Pelagians;
for thus they said, Non contra gratiam disputo (inquit Pelagianus) quia liberum
arbitrium defendo; si enim hominem creavit Deus, and illi liberum arbitrium
donavit, quicquid homo potest de libero arbitrio, cujus gratiae debetur, nisi
ejus, qui eum condidit cum libero arbitrio? I do not reason against Grace
(says the Pelagian) while I defend Free Will: for if God created Man, and gave
him Free Will, whatsoever a Man is able to do by his Free Will, to whose Grace
is he indebted, but to his who made him with Free Will? The very same Answer
does the Jesuit give us here, that whatsoever a Man does by virtue of his
Free Will, it is by the Gift of God, because Free Will is his Gift: Et nos
istam qua conditi sumus, quanquam hoc nomine appellatam minime legerimus, tamen
quia gratis data est gratiam fatemur, sed ostendimus majorem esse istam, qua
Christiani sumus: And we also do acknowledge the Grace of Creation, whereby we
are made, because it is freely given, tho we find it no where called by the
name of Grace; but yet there is a greater Grace, and more properly so called,
by the which Grace we are made Christians. August. de verbis Apostol: Sermon. 11.

Free Will, they say, is not utterly extinguished, but only abated in Strength,
and attenuated: Bellarm. de great. lib. 5. cap. 30. Council. Tridentin. sess. 6.
cap. 1.

They (the Papists) say not, that a Man by his Free Will only is able to live
well, or to obtain eternal Life; for Bellarmine proves at large, that a Man
has no Power of himself, without the special assistance of Grace, either to
believe, lib. 6. cap. 2. to prepare himself to receive Grace, cap. 5. or to
love God, cap. 7. or to will any thing appertaining to Salvation, without the
help of God's Grace, cap. 4.

This then is their Opinion, That tho the Will of Man be not able of it self
only to do any thing in spiritual Actions, yet being aided and assisted by
Grace, it may: so that they attribute part to Grace, part to Free Will. The
first motion and stirring of the Heart, they say, is only of God; and here the
Will works nothing at all: then it is the part of Free Will to apprehend
Grace offered, to give Consent unto it, and to work together with it: Trident.
Council. sess. 6. cap. 5. can. 4.

The Rhemists also thus define the matter: Tho our Election, Calling, first
coming to God, be not wholly or principally upon our Will or Works, yet our
willing and working of any good to our Salvation is the secondary Cause; God's
special Motion, Grace, Assistance, is the Principal. Romans 9. Sect. 4.

This then is their meaning, that God's Grace and Man's Free Will do work
actively together: as the Rhemists note, The Gentiles, tho they believed
specially by God's Grace and Preordination, yet they believed also by their own
Free Will. Rhem. Acts 1. 13. Sect. 2.

Bellarmine says, That a Man, notwithstanding the first stirring, as also the
helping and assisting Grace, absolutely by his Free Will may do well if he
will, and not do well if he will not: Lib. 5. cap. 29. Respons. ad Testim. 21.
Thus the Jesuit makes the Will of Man the principal, not the secondary Cause
(wherein the Rhemists are more reasonable, as we have seen, that make it only
the inferior Cause) for the Will of Man may make Grace frustrate, but Grace
cannot make Free Will frustrate by the Jesuit's Doctrine. See the whole of this
in Dr. Willet' s Synop. Pap. p. 947, 948, 949, 950, 954, 955, 956.

Quod sit Dei propositum salvare omnes, and elegerit eos and praedestinarit
vitae aeternae, servata tamen condition: That it is God's Purpose that all Men
should be saved, and that he has elected and predestined them to eternal
Life, the Condition kept, that is, if they believe. Heming. de gratia
universal. p. 20. So also Snecanus; Deus universaliter omnium in Christo
misertus assumpsit humanum genus in reconciliationis foedus: That God having
Mercy upon all, has received whole Mankind into the Covenant of
Reconciliation, de praedestinat. 480. That is, as many as believe; which Gift
to believe they acknowledge to be of God, and the same not denied to any, but
offered generally to all; and that it is in Man's power to give assent unto
Grace offered, and to believe: Voluntatem a Deo doctam and motam a Spiritu
sancto, posse se applicare ad gratiam, assentire Evangelio, credere: That the
Will being taught of God, and somewhat stirred of the Spirit, may apply it self
to Grace, give assent to the Gospel, believe, etc. Heming. de liber. Arbitr.
Dr. Willet, ibid. p. 884.

Catarinus maintained in the Council of Trent, that Man without the special
help of God, can do no Work which may truly be good, tho morally, but sins
still, etc. and proceeds exceeding well. -- But this Opinion was very sharply
impugned by Soto, proclaiming it heretical, for inferring that Man had not
liberty to do well, nor could obtain his natural end, which was to deny
Free Will with the Lutherans. He maintained a Man might by that strength of
Nature observe every Precept of the Law, in regard of the Substance of the
Work, tho not in regard of the End, which was enough to avoid Sin. He said
there were three sorts of human Actions, one the Transgression of the Law,
which is Sin; another, the Observation thereof, having Charity for the end,
which is meritorious and acceptable to God; the third mixed, when the Law is
obeyed for the substance of the Precept, which Work is morally good and perfect
in its kind, because it accomplisheth the Law, makes every Work good according
to Morality, avoiding by that means all Sin. But he moderated this great
Perfection of our Nature, by adding, that it was one thing to take heed of any
one particular Sin, and another to beware of all together; and said that a Man
might avoid any one, but not all; by the Example of him that had a Vessel with
three holes, who could not stop them with two Hands, but could stop which two
of them he would, one remaining open of necessity. This Doctrine did not
satisfy some of the Fathers; for tho it clearly showed that all Works are not
Sins, yet it did not wholly salve Free Will, because it will necessarily
follow, that it is not free in avoiding all Sin. But Soto giving the title of
good Works unto these, knew not how to determine whether they were preparatory
to Justification. It seemed to him they were in regard of the Goodness of them;
and it seemed they were not, considering the Doctrine of St. Austin, approved
by St. Thomas and other good Divines, that the first beginning of Salvation
proceeds from the Vocation of God. He avoided these straits by a distinction,
that they were preparatory afar off, but not nearly, as tho giving a remote
preparation to the force of Nature, the first beginning was not taken away from
the Grace of God. History of the Council of Trent, p. 184, 185.

They hold, that when a Man does his Endeavor, God will not deny him Grace,
(there is their congruous Merit) and think they salve all by saying, this
Endeavor must be from Divine Assistance: but Pelagius acknowledged that no
less than they, and Augustine, with other his Opposers, take notice of it; yet
because he would have Grace to be given according to Merits (tho by Merits was
understood, not that which deserved it, but any thing done by a Sinner, in
respect of which Grace is given, as Bellarmine confesses) they condemn him, as
evacuating the Redemption of Christ, and the Grace of God. Morning Exercise
against Popery, p. 453.

The Papists think there is sufficient Aid to Conversion given to all Men; with
which Aid they may so cooperate with the help of their Free Will, that they
may be converted, although there came no other effectual Aid: And by effectual
Grace, they understand that Grace which is efficient, and does bring its Effect.

The Arminians, who in the Question of Grace and Free Will, do so dress and
trim up Popery, as the Papists do Pelagianism, do often use that distinction of
sufficient and effectual Grace, but with such a floating Speech, and affected
Ambiguity, that it is hard to know what is effectual Grace with them. Peter du
Moulin's Anatomy of Arminianism, p. 312.

Romans 2. 5. Thou after thine hardness, and Heart that cannot repent, heapest
unto thy self Wrath, etc. Pererius out of this place infers, that it is in
potestate hominis been vel male agere, in the power of Man to do well or evil;
for it should otherwise be unjust to punish a Man for doing evil, and for want
of Repentance, whereas he can do no other. Disput. 2. in c. 2. numer. 23.

Protest. Romans 10. 14. Quomodo credent sine praedicante?

Bellarm. Quibus Evangelium non praedicatur, possunt a Deo excitari ad Deum
credendum, and. ex tali fide excitari possunt ab orationibus and Eleemosynis
majus fidei tamen a Deo impetrandum: cujus rei exemplum habemus in Cornelio.
Bell. Enerv. Ames. Tom. 4. p. 70.

Protest. Romans 10. 14. How shall they believe without a Preacher?

Bellarm. They to whom the Gospel is not preached, may be excited of God to a
belief in God, and may be stirred up by such a Faith to seek of God by Prayers
and Alms-deeds a greater light of Faith; of which thing we have an Example in
Cornelius.

Bellarm. Partitionem gratiae, in sufficientem and efficacem, Haeretici nostri
temporis omnino repudiare coguntur, cum apud eos qui a Deo moventur, necessario
been agant, qui vero non moventur, non possint been agere; ac per hoc omnis Dei
motio sit efficax, nulla sufficiens -- Auxilium Dei vere sufficiens adsuit
nonnullis, qui tamen re ipsa conversi non sunt. -- Negamus igitur auxilium Dei
sufficiens, quo possit homo vel sua intrinseca potentia, vel indifferentem Dei
gratiam determinando converti, ab iis recipi, qui nunquam reipsa convertuntur.

Bellarm. The partition of Grace into sufficient and efficacious, the Heretics
of our time are compelled to cast away, when with them, they that are moved of
God do well necessarily, but they that are not moved cannot do well; and by
this all motion of God is efficacious, none sufficient. -- Some have the help
of God that is truly sufficient, who nevertheless are not in very deed
converted. -- We therefore deny the sufficient help of God, by the which a Man
may either from his own intrinsic Power, or by determining the indifferent
Grace of God be converted, to be by them received, who never are indeed
converted.

Bellarm. Isa. 5. Quid est quod ultra debui facere vineae meae, and non feci?
expectavi ut faceret uvas, and fecit labruseas. Dominus deder at illis
sufficientem culturam, id est, sufficientem gratiam, per quam vere and proprie
converti possent: neque alias potuisset expectare fructum bonum, gratiam tamen
efficacem non habuerunt: nam si habuissent, fructum bonum utique fecissent.

Bellarm. Isa. 5. What is there that I ought further to do to my Vineyard that
I have not done? I expected that it should bring forth Grapes, and it brought
forth wild Grapes; the Lord gave them sufficient Culture, that is, sufficient
Grace, by which they might be truly and properly converted, neither could he
otherwise have expected good Fruit, nowithstanding they had not efficacious
Grace for if they had had, they had verily brought forth good Fruit.

Bellarm. Act. 7. 51. Vos semper spiritui sancto restitistis: Inspirabantur
igitur eis bona desideria, it a ut converti potuerunt; nam aliter quomodo
resistebant spiritui sancto? and cur tam acriter arguntur?

Bellarm. Acts 7. 51. Ye have always resisted the holy Spirit: there were
therefore good Desires inspired into them so as they might be converted; for
otherwise how did they resist the holy Spirit? And why are they so sharply
reproved?

Protest. Hu^nodi ratione probare possit sophista aliquis, Diabolum ipsum
habere gratiam sufficientem: quia ille etiam suo modo resistit semper spiritui
sancto, Zech. 13. 1. and certe Stephanus ibi loquitur de hominibus plane
diabolicis, qui duri erant cervice, and in circumcisi cord and auribus. 2.
Resistendi modus qui ibi intelligitur ab ipso Stephano satis explicatur, ver.
52, 53. Persequuti sunt illos qui praenunciarunt Christum: interfecerunt
Christum; legem acceptam non observabant. Resistebant spiritui sancto in lege
and Prophetis loquenti. Amesius Bellarm. enervat. p. 47, 48, 49, 51.

Protest. By this kind of reasoning any Sophister may prove that the Devil
himself has sufficient Grace, because he also after his manner always
resists the holy Spirit, Zech. 13. 1. and certainly Stephen speaks there of
Men evidently diabolical, who hardened their Necks, and were uncircumcised in
Heart and Ear. 2. The manner of re^sting which there understood, is
sufficiently explained by Stephen himself, ver. 52, 53. They persecuted them
who foretold of Christ, they had put Christ to Death; they observed not the
received Law; they did resist the holy Spirit speaking in the Law and Prophets.

Bellarm. Apoc. 3. 20. Ego sto ad ostium, and pulso; ii ad quorum cor Dominus
pulsat, si non habent sufficiens auxilium aperiendi, cur Dominus pulsat? an
ignorant eos aperire non possent? an stultus non esset qui ostium vicini
pulsaret, si certo sciret, neminem intus esse qui aperire possit? Ibid. p. 52,
58.

Bellarm. Apoc. 3. 20. I stand at the Door and knock; they at whose Heart the
Lord knocks, if they have not sufficient help to open, Why does the Lord
knock? or knows he not that they cannot open? Were he not a Fool that would
knock at a Neighbou^'s Door, if he knew certainly that there is no one within
who can open? Ibid. p. 52, 58.

Molina de concordia Disputat. 3. Asserimus auxilia praevementis and adjuvantis
gratiae, quae lege ordinaria viatoribus conferuntur, quod efficacia aut
inefficacia sint, pendere a libero consensu and cooperatione arbitrii nostri
cum illis; atque adeo in libera potestate nostra esse, vel illa efficacia
reddere, vel inefficacia. Citantur haec verba and refutantur a Matthaeo de
Respolis, Lib. 2. quaest. 1. Concl. 4. Becanus de auxiliis, part 2. cap. 3.
hanc habet conclusionem: si ergo quaeratur prima radix, quare haec gratia sit
efficax, illa inefficax, recurrendum est ad liberam cooperationem voluntatis:
Eadem (quamvis aliis verbis fucata) est sententia Suarez, Vasquez, and ipsius
etiam Bellarmini, etc. Ibid. p. 53, 54.

Molina's 3d dispute of Concord. We assert that Assistances both of preventing
and helping Grace, which by an ordinary Law is conferred on Viators, that they
be efficacious or inefficacious depends on the free Consent and Cooperation of
Free Will with them: and are so in our free Power to render them either
efficacious or inefficacious. These words are cited and refured by Matthew de
Respolis, lib. 2. quest. 1. concl. 4. Beca^s de auxiliis part 2. cap. 3. he
has this Conclusion; If therefore the first Root be sought, wherefore is this
Grace efficacious, that inefficacious, we must have recourse unto the free
cooperation of the Will: the same (tho dressed in other words) is the Opinion
of Suarez, Vasquez, and even of Bellarmine himself.

Bellarminus. Auxilium sufficiens ad salutem pro loco and tempore, mediate vel
immediate omnibus datur; iis qui usu rationis utuntur datur immediate; iis
autem qui rationis usum non habent, mediate, quoniam Parents eorum Baptismum
ipsis procurare possunt si volunt -- Bellarm. Auxilium sufficiens ac
necessarium ad vitanda peccata omnibus hominibus, and omni tempore, vel
immediate, vel mediate, a divina benignitate praestatur.

Bellarmine; Sufficient Assistance unto Salvation for place and time is
mediately or immediately given to all. It Is immediately given to them that have
the use of Reason: but to them mediately who have not the use of Reason,
because their Parents may, if they please, procure Baptism for them. --
Bellarm. Sufficient and necessary help to avoid Sin is from God's Benignity
bestowed to all Men, and always either immediately or mediately.

Protest. Videtur quidem haec propositio aliquid aliud sonare quam Pelagius
dicebat, dum omnia tribuit auxilio divino: sed verbis mutatis eadem sententia
retinetur. Si enim Pelagius cogitasset de auxilio alio quod omni homini, omni
tempore adest praeter illud quod possibilitatem naturae, and potestatem liberi
arbitrii vocabat, adeo insanus nunquam fuisset, ut sine ulla necessitate de
viribus naturae abstracte contenderet adversus auxilium quod a natura nunquam
separatur. Been igitur observat Bonaventur. in 2. d. 28. de pot. lib. arb. 7.
2. Hoc fuit quod decipit Pelagium, quod liberum arbitrium nunquam destituitur
omni gratia gratis data, and ipse posse gratiae attribuit ipsi naturae.
Infoelicitas fuit Pelagii, quod illo seculo nemo Catholicus docuit gratiam ad
peccata vitanda, aeque communem esse, ac est ipsa natura. Ibid. p. 64, 66, 67.

Protest. This Proposition seems truly no otherwise to speak than what the
Pelagian said, while he attributed every thing to divine Assistance; the same
Opinion but in other words is held: for if Pelagius had of another assistance
thought, which at all times is present with every Man, beside that which he
called the possibility of Nature and power of Free Will, he would never have
been so foolish, as without any necessity abstractedly plead for the power of
Nature against the assistance which is never separated from Nature. Bonaventure
therefore well observed in 2. d. 28. de pot. lib. arb. 7. 2. This was that
which deceived Pelagius, that Free Will is never destitute of all Grace freely
given, and he himself attributed the power of Grace to Nature it self. It was
the unhappiness of Pelagius, that in that Age no Catholic taught, that Grace
to avoid Sin is as equally common as Nature it self.

Baxterian.
NOte, That Mr. Baxter's speaking of the Covenant of Grace being made with all,
so as that all were and are under and within it, tho they never so much as
heard of it, or of Christ, the Do^trine of the Trinity, or the Scripture it
self; yet if they improve but the small Remams of the Light of a natural
Conscience, (the Quakers Christ and Doctrine) so as to perform the Conditions
of that whereof they never had the least inkling, they may be quakerwise saved,
for which he is brought in as speaking of the Covenant under this Head.

Omnibus spiritus sanctus gratia aliquali ipsis adest, qua nisi (...), ipsos
regeneraturus est. The holy Spirit in some Grace is present with all, which
Grace unless they abuse he would have regenerated them. Mr. Baxter' s Method.
Theol. Part 3. p. 7.

Plusquam probabile tamen est, quod in quantum unusquisque legis gratiae
subdi^s aliqualis foederis gratiae adhuc particeps est, in tantum eum auxilia
habere necessaria ad gratiam majorem aliquam obtinendam. Nemo enim sub foedere
gratiae etiam initialis est qui nullam omnino ejus foederis gratiam possidet.
Et nemo gratiam aliqualem possidet, qui non per eam ad meliora obtinenda
adjutus est. Et iamsi autem haec gratia non adhuc sufficit ad salutem,
sufficere tamen potuit ad quandam meliorationem -- Promulgatio editionis
perfectioris foederis gratiae, statum imperfectiorem finivit, ipsis quibus haec
promulgatio facta est: majora scilicet and praeceptis and conditioni and
promissis hujus perfectioris editionis insunt, quam in foedere initiali. At ubi
majora obtinent, minora (nisi in quantum majoribus inclusa) cessant. At ubi
editio perfectior nunquam promulgata est, imperfecta non cessat.

It is far more probable, that as much as every one is some sort of a Subject
of the Law of Grace, and as yet partaker of the Covenant of Grace, so much he
has of necessary Helps to obtain a greater degree of Grace: For no Man is
under the Covenant of even initial Grace, who altogether enjoys none of the
Grace of that Covenant, and no Man possesses any Grace who is not helped by it
to obtain better; but although this Grace suffices not as yet unto Salvation, yet
it may suffice unto a certain Melioration, or bettering the Person.

The Promulgation of the perfecter Edition of the Covenant of Grace, has
brought to an end the more imperfect state for them to whom this Promulgation
is made: there are even greater things belonging both to the Precepts and
Condition and Promises of this more perfect Edition than in the initial
Covenant. But where greater things are obtained, the less (unless so far as
included in the greater things) cease: But where the more perfect Edition is
never promulgated, the imperfect cease not. Ibid. p. 19.

At gratia omnis ad salutem sua natura tendit, and ad gradum aliquem erga
salutem promovendum, suo genere, sufficiens est; and quicunque mortalium
condemnabitur ob gratiae talis, ad meliorationem quandam suo genere
sufficientis, vel rejectionem, vel abusum, vel neglectum condemnabitur: Ergo
totum genus humanum per foedus gratiae initiale cum Adamo and Noe, in propiorem
salutis capacitatem positum fuit: Jam autem per peccata parentum sequentium
minus salutis capaces redduntur, non autem omnino incapaces, gratiam enim
foederis nimium foris fecerunt, and amiserunt, at foedus tamen non fit nullum,
aut abrogatum; neque tota foederis gratia illis cessavit: sub capacitate igitur
remotiore salutis adhuc manent; at non sub proxima. But all Grace in its own
nature tends to Salvation, and unto a certain degree toward the furthering
of Salvation, in its own kind sufficient; and whoever shall be condemned, he
shall be condemned either for the rejection, or abuse, or neglect of such Grace
that was sufficient in its own kind to make them better. Therefore all Mankind
by the initial Covenant of Grace with Adam and Noah, were put into a more
proper Capacity of Salvation: for now by the Sins of following Parents they are
rendered less capable of Salvation, but not altogether incapable; for they have
too much forfeited and lost the Grace of the Covenant, but yet the Covenant is
not null or abrogated, neither has all the Grace of the Covenant ceased unto
them; they therefore as yet abide under a more remote Capacity of Salvation,
but not under the nearest. Ibid. p. 22.

Quia omnino improbabile est ex natura rei, Deum opt. Max. totum mundum per
talem gratiae legem jam regere, quae tantum ad omnium fere condemnationem
sufficeret, and ad nullius omnino salutem -- quia si ante Christi (...) (...)
per annos circa qu^uor mill fides antea descri^ sufficiens ^t ad s^lutem, and
si tales fuere fideles extra Ecclesiam Judaicam (sicut ex instantiis
Melchisedeki and ejus subditorum, Jobi and ejus amicorum, filiorum Ismaelis,
Esavi, Keturae, etc. and Niniv^arum, etc. fit plusquam probabile) tunc idem de
exteris quibusdam adhuc judicandum est -- quia dicta sacrae scripturae plurima
sententiae huic adstipulantur, and nulla contradicunt. Act. 10. 34, 35. In omni
gente qui Deum timet and justitiam operatur, ab ipso acceptus est. Lege fidei
Noe, Rahab, and aliorum descriptionem, Heb. 11. Romans 2. 4, 6, 7. Bonitas Dei te
ducit ad poenitentiam -- qui unicuique tribuit secundum opera sua; illis qui
per patientem continuationem been agendo, quaerunt gloriam, honorem and
immortalitatem, vitam aeternam -- 14. Quando enim gentes quae legem non habent,
ex natura faciunt ea quae in lege sunt, hae legem non habentes, sibi ipsis lex
sunt, and legis opus eorum cordibus inscriptum commonstrant, conscientiis
ipsorum attestantibus, and cogitationibus ipsorum interim aut accusantibus aut
excusantibus. Act. 17. 27. Ut Deum quaerunt si forte palpando eum invenirent,
etiamsi ab unoquoquo nostrum non proc^l absit. -- Object. Act. 4. 12. Nullum
aliud nomen sub Coelo datum est, per quod salvi fiamus -- Resp. Verum hoc: non
alter est inter Deum and homines Mediator, non alter Messiah expectandus: non
aliud pro peccatis sacrificium est; neque salutis illius spes ^lla restat, qui
Christum incarnatum ipsi praedicatum respuit. Attamen qui Evangelium nunquam
audivere per idem nomen, id est, per eundem Mediatorem salutem obtinere
possunt, sine fide vel notitia ejus incarnationis, mortis, resurrectionis, si
insapientiam and misericordiam divinam, mundum a peccatis and morte redimentem
and salvantem, credant, and ea omnia credant and faciant quae per foedus
gratiae initiale necessaria fac^a fuerunt.

Because it is altogether improbable from the nature of the thing that the great
God should now govern all the World by such a Law of Grace, which should only
be unto the Condemnation in a manner of all, and altogether unto the Salvation
of none. -- Because, if before the Incarnation of Christ for about four
thousand Years, the Faith before described was sufficient unto Salvation; and
if such were the Believers out of the Jewish Church (as is more than probable
from the instance of Melchisedeck and his Subjects, of Job and his Friends, the
Sons of Ishmael, Esau, Ketura, etc. and of the Ninivites, etc.) then the same
thing must be judged of some that are as yet out; because very many Phrases of
holy Scripture favor this Opinion, and none contradict it. Acts 10. 34, 35. In
every Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of
him. Read the description of the Faith of Noah, Rahab, and of others, Heb. 11.
Romans 2. 4, 6, 7. The Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance. -- Who
rendereth to every Man according to his Work: to them who by patient continuing
in well-doing, seek Glory, Honor and Immortality, Life eternal -- 14. For when
the Gentiles who have not the Law, by Nature do those things which are in the
Law, these not having the Law, are a Law to themselves, and show the Work of
the Law written in their Hearts, their Consciences bearing witness, and their
Thoughts in the mean while accusing or excusing. Acts 17. 27. That they may
seek after God, if happily they might find him by feeling, although he is not far
from any of us --

Obj. Act. 4. 12. There is no other Name given under Heaven by which we may be
saved. -- Answ. This is true: there is not another Mediator between God and
Men; not another Messiah expected; not another Sacrifice for Sin: neither
remains any hope of his Salvation who refuses Christ incarnated preached to
him. But nevertheless, they who never heard the Gospel may obtain Salvation by
the same Name, that is, by the same Mediator, without Faith or knowledge of his
Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, if they believe in the Divine Wisdom and
Mercy redeeming and saving the World from Sin and Death; and if they believe
and do all those things which were by the initial Covenant of Grace made
necessary. Ibid. p. 23.

Sapientis Christiani non est, aut de jure Christi aut Mundi redempti
beneficiis diminute, aut contemptim vel loqui, vel cogitare, aut etiam populi
peculiaris majora privilegia, aliorum aliis exaequando, vilipendere.

It becomes not wise Christians either to speak or think diminutively, or
contemptibly of the Right of Christ, or of the Benefits of the redeemed World,
or either to disesteem the greater Privileges of a peculiar People by equalling
with them those of others. Ibid. p. 68.

And here the first thing to be enquired after is, What Law of God the World
that hears not of Christ, is now under, as the Rule of Duty and of Judgment.
And then, 2. To enquire, Whether they so keep that Law as to be saved by it? We
can say nothing to the second, without the first. -- And we have here nothing
to doubt, but, 1. Whether they are under any Law or none? 2. If any, whether it
be the Law of Innocence as made with Adam, or the Law of Grace? 3. And if the
Law of Grace, whether of the first or second Edition? And, 1. It is certain,
that they are under a Law (and not only under a Physical Government, as a Ship
at Sea, or Brutes are) for else God were not their Ruler, and they his
Subjects, so much as by Right and Obligation; and then they are bound to no
Duty, nor in hope of any Reward, nor in danger of any Punishment for
Disobedience; for where there is no Law, there is no Transgression. -- It is
certain, that they are not under the Rule of the Covenant of Innocence made to
Adam, or the Law of Innocence, as containing the Precept, premiant and penal
Parts, which is the same with the Covenant as offered. This I proved before:
(Tho I was long ignorant how far that Covenant was repealed, till Mr. Lawson's
Papers, which I labored to confute, did begin to enlighten me.) God now says
not to Man [I give thee Life on condition thou be perfectly innocent and
perfectly obedient:] Nor does he say [I command thee to be perfectly innocent,
sinless, and obedient, that thou may live:] for no Man is a Subject capable
of such a Command or Promise, being already a Sinner. -- If any should think
that they are under the bare preceptive part of the Law of Innocence, with the
penal part, without any Promise, or premiant part or hope of Life, this is
certainly a mistake. -- Because, 1. God has no such Law, nor never had, which
has no Promise or premiant part, and is not in a Covenant-form: what he does
by the Devils belongs not to our Question; but as to Men, they must be under
a Covenant of Works or of Grace. And it were a hard Conceit to think, that the
far greatest part of Mankind had never any Means to use for their Salvation,
nor any thing to do for it, but were under a mere Sentence of Despair and
Damnation, as the Devils are, without any offer of help, or hope, and
consequently that none of them all are guilty of refusing any such Mercy, or
neglecting any such Means and Duty. 2. The very nature of Law and Government
tells us, That if God commanded any Duty, it is that the Subject may be the
better for it; and he never says to any [obey me perfectly, and thou shall be
never the better for it.]

Besides, the very Precept is not in force in that sense as it stood in the Law
of Innocence, for so it bound only innocent Man to keep his Innocence: But God
says not, Keep that which thou have lost. Obj. God is not bound to change his
Law if Man sin. Answ. I answered this before, that God is not the Changer: But
the Law will not continue to be a Law, but by continuing to signify God's
governing Will: And it cannot so signify his governing Will, when there is no
Subject to be a capable terminus; so that it ceased, cessante capacitate
subditi, vel cessante termino. To say that the Law still signifies what God
would have had Man do while he was capable, is true, but that says no more but
that [it was once a Law, and now is none:] for so it may do by the dead, yea,
were they annihilated; even tell others what God would have had them do, but
this is not a ruling Act, but lex transit in sententiam. And to say, that at
least the Law binds a Sinner to perfect Obe-dience for the time to come, is
to say, that it binds not as the Law of Innocence, but of some other Law, of
which we are enquiring.

And it is a clear Truth (before proved) [or ever was, or will be] That God
brought all Mankind in Adam under a Law and Covenant of Grace, founded in the
Promise of the Victory of the Woman's Seed: And his dealing with all Men ever
since does fully confirm it. And this Law made to Mankind in Adam and Noah, was
never repealed to the World, but perfected by a perfecter Edition to those that
have the Gospel.

Having proved that it is a Law of Grace that all the World is to be ruled and
judged by, it remains to be enquired, whether any of them that have not the
Gospel, do keep the Conditions of this Law, and so are justified by it, and
saved? To which I answer, 1. That being a matter of Fact, it is not of so great
importance for us to be certain of it, as some imagine: And who can be certain
of the Affirmative, unless the Scripture affirm it; when if we knew all the
World, one Man cannot be certain of another's sincerity? And much less can any
be certain of the Negative, without Scripture-negation, seeing no Man can know
every Man in the World, and every Heart. 2. But it is exceeding probable, at
least, that God would never govern many hundred parts of the World (compared to
the Jews) before Christ's Incarnation, by a Law of Grace, which yet no Person
should ever have effectual Grace to keep as far as was necessary to his
Salvation. Mr. Baxter's End of Doctr. Controv. chap. 16.. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 28, 29.

Obj. Do you not thus confound the World and the Church? Answ. No: I ask you,
did he confound them before Christ's Incarnation, who thought that more than
the Jews were saved? Certainly no; no more do I now.

The word [Church] is sometime taken so properly and strictly, as to signify
only those that are under the Covenant of Peculiarity: And so the Jews before
Christ's Birth, and so Christians since, make up the Church (and some few
perhaps before the Jews Covenant): But sometimes it is taken more largely for
the Kingdom of God, for all that are in a state of Salvation under the several
Editions of the Law of Grace: And so Job and his Friends, and Melchisedeck, and
many others before, and all now that love God and Holiness, Sincerity, are of
the Church. Accordingly by the [World] is meant, 1. All Men as under the
Redeemer's Law of Grace, antecedently to their consent; and so all the World
belongs to God's Kingdom, as subditi obligati. 2. Rebels that refuse Consent,
and so are of the Kingdom by Obligation, but condemnable for Rebellion: And
these are the [World] in the worst sense. 3. Consenting Subjects under the
common Law of Grace, who yet were not Jews, nor are not in the Covenant of
Peculiarity; and are in a state of Salvation, tho not in the Church of the
Peculiar (as the Subjects of Melchisedeck, Shem, etc.) and so are both in the
Church and in the World in several senses. Ibid.. 35, 36, 37.

The reason why we use the word Condition is, because it best suits with Man's
relation to God (or rather, according to our Author' s Divinity, creates and
gives it a being) in his present dealings with us, as his Subjects in trial for
Eternity -- and own that all is of Gift, tho given in an order suitable to our
Condition, as Subjects in a state of Trial -- whether the Law be a Rule of
Duty. This the Doctor affirms, as I also do, tho he denies any Threatening or
Promise to back God's Law as to the Elect; nor whether the Elect ought to be
holy, and will be holy: This the Doctor owns, but he places it wholly on the
Decree and Christ's Care, (mark that word!) denying that God has required it
as indispensibly necessary to our inheriting any Blessing promised to the
Elect, and judges Christ has done all for us, and enjoineth nothing on us to
do (not beside his own special Operation, wherein the Care of Christ is
eminently manifested) in order to any good thing. Mr. Dan. Williams' s Gospel
Truth stated, etc. p. 46, 107. (So that he makes special Grace, as the Papist
and Quaker do, in its Essence and Privileges both as to Order, Use, and
Termination, wholly to depend upon our improving or nonimproving of common or
natural Grace.) Thus he proceeds, that Regeneration and effectual calling must
be before either our sight of or Union with Christ, which is no more than a
bare moral Reformation upon the awakenings of a natural unrenewed Conscience.
-- An enlightened unregenerate Soul cannot act toward Christ (when he is first
presented to its view) below these Instances: It Is not a regenerate Heart that
admits actings contrary to any of these; it is a regenerate Heart, it will
discover it self in each of these (speaking before of assenting, trus^
consenting, accepting of, ^ing upon Christ, etc.) A^s, upon the offer of Christ
as a Savior, (...). 9. 6. Sure a regenerate Principle includes a dispo^tion to
all these Acts, and the first view of Christ will excite and attract them. --

Whether the Soul of a Sinner, as to its habitual disposition and purpose, is
under the reigning Power of Enmity, Rebellion and Filthiness, till after it
has a saving Interest in Christ? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny,
affirming this Disposition is altered in our effectual Vocation, and there can
be no true coming to Christ for Pardon, and especially for Sanctification
without that purpose. -- Thou feast what a great change is made on the Heart by
effectual calling, and that our Answer to this Call (which lies in a Consent
answerable to this Change in the Faculties) is the means of our Interest in the
offered Grace, which is Christ and his Benefits (which is quite contrary to 2
Cor. 5. 17. Joh. 15. 4, 5.) Ibid. p. 65, 71, 72.

To have some moral Power to know, and desire, and practice some moral Good, it
seems is inseparable from Man in via. --

Tho some would have more Power ascribed to Nature, and others appropriate more
to Grace, yet in this it is no Controversy how much is to be attributed to God;
for both Nature and Grace, and the Powers of both are totally from God. Mr.
Eaxt. End of Doctr. Controv. chapter 9.. 5, 7. (Because God is the God of Nature,
and manages our Natures in the exercise of all Moral Actions; therefore they
are the same identically with special Grace, which appears clearly from what
was above recited out of this Author in the same Piece, p. 17, 18. That the
Quarrel between Austin and Pelagius, etc. was mostly about either unsearchable
things, which neither side understood, or about ambiguous words, etc.) and
hence he tells us -- The word [moral Power] signifies, 1. Sometimes a Power to
moral Actions, (and so natural Power in Man is also moral in some degree.) 2.
Sometimes a holy Disposition, especially in the Will, to such holy moral
Actions, which is the rectitude of our natural Powers, or the Health of them in
a saving degree or sort, and is the Gift of Grace since Sin departed. 3. Most
frequently I use the word for such a degree of God's helping or healing Influx
or Grace, as is short of a habit for promptitude and facility, but yet puts,
the Soul in such a disposition, by which Man can do the Act (and it may come to
pass without more Grace whether it do or not) which the Dominicans call
sufficient Grace, and I rather call necessary Grace. 4. Sometimes it is meant
(as causa moralis) for that which is Power reputatively. -- Otherwise all the
Sin of Adam and the World would be resolved into the necessitating Will and
work of God, and so all Faith would be subverted.

Therefore Man's Will was such a Faculty as could be a causa prima of the moral
Modification, or Specification of its own Acts; not a causa prima simpliciter,
but thus, secundum quid: for else God must be the causa prima of Sin, which is
the ill Modification of that Act.

I know that to Nature the Reasonings of our late Infidels to prove, that
every. Act of the Will is as truly necessitated as the Motions of a Clock, do
seem plausible and hard* to answer; because it seems strange, that in any
mode of Act Man should be a first cause of it, and that a C^atures Act should
have no superior Cause in any mode: But on the other side the Evidence is
cogent. 1. That God is able to make a self-determining Power that can thus do;
for it is no Contradiction. (He might have said, because the Socinians say, to
uphold the Deity of Christ, whom they blasphemously deny to be God by Nature,
that he was made God.) 2. That it is congruous, that below the happy race of
confirmed Spirits, there should be a race of such undetermined free Agents left
much to their own self-determining Power. 3. And Experience persuades us de
facto, that so it is. 4. And they that deny it, must unavoidably make God the
prime cause of all Sin (i. e. lest he should be deemed the prime cause of all
special, effectual by a creating Power, and of all saving Grace; for here lies
the diverting and cautionary Craft, since if he be acknowledged as the prime
efficient cause of the one in the Will of Man, of course he would make thee
believe he must be so in the other) in a higher than it is or can be ascribed
to Satan: And is all this with the rejection of Christianity more eligible,
than the Concession that God can and does make a Creature with such
self-determining Free Will, as can, as a first cause of its modified Act, sin
without God's Predetermination? Mr. Baxt. ibid.. 11, 17, 18, 19.

The Will is still a self-determining Principle, supposing, 1. God's necessary
Influx, as he is the first cause of Nature. 2. And the being and convenient
position of Objects. 3. And the perception of the Intellect. 4. And the
concourse of necessary concomitant second Causes. Ibid. chapter 14.. 3.

Certissime igitur datur in rerum natura potentia vera, seu ut dicitur,
sufficiens, quae non semper reducitur in actum: vel gratia datur aliquando quae
dicitur sufficiens (vel proprie magis necessaria, utpote sine qua effectus esse
non potuit, and per quam esse potuit) quae tamen nunquam actualiter efficit;
vel datur gratia efficax ad veram potentiam, quae non est efficax ad actum,
etc. Mr. Baxt. Method. Theol. Part. 1. p. 271.

That there is such a thing in Nature as a true, or, as it is called,
sufficient Power given, is most certain, which is not always brought into Act:
or Grace is sometime given, which is called sufficient (or more properly
necessary, so that without which the Effect cannot be, and by which it may be)
which nevertheless never actually effects: or, there is Grace efficacious
unto a true Power given, which unto Act is not efficacious, etc.

I shall here recite somewhat out of Mr. Durham upon the Revelation, tho part
of it quoted before concerning Mr. Baxter.

He asserts, that the sincerity of saving Grace as saving lies materially, not
in the bare nature thereof, but in the degree; not in the degree considered
absolutely in it self, but comparatively as it is prevalent against its
contrary, that is, when Love adhereth more to God than any other thing, and
such like, which he endeavors to show both in the infused Habits and in the
Acts of saving Grace: Saints everlasting Rest, (...) p. 222. and p. 235. does
assert, That in loving God and Christ as Mediator, there is no more than a
gradual difference between the regenerate and unregenerate; and in the end, he
does load the common Opinion with many dangerous Con^quents -- and therefore
expressly asserteth, p. 235. that there is no more but a gradual difference
betwixt the Grace that is in a regenerate Man, and the love that he has to
God, and the common Grace and Love that may be in one unregenerate; which would
seem to say, that the one may love God on the same consideration and account,
and from the same Motives that the other may, especially considering that he
does extend this mere gradual difference both to the Habits and Acts: and so
the Question here comes to this, If there be any other difference than a
gradual difference to be enquired for: And this is that which we assert, that
there is beside any gradual difference a difference in kind (that is, in
respect of the former Qualifications) betwixt saving and common Grace, and that
in our search the one is to be enquired for with the other; so that no degree
simply can quiet the Mind, except it be so qualified as aforesaid. And we
conceive that the Instances, Reasons, Similitudes and Scriptures that are
adduced by that Reverend Author to illustrate and confirm his Opinion, will do
no more but this, to wit, show that when a gracious Person is acting
rationally, God's Interest will be prevalent with him in degree, and that ever
it should be so; and that it is most useful for a Believer's clearness that it
be so in a high degree: All which are without question; but they will no ways
exclude the Qualifications mentioned, but rather do presuppose them; as for
Example, p. 231, 232. he says, That sincere Sorrow must be at such a degree
that it prevail over our delight in Sin and love to it, else it cannot be
saving: although this be true, yet can any say that this is enough except the
principal Motive, etc. from which it proceeds, and by which it is qualified,
be considered, as was formerly hinted? Again, p. 234, he says, True Love to
the Brethren consists in this degree, that it love them above our Honor and
Wealth, etc. And (says he) what did the Love of some in Q. Mary' s days want
but a more intense degree to make it prevail over Love to their Houses, to
their Honor, Safety, etc. that it might be sincere? Beside this intense
degree, there might be wanting a right Principle for bringing forth of Love,
and a right account upon which to love them, without which the hazarding of
Lives and Estates both for them, had never been accounted sincere Love before
God; and with which the giving unto them a Cup of cold Water as in the name of
a Disciple, is, Mat. 10. Mr. Durham on the Revelation, p. 107, 109. All this
Baxterian Sanctification is that which runs through the whole of Mr. Dan.
Williams's Pieces as a Prerequisite Regeneration, Faith, Holiness, Obedience,
etc. unto our actual Union with Jesus Christ.

Quaker.
MEn must know Christ, i. e. in his Light, which Cornelius was in, which is his
Day that Abraham saw, whether they ever see his fleshly Person, yea or nay,
before they can know God, who is known in nothing but his own Light, the Son,
who is known in nothing but his own Light, the Spirit, that comes from and
leads to him; so that to say as a Professor of note said in a public Assembly
in Ireland, of a Friend of Truth, called a Quaker, whom I know, having heard
him speak, This Man knows much of God, but little of Christ, is little less
than a Bull that savours, for the natural literal Knowledge of both, of little
less than a spiritual Ignorance in the Mystery of both God and Christ. -- And
this gives me the hint to make mention of another Argument: That this Light is
not natural which is in all, viz. because it comes from God and Christ into
every Creature, not by Creation, as the rational Soul, and its Faculties of
Understanding, Will, Mind, Memory, Conscience it self do, and such Properties
as are de esse hominis, whether constitutive or consecutive, so that a Man is
no Man at all, or has not the essential form of a Man, as distinct from the
outward B^utum, or Beasts of the field; for a Man may remain Phusicos, a
natural Man, or rather Psucichos (as the word is in many places, where rendered
natural, as well as where sensual, 1 Cor. 2. 1 Cor. 15. James 3. Jude 15.) a
true animal Soul-ly Man, a Man that has a Soul rational and sensitive, tho in
its Faculties defaced, clouded, darkened, benighted, and lost from the Lord, and
his Light now withdrawn from him, even after the Light is hid from his Eyes (as
it was ever at last from such, as to any Life by it, who would not be led to
Life by it while they had it; witness the Pharisees, and Jerusalem) and after
he remains now irrecoverable for want of Light to the primitive pure Nature,
which only loves and obeys the Law, and delights truly in the Light. --
The Light then, I say, comes from God and Christ into the Mind and Conscience,
not as the Soul, and its essential Faculties of Understanding, Will, etc. do,
which with the org^nic^l Body, make that one Compositum ca^l'd M^n, that may be
either in Unity and Communion with God and Christ, or in Enmity and Separation
from them, according as he walks, or walks not in the Light that shines from
them, but by way of immediate infusion from them into the Mind and Conscience
(which of it self is a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and destitute as to the
Knowledge of God, without a measure of it) as a thing distinct and separable
from the Man in whom it is, and a Witness against him, when he runs from the
Will of God revealed to him in it, tho eternally one with God and Christ; from
whom it shines and flows (and not ex principiis naturae, as I. O. says) with
whom it ever sides, let the Man go whither he will, never consenting to any,
but condemning all Iniquity committed by him, and counselling continually
(whether heeded or no) before hand against it: And, lastly, from whom it is as
unchangeably inseparable, as the light Beams and Rays of the Sun are from the
Sun it self, from whence they shine, with which they are in conjunction still,
whether this or that part of the World be enlightened by it, or by the Moon's
interposing eclipsed from it, yea or no. Mr. Sam. Fisher' s Testimony of Truth
exalted, p. 609.

Is the Light in America then any more insufficient to lead ^s Followers to
God, than the Light in Europe, Asia, Africa, the other three parts of the
World? I have ever looked upon the Light in all Men (since I began to look to
it in my self) as one and the self same Light in all where it is, in sort and
kind, tho different in degree and measure, which varies not the Nature of any
thing, and that (according to the measure of it, and in such wise as it is
attended to withal) it shows the same things in all Men, as to the Mystery,
Substance and Spirituality of them, tho the outward History of this in an
outward Letter, some may be better skilled therein than some. --

I wot how Cornelius came to be accepted in his Prayers and Alms, as a Man
truly fearing God, before by an outward Ministry he ever heard of Christ
incarnate, dying, rising, ascending, interceding, etc. (after all these things
were outwardly and actually transacted also) since all you agree, and we with
you, that out of the Knowledge of Christ, the Light, there is no acceptance at
all with God, nor in any other Name, either Justification or Salvation. Was it
not in his Obedience to the Light he had, which came from Christ the Light, tho
as yet he knew him not after the Flesh? And by what Light did they who wrote of
Christ's Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. see them before they
wrote, as some did, viz. Abraham, who saw his Day before any History or Letter
of your Scripture at all was written? Ibid. p. 696.

Some called him a Holy Spirit, as Seneca, Epist. 41. who said, There is a holy
Spirit in us, as we treat him. Cicero calls it an innate Light, in his Book
de Republica, cited by Lactantius, 6. Instit. where he calls this Right Reason
given unto all, constant and eternal, calling unto Duty by commanding, and
deterring from Deceit by forbidding: Adding, that it cannot be abrogated,
neither can any be freed from it, neither by Senate nor People; that it is one
eternal, and the same always to all Nations; so that there is not one at Rome,
and another at Athens; whosoever obey it not, must flee from himself, and in this
is greatly tormented, although he should escape all other Punishment. Plotinus
also calls him Light, saying, that as the Sun cannot be known but by its own
Light, so God cannot be known but with his own Light: and as the Eye cannot see
the Sun, but by receiving its Image; so Man cannot know God, but by receiving
his Image; and that it behoved Man to come to Purity of Heart before he could
know God; calling him also Wisdom, (cursed Blasphemy) a Name frequently given
him in Scripture; see Prove. 1. 20 to the end, and Prove. 8. 9, 34. where Wisdom
is said to cry, entreat, and invite all to come unto her, and learn of her. And
what is this Wisdom but Christ? Hence such as came among the Heathen to forsake
Evil, and cleave to Righteousness, were called Philosophers, that is, Lovers of
Wisdom: They knew this Wisdom was nigh unto them, and that the best Knowledge of
God and Divine Mysteries, was by the Inspiration of the Wisdom of God.
Phocylides affirmed, that the word of the Wisdom of God was the best. -- And
much more of this kind might be instanced, by which it appears they knew
Christ, and by his Work working in them, were brought from Unrighteousness to
Righteousness, and to love that Power by which they felt themselves redeemed;
so that, as says the Apostle, they show the Work of the Law written in their
Hearts, and did the things contained in the Law, and therefore as a^ (...) of
the Law are, were no doubt justified, and ^ave (...) by the Power of (...) in
them. Mr. (...) Apology, p. 132, 133.

This is the Universal or Catholic Spirit, by which many are called from all
the four Corners of the Earth, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

By this the secret Life and Virtue of Jesus is conveyed into many that are
afar off, even as by the Blood that runs into the Veins and Arteries of the
natural Body, the Life is conveyed from the Head and Heart unto the extremest
Parts. There may be Members therefore of this Catholic Church both among
Heathens, Turks, Jews, and all the several sorts of Christians, Men and Women
of Integrity and Simplicity of Heart, who, tho blinded in something in their
Understanding, and perhaps burdened with the Superstitions and Formality of the
several Sects in which they are engrossed, yet being upright in their Hearts
before the Lord, chiefly aiming and laboring to be delivered from Iniquity,
and loving to follow Righteousness, are by the secret touches of this holy
Light in their Souls, enlivened and quickened, thereby secretly united to God,
and therethrough become true Members of this Catholic Church. Now the Church
in this respect has been in being in all Generations, for God never wanted
some such Witnesses for him, tho many times slighted, and not much observed by
this World. And therefore this Church, tho still in being, has been oftentimes
as it were invisible, in that it has not come under the Observation of the Men
of this World, being, as says the Scripture, Jer. 3. 14. One of a City, and
two of a Family. And yet, tho the Church thus considered, may be as it were hid
from wicked Men, as not then gathered into a visible Fellowship, yea and not
observed by some that are the Members of it, yet may there notwithstanding many
belong to it, as when Elias complained he was left alone, 1 Kings 19. 18. Ibid.
p. 192.

Light (says Tho. Lawson) is the same in him that hates it, and in him that
loves it. And again, Grace is the same in him that turns it into
Lasciviousness, as in him that is taught by it. The same Seed as fell on the
good ground, fell on the Highway, stony and thorny Ground. Lip of Truth, etc.
p. 45, 47.

The Talent hid in the Earth (quoth Alexander Parker) is the same with those
improved. Testimony of God, p. 12.

By what is the new Birth wrought, if not by following the Light of Christ in
the Conscience? E. B. True Faith, etc. p. 19. To this Mr. Stalham answers in
his Appendix to his Charge against the Quakers Reviler rebuked. To inform the
ignorant we teach out of Scripture, that the Newbirth is not wrought by our
following Work, but by God's preventing Grace, casting the Promise into the
Heart, and quickening the Seed by the incoming of the Spirit, Jam. 1. 18. with
Joh. 3. 5. Regeneration is not acquired by our Acts, but infused of God by his
Will and Power, Joh. 1. 12. p. 5, 8.

Whose Light (i. e. the suffocated remains of the Light of Nature) is in the
midst of all this Darkness, tho the Darkness comprehend it not. But as many as
repent of their following this way of self Wisdom and Knowledge, and come to
stand still, to such he shows his Salvation, and his Kingdom near at hand,
which the Serpent, while they follow him, does put afar off. James Naylor's
Love to the Lost, p. 4.

And this Word that reconcileth is not afar off, it is not in Heaven, that any
should say, Who shall go up for us, and bring it down to us, that we may hear
it and do it? So then the Indians and Americans shall not perish for want of
the Bible which we have here in England; neither is it beyond the Sea, that any
should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us? etc. -- True indeed, all are not
sanctified and made perfect by him, although this was the end of his coming (that
he might finish Transgression, and make an end of Sin) and this was the Will of
the Father in sending him, to wit, our through Sanctification) but this is not
because all have not a knowledge and manifestation of his Light (or spiritual
appearance of him) in themselves, but because all do not believe in and obey
this his Appearance. Now that People may attain to what knowledge may be had of
God by the inward manifestation of the Light of his Son (which is a measure of
his Spirit) in their Hearts, this is clearly proved by the Apostle, Romans 1. 19.
That which may be known of God (says he) is manifest in Men; for God has
showed it unto them. For the Lord of the whole Earth, who is the Preserver of
Men, he is impartial in his Love to all Mankind, not only to them in
Christendom (so called) who have the Scriptures amongst them, but his Love is
extended unto all People, in one Land as well as in another; for his Spirit is
not inseparable from the Scriptures (as some suppose) yet would I not be
thought to undervalue the Scriptures any whit, for I have very venerable
thoughts of them, and a reverential esteem for them, as being holy Writings:
but I dare not consine all Means for Man's Salvation in them, because the Lord
has not confined himself to them, but has left himself a Witness in every
Conscience, which Witness is a spiritual manifestation of his Son, the Savior
of the World, etc. Mrs. Elizab. Bathurst Truth's Vindication, p. 82, 102.

Let us then observe, that this Seed of the Kingdom, this saving, supernatural
and sufficient Word was really sown in the stony, thorny Ground, and by the
wayside, where it did not profit, but became useless as to these Grounds: It
was, I say, the same Seed that was sown in the good Ground. It is then the fear
of Persecution, and deceitfulness of Riches (as Christ himself interprets the
Parable) which hinders this Seed to grow in the Hearts of many: Not but that
in its own nature it is sufficient, being the same with that which grows up
and prospers in the Hearts of those who receive it. So that, tho all are not
saved by it, yet there is a Seed of Salvation planted and sown in the Hearts of
all, by God, which would grow up and redeem the Soul, if it were not choked
and hindered. Mr. Barclay' s Apology, p. 115. --

We understand not Men simply, as having Grace in them, as a Seed (which we
indeed affirm all have in a measure) but we understand Men that are gracious,
leavened by it into the nature thereof, etc. Ibid. p. 214.

This is a Maxim engraven in every Man's Heart naturally, that no Man is bound
to that which is impossible. Since then Christ and his Apostles have commanded
us to keep all the Commandments, and to be perfect in this respect, it is
possible for us so to do -- because we receive the Gospel and Law thereof
(here is a right Baxterian, the Law of the Gospel, with his new Law) for that
effect, and it is expressly promised to us, as we are under Grace, -- Romans 6. 14.
chap. 8. 3. for, if this were not a Condition both requisite, necessary and
attainable under the Gospel, there were no difference betwixt the bringing in
of a better hope, and the Law, which made nothing perfect, etc. Ibid. p. 176.

From whence it appears, that tho many receive not the Light (as the Darkness
comprehends it not) nevertheless this saving Light shines in all, that it may
save them. Ibid. p. 113.

That it is by this Light, Seed, or Grace, that God works the Salvation of all
Men, and many come to partake of the Benefit of Christ's Death and Salvation
purchased by him. By the inward and effectual Operations of which, as many
Heathens have come to be partakers of the Promises, who were not of the Seed of
Abraham after the Flesh; so may some now, to whom God has rendered the
Knowledge of the History impossible, come to be saved by Christ. Having already
proved, that Christ has died for all, that there is a day of Visitation given
to all, during which Salvation is possible unto them, and that God has
actually given a measure of saving Grace and Light unto all, preached the
Gospel to and in them, and placed the word of Faith in their Hearts, the Matter
of this Proposition may seem to be proved. Mr. Barclay, ibid. p. 120.

To whom the Gospel, the Power of God unto Salvation, is manifest, they may be
saved, whatever outward Knowledge they want: But this Gospel is preached in
every Creature, in which is certainly comprehended many that have not the
outward Knowledge: Therefore of those many may be saved. --

Tit. 2. 11. Than which nothing can be more clear, it comprehending both the
parts of the Controversy: 1. It testifies that it is no natural Principle or
Light, but says plainly, it brings Salvation. 2. It says not, that it has
appeared to a few, but unto all Men. Ibid. p. 125, 126.

That God, who out of his infinite Love, sent his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ,
into the World, who tasted Death for every Man, has given to every Man,
whether Jew or Gentile, Turk or Scythian, Indian or Barbarian, of whatsoever
Nation, Country or Place, a certain day or time of Visitation, during which day
or time it is possible for them to be saved, and to partake of the fruit of his
Death. -- That for this end God has communicated and given unto every Man a
measure of the Light of his own Son, a measure of Grace, or a measure of the
Spirit. -- That God in and by this Light and Seed, invites, calls, exhorts and
strives with every Man, in order to save them; which, as it is received, and
not resisted, works the Salvation of all, even of those who are ignorant of the
Death and Sufferings of Christ, and of Adam's Fall, both by bringing them to a
sense of their own Misery, and to be sharers in the Sufferings of Christ
inwardly, and by making them partakers of his Resurrection, etc. Ibid. p. 89,
90. As the Grace and Light in all, is sufficient to save all, and, of its own
nature, would save all; so it strives and wrestles with all for to save them:
he that resists its striving is the cause of his own Condemnation; he that
resists it not, it becomes his Salvation; so that in him that is saved, the
working is of the Grace, and not of the Man, and it is a Passiveness rather than
an Act; tho afterward (i. e. when we are restored unto Adam' s state before
the Fall) as Man is wrought upon, there is a Will raised in him, by which he
comes to be a Co-worker with the Grace: for, according to that of Augustine, he
that made us without us, will not save us without us. So that the first step is
not by Man's working, but by his not contrary working (i. e. he is so civil, as
not to suffer any of his Corruptions to disturb the Work, which I take to be no
small part of the Work.) And we believe, that at these singular seasons of
every Man's Visitation abovementioned, as Man is wholly unable of himself to
work with the Grace, neither can he move one step out of the natural Condition,
until the Grace lay hold upon him; so it is possible to him to be passive, and
not to resist it, as it is also possible for him to resist it: So we say, the
Grace of God works in and upon Man's Nature, which, tho of it self wholly
corrupted and defiled, and prone to the evil, yet is capable to be wrought upon
by the Grace of God, even as Iron, tho a hard and cold Metal, of it self may be
warmed and sostned by the heat of the Fire, and Wax melted by the Sun: And as
Iron or Wax when removed from the Fire or Sun, returns to its former
condition of Coldness and Hardness; so Man's Heart, as it resists or retires
from the Grace of God, returns to its former condition again. Mr. Barclay,
ibid. p. 101, 102. --

In this respect then, as he is in the Seed, which is in all Men, we have said
Christ is in all Men, and have preached and directed all Men to Christ in them,
who lies crucified in them by their Sins and Iniquities, that they may look
upon him whom they have pierced, and repent; whereby he that now lies as it
were slain and buried in them, may come to be raised, and have Dominion in
their Hearts over all. Ibid. p. 98.

Object. There is no Name under Heaven by which Salvation is known, but by the
Name JESUS: therefore they (not knowing this) cannot be saved. I answer; Tho
they know it not outwardly, yet, if they know it inwardly, by feeling the
Virtue and Power of it, the Name Jesus indeed (which signifies a Savior) to
free them from Sin and Iniquity in their Hearts, they are saved by it. I
confess there is no other Name to be saved by; but Salvation lies not in the
literal, but in the experimental knowledge; albeit those that have the literal
Knowledge, are not saved by it without this real experimental Knowledge; yet
those that have the real Knowledge may be saved without the external. -- -- How
many are injured by Adam's Fall, that know nothing of ever there being such a
Man in the World, or of his eating the forbidden Fruit? Why may they not then
be saved by the Gift and Grace of Christ in them, making them righteous and
holy, tho they know not distinctly how that was purchased unto them by the
Death and Sufferings of Jesus that was crucified at Jerusalem, especially
seeing God has made that Knowledge simply impossible to them? Ibid. p. 128.
(See the Confidence of this Author, p. 91. where, like the Baxterian, he would
wash himself clean from Pelagianism, Semi-pelagianism, Socinianism, etc. as Mr.
Dan. Williams at Pinners Hall, which he gives an account of in the close of his
Gospel Truth, etc.)

Because we call all Men to the Light within, their own Consciences, and to
take heed to that, as ever they intend to enter into Life, assuring them, that
by the leadings of the Light, if they will, they may come to God, and work out
their Salvation, and escape the Condemnation that is to come; they make People
believe, as if we held that all Men in the Fall had of themselves a Free Will,
and a Power of their own (without God) to save themselves, and without any
special spiritual or supernatural Grace or Gift of God, even by their own
natural Light, which flows from the Principles of mere Nature, to help,
deliver, and redeem themselves; and as if we did destroy all that free Grace,
great Goodness, and rich Mercy of God, of whose Mercy and Grace only it is, and
not of themselves, that they can be saved. Whereas we ascribe all the Glory of
our own and every Man's Salvation to God alone, and his mere Mercy and free
Grace, which is, and alone is sufficient thereunto, and not to any Man, nor any
thing at all in Man, that is of Man, and not rather the free Gift of God to
him, saying, That it is not in Man without the Gift and Grace of God, either to
guide or to bring himself to Salvation, nor in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God only that shows Mercy: And that Light of his in every Man's
Conscience, even in the Heathens, which these Men in the Cloudiness of their
own Consciences, which come not to the Light that is in themselves, call
natural, we say is that special Gift of God's own Grace, every degree of which
is sufficient to help, heal and save him that takes good heed to it, and to
lead him forth that follows it (as it increases on him that does so) to the
Light of Life: yea, it is a measure of that Spirit of his, a manifestation of
which is given to every Man to profit withal, of that Spirit that strives with
all Men (but that most resist it in their stiff Necks and uncircumcised Hearts)
that convinces the whole World of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment (therefore
all have within them that which is essentially saving) tho all are not
thereupon converted by it, (for want of putting forth their finite assistance
to support and carry forth an infinite Power in the work) some measure (at
least one Talent) of which is given to the most unprofitable Servant, till, for
not trading therewith, it be taken from him; it is something of that Goodness of
God, which (tho Men will not know it, and few are led by or follow it, while it
draws them, yet) does lead them: and tho they refuse to return, and so fare the
worse for it, does its own part, so far as to draw them to Repentance: yea,
it is, tho in Men, yet of God, and no less than his own Law in their own Hearts,
of which Law the Letter says (tho Men till spiritualized by it are carnal, and
sold under Sin, yet) is spiritual, holy, just and good, whereby every Man is a
Law to himself before God, who will judge him, and either accuse or excuse,
acquit, absolve, clear, justify, or condemn him, in the day when he judges the
Secrets of Men by Christ out of the Book of their own Consciences (once to be
opened, in which thereby both j^s and factum, Right and Fact is manifest)
according to the Gospel that is preached in it and by it in every Creature under
Heaven, as well as to some by Man's Ministry, and to all by some Ministry or
other also, etc. Mr. Fisher' s Testimony of Truth, p. 36, 37.

Now then to make a more full and final Enquiry into the cause of that foresaid
grand Impenitency, is it for want of that saving Light of God, that is (if
heeded) sufficient to guide all Men, even to that Repentance which is to
Salvation, that is never to be repented of? Nay verily, not so neither, for all
Men have from God and Christ a Light within them, a measure of that true Light,
which is sufficient to bring them that follow it to Salvation, but only that
it is not attended to. Ibid. p. 593.

From what has been said and showed above then, I affirm, that the Grace and
Light in the Conscience, which in some measure or other is from God and Christ
given in common to all Men, is not only universal, but saving; and tho most are
by it no more than accused, reproved, condemned, and left without Excuse, and
not justified nor saved, yet there wants not sufficiency in it to save, and
that Men are not saved but mostly condemned by it, it is only because they
answer not the Mind of God revealed in it, but love the Darkness more than it,
which they hate to come to (as Christ says) because their Deeds are evil:
whereas did they but glorify him answerably to what he requires of them, who
nor exacts, nor expects from any the doing more of his Mind and Will, than what
he one time or other manifests to them to be his Will concerning them in
their own Consciences, they should not be without Excuse, nor stand condemned
in God's sight, but be accepted, justified, and saved from the Wrath which
comes only on the Children of Disobedience; it being the Power of God as
sufficient to the Excuse and Salvation of those from Sin and Wrath that obey
the measure of it in themselves, as to subject those to Accusation, Rejection,
Judgment, Wrath, and Condemnation, that rebel against it. Mr. Fisher, ibid. p.
661.

That tho all are not saved by it, yet all have some of that Light and Grace
which is saving; and that all are not saved, as some are, it is because they
come not into that Light and Grace of God which is come into and unto them. --
Therefore there is in every Man some of that Light of God, which as it is
heeded, according to the measure of it, is able to guide him infallibly to judge
of the Matters, Truths, Ways, Doctrines, Spirits, he is bid to try, on peril of
being deceived to Damnation, and a sufficient safe Guide to lead him unto God.
Ibid. p. 661, 696, 697.

And as for the Heathens, how they have that which is to be known of God (even
enough as to their Salvation) manifest by God himself within them, and not only
the Wrath of God against all their Ungodliness, but also the Righteousness of
God revealed from Heaven, even by him that speaks from Heaven in their own
Hearts; so that they both know God in some measure (tho not liking to retain
the knowledge of him in them, nor glorifying him as God, answerably to what they
know of him, their foolish Hearts are darkened, and they given over to
Vileness) and also know the Judgments of God, that the things they do are
worthy of Death, as also, that Life and Peace from God should be to them in the
contrary, and so are condemned, accused, and without Excuse when they sin, as
well as cleared, accepted, justified before God within themselves when they do
well, by the Work of the Law of God written in their Hearts; by which, tho they
have not the Law in Letter, or a literal Copy of it, as Professors have, whom
they will judge and be justified before, for all the Professors boasting, if
they do the things contained in the Law, as it is written in their Consciences:
and much more to this purpose is so clear to them that in the Light, with any
solid Understanding, and not in their own benighted Minds, and prejudiced
Spirits against the true Light, which the Letter points to, read the first and
second Chapter of Paul to the Romans throughout, that all the Objections to the
contradicting of (...) Truth we (even thence) plead against them made by our
hasty Opposers, will appear to be but obulary Sticks and Straws, Reeds and
Rushes, when (as anon we must) we come to examine them: Therefore the Premises
well considered, it will plainly appear, that some measure at least of that
saving Light and Grace, which is sufficient to lead such as follow it unto
Life, is vouchsafed to all and every Man. Mr. Fisher, ibid. p. 628.

Wherefore, Why, why will ye die? turn, turn your selves and live, and work out
your own Salvation with fear and trembling; for I have done my part, a Friends
part toward you, I have wrought in you both to will and to do of my free Grace
and good pleasure; it wants but your putting that into Act, which I of my free
Grace have put into your Power, and your willing and doing accordingly, and
your getting up, and trading with your Talent, and turning to the Light that I
have entrusted you with, and reprove your evil Deeds by; Will ye always resist
my holy Spirit when it moves in your Hearts, and be stiff necked and stubborn?
Turn ye at my Reproof, and I will make known my words to you; if not, as I
call, and ye refuse, so the time will be, ye shall cry and I will not hear you,
(Now what is it that cries? if it be the Light within as it is saving Grace,
the Lord will not refuse to hear it; if it be the Darkness that is within that
cries, it is senseless cry, both as to the Justice of God, and the Condition of
the Soul; therefore it is no more than the yellings of an awakened, unrenewed
natural Conscience, the Quakers universal salutiferous Grace and Christ)
because ye did not choose the fear of the Lord, would none of my Counsel, set at
naught all my Reproof, which otherwise you should have found to have been the
way of Life: I am in Christ reconciling the World to my self, not imputing
Trespasses; and I have sent out a Ministry to declare this my Reconciliation to
the World, as concerning all that is past, if they now do not ponere obicem,
and abide in Enmity; I am Friends unless they will needs fight on, and fight it
out with me to the last, and then they will have the worst on it: I have made
him Sin that knew none, that they might be Righteousness, who are yet in their
Sins; I have given him a Ransom for all, and he has offered himself and died
for all that were dead in their Sins, and tasted Death for every Man: Now then
hear my Ambassadors that pray you without, as in my Son's stead, who also
himself by his Spirit strives with you to the same end within, that ye would be
reconciled to God; and having these Promises, and received so much Grace as
brings Salvation with it to such as despise it not, receive not this precious
Grace of God in vain, but cleanse your selves from all Uncleanness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God: I have drawn you with the Cords
of my Love, ye will perish if ye refuse to return. Mr. S. Fisher, ibid. p. 632.

Acts 10. 34. Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of Persons: But in
every Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of
him. Peter was before liable to that Mistake that the rest of the Jews were in,
judging that all were unclean except themselves, and that no Man could be
saved, except they were proselyted to their Religion, and circumcised. But God
showed Peter otherways in a Vision, and taught him to call nothing common or
unclean; and therefore seeing that God regarded the Prayers of Cornelius, who
was a stranger to the Law and to Jesus Christ, as to the outward, yet Peter saw
that God had accepted him: And he is said to fear God before he had this
outward Knowledge; therefore Peter concludes, that every one that in every
Nation, without respect of Persons, fears God and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him: So he makes the fear of God and the working of Righteousness,
and not an Historical Knowledge, the Qualification; they then that have this,
wherever they be, they are saved. Now we have already proved, that to every
Man that Grace is given, whereby he may live godlily and righteously; and we
see that by this Grace Cornelius did so, and was accepted, and his Prayers came
up for a Memorial before God, before he had this outward Knowledge. Also was not
Job a perfect and upright Man, that feared God and eschewed evil? Who taught
Job this? How knew Job Adam's Fall? And from what Scripture learned he that
excellent Knowledge he had, and that Faith, by which he knew his Redeemer lived?
for many make him as old as Moses; was not this by an inward Grace in the
Heart? Was it not that inward Grace that taught Job to eschew Evil, and to fear
God? and was it not by the workings thereof that he became a just and upright
Man? How does he reprove the Wickedness of Men, chap. 24.? And, after he has
numbered up their Wickedness, does he not condemn them, ver. 13. for rebelling
against this Light, for not knowing the way thereof, nor abiding in the Paths
thereof? It appears then Job believed that Man had a Light, and that because
they rebelled against it; therefore they knew not its Ways, and abode not in
its Paths, even as the Pharisees who had the Scriptures are said to err, not
knowing the Scriptures. And also Job's Friends, tho in some things wrong, yet
who taught them all those excellent Sayings and Knowledge which they had? Did
not God give it them in order to save them, or was it merely to condemn them?
Who taught Elihu that the Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding,
that the Spirit of God made him, and the Breath of the Almighty gave him Life?
And did not the Lord accept a Sacrifice for them? And who dare say that they
are damned? But further, the Apostle puts this Controversy out of doubt; for,
if we may believe his plain Assertions, he tells us, Romans 2. that the Heathens
did the things contained in the Law. From whence I thus argue: In every Nation
he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted: But many of the
Heathens feared God, and wrought Righteousness; therefore they were accepted.
The minor is proved from the Example of Cornelius. But I shall further prove it
thus; He that does the things contained in the Law, fears God and works
Righteousness: But the Heathens did the things contained in the Law; therefore
they feared God, and wrought Righteousness. Can there be any thing more clear?
for, if to do the things contained in the Law be not to fear God and work
Righteousness, then what can be said to do so, seeing the Apostle calls the Law
spiritual, holy, just and good? But this appears manifestly by another medium
taken out of the same Chapter, ver. 13. so that nothing can be more clear: The
words are, The Doers of the Law shall be justified; from which I thus argue,
without adding any word of my own: The Doers of the Law shall be justified; but
the Gentiles do the things contained in the Law. All that know but a
Conclusion, do easily see what follows from these express words of the Apostle:
And indeed he through that whole Chapter labors, as if he were contending now
with our Adversaries, to confirm this Doctrine, ver. 9, 10, 11. Tribulation and
Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile: for there is no respect of Persons with God. Where the Apostle
clearly homologates the Sentence of Peter before mentioned, and shows that Jew
and Gentile, or, as he himself explains in the following Verses, both they that
have an outward Law, and they that have none, when they do good shall be
justified. And, to put us out of doubt, in the very following Verses he tells
us, that the Doers of the Law are justified, and that the Gentiles did the Law.
So that, except we think he spoke not what he intended, we may safely conclude,
that such Gentiles were justified, and did partake of that Honor, Glory and
Peace, which comes upon every one that does good; even the Gentiles that are
without the Law, when they work good, seeing with God there is no respect of
Persons: so, as we see that it is not the having of the outward Knowledge that
does save, without the inward, so does neither the want of it, to such to whom
God has made it impossible, who have the inward, bring to Condemnation: And
many that have wanted the outward, have had a knowledge of this inwardly, by
virtue of that inward Grace and Light given to every Man, working in them, by
which they forsook Iniquity, and became just and holy, as is above proved, who,
tho they knew not the History of Adam's Fall, yet were sensible in themselves
of the Loss that came by it, feeling their Inclinations to Sin, and the body of
Sin in them; and tho they knew not the coming of Christ, yet were sensible of
that inward Power and Salvation which came by him, even before as well as since
his appearance in the Flesh: For I question whether these Men can prove, that
all the Patriarchs and Fathers before Moses had a distinct knowledge either of
the one or the other, or that they knew the History of the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil, and of Adam's eating the forbidden Fruit; far less that Christ
should be born of a Virgin, should be crucified, and treated in the manner he
was: For it is justly to be believed that what Moses wrote of Adam, and of the
first Times, was not by Tradition, but by Revelation: yea, we see that not only
after the writing of Moses, but even of David, and all the Prophets who
prophesied so much of Christ, how little the Jews that were expecting and
wishing for the Messiah, could thereby discern him when he came; that they
crucified him as a Blasphemer, not as the Messiah, by mistaking concerning him:
for Peter says expressly, Acts 3. 17. to the Jews, that both they and their
Rulers did it through Ignorance. And Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. 8. That had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Yea Mary her self,
to whom the Angel had spoken, who had laid up all the miraculous things
accompanying his Birth in her Heart, she did not understand how and when he
disputed with the Doctors in the Temple, that he was about his Father's
Business. And the Apostles, that had believed him, conversed daily with him,
and saw his Miracles, could not understand neither believe those things which
related to his Death, Sufferings, and Resurrection, but were in a certain
respect stumbled at them. Mr. Barclay' s Apology, p. 129, 130, 131, 132. [This
in the whole substance of it is the same with Mr. Baxter, as the Reader may
observe in both the three foregoing Columns, where in each of them, to make way
for an universal Redemption, they stick not to assert, that Salvation may be
attained without the knowledge of Christ, yea, even by a bare attendance unto
the Dictates of Nature; and to fortify this infernal Dogma of theirs, would
insinuate, that the Patriarchs, and others out of the Old Testament were so
saved.]

By all which it is plain, that these four do as one Man withstand this Truth
the Quakers testify concerning the general Love and Grace of God in Christ
Jesus to all Mankind, i. e. every individual Man in their above cited Sayings,
so far as to give them all any such measure of saving Light, as puts them but
into a possibility of Life, if they never so well improve it, and the
Universality of a Light in Men, sufficient to save them, or (which is all one)
the Sufficiency of the Light to save from Sin, which is asserted by the Quakers
to be in some measure given by Christ universally to all Men. -- I shall
therefore address to a little farther Examination of what the Scriptures
declare for, and our four Divines, against the Truth of God in these
Particulars, whose Oppositions of it are much what from the same grounds, and
those no other than the same that are made use of by all personal Electionists,
to push at that precious Doctrine of the general Love of God to the whole
World, in vouchsafing some measure of no less than truly saving Grace
universally to all and every Individual in it, or of Light sufficient to lead
to Life such as follow it, to each particular Person among Mankind, so that not
any perish for want of the Love of God and Christ, or Willingness in God and
Christ to have them saved, or of true strivings of their holy Spirit with them,
to draw them from the way of Death, or of Light sufficient to lead them out of
that Darkness that destroys them, or of Power and saving Grace given them from
God to work out their own Salvation, or of Christ the Savior's dying for them,
and offering himself a Ransom for every one, as well as any one; or of
Sufficiency in him to save such as come to God by him, or of true Tender of
Life, Peace and Reconciliation with God to him, or of true purpose and intent
in God and Christ to receive them to Mercy, on condition of their Repentance,
or of space given them to repent in and return, or upon the account of any
particular personal Predestination or Reprobation of them to Condemnation, per
saltum, peremptorily, unalterably, before they were born, without reference had
to Impenitency in Ungodliness foreseen, or upon any such like consideration, as
our Divines hold forth, but merely through their own slighting of that Love,
resisting of the foresaid Strivings, despising of the Riches of that Grace,
Long-suffering and Forbearance, refusing to be led to Repentance by that Light,
and by it to come to that Savior from whom it comes, not turning at the
Reproofs of it, not improving the said Gift of the Power of God, and
Manifestation of the Spirit given to profit withal, not putting themselves
forth according to the measure of it in them, but receiving it in vain, not
trading with the Talent, but trifling away the acceptable time, the day of
God's Salvation, the day given to them, wherein the Lord would hear and succor
them, not minding therein the things that make for their Peace, till hid from
their eyes: these and such like, as fall out only on Man's part, who remains in
the Enmity, when God is in Christ reconciling, not imputing Trespasses to the
World, but as the World goes on obstinately therein, destroying themselves
(whilst in God still is or was their Help; nevertheless, whether they hear or
forbear, live or die, be saved or damned) are the sole Causes of Men's
Destruction and Perdition, who perish not at all according to the Will of God,
desiring it should be so, if (salva veritatis, voluntatis, immut abilitatis,
and justitiae Gloria, without violation to his Justice, Truth, and purely good
and immutable Will, which is, that the godly shall prosper, and the ungodly
perish) it may be otherwise, tho yet permitting it so to be when there is no
Remedy. Mr. Sam. Fisher, ibid. p. 622, 623.

Therefore he vouchsafes to all and every Man, even those that come to perish,
but that they neglect it, at some time or other, some measure of saving Grace,
and a Light sufficient to lead them to Salvation. -- If God did not give at one
time or other to all Men such Grace, Liberty and Power, as is sufficient to
bring them to Life, if they will choose the Life, and will improve that Light
and Power to the working out of their Salvation, when he bids them, by it, then
God could not to all Men tender Life by his Ministers, nor say, Work out your
own Salvation, choose Life that ye may live, else my Soul shall choose your
greater Destruction, without mocking of Men in their Misery, before that time
wherein he says, he will only and may justly mock at their Calamity -- Nay, nor
yet without horrible Cruelty, Absurdity and Nonsense.

Therefore God has undoubtedly vouchsafed a measure of his saving Grace and
Power, and a Light sufficient to lead them to Life, if they use well, improve,
obey, follow that Light, Power, and Grace to all and every Man. Ibid. p. 624.
[I shall add to this my Countryman's Testimony, Mr. Dan. Williams; If the
Covenant be not conditional, as to the disposing of these Benefits, it would
follow, 1. That all to whom the Offers are made, have an Interest in them, or
it is not a serious Offer, no, nor a true Offer, as not containing a real and
mutual Connection between the Benefit and the Duty. 2. Faith it self is no more
necessary to our first Interest in these Benefits, than any other Grace, nay
than Unbelief. Let no body object (or my Assertion is gone, he should have
said) It Is a sign, for so is any other Grace; yea, so might be the Description
of Paul by his Name, by his Abode, yea by his Sin, viz. a Persecutor: Paul the
Persecutor, of such an Age and Place, would serve as well to evidence him a
justified Man, as his Faith. Abundance of such Consequences, to the very
overturning of the Gospel, and all Religion, are unavoidable. [Gospel-Truth
stated, etc. p. 52, 53.] But to return. --

Therefore undoubtedly God has sufficiently and savingly enlightened and
empowered all, and every Man every where, by such measure of that Grace of his,
as may lead and enable them to act that Repentance which is to Life and
Salvation. -- God says, what should or could I have done more for them that I
have not done? which he could not have said in the Judgment of Reason it self
(as much as he had done for them in giving them an outward Scripture) if he had
not vouchsafed them withal some measure of that Light and Grace which is only
able to guide Men that improve it to Salvation; for less than so much could not
put them into so much as a possibility of Salvation, for all their Letter; and
in all reason he should have put them at least into a possibility of it, by
Grace sufficient (if improved) to bring them to it, or else all he did for them
beside, was little worth, or worse than nothing to them, and he had not done
enough on his own part toward their Deliverance from Damnation, let them have
put forth themselves never so far, but rather that which (according to your
Principles must unavoidably tend to their sorer Condemnation, but doing that)
and putting them by the Gift of his own Light, Grace and Power, into a capacity
to work out their own Salvation (whether they would walk in that Light, or not
walk in it, improve that Power, Gift of Grace, or not improve it) he would be
clear of their Blood, and their Miscarriage on their own part, and they perish
on the score of their own putting the Salvation of God far from them, when he
brought it nigh them, etc. Mr. Samuel Fisher, ibid. p. 626, 627.

Head 8. That the Doctrine of Assurance, etc.
Papist.
SI quis dixerit, fidem justificantem, etc. If any Man shall say, that
justifying Faith is nothing else but a Trust or Confidence in the Mercy of God,
remitting Sins for Christ, or that this Confidence or Trust is that only
whereby we are justified, let him be accursed. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can.
12. See Mr. Burton's Christian Bulwark, p. 221, 222.

Mr. Burton says further of the Papists, p. 225. Sentio ego pro mea exiguitate
ingenii, etc. I am of opinion, according to the Slenderness of my Capacity,
that if there were no other Argument that we are not justified by Faith alone,
than that hence it would follow that a Man is certain he is in the State of
Grace, we should for this only Cause deny Justification by sole Faith: such is
the Evidence that Faith makes no Man certain of his Salvation. -- Et tamen
Adversarii, etc. And yet the Adversaries by their perverse Argumentation do
even hence especially reason and conclude, that we are justified by Faith
alone, because otherwise no Man were sure of his Justification: for such a
strong Evidence do they take it, that every one ought to be certain of his
Salvation. Soto de not. and great. lib. 3. cap. 10.

Their probable Conjectures (says Mr. Burton) of their Justification, are
altogether abhorrent from the Nature of Faith in Christ, and mere Illusions.
Such Probabilities are Impossibilities of Salvation. But it is a good reason
for the Pontificians, why they should deny Certainty of Faith, if the best
Certainty be only conjectural Probability -- say they, only spiritual Men,
living in the State of Perfection (as devout St. Anthony) may have a Certainty
of Salvation built upon his good Life. -- This is another strong Reason why
Pontificians exclude Certainty of Faith of Salvation, seeing it is rather
grounded upon good Works. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 15. --

The Pontifician Reasons and Allegations for their Uncertainty of Faith, we
find sundry of them set down in the History of the Council of Trent, together
with the Answers unto them, forced from the Canvase of the opposite Parties:
some holding that the Opinion of Certainty of Grace was an intolerable
Arrogance: Others, that that Certainty in its kind was meritorious. The first
of these were for the most part Dominicans grounding their Opinion of
Uncertainty upon the Authority of Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, and the
Schoolmen: Also upon Reason, saying, That God would not make Man certain of
Grace, lest swelling with Pride, and opinion of himself, he should despise
others, as knowing himself to be righteous, and others notorious Sinners. Also
that Christians would grow sleepy, slothful and careless of good Works. In
which respect Incertitude of Grace was profitable, yea meritorious. For
Perturbation or Trouble of Mind is that which at first afflicts Men; but to
those that have learned to bear it, it becomes at length meritorious. Histor.
Council. Trid. lib. 2. See Mr. Burton, ibid. p. 231, 232.

We see (says Mr. Burton, p. 266, 267.) what glorious Elogies or Praises the
Holy Ghost gives to saving Faith, the proper Effects whereof are Assurance,
Truth, Confidence, Boldness, which the vulgar Latin so often translateth
Fiducia, a word much envied by the Council of Trent, and extremely inveighed
against, yea and shamelesly injured by Vega, who taking upon him to interpret
the meaning, and to measure out the Latitude of Fiducia, does pitifully mangle
and mince it, saying, that it has some certain Agreement with Faith, but so as
it is distinct from Certainty, and that it is a kind of Motion of the Appetite,
and that it may be in deadly Sinners trusting that they are justified when they
are not; and that it is a probable Persuasion of obtaining our Desires, and
that this probable Persuasion of obtaining the Mercy of God is a most fit means
to the obtaining of Faith. Vega, lib. 14. de Peccato mortali and veniali.

Work your Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Ergo, Men must not be secure,
neither can be sure of their Salvation. Again, make your Election and Calling
sure by good Works. But this Certainty that depends of good Works is but
conjectural: and if it do arise from good Works, then Faith only certifieth us
not of our Justification. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Justificat. cap. 6.

This Knowledge which the Apostle speaks of, 1 John 3. 14. does not show an
absolute and insallible Certainty or Sureness, but we may be said to know,
whenas by Signs and Conjectures only we do gather any thing. Bellarm. Respons.
ad loc. 13.

For every Man to be assured infallibly that he shall be saved without special
Revelation, is a most damnable, false Illusion and Presumption, Romans 8. Sect.
9. They call it a faithless Persuasion of Salvation to be confident of God's
Grace and Salvation, and sides daemoniorum, non Apostolorum, the Faith of
Devils, not of Apostles, Rhem. 1 Cor. 9. Sect. 9. So the Tridentine Council
calls Certitudinem Remissionis, etc. the Certainty of Remission of Sins a
vain and faithless Persuasion. And therefore every Man, de gratia formidare and
timere potest, may stand in doubt, and be afraid, whether he be in the State of
Grace. Sess. 6. cap. 9. St. Paul says, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified: Paul durst not assure himself, whether he were justified.
Rhemist. Work your Salvation with Fear and Trembling: Ergo, Men must not be
secure of their Salvation. See Dr. Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 1004, 1006, 923.

The Romanists do teach, that a Man, as long as he lives here, cannot be
certain of Faith, whether he believes of Remission of Sins, whether he be
justified, of Reconciliation, whether he be in the State of Grace, of Adoption,
whether he be the Child of God, of Life eternal, whether he shall be saved.
Contrary to the Apostle, who shows, that by Faith we may be assured of all
these, as if Remission of Sins, for otherwise we could not be at Peace with
God, which we obtain being justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1. of Adoption, that by
the Spirit we can call God, Abba, Father, chapter 8. 15. of everlasting Salvation,
for there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, chapter 8. 1. Dr.
Willet on the Romans, p. 26.

Controv. 12. Of the Certainty of Faith; Romans 4. 16. That the Promise might be
sure. This is an evident Place against that Popish Uncertainty of Remission of
Sins: for they hold it a Presumption for a Man to be sure of God's Favor, and
of their Justification by Faith in Christ -- as that God's Promises, as
likewise his Menacings, are conditional, as that of Jonah, that Niniveh should
be destroyed within forty days; and that pronounced by Isaiah to King Hezekiah,
that he should die -- no Man is sure of his Perseverance and Continuance to the
end -- unless a Man were sure to be without Sin, which is impossible in this
Life, he cannot be certain of his Salvation. -- Bellarmine further collecteth
upon this place, v. 20. Being fully persuaded, that he which had promised, was
able to do it, etc. that this Faith, whereby Abraham was justified, was not any
Assurance of the Remission of Sins, but fides dogmatica vel historica, a
dogmatical or historical Faith, a belief of the Omnipotency of God: Bellarm.
lib. 1. de Justific. cap. 11. See Dr. Willet, ibid. p. 228, 229, 230.

Romans 5. 5. We have access unto this Grace wherein we stand. Calvin out of this
place refuteth two Errors of Popish Sophistry, the one that the Faithful for
the present cannot be certain of the Grace of God, and of the Remission of
their Sins; the other that they are not sure of final Perseverance. But to
stand in Grace signifies to be sure of the Grace and Favor of God: One may
attain unto the favor of the Prince, but he is not sure to continue in it; but
God's Favor in Christ is most constant, whom Christ loves he loves to the
end, John 13. Tolet here foisteth in one of his Popish Drugs, that Tranquillity
and Peace of Conscience, and Certainty of Remission of Sins, is not the Fruit
or Work of Faith in the faithful; for the wicked, that know not their Sins,
have also a quiet Conscience. Tolet. Annot.

Contra. There is great difference between a senseless and a quiet Conscience;
the wicked feel not the prick of Conscience, because their Sins are concealed
from them; but the faithful have Peace of Conscience after the sight of their
Sins, which they know to be remitted in Christ: so Paul was alive without the
Law, but afterward when Sin revived he died; Romans 7. 9. Where then the
Conscience is cast into a slumber of Security, Sin reviving awaketh and
troubles it; but where Sin is remitted in Christ, the Conscience cease to be
troubled and perplexed, as in the wicked. Ibid. p. 266.

Romans 6. 8. We believe that we shall also live with him, etc. Hence it is well
inferred, that the faithful are assured by Faith, both of their Perseverance in
the State of Grace in this Life, and of everlasting Life in the next; for we
believe, says the Apostle, that we shall live, etc. We nothing doubt of it:
and in the same Sense the Apostle said before, (...), knowing, v. 6. And again,
(...), knowing, v. 11. (...), gather ye, or conclude ye, as the word is taken,
Romans 3. 28. and here (...), we believe; all which words imply a Certainty
without doubting. Contrary hereunto is the Doctrine of the Romanists, which
hold it to be a point of Presumption to have Assurance of Salvation. -- Ibid.
p. 303, 304. Romans 8. 16. The same Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, that
we are the Children of God. Tho this be an evident place to prove the Certainty
of Salvation in the persuasion of the Faithful, because the Testimony of the
Spirit is infallible; yet the Romanists are not ashamed to deny, that any such
Certainty may be gathered from hence: they say this Testimony of the Spirit is
nothing else, but the inward good Motions, Comfort and Contentment of Spirit,
which the Children of God do daily feel more and more, etc. Rhemist. Annot. And
Pererius, it is but gustus quidam spiritualis praesentiae, a kind of Taste of
the spiritual Presence of Grace: and he consents unto Thomas, who thus
interprets this Testimony of the Spirit to be conjecturalem persuasionem, a
conjectural Persuasion: but infallibilis certitudo, an infallible Certainty
cannot he had, citra specialem Dei revelationem, without the special Revelation
of God. Ibid. p. 393.

Romans 8. 38. I am persuaded, etc. The Romanists, to elude this so evident a
Place for the certain and sure Persuasion, which the Elect have by Faith of
their Salvation, do frame us diverse Answers. 1. That St. Paul had this by
special Revelation, it is generally given to all Believers. 2. In general we
are certain, that all the Elect shall be saved, but in particular it is not
known. 3. The word (...), I am persuaded, signifies a moral kind of Assurance,
not Certitudinem fidei, a Certainty or Assurance of Faith: as the Apostle uses
the same word, Heb. 6. 9. We are persuaded better things of you. Romans 15. 14. I
am persuaded of you that you are full of Goodness. But Paul could not believe
these things of others, by a Certainty of Faith: to this purpose Bellarm. lib.
de Justificat. cap. 9. Pererius Disput. 28. 4. For Paul himself was not certain
of his Election, thus writing, 1 Cor. 9. 27. I do beat down my Body, etc. lest
when I have preached to others, I my self should be a Reprobate. Staplet.
Antidot. p. 503. Ibid. p. 401.

Baxterian.
ALL true Believers have not assurance of their Justification, because they are
not certain that their Faith is such as has the Promise of Justification: He
that believes perceives that he believes, but yet may be uncertain that his
Faith is so sincere, as no unjustified Man can have. -- No Man has perfect
Assurance, that is the highest degree in this Life: for if all our Graces be
imperfect, our Assurance must needs be imperfect (because that our
Justification materially lies in our inherent Righteousness, therefore we
cannot be assured of a justified State till the Graces thereof be perfected in
Glory).

Bellarmine's moral Certainty is more than most Christians attain to; and his
and other Men's Concession thereof tell us, that in this Point our Difference is
less than those have thought, who have said it was sufficient Cause of our
Separation from Rome. (Here our ancient as well as modern Reformers from the
Church of Rome, are all condemned by this Author at one clap). Mr. Baxter's end
of Doct. Controv. chapter 24.. 3, 8, 13.

Q. Whether habitual Love, or Holiness (or the Spirit) be ever lost?

Answ. That there is a confirmed State or degree of Holiness that is never
lost, I do hold, and that this is attainable, and in that State Men may be
certain of Salvation: But whether the least degrees of habitual Grace be
utterly losable, which prove a present Right to Life, till they are lost, I
must plainly profess I do not know; much may be said on both sides: And if my
Ignorance offend any, it offends me more; but how shall I help it? I think it
is not for want of Study, nor of impartial Willingness to know the Truth: And
Ignorance of the two is safer than Error, by which we trouble and seduce those
about us. And in this case so many great and excellent Men have erred (either
Augustine, with the Generality of the ancient Churches, or Calvin, Zanchy, and
most of the Reformed) that my Ignorance is pardonable where their Error it self
is pardoned. But let those that are wiser rejoice in the greater measure of
their Wisdom: But yet think not, that taking up either Opinion upon the trust
of their Party, is such. (See here, Reader, the Craft of this Author, who saw
he was not able either from Scripture or Reason to undermine the Truth of this
Doctrine of Assurance under a Covert of an acknowledged and seemingly modest
Ignorance, wounds it as an Error in all those who have in their several
Generations defended the same against its Opposers). --

Others say only, that Men may sin, and may lose acquired Grace, but no degree
of that which is infused. But we have small Reason to think that our increased
degrees are not as much infused as the first Degree was: and yet Experience
proves, that such added Degrees may be lost. Ibid. chapter 26.. 9, 11.

It is impossible for any one in this Life, in Mr. B's Sense, to attain unto
Assurance.

Controv. Is Pardon and Justification perfect the first Moment?

Answ. No, 1. All the Punishment is not yet taken off: We have yet much penal
want of Grace, and the Spirit's Operations and Communion with God. 2. We have
not Right to the present Removal of all the Punishment. 3. Many more Sins
hereafter must be pardoned. 4. Much means is yet to be used for final
Justification. 5. That final Justification only is perfect. Mr. Baxter's
Breviat of Justification, Part 1. p. 47.

These Conditions are our Duty by God's Command, and not less so, by being made
terms of the benefit in the divine Grant.

The Covenant, tho conditional, is a Disposition; there is Grace in giving
Ability to perform the Condition, as well as in bestowing the Benefits: God's
enjoining one in order to the other, makes not the Benefit to be less of Grace,
but it is a Display of God's Wisdom, in conferring the Benefit sutably to the
Nature and State of Men in this Life, whose eternal Condition is not eternally
decided, but are in a State of Trial. (So that the Believers Assurance must
wait for a State of Glory.) Mr. Dan. Williams's Gospel Truth, etc. p. 46.

Faith is not an Assurance, or inward Persuasion, that Christ is ours, and our
Sins are pardoned (tho it be the Fruit of such a Faith, through which alone it
is that Assurance comes, Heb. 11. 1.) Men may have this Persuasion, who do not
savingly believe: (i. e. A Man may be hanged for wearing a Suit of Clothes that
he had stolen, therefore another must not wear his own, a more Popish Evasion!)
They in Mat. 7. 22. had this, (had what? what this Assurance that comes by
Faith? which Dr. Crisp only pleads for) when they cried, Lord, Lord, open to
us! (Mind the Context, Reader, it is upon the account of their Works that they
would come in, whereon they founded the assurance of their Acceptance, not a
word of the Faith that Dr. Crisp speaks of, but our Author's Prerequisites to
this false Persuasion) neither did the foolish Virgins seem without it, Mat.
25. 12. (tho they had those predisposing Qualifications unto their Union with
Christ, and Justification by him, that our Author and some of his fry so much
plead for) yea, it is what the most profligate Sinners (Bellarminus Redivivus)
grow secure by, to their own Destruction; and this upon the general word of
Grace. -- Many true Believers have not this Persuasion; let common Experience
be consulted -- (therefore it is not to be sought for or attained unto by Faith
alone, but Works also) -- such as have had assurance, do (by the Doctor's
Opinion) fall into the Sin of damning Unbelief, (what will not a Whore's
Forehead engage in when sufficiently brazened Unbelief even in Believers, which
is their Plague, carries the same nature in it with that total Unbelief that
reigns in the Reprobate to their Condemnation, and what is this to the
purpose?) whenever they doubt their Interest in Christ, and especially if they
conclude that they have not this Interest: A sad doom on many pious Souls. --
This Persuasion should suppose an Interest in Christ, and does not give it:
(Here the Shoe pinches, for says our Author) It Is a false Conclusion, that
Christ is mine before he is so: (But is he not mine before I know it? Or upon
what is my Assurance founded when I come to know it?) And must the great term
of Life be a Lie? (Even the elaborate Predispositions, the very Hinge upon
which, with these Men, this Relation moves) we are to examine our selves
whether we be in the Faith, and so whether Christ is in us, before we assure
our selves that he is in us; 2 Cor. 13. 5. (This, Reader, is a nervous and
strenuous Caution, especially if he had told us, what be the Works of his being
there, how and wherefore he came there, and what it is he testifies unto the
Soul, when come there; but this would have spoiled all, and therefore he tells
us [who value him and his Doctrines as much as the Pope's Bull] with somewhat
an angry Expostulation.) And where has God made this Proposition, My Sins are
laid upon Christ to be the Object of saving Faith? (q. d. he shall never
persuade me to such an Assurance until I have brought him those conditional
Qualifications whereon my Pardon is materially [tho meritoriously for Christ's
sake] founded, etc. with the rest of his pitisul stuff which has been
sufficiently handled already, as condemned by the Lord and his Word.) Mr. Dan.
Williams, ibid. p. 63.

TRUTH, Tho our Sins were imputed to Christ with respect to the Guilt thereof,
so that he, by the Father's Appointment, and his own Consent, became obliged,
as Mediator, to bear the Punishments of our Iniquities, and he did bear those
Punishments to the full Satisfaction of Justice, and to our actual Remission
when we believe, nevertheless the filth of our Sins was not laid upon Christ,
nor can he be called the Transgressor, or was he, in God's account, the
Blasphemer, Murderer. Mr. Dan. Williams's Gospel Truth, etc. p. 6. (so that
when we come to believe, we have no other ground of an Assurance of our Peace
with God, and the Pardon of Sin, together with our justified State before God,
but our Faith which gives the same its Being and Continuance; for Sin, with our
Author, as a matter of Fact, wherein its Filthiness and Abhorrency does lie,
was never charged upon Christ by a transacted Imputation [which he most
impudently and treacherously would make his Reader believe, even contrary to
his verbal Recitation of Dr. Crisp's Sayings, that it must be by Transfusion,
p. 8.] but the Guilt of nothing, for Sin is not imputed unto him, and the
Punishment he underwent not a proper Satisfaction unto Justice, as offended,
since it was not that very idem which was due unto our Sins, that Christ did
bear: is not this a strange sort of a hellish Foundation for us to fix our
Persuasion of the favor of God upon? Let the Reader judge) This very ground of
Peace and Assurance thereof, does he endeavor to undermine us off, in p. 12.
TRUTH.

The Atonement made by Christ, by the Appointment of God, is that for which
alone the Elect are pardoned, when it is applied to them. (I suppose none can
pardon Sin as Sin but God, but this he cannot do, without an entire respect to
the Honor of his great Name, wherein all his Attributes are essentially
concerned, out of which Number his Justice will never be expunged or dispensed
withal without a full and complete Satisfaction; this is either given by Christ
in an eternal Covenant-Engagement, and actually in his Sufferings, and when we
believe, as this Author crudely says, when it is applied unto us, then are we
pardoned; which renders the Blood of Christ and his Atonement in the actual
Sacrifice of himself, to be but a mere empty dependent Notion, and that upon
our Faith, whose efficacious Reception with God for Sinners found no place, nor
ever shall until we believe; for says he) But the Elect are not immediately
pardoned upon Christ's being appointed to suffer for them. (Here his Promise in
the eternal Compact to die for the Elect in the fullness of time, would not be
taken or trusted unto by the Father) nor as soon as the Atonement was made,
(here the Insufficiency of his Death is blasphemously asserted by this Author)
nor is that Act of laying Sins on Christ God's forgiving Act, by which we are
personally discharged. (Here the eternal actual Love of God toward his Elect
in Christ, their actually pardoned and justified State in what Christ both did
and suffered for them according to the Judgment of God, depends materially,
formally, and really as to its Being, upon their Believing; whereas it is by
Faith indeed that they are manifestatively and experimentally unto and within
themselves discharged before God, as receiving from him freely what he had
before received from Christ graciously and juridically for them: on this it is
that they come to fix their Assurance by Faith, and thereby rejoice in a well
and irreversibly grounded Hope of the Glory of God. Romans 4. ult. Compare chapter 5.
1, 2, etc. also, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

Quaker.
THere are two Reasons why the Quakers are brought in here as Opposers of the
Doctrine of Assurance.

1. In that they positively, yea furiously hold, that no Man is justified in
this World before or in the sight of God, but as he is sanctified, from which
State of Sanctification (as they hold) he may yet fall away.

2. In that no one can (in their Judgment) be assured of the Reality of his
Sanctification in this Life, until he arrive here at a sinless State of
Perfection, unto which they hold Man may come if he be true to the Conduct of
the Light within. The former being a downright Lie, and the latter utterly
impossible, as by Scripture Assertions, and Examples irresistibly appears;
therefore it is manifest that they are utter Enemies to this Doctrine of
Assurance in a sound well bottomed Sense, as is clear from what follows.

It (viz. the Light within) takes away all ground of Despair, in that it gives
every one ground of Hope and certain Assurance, that they may be saved; neither
does feed any in Security, in that none are certain how soon their day may
expire, and therefore it is a constant Incitement and Provocation, and lively
Encouragement, to every Man, to forsake Evil, and close with that which is
good. --

But that this may be resisted and rejected in both, in which then God is said
to be resisted and pressed down, and Christ to be again crucified and put to
open shame in and among Men; and to those as thus resist and refuse him, he
becomes their Condemnation. Mr. Barelay's Apology, etc. p. 91. compare p. 90.

As, upon the one hand, they err that affirm that the least degree of true and
saving Grace cannot be fallen from, so do they err, upon the other hand, that
deny any such Stability to be attained, from which there cannot be a total and
final Apostasy. Ibid. p. 187.

For all the Arguments which these alledg, that affirm there can be no falling
away, may well be received upon the one part, as of these who have attained to
this Stability and Establishment, and their Objections solved by this
Concession; so upon the other hand the Arguments alleged from Scripture.
Testimonies, by those that a^rm the possibility of falling away, may well be
received of such as are not come to this Establishment, tho having attained a
measure of true Grace. Thus then the contrary Batterings of our Adversaries,
who miss the Truth, do concur the more strongly to establish it, while they are
destroying each other. But lest this may not seem to satisfy such as judge it
always possible for the best of Men before they die to fall away, I shall add
for the proof of it, some brief Considerations, from some few Testimonies of
Scripture. Ibid. p. 187, 188.

For Man not minding the Light and Law within in his Heart, which not only
discovers Sin, but leads out of it, and so being a Stranger to the new Life and
Birth that is born of God, which naturally does his Will, and cannot of its own
nature transgress the Commandments of God, does, I say, in his natural State,
look at the Commandments as they are without him in the Letter; and finding
himself reproved and convicted, is by the Letter killed, but not made alive; so
Man finding himself wounded, and not applying himself inwardly to that which
can heal, labors in his own Will after a Conformity to the Law, as it is
without him, which he can never obtain, but finds, the more he wrestles, the
more he falls short. So this is the Jew still, in effect, with his carnal
Commandment, with the Law without, in the first Covenant-State, which makes not
the Camers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9. 9. tho
they may have here a Notion of Christianity, and external Faith in Christ. This
has made them strain and wrest the Scriptures for an imputative Righteousness,
wholly without them, to cover their Impurities; and this has made them to
imagine an acceptance with God possible, tho they suppose it impossible ever to
obey Christ's Commands. But alas! O deceived Souls! that will not avail in the
day wherein God will judge every Man according to his Works, whether good or
bad. -- So then, if thou desire to know this Perfection and Freedom from
Si^possible for thee, turn thy Mind to the Light and spiritual Law of Christ in
the Heart, and suffer the Reproofs thereof, etc. Ibid. p. 177, 178.

True Faith is in the Light of Christ, and in the Word of God, which is that
Word of Faith which the Apostles preached, and testified of in their Words and
Writings, that it was nigh to Men, even in their Hearts, that there they might
both hear, and do it, Romans 10. 8. Neither does any Man either hear or believe
in Christ to Salvation, any further than as he heeds, hears and believes in
that Light and ingrafted Word whereby Christ counsels him in his own
Conscience, although he should (as the unbelieving Jews did) hear him speaking to
them with audible Voice, or believe (as all unbelieving Christians do) the
whole History of him according to the Flesh: so then Faith unto Life coming by
Hearing, and Hearing unto Life being of that Light and Word of God, which is
nigh in the Heart, which is the Word of both Faith and Life, the Apostles
Speeches were in vain, if there were not such a Light and Word within to be
believed in, to the hearing and believing in which the Apostles were sent to
turn Men. Men's obeying of which Word within, was the end of their using those
Words they spoke and wrote to them in from without. Moreover, we deny not
Preaching without by such as are sent, as Paul was, to turn Men to the Light
within, but the Light within only (which is the ground of these Men's Assurance,
a mere Pelagian Rock or Quackmire) is that which guides and leads those that
are turned to it, and continue attending to it, sufficiently and safely to God.
-- Therefore they need such renewing, transforming, putting off the old Man,
nonconforming to this World, because that is the good Will of God concerning
them; and also Millions of Men, who have the Light in them, that condemns and
reproves them for their Rebellion against it, are not conformable thereunto:
and therefore they both have and need such a Light within them, antecedent to
that renewing; and need also to be called upon to turn unto it, that they may
thereby see how conformable they are to this evil World, and nonconformable to
that Will of God, that they may thereby first know the good Will of God which
is manifested in that Light. And, Secondly, by obeying that Light be conformed
to that Will, and no more unto the World, but transformed by the renewing of
their Minds: so that whereas they conclude all Men ought to be renewed after
God's Image, etc. therefore all have it not; I contrariwise conclude, All ought
to be renewed according thereunto, etc. therefore All have a Light sufficient
to lead them, as they follow it, into the Image of God. Mr. Fisher's Testimony
of Truth, etc. p. 683. (so that thou see, Reader, that the Quakers ground of
Assurance of eternal Life, is fixed upon that which every Man has within
himself, and that upon our Attendance or Non-attendance upon it, our
everlasting State and Condition does depend). --

When the Question is about the Light of God in the Heart, of which we say,
that tho none can come to Christ without God draw him, yet by that God draws
all Men, tho all Men come not after him: And so the reason why they perish
still, is not because God does not draw them to Life by a Light sufficient to
lead to it, but because they resist, hang back, and will not follow it;
therefore says God, I drew them with the Cords of my Love, with the Bands of a
Man, yet shall they go into Captivity, because they refused to return. Ibid. p.
697.

And howbeit, the Righteous turning from his Righteousness to Iniquity, may
die, as the Wicked turning from his Wickedness to that which is lawful and
right, may live; and the same Person may turn, and return, and turn again, and
be in possibility of Life or Death, according as he chooses when both are set
before him; yet the ways of God are equal, and his Judgments according to
Truth, and each Man has from him for ever as he does: and tho the Man that is
now a Sinner, may become a Saint like David, and a Sinner again, and by true
Repentance and Purging with Hyssop a Saint again, (so a Child of God to day,
and a Child of the Devil to morrow) yet the Saint has no part with the Sinner
in his Lake, nor the Sinner any share in the Inheritance of the Saints which is
in the Light, but each has his own peculiar and proper Reward, and the Heart
of the one knows his own Heaviness, and the Stranger intermeddles not with the
others Joy. -- And howbeit, Men may of Unbelievers become Believers, and
Believers in the Light may by an evil Heart of Unbelief draw back to Perdition,
and depart from the living God; yet whether they believe or not, God abides
faithful, and cannot deny himself: the Believers Portion that believes is the
Life, and the Unbelievers part is the Lake. And tho he that is now an
Unbeliever (mediante fide) may become a Believer, and be saved, and he that now
believes, making Shipwreck of his Faith and good Conscience (as Judas and
others did) may come to be damned, yet no Believer is ever damned, nor is any
Unbeliever ever saved; (this is as notable a Baxterian Blind as I have seen)
but the Foundation of the Lord, who knows his own evermore, (i. e. such as of
their own good Will from the self-distinguishing Improvement of a common and
universal Light, design, and hold out to follow it) stands ever sure, (with
their good leave) let Men go which way they will, who owns none that name the
name of Christ, and depart not from Iniquity, and owns all who e^re they be
that do according to his everlasting and unchangeable Decree, (determinable
upon the Goodness or Illness of their Resolutions, and continuance of their
Practices accordingly) that stands thus steadfast without variation for ever,
viz. That he that believes only shall be saved, and he that believes not shall
be damned, Mark 16. 16. -- Every Believer and Babe (as so) that is truly born
of God, is perfect after Christ's own Image, and in the divine Nature, tho not
grown up into the measure and fullness of Christ's Stature, and stands justified
and accepted in the sight of God, and out of the Condemnation, while out of the
Transgression; and every Unbeliever in the Light is out of God and Christ, who
are Light, and is in the Darkness, and of the Devil the Prince of Darkness, and
is in the Condemnation, because in the Transgression, and one with that Seed
which is in the Reprobation; and each Seed, and the Son that respectively is
born of it, has its own proper Portion divided out unto it; and that which is
of the Spirit has Life together with it; and who is of the Serpent and the
Flesh sows to it, and (if not parted from it) must perish together with it, and
accordingly reap nothing but Corruption. Ibid. p. 717, 718.

I say, can any think Paul such an one, but such as sell themselves to Folly?
Not considering that Paul speaks of three States he had experienced, one before
the Law or Light, when he lay dead in Sin; a second, under it, while he warred
against it, (Romans 7.) a third, in Christ, wherein he stood from and in full
Dominion over it, (but one of which three he could possibly be in at once and
at this time, and that was the third, having passed the other two (as is
evident, chapter 8. 2, has made me free) can any but benighted ones, that being
sold under Sin themselves, measure others by themselves, judge Paul to be (the
Premises considered) under Power of Sin, (this is the Baxterian cheating Mode,
who says not under the Power of Sin as a Dominion, but under its tyrannical
disallowed oppressive Power) and unfreed from it at this present, and that he
wrote of himself as wretched de praesenti, because he wrote it in praesenti,
thus and thus I am? Ibid. p. 720. (The sum of this Hodg-podg Farrago, and our
Author's blasphemous Abuse of the Scripture is, That our Assurance of an
uncondemned State is not attained unto, until we be thoroughly and absolutely rid
of Sin.

I shall transcribe what is to go cross under these three Columns of the
Doctrine of Assurance out of Mr. Burton's Christian Bulwark, and the rather
because he takes notice not only of the Council of Trent's bare Rejection of
the same, but its crafty Method and End therein, not far unlike some others
this day: wherefore it is that I desire the Reader's Patience to pass by my
Prolixity, till he has read it over, and impartially, that he would compare the
same with our Baxterian Schematists in their process upon this point. -- The
Council of Trent being in general an Enemy to the Certainty of Faith, which
gives a true Believer an Assurance of his Salvation; and withal considering
how evident both Scriptures and Fathers were in this point, so strongly
propugned and maintained by Luther; and, Thirdly, the Council it self in the
Canvase of this Point, while it was in Consultation, or rather in Contention,
being divided into contrary Parties and Sides, some holding for Certainty, as
Catarinus, and others for Uncertainty, as Vega and others, as the History of
the same Council does notably discover: Therefore it became the politic Spirit
of the Council to use all cautelous Circumspection in the definite concluding
of this Point, contriving it under such umbratilous and sub-obscure terms, as
that they might seem neither grossly to oppose the open Truth, nor yet displease
that Party of the Council that seemed to incline to the Truth's side, nor yet
leave Luther uncondemned for defending the Truth, nor yet betray their own
Cause, which was to advance the Uncertainty of Roman Catholic Faith:
Uncertainty being the very hint which gave occasion to the Serpent boldly to
insult, and so to overthrow Mankind. For when Eve said, Lest ye die; the
Serpent finding her staggering, takes the advantage and strikes her with a
downright blow to the ground, Ye shall not die at all -- Council. Trid. Sess. 6.
cap. 9. Quamvis necessarium sit credere, etc. that is, Although it be necessary to
believe, that Sins neither are, nor ever were remitted, but freely by divine
Mercy for Christ; yet no Man boasting of Confidence and Certainty of the
Remission of his Sins, and therewith wholly resting, ought to say, that his
Sins are or have been remitted: seeing this vain Confidence, void of all Piety,
both may be amongst Heretics and Schismatics, yea and is now in these our
days, and is preached with great Contention against the Catholic Church. But
neither is that to be affirmed, that they who are truly justified, ought
without any doubting at all to conclude with themselves, that they are
justified, and that none is absolved and justified from Sins but he that
certainly believes that he is absolved and justified: and that in this sole
Faith, Absolution and Justification consists, as if a Man not believing this,
should doubt of the Promises of God, and of the efficacy of Christ's Death and
Resurrection. For as no godly Man ought to doubt of the Mercy of God, of the
Merit of Christ, and of the Power and Efficacy of the Sacraments, so every Man
while he looks upon himself, and his own proper Infirmity and Indisposition,
may be afraid and fearful of his own Grace: seeing no Man can know by the
Certainty of Faith, wherein there may not lie some Error, that he has obtained
the Grace of God. -- Now I desire the Christian judicious Reader to observe the
sundry Passages, and as it were the several Threads of this (...). First, like
the painted Whore she sets a fair Face or Preface upon the Matter, as
attributing Remission of Sins to God's Mercy for Christ, (as our Baxterians do
this day) which every one must necessarily believe (she could say no less, tho
in the upshot of the matter, she would have Men to believe nothing less) but in
the next place she comes with a by-blow, and condemns the Confidence and
Assurance of Faith, under the terms of Boasting. And therefore prefixeth this
Title before the Chapter, Contra inanem Haereticorum fiduciam; Against the vain
Confidence of Heretics: A notable pack of Cunning, well beseeming the Mystery
of Iniquity. They do not go bluntly to work, to beat downright that Confidence
and certain Assurance which is in a true justifying Faith; but slily they wound
it, as Joab did Abner, under the fifth Rib, as being none but him that vainly
boasts and braggeth of the Assurance of his Justification. Indeed, if this
Assurance were nothing else but a vain Confidence and Boasting, they say
something. But while they join this Certainty and Assurance of Faith with vain
Boasting, they plainly discover their masked Hypocrisy, by mixing and
confounding the pure Gold of Faith with Man's Dross, as if they were both one,
to be faithfully assured and vainly confident. But this Assurance, whatsoever
it is, it must be in Heretics and Schismatics, Catholics must have nothing
to do with it, as being a vain Confidence; yet vain as it is they confess it to
be a great and vehement Enemy to the Catholic Church, to wit, the Roman
Catholic Church. In which Church none must so certainly believe the Remission
of his Sins, as to exclude all doubting, especially in regard of his own
Indisposition and Infirmity, being fearful of his own Grace: and no marvel if
such be full of fearful Doubtings, that build their Salvation and Justification
upon their inherent Grace. But the Conclusion is peremptory, just like the
Serpent, in the third of Genesis, beginning smoothly, but ending roughly, like
the Southern Wind, Ye shall not die at all. So Trent's Conclusion is, that no
Man can know by the Certainty of Faith, whether he have the Grace of God, or no
--.

Si quis dixerit, etc. If any shall say, that it is necessary for every Man,
for the attaining the Remission of Sins, to believe certainly, and without any
doubting of his own Infirmity and Indisposition, that his Sins are remitted;
let him be accursed --.

Note here, another by-blow at the Certainty of Faith, but seeming to be laid
upon the Shoulders of humane Frailty and Indisposition: as if Remission of Sins
depends upon our own Strength and Disposition. But I marvel why the
Pontificians so much distrust their own Indisposition, about the Certainty of
Justification, when they so much dignify their natural Disposition (the
Baxterian Prerequisites) unto Justification, save only that (for the love of
their worldly Pomp, Pleasure and Profit, one special prop whereof is their
Uncertainty, causing the simple seduced People to rest wholly upon their
Priest, Pope and Purgatory, as the last Sanctuary of their troubled Souls) they
are not disposed to give God the Glory, and to seal to themselves the Comfort
of Justification by the Certainty of Faith, which Certainty of Faith they must
needs extremely hate, when to disgrace it, they are fain to disparage their own
Strength and Disposition, which otherwise they do so much deify and adore. And
as if Man's Disposition in the State of Grace, being accompanied and assisted
with Grace, came short of that Disposition which goes before Grace, and as if
Man's Disposition were not as able to confirm him in Grace, as to prepare him
unto Grace. But we will not envy them their Indisposition to assurance of
Grace, no more than we admire that Grace of theirs which can give no solid
Comfort and Assurance to the Soul and Conscience --.

But let us hear what Trent further says, Can. 14. Si quis dixerit, hominem a
peccatis absolvi, etc. If any shall say, that a Man is absolved and justified
from Sins, in that respect that he certainly believes he is absolved and
justified; or that none is truly justified, but he that believes he is
justified [the Baxterian Mask still] and that Absolution and Justification is
perfected by this sole Faith; let him be accursed. -- Note here that the
Council of Trent differs not one Hairs breadth from denying Faith it self to
be absolutely necessary to Justification, as we shall more plainly discover her
Mind herein hereafter.

And Can. 15. Si quis dixerit, hominem renatum and justificatum, etc. If any
shall say, that a Man regenerate and justified is bound by Faith to believe,
that he is certainly in the number of the Predestinate, let him be accursed.
And to conclude, the 16th Canon is also annexed as a Blade in this Reed, Si
quis magnum illud, etc. If any shall say, by an absolute and infallible
Certainty, that he shall certainly have that great Gift of Perseverance unto
the end, except he shall know this by special Revelation, let him be accursed.
-- Thus have we set down the whole Mystery of Pontifician Uncertainty of Faith
in gross, as we find it engrossed in the Council of Trent: For the further
unfolding whereof, let us consult the authentic Commentaries of the Council.
-- But first, observe we here what a deal of pains they have bestowed about
this one point of Uncertainty, and partly for the Reasons formerly alleged in
the beginning of this Chapter: but principally do they impugn this Bulwark of
the Certainty of Faith, because it is a main Opposite to all their humane
Inventions, wherewith, as so many Rags, they have patched up their meritorious
Capuchin Garment of Justification. As the learned. Chemnitius has well
observed in his Examen de fide Justif. upon this point, saying; Nec sane nullae
sunt causae, etc. Nor is it without cause (says he) that the Pontificians do
eagerly contend for the maintenance of their Uncertainty: for they well
perceive, that the whole Negotiation of Pontifician Merchandise is sustained by
this means. For the Conscience seeking some certain and firm Consolation when
it hears that Faith it self, even when it apprehends Christ the Mediator,
ought to doubt of the Remission of Sins, it begins to devise a mass of
Inventions, (as others of their Works) as Vows, Pilgrimages, Invocations of
Saints, Pardons, Dispensations, Croisadoes, Bulls, Masses, and a thousand such
like, being all but untempered Mortar, to build their Castle of Uncertainty in
the Air. The Conscience in this case being like the unclean Spirit in the
Gospel, which seeking Rest, and finding none in the wavering Uncertainty of
Pontifician Faith, takes unto himself seven other Spirits worse than himself,
and so the Conscience becomes more unclean, more unsettled than it was before
(thus the Neonomian Garment of Justification is part per pale the
Rightcousness of Christ, conditional Prerequisites, and good Works if they hold
out to the end) -- Now in the further laying open of this Mystery of
Uncertainty, if we should follow the infinite Perplexities and Windings which
we find in their most authentic Commentaries upon this Point, we should tread
an endless Maze, as tracing them in their Uncertainties. Vega writes a large
Commentary upon the forecited ninth Chapter of this Council of Trent. And Soto
spends four large Chapters upon it. No marvel to see Men wander wide in a
Wilderness of Uncertainty. But we will deal with them as the Prophet says
concerning the wild Ass; Jer. 2. 24. A wild Ass used to the Wilderness, that
snuffeth up the Wind at her pleasure, in her occasion who can turn her away?
All they that seek her, will not weary themselves, in her Month they shall find
her. So these Pontificians, wandering in the wild disconsolate Desert of
Doubtfulness and Distrust, snuffing up the Wind of vain Opinions at their
pleasure, cannot be averted from their Aberrations; and for a Man to pursue
them by the foot, were to weary himself: he shall easily find them out in their
Month, when and where they disburden themselves of the fruit they traveled
withal. We will therefore only touch those weighty Reasons which they bring for
the establishing of their Uncertainty. -- Soto has reserved and marshalled
this point of Uncertainty, together with the Arguments of it, in the latter end
of his third and last Book, de Natura and Gratia, as being his Roman Triarii to
help at a dead lift. And indeed the main Doctrine of Justification has such an
inseparable relation to this point of Certainty, as this being denied and
removed, the whole Doctrine of Faith falls to the ground. And therefore
coming to this point, we may well apply this Proverb, Ad Triarios jam res
rediit: The matter comes now to be tried by the Triarii, in whom resided the
main shock, dint and upshot of the Battle. As Soto says, Sentio ego pro mea
exiguitate ingenii, etc. I am of opinion, according to the slenderness of my
Capacity, that if there were no other Argument, that we are not justified by
Faith alone, than that hence it would follow that a Man is certain he is in a
state of Grace, we should for this only cause deny Justification by sole Faith:
such is the Evidence (says he) that Faith makes no Man certain of his
Salvation. Et tamen adversarii, etc. And yet the Adversaries (says he) by
their perverse Argumentation, do even hence especially reason and conclude,
that we are justified by Faith alone, because otherwise no Man were sure of his
Justification: for such a strong Evidence do they take it, that every one ought
to be certain of his Salvation. Thus Soto. And on the other side Luther says,
Etiamsi nihil praeterea peccatum fuisset in doctrina pontificia, etc. Although
there had been no other fault in the Pontifician Doctrine, than that they
taught, that we ought to stagger and waver, misdeeming and doubting the
Remission of Sins, of Grace and our Salvation, yet we had just cause to
separate our selves from that infidel and misbelieving Church. So he (tho Mr.
Baxter, ut supra, condemns him and all others for so saying.) -- The case
therefore standing thus, between Certainty and Uncertainty, in the matter of
Salvation, that thereupon depends the winning and losing of the field; it
concerns both sides to be no less sollicitous of the well-managing of their
Forces, if not much more than the ancient Romans, and their opposite Enemies
the Albanians: when both sides resolved and concluded to pawn their perpetual
Liberty and State to each other, upon the success of one Conflict between three
Twin-brethren called Horatii, on the one side, and other three Twin-brethren
called Curatii, on the other. -- First therefore let us take a view of the
State and Strength of the Pontifician Party. To omit their many Distributions
of Certitude, as either in regard of the Object, or of the Subject, or some
Divine, or some Moral, etc. wherein both Soto and Vega do infinitely confound
themselves; take we notice first in general, what kind of Certitude they admit,
and allow of, and what they reject and disallow. The Certitudes or Certainties
which they allow of, are these: first, a Certitude of Catholic Faith; to wit,
a general Faith concerning the Truth of all things revealed in the Word of God,
etc. which Certitude they call a firm and certain Assent (tho obscure) to the
general Truth of God's Word; and this they call the Certitude, in regard of the
Object, the Assent whereof cannot be deceived: so that they confess a certain
general Certainty. And this is suitable and proportionable to that kind of Faith
which they hold, namely a general Faith. So that their general Certainty stands
upon very good Reason, for how can their Certainty be any other but general,
when their Faith is no other but general? for as he said, Judge. 8. 21. As the
Man is, so is his Strength: so as the Faith is, such is the strength of it.
Certitude therefore being the Property of Faith (as we shall show hereafter)
then Faith being general, the Certitude thereof can be no other than general.
Secondly, They do also seem to admit of a certain particular Certainty of
Faith, but with such Limitation. as they make it to be a most uncertain
Certainty, such as may be either true or false. To this purpose, Vega defining
Certainty to be a certain Assent void of all doubting, whose proper Object is
Truth, hereupon he thus infers; Itaque licet certi nequeant, etc. Therefore
(says he) tho none can properly be said to be certain of their Grace, but
those that certainly and truly believe that they are in the State of Grace; yet
we may, and ought to affirm, that all they do certainly assent they are in a
State of Grace, who without all doubt of fear do persuade themselves hereof,
whether their Opinion herein be true or false. Et nonnunquam, etc. And ofttimes
(says he) Philosophers and Divines do so abuse these terms, as that they
affirm, that all that have a certain assent of any thing, are absolutely and
simply persuaded thereof. Quamobrem, etc. Wherefore the Fathers (to wit, of
Trent) in this ninth Chapter, doubted not to say, that Heretics and
Schismatics do boast of the Certainty of the Remission of their Sins, when
notwithstanding they certainly knew, that that Certainty was rather a most vain
Persuasion of their Justification. And so Vega concludes, neque dubium, etc.
Nor do we doubt, but that we may say in plain terms, that the Heretics of our
time have not an opinion of their Grace or Justification, but a Certainty. Note
here (judicious Reader) that the Pontificians (as our Baxterians) do allow of a
certain uncertain particular Certainty of Faith, namely, such as may be either
true or false. They might better have said just nothing; saving that they
cautelously put this Clause by way of Prevention, that if a particular
Certainty of Faith be never so manifestly proved, yet it may prove at
hap-hazard, either true or false. And this Vega would demonstrate by a
Distinction, saying, There is a twofold Certainty, per se, or quoad nos: either
a Certainty in regard of the Truth it self believed, or in respect of our
Apprehension, which may be deceived, according to the Council's own Text --
with these Limitations do the Pontificians confine their allowance of the
Certainty of Justification. 1. It is only general, not special or particular.
2. If particular, there be any, they say it may be true or false. 3. This
special Certainty is given to none, but by special Revelation, and that to some
special choice Persons; as the blessed Virgin and the Apostles. 4. Just Men may
have some conjectural Signs and probable Opinions of their Justification. 5. If
any had this special Certainty, then certainly St. Anthony, a Privilege, which
not even the holy and faithful Martyrs are capable of without special
Revelation, says Vega. His Reason is, because even Heretics may be Martyrs,
and constantly die for Christ. This is the State of Pontifician Doctrine about
Certainty and Uncertainty of Faith in Justification. Mr. Burton's Christian
Bulwark, chap. 14. part of it.

Head 9. That true Grace, etc.
Papist.
THese Patrons of universal and conditional Election and Grace, which affirm
that Men are no otherwise elected, but with condition if they believe, and so
long are they elected, as they continue in Faith, do consequently also hold,
that Men may both lose their Election, and lose their Faith; and of the Vessels
of Honor, if they fall from Faith, become Vessels of Wrath: Heming. p. 30. And
they which are written in the Book of Life, may be rased out of it: Huber.
These. 757. The same also is maintained by Snecanus, that the Elect may finally
fall away from Christ, p. 976.

That Election may be lost, they would thus prove it out of Scripture: Moses
says unto God, Exodus 32. 32. If thou will not pardon them, raze me out of the
Book which thou have written: the Lord answered, Him that sins will I put
out of my Book. Neither Moses would have asked an impossible thing, neither
would God have so answered, if that they could not be rased out of the Book of
Life that are written there. Huber. These. 766.

They also object that place, I beat down my Body, etc. I my self should be a
Reprobate, etc. Ergo, The Elect may become a Reprobate. Pucks. Vet. 77.

Now that Faith also may be lost, they show it thus; Through thy Knowledge shall
the weak Brother perish for whom Christ died? Ergo, a Man may lose his Faith,
and so perish. Heming. p. 24.

Hemingius, p. 65. answers John 10. 29. that no Man by violence can pluck the
Elect from God, yet they willingly may fall away. Snecanus also grants, that
on God's behalf our Election is sure and immovable, but not on Men's behalf,
unless they continue, and hold fast their Faith to the end, p. 976. Dr.
Willet's Synop. Pap. p. 912, 913.

The Papists. A Man, they say, may fall away from the Faith which once truly he
had, and be deprived altogether of the State of Grace, so that he may be justly
counted among the Reprobates. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Justificat. cap. 14.

Argum. First they alledg these and such like Testimonies of Scripture: If a
righteous Man turn away from his Righteousness, etc. St. Paul also says of
some, That they had made Shipwreck of their Faith. Rhem. Bellarm. lib. 3. de
Justificat. cap. 120. Ergo, true Faith and Justice may be lost.

David, Peter, did grievously fall: Saul, Simon, Judas, became Reprobates:
Ergo, the Righteous may finally fall away. -- The Doway Proctors and Agents
(...) the Pope and Popery would thus infringe the Certainty of Faith; as of
Sampson they give this Note upon these Words, If my Head be shaven my Strength
shall depart from me: Supernatural Strength or Grace departs, when any leave
the Rule of their Profession. As concerning David, they say, that he was not
without Faith, yet contaminate not with Iniquity: so they say Solomon lost
God's Grace, and fell away. See Dr. Willet's Synop. Papis. p. 1009, 1010.

Huberus answers, that all Men are elected and adopted in Christ, These. 748.
and that God gives Faith, converteth the Heart, illuminateth, works
effectually in all that are so elected, and made the Vessels of Mercy, These.
867. But yet so that the Vessels of Honor thus prepared of God, may be made
the Vessels of Dishonor, These. 903. so the same Vessels are prepared of God to
Honor, of themselves and Satan to Destruction; These. 870. Ibid. p. 897.

This Promise of Christ is conditional, that so long as they continue
Believing, Baptism is a sufficient Remedy: but if they fall away from Faith,
then Baptism suffices not: for if there were not a Condition, then Apostates
should be saved, because they once believed: Sic Bellarm. cap. 19. Respons. ad
Argum. 1.

Contra. There need no condition of Perseverance to be annexed to Faith, seeing
it is a Property of true Faith, never finally to be lost: otherwise our Savior
would not have said, John 5. 24. He that believes has passed from Death to
Life. He pronounces as tho it were already done, which is but in Faith,
because of the assurance thereof: Wherefore Apostates and Backsliders, tho they
seemed once to believe, yet had no true Faith, as St. John says, They went out
from us, but were not of us. Dr. Willet, Ibid. p. 580.

That the Elect cannot fall away from the Grace and Favor of God, and be
wholly given over unto Sin. Romans 8. 35. What shall separate us from the Love of
Christ? etc. Notwithstanding this evident Testimony of the Apostle, Pererius
affirms, that one which is predestinate may be sine gratia Dei, without the
Grace of God, and in deadly Sin: his Reasons are these: 1. It was Jovinian's
Heresy, that he which was once justified could not fall from the Grace of God
into deadly Sin. Hierom. lib. 2. advers. Jovinian. 2. He urges the Examples of
Adam, Aaron, David, and the Apostles which fled from Christ, who all lost the
Grace they had, and fell into grievous Sins. 3. If Grace could not be lost,
then these Exhortations of Scripture should be superfluous; Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. And work out your
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2. 13. and such like.

Contra. The Error of Jovinian was, that one being in the state of Grace, could
not fall into Sin: which Opinion the Protestants abhor: for tho we say that the
Elect cannot fall away from that Grace and Favor of God, yet they fall into
Sin, and the Works of Grace may be intermitted in them: yet wholly given over
unto Sin they cannot be, which Pererius understands by falling into deadly
Sin. Dr. Willet on Romans, p. 399, 400.

They (viz. the Papists) say, a Man cannot be certain of his Justification,
that is not certain of his Perseverance in Grace to the end. But no Man (say
they) can be sure of his Perseverance, therefore no Man can be sure of his
Salvation. Council. Triden. Sess. 6. Can. 15. See Mr. Burton's Christian
Bulwark, p. 231, 232.

That no Man can promise to himself absolute Certainty to Perseverance until
the end, but should put his hope in the assistance of God, who will continue if
Man fail not. History of the Council of Trent, Sir Nathaniel Brent's
Translation, p. 210. (This I suppose without any Violence offered to Mr.
Baxter' s Sentiments, may be well placed amongst his Aphorisms.)

Vega in behalf of the Council of Trent prosecutes his Arguments, to prove the
Uncertainty of Predestination and Perseverance in five, whole Chapters
together, from the third to the seventh, showing himself a true Pontifician in
doubling and juggling with the Truth. But his Arguments are so slight, and his
Instances so impertinent, that I will not spend time in the reciting of them.
Only I will name the Head of them, that the Reader may thereby estimate the
whole Body: As that some Predestinate have sometimes been out of the State of
Grace; as namely, before their effectual Calling, and some after their
effectual Calling, as falling from Grace by every mortal Sin, as the
Pontificians teach. And as they may fall from Grace, so the wicked (he must
needs mean the Reprobates as opposite to the Elect, for else all Men by Nature
are wicked, and there is no difference, as the Apostle speaks) the wicked
(says Vega) may be received into Grace as the Predestinate may fall from
Grace. And so we yield unto him, that the wicked, that is, the Reprobates may
be as well received into Grace as the Predestinate and Elect may fall from
Grace totally or finally. See Mr. Burton's Christian Bulwark, p. 306.

Baxterian.
THis might be evidenced by many Reasons. 1. It is not saving Faith which is
not operative to these effects. It cease to be true (tho it was once so, by
its ceasing to be so) whenever it wholly fails of purifying the Heart, and
working of Love. Many affirm, that all Graces are seminally in Faith, as in
their Principle such must grant, that as Faith justifies us first in receiving
and relying on Christ, so it continues to justify us by continuing those Acts,
and exerting it self in those other Operations, which are essential to its
Nature. And thus some expound James 2. 24. 2. Obedience, good Works and
Perseverance, preserve us from those contrary Evils which do subject Men to
Condemnation: I keep my Body under, lest by any means, when I have preached to
others I my self be a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27. 3. The Gospel-Constitution does
by its Promises and Threatenings make persevering Holiness, Obedience and good
Works, the necessary way to Heaven. These are not only a natural, but a moral
Meetness for Heaven. -- The Gospel Constitution contains Promises and
Threatenings, which affect all of us, as a Rule of Happiness and Misery: By
these God governs Men, and Men's Hopes or Fears should be directed by these, as
their Rule. Dr. Crisp not observing this, (poor Man! it seems he had not
attained to our Neonomian Holiness) has run into those Mistakes which open a
door to all Licentiousness, tho he intended it not. His whole Scheme implies,
that Christ does not distribute Blessings or Punishments by any Rule that
refers to the Actings of Men (as knowing that whilst he was scraping his
conditional Prerequisites in order to his coming unto and reception with
Christ, he might probably fall in the Dirt by the way; Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum) I have proved the contrary, chapter 8, etc. For if the
Covenant of Grace be conditional, and Faith and Repentance are necessary to
Forgiveness, etc. the Substance of this must be granted -- Christ in the Gospel
declares, they shall miss of Heaven, and eternally perish, who are Apostates,
ungodly, disobedient and unprofitable, and that for being such. --

Heb. 10. 38, 39. Is this a Threatening or not? Will not Christ deal with Men
according to it? Is it not true of all Persons? Don't say the Elect Believer
will not fall away: I think the same, but yet is it the less true, that even he
shall perish if he fall away? Mr. Dan. Williams's Gospel Truth, etc. p. 112,
113, 117, 118.

Whether God does require any more of any Sinners for Salvation, than that they
believe in Christ, repent of Sin, persevere in true Holiness, sincere
Obedience, or good Works internal and external; and if we do so can we perish?
and does not the Promise secure Life upon doing these? -- If any Sinner believe
not, and repent not, has Christ ever promised to save him? Will any Decree, or
the Merits of Christ secure him? Again, if any penitent Believer shall
apostatize, prove ungodly and unfruitful, hate God, or neglect to love God and
his Neighbor wholly, etc. shall this Man be saved? Has not Christ determined
the contrary? (even against this once penitent Believer) will his first Faith
save him? A Resolution of these two things, according to the very scope of the
Word, will decide the main of this Controversy. These assert the Rule of
Christ's rectoral Distributions, and the Decree comes not in opposition to the
Methods of his Government, by which we are to govern our Hopes and Fears. Ibid.
p. 124, 125.

Should they that are united unto Christ apostatize from Faith, they would
thereby forfeit and lose this Union. If any cease to be Believers, they would
cease to be Members of Christ. This is the scope of John 15. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And
is it not apparent, that Apostasy sinks a Man into no more Unbelief than what
prevailed before he believed at all? Ibid. p. 80, 81.

Whether Holiness and sincere Obedience and Perseverance are the way to Heaven,
and are required of the Elect as the Conditions of their obtaining Salvation;
or is Heaven promised to them, if they persevere in Holiness and sincere
Obedience, and the loss of Heaven threatened, in case they continue wicked and
disobedient, or after Grace turn Apostates. This the Doctor denies, and I
affirm. Ibid. p. 107. -- What are all these, if our State be in no Suspense as
to what we shall be or do? p. 116.

Etiamsi praesens ad beneficia foederis jus conceditur, etc. Although a present
Right unto the Benefits of the Covenant is granted under the condition of
present Faith, yet the continuation of Right is given from the continuation of
Faith. For because it is given to a Believer, and an Apostate is not a Believer,
therefore from the Cessation of Faith will the Rights of the Covenant cease. --
Justificatio finalis and glorificatio, etc. Final Justification and
Glorification immediately possessed, are to none of Believers due before final
Victory and Perseverance: not as if only in Donations sub termino, because the
time of possessing is not yet come, but because a Right unto Possession is not
as yet full but imperfect: for the Right is not perfect, where the whole
Condition is not as yet performed. Mr. Baxter's Method. Theol. p. 398.

Q. Is the holy Spirit even unto the end, or Perseverance, promised truly to
Believers, and to the holy, absolutely, or under some condition?

Answ. Under a Condition, etc. Ibid. Part 3. p. 218.

Q. Are all or most Christians certain that they shall persevere?

Answ. No: for most Christians in the World hold, that Perseverance is
uncertain to the Godly, and how can they be certain of it to themselves? --
Much more may such live in Joy that are sure of their present State of Grace,
tho not of their Perseveranee. -- For Experience tells us, that tho most of
the Christian World are against the Do^rine of certain Perseverance of all true
Lelievers, yet many of them live and die in Comfort. Mr. Baxter's end of Doct.
Controv. chapter 26.. 18, 22, 23. (This is quite contrary to the Comfort and the
grounds thereof that the Psalmist had in his slraits, Psalm. 73. 21, 22, 23, 24.
and 23. 4, 6.)

That there is a confirmed State or Degree of Holiness that is never lost, I do
hold, and that this is attainable, and in that State Men may be certain of
Salvation. But whether the least Degrees of habitual Grace be utterly loseable,
which prove a present Right to Life, till they are lost, I must plainly profess
I do not know; much may be said on both sides, etc.

Whether there be a State of Confirmation here?

Answ. Undoubtedly there are some Christians that are strong, rooted, settled,
established, and some that are weak, and like Children tossed up and down --

There is a need of strengthening Grace. It is agreeable to Scripture, Reason
and Experience, to judge, that strengthened Christians stand faster than the
weak, and that it is in it self more unlikely that they should be seduced and
forsake Christ. Mr. Baxter's end of Doct. Controv. chapter 26.. 9, 14, 15. (compare
this with Isa. 40. 9, 10, 11, 29, 30, 31. Nay, had the Baxterian together with
the Papist and Quaker, said that Grace in its degree tends more to the
experimental and satisfactory Establishment and Confirmation of a Believer than
where it is of a lower growth, tho as true in its kind [which they do
acknowledg] as the other, it would have been somewhat to purpose; lut to say
this is loseable and not the other, as it is unscriptural, so it is the very
Doctrine of Devils; for they that are most perfectly grown in Grace, by their
own Rule, have these their perfect Degrees built but upon that which may
essentially be lost, it being but an Improvement of it: and to see a House
stand without a Foundation, were to build Castles in the Air with a witness; or
to see a House give either a being or permanent footing unto its Basis, is much
the same.)

Quaker.
FOR, since the Wages of Sin is Death, there is no Man while he sins, and is
subject thereunto, but may lawfully suppose himself capable of perishing. Hence
the Apostle Paul himself says, 1 Cor. 9. 27. But I keep under my Body, and
bring it into subjection, lest by any means, when I have preached to others, I
my self should be a Castaway. Here the Apostle supposes it possible for him
to be a Castaway, and yet it may be judged he was far more advanced in the
inward Work of Regeneration, when he wrote that Epistle, than many, who now
adays too presumptuously suppose they cannot fall away, because they feel
themselves to have attained some small degree of true Grace. (So that it is not
the kind, but the Baxterian Degree of Grace that secures our Perseverance.) Mr.
Barclay's Apology, p. 188.

Although this Gift and inward Grace of God be sufficient to work out Salvation,
yet in those in whom it is resisted, it both may and does become their
Condemnation. Moreover, they in whose Hearts it has wrought in part to purify
and sanctify them, in order to their surther Perfection, may by Disobedience
fall from it, turn it to Wantonness, 1 Timothy 1. 19. make Shipwreck of Faith, and
after having tasted the heavenly Gift, and been made Partakers of the Holy
Ghost, again fall away, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. yet such an Increase and Stability in
the Truth may, in this Life, be attained, from which there cannot be a total
Apostasy. Ibid. p. 184.

-- Neither is the Grace of God frustrated, tho the effect of it be diverse,
according to its Object: being the Ministration of Mercy and Love, in those
that reject it not, but receive it; John 1. 12. but the Ministration of Wrath
and Condemnation, in those that do reject it, John 3. 19. (tho, as they say, it
is the universal and saving Light of Jesus Christ). Ibid. p. 103.

If Men turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, then they must once have had it:
But the first is true; Therefore also the second.

If Men may make Shipwreck of Faith, they must once have had it, neither could
they ever have had true Faith without the Grace of God. But the first is true;
therefore also the last.

If Men may have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and been made Partakers of the
Holy Ghost, and afterward fall away; they must needs have known in measure the
Operation of God's saving Grace and Spirit, without which no Man could taste
the heavenly Gift, nor yet partake of the Holy Spirit. But the first is true;
therefore also the last. Ibid. p. 185.

Object. First they alledg, that those Places mentioned of making Shipwreck of
Faith, is only understood of seeming Faith, and not of a real true Faith.

Answ. This Objection is very weak, and apparently contrary to the Text, 1 Timothy
1. 19. where the Apostle adds to Faith a good Conscience, by way of
Complaint; whereas if their Faith had been only seeming and hypocritical, the
Men had been better without it than with it; neither had they been worthy of
Blame, for losing that which in it self was evil. But the Apostle expressly adds
[and of a good Conscience] which shows it was real; neither can it be supposed,
that Men could truly attain a good Conscience, without the Operation of God's
saving Grace, far less that a good Conscience does consist with a seeming false
and hypocritical Faith. Again, these Places of the Apostle being spoken by way
of Regret, clearly import that these Seize they had fallen from, were good
and real, not false and deceitful, else he would not have regretted their
falling from them. And so he says positively, they tasted of the heavenly
Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc. not that they seemed to
be so, which shows this Objection is very frivolous.

Object. Secondly, They alledg Phil. 1. 6. Being confident of this very thing,
that he which has begun a good Work in you, will perform it, until the day of
Jesus Christ, etc. And 1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the Power of God, through
Faith unto Salvation.

Answ. These Scriptures, as they do not affirm any thing positively contrary to
us, so they cannot be understood otherwise than as the Condition is performed
upon our part, seeing Salvation is no other ways proposed there, but upon
certain necessary Conditions to be performed by us, as has been above proved,
and as our Adversaries also acknowledge, as Romans 8. 13. Heb. 3. 14. For if these
Places of the Scripture, upon which they build their Obligation, were to be
admitted without these Conditions, it would manifestly overturn the whole Tenor
of their Exhortations throughout all their Writings. Ibid. p. 186, 187. --

For all the Arguments which these alledg, that affirm there can be no falling
away, may well be received upon the one part, as of these who have attained to
this Stability and Establishment, and their Objections solved by this
Concession: so upon the other hand, the Arguments alleged from Scripture
Testimonies, by those that affirm the possibility of falling away, may well be
received of such as are not come to this Establishment, tho having attained a
measure of true Grace. Ibid. p. 187, 188.

Herein I say is the dimness of the Divines, and mere Humanity of the Doctrines
of the Academical Doctors discovered. Also the Quakers, with the Innocence of
their Cause, cleared against the Insolency of the choicest Champions that
contemn them, and the Divinity of their Doctrines vindicated from their
Clamours, in the Points hereunder specified, viz. Anti-Papism, Liberty of
Conscience, having the Faith of God without respect to the Persons of Men,
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ alone, the Scripture, and what it
is as to name and thing; the word of God, and what as to name and thing; the
Light of Christ in the Conscience, as to its Universality and Sufficiency, and
how it and not the external Text or Letter is the only firm Foundation of the
Churches Faith, the only true Touchstone of all Doctrines, the only right Rule
of all saving Belief and holy Life. The infallible Spirit's infallible Guidance
of all that follow him as their Guide at this very day: The general Grace and
Love of God in Christ to the whole World, and every Individual in it, and how
it is great, universal, true and unfeigned, notwithstanding (through each
perishing Man's own fault) very few in it are saved; Election and Reprobation,
how it is of two Seeds only absolutely, and of Persons only conditionally, as
born of, and growing up (respectively) into the Image of those several Seeds,
etc. Mr. Fisher's Testimony of Truth exalted, p. 30.

See, Reader, here is a whole Cloud of Witnesses bearing Testimony, that it is
possible, if there be not a diligent watching, for People to fail of (or rather
fall from) that measure of the true Grace of God, which was once given to them.
Therefore what the Quakers hold in this point is no new Doctrine: for if this
could not possibly be, how could any do despite unto the Spirit of Grace, or
resist the Holy Ghost? Yet do this People believe, a Christian may come to such
a growth and standing in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus, from which he
cannot fall away, according to that Promise in Rev. 3. 12. And they also
believe, that such a one may come to be assured, that he is in such a State
even as the Apostle was, who said, For I am persuaded that neither Death nor
Life, etc. Romans 8. 38, 39. Mrs. Elizabeth Bathurst's Truth's Vindication, p.
53, 54.

And this I have found (says James Naylor) an everlasting Truth, whatever Men
believe or imagine, that no longer than a Man keeps his face toward the Light
of God, no longer are his Sins past behind his back, whether they be Sins past,
present, or to come; but if he turn from God's Righteousness, his own Iniquity
will rise and meet him, both new and old, and in vain does such believe they
are blotted out of God's sight. Possession of the living Faith, p. 23, 24.

From the whole we may say of these Men, as a Person of Quality said of the
determinate Issues of the Synod of Dort, that they had dressed Religion in a
Fool's Coat; and therefore to set and help off their old wrinkled and exploded
Wares, we shall leave these Italian Pedlars the assistance of an old Song, as
well becoming their Doctrines and Practices for the vending of them, together
with my Countryman Mr. D. Williams's dawbing, painted and patched and caetera's.

From the fair Lavinian Shore,
We your Markets come to store;
Muse not tho so far we dwell,
And our Wares come here to sell;
Such is the sacred Hunger of Gold,
Then come to our Pack, where we cry,
What do you lack, what do you buy,
For here it is to be sold.
You whose Birth and Breeding base,
Are ranked into a noble Race;
And whose Parents heretofore,
Neither Arms nor Scutcheons bore:
First let us have but a touch of your Gold,
Then come to us, Lad,
You shall have what your Dad
Never gave, for here it is to be sold.
Madam, for your wrinkled Face,
Here Is Complexion it to grace,
Which, if your earnest be but small,
It takes away the Virtue all.
But if your Palms are anointed with Gold,
Then you shall seem like a Queen of fifteen,
Tho you are threescore years old.
I shall conclude this ninth and last Head, as running cross the three Columns
thereof, with some Observations out of Dr. Owen' s second Volume upon the
Hebrews, collected and recited verbatim, partly out of his Exercitations and
Exposition in the same; unto which I shall add his Explication of the Parable
of the Pharisee and Publican -- together with some Notes out of his piece of
Apostasy. -- The Doctrine concerning the Priesthood and Sacrifice of the Lord
Christ, has in all ages, by the Craft and Malice of Satan, been either
directly opposed, or variously corrupted; for it contains the principal
Foundation of the Faith, and Consolation of the Church, which are by him
chiefly maligned, it is known in how many things, and by how many ways it has
been obscured and depraved in the Papacy; sundry of them we have occasion to
deal about, in our Exposition on many Passages of the Epistle. For they have
not so much directly opposed the Truth of the Doctrine, as disbelieving the use
and benefit of the thing it self unto the Church, they have substituted various
false and superstitious Observances to effect the end whereunto this Priesthood
of Christ and his holy Discharge thereof are alone of God designed. These
therefore I shall no otherwise consider, but as their Opinions and Practices
occur occasionally unto us, either in these Exercitations, or in the Exposition
ensuing. But there are a Generation of Men whom the Craft of Satan has stirred
up in this and the foregoing Age, who have made it a great part of their
preposterous and pernicious Endeavors in and about Religion, to overthrow this
whole Office of the Lord Christ, and the efficacy of the Sacrifice of himself
depending thereon. This they have attempted with much Subtilty and Diligence,
introducing a metaphorical or imaginary Priesthood and Sacrifice in their room:
so robbing the Church of its principal Treasure, they pretend to supply the end
of it with their own Fancies. They are the Socinians whom I intend. And there
are more Reasons than one, why I could not omit a strict Examination of their
Reasonings and Objections against this great part of the Mystery of the Gospel.
The Reputation of Parts, Industry and Learning, which the bold Curiosity of
some has given unto them, makes it necessary, at least upon unavoidable
occasions, to obviate the Insinuation of their Poison, which that opens a way
for. Besides, even among our selves they are not a few, who embrace and do
endeavor to propagate their Opinions. And the same Course, with their faces
seeming to look another way, is steered by the Quakers who have at last openly
espoused almost all their pernicious Tenants, although in some things as yet they
obscure their Sentiments in cloudy Expressions, as wanting Will or Skill to
make a more perspicuous Declaration of them. And there are others also
pretending to more Sobriety than those before mentioned, who do yet think that
these Doctrines concerning the Offices and Mediation of Christ are, if not
unintelligible by us, yet not of any great necessity to be insisted on, for of
that Esteem are the Mysteries of the Gospel grown to be with some, with many
among us. Exercitat. p. 2, 3. -- Now Wisdom and Knowledge have both of them
respect unto Truth. Where they are attained, there Truth it self does dwell. In
the due Consideration of the Lord Christ are these Treasures opened unto us.
And although we may not at once clearly and fully discern them, yet we are in the
proper way to know them and possess them. There is not the least Line of Truth,
how far soever it may be extended, and how small soever it may at length
appear, but the Springs of it lie in the Person of Christ: And then we learn it
aright, when we learn it in the Spring, or as it is in him, Ephesians. 4. 21. which
when we have done, we may safely trace it down, and follow it unto its utmost
extent. But he that looks on Gospel Truths, as Sporades, as scattered up and
down independently one of another, who sees not the Root, Center and Knot of
them in Jesus Christ, it is most probable, that when he goes about to gather
them for his use, he will also take up things quite of another nature. They
say, that all moral Virtues are knit up in one, that is Righteousness, so that
he who has that, has all the rest, at least radically and virtually. This I
know, that all spiritual Truths are knit up and centred in him who is the
Truth. And they who have learned him, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 20. have
with him received the Seeds of all Truth, which being watered and attended, as
they ought, will in due time flourish into all their proper Branches and
Fruits; for all things are gathered into one Head in him, Ephesians. 1. 10. -- The
right Performance of this Duty enlivens, excites and acts all those Graces and
gracious Affections which are effectual to preserve us in the Truth, and to
keep us from Decays in our Profession. The Lord Christ being the proper Object
of them, and this Consideration consisting in the application of the Faculties
of our Souls unto that Object, by a due exercise of those Graces, they must
needs be increased and augmented thereby, as all Grace grows and thrives in and
by its Exercise, and ordinarily not otherwise. And when any Grace is so applied
unto Christ, as spiritually to touch him, Virtue goes forth from him for its
strengthening. The neglect then also hereof, must of necessity produce the
contrary effect, John 15. 5, 6. -- Thus in particular is Faith increased, for
according as the Object of it is cleared, manifested, represented, suitable and
desirable unto the Soul, so is Faith it self excited and stirred up, and
strengthened. Now this is no otherwise done but when the Soul is enabled
graciously to ponder on the Person and Offices of Christ. There it finds all
that is needful unto it to make it happy and blessed, to procure Pardon, Peace,
Righteousness and Glory for it. This Faith receives, and is improved by it; so
the Apostle informs, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Having Boldness and Liberty given us in the
Gospel, to consider and behold by Faith the Glory of Christ, we are thereby
transformed into his Likeness and Image, namely by an increase of Faith,
whereby we grow up into him who is the Head. And this brings along with it an
increase in all other Graces, whereby we are preserved in the Profession and
Practice of the Truth. -- By this means also a Fountain of godly Sorrow is
opened in the Hearts of Believers, which is a precious Grace, Zech. 12. 10. The
consideration of the Lord Christ, as pierced for us, or by us, will melt and
humble the Soul, or it will never yield unto any Ordinance of God. -- The
Spouse in like-manner in the Canticles giving an account of her great and
incomparable Love unto her Beloved, manifests that it arose from the exact
Consideration that she had taken of his Person, and all that belonged
thereunto, chapter 5. 9, 10, 11. The like may be said of all other Graces, and by
these we must be preserved or utterly fail. -- We may see here the Reason, why
so many turn aside, and fall off from the Truth and Ways of the Gospel. They
have given over a due Consideration of Jesus Christ his Person, Offices and
Mediation, and so have lost the means of their Preservation. They have been
weary of him, not seeing a Form or Loveliness in him for which he should be
desired; what a sad instance have we hereof in those poor deluded Creatures,
who neglecting him, pretend to find all Light and Life within themselves? This
is their Bethel, the beginning of their Transgression. For when Men have
neglected the Person of Christ, is it any wonder if they despise his Ways and
Ordinances, as is their manner? Indeed the Ordinances of the Gospel, its
Worship and Institutions have no Excellency, no Beauty in them but what arises
from their relation unto the Person and Offices of Christ; and if they are
neglected, these must needs be burdensome and grievous. And as it is in vain to
draw Men unto the Embracement of them, who know him not, who are not acquainted
with him, seeing they appear unto them the most grievous and intolerable of all
things that can be imposed on them; so they who, on any account, cease to
consider him by Faith, as he is proposed unto them in the Gospel, cannot long
abide in their Observation. Give such Men the advantages of Liberty, and
keeping up a Reputation of Profession without them, which they suppose a new
singular Opinion will furnish them withal, and they will quickly cast them off
as a Burden not to be born. And as it is with Gospel Worship, so it is with all
the Articles of Faith, or important Truths that we are to believe. The Center
and Knot of them all is in the Person of Christ. If they are once loosed from
thence, if their Union in him be dissolved; if Men no more endeavor to learn
the Truth, as it is in Jesus, or to acquaint themselves with the Will of God,
as he has gathered all things unto an head in him, they scatter as it were of
their own accord from their Minds, so that it may be they retain no one of
them; or, if they do so, yet not in a right manner, so as to have an experience
of the Power of them in Obedience. This is the cause of the Apostacies amongst
us; Christ is neglected, not considered, not improved. A Light within, or a
formal Worship without, are enthroned in his stead, and thence all sorts of
Errors and Evils do on their own accord ensue: deal with any whom you see to
neglect his Ways and Truths, and you will find this to be the state of things
with them, they have left off to value and esteem the Person of Christ, or they
had never any Acquaintance with him. And in vain is it to dispute with Men
about the Streams, whilst they despise the Fountain. The Apostle gives us a
threefold Miscarriage in Religion; Col. 2. 18. (1.) A pretense of a voluntary
uncommanded Humility, a pretended Mortification, indeed a bare covering of base
and filthy Pride. (2.) A worshipping of Angels, an instance to express all
false self-invented Worship. And, (3.) Curiosity in vain Speculations, or Men's
intruding themselves into the things which they have not seen, setting out
things with swelling Words of Vanity, wherewith in truth they have no
acquaintance, whereof they have no experience. And all these, says he, v. 19.
proceed from hence, that they hold not the Head, they have let go the Lord
Christ, from whom all Truths are to be derived, and consequently all Truth it
self. Here lies the Spring of our frequent Apostacies. Again, we may hereby
examine and try our selves: Do we at any time find the Ways, Institutions or
Ordinances of Christ grievous or burdensome unto us? Do we find a secret dislike
of them, or not that delight in them which we have formerly enjoyed? If we
search into the Root of our Distempers, we shall find that our Hearts and
Spirits have not been exercised with that Consideration of the Person and
Office of Christ which our Duty calls for. We have not been kept in a constant
Adoration of his Majesty, Admiration of his Excellency, Delight in his Beauty,
Joy in his Undertaking, holy Thoughtfulness of his whole Mediation. This has
betrayed us into our Lukewarmness and Indifferency, and made us faint and weary
in his ways. Hence also all Endeavors for a Recovery from such a frame, that
regard only the particular Instances that we are sensible of, are languid and
successless. He that finds himself faint in, and weary of any of the ways of
Christ, or any Duties of Obedience unto him, or that discovers an
undervaluation of any of the Truths of the Gospel as to their Use and
Importance, and thinks to recover himself, and retrieve his Spirit only by
applying himself unto that Particular wherein he is sensible of his failure,
will labor in the fire, and to no purpose: It may be that after some days, or
months, or years, he will find himself more at a loss than ever, and that
because although he striveth, yet he striveth not lawfully. If we would recover
our selves, we must go to the source and beginning of our decays. -- This tends
directly unto our Instructions in these perilous days, such as the latter days
are foretold to be. All means that ever the Devil made use of from the
Foundation of the World, to draw off or deter Men from Gospel-Obedience, are at
this day displayed. The World smiles upon Apostates, and promises them a
plentiful Supply of such things as the corrupt Nature of Man esteems desirable.
Errors and false Worship, with Temptations from them, spread themselves with
Wings of glorious Pretenses over the, face of the whole Earth. Trials,
Troubles, Storms, Persecutions, attend and threaten on every hand: and he only
that endures unto the end shall be saved. He that like Jonah is a sleep in
this Tempest, is at the door of Ruin; he that is secure in himself from danger,
is in the greatest danger of falling by Security. What then shall we do, what
means shall we use for our Preservation? Take the Counsel of our blessed
Apostle; Holy Brethren, Partakers of the heavenly Calling, consider the Apostle
and High Priest (...) our Profession. And again, chapter 12. 3. Consider him who
endured such Contradiction of Sinners against himself, lest you be weary and
faint in your Mind. Be much in the consideration of the Person, Office and Work
of Christ. This will conform you unto him, derive Strength from him, arm you
with the same Mind that was in him, increase all your Graces, keep you from
being weary, and give you assured. Victory. He deserves it, you need it, let it
not be omitted. -- This will give direction unto them who are called unto the
work of teaching others. The Person and Offices of Christ are the things which
principally they are to insist upon. For that which is the chiefest Object of
the Churches Faith, ought to be the chiefest Subject of our Preaching. So Paul
tells the Galatians, that in his preaching, Christ was evidently crucified
before their Eyes, Gal. 3. 1. He proposed Christ crucified unto their
Consideration, determining, as he speaks in another place, to know nothing
amongst them, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. For if the Consideration of
Christ be such an important Duty in Believers, certainly the due Proposal of
him unto their Consideration is no less in Preachers. Christ alone is to be
preached absolutely, and all other Truths as they begin, end, and center in
him. To propose the Lord Christ amiable, desirable, useful, and every way
worthy of Acceptance, is the great Duty of the Dispensers of the Gospel. Dr.
Owen on the Hebrews, Vol. 2. p. 23, 24, 25, 26. -- Our Apostle tells us, that
the preaching of the Cross was Foolishness to them that perished, 1 Cor. 1. 18.
And they perished merely on that account: It was Foolishness unto them, they
liked not the Mystery of it, they saw no Wisdom in it. And this he did with
respect unto Jews and Gentiles, as is manifest in that place. To confirm this,
I shall instance in some of the principal Heads of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and show how Unbelief prevails with Men to dislike them, to reject them, and to
look on them as Folly. And the first is this; That Jesus of Nazareth, poor and
contemptible as he was in the World, generally esteemed by the Men of those
days wherein he lived, to be a Seducer, a Glutton, a Blasphemer, a turbulent
Person, hated of God and Man, being taken as a Thief, and hanged upon a Tree,
and so slain by the consent of the World, Jews and Gentiles, as a Malefactor,
was the Son of God, the Savior of the World, and is both Lord and Christ. This
is the beginning of the Gospel, which the Apostle preached to the Jews and
Gentiles, Acts 2. 22, 23, 24. Ye Men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of
Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you by Miracles, and Wonders, and Signs,
which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know: Him
being delivered by the determinate Counsel and Fore-knowledg of God, ye have
taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain; whom God has raised up:
that is, this Jesus of Nazareth which we preach, him whom you remember well
enough, he was among you but the other day, and preached unto you, and wrought
Signs and Miracles among you. And you may further remember him by an infallible
Token; for with wicked hands you crucified and slew him. Well! and what of this
Jesus whom we slew and crucified? Why says the Apostle, (...), Let all the
House of Israel know assuredly that God has made him both Lord and Christ,
ver. 36. Him, who is that, an appearance of the eternal Word? A Dispensation of
Grace appearing in him; the sight of God in Man? No, no, but (...) That same
Jesus whom ye crucified: That same Man whom about eight weeks ago you
crucified, him has he made both Lord and Christ, or in his Resurrection and
Exaltation declared so to be. And this the Holy Ghost lays a sure Foundation of
in his Expression of his Incarnation and Birth. The Angel tells Mary his ^her,
(...), Luke 1. 31. Thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bear a Son, conceive
him by the Power of the Most High, and bear him after the manner of Women. And
then, ver. 35. (...), That holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God. That holy thing was the Child which she conceived,
afterward called Jesus of Nazareth. And it* was termed an holy thing, because
it was (...), not a Person of it self, as conceived by her, had not a personal
Subsistence in, by, and of it self, but subsisted in the Person of the Son of
God, on which account it was called the Son of God. And when he was born, the
Angel tells the Shepherds that that day was born the Savior Christ the Lord,
Luke 2. 11. who he tells them in the next Verse was (...), the Infant that was
wrapped in swaddling Clouts, and placed in the Manger. To this purpose do the
Apostles declare themselves again, Acts 3. 13, 14, 15. The God of Abraham, and
of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus,
whom ye delivered up and denied him in the presence of Pilat, when he was
determined to let him go: But ye denied the holy one, and the just, and desired
a Murderer to be granted unto you, and killed the Prince of Life, whom God has
raised from the dead. Still they direct them to the Man whom they saw, and
knew, and dealt wickedly and injuriously withal. And this Man, he tells them,
this Christ, must be received in the Heavens, until the restitution of all
things, when he shall come again, ver. 19, 20, 21. so himself lays this as the
Foundation of all his Preaching; John 8. 24. If (says he) ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall die in your Sins; that I Jesus of Nazareth, that speak unto
you, and converse with you, am the Messiah, the Savior of the World, you shall
die and perish for evermore; this I say is one, and one of the first
fundamental Principles of the Gospel; and I shall a little manifest how
Unbelief dislikes this Principle, and by that Dislike prevails with Men unto an
Apostasy from the Gospel it self. -- I might insist upon the great instance
hereof in the Nation of the Jews unto whom he was sent first, and in an
especial manner; but I have done this at large in the first part of our
Prolegomena unto this Work, whereunto I refer the Reader; only we may mind how
this was fore expressed concerning them by the Prophet, Isa. 53. 2. He has no
Form nor Comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty that we
should desire him. They could not see or discern any thing in him for which
they should receive him, or believe in him, as to the end for which he was sent
of God. As Hiram King of Tire, when he saw the Cities which Solomon had given
him, they displeased him, and he called them Cabul, and so he rejected them, 1
Kings 12. 13. So did the Jews when they came to see the Lord Christ, they were
displeased with him, and reproaching him with many opprobrious terms utterly
rejected him, under the Power of which Unbelief they yet reject him. I might
also insist on the Pagans of old, who derided the crucified God of the
Christians. But I will leave them under the Conquest which the Gospel obtained
against them. Mention also might be made of the Gnostics, and other ancient
Heretics with their endless Genealogies and Fables, making him to be only an
appearance of a Man; and tho himself said he was a Man, and his Friends said he
was a Man, and that God himself said he was a Man, and that he sent forth his
Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, tho he lived and died a Man, yet they
would not acknowledge him so to be. But these are long since gone off the stage,
although we have yet to do with their Offspring, under several Forms and Shapes.
The Popish Figment also of Transubstantiation, springing from the same Root,
utterly overthrowing the humane Nature of Christ and our Salvation wrought
therein, might be on this account remarked. And so also might the Imagination
of the Mennonites, who will not grant that the Man of whom we speak took Flesh
of the Substance of the Virgin, but that his Flesh was spiritual, as they
speak, brought from Heaven, and only passing through the Womb of the Virgin,
that he might appear to be a Man. And so said some of old, concerning whom
Tertullian says, that according to their opinion, Maria non filium gestabat in
utero sed hospitem: Mary bare not her Son in her Womb, but a Guest; for they
utterly dislike it, that one Partaker of Flesh and Blood, like our selves,
should be this Son of God. And therefore this Figment which overthrows the
Covenant of God with Abraham, and all the Promises of the Messiah, that he
should be of his Seed, and of the Seed of David, at once rejecting the whole
old Testament, and turning the Stories of the Genealogy of Christ, recorded to
manifest the Faithfulness of God in his Promises, into Fables, must be exalted
in the room and place of that Truth which is so fully, so frequently asserted
in the Gospel, and which is the prime Foundation of all our Profession. All
these Oppositions unto, and Apostacies from the Gospel, sprang from this
especial Cause, or the dislike of Unbelief against this Principle of its
Mystery and Doctrine. But I shall particularly instance in two sorts of Persons
that are of nearer Concernment unto us than any of these. -- And the first is
of them they call Quakers. It is strange to think into how many Forms and
Shapes they have turned themselves, to darken the Counsel of God in this
matter, and to hide their own apprehension from the Light. At their beginning
in the World they made (many of them) no Scruple plainly to affirm, that all
that is spoken concerning Christ, was a mere Dispensation of God, and an
appearance of the Light; but as for such a Man as we have described, they had
no regard of him. This at first served their turns, and they intended no more
by Christ, but that which they call the Light of God within them. But what
shall we say unto these things? If all the Testimonies that we have given unto
the Man Christ Jesus, if all that is spoken of him in the Gospel, all that he
did, all that he suffered, which he now does in Heaven by Intercession, what he
shall do at the day of Judgment, all that is required of us toward him, in
Faith, Love, and Obedience, be not enough to prove him a real individual Man,
we may certainly be all of us in a mistake as to what we our selves are in this
World, we may be all Dispensations, who have hitherto taken our selves to be
the Sons and Daughters of Men. But it is some while since they seem to have
forsaken this Imagination, being driven from it by the common Expostulations of
every ordinary Christian, what do you think of Jesus that died at Jerusalem?
They have begun in words to acknowledge his Person, but yet continue strangely
to obscure their Thoughts concerning him, and to confound it or the Presence of
God in and with him, with their own pretended Light. And whence does this
arise? It is merely from the secret Dislike that Unbelief has of this Mystery
of God. Hence they cannot see that Form and Comeliness in him for which he
should be desired. -- Again, others there are who grant, that all we have
spoken concerning the humane Nature of Christ is true: That he was so born,
that he so died, and that he was so a Man as we have declared. And this Man,
say they, was justly called, and is so the Son of Son, because God employed and
exalted him unto all Power in Heaven and Earth. But that he should be the
eternal Son of God, that the eternal Word should be made Flesh, that a divine
Person should receive the humane Nature into Subsistence with it self, this
they utterly reject. This is the way of the Socinians. The Testimonies being so
many, so plain, so uncontrollable, that are given in the Scripture unto this
Truth, what is it that carrys Men to advance a Contradiction unto them, to
their own Ruin? Why Unbelief does not like this Mystery of God manifested in
the Flesh, this insensibly alienates the Soul from it; and what Men pretend to
receive by the Conduct of Reason and Argument, is indeed nothing but Prejudices
imposed on their Minds by the Power of Unbelief. -- Secondly, Another main
fundamental Principle of the Gospel is, That by the Obedience unto God, Death,
and Bloodshedding of this same Jesus, who was crucified and slain, is
Redemption, Forgiveness of Sins, Deliverance from the Wrath to come,
Righteousness, and Acceptance with God to be obtained, and by him only. -- The
other Proposition respected the Person of Christ, this does his Mediation, and
this in the second place was insisted on in the preaching of the Gospel. That
this was the sum of the Doctrine of the Scriptures concerning him, himself
taught his Disciples, Luke 24. 45, 46, 47. Then opened he their Understanding,
that they might understand the Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is
written, and thus it behooves Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day, and that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his
Name. And this the Apostles jointly express exclusively unto all other Mediums
as to the end proposed; Acts 4. 12. There is no Salvation in any other, for
there is none other Name under Heaven given amongst Men whereby we must be
saved. -- The great Inquiry of Men in the World, convinced of an immortal
Condition, is that which we have expressed, Acts 16. 30. What must we do to be
saved? This lies in their Thoughts more or less all their days, and is rolled
in their Hearts under that severe Notion; Isa. 33. 15. Who among us shall dwell
with that devouring Fire? Who among us shall inhabit with everlasting Burnings?
And of this Inquiry there are two Parts. 1. How they may obtain Forgiveness of
Sin; Mich. 6. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before
the High God? Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, and Calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my
Body for the Sin of my Soul? When a real Sense of the Guilt of Sin is by any
means brought upon the Soul, it is vehement and urgent, and will give them in
whom it is, no Rest, until they can fix on some way of Relief. 2. What they
shall do for a Righteousness, upon the account whereof they may obtain
Acceptance with God, for it is not enough that Men be one way or other
acquitted from Sin, but they must be righteous also. In this case, the Jews
sought for Righteousness as it were by the Works of the Law, Romans 9. 32. For a
Righteousness they knew they must have, and being ignorant of the Righteousness
of God, they went about to establish their own Righteousness, Romans 10. 3. --
Now this Head of the Gospel that we mentioned is a direct Answer unto these two
Questions. For in answer to the first, it declares, that by this Jesus Christ
alone is Forgiveness and Remission of Sins to be obtained. In him we have
Redemption through his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sin, Ephesians. 1. 7. See Heb. 9.
12, 13, 14. This was, as the Gospel declares, the Design of God the Father,
Romans 3. 24, 25. and of his own Love and good Will, Rev. 1. 5. And this the
Apostles preached, (...), amongst the chiefest things of their Message to the
World, 1 Cor. 15. 3. And to the second, it answers, that by the Obedience and
Sufferings of Christ alone, is the Righteousness inquired after to be obtained.
For by his Obedience, the obedience of one, are many made righteous, Romans 5.
19. For not only by him is preached unto us the Forgiveness of Sins, but by him
all that believe are justified, Acts 13. 38, 39. See Phil. 3. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 1.
30. -- -- This is another important part of the Mystery of the Gospel, and that
which Unbelief greatly dislikes, that is, it is apt to beget in the Soul a
dislike of it. And a great instance we have in the World of its Power and
Efficacy to draw Men off from the Gospel. For Unbelief in this matter is the
real Foundation of the whole Papacy. They cannot rest in Christ alone for
Righteousness and Forgiveness of Sins. Hence has sprung their Sacrifice of the
Mass for the quick and dead; hence their Indulgences from the Treasures of the
Church; hence their Penances and Works satisfactory for Sin; hence their
Purgatory, religious Houses, Pilgrimages, Intercession of Saints and Angels,
Confessions and Absolutions, with the Remainder of their Abominations. (Hence
let me add, arises also the Baxterian Prerequisites, Conditions and
Preparatives to Justification before God, and the continuation of that State in
its dependence upon our Retention of and Perseverance in these Prerequisites,
Conditions and Preparatives; hence from a t acit Unbelief also of the fullness
of the Satisfaction of Christ, Sins past, present, and to come, are not at once
pardoned, but gradually; i. e. as we commit them, believe and repent, so they
are remitted; grounding our Acquitment from an offended Justice, the righteous
Demands of a broken Law, twitches of Conscience, Accusations of Men and Devils,
upon the progress of an inherent Righteousness). All these things spring from
no other Root but this, namely, that from the Power of their Unbelief Men think
it a foolish thing to look for Pardon and Righteousness solely from another,
and not to trust to themselves in any thing. And the reason why they have
multiplied Instances to the same purpose is, because they can indeed find Rest
and Satisfaction in none other, and do therefore please and deceive their Souls
with this Variety. And what is it that has driven a company of poor deluded
Souls amongst our selves, to trust unto a fancied Light within them, and a
feigned Perfection in their ways? They cannot think it wise, prudent, safe,
they like it not, to rest, to trust for their All upon one who lived and died
so long ago. Men make sundry Pretenses, use diverse Arguings and Pleas for
their turning aside unto their crooked Paths, endeavor by all means possible
to justify themselves; but the bottom of all lies here, that this Doctrine of
the Cross is Foolishness unto them, and they are under the Power of their
Unbelief which dislikes the Mysteries of it. -- Thirdly, Another Principle of
the Mystery is, That the way and means whereby Forgiveness of Sin,
Righteousness and Acceptance with God for Sinners, is attained by this Jesus
Christ, is, that by the Sacrifice of himself, his Death and Bloodshedding, with
the Punishment for Sin which he voluntarily underwent, God was atoned, his
Justice satisfied, and his Law fulfilled, and that because he in his insinite
Wisdom and Sovereignty, with the Will and Consent of Christ himself, to charge
all the Sins of all the Elect upon him, and to accept of his Obedience for
them, he undertaking to be their Surety and Redeemer. To clear this Principle
the Gospel teaches, (1.) That notwithstanding all that was visibly done unto
Jesus by the Jews and others, yet the Hand and Counsel of God was in the whole
business, designing him thereunto. See Acts 2. 22, 23. Romans 3. 2. (2.) That his
own merciful and gracious Goodness concurred herein. However the Jews seemed to
hale him up and down as a Malefactor, and violently to slay him, yet if his own
Will had not been in the Work, unto another end than what they had in design,
they had had no Power over him, John 10. 18. But he came on fet purpose to lay
down his Life a Ransom, Mat. 20. 28. and to offer himself a Sacrifice for
Sinners, which he performed accordingly, Ephesians. 5. 2. Gal. 2. 20. Rev. 1. 5. Heb.
1. 3. (3.) That the end of all this, was that which we before laid down,
namely; that he might be made Sin for us, that we might become the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. So also, Gal. 3. 13. Isa. 53. 4, 5,
6, 10. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. And this Principle also Unbelief rises up with great
Power and Efficacy against in many, and that on sundry accounts: For, 1. That
God should comply as it were, and have an hand in that Work for any end of his,
wherein Satan and Men as wicked as over the Sun shone upon, did execute the
Fullness of their Rage and Villainy, and for which he afterward utterly and
miserably destroyed those Murderers, is Folly to some. Some turned the whole
story into an Allegory; some said, it was acted only in show and appearance,
and not in Reality and Truth: Some, that he was conveyed away, and Barrabas
crucified in his stead, with sundry other such foolish Abominations. 2. Some of
late refusing to see the Wisdom, Holiness and Righteousness of God in this
matter, in bringing about his own Counsels, and doing his own Work,
notwithstanding the Interposition of the Sins of the worst of Men, deny that
God determined any thing therein; but left it wholly unto the Liberty of the
Jews, on the determination of whose Wills the whole Work of Salvation was
suspended. 3. Some reject the whole matter it self. That the just should suffer
for the unjust, the innocent undergo the Punishment due to the guilty; that one
should sin, and another suffer; that he whom God loved above all, should
undergo his Wrath for them and their Deliverance, whom he had grounds of
Righteousness to hate and destroy, is a foolish thing unto them. This all the
Socinians in the World despise, and it is rejected by the Quakers amongst our
selves, and variously corrupted by the Papists and others. (Who these others
are, I suppose the Reader may safely by this time a day, without the help of a
Spirit of Prophecy, guess at). And there is none of all these but will plead
Reasons and Arguments for their Opinions. But this that we insist on is the
true and real ground of their Miscarriages. They are under the Power of that
Unbelief, which acts it self by a Dislike of the Mysteries of the Gospel.
Pretend what they will, it is Unbelief alone that is the cause of their
Apostasy. I might instance in other Principles of the like nature and
importance, but I should dwell too long on this Digression. Dr. Owen, Ibid. p.
124, 125, 126, 127, 128.

Luke 18. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. That the design of our Savior herein was to
represent the way of our Justification before God, is evident, (1.) From the
Description given of the Persons whom he reflected on; ver. 9. They were such
as trusted in themselves that they were righteous, or that they had a personal
Righteousness of their own before God. (2.) From the general Rule wherewith he
confirms the Judgment he had given concerning the Persons described: Every one
that exalts himself shall be abased, ver. 14. And he that abaseth himself
shall be exalted. As this is applied unto the Pharisee, and the Prayer that is
ascribed unto him, it declares plainly, that every Plea of our own Works, as
unto our Justification before God, under any consideration, is a
Self-exaltation which God despises; and as applied unto the Publican, that a
Sense of Sin is the only Preparation on our part for acceptance with him on
Believing. -- Wherefore both the Persons are represented as seeking to be
justified, for so our Savior expresses the issue of their Address unto God
for that purpose; the one was justified, the other was not. The Plea of the
Pharisee unto this end consists of two Parts: (1.) That he had fulfilled the
Condition whereon he might be justified. He makes no mention of any Merit (no
more than our Baxterians) either of Congruity or Condignity. Only whereas there
were two Parts of God's Covenant then with the Church, the one with respect
unto the moral, the other with respect unto the ceremonial Law, he pleads the
Observation of the Condition of it in both Parts, which he shows in instances
of both kinds, only he adds the way that he took to further him in this
Obedience, somewhat beyond what was injoined, namely, that he fasted twice in
the Week. For when Men begin to seek for Righteousness, and Justification by
Works, they quickly think their best Reserve lies in doing something
extraordinary more than other Men, and more indeed than is required of them.
This brought forth all the Pharisaical Austerities in the Papacy. Nor can it be
said, that all this signified nothing, because he was an Hypocrite and a
Boaster; for it will be replied, that it should seem all are so who seek for
Justification by Works: for our Savior only represents one that does so;
neither are these things laid in the Bar against his Justification, but only
that he exalted himself in trusting unto his own Righteousness. (2.) In an
Ascription of all that he did unto God: God, I thank thee. Although he did all
this, yet he owned the Aid and Assistance of God by his Grace in it all. He
esteemed himself much to differ from other Men, but ascribed it not unto
himself, that so he did. All the Righteousness and Holiness which he laid claim
unto, he ascribed unto the Benignity and Goodness of God. Wherefore he neither
pleaded any Merit in his Works, nor any Works performed in his own strength,
without the aid of Grace. All that he pretends is, that by the Grace of God he
had fulfilled the Condition of the Covenant, and thereon expected to be
justified. And whatever Words Men shall be pleased to make use of in their
vocal Prayers, God interprets their Minds according to what they trust in, as
unto their Justification before him. And if some Men will be true unto their
own Principles, (you may guess who the Doctor means) this is the Prayers which
mutatis mutandis, they ought to make. -- If it be said, that it is charged on
this Pharisee, that he trusted in himself, and despised others, for which he
was rejected: I answer, (1.) This Charge respects not the Mind of the Person,
but the Genius and Tendency of the Opinion. The Persuasion of Justification by
Works includes in it a Contempt of other Men (as that they are unstudied,
ignorant, and illogical) for if Abraham had been justified by Works, he should
have had whereof to glory. (2.) Those whom he despised were such as placed
their whole Trust in Grace and Mercy, as this Publican. (Poor Dr. Crisp and
others, well meaning Men, but grievous Antinomians). It were to be wished, that
all others of the same Mind did not so also. -- The Issue is with this Person,
that he was not justified, neither shall any one ever be so on the account of
his own personal Righteousness. For our Savior has told us, that when we have
done all, that is, when we have the Testimony of our Consciences unto the
Integrity of our Obedience, instead of pleading it unto our Justification, we
should say, that is, really judge and profess that we are (...), unprofitable
Servants, Luke 17. 10. As the Apostle speaks, I know nothing by my self, yet am
I not thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4. And he that is (...), and has nothing to
trust unto but his Service, will be cast out of the Presence of God, Mat. 25.
30. Wherefore on the best of our Obedience to confess our selves (...), is to
confess, that after all in our selves we deserve to be cast out of the Presence
of God. -- In opposition hereunto the State and Prayer of the Publican under
the same design of seeking Justification before God, are expressed. And the
outward Acts of his Person are mentioned as representing, and expressive of the
inward Frame of his Mind. He stood afar off, he did not so much as lift up his
Eyes, he smote upon his Breast. All of them represent a Person desponding, yea
despairing in himself. This is the Nature, this is the Effect of that
Conviction of Sin which we before asserted to be antecedently necessary unto
Justification. Displicency, Sorrow, sense of Danger, fear of Wrath, all are
present with him. In brief he declares himself guilty before God, and his Mouth
stopped, as unto any Apology or Excuse. And his Prayer is a sincere Application
of his Soul unto sovereign Grace and Mercy, for a deliverance out of the
Condition wherein he was by reason of the Guilt of Sin. And in the use of the
word (...), there is respect had unto a Propitiation. -- Some make a weak
Attempt from hence, to prove that Justification consists wholly in the
Remission of Sin, because on the Prayer of the Publican for Mercy and Pardon,
he is said to be justified, but there is no force in this Argument. For, (1.)
The whole Nature of Justification is not here declared, but only what is
required on our part thereunto. The respect of it unto the Mediation of Christ
was not yet expressly to be brought to light, as was showed before. (2.) Although
the Publican makes his Address unto God, under a deep Sense of the Guilt of
Sin, yet he prays not for the bare Pardon of Sin, but for all that sovereign
Mercy or Grace God provided for Sinners. (3.) The term of Justification must
have the same Sense, when applied unto the Pharisee, as when applied unto the
Publican. And if the meaning of it, with respect unto the Publican, be, that he
was pardoned, then has it the same Sense with respect unto the Pharisee, he
was not pardoned, but he came on no such Errand: He came to be justified, not
pardoned, nor does he make the least mention of his Sin, or any Sense of it.
Wherefore although the Pardon of Sin be included in Justification, yet to justify
in this place has respect unto a Righteousness, whereon Man is declared just
and righteous, wrapped up on the part of the Publican in the sovereign producing
Cause, the Mercy of God. Dr. Owen of Justification, p. 435, etc.

There is a piece of Dr. Owen' s, entitled, The Nature of Apostasy, etc. which
I could freely recommend to the Reader's diligent, sober and weighty
Consideration, as being of the most pertinent use in this day, next unto the
Scriptures themselves, as any Book I know extant, out of which with some
Passages I shall conclude this part of the Work --.

As unto those things which are contrary unto Reason as corrupted, these they
(viz. the Socinians) deprave and wrest unto a compliance therewithal: so they
deal with the Doctrine of the Attributes of God, of his eternal Decrees, of the
Office and Mediation of Christ, of Justification by his Righteousness, of the
Power and Efficacy of the Grace of the holy Spirit in the Conversion of
Sinners. -- The Poison of these Principles is greatly diffused in the World.
For hence it is that all those Doctrines of the Gospel which have any thing of
spiritual Mystery in them, which are constituent Principles of, or do any way
belong unto the Covenant of Grace, and so not absolutely reconcilable unto
Reason as corrupt and carnal, are by many so laden with Contempt and Scorn,
that it is sufficient to expose any Man unto the Contumelies of ignorant,
irrational and foolish, who dares to avow them. Such are the Doctrines of
eternal Predestination, of the total Corruption of the Nature of Man as unto
spiritual things by the Fall, of the Power and Efficacy of the Grace of God in
the Conversion of Sinners, of the Nature and Necessity of Regeneration, of
Union with Christ, of Justification by the imputation of his Righteousness, of
the Nature of internal inherent Righteousness or Evangelical Holiness, of the
necessity of continual Supplies of the Spirit in actual Grace unto all Duties
of Obedience, of the Power of the Holy Ghost evidencing the divine Authority of
the Scriptures in and by themselves, with sundry others. Many can see no Reason
for the admittance of these things, or they cannot see the reason of them; and
therefore although they are fully and plainly declared in the Scriptures, yet are
they (by no small Generation among us) so derided and exploded, as that the
very Names of them are grown into Contempt. But why all this Scorn, all this
Severity? Men may do well to consider, that not long since all the Prelates of
England owned these Doctrines as Articles of Faith which now they so deride.
And although they are not obliged by any divine Precept to be of the same Judgment
with them because it was theirs, yet it may be they are under some Obligation
from the Laws of the Land not to renounce the ancient Doctrines of the Church,
and are certainly bound by the Laws of Christian Modesty and Sobriety, not to
vilify and scorn the Doctrines they owned, and all that do profess them. --
Ignorance of the Righteousness of God, has been another Spring of this
Apostasy. This the Apostle expressly declares to be the Reason why Men go about
to establish a Righteousness of their own: Romans 10. 3. Being ignorant of the
Righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own Righteousness,
they have not submitted unto the Righteousness of God. And this he speaks of
the Jews, and that the best of them, who followed after Righteousness, and
sought it as it were by the Works of the Law; Romans 9. 31, 32. Of all Men they
thought themselves most knowing of the Righteousness of God, for they made
their boast of God, and knew (as they thought and professed) his Will, and
approved the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law,
and were confident that they themselves were Guides of the Blind, and the Light
of them that are in Darkness, Instru^rs of the Foolish, and Teachers of Babes,
having the Form of Knowledge and of the Truth in the Law, Romans 2. 17, 18, 19,
20. Yet these Men submitted not to the Righteousness of God, but went about to
establish their own Righteousness, because they were ignorant of the
Righteousness of God. And wheresoever this Ignorance is, Men will do so. --
Take the Righteousness of God in any Sense wherein it is mentioned in the
Scripture, and this Event will follow upon the Ignorance thereof. For it must
be either the Righteousness that is in him, or the Righteousness he requires of
us in the Law, or the Righteousness he has provided for us in the Gospel.
Consider it any of these ways, and the Ignorance of it is that which
countenanceth Men in betaking themselves unto a Righteousness of their own, yea
unavoidably casts them upon it. For, -- a right understanding of the infinite
Purity, the glorious essential Holiness of the Nature of God, of his absolute
eternal Righteousness, as the Lord and Judge of all, will teach Men what
Apprehensions they ought to have of any thing done in them or by them; Heb. 12.
29. Heb. 1. 13. Exodus 34. 7. Romans 1. 32. Josh. 24. 19. Whilst the dread and
terror of the Excellency of this Holiness and Righteousness is before Men, they
will not easily betake themselves, and their Trust into a Righteousness of
their own. There are two sorts of Persons that the Scripture represents under
an Apprehension of this Righteousness of God. The first are convinced guilty
Sinners, and the other humble holy Believers; and what Thoughts of themselves
each sort is thereon filled withal, it does declare. For the former sort we
have an instance in Adam, Genesis 3. 10. in others, Isa. 33. 14. as also Mic. 6.
7. The sum is, they can think of nothing, have no other Conceptions in their
Minds, but how either they may fly from him, and hide themselves, or feign to
themselves impossible ways of Atonement, or be swallowed up in Horror and
Despair. Send them in this Condition unto a Righteousness of their own, and
they will easily understand you do but reproach their Misery. And for the other
sort, or humble holy Believers, we may see also how on this occasion they
express themselves in this matter; Job 4. 17, 18, 19. chapter 9. 2. Psalm. 130. 3.
Psalm. 143. 6. They all jointly acknowledge, that such is the glorious Holiness
and Righteousness of God, such is the Imperfection of our Righteousness and
Impurity of our Works, that there is no appearance or standing before him on
their account. It is the want of a due Meditation hereof, that has produced
the many presumptuous Opinions in the World concerning the Justification of
Sinners. The Scripture speaking of Justification, directs us to conceive it in
the sight of God, Psalm. 130. 2. or before him, Romans 3. 20. Teaching us, that in
this matter we should set our selves as in the presence and under the eye of
this Holy God, and then consider on what ground we may stand before him. But
where Men are ignorant of this Righteousness of God, when they have secret
Thoughts that he is altogether such an one as themselves, as the Psalmist
speaks; that is, one who is either not so holy in himself as is pretended, or
one who does not require a Sutableness in us unto his Holiness, but is little
concerned in our Duties, less in our Sins; is it any wonder if Men think they
can of themselves do that which is satisfactory unto him, and so go about to
establish their own Righteousness? And this way even in Teaching have some
betaken themselves unto. They endeavor to satisfy their Disciples, that there
is no such Severity in God against Sin as some pretend, no such Holiness in his
Nature as necessarily to infer an Indignation against every Sin; that they are
but vain Frights and needless Disquietments which either their own Consciences
or the Preaching of some Men do put them unto. And if they can prevail to be
credited herein, there is no doubt but that those whom they so persuade will be
pleased with their own Righteousness; but whether God in this matter of
Justification will be pleased with it or no, is not so easy to be determined.
--

And hence it is, that all Opinions of a Self-Righteousness or Justification by
Works, have always produced Licentiousness of Life, tho they who assert it
clamorously pretend to the contrary. (As the Baxterians have done, and
especially Mr. Dan. Williams of late has revived the same virulent Charge
against the Doctrine of Free Grace in his Gospel Truth stated, etc. p. 113. Dr.
Crisp, says he, not observing this, (i. e. his conditional Motives and
Prerequisites) has run into those Mistakes which open a door to all
Licentiousness) so when a Righteousness of Works was absolutely enthroned in
the Papacy before the Reformation, the Lives of the Generality of Men were
flagitiously wicked, and most of the good Works that were performed amongst
them were but Barterings with God and Conscience for horrible Vices and
Impieties. Accordingly also unto the growth of the same Opinion in its various
degrees among us, is the progress also of all sorts of Impiety and
Licentiousness of Life. And if the Masters of these Opinions would but open
their eyes, they would see, that whereas they assert their Justification by
Works under a pretense of a necessity so to do, for the maintenance of Holiness
and Righteousness among Men, that Unholiness, Unrighteousness, Intemperance of
Life, and all Abominations do grow upon them, such as were not heard of in
former days among them who made any profession of Religion. And the Reason
hereof is, because the very same Notions of God which will allow Men to suppose
that they may be justified in his sight by their own Duties, will also
accommodate their Lusts with several Apprehensions that he will not be so
severe against their Sins as is supposed. However this is plain in matter of
Fact, that the opinion of Self-Righteousness and Looseness of Conversation in
the practice of Sin, have gone together generally from the days of the
Pharisees to this present season. And as this proud Conceit receives daily
Advancement in several degrees, under various Pretenses, it is to be feared the
World will be more and more filled with the bitter Fruits thereof. It is Grace
and the Doctrine of it, as well as its Power, that must put a stop to Sin. He
that drives Men into a Righteousness of their own at one door, opens another
unto their Sins. And all that we have got hitherto by fierce Disputations about
Justification as it were by Works, is only that the Faith of some has been
weakened, the Peace of Multitudes disquieted, Differences increased, without the
least evidence of Holiness improved, or the Vices of Men reformed by them. And
it will not be granted, that the strictest Professors in these days (whether
they have imbibed these Opinions or no) do in real Holiness and Fruitfulness of
Life exceed those of the foregoing Age, who firmly and without Hesitation
trusted unto the Lord Christ alone, for Life, Righteousness and Salvation. --
As this Apostasy is yet in its Progress, so what will be its Event, what it
will arise unto, is altogether uncertain. God can put a stop unto it when he
pleases, as he has in his holy Purposes fixed Bounds unto it which it shall
not pass. But in the mean time being greatly provoked by the Ingratitude of a
wicked World, no Man knows how long he may suspend those more powerful
Influences and more extraordinary Effects of his Word and Spirit, which are
needful unto the healing of the Nations, and without which they will not be
cured. I hope for better things, and pray for better things, but I have no
certain ground of Assurance that this Apostasy shall not grow, until in one
instance or other of it, it swallow up all visible Profession. The whole World,
so far as I know of, (I mean these Parts of it) may become Papal again, or be
so corrupted in their Principles, and profane in their Lives, as that it is no
great matter what their Profession in Religion be. Two things I do know or
believe, namely, (1.) That the Foundation of God stands sure, having this
Seal, God knows who are his: His Elect that truly fear him, and diligently
serve him, shall be preserved from perishing eternally, and every thing that
necessarily leads thereunto. (2.) That God has appointed a time and season
wherein he will not only put a stop unto this defection from the Gospel, but an
end also. He will one day execute the Vengeance that he has written and
recorded on the Throne, Power and Kingdom of the Antichristian Apostasy, and in
one day shall the Plagues of Babylon come upon her. And he will again turn to
the People a pure Language, that they all may call on the Name of the Lord, to
serve him with one Consent, Zeph. 3. 9, 10. He will again revive the Beauty of
his Worship, and the Glory of Holiness in the Earth. But in the mean time what
things may come unto, I know not. Those who pretend to a clear Inspection into
future things, may not do amiss strictly to examine the grounds whereon they
proceed. For many have been made ashamed of their Predictions, that within such
and such a time the Yoke of Babylon should be broken. This is all I say, (and I
say it only for my self) I know no Assurance that can be given on infallible
grounds, that the Apostasy which we are treating of, shall not one way or
other, in one instance or other, become again to be Catholic, and prevail
against all open visible Profession of the Purity and Power of Gospel Worship
and Holiness. Now if this be not so unto others, yet unto my self it ought to
be a warning, how I may be thought worthy to escape, and to stand before the
Son of Man. And I am sure there is so much danger of it at least, as to deserve
the Consideration of all who take care of their eternal Salvation. For if
things should come to such a pass, they are not many, they are but very few who
will be entirely preserved. The most will one way or other suffer Loss. And it
is not an easy thing to be found among the number of the few in such a season.
Can we think Men careless in holy Duties, cold in Zeal, lukewarm in Love,
barren in good Works, cleaving to the World, and conformable to it, low in
their Light, dubious in their State, useless in the World, fearful of Trials,
will be of this Number? They are woefully deceived who are pleased with such
Apprehensions; other Principles, other Ways, Courses and Practices, will be
required in them who shall be hidden and safeguarded in that day. Dr. Owen of
Apostasy, p. 297, 300, 301, 302, 350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 357, 533,
534, 535, 536.

It is not either against Mr. Baxter, or for Dr. Owen, or any of their
distinct, particular Judgments (merely as such) that these my Quotations on all
hands are brought in, but to let the Reader see who it is that speaks the
Language of Christ, and who of Antichrist.

Therefore to obviate the Neonomian Charge of Absurdities (because not
concording with their Reason) as cast upon the Protestant scriptural Doctrine
of Christian Faith, Religion and Experience, I shall recite Mr. Herbert
Palmer's Character of a Christian in Paradoxes, who was an ancient worthy
Presbyterian Puritan, and yet an Abhorrer of Baxterianism, which is another
Paradox amongst some, tho not all of them.

1. A Christian is one who believes things which his Reason cannot comprehend.
2. Who hopes for that which neither he nor any Man alive ever saw. 3. Who
labors for that he knows he can never attain. 4. Yet in the issue, his Belief
appears not to have been false; his Hope makes him not ashamed, his Labor is
not in vain. 5. He believes three to be one, and one to be three; a Father not
to be elder than his Son, and the Son to be equal with the Father, and one
proceeding from both to be fully equal to both. 6. He believes in one Nature
three Persons, and in one Person two Natures. 7. He believes a Virgin to have
been a Mother, and her Son to be her Maker. 8. He believes him to be born in
time, who was from everlasting; and to be shut up in a narrow room, whom Heaven
and Earth could never contain. 9. He believes him to have been a weak Child
carried in Arms, who is the Almighty; and him to have died who only has Life
and Immortality in himself. 10. He believes the God of all Grace, to have been
angry with one who never offended him; and the God that hates all Sin, to be
reconciled to himself, tho sinning continually, and never making, or being able
to make Satisfaction. 11. He believes the most just God to have punished a most
innocent Person, and to have justified himself, tho a most ungodly Sinner. 12.
He believes himself freely pardoned, and yet that a sufficient Satisfaction was
paid for him. 13. He believes himself to be precious in God's sight, yet he
loathes himself in his own sight. 14. He dares not justify himself even in those
things wherein he knows no fault in himself: yet he believes God accepts even
those Services wherein himself is able to find many faults. 15. He praises God
for his Justice, and fears him for his Mercies. 16. He is so ashamed that he
dares not open his Mouth before God, yet comes with boldness to God, and asks
any thing he needs. 17. He is so humble as to acknowledge himself to deserve
nothing but evil, yet so confident as to believe God means him all good. 18. He
is one that fears always, and yet is as bold as a Lion. 19. He is often
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: often complaining, yet always giving of
Thanks. 20. He is most lowly minded, yet the greatest Aspirer; most contented,
yet ever craving. 21. He bears a lofty Spirit in a mean Condition, and when he
is aloft, thinks meanly of himself. 22. He is rich in Poverty, and poor in the
midst of Riches. 23. He believes all the World to be his, yet dares take
nothing without special leave. 24. He covenants with God for nothing, yet looks
for the greatest Reward. 25. He loses his Life and gains by it, and even while
he loses he saves it. 26. He lives not to himself, yet of all others is most
wise for himself. 27. He denies himself often, yet no Man that most pleases
himself loves himself so well. 28. He is the most reproached and most honored.
29. He has the most Afflictions and the most Comfort. 30. The more Injuries
his Enemies do to him, the more advantage he gets by them. 31. The more he
himself forsakes of worldly things, the more he enjoys of them. 32. He is most
temperate of all Men, yet fares most deliciously. 33. He lends and gives most
freely, yet is the greatest Usurer. 34. He is meek toward all Men, yet
unexorable by Men. 35. He is the best Child, Brother, Husband, Friend, yet
hates Father and Mother, and Wife and Brethren, etc. 36. He loves all Men as
himself, yet hates some Men with perfect Hatred. 37. He desires to have more
Grace than any has in the World, yet he is truly sorry when he sees any Man
have less than himself. 38. He knows no Man after the Flesh, yet gives to all
Men their due respects. 39. He knows if he pleases Men, he is not the Servant
of Christ, yet for Christ's sake he pleases all Men in all things. 40. He is a
Peacemaker, yet continually fighting, and an irreconcilable Enemy. 41. He
believes him to be worse than an Infidel that provides not for his Family, yet
he himself lives and dies without Care. 42. He is severe to his Children,
because he loves them: and being favorable to his Enemies, revenges himself
upon them. 43. He accounts all his Inferiors his Fellows, yet stands strictly
upon his Authority. 44. He believes the Angels to be more excellent Creatures
than himself, and yet counts them his Servants. 45. He believes he receives
many good turns by their means, yet he never prays their Assistance, nor craves
their Prayers, nor offers them Thanks, which yet he does not disdain to do to
the meanest Christian. 46. He believes himself a King, how mean soever he be;
and how great soever he be, that he is not too good to be Servant to the
poorest Saint. 47. He is often in Prison, yet always at liberty, and a Freeman
tho a Servant. 48. He receives not Honor from Men, yet highly prizes a good
Name. 49. He believes God has bidden every Man that does him any good to do
so, yet he of any Man is the most thankful to them that do ought for him. 50.
He would lay down his Life to save the Soul of his Enemy, yet will not venture
upon one Sin to save his Life that has saved his. 51. He swears to his own
hindrance, and changes not, yet knows that his Mouth cannot tie him to Sin. 52.
He believes Christ to have no need of any thing he does, yet makes account he
relieves Christ in all his Deeds of Charity. 53. He knows he can do nothing of
himself, yet labors to work out his own Salvation. 54. He confesses he can do
nothing, yet as truly professes he can do all things. 55. He knows that Flesh
and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, yet believes he shall go to
Heaven Body and Soul. 56. He trembles at God's Word, yet counts it sweeter to
him than the Honey and the Honeycomb, and dearer than thousands of Gold and
Silver. 57. He believes that God will never damn him; and yet he fears him for
being able to cast him into Hell. 58. He knows he shall not be saved by his
Works, and yet does all the good Works he can, and believes he shall not be
saved without them. 59. He knows God's Providence orders all things, yet he is
so diligent in his business, as if he were to cut out his own Fortune. 60. He
believes beforehand God has purposed what shall be, and that nothing can make
him alter his purpose, yet prays and endeavors as if he would force God to
satisfy him however. 61. He prays and labors for what he believes God means to
give him; and the more assured he is, the more earnest. 62. He prays for that
he knows he shall not obtain, and yet gives not over. 63. He prays and
labors for that which he knows he may be no less happy without. 64. He prays
withal his Heart not to be led into Temptation, yet rejoices when he is fallen
into it. 65. He believes his Prayers to be heard, even when they are denied,
and gives Thanks for that which he prayed against. 66. He has within him the
Flesh and the Spirit, yet is not a double minded Man. 67. He is often led away
Captive by the Law of Sin, yet it never gets the Dominion over him. 68. He
cannot sin, yet he can do nothing without Sin. 69. He can do nothing against
his Will, yet he does what he would not. 70. He wavers and doubts, and yet
obtains; he is often tossed and shaken, and yet like Mount Zion. 71. He is a
Serpent and a Dove, a Lamb and a Lion, a Reed and a Cedar. 72. He is sometimes
so troubled, that he thinks nothing is true in Religion; and yet if he did
think so, he could not be at all troubled. 73. He thinks sometimes God has no
Mercy for him, and yet resolves to die in the pursuit of it. 74. He believes
like Abraham in Hope, and against Hope: And tho he can never answer God's
Logic, yet with the Woman of Canaan he hopes to prevail with the Rhetoric of
Importunity. 75. He wrestles with God and prevails; and tho yielding himself
unworthy the least Blessing he enjoys already, yet Jacob-like, will not let God
go without a new Blessing. 76. He sometimes thinks himself to have no Grace at
all, and yet how poor and afflicted soever he be besides, he would not change
Conditions with the most prosperous upon Earth that is a manifest Worldling.
77. He thinks sometimes the Ordinances of God do him no good at all, and yet he
would rather part with his Life than be deprived of them. 78. He was born dead,
and yet so, as it had been Murder to have taken his Life away. 79. When Life
was first put into him, is commonly unknown; and with some, not until they had
learned to speak, and were even grown up to the stature of a Man; and with
others, not till they were ready to drop into their Graves for age. 80. After
he begins to live he is ever dying; and tho he have an eternal Life begun in
him, yet he makes account he has a Death to pass through. 81. He counts
Selfmurder a most heinous Sin, yet he is continually busied in crucifying his
Flesh, and putting to Death his earthly Members. 82. He believes that his Soul
and Body shall be as full of Glory as theirs that have more, and not more full
than theirs that have less. 83. He lives invisibly to those that see him, and
those that know him best do but guess at him; yet they sometimes see further
into him, and judge more truly of him than himself does. 84. The World did
sometimes count him a Saint, when God counted him an Hypocrite; and after, when
the World branded him for an Hypocrite, God owned him for a Saint. 85. In fine,
his Death makes not an end of him; his Soul which was created for his Body, and
is not to be perfected without his Body, is more happy when it is separated
from it, than it was all the while it was united to it; and his Body, tho torn
in pieces, burnt to Ashes, ground to Powder, turned into Rottenness, shall be
no loser. His Advocate, his Surety shall be his Judge, his mortal part shall
become immortal, and what was sown in Corruption shall be raised in
Incorruption and Glory; and his spiritual part, tho it had a beginning shall
have no end, and himself a finite Creature shall be possessed of an infinite
Happiness. Amen. Mr. Herbert Palmer B. D. Master of Queen's College, Cambridg,
in his Memorials of Godliness and Christianity, p. 53, etc.

Now what Mr. Palmer lays down, not only as the Trial and Exercise of a
Christian's Faith, but also the Support and Evidence thereof, as being the very
Substance and Marrow of his practical walking and conversing together with that
Communion which arises therefrom with God, and also his Conversation in and
with the World, is that, as being Paradoxisms or Contradictions to Flesh and
Blood, for which the Papist as such, Baxterian as such, and Quaker as such, do
therefore refuse, yea vilify with Scorn. Thus what Mr. Palmer and all other
Believers took and take to have been and to be the Glory of God's Covenant
Dispensation in all Generations more or less toward his People as including
therein the very Mystery of Godliness, and the secret Testimony of his
distinguishing Love toward them, they convert into the black Characters of
Absurdities, Irrationalities, the Spring and Principle of all Licentiousness,
the Test and Evidence of Antinomianism, and in sum the very Farrago of
mysterious Nonsense, as our Pseudo-reverend Author D. Williams terms it, in
that most famously infamous last piece of his that I have seen, which prefac'd
the Report of his late Neonomian Virtues, Prerequisites and Qualifications unto
his Country and Countrymen. Whence let me tell thee, Reader, had the Orthodox
Presbyterian Party but dealt with Mr. Baxter as faithfully and strenuously,
openly and nakedly, without soothing and self-exalting Phrases and Titles,
which tended but to puff him up, whose Doctrines were mostly disapproved and
abhorred by them, as Dr. Owen has done with Mr. John Goodwin in his Treatise of
Perseverance, and that notwithstanding his congregational disciplinary
Judgment, whereof as I am informed he was as to Church Government, this
Baxterian Divinity with its speckled Wings, possibly ad captum humanum, would
not have dilated it self, so to the impoisoning of the Nation, heartning and
hardening of our Enemies [from whose Tents we have lately heard his acclamatory
Commendation resounding] and sadning of the Hearts of many thousands in our
Israel, if not to the distracting of the Minds and Spirits of many upright,
plain and simple hearted ones, as it is to be feared it has done. -- But tho
Offenses must come, yet woe will be to them through whom they do come. -- But
before we proceed to obviate the measures of some, who through Ignorance of
Mind, or Supineness of Spirit, or especially Heart-craftiness and practical
Deceitfulness of such, who holding the Truth in Unrighteousness, may insinuate
that these Authors above mentioned are wronged by discerpting Sentences, or by
dwelling upon some casually inadvertent Expressions of theirs, let such know
that I am ready (God assisting) to make it evidently appear that the whole
scope and tendency of their Divinity in the full Body and Substance thereof, is
to evert the whole Mass of the Protestant Christian Religion as epitomized in
the nine Heads of the Introduction; and for this end let but the industrious
and judicious Reader take but the fairest and most seemingly orthodox of their
Notions, and trace it faithfully up unto its radical Spring, Origin and
Dependence, as held by themselves, still pursuing it to its designed Station
and Office, together with the practical Use and inferential Consequences and
Effects thereof upon the Minds of the Children of Men; and without either the
help of a precarious Subscription, or the lifeless Engine of artificial Heads
of Union, I question not in the least the Coalescency of his Judgment with me
herein; for Persons and their Profession are not to be determined upon, either
as to their Orthodoxy or Sincerity upon occasional Excursions that may drop
either from their Pens or Mouths, or Failures in walking, but by the Scope of
the one, and the Course of the other, which is to be attended unto, if ever we
would make a right Judgment concerning them. And tho some amongst us begin to
alleviate the force of former Charges, and the suspectedly foreseen present
ones against the Baxterian Doctrine, by saying that Mr. Baxter's Errors were
but of late, and the Offspring of his Dotage, yet if this be the Rule that even
his own Friends and Well-wishers would have us follow in our Determination of
his Ability in things of this nature, especially comparing his former Works
with his later, together with the same Oppositions made then unto them by
eminent and orthodox Writers, and what has been of late also done by others, I
must needs say by Consequence that he never was in the things of Religion truly
a compos mentis one; for his end of doctrinal Controversies is but an
Abridgment of his Methodus Theologiae, and his Breviate of Justification but a
Transcript of his Life of Faith, together with the grounds upon which the
whole, or at leastwise the main part of his Saints everlasting Rest does
depend, and all this weighed with the early opposition he made unto Dr. Owen,
because of the Truths that he held, as may be seen in the Doctor's Appendix
unto his Treatise against Mr. Biddle, that rank Socinian and Anthropomorphite.
You will never come thoroughly to apprehend some Authors (as one well observes)
so much by what they hold, as by what they oppose. Therefore to undeceive the
fond Conceptions that some have entertained, that Mr. Baxter's Heterodoxy
should arise from a crazed Superannuatedness, let the Reader have his Recourse
unto the close of his Preface unto his Breviate of Justification; his Words
are, This Week an honest, judicious, moderate Friend (that is more a Consenter
than a Dissenter, as far as I can judge, sent me the Notes which I answer in the
latter end, as partly his own and partly others, which (not as opposing them,
but as tending to elucidate the whole Cause) I here adjoin, tho all or most
here said, is said elsewhere before [Mark that Reader] which I mention, lest
you think that I took all for his own Opinion which he cited out of Dr. Owen,
who himself reformed much of his former Judgment about Doctrine and Government
before he died. -- Now for my share I cannot guess or imagine upon what account
it is that Mr. Baxter so confidently asserts this of the Doctor, unless it be
from a surreptitiously designed affixing of a Preface of Dr. Owen's to Mr.
Samuel Clark's Annotations upon the New Testament, which in the Doctrine of
Justification absolutely lie opposite unto, nay fundamentally evert all the
Doctor's Pleadings and Arguments for the same, in the whole Course of his
Controversies upon that Point. Now compare what the Doctor is brought in to say
for the Exposition, with the Exposition it self of those Places especially that
treat of Justification, as Romans 10. 3, 4. Phil. 3. 8, 9. together with Mr.
Clark's References therein unto other places: It may not be expected that I
should be able to pass any judgment on all the particular Expositions of all
places which he gives; but this I must say, that to the best of my
Understanding, he (viz. Mr. Clark) has made his choice of the especial Sense
which he gives of the Word in all places, with great Diligence and Judgment.
And it is evident that in the whole, he has so carefully and constantly
attended unto the Analogy of Faith, as that the Reader may safely trust to him,
without fear of being led into the Snare of any Error or unsound Opinion. --
Now, I say, compare this with the Annotations as to the abovementioned Places
in Scripture, and thou will find that in the matter of Justification, it is
neither more nor less than what both the Papist, Baxterian, and Quaker do hold;
but that there was a Craft in it, (according to the subtle prevaricating
Practices of these Men) appears from the date of Dr. Owen's and that of Mr.
Baxter's Preface unto the same, the former's being in Febr. 14. 1682/3. and the
latter's in Aug. 22. 1683. Now whatever Annotations were put into the Doctor's
hands I know not, but I dare be confident he never did knowingly recommend
these to the Reader. For do but bring the Doctor's Expositions of those places
in Scripture, which refer unto a Righteousness for Justification, and suit them
with Mr. Clark's Annotations upon the very self-same Texts, and thou will find
their Consonancy therein to be as much as is between God and the Devil, Christ
and Antichrist, Heaven and Hell, Light and Darkness, Grace and Sin, yea
Salvation and Damnation; and that the Difference does not lie only in Words, as
some confidently assert, but in their essential Nature, formal Application,
together with that Use and Tendency that a Believer ought by Faith to make an
Improvement of, in his non-peradventure-Walkings with God. Now can it be
supposed that the Doctor would say, that Mr. Clark in his Annotations did so
carefully and constantly attend unto the Analogy of Faith, as that the Reader
may safely trust to him, without fear of being led into the Snare of any Error
or unsound Opinion; I say, can this be said of him in reference to the Doctrine
of Justification, who elsewhere speaks of such that had embraced the same, in
Mr. Clark's own verbal Sense, That if our Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them
that are lost? Treatise of Justif. p. (...). -- No, beware of these cursed
Deceivers, who value not how they deal either with Teachers or Learners,
Authors or Readers, so they can but compass their own vile wretched ends
thereby, like the Pharisees of old, whose Doctrines and Practices they both
tenaciously hold and prosecute, indefatigably compassing Sea and Land to
proselyte poor Souls into their Nets. And herein I must give the Reader a
Caution against their subtle Proceedings; for amongst us here they have been
long since and of late, under a pretense of Charity unto Souls, a dispersing
their rotten Authors by way of free Gift, and partly through the hands of some
inadvertent upright ones, both in London and in the Country, have endeavored
the same, yet through Mercy in some measure prevented, but especially and too
much effectually by those who have discovered their Rottenness in, or at least
their Indifferency for the Truth, in their warping from or lukewarm
Unconcernedness for the same. And lest the Reader should suppose, or be made by
some of our impudent and yet crafty Insinuators to believe, that his Judgment
herein is designedly imposed upon, let him but cast his eye upon these Columns.

Mr. Barclay the Quaker, upon 2 Cor. 5. 21.
FRom whence they argue; That as our Sin is imputed to Christ, who had no Sin,
so Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us without our being righteous. But
this Interpretation is easily rejected, for tho Christ bare our Sins, and
suffered for us, and was among Men accounted a Sinner, and numbered among
Transgressors, yet that God reputed him a Sinner is no where proved. -- For
indeed if this Argument hold, it might be stretched that length as to become
very pleasing to wicked Men that love to abide in their Sins: for if we be made
righteous as Christ was made a Sinner merely by Imputation, then as there was
no Sin, not in the least in Christ, so it would follow that there needed no
more Righteousness, no more Holiness, no more inward Sanctification in us, than
there was Sin in him. So then by his [being made Sin for us] must be understood
his suffering for our Sins, that we might be made Partakers of the Grace
purchased by him, by the Workings whereof we are made the Righteousness of God
in him. Mr. Barclay's Apology, p. 149.

That it is by this Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the new Creation in us,
that we are justified, does evidently appear from that excellent Saying of the
Apostle included in the Proposition it self; Tit. 3. 5. According to his Mercy
he has saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, etc. Now that whereby we are saved, that we are also, no doubt justified
by, which words are in this respect synonimous. Here the Apostle ascribes the
immediate Cause of Justification to this inward Work of Regeneration, which is
Jesus Christ revealed in the Soul, as being that which formally states us in a
capacity of being reconciled with God, the washing of Regeneration being that
inward Power and Virtue whereby the Soul is cleansed and clothed with the
Righteousness of Christ, so as to be made fit to appear before God. Ibid. p.
156, 157.

Col. 1. 27. Christ within the hope of Glory. Now that which is the Hope of
Glory can be no other than that which we immediately and most nearly rely upon
for our Justification, and that whereby we are really and truly made just. And
as we do not hereby deny, but the original and fundamental Cause of our
Justification is the Love of God manifested in the appearance of Jesus Christ
in the Flesh, who by his Life, Death, Sufferings, and Obedience, made a way for
our Reconciliation, and became a Sacrifice for the Remission of Sins that are
past, and purchased unto us this Seed and Grace from which this Birth arises,
and in which Jesus Christ is inwardly received, formed and brought forth in us,
in his own pure and holy Image of Righteousness, by which our Souls live unto
God, and are clothed with him, and have put him on. Ibid. concerning
Justification, p. 157.

Mr. Samuel Clark's Annotations upon 2 Cor. 5. 21. and other Places in
Scripture as to the Doctrine of Justification.
-- THAT we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Become righteous by
that way of Righteousness which God has established in the Covenant of Grace,
viz. the Righteousness of Faith, see on Romans 1. 17. n. 69. Upon the account of
Christ's Undertaking and Performance.

For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith, as it is
written, The just shall live by Faith: q. d. It appears that the Gospel is a
powerful means to bring Men to Salvation, because it teaches Justification by
Faith, which is the only way of obtaining Salvation (and so here he begins to
prove Justification by Faith) in the Gospel, chapter 3. 21, 22, 26. and 10. 3. 2
Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 9. that way or method of becoming righteous, which is of
God's Institution, Ordination, Appointment and Establishment, and which alone
he will accept to Life, and which he works by the Power of his Grace (hence the
Gospel is called the Ministration of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. 9.) fully and
plainly discovered, (which was wholly unknown to the Gentiles, and but
obscurely made known to the Jews) and also bestowed, which is attained (not by
Works of the Law, but) by Faith, chapter 3. 21, 22. Phil. 3. 9. And by the
continual Exercise and Improvement thereof, whereby we grow from one degree to
another (as Psalm. 84. 7. 2 Cor. 3. 18.) and continue to be righteous, Rev. 22.
11. Hab. 2. 4. Gal. 3. 11. Heb. 10. 38. He that performs the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace, and so is accounted by God a just and righteous Person, --
Romans 4. 5. -- his Faith is counted for Righteousness -- i. e. upon his
belleving he is graciously dealt with by God, as if he were righteous in the
strictest Law-Sense. See n. 9. v. 3. It was counted unto him for righteousness.
-- It was put upon his account by God, as one Instance or Particular (among
others) of his Righteousness, and accordingly he was graciously, and without
any Desert on his part esteemed and owned to be a righteous Person, and dealt
with accordingly; or this his Faith was counted by God his
Gospel-Righteousness, as being the performance of the Condition which the
Gospel requires to Justification. -- Tit. 3. 5. Washing of Regeneration. -- By
Regeneration, whereby (as by a Bath) we are cleansed from the Filth of Sin,
Ezekiel. 36. 35, 37. Being justified by his Grace. -- Acquitted from the Guilt of
Sin, and counted righteous. See on Romans (...). 28. V. 37. -- By the Law of
Faith. That Gospel-Law or Constitution which sets up Faith in the room of
Law-works for Justification: which Faith is the Work of God, and so takes away
boasting of our own Abilities -- V. 28. q. d. since it appears by all that has
been said, that all are Sinners, and so cannot be justified by the Law, and
that God has set up another way of Justification by Faith, viz. by Faith,
therefore Gal. 2. 16. accounted righteous, and dealt with accordingly -- By
believing in Christ which is our Gospel-Righteousness, or the Terms and
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace for Justification. See ver. 22. By Faith of
Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 9. By such a firm, hearty, lively Belief of Christ, to
be what the Gospel declares him to be, as begets sincere Obedience in the Life,
Jam. 2. 24. which way of Justification belongs unto all, etc. Col. 1. 27. --
Christ in you the hope of Glory, q. d. It Is not so much by reason of what
Christ has done for you without you, as by reason of what Christ has done for
you within you, that you have any grounds of Hope, the only Foundation you have
to build your Hope of Heaven upon.

Mr. Samuel Fisher the Quaker, upon 2 Cor. 5. 21.
T. D. How he is our Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. ult. tell us, as Christ was made
Sin for us, so we are made the Righteousness of God in him; but the former was
by Imputation, not Inherence, and therefore so the other.

Rep. How now T. D. what is it so indeed, even so and not otherwise, that as
Christ was made Sin for us, which was secundum te, by Imputation only, never
Inherence, so we are made Righteousness, i. e. by Imputation only, never by
Inherence? Art thou not a loud Liar in this? -- We are here said (...), to be
made, i. e. by a new Birth, and not a bare naked account by the Righteousness
of God in Christ. -- We who are of Abraham's Faith, and not of your mere
Adamical Fancy, are made not computatively only, but inherently righteous
before God in him, by a real Participation of his own divine Nature, etc.
Testimony of Truth, p. 180, 181, 182.

Obj. And tho it is said he justifies the ungodly:

Rep. I say, yea, Justification is ever of Ungodly ones, yet never in but from
their Ungodliness, as Sanctification and Salvation is of Sinners, but not in,
but ever from their Iniquities; he clears the guilty, but by no means, no not
Christ's Blood. So Exodus 34. 7. as to clear the guilty while in their Sin, or
hold them guiltless, as T. D. dreams he did David, while they are guilty of
Adultery and Murder, and while they are taking his Name in vain, crying, Lord,
Lord, but not doing what he says, naming his Name but not departing from
Iniquity; he makes Christ to such as believe in his Light, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, but (what e're some count) he in
no wise counts him so to any, any further than he does so make him. Ibid. p.
164.

Gal. 6. 3, 4. If any Man think himself to be something, and that he is thought
of God, for that Holiness which is in another without him, to be something when
he is nothing, and witnesses neither that other nor his Holiness within
himself, he deceives himself: but let every Man prove his own Work, and what
he does by the Spirit of Christ within himself of the Will of God, and then
shall he have rejoicing within himself alone, or at least also, and not in
another Person without him only; and he that glories, will glory in the Lord,
Christ in him the hope of Glory, in the Lord in himself, in whom the Seed of
Israel finds Righteousness and Strength, and Salvation from the Sin, is
justified, and shall glory, Isa. 45. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Ibid. p. 189.

Now let any one of a common competent Judgment (but ordinarily conversant with
Dr. Owen' s Writings) speak, whether he can suppose that such an one's Preface
to Mr. Clark's Annotations was honestly or justly obtained, i. e. whether he
that had pleaded so often, so excellently, and so indefatigably against this
Papistical, Baxterian and Quakeristical way of Justification, both as to its
Matter and Form, should be induced, tho but upon a transient or cursory Perusal
(especially considering his Aptitude and Skill in things of this nature) of the
said Annotations, to recommend them as being safe and sound unto the Reader's
view, which is that he calls ut supra, no less than the Foundation of Papacy,
is that which I highly question, as also that Preface of his prefixed unto Mr.
Lobb's piece against Dr. Crisp, and that for several Reasons which may be
produced if occasion offer it self. But this is the manner of them, as Dr. Owen
in his Appendix unto his Salus Electorum, etc. takes notice of, how some had
abused Mr. Caryl's Imprimatur unto some of Mr. Joshua Sprigg's Works, which
were passable by affixing it unto others of the same Author which were fulsom
and rotten, p. 329. 330.

Now this Annotator may boast of his Seize in procuring Prefaces to
shelter himself in, as a manumissive Imprimatur from two of so different a
Judgment in this Doctrine of Justification as Dr. Owen and Mr. Baxter were, as
he who in the Parliament time thought to secure himself from the Distaste and
Violence that might arise from his adhering unto either one or the other of the
both Parties concerned in those civil Broils, who meeting with one that had
loaded both his Shoulders with a parcel of Puddings to make his test of Persons
thereby, and asking the first he met with, who he was for? replied, for the
King: upon which he told him he was an honest fellow, and gave him one; the
next he met with upon the same question put to him, answered, he was for the
Parliament, who thereupon received the same Character and Pudding-reward; but
this same third insisted on, in a pursuit of the same question put unto him,
said he was both for King and Parliament, which procured him the Honor of
being a cunning Knave, and the reward of a couple of Puddings to boot.

Note, Reader, That as a Believer's Life and Conversation in the distinct,
sincere, and analogical Lines thereof, is an exact Acrostick and Propension
drawn from every Letter in the Name, Person, and Offices of Jesus Christ, and
Attributes of God in him, as so many Beams coming forth and shining through him,
as the Son of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. Ye are our Epistle writton in our
Hearts, known and read of all Men. For as much as ye are manifestly declared to
be the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with Ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God, not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the
Heart. Compare with ver. ^8. But we all with open face beholding as in a Glass
the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord. So in his very Heart and Nature, as well as
personal Covenant Station before the Lord, he is but one interwoven Anagram
with him, either as to the Justification of him, in the latter Sense, by a bare
imputed, yet real tho external Righteousness; and also Qualification of the
former, i. e. his Nature, in its assimilative Principle or Seed, Disposition
and material effects, and that by Creation through Infusion and Renovation,
which we call Regeneration. In the one respect he is the Lord our
Righteousness, and he shall be called the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.
chapter 33. 16. This refers to their personal Justification, or legal and actually
federal Union with Jesus Christ. In the other respect, he is our Sanctification
or Holiness, and they are his also: 1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us -- Sanctification -- compare with Isa. 62. 9.
But they that have gathered it, shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and they
that have brought it together, shall drink it in the Courts of my Holiness, chapter
63. 18. The People of thy Holiness have possessed it but a little while --
which bespeaks and imports a likeness of Nature unto him, from its Spring and
Effects: 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit: compare
with 2 Pet. 1. 4. whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by those ye might be Partakers of the divine Nature --. Herein
lies not only the Mystery of divine Wisdom in contriving or forecasting, but
also the subjective distinct personal matter of that Mystery in the conjoint
mutual respective Interest that fall in betwixt Christ and his Members, whereby
they become in time [as arising from an eternal, solidly stated Fountain in and
with him, and God through him, Psalm. 139. 15, 16.] one complete, actual and
visibly mystical Body with him as their Head: 1 Cor. 12. 12. For as the Body is
one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body, being many,
are one Body: so also is Christ. Compare Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. And has put all
things under his Feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the
Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. Chapter 4.
12, 13, 15, 16. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the
Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the
measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ. But speaking the Truth in
Love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ, --
from whom the whole Body fitly joined together and compacted by that which
every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it self in Love.
Thus in an Acrostick Sense, Christ is the Spring, Fountainhead, or
communicative Root of the Regeneration and Sanctification of the Church,
together with the Image of Christ, who is the express Character of the Father,
arising from the same, whence she is said to be begotten after the likeness of
God. Thus also in an Anagrammatical Respect, by a Transposition of Letters,
their mutual personal Covenant-Station and commutative Charge of Sin and
Righteousness is held forth, and their external and legally stated relation
unto each other in one mystical Body, whereof he is the Head, and she in him as
her representative Head covered with the Robe of his Righteousness for her
Justification; whence it is said that she is built upon a Rock, put into a
Cleft thereof, the Lord her Pavilion, Covering and Ark; and in both these this
great Mystery is typified by Eve's being taken out of Adam's side, so the
Church is looked upon as taken out of the Side of Christ even by Blood and
Water, which the Spirit testifies unto, in the Hearts of Believers; 1 John 5. 8.

The whole of this, as to the main Bulk thereof, might be further illustrated
from Solomon in his judicial Proceedings with the two Harlots, who was at least
therein an allusive Type of Christ, and that in the divine Attribute of his
Wisdom; which typical relation the said Solomon more especially manifested in
the exercititious and discriminative Discovery thereof, by the manner of his
Progress in Judgment concerning the Infant, about whom the Contest grew between
the two Harlots, i. e. whether of them both had, for none but one could have a
just Propriety in him: this he decided from their own Mouths, and formed the
Aequilibrium of his Sentence in his Determination of the Matter under Debate
from their own Pleadings, Resolutions and Conclusions, namely, that she and
only she, must of natural and moral, and consequently legal necessity, be
reckoned upon as the true Mother of the Child, who would rather part with him
entirely, together with all her Interest in him, unless she had him both whole
and alive. Thus it will go with all the Professors of Christianity sooner or
later; for each Party cries out, lo here, lo there is Christ, we are the Temple,
Church, and Reformation in Religion, not so much espousing Christ and his
Interest in the whole Substance and living Efficacy thereof, as seeking by what
they partially and remotely own of him, that he therefore should espouse them,
their Cause, Interest and Faction, or humanely compacted Designs, together with
their worldly, carnal, self-justiciary, and prerequisite Reserves therein: this
is the very shelter of Paganism in the Papacy, which if once removed, would
soon appear in its proper Colors, the wasted Umbrage of Superstition, and the
vertiginous Lethargy that has beset and befallen too many Churches that
pretend highly to Reformation this day, namely the adapting of scriptural Names
and Terms to either Persons wholly ignorant of the same, or to things that have
no Affinity indeed with, but are utterly foreign unto them. But Christ will not
be so served by Men, no more than Solomon his Type would be gulled by the bold
and yet false Pretenses of the Harlot; for the Apostle is expressly distinct in
both these, that it is a whole and a living Christ, for the ends designed of
God in order unto Salvation, we must attend unto, i. e. a whole Christ for
Righteousness as personally wrought out by him in his Obedience unto the
preceptive and sanction part of the moral Law excluding all other predisposing
and subordinate Righteousness to Justification, and a living Christ, or Christ
dwelling in the Soul by his Spirit, Word and Grace, for Regeneration unto
Sanctification: Acts 13. 38, 39. Romans 10. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 30. chapter 15. 55. Gal. 5.
2. chapter 4. 19. chapter 2. 20. Acts 5. 31. Phil. 1. 21. Col. 3. 11.

Study but the Arguments of our old Reformers against the Church of Rome in
vindication of their Separation from her, together with their distinct
Pleadings in subserviency unto the same, in several polemical and practical
Treatises of theirs, as also their present Articles of the Church of England,
those of Lambeth and Dublin, for the Doctrines of Justification and
Regeneration both as to Matter, Order and Use, and thou will soon find not only
what ground the Enemy has got upon us in our too apparent Apostasy in the
general from the Truth and Zeal for it, but also his Subtilty to return upon us
by a parcel of new Schematists through the Trap-door of a seeming
Nonconformity. For a conditional Salvation must have a conditional Savior, a
conditional Savior must be a conditional Christ, and a conditional Christ must
be a conditionally anointed one, partly of God, and partly of Man, for that
Work of Salvation; for under these Baxterian Conditions pleaded for, and that
as Prerequisites and Subordinates unto our Interest in this their Papistical
and Quakeristical Christ, if such a Blasphemy might be admitted, the Efficacy
of this his Unction or Anointi^ and therein the whole of the Purposes of the
Father, the Engagement of the ^on, together with the Sufficiency of what he did
and does in the absolute satisfactory and meritorious Prevalency thereof, must
depend and lie. The Relation of a Father and Son as such is the same, tho for
the present there may not only be a vast but essential Disproportion between
them in their Frame, Life, and Conversation: yet all this while the Father not
only wishing, but also using all the means imaginable to reduce his Son to his
own steps, and that in the sedate, well-composed temper of his Mind, as well as
his external reforming Deportment both in his Conversation and Industry, as may
best adequate and comport him with his Purposes and Likeness, and also to fit
him for the Possession, Enjoyment, and Improvement of that which he as a Father
had of his Love, Wisdom, Power, Care and Industry provided for, and settled
upon him, as his Child; yet in the interim the relation is not at all
destroyed, tho the Experience and comfortable Intercourse arising from such a
relation is totally eclipsed, Luke 15. 17. This MY SON that was dead, is alive.
Now herein lies the difference between a heavenly and an earthly Father, the
latter can but wish, would, pray, use this and the other means, and depend
after all upon another for a Blessing upon the same; but it is otherwise with
God, he brings to the means, and blesses them and his in the use of them, by
conveying a saving Sight, a Heart-renewing and sealing Efficacy and Testimony
of the Spirit unto them of their eternal Interest in the Privileges of
Adoption, which Adoption is the very Covenant, immediate and lineal Foundation
of their Reception of the Spirit for Regeneration: Gal. 4. 6. And because ye
are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying,
Abba, Father. And notwithstanding their present Acts of Rebellion, this
relation between God and his adopted ones, which is a legal choice, tho
originated in Grace, of them in Christ, they being adoptedly chosen in him by
the Father, and upon the valuable Considerations of Christ's standing in their
room and stead in the Transactions between the Father and the Son, this as
commencing from Eternity will also terminate in Eternity; yet he knows how and
when to make of an unwilling a willing People, and in pursuance of this their
Privilege Christ, like the good Shepherd, will not lose one of them, but rather
than fail in bringing any of them unto an actual Fruition of the Benefits of so
distinguishing a State, he will drive them gently, bear them up in his Arms,
yea carry them upon his Shoulders, and protect them, as he has done in all
Generations, against all the liers in wait, ravening Wolves, and deceitful
Teachers, that would rob or befool them of so inestimable a Treasure and
Inheritance. Wherefore I desire the Reader impartially to consider and weigh
the following Scheme or Figure, as not being in the least measure willing to
lay a precarious Enforcement upon his Intellectuals, the Method of some with
their supine and decoyed Subscribers and Followers this day: That Transgression
as an Act in its just consequence, infers Guilt and Obnoxiousness, and that as
entituling unto Punishment and Death. Obedience Innocence and Reward,
Acquitment and Life. Separate any one of these Heads from the rest of them,
either in their direct lineal Dependence each upon other, or their opposite and
yet mutual Covenant Station by way of Commutation, as they irreversibly stand
related the one of the other, and that both in a civil and spiritual
Acceptance, and you will soon overthrow the very grounds of Justice in ^s
Proceedings against a Transgressor, and that whether inherently and in his own
Person actually so, or but imputatively and by way of Federacy and commutative
Obligation reckoned upon as such: for a matter of Charge must be first
exhibited, whether in one Sense or another, or the Gu^t cannot properly, but
Socinian-wise, metaphorically be fixed upon, and consequently the Punishment
must be executed injuriously or illegally, yea rather fancifully and
fantastically, either upon the voluntary Surety or actual Transgressor. For
Justice has no regard in this case, to either a Love or Hatred of any Person,
but puts that Law in execution against such who are charged with the matter of
the Breach thereof; otherwise how shall it pass sentence? or upon whom? what
must be the Rule of its Proceedings herein? and what is the Punishment it
condemns unto? since do but take a Sinner by Imputation, and if he do not
undertake and undergo personally and identically the same, that the real
Criminal in his own Person lies obnoxious unto, what does he do for him? But
say they, by his Obedience to a peculiar mediatorial Law, an equipollent
Satisfaction is provided; but this is no proper Satisfaction unto either a
broken peculiar Law, or injured Justice, but an ungrounded hellish vacating of
the one, and an impudent bribing of the other. And do but observe those that
are, either wholly or partially, or hesitantly against this undeniable and
fundamental Truth of a Transimputation of Sin and Righteousness, and you will
find that at the very bottom of such a Denial there lies a secret rejection of
both Covenants indeed, properly such in their genuine nature or kind, as
originated in a personal Contract with others in and by one peculiar personal
Head. As that the Covenant of Works is not a peculiarly moral Covenant, so as
to include in its preceptive Prohibition given of God unto Adam, in that
particular or singular Restriction of his, viz. not to eat of such a Tree, or
he should die, even that very Obedience of his, and all his Posterity in him,
as had a relation to that Law afterward held forth in its literal Edition,
Discovery, and Promulgation in the Decalogue or ten Commandments, but that it
is some peculiar and entire in it self Law of Innocence, which indeed is in the
design thereof by these Men but a mere diverting blind; for tho it is true,
that the Covenant of Works was made with Adam when in a State of Innocence, but
that the Law whereon this Covenant was founded, respected only Adam, and merely
that Tree, and not the whole of pure Mankind in him, and the Perfection of
their nature in him also, which is the Original of what was afterward at Mount
Sinai given forth but in Words, tho in Power, and formerly concreated with him,
is a damnable Heresy, striking at the principal Engagement of Christ in the
Covenant of Grace as the representative Head of all the Elect of God in him,
and therein: wherefore it is that they conceive it as impossible that we should
have a relation unto Adam in a federal Sense, as his Covenant respects the
moral Law, or the Law that was concreated with his nature, that that was not
the Substance and Bounds of God's Covenant with him, as comprehended within
that specifical Prohibition of God, but a certain Law of Innocence peculiar
unto himself, upon the breach whereof he so discomposed the Faculties of his
Soul, and defatigated the Members of his Body, that all his Posterity as
begotten by and springing from such a corrupt Fountain, must be defiled and
depraved thereby; but what is all this to the purpose? Reader, do but narrowly
observe it, and thou will soon find both the Weakness and Treachery of such a
Sentiment: its Weakness will appear from hence, that if Adam's Perfection in a
State of Innocence lay in the sutably created frame of his Spirit unto that
Law, which was the Substance of that Covenant, then the Rebellion that seized
his Person upon the breach of that Covenant and Law thereof, must be the same
which he transferred unto all descended from him. But the Law of Innocence, as
they say, being a Law peculiar unto Adam, as not having any reference unto the
moral Law, against which it is that an obstinate Enmity, the very Minds of all
his Posterity are naturally and derivedly set, was that only Law which Adam
broke, and therefore must of consequence infuse into his succeeding Generation
a Nature depraved by his breach of a Law peculiar unto himself, as carries in
them a rebellious Frame against such another Law, that Adam never broke, heard
of, was made under or conformable unto. This seems strange that a corrupted
Spring should immit into its Streams that Corruption which it never was tainted
with: Its Treachery lies in this, that if it be granted that Adam's breach of
the Covenant of Works lay in a breach of the moral Law, even by that his single
Act of Transgression, then all his Posterity, as covenanted with in him, must
fall under that Charge, being born under that Covenant and Law, and not under
an universal Law, as a Covenant of Grace, which they would intrude upon us from
the former Supposition: and hence they know that Righteousness unto
Justification out of this State of Condemnation must spring from the Obedience
of one who is able to perform it, unto that very Law which the Elect in Adam
had personally, by way of Federacy, broken; which, I say, if once admitted of,
as they well perceive, would totally overthrow them and their Cause: but the
fifth Chapter of the Romans, as well as other innumerable places in Scripture,
will so stick in their Teeth and Consciences, and render them uneasy in their
pretended Peace, as the fifty third Chapter of Isaiah did that Jew, who said he
could deal well enough with the Christians, if it were but expunged the
Scripture. The sum and substance whereof in short is this; That to remove and
destroy any Thoughts of a real and forensick Act of God in Condemnation and
Justification by Sin and Righteousness in an external material Imputation of
either the one or the other, they labor to prove Adam's Covenant to have a Law
peculiar unto himself, and that Christ carries on the execution of his Trust in
the Covenant of Grace, by fulfilling a Law proper unto himself, in which his
People have no concern any further than that by the meritorious Effects thereof
they are justified by the Law of Faith, or the Righteousness of Regeneration;
and thus they blind their Readers, dealing with them as Zedekiah was used,
first had his eyes put out, and then was led Captive to Babylon; so that the
moral Law betwixt these two peculiar Laws of both Adams, like a Dish between
two Jointstools, falls to the ground, whilst he that is saved gets to Heaven by
some geometrical hocus-pocus Conditions; and he that is damned, is damned with
saving Grace, and for want of an improvement of it.

Hence it is that so many blundering Hurricanes issue forth in their absurd and
hellish Consequences from the Arminian and Socinian Tents, as of old roaring in
the midst of the Congregations, and thereby setting up their Ensigns as evident
Tokens and Signs of their Purposes, that with the Axes and Hammers of their
carnal tho but forced Arguments and Reasonings, would break down the carved
Work of the Temple, even the stated Effects of an infinite contriving Wisdom,
running through the whole of the Covenant of Grace, and that as equally
respecting in the full Dimensions thereof, the Glory of an unspeakable
righteous God and holy Law, as well as the Safety and Salvation of a wretched
Sinner; Psalm. 74. 4, 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31.

Arminianism and Socinianism are the two grand Pillars upon which the Gates of
Hell it self in its Power and Policy do hang and turn, and into which, as
originated in them alone, every individual, scattered, and less apparent, as
well as more discernedly open Heresy, maugre all the Subterfuges that Men
betake themselves unto, will one day be resolved and cast: for they are so much
the harder to be rooted our of the Nature of Man, by how much if we consider,
they were concreated with him, not only as an Appendix unto his State of
Innocence, but as part of his Perfection therein; and tho the terms of
Arminianism and Socinianism were not then in being, yet the Substance and
Matter of them, not as a Sin, but federal Qualification in a positive and
negative Sense, was both then and there.

1. Arminianism was the positive Perfection of Adam in his State of Innocence:
for tho it was of mere Grace that the infinite God and Creator of a Worm should
condescend to enter into Covenant immediately with such an one, but yet to
capacitate him to answer the future Conditions thereof, with a Power of
Volibility, was no small addition unto this Grace; nay it was the very Beauty
of his Creation, as to his federal Station, that God did not only lay before
him a Covenant, and offered, yea did enter into the same with him, but adapted
his Nature with a Principle of Possibility to close with, and answer it in the
Ends and Demands thereof: This self-Power in him, I say, as arising from his
created Ability to do the Will of God, no Man can say was his Sin, tho his
Forfeiture of it was; but for any one to hold, that it is there since the Fall,
where it is not, or that it is in any of the Posterity of Adam, either by
Nature or common and universal Grace, is in plain terms to give both God and
his Word the Lie.

2. Socinianism, passively considered, was part of this Perfection in Adam's
innocent State or Condition, and that in a negative or indirect Acceptance.
For that God essentially so, should in the Person of the Son, assume our Nature
into Union with himself, for the ends for which it was to be assumed, would not
only have been unnatural and nauseous unto the Sanity of his Reason in such a
State, wherein the whole of his Faculties, as suited unto the Tenure of that
Covenant, he was then under, did lie, but obstructive of its Perfection (being
a spiritual Illumination, and not congenial with his natural Light and Knowledge
in the very Essence and Kind of it) in that Obedience he was to give unto, and
thereupon his Fellowship with God raising in him a Rivalship of
Headship-Emulation, and such Distractions of Mind as would have been wholly
inconsistent with, yea resistent of that calm State and Frame he was in, by
which he was fitted for his Duty; for his Reason, tho wholly and completely so,
would have been darkened and disturbed rather than refreshed and strengthened, in
its proper and limited Service, by such a Knowledge that was neither the Spring,
Exercise or Ends of the same; there being as great an Imperfection in an
useless, supererogative Superfluity of Knowledge, as there is in a defect of
that which is true, God neither creating nor revealing any thing in vain.

This double-branch'd Perfection in Adam is that which Man naturally inclines
unto; for Nature as such, not as defiled, would from its own Propensity return
into it self for Refuge, upon this or the other emergent appearance of an onset
or danger, and from thence produces all those seemingly rational and plausible
Arguments against the divine Mysteries of the Covenant of Grace. Nay, let me
further add, The most virulent and deceitful Oppositions that have ever
assaulted the Church in perverting, polluting, and undermining the very
Foundation of the Gospel it self, have sprung from this bottom, even from this
propense Innateness in Man to arm himself from those remaining Sparks of these
primitive Principles of Reason, against the same; and tho these were once the
sanctified, preparative Qualifications of Adam unto his Obedience in the Nature
of it, and as adequated unto the then Covenant: but now to revive that which
was a Perfection in its Place and Office then, is to turn out the Covenant of
Grace, and to reintroduce that of Works into the room of the same. Hence it is
that the Faith and Obedience of the first Covenant may be called natural, and
that of the second supernatural, as springing from the different Heads of each
Covenant; 1 Cor. 15. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. not that it was natural to Adam as a
rational Creature, i. e. that I mean barely as such: but,

1. It is natural as concreated with him, for upon his very Being in Nature it
was natural with that Being; and therefore unrenewed Nature unto this very day,
as we find it, upon all Convictions even to those of a Deathbed Relation,
retires for its Peace unto this conditional Prerequisite, tho still owning of
Christ, yet that is no farther than as Sin and Guilt pursues the said
Convictions, and impeaches the Soul of an Imperfection, that therefrom attends
the best of its Duties; so that it is a Covenant of Works they would be
justified and acquitted by, tho by a Covenant of Grace Christ is relied upon as
a meritorious Introducer of such a Covenant of Works, as to their Failures
therein.

2. It is natural, as suited to or connatural with the Covenant he was to be
brought under, wherein the Goodness of God toward the perfecting of his
Creature in such a State does appear, otherwise he could not have been a
Subject capable of being covenanted with, not purely as to his rational
Faculties, nakedly considered as such, for therein he might have had a perfect
Creation in Essence, and yet have been an utter Stranger to the Faith of that
Covenant; for God requires Faith, or no Obedience can properly be given unto
him, or accepted of by him; and suitable to the Covenant we are under or taken
into, such will our Faith be. This is comprehended in the above recited bold
Assertion of Mr. Baxter's Method. Theol. Part 3. p. 307. In quantum sincere
obediens, etc. As far as any one is sincerely obedient, so far he sins not;
and as far as he sins not, so far he neither needs nor is capable of
Remission. Therefore Christ's Righteousness so far is not imputed unto him for
Remission. Two things exceedingly gravel them in this Point, 1. That an
inherent Holiness, tho it should be entirely perfect both as to kind and
degrees in this World, as truly as it is completely consummated without spot in
Glory hereafter, yet that none of this either in part or in whole, in this or
the World to come, is the Ground-matter, Form or Motive on which it is that God
proceeds in the personal Justification of a Sinner. 2. That therefore,
according to Mr. B's Maxim, If there be Sincerity in our Obedience, which of
course must take in the whole of the Principle and Fruits of the new Creature
in Disposition and Practice, whence then needs there a Christ, Remission of
Sins by him, or a personal Justification in his, that is, Christ's own
Righteousness before God? Whereas Christ is called the Door, or the Entrance
into a certain Inheritance, now a Door or our passing through it into an House,
does not give us a Title unto the House (it and all that belongs unto it is
either ours before, or upon what grounds may we determine them so to be?) but
it makes way without any legal Obstructions to take a free and full possession
of that which was of Right as well as of Grace or Gift our own before: from
whence these Questions will follow.

Q. 1. Whether a Believer in this his sinful mortal State stands justified
before God in a Righteousness exactly corresponding both in Kind, Parts and
Degrees with his own, i. e. God's Righteousness, and that in the infinite as
well as unspotted Nature thereof, according to the Revelation he has made of
the same in the whole of his Law toward Mankind in general, and which remains
upon them as such, wholly and unabrogated? For this is that Righteousness of
God which the Scripture speaks of; we know of no other than even that which is
of the Law, that self-same Righteousness delivered at Mount Sinai, the same in
the Kernel thereof that Adam received. This is that Righteousness which is
materially designed of God unto the Justification or Condemnation of a Sinner,
in the former Acceptance by a representative Head, High Priest and Sacrifice
wrought out for Salvation; in the latter by an immediate Discovery of the same,
and charge thereof, as to its Demands between God and the Sinner, without any
Vacation or Removal of it, either to save or condemn by any intermediate and
alleviating Law.

Q. 2. Whether this Righteousness becomes the believing Sinners Righteousness
for Faith, or whether it was not his before he believed, whereupon it was given
unto him to believe, and that by Faith he receives it?

Q. 3. Whether the principal Design as part of the proper and chief Nature of
Faith, is to justify it self as a subjective Grace, or the Person in whom it
is, and that from its renewing effects, tho taking in the Merits of another in
subserviency unto the same; or whether it does not lead forth the Soul in all
its regenerated Parts [nothing else but as such of Man being able to follow it]
to rely upon a Righteousness in the full essential matter of the same wholly
from without it self, to stand in, as in a Robe or Garment, for its truly and
unquestionably justified State before God? From all which I would advise the
Reader to be much in conversing with his own Heart, and therein that he be not
a Stranger unto the true Nature and Method of the Oppositions the unregenerate
Part within him makes unto the genuine Workings of the Spirit in the new
Creature: for his, viz. the Spirit's special Office and Engagement is to take
of the Truth as it is in Jesus, and show it unto such where he is at work; and
accordingly and therefrom as suitable unto such a discovery does he form and
carry on the new Birth in the Soul; John 16. 13, 14. Ephesians. 4. 21. Gal. 3. that
Chapter throughout, compare with chap. 4. 19. This treble Advantage will arise
therefrom, besides various other of its concomitant Appendixes, as,

1. Thou will thereby come to understand the Secret of God's Covenant, included
in and emerging it self by that little Springhead Appearance thereof in the
first Promise (which must conjointly respect the same Law that was broken in
Paradise, with what was afterward decaloguised in the ten Commandments; or for
what was it or any other Promise given, if it does not extend it self to the
relief of a Sinner from the damning charge of any Law?) made unto our federal,
fallen representative Head, the first Adam, and dilating it self thereby in the
wide Rivers of several more extensive, expatiated, enlarged and repeated
Promises, till it issue, as we find all along in the Scripture, in the divine,
immense, unfathomable, and boundless Ocean of eternal, infinite, and
unspeakably efficacious Love, Wisdom, Grace and Power, and all this as centring
the Soul with God in Christ; for put case thou were brought into the very
Perfection of Adam's State before the Fall, yet even therein thou would be in
the very Frame and Set-form of thy Spirit, an absolute Stranger, yea an entire
Enemy unto this Covenant: Therefore it is not purely thy debauched or immoral
Part, properly such, from which Reason it self, or the Light of Nature calls
for a Reformation, but thy refined, reformed, and more moralized Acquirements
that will appear to be the greatest Obstructer, if rested in, of thy discerning
into and adhering unto this great Mystery. This is abundantly testified unto
throughout the four Evangelists by those that came unto Christ and those that
refused him, together with the terms upon which both the one and the other were
so moved to do.

2. Thou will know thereby how to discern into and dispute against the very
Strength and Policy of all thine Adversaries, or the Enemies of the Truth, and
also be made capable from thine own inward Experience in this thy Christian
Warfare to engage and with Success to encounter them not only in their gross
Oppositions unto Truth in the Body of it, but also in every part thereof, and
that as to the crafty, more minute, particular, and more latent Method they
take to undermine the same: for any Argument against the Truth, tho never so
artificially interwoven, is but the Fruit of Unbelief's Dexterity, which cannot
be opposed but by Faith, and the more observantly and exactly thou do,
through the Grace of God, discern its being conquered by Faith in thy self, the
more armed and prepared thou will be to defeat the external Onsets thereof from
others. And indeed all the Enforcements and seemingly strong Arguments that are
brought forth, even at this day, against the Truth, are but the Issues of
refined Reason, and that as bearing a relation unto the first
Covenant-Constitution; but as they oppose the Mysteries of the second
Covenant-Frame, they are but the pure, genuine, and entire Offspring of a
reigning Unbelief.

3. Thou will be the more enabled thereby to teach and to strengthen others,
and to become a Glory therein unto God in thy Generation, as holding forth in
thy Spirit and Conversation the whole of this Covenant, and therein the
Attributes of God himself, [whereof his Image does consist] as graphically
impressed, and distinctly characterized upon the Faculties of thy Soul; whereby
thou becomest the living Epistle of Jesus Christ seen and read of all Men, to
the utter confounding of those that would asperse the Doctrines of the said
Covenant, as an inlet unto Licentiousness, and a judicial walking and practical
Testimony against such, who whilst they are loading the same with such lying
Calumnies, and putid Reproaches, yet indeed in the carnal Frame of their
Spirits, a deceitful Method in their Treatises, and wretched looseness in their
Lives and Practices (far inconsistent with that Holiness they seem to cry up,
to the everting of it in its Foundation or continued Spring, Matter and
Effects, as to the Reality of the same) they visibly, as a just Judgment from
God upon them, fall into that Dirt together with their Doctrines, that they
would cast upon others and the Truth withal. Whence weigh but these following
Questions.

Q. 1. Whether the blessed Jesus, God-man, stands differently [tho not in the
least separately from] related unto his Church, as representative Head thereof,
from what he does as Mediator?

Q. 2. Whether the State of a Man's Person in God's Act of Justification takes
not place in a legal way of Precedence of that Act of his, in Sanctification,
or the Renovation of our Natures, either in part or in whole?

Q. 3. Whether the Righteousness of Justification be the same either materially
or personally, and for the same Uses with that Righteousness which flows from
Regeneration, Renovation and Sanctification?

Q. 4. How is it that we come to know this our justified State, and whether we
lose it or no, and that upon what grounds as to the original, meritorious,
material, efficient, and (as some say) transformingly effectual Causes thereof,
both in their Order and subservient Dependence upon each other, and that as
irreversibly stated by an everlasting Covenant; and what thereupon are the
Reasons we have to conclude our Interest therein, in this our supposed Knowledge
of the same? If these three Heads be but distinctly handled, and genuinely
attended unto, we shall find this our Neonomian or Baxterian Body of Divinity,
to prove but a mere Nebuchadnezzar's Image, whose first appearance or uppermost
Manifestation is like fine Gold, and yet by attending upon it, as we see, waxes
worse and worse, descending still into baser and baser Metals, till the whole
Fabric thereof, even to its Foundation, issue in a rotten, commixed, deceitful
and Soul-destructive Pedestal, undermined, broken and shattered to pieces by
one Stone cut out without hands, or that little Worm Jacob corroding into the
very Bowels and Vitals of this Babylonish Dragon.

So that would but these our Adversaries fairly and above board argue the
Points under present Consideration, and that from Scripture and Reason, so far
as the latter is capable of being a faithful Handmaid unto the former, and that
without a discerpted adulterating of sound Authors from their Design in what
they quote of them on the one hand, or determining on the other hand upon the
Judgments of others, as if Orthodox, from occasional Sentences or Expressions
subtly vagabonding themselves by an outward seeming dress from that which
indeed they really depend upon in the scope of their rotten Divinity, their
Followers in their Numbers would soon be reduced to a Correspondency with the
Soundness of their Articles: and herein I may boldly say, without a Spirit of
Prophecy, that I neither doubt nor question but there are such who will give
them the meeting in this Cause (with a Christian Defiance to their Numbers,
Qualities, Qualifications, and their Attempts thereby) even in his and his only
Name, who will be Wisdom to the foolish, Strength to the weak, Clothing to the
naked, and Grace to the Beggar, so as to lay them heaps upon heaps, and that
from their own Arguments taken out of their own uncircumcised Philistine Tents,
even the Jaw Bone of an Ass, which God will in his due time so cleave asunder
[by his unravelling of all their Treacheries] as that it shall become a real,
suitable, succouring Relief and Refreshment unto all the tried and yet faithful,
yea resolutely unwearied Combatants in his Cause: nay, it will certainly
appear, that that which they seem most to trust unto, will prove their final
Overthrow, even as Goliah's Sword, of which David says from an Experience he
had of it, That there was none like it; and indeed there is not a more
effectual way to overcome an Enemy, than by disarming him so, as to engage him
with his own Weapon. Hence take this following Antidote against Unbelief:

1. To know that the more we are convinced of our natural Inability to believe,
is one of the greatest Engines (tho otherwise designed and managed by God in
his Elect) whereby Unbelief would step and thrust in, support and set up it
self, by working the Soul into such Discouragements, as that therefore it
ceases laboring after a true Knowledge of it in its kind, together with its
renewing Efficacy, and the Advantages arising therefrom; the nature of Unbelief
being to convert spiritual Remedies into spiritual Maladies, it is the
Unhealthiness or bad Concoction, as the Cause thereof in the Soul, turning that
which in it self is Food for Life, into Humors for Death; Lam. 3. 18, 19, 20,
21. Hos. 13. 9. Mat. 25. 24, 25, 26, 27. John 16. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10.
Psalm. 56. 3. Isa. 50. 10. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. chapter 3. 5. Psalm. 87. 7. Isa. 1. 5.
compare chapter 40. 29. Phil. 4. 13. 2 Kings 6. 33. compare Mat. 15. 22, 23, 24,
26, 27, 28, 29. Hence it is that a Supposition of an easy Attainment unto Faith
is the very strong hold and vital fort of Unbelief, which never disturbs the
securely confident or carnally bold Pretender, such I mean who can sleep in the
whole Skin of that Faith, Repentance and Holiness, that precedes a
Life-begetting Union between Christ and the Soul; and yet from such an old
Covenant Preparation it can and will naturally make use of the Merits of
another, were it but for its own Preservation, Man by Nature being as prone to
retain what purely arises from Nature, as he is to wish and endeavor with all
Diligence the compassing of his own Salvation, Isa. 50. 11. chapter 57. 10. Hos. 7.
9, 10, 11. chapter 10. 1. chapter 14. 8, 9. John 15. 5. (...), or severed from me, i.
e. as disunited unto me, you can do nothing: If our Believing be not here
excluded, then I suppose Faith is the Fruit of Union. It is one thing to
persuade our selves that we do believe, for fear of Condemnation, and another
thing to be persuaded by Believing to receive that Salvation, which was ours,
and as ours, antecedent unto our received Ability in the Act of Believing, or
the discerning, coming, receiving, applying and establishing Operation of the
Spirit in our Souls. Unbelief indeed as damning, or insensibly locking the Soul
up in a State of Condemnation, is Misbelief, or a false Faith. And it is not so
much a Deliverance from Hell, or this or the other thing that is even dreadful
and intolerable unto Nature it self, that a savingly convinced Soul labors
after, but into what it is that he is translated by his Convictions, what are
the grounds of his hopes of Deliverance thereupon, and also what the nature and
matter of his Fellowship with God is, as a Consequence thereof. For I may hear
that he that believes and repents not, shall be damned, which is very true, and
therefrom betake my self to a Duty of Believing and Repenting, when alas, I
consider not whence this Faith and Repentance does arise, what it is that Faith
leads me to lay hold of, how to improve the same, and for what ends: All which
in their own very Nature and Tenure, as to their Place and Office, carry along
with them their particular distinct Testimonies, from the abiding,
transforming, and renewing Seals of their Author: And yet all this is in
reference unto a Truth, as mine, independent upon my Faith and Repentance,
formerly so, yea from Eternity such as was fixed upon by God for me; for it is
not any, or all of Man's natural Endowments, or acquired Seize, yea
created Grace it self, that can in the least give a Being unto Truth, or my
relation unto and interest in it, tho Time and the special Operations of the
Spirit, are the opportune, conveying and efficient means of my discerning,
laying hold of, and retaining what was designed me by an eternal Contract;
since it is clear that tho Faith in me is the Root of my Love toward God, yet
Faith as a Gift from God unto me is a Fruit of his Love toward me. In short,
the very way that God takes to work out Unbelief, is that whereby the Devil
endeavors to bring it in; for Sin, as Mr. Herbert says in his Church Militant,
dogs the Church: This is the ground on which the Mystery of Iniquity in the
Papist, Baxterian, and Quaker is bottomed, whose Convictions reach no further,
and that the Devil is willing they should do, than to a condemning of sinful
and natural Self, still with this Proviso of setting up in the room thereof (by
the unscriptural help of the Merits of Christ, which they vainly imagine will
give it its Imprimatur) a religious Self, or created Righteousness for their
standing and justifying acceptance with and before God; and this makes it their
Idol, their Table becomes their Snare with a mors in olla. Hence it is that our
grand Enemies Engines, Instruments, Emissaries and Ministers, who love to
transform themselves ad instar Domini Patrisque suorum, into Angels of Light,
act the same part with him herein; for they go along with those very
Convictions which condemn for Sin, and all Inability in our selves to work out
our own Remedy, which in it self so far is true and of the Lord; but when this
self-abasement issues in a self-retirement for Peace and Establishment, and
that upon the recommendation and remote Support of another's Righteousness, in
the bare Merits, as excluding the imputed matter thereof, it is but the unclean
Spirit entering into, taking and keeping possession of the swept and garnished
House with seven other Spirits more unclean than himself, whose end thereby
becomes worse than his beginning; Job 37. 5, 6, 7. God thundereth marvellously
with his Voice, great things does he, which we cannot comprehend -- For he
says to the Snow, Be thou on the Earth; likewise to the small Rain, and to the
great Rain of his Strength -- He seals up the hand of every Man, that all Men
may know his Work.

2. To labor after a more through discerning into, which it is of the Faculties
and Passions of our Souls, that this Sin of Unbelief mostly engages, as to a
working up and maintaining of its Life and Interest thereby; whereby it is
indeed that we may be enabled from a Knowledge of the same, to perceive in what
it is that our master Sin or Lust, as an Obstacle unto the lively and
experimental Operations of Faith, does lie, which will appear to be the
principal Seat, most fostering Reserve, cherishing Matter, and as such
sheltering Retirement. of Unbelief; 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6. For tho the Apostle
charges the Hebrews, chapter 12. 1. to lay aside every weight, and the Sin which
does so easily beset us, yet observe but the Context both before and after, and
you will find that his main design therein was against the Sin of Unbelief, as
discovering it self by this or the other particular Lust yielded unto, and this
according unto that which more naturally would beset us: for as any and every
Lust is cherished radically by Unbelief, so there is in that Body Politic of
Satan's, for its preservation and the keeping of its Charter and Corporation, a
return or refunding of that which any Lust (as an out-lier or ranger) has
gained by its Reception, Entertainment, and Gratification, together with its
Preys and Spoils upon the Evidences even of a Believer's Peace and Comfort, to
the maintaining of its grand Stock, Magazine or Storehouse, and thereby the
Support and Relief of its own Foundation, which is Unbelief, as knowing that
the Superstructure of a Body of Sin can no more stand without it, than a House
without a Basis, and also that a Basis or Foundation will be but an useless
dead thing without a Building upon it. In fine, They supply and keep up each
other, as the Ocean and Rivers do; what the one emits or sends out into the
other, the same other refunds and returns into it, as its Origin and Spring
from whence it came.

3. To perceive distinctly how it is, and whence also it is, that this Sin of
Unbelief came in, as that any of the Posterity of Adam should be as a matter of
Fact on them personally charged with the same, all of them being by Nature born
Unbelievers, or as going astray from the Womb, and also therefrom naturally
corrupted or defiled, viz. from a representative standing in one Covenant-Head
as such, for its Imputation; and from a natural Fountain, Spring-conveying Head
of the same in this federal Relation, as to its infused and inherent Reign and
Dominion: Its contrary therefore must be diligently and indefatigably pressed
after, for the charge of it must be first removed before ever the Power of it
can be broken, even by such a Faith as objectively presents unto us a Head,
whereby Salvation is not only as completely wrought out for us, but as
commensurately as our Misery was transferred over unto us in the Matter and
Effects thereof; wherein there must be a full Correspondence, and that in the
exact change of our State, and effectual Renovation of our Nature, or Unbelief
will retain such a footing in the Soul, as will keep it in a staggering
posture, render the Promises but as a Bank-Office, no fixing or fastening upon
any one of them, for want of Union with him, in this federal Headship-Sense, in
whom they all are, upon which indeed our Interest in any of them is founded:
This is the Faith of God's Elect, from which there is a Promise of never
falling away, but that they in whom it is shall be kept or preserved through
the same, by the Power of God, as in a Garrison, unto Salvation. Therefore,

1. See that thou have Truth in the real kind, and just or methodical Order of
it; for God has not only an House, but this House has a Form, of whose
Privileges none shall be made Partakers, but such as are previously unto their
Fruition of them, taken into the said House. It is the Son must make us free,
if ever we be freed indeed, either from the Charge or Dominion of Sin; first in
Christ, then a new Creature, and not till then: and he that has the Son first,
has Life afterward; which quite overthrows the Tables or Fables of our
Neonomian Monychangers, with all their Trumperies, Bag and Baggage of
Prerequisites, Conditions, Causa sine qua nons; their first, second, and final
Justification; their universal and peculiar Covenant of Grace; their
particular, impersonal and invisible Election; their Christless ineffectual
Redemption; their insufficiently efficacious, and their inefficaciously
sufficient Mint of Grace; their Dark-lanthorn casually pendulous, and
contingently geometrical Articles of Assurance and Perseverance, together with
all the rest of those their Babylonish Vessels they would introduce into and
intrude upon the House and Temple of the Lord; and thereupon their Atheistical
Hobbs his Leap in the dark, when upon the brink of Eternity, whereof they are
never, as they say so much, as doctrinally cleared till their predisposing
Graces and subordinate Righteousness have passed the final test of the last day.

2. Make this Truth thine own, by laboring after its experimental influencing
Authority upon the inward and outward Man; nothing of this nature can be
reckoned to be ours in a comfortable witnessing Sense, but what we are cast
into the Substance and Mould of, Romans 6. 17. Whereto ye were delivered. This is
done instrumentally by the effectual subjective Operation of Faith, Heb. 4. 2.
and tends to keep the Soul steady in, and for the Truth; and by how much they
are incorporated the one with the other, by so much it is impossible for such
to act against the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. whence will follow;

3. That this Truth so received in its theoretick or doctrinal Matter and Form,
and its renewing or transforming Efficacy, will stand by thee in the greatest
of thy Trials, Exigencies and Straits, yea even at an hour of Dissolution, when
like a Child of Light thou shall walk safely and immovably, through the Valley
of the shadow of Death, unto the Mansions of eternal Glory: John 14. 1, 2, 3,
4. Let not your Heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me -- In
my Father's House are many Mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you:
I go to prepare a place for you -- And if I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am there ye may be
also -- And whither I go, ye know, and the way ye know. Job 13. 15. Tho he slay
me, yet I will trust in him -- Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the
Lord, that obeys the Voice of his Servant, that walks in Darkness, and has
no Light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Ver.
11. Behold, all ye that kindle a Fire, that compass your selves about with
Sparks; walk in the Light of your Fire, and in the Sparks that ye have kindled:
This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in Sorrow. John 9. 39. And
Jesus said, For Judgment I am come into this World, that they which see not,
might see; and that they which see, might be made blind. It is the Record of
God concerning his Son, that is the Foundation of our Peace, and accordingly
the Spring whereby he conveys the methodizing Testimony thereof unto the Soul:
Against which, either in whole or in part, whoever sets himself, is not in the
Apostle's Sense so much as to be entertained in our Houses, much less
subscribed unto in their Antichristian Principles and Practices; and he that is
not as ready to spend even his Heart's Blood, as well as Ink in defense of this
Cause, is not worthy to make a profession of it: 1 John 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. This is he that came by Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ; not by Water
only, but by Water and Blood; and it is the Spirit that bears witness,
because the Spirit is Truth. -- For there are three that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one. -- And there
are three that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood,
and these three agree in one. -- If we receive the witness of Men, the witness
of God is greater: for this is the witness of God, which he has testified of
his Son -- He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself: he
that believes not God, has made him a Liar, because he believes not the
Record that God gave of his Son. -- And this is the Record, that God has given
to us eternal Life: and this Life is in his Son. -- He that has the Son has
Life; and he that has not the Son of God, has not Life. Compare 2 Epist. V.
10, 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him
not into your House, neither bid him God speed -- for he that bids him God
speed, is Partaker of his evil Deeds.

To conclude, Reader, let not thy Zeal go beyond thy Knowledge; nor thy Knowledge
forestal a scriptural Information, nor a scriptural Information prevent the
Spirit's Interpretation; nor the^ Spirit's Interpretation leave thee destitute
of his Application, nor his Application outstretch thy Experience, nor thy
Experience outstrip thy Savor, nor thy Savor outgo thy Establishment; nor thy
Establishment leave thee short of a continued reliance upon him alone, who can
give thee Zeal according to Knowledge ballasted by the Rule of the Word, set
home by a creating Power of the Spirit, attended with a satisfactory
Experience, ^easoned with a transforming Savor, and fully established in a
complete, unquestionable, and undisturbed Dependence upon that blessed God, who
is All and in All unto all his through Jesus Christ.

Videte acumen, sed vitreum, quasi lucet vanitate, sed frangitur veritate. Aug.
de verb. Apost. Sermon. 1. How dear to me, O God, thy Counsels are!
Who may with thee compare?
Herbert' s Church militant. In thy Light let me see Light; In thy Life let me
live; In thy Righteousness let me stand; In thy Strength let me walk; In and by
the vigorous and suitable growth of thine Image upon my Soul, let me have
Communion with thee; In the savor of thy Grace or precious Ointments poured
forth, let me relish the Salt of thine everlasting Covenant, and the eternal
Mysteries thereof; And in thy Joy and Glory, as Father, Son and Spirit, one
infinite undivided Essence, let me be enwrapped, enrolled, and involved for
evermore.

Amen! Amen!
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. line 22. read this in my Apprehension. P. 44. Col. 2. l. 15. r. if
they will. P. 77. Col. 3. l. 27. r. now as the. P. 116. Col. 2. l. 14. f. less
r. loss. P. 122. l. 17. f. the r. their. P. 400. l. 11. f. Son r. God. P. 396.
l. 38. r. Recovery.

INDEX.
Tho the Subject Matter of the Book is couched under a Duplication of these
Nine following Heads, yet for the help of the studious Reader here follows an
Alphabetical Table of the most material things in this Work.
But I must advertise thee of two things:

I. That whereas you will find the Letters ABC made use of immediately after
the Citation of the Page, it is to refer you to the Column in the said Page, A
being for the first Column, B for the second, C for the third: And where they
are not used, but the Page barely quoted, the Book is not there so divided.

II. That, notwithstanding the Care of the Printer, it has happened that the
Book is double pag'd for 36 Pages together; to avoid Confusion in which, Note,
that where the Index refers to any Page in that Duplication, the first is
distinguished by a Star *.

Head 1. Concerning Predestination, p. 24. Head 2. Concerning the Covenant of
Grace, p. 42. Head 3. Concerning Original Sin, p. 76. Head 4. Concerning
peculiar Redemption, p. 88. Head 5. Concerning a proper Representative, 108.
Head 6. Concerning personal Justification, p. 127. Head 7. Concerning inherent
Sanctification, p. 179 *. Head 8. Concerning Assurance, p. 179. Head 9.
Concerning Perseverance, p. 193.
A.
ANtinomians, tho condemned whilst living, yet after their Death commended by
their Opponents, p. 20. Arminianism, the main Articles of it obviated, p. 47,
48. Arminius his sense of Justification ab^minably erroneous, p. 147, 148, 149,
150. A. A parallel Scheme of the Doctrines of the [old] Church of England, the
self-justiciary, and the People branded with Antinomianism for relying on the
Righteousness of Christ alone, under the Appellations of Conformist, Baxterian,
and Nonconformist, under nine main Heads, beginning at p. 24. Adam, how far
God was concerned in his Sin, p. 37, 38. A. His being substituted [or
appointed] by God as a public Head [makes] his Sin become ours, 78, 79. A. Not
[legally] as many as were born of him, 76. B. Not a [Representer] of all that
should spring from him, 8. B. Abraham made God his Debtor, 52. B. He was
justified by the [universal Covenant] of Grace from his [performed Conditions]
of the same, 53. B. Actual Justification results to no Man from Christ's mere
[Representation] of him, but from [Conditions] in himself, 100. B. Active and
Passive Obedience of Christ not to be separated, 116. A. Augustine against
Justian the Pelagian, Why? 156, 157, 158. A. * Accepting or refusing special
Grace depends upon Man's Free Will, 164, 165. B. * Assurance, its definition,
and a possibility of being attained in this Life, 182, 183. A. Twofold
Assurance, 179, 180. A. To be waited for with Faith and Patience, 180, 181. A.
The [Extract] of Election, etc. 182. A. A comfortable Doctrine, 188, 189, 190,
191. A. Positively denied to be perfect in this Life, 179. B. and 185, 186. B.
Only a Persuasion, 179, 180. B.
B.
MR. Baxter's End of Doctrinal Controversies quoted, and [some] of his Errors
therein detected, 10, 11. The difference between him and Dr. Crisp stated, 12.
His injust way of writing obviated, 12, 13. His corrupt Notion of Original Sin
obviated and detected, 14, 15, 16. A diabolical Assertion quoted out of his
Meth. Theol. 16, 17. His Definition of Election and Reprobation, 26, 27. B. and
28, 29, etc. B. His four [cursed Distinctions] to cure Controversies, 64, 65.
B. His sense of Sin and Righteousness, 77. B. Imputation of original Sin, 81.
B. His Shufflings obviated, 109, 110, 114, 115, 116, 144, 145. B. Believers how
chosen in Christ, 59, 60, 61. C. Not justified by any Covenant, so as if
themselves had perfectly obeyed, 92. B. But virtually in Christ, 112. B. Have
no reason to fear Sin, 154, 155. C. Brent Sir Nathaniel's account of a Dispute
between Friar Ambrosius Catarinus, and Friar Dominicus Soto concerning Sin and
Righteousness, 21, 22, 23.
C.
COntroversies, when needful, p. 1. Comparison betwixt the actings of our Age,
and the Practices of the Socinians with the Churches of Poland, 10. Concerning
Original Sin, and the Disparity, 86. A. Mr. Charnock's sense of Election, 39,
40. C. Mr. Cole's sense of Election, 42, 43, etc. C. Comforts that flow from
Justification, 140, 141, 142. A. Conditions of Justification, 156, etc. and
181. B. and 156. B. *. also vid. 170, 171, 172, 173. A. *. Covenant; to be in
the first Covenant with Adam a Fiction, 76. B. Covenant of Grace the Result of
an eternal Council, etc. 48, 49, 52, 53. C.. Made with Christ, 51, 54. C.
Covenant of Peculiarity (in Mr. Baxter's sense) not a separate State, but an
additional Privilege, 52. B. and 149 B. * Conjunction or Union, the nature of
it opened and applied to Christ, 123, 124, 125. Christ, how made Righteousness,
Sanctification, etc. 18, 19. His Sufferings merit the Pardon of Sin, 20. The
Head of Election, 38. As to his Suretiship in one Writ with Believers, 69, 70.
A. His personating the Elect in the Covenant of Redemption a Fiction, 59, 63.
B. and 108, 109. B. and a heinous Error, 110, 111. B. Christ his Performances
[in effect] denied to free us from Guilt or Punishment, 65. B. Not the Cause of
God's electing us, 59. C. A common Person or Head of Election from Eternity
how, 62, 63, etc. C. and 120, 121. Died only for the Elect, 90. A. In our place
and slead, 100. A. For none personally [or discriminatively] but for all
[universally] 88. B. His Sufferings for none particularly, or [not imputed] to
particular Persons, 89. B. His Obedience no full Satisfaction, or his
Righteousness not [properly] imputed unto the Elect, 89, 90. B. His Sufferings
in our Persons [reputatively] would not have redeemed us, 91. B. His Sufferings
for the Elect not [idem] but [equivalens] 101. B. Not reputatively the Person
sinning, 96, 97. B. He did not properly die to save any one, ibid. B. His Death
may have its end tho not one believe, ibid. His Righteousness [only the Cause]
of ours, 100. B. He died to redeem from Unbelief, 91. C. A Sinner by
Imputatiion how? 95, 96. C. and 113. A. and 129, 130, 131. A. His Active and
Passive Righteousness was as a Sponsor or Surety for the Elect, 108, 109. A. He
did not stand in our stead or Law-place, 111, 114, 115. B. His Sufferings only
obtained easier [Conditions] 113. B. His fulfilling the Law justified himself
but no Man else, 114. B. Whether in a foren^k sense the Person that sinned,
119. B. What ^sness of Christ justifies, 137, 138. A.
D.
DIfference between Sin and Punishment, 22. Between Gods Love to our Person and
Qualities, or Actions, 60. A. and 156. C. Between God's doing a thing in Christ
and through Christ, 58. C. Between being elected [with] Christ, and [in]
Christ, 60, 61, 62. C. Between our being virtually and seminally in Adam, 80.
B. Between a change of Nature and Condition, 118, 119. C. Between Christ's
Mystical and Real Body, 1^0. Between Justification and Sanctificati^n, 144,
145. A. and 149, 150, and 165, etc. C. Between St. Paul and St. James
concerni^g Iustificati^nn stated, 142, 143, 144. C. Great ^tween sincere Souls
and closest Hy pocrites; 176. *. The use of it to confute Papists and
Arminians, 117, 118. *. Difference between Regeneration and Conversion, 150,
151, 152. C. Between the Regenerate and Unregenerate, 153, 154. A. *. Between
Regeneration and Sanctification, 181, 182, etc. C. Between Morality and
Regeneration, from 153, to 161. C. *. Between Assurance and Presumption, 179,
etc. C. Dialogue betwixt a Neonomian and Antinomian concerning Assurance, from
187, to 191. B. Damnation not for Original Sin, 80, 99. B. Damnable, or a
Soul-damning Hypothesis of Mr. Baxter's, 101, 102. B. Debt; the Debt which
Christ paid twofold, 100, 101. A. Denial of Adam's Sin imputed to us the cause
of the denying the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness for Justification, 81,
82. C. Denial of Assurance one of the grand Abominations of Popery, 185, 186.
A. Doom and Fall of Babylon, a Poem, 223. Doctrine of Predestination
strenuously opposed by Mr. Baxter, 227. B.
E.
ELection its Definition, 27. C. No reason thereof in the Person elected, ibid.
It Is a Sovereign Act of God, 43, 44, 45. C. The number of the Elect certain,
26, and 29. A. and 25, 26. C. Not eternal, 40. B. None elected but those that
are dying in a finished course of Faith and Obedience, 41, and 134, and 150. B.
Not [special] and peculiar to any, but [universally] and indifferently to all,
230, 231, 232, 233. A. The Elect God's People before Conversion, 31. C. Eternal
Covenant in Mr. Baxter's Opinion only decretive [or to be] with Christ
incarnate, 48, 49, 51. B. Efficacy of Christ's Death depends wholly on the
Creature, 98. B. Errors concerning the word Justification, 164, 165, A.
Evangelical Justification, 131, 132, 133, 134. C. Epitaph on Mr. Baxter, 223.
F.
FAith, the Ear of the Soul, 7. The Eye of the Soul, 7, 8. The Hand of the
Soul, 9. The Mouth of the Soul, ibid. The smelling Faculty of the Soul, ibid.
Faith, Obedience, etc. the Effects of Election, 28, 29. C. Faith and Repentance
the [Conditions] of Justification, 143. B. Vid. Cont. 129, 130. C. Faith a
[Law] of Righteousness or Grace, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, etc. B. and our
[sincere Obedience] the [Condition] of this Law, according to which we shall be
acquitted or condemned at the day of Judgment, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163. B.
Faith, Holiness, etc. more necessary to Salvation [than Faith in Christ, or the
Sacrifice of Christ himself] 54, 55. B. Iustifies, how, 133, 134, 135. A. and
157, 158, etc. C. Vid. Cont. 133, 134, 140, 141, and 163, 164, 165. B. No
proper Condition of Justification, 138, 139. C. Not our Righteousness, 159,
160, 161. C. The [Cause] of Justification, 278. A. Final Perseverance in Faith
and Obedience no Cause or Condition of Election, 26, 27. C. Confirmed to the
Elect from the Consideration of its Foundation, the nature of the Covenant, and
the benefit of Christ's Victories and Intercession, from 193, to 198. A. and
207, 208. A. and 194, etc. 197, and 207. C. Final Apostasy positively asserted,
201, 202. B. Free Grace how consistent with full Satisfaction, 71, etc. C. Free
Justification obliges Believers to universal Obedience, 73, C. Freely
justified, how, 139, 140. A. Free Will in the Creature exploded, 179, 181. A.
and 168, 169, 170. A. *. and from 163, to 175. C. *. In the Creature asserted
and vindicated, 179, 180. B. and from 150, to 162. B *. and 354, 355, 356, 357,
358. A. Formal Cause of Justification, 138. A. and 141. C. Fisher the Quaker
abominably corrupt concerning Justification, etc. from 279, to 316. C. and from
330, to 337. C. and from 337, to 342.
G.
GEneral Redemption exploded, 67, 68. A. Asserted and [foolishly] vindicated,
55, and 99. B. Mr. Gibbon very corrupt, 243, 244, 245. B. Mr. Goodwin John
corrupt concerning Perseverance, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116. B. Good Works the
Criers of 'em up most loose in their Lives, 10. God not the Author of any Evil,
34, 35. A. His different ways of dealing with the Elect and Reprobate opened,
33, 34. A. Made no Man to be damned for his absolute Pleasure, 36. A.
Vindicated from Collusion or Deceit in the Gospel's being tendered to all, tho
all shall not be saved by it, 39, and 226, 227. A. Vid. Contr. 245. A. From
being a Respecter of Persons, 45, 46. A. His Foreknowledg and Decree
inseparable, 47. His foreknowing the Elect explained, 31, 32, 33. C. Actually
reconciled with the Elect before Conversion, 59. A. His Covenant with Adam for
himself [and Posterity] a Fiction, 58, 59, etc. B. His Predetermination may be
resisted, 151, 153. B. *. Bound to Man in five ties, 110, 111. A. Grace
losable, 194, 195, 196. B. Grace and Free Will [confounded] by the Papists,
163, 164. A. *. Not effectual the fault of the Refuser, 95, 96, and 105. B. and
361, 362, 363, 364, etc. A. Guilt of Adam's Sin charged upon all, not barely by
Imputation, but in some sort actually, 78. A. Grace excites to Duties of
Holiness, 395. Gospel-Mysteries not reconcilable to corrupt and carnal Reason,
the ground why despised by the Wisdom of this World, 404, 405.
H.
Mr. G. HErbert the Divine Poet, his sense of Justification, 153, and 165. A.
Of special Grace, 166, 167, 168. A. *. Mr. Herbert Palmer's most excellent
Christian Paradoxes in 85 Particulars, 408, 409, 410, 411.
I.
Innocence; the Law of perfect Innocence the only [Means] of Salvation, 62, 63.
B. Inherent Justification nothing but Sanctification, 159. A. No [Matter] of
our Justification before God, 161, 162. A. Inherent Righteousness the [Matter]
of our Justification, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, etc. B. Infants
Church Membership asserted, 195. B. Inconsistencies in the Popish Doctrine of
Inherent Righteousness, 270, 271. A. Immutability of the Covenant of Grace, 57.
C. Of God a great reason of the Saints full assurance of his Love, largely
treated from 185, to 191. C. Imputation both of Sin and Grace from the two
public Persons, or [Representatives] i. e. Adam and Christ, largely treated,
79, 80, etc. C. and 94, 95, 115, 116, 117. C. and 121. Vide further, 137. C. Of
our Sin to Christ, or his Righteousness to us, by virtue of [Union] or
[Representative Headship] denied by Baxterians, 150, 151, 152. B. In what sense
owned by the Papists, 265, 266, 267. A. Derided by the Baxterians, from 315, to
322. B. And by the Quakers, 262, 263. C. Denial of it very dangerous, 420.
Justification by imputed Righteousness [derided] 110. A. By Imputation, 127,
128, 129, 138, 139. A. Justification its definition, 136, 137. A. and 130, 131,
164. C. How applied and apprehended, 142, 143. A. Not by Infusion or Inherence,
145, 146. A. It Is but [one] and not twofold, as maintained by Papists, etc.
158. A. No [second] Justification by Works, but a Popish Diabolism, 163, 164.
A. Vid. Contr. 287, etc. A. Not [perfect at once] but depends upon Conditions
of continued Faith, etc. 128, 129, 130, 131, 132. B. and 135. Imperfect in this
Life, 138, 139. B. Perfect in this Life, 134, 131, 142. C. That and
Sanctification the same, 136, 137. B. vid. 127, 128. C. That and Sanctification
the Souls Garments, 14^, 147. C. Justification by Works asserted by Papists,
etc. 278, 279, 280, etc. A. What in Mr. Baxter' s sense, 202, 203, etc. B. Vide
more concerning it from 202, to 337. A. B. and C. Justified Persons may be
damned, but the Elect cannot, 205, 206. B. Justice and Mercy their Plea for and
against the Sinner, 174, 175, 176. And the [Expedient] to reconcile these, the
Blood of Christ, 177, 178, 179.
L.
LIght within (which is nothing but mere Nature) sufficient to Salvation, from
350, to 369. C. Licentiousness the tendency of Baxterian Tenets, 405, 407. Life
of Believers an Acrostick of the Name, Person, and Offices of Jesus Christ,
416, 417, 418, 419. Love: God's Love to us from [foreseen good] 68. B. Luther'
s Description of the [self-righteous] under 50 Particulars, 348, 349. Mr. Lob,
his unjust Aspersions upon the first Reformers concerning Assurance, 184. B.
M.
MAn must covenant with Christ to do his [own part] 67, 68. B. wholly excluded
in the Covenant of Grace, Reasons to prove it, 50. C. Man dead before special
Grace by effectual Calling, 173, 174, 175, 176. A. *. Matter of Justification,
what, 137. A. and 147, 148, C. And [Merit] of Justification, 140, 141. C. Merit
by [Obedience] 140, 142, 143. B. Proved from Scripture (as say the Papists)
290, 291. Martyrs with their Blood have sealed the truth of [Faith's being
God's special Gift] 165. A. * Mystery of Iniquity, what? 67. B.
N.
NAture of Christ's Sufferings largely opened and applied as only for the
Elect, from 92, to 97. A. Naylor the Quaker very corrupt concerning
Justification, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270. C. New Nature or God's Image
purely in it self [not capable of sinning] 18. An Objection concerning the same
answered, 19. New Gospel a Platform of it, 46, 47. Some further Considerations
about it, 75. also vid. 107, 108. New Testament Annotations made by Mr. Sam.
Clark, very corrupt and dangerous, 413.
O.
OBstructions of the Gospel's Purity, and who obstruct it, 2. Vid. 236, 237.
Obedience; Christ's Obedience was no Atonement, etc. 69. B. Objections against
final Perseverance answered, 194, 195, 196, 208, 209, 210. C. Objections and
Answers concerning Righteousness or Justification, from 303, to 315. B. Opinion
of some Papists sound concerning Justification, 153. A. Original Sin, Mr.
Baxter's quibling about it, 12, 13. How to be understood, 22. Three things to
be noted in it, 79. A. Not so [heavy] as actual Sin, 81. B. Three Objections
about the Nature of it answered, in which is couched much Diabolical Logic,
83, etc. B. How transmitted to Posterity, 76, 77. C. Twofold, viz. Guilt and
Filth, 79. C. The Guit why [convey'd] by Nature or Generation, rather than the
Sins themselves, 80, etc. C. Dr. Owen' s sense of Election and Non-election,
33, 34, 35, 36. C. His Epistle to Clark's Annotations judged to be spurious or
not fairly obtained, 413, 416. Opposed to Bellarmine concerning justifying
Righteousness, from 308, to 312. A. His sense of full Assurance, 180, 181, 182,
183. C. His Thoughts concerning Perseverance, from 206, to 212. B. and 211,
212, 213, etc. C. and 393, to 398.
P.
PArts of. Justification, 149. C. Pardon of Sin [not absolute, but conditional]
241, 242. B. Not perfect at once, 377. B. Papists deny Predestination to be a
[Decree] of God, 223, 224, etc. A. Their sense of final Perseverance at large,
from 388, to 393. A. Their definition of Original Sin, 236, 237. A. Their sense
of Redemption [universal] 239, 240, to 247. A. Their [corrupt] sense of
Christ's [Representative Headship] and Imputation of his Righteousness, from
249, to 252. A. Of Justification at large, from 262, to 337. A. Of
Sanctification at large, from 350, to 369. A. Of Assurance at large, from 375,
to 382. A. Penn the Quaker [corrupt] concerning Justification, etc. from 271,
to 277. C. Personality of Believers in Christ's Undertakings utterly denied,
239. B. Peace with Rome attempted, by Mr. Baxter, 221. Perseverance not
established upon the [Mutability] of our own Free Will, etc. 199, 200, 201. C.
Excellent Discourses concerning it, from 201, to 206. C. By whom asserted, 199,
200. A. A very comfortable and encouraging Doctrine, and not tending to
Licentiousness, 201, 202, 203, 204. A. Mr. Charnock' s sense of it, 197, 198,
199. C. Mr. Perkins' s [excellent] definition of Election and Reprobation, 24,
25. C. Possibility of being redeemed, and yet that Redemption rendered
ineffectual, asserted and [sottishly] argued under an inconsistent Comparison,
106. B. Mr. Prynn' s Anti-Arminianism dedicated to the Bishops and
Archbishops, quoted as an excellent Piece, from 211, to 217. A.
Predestination, its definition, 24. A. The Cause of this Decree, 26. A. The
parts of Predestination, ibid. Foreseen Faith, Perseverance, or Good Works no
[moving Cause] thereof, 25, 30, 35. A. Privation of Righteousness the
Punishment of Sin, 22. Preparation to Faith by Education, etc. 152. B. *
Purpose of Grace [from God's free Will alone] 50, 51. C. Punishment twice
inflicted if the Elect are punished, 92. B. and 100 B. Prayer: An abominable
Prayer taught a Widow by Pelagius, 163. B. *
Q.
QUestions and Answers concerning Perseverance, 205, 206. A. Questions put by
Baxter, and answered by himself with [Hellish Subtilty] concerning falling
away, etc. 199, 200, 201. B. Questions and Answers between Bellarmine and the
Protestants concerning Merits, Imputation, etc. from 293, to 308. A. Questions
and Answers concerning Righteousness and Justification, from 331, to 337. B.
Question, Whether the Covenant of Grace be made only with Christ, or with us
also, 66, 67. B. Questions of great moment answered, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428,
ad finem. Quakers; their sense of Predestination at large, and [cursed
Inferences] from it, from 223, to 233. C. and 233, 234, 235. Their Opinion of
Original Sin, 236, 237, 238, C. Concerning Redemption, not [peculiar] but
[universal] 239, 240, to 247. C. and 248. Concerning Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, or his [Representative Headship] agrees with the Popish and
Baxterian, and is [most corrupt] from 249, to 252. C. and 261. At large
concerning Justification, from 262, to 337. C. Concerning Sanctification, from
350, to 369. C. and from 369, to 374. Concerning Assurance, from 375, to 382.
C. Concerning final Perseverance, from 388, to 393. C. Quaker, Baxterian and
Papist linked together in the Doctrine of Justification, 222, etc. and in the
Doctrine of Predestination, etc. 224, etc. A. B. and C.
R.
REgeneration, its Rise, Nature, and Growth opened with relation to
Justification, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The Result of an [essential, material]
Application of Christ's Righteousness, 5. When true known by bringing the Soul
under a [submissive Reception] of an [external Righteousness] for
Justification, 17. No part of this Righteousness, ibid. The nature of it
opened, from 149, to 153. C. *. Wrought in [all] by the Spirit if not abused,
96. B. Regeneration and Sanctification not to be confounded together, 182, 183.
A. Righteousness of [our own] a prelude to another Righteousness, 132. B.
Indwelling Righteousness no [Matter] or [Cause] of our Justification, but a
double-branch'd piece of Popery, 20, 21. Not from Works, but Works from
Righteousness, 132. A. The meritorious Cause of Election, 43. B. By Faith, how,
or what, 160. A. Righteousness, various sorts* of it amongst the Papists, 262,
263. A. Of Christ [no part] of our Justification, 263, 264. A. Righteousness
and Sin derived from [two common Heads] i. e. from Christ and Adam, 76, 77, 85.
A. Righteous sundry ways, 133, 128, 129. A. Remonstrants their sense concerning
Sin and Guilt, 72, 73. B. Reprobation, its definition, 27, 28, etc. A. It binds
no Man [absolutely] under a [necessity] of sinning, and so being damned, 31. A.
Redemption and electing Love run parallel, 88, 89, 91. C. Repentance, whether
[before] Faith, 154. A. A [Condition] of Justification, 130. B. Before
Justification, a Popish Error, from 272, to 276. A. Reasons of Decay in Duties
of Holiness, 396. Rod* f^ Mr. D. Williams, and Mr. R. Baxter, 411, 412.
S.
SAlvation not by any [particular Profession] or Sect, 52, 180. A. Before
Christ's Incarnation, from Christ's Covenant-undertakings, 55. C. Without
Christ asserted, 57. B. Vid. the three Columns of Papist, Baxterian and Quaker,
from 350, to 372, etc. Satisfaction of Christ every way full to all Demands of
the Law, and no [Relaxation] of, or [purchasing Conditions] from 102, to 106.
C. Saints, beloved in God before they believe, ^67. C. Sanctification an
[Effect or Sign] of Justification, 151, 152. A. From the Spirit; Justification
from the Efficacy of Christ's Blood, 137. C. Its definition, 164, 165. C.
Saving and common Grace differ only in [degree] 150. B. *. It Is a restoring the
Image of God lost by Original Sin, 181, 182. A. A real Change, or new Creation,
149, 180, 181. C. Scriptures, none to prove that if Adam had stood his
[Posterity] should have stood likewise, 79. B. Innumerable to prove final
Perseverance, 205. A. Seven Scripture Arguments to prove it, 209, 210. A.
Against Merit; and the Papists abuse of 'em, 276, 277. A. Scheme showing how
the Papists Baxterians and Quakers [agree] in the Errors touching
Predestination, Justification, etc. beginning 223. Showing the [Agreement] of
Mr. Sam. Clark in his Annotations with Rob. Barclay and Sam. Fisher; two strong
Quakers, concerning their corrupt Notion of Justification, 414, 415, etc. Of
Life and Death, or Reward and Punishment, according to Baxter, and its
Explication, 419, 420, 421. Scotch Quaker Earclay [corrupt] concerning
Justification,. etc. from 317, to 329. C. and from 343, to 347. Security the
danger of it, 397. Sin not the [Cause] of Reprobation, 27, 43, 44, 45. A. Three
things noted concerning it, 83. A. How, or in [what sense] it remains in the
godly,. 83, 84. A. [Abominably] charged upon God, 77. B. How charged upon
Christ, and [whose] 98. A. Of the Elect not [barely] the [Cause] of Christ's
Sufferings, 98. B. As well as Punishment [bore] by Christ, 112. A. Committed by
one and punished in another, 122, 123. This kind of Punishment not
promiscuously inflicted, but from particular Conjunction either of Relation or
Interest, and the whole applied to Christ and his Church, ibid. Socinus' s nine
Objections and their [wicked] Answers, tending to prove that Christ's Death was
only for an Example of Life, and not a Ransom for Sin, from 329, to 347.
Socinianism and Arminianism the two Pillars whereon the Gates of Hell are hung,
422, 423. Song: An old Song for the Papists, Baxterians and Quakers to sell
their old rotten Ware by, 393. Sufficiency of Grace, etc. in the [Creature] for
Salvation, from 361, to 363. A. and from 350, to 357. B. Vid. ibidem, C. In
Christ's Sufferings for the whole Election, 104. A. Sufferings of Christ in the
[room] and [stead] of the Elect, 92, 93, 94, 110. C. and 106, 107, 109, 110,
113, 114, 115, 119, 120. A. The [same] that should have been inflicted. on the
Elect in [kind] and [degree] hoth with respect to [Loss] and [Sense] from 96,
to 102. C. Suretiship opened and applied to Christ, 117, 118. A. Vid. 120, 121.
Similitude concerning Mr. Baxter, 220, etc.
T.
TErms of the Covenant, 176. B. *. Testimony of Martyrs to the Doctrine of
Perseverance, 208, 209. A. Three words used by the Hebrews to set forth the
Nature and Certainty of justifying Faith,. 192. Three great Changes wrought in
a Christian, 146. C. Three [Orders] of Believers or Repenters amongst the
Baxterians, 41. B. Threefold Miscarriages of Men in Religion, 396. Mr.
Troughton [derided] by Mr. Baxter upon account of his Sentiments concerning
Justification, 322, 323, 324, 325. B. Total Apostasy the Doctrine of Papists,
from 388, to 392, etc. A. And of Quakers, from 388, to 392. C. Time when
Perseverance first opposed, 198, 199. A. Transacting the Filthiness of Sin upon
Christ blasphemous, 118. B. Transmutation of [Righteousness to us] and [Sin to
Christ] glorious and comfortable in the Effects of it, 126, 127. Truths, so in
themselves being misplaced, mistim'd, etc. more pernicious than Errors, 20.
Trent; Council of Trent concerning Faith and Assurance, 376, 377. A. and 383,
384, 385, 386, 387.
U.
UNiversal Covenant how pleaded for by Mr. Baxter, 50. B. and 361, 362. A.
Universal Redemption a Forgery,. 28. A. Vid. 183, 184, etc. Pleaded for, 239,
240, 241. B. How to be understood, 89, 90, 91. C. If it be admitted, it follows
that all the Sins of the Reprobate are forgiven, 89. A. Universal saving Grace
the School of Atheism, 150, 151, 152. A. *. No Scripture for it, 159. A. *.
Mere Nature, 160, 161, 162, 163. A. * Universal Grace [sufficient] to
Salvation, 181, 182, 183. B. Union between Adam and his Progeny, as it refers
to Original Sin, considered, 81. A. Betwixt Christ and Believers makes him our
[Representative] 108, 109. C. The nature of it largely opened, 217, 218, 219,
220. Unchangeableness of God one reason of Sinners Justification, 154, 155,
156. C. Unbelief of what Christ is in himself, and what made to us, the Rise
and Foundation of Popery and Quakerism, 401, 402.
W.
WOrks before Grace not acceptable to God, 55, 180. and 155. A. *. Works
[necessary] to Salvation, 268, 288. A. Dr. Willet' s Answer to Huberus' s
Assertions concerning Universal Redemption, 91, etc. A. Mr. D. Williams' s
[Diabolical] and Nonsensical quibbling to overthrow Christ's Sufferings for the
Elect only, 93, 102, 103. B. His Doctrine and Dr. Chauncy' s concerning
Justification compared, from 299, to 301. B. His sense of Assurance, from 197,
to 184. B. and 377, 378, to 381. B. Of Perseverance, 202, 203, 204. B. Of
Justification, from 273, to 297. B. Concerning the [personal] and [proper]
Representative Headship of Christ, 249. B.
Finis Indicis.
Some Scriptures occasionally opened in this Work.
GENESIS 1. 2. p. 3. 3. 21. p. 146. * Ruth 2. 13. p. 192. 2 Samuel 12. 13. p. 156. *
Psalm 92. 13. p. 7. 42. 11. p. 142. 37. 3. p. 192. Prove. 28. 14. p. 184.
Eccles. 9. 1. p. 185. Gant. 7. 4. p. 9. Isa. 45. 22. p. 7. 53. 10. p. 89. 7. 9.
p. 192. Zech. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. p. 8. Mal. 1. 10, 11. p. 58. 4. 2. p. 6.

John 17. 5. p. (...). 8. 56. p. 76. Romans 5. 12. p. 77, (...). 10. 6. p. 188.
1 Cor. 15. 45 p. 77. 1. 30. p. 157. * 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. p. 127, 157 *. p. 96.
1. 20. p. 192. Ephesians. 1. 9. p. 59. 2. 16. p. 120. Galat. 5. 2. p. 15. 4. 4. p.
96. Philip. 3. 9. p. 185. * 2. 12. p. 184. 1. 6. p. 204. Philem. v. 18, 19. p.
117. 1 Pet. 2. 24. p. 122. Jude v. 3. p. 1. Rev. 7. 9, 13, 14. 19. 18. p. 147.
*

Books sold by William Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-street.
A Plain and impartial Enquiry into Gospel Truth. Price 1 s. A short Review,
with some Remarks upon the Union in the late Agreement in Doctrine amongst the
Dissenting Ministers in London. Price 6 d. Both by Tho. Edwards, Esquire and fit to
be bound up with this Volume.
BOOKS printed for Benjamin Keach, and sold by William Marshal.
His Metaphors of the Scriptures, in two Volumes in Folio. His Golden Mine
opened, or the Glory of God's rich Grace displayed, in 4to. The Display of
glorious Grace, or the Covenant of Peace opened, in fourteen Sermons. God
acknowledged, or the true Interest of the Nation. Price 6 d. The everlasting
Covenant, or the nature of the Covenant of Grace opened. Price 6 d. The Child's
Delight, wherein all the chief Principles of the Christian Religion are clearly
(tho briefly) opened. Price 6 d. bound. Those that send for a dozen, shall have
them for 5 s.
BOOKS sold by John Marshall at the Bible in Grace Church Street.
A View of an Ecclesiastic in his Socks and Buskins: or, a just Reprimand
given to Mr. Alsop, for his Foppish, Pedantick, Detractive and Petulant way of
Writing. The History of the Union between the Presbyterians and the
Congregational Ministers, with the Causes of the Breach of it. Price 6 d.
Variety without Vanity; or a Collection of Copies fitted to the Capacity of the
Learner, for attaining a legible Hand in Writing. Price 6 d. The Ten
Commandments in Verse in a large Copper Plate fit to hang up, very delightful.
Price 6 d. The Life of Man demonstrated in its several Ages from the Cradle to
the Grave, in a large Copper Plate. Price 6 d. Multum in parvo, or a
compendious Spelling Book, with variety of Copper Cuts. Price bound 6 d. The
Heavenly Footman, or a Description of the Man that gets to Heaven, the Way he
runs, the Marks he goes by. By I. Buny^, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.

