THE EFFECT of what was Spoken BY Sir JOHN LOW THERE TO THE KING, At the desire
of Several Members of Parliament, That Dined together, on Wednesday, January
29. 1689.
THis day a great number of Parliament Men dined together, They thought
themselves obliged to give your Majesty an Assurance of their Loyalty; now,
that by your Majesty's Prorogation, they are going into their several Countries
where they live. They thought it would be a trouble to come to attend your
Majesty in so great a body, so commanded me, with the rest of these Gentlemen,
to represent the whole, and give your Majesty this Assurance: That they present
their humble Duty to your Majesty, and assure you Sir, They are ready to
venture their Lives, and all that is dear to them, in your Service; That they
will make it their business to see that such Moneys as is given, may be
speedily and effectually raised. And because your Majesty is resolved in Person
to go into Ireland, they heartily pray for your Majesty's Journey, Success in
your Arms, a speedy and safe Return, a long and happy Reign over us.

The Effect of his Majesty's Answer.
Gentlemen,
I Take this Address very kindly, and desire you will return my thanks to all
the Gentlemen; and assure them, that as I have ventured my Life in defense of
these Kingdoms, nothing shall be wanting of my side to complete their
Happiness. I think my going in Person into Ireland, will be a great means to
put an End to the War, therefore am resolved upon it. I also assure you, I will
make it my particular Care to protect and defend the Church of England, as by
Law established. I shall desire you will in my absenve, take care that all
things be kept in good peace and good order; and at my Return, I hope in God,
all things will be well settled; that we may be happy, and enjoy one another,
and every man his Right.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1689.


