TWO DECLARATIONS OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, The one
concerning His Majesty's late Proclamation for the suppressing of the present
Rebellion, under the command of ROBERT Earl of Essex; And the gracious offer
of His Majesty's f^ee Padon to him, and all such of his Adherents as shall
within six days after the date thereof lay down their Arms.

The Other For the raising of all power, and force, as Well Trained Bands as
others, in several Counties of this Kingdom, to lead against all Traitors,
and their adherents, and them to arrest and imprison, and to sight with, kill,
and slay all such as shall oppose any of His Majesty's loving Svbjects that
shall be employed in this service, by either, or both Houses of Parliament.

Ordered that these two Declarations be forthwith Printed. Hen Elsinge, Cler.
Parl. D. Com.

August. 16. London, Printed for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

THe Lords and Commons having received in a Letter from His Majesty, a printed
Paper, entitled, a Proclamation for the suppressing of the present Rebellion
under the Command of ROBERT Earl of Essex; And the gracious offer of His
Majesty's free pardon to him, and all such of his adherents as shall within six
days after the Date thereof lay down their Arms, Do declare and publish,
That the matter of this libellous and scandalous Paper is the venom of those
Traiterous Counselors about his Majesty, long since discovered, and so often
complained of by both Houses of Parliament: Who having for many years together
carried a wicked design to alter Religion, and to introduce Popery,
Superstition, and Ignorance (the ready way to an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government) And for that purpose not only maintained Agents at Rome, but
invited and procured sundry Nuncio's or Agents to be sent into this Kingdom
from the Pope; by which means Popery and Superstition was so far advanced,
that nothing but the convening of this Parliament (occasioned by the coming of
the Scots) could in all humane reason have prevented them in their design, the
only true reason why these mischievous counselors maligning, that power which
oppose it self against their destructive and horrid coun^^lls, have now at
last, as the Masterpiece of all their Machinations advised His Majesty, in
effect, to proclaim^ at (...) His House of Peers, the hereditary Counselors of
the Kingdom, and His House of Commons, the representative Body of the whole
Commons of the Kingdom, to be all Rebels and Traitors; And by that Paper have
endeavored so far to blind the eyes of the people, as to make them guilty
of their own destruction, by helping to subdue and destroy the Parliament (the
only means, under God, to preserve their Religion, Law, and Liberties) And to
persuade the Kingdom that his Majesty, by the assistance of Papists, and
persons Popishly affected, will maintain the Protestant Religion: that by the
help of men Outlawed, and of desperate fortunes, will maintain the Laws of
the Land; And with fugitives from Parliament, and Traitors and Delinquents to
the Parliament, will preserve the Privileges thereof; and attempt so
desperate, and so transcendently wicked, That the Lords and Commons do
unanimously publish and declare, That all they who have advised, contrived,
abetted, or countenanced, or hereafter shall abet and countenance the said
Proclamation, to be Traitors, and enemies to God, the King, and Kingdom, and to
be guilty of the highest degree of Treason that can be committed against the
King and Kingdom, And that they will, by the assistance of Almighty God, and
of all honest English Protestants, and lovers of their Country, do their best
endeavors (even to the utmost hazard of their Lives and Fortunes) to bring all
such unparalleled Traitors to a speedy and exemplary punishment.

And whereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament did formerly choose the Earl
of Essex to be Captain General of such Forces as are, or shall be raised for
the maintenance and preservation of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings
Person, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, the Liberty and
Property of the Subject, and the Rights, and Privileges of Parliament.

The said Lords and Commons, do now Declare, That they will maintain and
assist him, and adhere unto him the said Earl with their lives and estates, in
the same Cause, as in Conscience and Duty to GOD; the King and their Country
they are bound to do.

And lastly, The Lords and Commons do further Declare, That notwithstanding
those wicked Counselors which inclined his Majesty to make war against our
brethren of Scotland, and by Prayers and Proclamations read in Churches, to
pronounce them Rebels and Traitors: That withheld his Majesty from setting
forth any Proclamation against those bloody Rebels in Ireland till January
last, although the Rebellion brake forth the 23. of October before, and
notwithstanding the importunity of both Houses of Parliament, that a
Declaration might issue to that purpose; have now advised and prevailed with
His Majesty by this Proclamation, to invite His Subjects to destroy his
Parliament, and good people, by a civil War, and by that means to bring
ruin, confusion, and perpetual slavery upon the surviving part of a then
wretched Kingdom: Yet the Lords and Commons to witness their constant, and
unshaken loyalty and affection to his Majesty, do solemnly declare, That if
his Majesty shall immediately disband all his Forces, and be pleased to
abandon those wicked Counselors, and leave them to condign punishment, and
return and hearken to the wholesome advice of his great Council, they will
really endeavor to make both his Majesty, and his posterity as great, rich,
and potent, as much beloved at home, and feared abroad, as any Prince that ever
swayed this Scepter, which is their firm and constant Resolution.

FINIS.

