(...)OTES of the HONORABLE, the COMMONS of ENGLAND, Assembled in the late
PARLIAMENT at Westminster, in FAVOR OF Protestant Dissenters.
November 6. 1680. REsolved, (Nemine contradicente) That it is the Opinion of
this House, That the Acts of Parliament, made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth,
and King (...)s, against Popish Recusants, ought not to be extended (...)nst
Protestant Dissenters.

Ditto. Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare bring in a Bill, for
Repeal of all or any part of the Act of (...)iament made in the 35th year of
the Reign of Q. Elizabeth.

Wednesday 24. ditto. (...)esolved, That an humble Address be made to his
Majesty (...) this House, by such Members thereof, as are of his (...)esties
most Honorable Privy Council, to desire his Ma(...) to give Order, That all
his Protestant Dissenters who Prosecuted upon any Poenal Laws, made against
Popish (...)sants in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James, (...) be
admitted to a Composition in the Exchequer with(...) (...)aying any Fees.

(...)dered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill, declaring, (...) the Acts
of Parliament, made in the Reign of Queen (...)eth, and King James, against
Popish Recusants, shall not (...) (...)tended against Protestant Dissenters.

Friday 26. ditto. (...) Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That his
Ma(...) (...)ad been attended by such Members of this House as are Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, with an Ad(...) concerning the Protestant
Dissenters, and That his Ma(...) Answer is, That they shall be discharged, and
without (...) (...)s far as may be done according to Law, and that they be
recommended to the Judges.

(...)to. An Engrossed Bill the same day for the Repeal of an made in the 35th
year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (...) (...)ead the third time.

(...)solved, That the Bill do pass, and that the Title be, An (...) for the
Repeal of a Statute made in the 35th year of the (...) of Queen Elizabeth; and
that Sir Eliab Harvey do carry (...) Bill to the Lords for their concurrence.

Wednesday 15th ditto. (...) Message from the Lords by Sir John Hoskins and Sir
(...) Adam Dateley.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have Commanded us, to ac(...)int this House, That they
have Agreed to the Bill, sent (...)m this House, Entitled, An Act for the
Repeal of a Sta(...)e made in the 35th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth;
(...)th some amendments, to which they desire the Concur(...)ce of this House.

(...)solved, Nemine contradicente, That a Bill be brought in for (...)
(...)ssociation of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, for the (...)y of his
Majesty's Person, the defense of the Protestant (...)ion, and the preservation
of his Majesty's Protestant Sub(...)cts, against all Invasions and Impositions
whatsoever, and for preventing the Duke of York or any Papist from succeeding
(...)o the Crown.

Thursday, December. 16th. England, from the Penalty of cer(...)ain Laws, was
read the first time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be Read a Second time on Monday morning next, at
Ten of the Clock in a full House.

Friday, December. 24. England, from the Penalty of certain Laws, was read a
second time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be Committed upon the debate of the House.

Monday, Jan. 10. Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That the
Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters, upon the Penal Laws, is at this time
grievous to the Subject, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, an
Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

Oxford, Thursday, 24 March, 1680. An Act for the Repeal of a Statute made in
the 35th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, was not presented to his Majesty
(as the rest; of the Bills were) for his Royal Assent.

Resolved, That this House will to morrow Morning at Ten of the clock take into
consideration, by what means the said Bill miscarried.

Friday, 25 of March. An Act for the Repeal of a Statute made in the 35th year
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; but was not tendered to his Majesty for his
Royal Assent.

The King has graciously declared his Resolve for frequent Parliaments,
knowing with that wise King Solomon; That in the multitude of Councels there is
safety; Plus vident oculi, quam oculus. Many Eyes see more than one.

A Parliament is not a concourse of insignificant Atoms, that have no
Influence, or Effects, but they are rather a Congregation or Assembly of Gods:
It may be, this made Mr. Coleman call them [The Omnipotent Parliament:]
However, our own Chronicles, calls them a Compound, consisting of so many
Principes Populi, the Princes of the People; and who ever have been so
foolhardy, as daringly to run a counter or contrary motion to such Councels,
have upon the long Run, Run or Rode Neck-breaks at last: This is recorded as
the experience of all foregoing Ages: The Parliaments Motto is, Nemo me impune
lacessit: None ever escaped soot-free, that durst oppose and provoke that great
Council; both the many and the mighty have in former times like the fluid Waves
of the Sea dashed themselves in pieces upon the Justice of Parliamentary Rocks:
And how can these of our present times expect any better success, who act
diametrically opposite to the sagest Sentiments of the two Houses of
Parliament, wherein the Lords and Commons did concur so happily in Repealing
the Act of the 35th of Queen Elizabeth, (which was only intended against Popish
Recusants) well considering, that The prosecution of those Penal Laws against
Protestant Dissenters, at this Juncture of time, can be no better than a
gratifying and promoting the Popish Plot. The Parliament House has this
Honorable Inscription over it: Haec Domus odit, amat, punit, conservat, Honorat
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos.
This House hates Sin, loves Peace, and Vice corrects,
Maintains just Laws, and Honest men protects.


Now these preceding Votes, upon mature and deliberate consideration being
Resolved upon, by the Honorable the Commons of England assembled in the two
last Parliaments (Nemine^ contradicente,) who for Loyalty, Prudence, Wisdom,
Integrity, and Estates, were never before paralleled; may it not concern every
Subject, especially Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, and other his Majesty's
inferior Officers, to take a view of, and be well acquainted therewith, so as
they may not be imposed upon by any Insinuation, Promise or Pretense
whatsoever, to do that which may tend to Weaken the Protestant Interest and
Encourage the Popish Faction; considering, That whosoever shall Act contrary
thereto, do wilfully and plainly Act against the express Sense of the Commons
of England, their own and the Nations Representatives, and consequently cannot
but expect to be accomptable for the same.

It being one Essential part of our English Government, that there is always a
Parliament in posse, though not in esse.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange.


