THE Commons Address Against the DUKE of LAUDERDAIL, Presented to His Majesty,
May 9. 1679.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, finding your Majesty's Kingdoms involved in imminent
dangers, and great difculties, by the evil designs and pernicious Councels of
some, who have been, and still are in high places of Trust and Authority about
your Royal Person, who contrary to the duty of their places, by their Arbitrary
and destructive Counsels, tending to the Subversion of the Rights, Liberties,
and Properties of your Subjects, and the alteration of the Protestant Religion
Established, have endeavored to alienate the hearts of your good Subjects from
your Majesty and your Government, which we by our duty are bound to preserve.
We have just reason to accuse John Duke of Lauderdail, for a chief Promoter of
such Councels; and more particularly, for contriving and endeavoring to raise
jealousies and Misunderstandings between this your Majesty's Kingdom and
Scotland, whereby Hostilities might have ensued and arisen between both
Nations, if not prevented: wherefore we your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects
cannot but be sensibly affected and troubled to see such a person,
notwithstanding the repeated Addresses of your late Paliament, continued in
your Council at this time, when the Affairs of your Kingdom require none to be
set in such employments, but such as are of known Abilities, Interest, and
Esteem in the Nation, without all suspicion of either mistaking or betraying
the true interest of the Kingdom, and consequently of Advsing your Majesty ill.

We do therefore beseech your Majesty, for the taking away the great Jealousies
and dissatisfactions amongst your good Subjects, who are oppressed with great
grief and sorrow, that your Majesty will graciously be pleased to remove the
Duke of Lauderdail from your Majesty's Councils, in your Majesty's Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, and from all Offices, Employments, and places of Trust,
and from your Majesty's presence for ever.

A Speech in the House of COMMONS, upon Reading the Bill against the D. of
York, May 1679.
WE have now the weightiest matter under our Considerations that ever came
before us, therefore we ought with the highest Zeal to speak our minds boldly
for the King and Kingdom: for as the matter is of no less importance than to
secure our Religion to Posterity, so much the rather should we apply our selves
to manifest that we will not be discouraged by any seeming opposition
whatsoever.

But as the Lord Chancellor lately told us, This is the time, so I must repeat
it, That it is indeed the time; that is to say, the moment: which if we should
suffer to slip from us, it may never be in our power to regain, and then our
Children may be bound to Curse us: for I must tell you, That it will be utterly
impossible ever to secure the Protestant Religion under a Popish Successor,
unless you do totally disable him to inherit these Protestant Countries; and
the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome will infallibly steal upon us.

For to think to restrain a King under the Power of a Penal Law, thereby to
secure Religion, is no more than to bind Sampson with Cords, who as soon as
it is said, The Philistims are upon thee, will break them all in pieces, and
carry the Gates away with him, and leave you open to the Invasion of the Enemy;
nothing therefore can be able to secure us, but to clip his Locks: For if the
Papists do at this time design to subvert our Religion under a Protestant
Prince, how much more will they design against us under a Popish Successor?
What will not the Priests and Jesuits undertake, to procure our Destruction,
when they shall have the favor of the Prince, and are secured that the Laws
and Statutes made against them, shall not be put in Execution? for it is
Coleman's Maxim, That if the Popish Religion stood upon an equal foot with the
Protestant, the Popish Religion would get the better, as they would manage it;
and then our Estates could never be secure, no, nor our very Lives; and
Protestants would be discouraged, and hardly dare to speak their minds; and
Massacres may be as frequent and as great here, as they were formerly at Paris:
So that it is clear we can never restrain him.

The Lord Chancellor in his Speech tells you, That when His Majesty shall
happen to dye, we shall have a convenient time to settle Religion and the
Nation. Let me ask you, Must we act with the Successor, or without him? If we
act with him, he will never consent to any thing we shall do against him; if
without him, we act as a Commonwealth; and that he will never suffer, but
perhaps will send his Guards and turn us out of Doors, and what will become of
us then?

One Reason laid down to us likewise is, That it is impossible for a Successor
to raise Money, but by Consent of Parliament: that point may be easily answered
by us, There are many small Buroughs and Towns who choose us, where there are
but few Voices; how easy is it to purchase those Votes by Money? if he should
lay out Ten or Twenty thousand pound for the purchase, they would soon give it
him again; and then the whole Nation will be ruined without Redemption. The
Speech of the Lord Chancellor is only a Fig-leaf to cover our Nakedness, or
rather Leaf-Gold to flatter us; or like a Mother who having a froward Child,
and upon necessity must do something to pacify it, she gives it any thing she
has, but lets it keep it no longer than she pleases.

Now I have shown you the necessity of this Bill, let us next consider, that
the good which will come by it, is far greater than the evil that can ensue
upon it; which I will thus demonstrate: If we give way to a Popish Successor,
we give away Religion, and have Popish Tyranny for a Recompense; and then
consequently, our Estates will be taken away; and for an English man to lose
his Estate, is worse than to lose his Life, since he must continue in perpetual
Bondage, and be worse than a Captive slave, and shall be Priest-ridden every
day: therefore in my opinion, it is far better for us to resolve to maintain
our Religion, and to secure our selves by opposing any Violence that shall be
offered to us from abroad, than to be in danger of having our Throats cut every
moment, by those that shall be amongst us.

Now let us consider, whether this may be effected by Law, or out of necessity.
I will put the Case, That if a Prince be born to a Kingdom who is either
Lunatic, or otherwise disabled to do the Kingdom any good, shall not the
Subjects in this case proceed to choose another who may preserve the Kingdom,
when otherwise it must of necessity perish? As lately in the Case of Portugal,
they chose another to succeed, because of the disability of the former; And
shall not we then disable the Duke, who cannot possibly do the Nation any
service, his Principles being so contrary and destructive to the Laws,
Statutes, and Constitutions of this Government, as nothing but ruin can ensue
thereby?

Now as to the Point of Law, I must say, that as for a private person to rise
against his Prince is Rebellion; so on the contrary, when there is an Act of
Parliament to disable him, and that upon such good grounds and reasons as we
have heard read against him this day, we shall be justified by all the World in
opposing his Claim; and we have had Presidents of this kind heretofore. And it
was Enacted in Queen Elizabeth's time, That those who durst any way dispute that
the King and Parliament could not appoint a Successor, should be guilty of a
Praemunire.

FINIS.

