AN Eighth Collection OF PAPERS Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England: VIZ. I. The Trial and Examination of the Test of the Church of
England's Loyalty. II. Some Reflections upon the Additional Libel, entitled,
An Instance of the Church of England 's Loyalty. III. The Pedigree of Popery,
or Genealogy of Antichrist. IV. A Letter to a Person of Quality, occasioned by
the News of the Ensuing Parliament. V. Father La Chaise's Project for the
Extirpation of Heretics: In a Letter from him to Father Petres. VI. An Account
of the Papers that have been Collected, relating to the present Juncture of
Affairs.


Licensed according to Order.



LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, 1689.

The Trial and Examination of a late Libel, entitled, A New Test of the Church
of England's Loyalty. With some Reflections upon the Additional Libel,
entitled, An Instance of the Church of England's Loyalty.
THE Church of England has of late years especially been on the charitable side
toward the Papists, and has allowed them to be Christians and not
Anti-Christians, nay to be a true Church and not the Synagogue of Satan; and
seemed to have utterly forgotten the two fundamental points of Popery, That
Heretics are to be pursued with Fire and Sword, which was determined by the
Lateran Council, under Innocent the Third, and conscientiously practiced ever
since; And that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, which the Council of
Constance determined in the case of John Huss, and Jerome of Prague: And in
this excess of Charity which hops all things and believes all things, they
have hoped against hope, and have exercised strong acts of Faith where no Faith
is, neither have they had any apprehensions of being destroyed, but rather of
being saved and protected with Fire and Sword. But finding in great measure
their Charity mistaken, to the end that all their disappointments may seem just
upon them, they are presently taxed with Disloyalty. So Aesops Lamb, when she
was to be eaten, was charged by the Wolf for muddying the upper part of the
stream which was far above her. In Vindication therefore of the Church of
England, and to show her innocence in this point, I shall examine this new Test
of the Church of England's Loyalty, where she is tried and cast, weighed in the
Balance and found light, but, to our comfort, it is by deceitful weights and
measures.

The first device is to pretend, That the Church of England appropriate to
themselves alone the principles of true Loyalty, and that no other Church or
Communion on earth can be consistent with Monarchy, or indeed with any
Government. This is a presumption of so high a nature, that it renders the
Church of England a despicable Enemy to the rest of mankind.

To which I answer, That the Church of England is here represented by that
which is the true Character of the Church of Rome, which has all along been a
known Engrosser. Which pretends to have all Faith, and all Holiness, and will
have all Heaven to her self, and pretending to have the Keys of it, will suffer
none other to come thither. Whereas the Church of England allows, not only that
all Protestants have true Faith and true Loyalty as well as she, and the same
Faith and Loyalty, as appears by the Harmony of their Confessions, but also
that Pagans are capable of moral virtue, such as Loyalty is, and have
heretofore been great examples of it. Many of them have looked upon themselves
as not born for themselves, but for their Country, and were strict observers of
the Laws: And it is well known, that Socrates in particular had that Reverence
for the Laws, that though he was put upon it by his Friends, yet he would not
break them to save his Life. His Bones and Sinews, as his words are in Plato's
Phaedo, could easily have carried him into a Foreign Country, but he would not
suffer them to do it. And therefore this Author, in saying that the Church of
England averrs, That no other Sect or Community on Earth from the Rising to the
Setting Sun can be capable of this singular gift of Loyalty; betrays his malice
and ignorance together, and plainly shows, that though he make new Tests of
Loyalty, yet he does not know what Loyalty is.

The word Loyal is a Term of Law, and is indifferently applied to things as
well as Persons. So a Loyal Judgment is a Judgment according to Law, and is
opposed to a false Judgment. A Loyal contract is a lawful bargain. A Man buys
an Horse in a Market, and then he has a Loyal Title, a Legal Title to him. So
again, a Person behaves himself according to Law, and observes the Laws of the
Land, and then he is a Loyal Man, he is Legalis Homo, as a Juryman is required
to be, that is, such a one as cannot be challenged for a Criminal, or a breaker
of the Laws. And in case a Man's Behavior be according to Law, it is Loyal,
whether it respect a Superior or an Inferior. Action nest autre chose que
Loial demand de son droit. An action is nothing else but the Loyal Demand of a
Man's Right. Mirror, p. 115, and p. 122. A Sergeant at Law shall not use any
deceits in his practice, nor consent to them, mes Loyalment maintiendra le
droit de son Client, etc. But shall Loyally maintain the Right of his Client,
so that it be not overthrown by any folly, negligence, or default of his.

From hence it follows, that Loyalty can have no other rule or measure but the
Law; for though some Men love to have confused notions of things, and speak of
Loyalty as if it were a thing in the Clouds, and some abstruse matter over our
Heads, yet it appears to be plain thing, and of easy comprehension, for it is
nothing else but Conformity to the Laws. The plain English of Loyalty is
lawfulness, and it is utterly impossible that there should be any other Test or
Touchstone, any other measure or standard of lawfulness but the Law it self.
For if there had been no Law, as there had been no Transgression nor Violation
of it, so there had been no Loyalty nor Conformity to it. And therefore Loyalty
against Law is a contradiction, it is obedience made up of disobedience. The
Law is that which makes the King our Liege Lord, and us his Liege People, and
accordingly both Prince and People are mutually sworn to the keeping of it; and
our Allegiance binds us to an obedience according to Law, and not otherwise. To
obey the King himself contrary to Law is Disloyalty, and to disobey the King in
obedience to the Laws is Loyalty. If it be not thus, then all the Judges of
England for these 340 Years and upwards, have been all Sworn to be Disloyal.
For they are sworn to proceed according to Law, though the King by his Letters
or Writs under the great Seal, or under the little Seal, or by his own mouth
should command them the contrary, 2. 18. 20. Ed. 3. Fortesc. c. 51. Etiamsi Rex
per Literas suas aut Ore tenus Contrarium jusserit. And so in the Court Leet,
when we swear that we will be true Liegemen, and true Faith and Troth bear to
our Sovereign Lord the King, and that we shall no Felony nor Treason commit,
nor thereunto assent, and shall be obedient to all the K. Majesty's Laws,
Precepts and Process proceeding from the same: It is plain, that we do not
promise any obedience to Precepts or Process which are contrary to Law, or
besides the Law, and not grounded upon it; No, that is no part of our
Allegiance, which you plainly see is limited to the Laws.

Now this being the undoubted notion of Loyalty, how should the Church of
England ever dream of appropriating it to her self, since obedience to the Laws
of their Country has always been practiced in all Nations, by all virtuous men
whatsoever; it being a point of common honesty and justice, that men should
abide by those Laws, which either themselves or their Proxies have made, and to
which in one way or another they have given their own consent, which always
concludes, and is binding to an honest Man: Only there is one sort of men in
the World, who can never be Loyal; because no Man can serve two Masters, the
Government of his own Country and the Pope of Rome. They who have a Legislator
abroad to give them new Laws, and a Dispencer to repeal the old ones, can never
be true and firm to the Laws of their natural Country. Their Loyalty is in
Abeyance to the Pope's Laws, (which agreed even with the old Laws of England,
bofore the Reformation, like Fire and Water, as Archbishop Cranmer proves in
his large Letter to Q. Mary) and their Allegiance is pinned upon the the Pope's
Sleeve. In the mean time the Church of England has very great reason to insist
upon her Loyalty, because if a man be not a lawful man, he is defeated of the
benefit of the Law in many cases: Whereas the members of the Church of England
are able to use the old legal exceptions against their present Accusers. Siri,
jeo suy Loial home, and a la foy le Roy, and cest provor est felon, and horse la
foy le Roy. Sirs, I am a lawful man and in Allegiance to the King, and this
Accuser of mine is a Felon or a Traitor, and never took the Oath of Allegiance.
And we are ready to join issue with them upon this point, Whether they or we be
the lawful men, and which of us are guilty of High Treason against the King
and the Realm, Felony, Misprision of Treason, Praemunire, and are utterly
disabled by the Law to hold any Office either Civil or Military, not only by
the Statutes made in Q. Elizabeth's time, but also in the Reigns of King James,
and of King Charles the Second. And therefore as often as we are taxed in our
Loyalty, we shall only ask them, what Laws we have broken? Or whether it be We
or They who hate the Laws of the Land, and are continually exclaiming against
them, and would blow them up with as good a Will, as once they attempted to
blow up all the States of the Kingdom in the Parliament house where those Laws
were made, and for that very reason, because those Laws were made there. See 3
Jac. c. 1. the Statute which is yearly read in our Churches on the 5th. of
November.

Having thus explained the true sense and meaning of Loyalty, it is easy for
every body to apply it, and to justify the Church of England's carriage and
behavior, both in her Infancy and now in her Old Age (by the way, old Folks
and threatened Folks live long) And to show, that it has been according to the
Laws of the Land; which if they had broken and opposed, as the Papists have
done, they might then be charged with Disloyalty indeed. But while they
continue to keep the Laws, by the Grace of God the Laws will keep them: for so
long the Law enables them to hold their own, they can challenge the benefit of
the Law, they can claim a legal Protection, which is far better than any which
is illegal and arbitrary, uncertain and precarious, and they are on the better
side of the Hedge of all the Violators of the Law whatsoever. I shall not need
to trouble my self with the Remainder of this new Test, any otherwise than by
making some very short Notes upon the most remarkable passages in it.

I The first charge is, That the Church of England assisted Usurpers to invade
the Crown, meaning the Lady Jane and Q. Elizabeth.

As for the the first of these, I cannot see how it can be charged upon the
Church of England, because the Protestants were divided about Q. Janes Title,
some were for it, and some were against it, as particularly Judge Hales and the
Suffolk Gospellers, who stuck to Q. Mary, and were but sorrily rewarded for it.
But to wave Q. Janes case, and what might be said concerning it from the
Statute, 11 Hen. 7. c. 1. I think this is a very fair offer, that when the
Papists have answered for all the bad Titles which were set up in the times of
Popery, which were at least in the proportion of two bad ones for one good, we
will then answer, as well as we can, for that single one, which has happened
since the time of the Reformation.

The other Usurper, which the Church of England Assisted to Invade the Crown,
was Q. Elizabeth, a known Bastard. It is well known that a Popish Parliament
then sitting, acknowledged her Title, and assisted in setting her upon the
Throne, and not the Church of England, which was then driven into Corners, and
into Foreign Countries, and was not in a condition to assist any body. And
whereas Q Elizabeth is said to have been a known Bastard, the Church and Court
of Rome knew the contrary. For they knew that her Mothers Marriage was good,
because the former Marriage was naught. And the former was confessedly naught,
because it wanted the Pope's Dispensation and License, which was bought with a
mighty sum of Money, to make it good. If it had been lawful in it self, it
had not needed the Pope's Dispensation to make it lawful: And we are willing
to refer it to all the World, whether the Pope's Dispensation can make an
unlawful Marriage to be lawful.

II. We are told, That the Prelatick Protestancy, called the Church of England,
enacted those bloody Canibal Laws, to Hang, Draw, and Quarter, the Priests of
the living God. I suppose he means the Mass Priests. Now these Canibal Laws
were made to hang them, not as Priests, but as Traitors and Traiter-makers. But
I would fain ask, Might not any Sheep-stealer, or Cutpurse, in Newgate,
exclaim against Persecution, and the bloody Canibal Laws, with a much better
grace? That a Man made in the Image of God should be hanged like a Dog, for
such trifles as a Sheep, or a little loose Pocket-money! Whereas the Law of God
only required Forefold Restitution in those cases; and in some Countries,
Stealing was not only lawful but was encouraged as an Accomplishment. But on
the other hand, in God's own Government Idolatrous Priests were to be put to
death. And by the Law of Nations in all Countries whatsoever, Spies, Deserters,
Adherents and Emissaries of a public Enemy (as by our Law the Pope is to us,
and by his Law all Heretics are declared to be to him) are all to be hanged up.

And then as for the Mass Priests being called the Priests of the living God, I
appeal to the senses and understanding of all mankind, whether the Lord God,
the Maker, the former, and the Creator of a Mass Priest, whom he carries in his
Box and Worships, be a living God or no? Nay, according to the School of the
Eucharist, I will be judged by the very Rats and Mice which often run away with
him.

III. The next thing the Church, or rather the State of England is charged
with, for it was a Parliament business at least thirteen Years, is the
Execution of Mary Q. of Scots, for Treason against Q. Elizabeth: Wherein if
they did any thing contrary to Law, and the Allegiance due to their then
present Q. Elizabeth, they are chargeable with disloyalty, otherwise not. And
whereas this Author calls it a Barbarous Murder, and an Execrable Fact, I
would desire him to speak low, for if the Laws should over-hear him, they would
call this, Arraigning the Justice of the Nation. And in saying that this Fact
was the first of the kind, he betrays great Ignorance: he might as well have
said, that the Emperor Licinius, Colleague with Constantine the Great, and Q.
Joan of Naples, are still living. And as yet I have never read, that what
Constantine did in that case, was to the scandal and reproach of Christianity,
or even of those Christians who lived under Licinius, and joined with
Constantine the Great in that Affair.

But fourthly I find (which is the Substance of the sixth and seventh Pages)
that the Church of England might have all her old scores cleared, and all her
former faults forgotten, and might pass for Loyal still, if she would now
consent to the Repeal of the Sanguinary Penal Laws, which were purposely
enacted to maintain the Usurpation of Queen Elizabeth) and the late impious
Tests. Which puts me in mind of the conditions of peace, which the Wolves sent
to the Sheep. The main Article was, that the Sheep should deliver up their
Dogs, which they kept for a Guard, and which were the great hindrance to a firm
and lasting Peace. But every body knows how long the Peace lasted. But to
proceed, If the Sanguinary Penal Laws were purposely enacted to maintain the
Usurpation of Queen Elizabeth, how came they to be enacted afresh in the first
year of King James, when that Usurpation was over? How came they two years
after 3 Jac. c. 1. to be called Religious and necessary Laws? And how came more
of these Religious and necessary Laws to be made in the same Parliament, and in
succeeding Parliaments? As for the late impious Tests (choice Epithets for the
Laws of the Land) they were made as appears by the Title of the Acts, To
prevent dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants. Now the sheep might
safely have parted with their Dogs, if the Peaceable Wolves at the same time
would have parted with their Fangs.

5. In the last page he says, As for the Tests themselves, it is not my
Province to show the Absurdities of them in point of Doctrine. It is well it is
not, for he must get abundance of help whenever he goes about that Work.
However he offers at it in these words. Though by the by I must hold it a great
folly, to say that Transubstantiation is not a probable opinion at the least,
considering the number and Learning of those who maintain it, which is the best
part of Christendom: And if it be a probable opinion, it must be a great
Temerity in any man to swear there is no such thing. I had always thought that
a probable opinion must be made out by proofs and probable reasons, and not by
numbers and telling of Noses. But it seems the cause of Transubstantiation runs
very low, when it must be maintained by such Arguments, as hold much stronger
for Paganism and for Diana of the Ephesians, whom all the World worshipped. The
Religion of the Heathens was of a larger extent and of longer standing than
Popery, and was maintained by all the learning of Athens and of Ancient Rome,
and yet we dare be Sworn, that it was a false Religion. I think we do not
renounce Transubstantiation upon Oath, but only by public Declaration and
Subscription; but if we did, it would by no means be a rash Oath. For may not I
safely swear, that there is no such Figure as a Square Circle, when the thing
involves manifold contradictions, and it is plainly demonstrable that the
properties of a Square and of a Circle are utterly Inconsistent. Now we have a
thousandfold more Evidence, and are able to make as clear proof and
demonstration of it a thousand times over, that there never was, nor is, nor
can be any such thing as Transubstantiation, which is nothing else but a heap
of Contradictions, Absurdities, and impossible Falsehoods. And therefore we have
the same assurance that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation never came nor could
come from God, as we have of this clear and evident Truth, That it is
impossible for God to Lie.

VI. And now we are come to the conclusion and upshot of the business, which is
in these words. So that upon the whole matter the Loyal Church of England must
either change her old Principles of Loyalty, and take example by her Catholic
Neighbors how to behave her self toward a Prince who is not of her
persuasion; or she must give his Majesty leave not to nourish a Snake in his
own Bosom, but rather to withdraw his Royal Protection, which was promised
upon the account of her constant Fidelity. I wish this Author had been more
express and particular in this Dilemma and difficulty, to which he thinks he
has reduced the Church of England; either to turn over a new leaf, and learn a
new lesson of Loyalty from her Catholic Neighbors, or else to do worse. For
he does not tell us, which of our Catholic Neighbors we must take example by,
whether Mrs. Celier, and Mr. Sclater, who have both published to the World,
that they turned Papists, that is, have made themselves High-Traytors, for the
improvement of their Loyalty; or whether we should take example by this Author
himself, to call Queen Elizabeth Bastard, to ridicule an Infallible English
Parliament, as he calls it in Scorn, to deprave and vilify several Statutes,
which are and will be the standing Laws of the Land, till such time as they are
repealed by Act of Parliament: And therefore he has not been so clear as he
might have been in this point. Which the Church of England will hardly trouble
her self about, because she likes her old Principles of Loyalty very well, and
is not given to change, but knows when she is well. In the mean time this
Author tells us very plainly, and expressly enough, that till the Church of
England change their old Principles of Loyalty and take example by their
Catholic Neighbors, they are to be looked upon as a Snake in his Majesty's
Bosom, and cannot expect to be protected. Alas! this Gentleman is utterly
mistaken. For a Legal Establishment has a Right to a Legal Protection, and the
King is bound both by his Oath, and by the duty of his Kingly Office to protect
the Church of England, as it is by Law established. And therefore to talk of
withdrawing Protection from the Church of England, is to talk of removing the
Thames to York. But we are so much used to such empty threatenings and flashes
in the Pan, that we know they will not kill. So the Reply to the Oxford Reasons
against Addressing threatens the Church of England, that by the Prerogative in
Matters Ecclesiastical it may be in great measure Legally Subverted, p. 4. A
Legal Establishment even while it remains such, Legally Subverted! They would
make us believe, that the Laws of England were made up of Jesuitical
Equivocations, and did blow Hot and Cold with the same mouth. But besides, That
Replyer should be told that a thousand more of his pompous Quotations which
were written in the time of the High Commission will not Revive that Branch of
the Statute 1 Eliz. upon which the High Commission Court was erected. And
likewise he should be told, that a Power given by One Statute, and taken away
afterward by Two, is certainly reduced to its Primitive nothingness.

But I return to our present Author only to take my leave of him, which he has
done of the Church of England in these words: And now let us leave the Holy
Mother Church at liberty to consult what new Measures of Loyalty she ought to
take for her own dear Interest, and for ought I know it may be worth her
serious consideration. I am in hopes, That this Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood, (though this Author be pleased to trample upon
her with so much Scorn and Insolence) will take occasion, even at an Enemies
bidding, to consult what New Measures of Loyalty she ought to take for her own
dear Interest, and for the Interest of Posterity which is much dearer, and for
the Everlasting Interest of both, which is dearest of all. And will humbly and
heartily Bewail her Disloyalty to her great Lord and Master, and those many,
and great, and open Transgressions and Violations of his most Holy and
Righteous Laws which are amongst us. And O that every member of that Communion
in particular would speedily repent, and return to his Duty, and persevere in a
course of Holy Obedience to his lives end! This is the Loyalty that is too much
wanting in the Church of England, which is due to the Laws of our Blessed
Savior, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords. As for her Earthly Lords, They
cannot charge her with any Disobedient or Lawless carriage toward them, or
with any Disregard to the Laws, unless perhaps in some unwarrantable Officious
Instances, which it would hardly be Proper for them to Object against her. And
to the end that both we and our Children after us may be Better Subjects to our
Blessed Lord, than hitherto we have been, I am in hopes That the Church of
England will lay a dead Hold upon that great Depositum which the Laws have put
into her hands, which is the only Instrument of our Reformation, I mean the
English Bible. We are very bad now: But what would become of us, if we should
likewise be deprived of the only means to make us better? If all the Laws of
the Land were Abolished, there could be no Loyalty: And if the Gospel were
taken away, which is the Laws and Statutes of Heaven, how were it possible for
us to be the Subjects of Jesus Christ? We might indeed be the Servants of Men,
and Vassals to the Pope, but we could not possibly obey the Gospel of Christ,
if it were taken and hid from us. We remember full well who they were that
would not suffer an English Bible to be in this Kingdom for very many Ages
together: And if any Devout and Religious Soul, who desired to know his
Master's will, had gotten but the Lord's Prayer, or Ten Commandments in
English, it cost him his life. We shall never forget the Seven Coventry
Martyrs, who were Burned all together in the little Park, the 4th. of April
1519. for teaching their Children and Family the Lord's Prayer, and Ten
Commandments in English. Nor shall we ever forget how the poor Children were
sent for, and charged in no wise to meddle any more with those very small
Scriptures, upon pain of suffering the same Death with their Parents. What is
once made Heresy by an Infallible Church, must be always, and everywhere
Heresy, though Heresy indeed is not everywhere Burning, for want of
opportunity. Thanks be to God and our good Laws that it is not so here. And I
hope the Church of England will always be careful to assert the Authority and
Majesty of the Laws, which are so much to be preferred and valued above our
Lives, in as much as by them we enjoy both our Lives and the Protestant
Religion together. May God be entreated to continue this Unvaluable and
Undeserved Blessing to us and to our Posterity. Amen.

Some Reflections upon the Additional LIBEL, entitled, An Instance of the
Church of England 's Loyalty.
IT is a just Judgment upon those who have Renounced their Reason to embrace
Transubstantiation, and thereby have distorted their natural faculties, that
their Understandings stand awry for ever after, and we cannot expect so much as
Common sense from them any more. From thenceforward they Write as well as
Believe contradictious Mysteries; and he that means to comprehend their awkerd
and perverse Reasonings must stand upon his Head. We need not go far to fetch
Examples of this, for the late Instance of the Church of England 's Loyalty, is
a remarkable Instance of all that I have said: Wherein there are these
following Absurdities, delivered in a way of much smartness, and with the
appearance of very close Reasoning.

1. The Articles and Canons of the Church of England are set aside, and some
few Addresses in this present Reign, are made the Standard of the Doctrine of
the Church of England.

2. The Bishops and Clergy of several Convocations, who have been Dead these
Hundred years, are rendered Disloyal, for not governing themselves by these
Addresses two years ago, which they knew not of.

3. Mary Queen of Scots is made Queen of England by such an Argument as makes
her No Queen of Scots, and by giving her another Kingdom takes away her own.

4. Mary Queen of Scots is made Queen of England upon the Hypothesis of the
Paternal Right, when upon that Hypothesis she was disinherited and foreclosed
from the Crown of England by two successive Patriarchs, Henry the 8th. and
Edward the 6th. I should think for that very reason, that the Hypothesis of the
Laws had been a much better Hypothesis.

In the opening a little and showing these Absurdities I suppose I shall meet
with all that is remarkable in that Paper.

1. The Articles and Canons of the Church of England are set aside, and some
few Addresses in this present Reign, are made the standard of the Doctrine of
the Church of England, p. 3. and 5. Is this arguing from the Church of
England's Own Principles? which he says is the design of his Paper, p. 6. Is it
the Principle of any one Clergyman in England, that the Doctrine of the Church
of England is to be sought for and found out in Addresses? Or in any thing but
the Liturgy and Homilies, the Articles and Canons of the Church, which have the
public Sanction and the Universal consent of the whole Clergy? If he had found
materials out of any of these to make good his charge of disloyalty, he had
done like a Man, and the Church of England had been condemned out of her own
mouth; but if he cannot do this at present, we will have patience to stay till
he can, and in the mean time he had done wiselier to have said nothing.

2. The Bishops aad Clergy of several Convocations, who have been dead these
hundred years, are rendered disloyal, for not governing themselves by these
Addresses two years ago, which they knew not of. This is a great hardship
indeed, that men shall be tried and condemned by Laws, which were not promulged
till an hundred years after their death. The present Church of England has a
very great Reverence for those Bishops and Clergy, who were the Restorers of
the Protestant Religion to this Kingdom, and who had formerly hazarded their
lives for it, and will be very loath to see them pass under the Character of
Traitors and Rebels: And when we demand, what Laws of the Land, or what
Principles of the Church of England they had transgressed, we are in effect
told, that they were Rebels against some chosen expressions in very modern
Addresses. The instance which he gives is the Church of England's behavior
toward Mary Queen of Scots above an hundred years ago: now mark his words p.
5. But yet because I am about to give a notorious instance of their Receding
from this Principle, (namely the Divine Right of Succession) when the practice
of it thwarted their Interest, it will not be amiss to observe, that they have
acknowledged in their several Addresses to his present Majesty, upon his
Accession to the Crown, the Unalterable and Inherent Right of Succession. Now
this is the Reasoning which, as I said before, would make a Man stand upon his
Head. Besides, How could they Recede or go back from a Principle which they
never came to, and were never nearer it than at an Hundred years Distance? For
their Opinion or Principle, call it what you will, was this, as appears by the
27. Eliz. That in case an Heir in Remainder killed the present lawful
Possessor of the Crown, that person had not a Divine Right of Succession: And
that neither God nor the Laws ever meant to Reward the falsehood of Treason, and
the bloody Usurpation of a Crown, with so much the Earlier possession of it. My
business is not to concern my self about either of these Principles or
Opinions, but only to show the absurd Reasoning of this Writer.

3. Mary Queen of Scots is made Queen of England by such an Argument as makes
her no Queen of Scots, and by giving her another's Kingdom takes away her own.
The Argument is this, That Queen Elizabeth being Illegitimate, and only an
Act-of-Parliament-Queen, could not interpose betwixt the Crown of England and
Mary Queen of Scots, who was Heir by Inherent Birthright. Now does not all the
World know, That all the Title that Mary Queen of Scots had to the Kingdom of
Scotland, was an Act of Parliament made at Scone in the time of Robert the
First; whereby his Issue by Elizabeth Moore his Concubine, (whom he never
Married, but who was afterward Married to one Giffard a Gentleman of Louthien)
were made Inheritable to the Crown; and at the same time all his legitimate
Children, by his lawful Queen Eupheme, were set aside. These men take just the
same measures as their Father Garnet did in the Gun powder Treason, who
Resolved, That in order to blow up the Heretics, they might lawfully blow up
their Catholic Friends too: Nay, all that this Instancer says against Queen
Elizabeth (admitting it to be True, which we do not) bears much harder upon the
Title of Mary Queen of Scots. Was Queen Anns Marriage with Hen. 8. naught? But
in Elizabeth Moors Case there was no Marriage at all. Or was King Edward set
aside to make way for Illegitimate Elizabeth? But so it was done by the Act at
Scone. Every body understands the English of Queen Ann Bolens Precontract, when
they remember, That King Henry the 8th. was Married again to the Lady Jane
Seymour, within Three days after the Beheading of that Queen.

4. Mary Queen of Scots is made Queen of England upon the Hypothesis of the
Paternal Right, p. 3. and 5. when upon that Hypothesis she was disinherited and
foreclosed from the Crown of England by two Successive Patriarchs, Henry the
8th. and Edward the 6th. Henry the 8th. by his last Will and Testament excluded
the House of Scotland, and Edward the 6th. by his Will excluded both that and
his own Sisters likewise. But as the Bishop of Ross argued against the first
Will, that it was not subscribed by his Graces own handwriting, as was
directed by the Act of Parliament, but only signed with a stamp of his Name; so
King Edward was never enabled by an Act of Parliament to dispose of the Crown
at all: And so neither of these Wills signified any thing, because the Prince
has no Power but what the Law gives him. Whereas if these foresaid Princes had
been Patriarchs, and full of Inherent Paternal Power, they could have
Disinherited without an Act of Parliament. For if a Father cannot Disinherit,
much less has he Power of Life and Death.

It were endless to reckon up all the awkerd and wilful mistakes which fill up
that Sheet of Paper. As where he insinuates, p. 7. That the 3th. of Elizabeth
was owing to the Queens Consciousness of the Insufficiency of her Title: It is
nothing so; But it was made for the Preservation of her Person, and that no
body presuming upon an Unalterable and Unforfeitable Title in Reversion might
immediately destroy her. An Act it is which is Law to this day, and was recited
13 Caroli 2. and there Expressly made a Pattern for the 13th. of his Reign. And
whereas he says p. 8. That before the Queen of Scots was taken off, and so the
Succession pretty well secured against Popery, the Church of England never
Persecuted any of her Protestant Dissenters, but as soon as that Work was done,
and the Court likely to continue on their side, then out flies the 35 Eli2.
cap. 2. against Sectaries: In those very few words there are a great many
Blots. For first, I hope the 23 of Elizabeth was several years before the Death
of the Queen of Scots, and if that Act was not made against the Protestant
Dissenters, they have had the more wrong done them, in having been since
Prosecuted upon that Act. Second, He words it as if the 35 of Elizabeth came
out the next day, or at least very shortly after the Death of the Queen of
Scots; whereas it was not till many years after. 3d. Whereas the present Church
of England is upbraided with the 35 Eliz. it is not beyond the memory of Man
since in this Church a Bill passed both Houses of Parliament for the Repeal of
that Act, but when it came to the Royal Assent, the Bill was not to be found,
and they say there was foul play in the losing of that Bill. But I think the
greatest blot and blunder of all is a little above in the same page, in these
words; After the Queen of Scots Condemnation, the Parliament Petitioned for her
Execution, each House apart; and the Bishops gave their Reasons why it ought to
be. If the Bishops had Reasons why it ought to be, then they were no Traitors
nor Rebels as they are all along branded; then they did not kill the Heir that
the Inheritance might be theirs, for that we are very sure ought not to be. And
if their Reasons are weak and Insufficient, and in effect no Reasons, why then
are they not Answered? For the bare mentioning of them without answering them,
will leave a suspicion, in all men's minds, that there is somewhat in them which
is unanswerable. And truly this is just such another piece of work, as a very
young and unskilful Conjurer uses to perform, in raising what he cannot lay.

In a word, I do not see one true and close thing in this Paper, unless it be
this, p 3. That the Church of England-men themselves do not Obey their own
Canons. Which if they had Obeyed, and particularly the 114. Canon, whereby they
are bound to present all Popish Recusants and all that are Popishly given,
every year; They had not this day been troubled with New Tests and Instances of
their Loyalty: But failing in that part of their Loyalty and Obedience, they
are now Questioned for all the rest. However, it is never too late for men to
return to their Duty.

To conclude, I would advise these Popish Scriblers to let the Church of
England alone, which has both the Truth of God and the Laws of the Land on her
side; and having Heaven and Earth on her side, all the Powers of Hell cannot
prevail against her; much less is she to be run down by a few Impotent Libels,
which can never attain their End, nor arrive at their Conclusion, though we
should grant them all their own Premises. For supposing Queen Anns Confession
of a Precontract, yet that does not make Queen Elizabeth Illegitimate: And
supposing her Illegitimate, and only an Act-of-Parliament-Queen, yet that does
not make her an Unlawful Queen: And supposing her an Unlawful Queen, and
without a legal Title, and only Queen for the time being, yet the Church of
England were not Rebels and Traitors for Assisting her but did their true Duty
of Allegiance, as is expressly said in the 11 Hen. 7. c. 1. which Act was made
on purpose to save the Peoples Allegiance in that Case, who had like to have
been Ruined but a little before, by the cross Pretensions and Alternately
prevailing Titles of York and Lancaster. Nay to go farther, supposing that
Queen Elizabeth was an Usurper, and the Church of England over and above
Traitors and Rebels, and thereupon all the Laws made in her time of no
Authority; (for that I know is the point that they would be at, and the only
meaning of all this Scurrility poured forth upon that Queen and her Clergy) yet
still they would lose their Aim; those Laws having been confirmed in so many
Parliaments since, and by such Princes, as now they list not to bark at: Though
heretofore the Jesuit Parsons in his Book of the Succession, under the Name of
Doleman, showed himself and his Fraternity to be as much Devoted to K. James's
Title, as this Author is now to Q. Elizabeth's. In short, being nothing is to be
gotten by Railing against Q. Elizabeth, and by making her Illegitimate, they
may as well let her rest in Peace, or pass for Legitimate: And they may save
the foul spittle they are daily casting upon her, which will serve much better
for the making of their Holy Water.

The PEDIGREE of POPERY; OR, The GENEALOGY of ANTICHRIST.
THE DEVIL begat Sin, Sin begat Ignorance, Ignorance begat Error and his
Brethren, Error begat Pride, Pride begat Free Will, Free Will begat Merit,
Merit begat Forgetfulness of Grace, Forgetfulness of Grace begat Transgression,
Transgression begat Distrust, Distrust begat Dissatisfaction, Dissatisfaction
begat the Sacrifice of the Mass, The Sacrifice of the Mass begat Superstition,
Superstition begat Hypocrisy, Lying Hypocrisy begat Gain, of her that was the
Wife of the Offertory, Gain begat Purgatory, Purgatory begat Anniversary or
yearly Masses, or Trentals, Anniversary (being a foundation) begat the
Patrimony of the Church, The Patrimony of the Church begat Wicked Mammon,
Mammon begat Luxury, Luxury begat Usurpation, Usurpation begat Cruelty, Cruelty
begat Immunity, Immunity begat Lordship, Lordship begat Pomp, Pomp begat
Ambition, Ambition begat Simony, Simony begat the POPE and his Brethren the
Cardinals, in the Transportation into Babylon; and after the Transportation
into Babylon, The POPE begat the Mystery of Iniquity, The Mystery of Iniquity
begat School Divinity, School Divinity begat the Casting away of Holy
Scripture, The Casting away the Holy Scripture begat the Legend, The Legend
begat Monkery, Monkery begat Blind Zeal, Blind Zeal begat the Murdering of
Saints, The Murdering of Saints begat the Contempt of God, Contempt of God
begat Dispensation, Dispensation begat License to Sin, License to Sin begat
Carnal Policy, Carnal Policy begat Jesuitism, Jesuitism begat Four Monsters,
Equivocation, Mental Reservation, Probable Opinion and Direction of the
Intention;
These Four Monsters survive to this day, and begat a Multitude of Sons and
Daughters, viz. Atheism, Tyranny, Treason, Assassination, Perjury, Inquisition,
Massacre, Masquerade and Open Popery, City-Burning, Chequer-Stopping,
Charter-Catching, Large Finings, Severe Whippings, Non obstante, Closetings,
Subscribings, Member-makings, Addressings, and all kind of Abominations, which
walking abroad in a Dress of Religion and Dissimulation, complete the whole
Train of Antichrist, etc. To the perpetual Establishing and Setting up of
POPERY, and the putting down of and for ever subverting and casting away all
Christianity.

A LETTER TO A PERSON of QUALITY, Occasioned by the News of the Ensuing
PARLIAMENT.
Honored Sir,
THE next Parliament being that by which the Hopes or Fears of the Nation are
in a great measure to be determined, and your Interest being considerable
enough to make you a Member of it, give me leave to send you these
Considerations on the present state of Affairs; Let not, I beseech you, your
being placed in so High a Post, make you neglect any Information you may
receive from a Person, though of an inferior station. He that is near the Sun,
does indeed partake of most warmth; but he may have a more advantageous
prospect of things that lies at a convenient distance.

Sir, I doubt not but you will be one of those, who will shortly represent a
Nation, whereof, by a moderate computation, at least Two Hundred parts are
Protestants; and (whatever your concern may be at another time for any
particular division of them) it is a care of the Religion in general I now
inculcate to you. I am sure that, whatever Glosses are put upon things, whether
you will consent that Popery shall come in, is the truth of the Question; and
the present Scene of Affairs is laid in too much Sun, to make us either not see
the Design, or not suspect the Contrivance.

We know that pairing of our Nails and Claws, Rooting out the Sanguinary Laws,
and humbling the Church of England, are the witty Sarcasms of every Phamphlet:
But if we consider that there is a Church in the World: That does both teach
and practice such Cruelties, to which the utmost severities of our Penal Laws
are indeed; in comparison, but scratching; we shall find that these Laws are
only Defensive weapons: And that they were never enacted without reason, nor
practiced without Provocation. And upon that consideration, it is as
unreasonable a request at this time to take them off, as it would be to desire
the Hollanders to dig down those Banks that stop an Inundation.

Not to give you a view of Popery in speculation; such as, That there is no
Faith to be kept with Heretics: That the Pope may Absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance to their Natural Prince: That Heretical Princes may be slain by
their Subjects, and the like; (though these have been too solemnly established,
not to be considered,) we have overt acts enough to justify our apprehensions.
We cannot choose but remember a Reign wherein our Religion had very little
quarter; the Gunpowder Plot was laid too deep to be so soon forgotten; and some
Centuries must pass, before they can wipe off the stains of the Irish Massacre:
Nay, though the belief of these and the like Cruelties may be objected against,
as being built upon the Uncertainty of Traditions, yet we have late and visible
instances to refresh our Memories: We have every day at our doors living
Monuments of Inhumanity, that warn us to prevent our own, by their Misfortunes;
and that plainly show to us, that the circumstances of their Sufferings,
deserve as well our Care as Compassion.

As for the Penal Laws, I dare say they were designed for the security of the
Government; but if the King and Parliament think otherwise, (though I confess
the debate about them two, may prudentially be referred to another season) I
envy no man the Liberty of his Conscience: But the TEST (the repealing of which
is expected will be the merit of the late Indulgence) will certainly admit of a
further consideration: The wisdom of that Parliament that enacted these Laws,
thought then they were great Securities to our Religion against Popery; and I
cannot perceive any such favorable aspects, that at this time may render them
the less necessary. These Laws cannot be pretended to affect any Man's
Conscience, unless our Preferments make the scruple; and if so, we shall find
this Indulgence to be a very hard bargain, when for the liberty of a Barn, we
shall give them possession of our Churches. We must consider that the
consequence of this Repeal will be no less; for if Mandates (as be sure they
will) be liberally distributed, what Patron can deny to Present, or Bishop
refuse Admission? And indeed we shall leave them but a very indifferent excuse;
when they can return no other reason for not complying with the King, but
because the Person he recommends, is of his own Religion.

If by the present distribution of Offices, both Civil and Military, we had no
reason, after this Repeal, to suspect at least a proportionable share in the
favor of the Government; the request would be something plausible; but since
by comparing of things, we may rationally guess, that the Papists, by this
advantage, do not only design to partake of, but engross the Preferments; we
must enevitably conclude, That so tame a resignation of our Offices and other
Places, into the hands of those, who by fatal experience have showed us what
use they will make of them, will be too generous and dangerous a Complement at
this time to be offered.

Nay, it is a little too much upbraiding our own Loyalty, to take off these Laws
at this juncture, as if the Protestants either would not, or could not
discharge all Places of Trust, without the addition of Popish Services. We were
able to bring the King to the Throne, and preserve him in it without their
assistence; and if on the sudden they become so necessary, we must have leave
to believe, that there is some extraordinary work to be done, that Protestant
hands are too unhallowed for the undertaking.

I should imagine, that before you think of repealing the Tests (...) debate
would be most natural to enquire whether they are now in (...) and to consider
whether the Acts of a King solemnly ratified in ^^^^^ament, are not a little
too venerable to be made bold with, and dispensed by every indigent Officer.
Your Liberties and Privileges will be so closely inter oven with those of your
Predecessors, that not to be concerned for th^^ reach of theirs, will be in the
event to neglect your own: So that when this Drudgery is over, and shall be
thought useless, if upon other occasions the plain meaning of your Acts should
be wrested by the Ignorance or Knavery of the Interpreters; you will have no
right hereafter to complain of the Wrong, though never so fatal, since you your
selves tacitly admit of so partial a Precedent.

Before you admit Papists into Public Employments, you will surely consider
the consequences of it farther than His present Majesty's services; and though
their Loyalty may be thought Stearing in this Reign, you will no doubt harken
to the reasons that may be given to suspect it in the next. In the Council of
Rome under Gregory the 7th, in the 3d and 4th Councils of Laterona under
Alexander the 3d, and Innocent the 3d, in the Council of Lions, under Innocent
the 4th, and in that of Constance under Martin the 5th, it was established,
That the Pope has Power to depose Princes, and absolve Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, That Heretical Princes shall be deposed, as was actually
practiced upon the Emperor Frederick the 2d. To name no more, these are such
indispensible ties they lie under to destroy us, that we should be
unpardonable, if we expose the Royal Person we have in view for the next
Succession to the danger of such astonishing Anathemas.

And these are so far from being groundless suggestions, that we should be raw
in our own History, if we cannot produce Copies that have been faithfully
transcribed from the fatal Originals: Pope Pius the Ninth's Bull against Queen
Elizabeth was too publicly exposed not to be taken notice of: In it he by his
Power Apostolical declares the Queen a Heretic; her self and all her adherents
to be Excommunicated and Anathematized; he deprives her of all her Dominions,
and absolves her Subjects from any Oaths of Allegiance they had sworn to her,
and forbids them under the penalty of an Anathema to pa^ act of obedience to
her. Thus as a Heretic and an Usurper was she left to the rage of the whole
Party; and though they thought cruelty ^^ that time not to be so advisable;
yet they were forced to make (...) want of strength to be an Apology to excuse
their good nat^^^ (...) such a case indeed we find the most favorable of their
Cas^^^, to allow that the zeal and intention of Catholick^ to root out Heresy,
is sufficient where Heretics are (...) prevailing.

To this let us add (as it more nearly affe^^^^^) the Bull of Clement the
Eight, toward the close of that Queens Reign, in which it provided, That when
it should happen that Miserable, Woman (as the Pope's Phrase is (should dye,
that they should admit none to the Crown, Quamtumcunque propinquitate
Sanguinis, niterentur, nisi ejusmodi essent qui fidem Catholicam non modo
tolerarent, sed omni open ac and studio promoverent, and more Majorum
jurejurando se id praestituros susciperent, etc. though never so nearly allied
to it by blood, unless they would not only tolerate the Catholic Religion, but
promote it by all their force and endeavor, and according to ancient Custom
would by Oath undertake to perform the same. Which Bull had an immediate
reference to King James the First, and was intended to prevent him in his Claim
to the Crown, which he was then the Heir to.

If then men are justly moved by examples; and that fear is so far from being a
weakness, that it is commendable when well grounded; we must be inexcusably
stupid, if we do not look about us when we have instances before us that are so
fresh and flagrant: We must shamefully overlook all the transactions of Europe,
if the danger of Popery at this time make no impression. By all that we can
observe, their hopes of Establishing their Religion seem to be warm and
vigorous; and though their Opportunity seem to be short, their Methods are
quick and surprising: Despairing to reduce us by common policy of Time and
Persuasion. When they have got the Power into their hands, we must expect to
surrender upon discretion: A Heretic no more than a Rebel is allowed the
privilege of capitulating: Our Laws are like Sampson's hair, the cutting of
them off will reduce us to a state of weakness; and I am afraid we shall find
it too late to lament the loss of our strength, when the Philistines are upon
us.

Men, if they please, may harangue upon the Liberty we enjoy, and the Security
we are promised; and plausibly insinuate that a Cloud no bigger than a man's
hand can never be improved into a Tempest; but for all that, matter of fact and
daily observations are evidences to clear to be baffled; we cannot bring our
sense and reason to such a resignation, as to believe that Popery has no mind
to be uppermost; the Design is too plain to be palliated; and I could reckon up
several circumstances to prove it, did it not engage me to reflect upon some
things, that are too tender to be mentioned.

The great Pains that the Papists take to solicit Votes for repealing the
Tests, is a full conviction to me that the Protestants have no small interest
in them; and therefore we ought no more to be persuaded by them out of our
Laws, than a man ought to give up his Weapon to an Adversary, from whom he is
to expect no quarter when he is taken. If the Papists had no other aim by this
intrigue, but (as they would make us believe) a Liberty to enjoy all Civil
Offices in common with other Subjects, their Number in the Kingdom is so
inconsiderable that the advantage they could propose to themselves from this
Liberty, would not be worth the labor of procuring it: the Tests lay no Task
upon them but that one of being quiet, and minding their own business; they are
excused from serving the Offices of Sheriffs, and being returned upon Juries,
and these have never been looked upon as advantages to be canvassed. Nay,
supposing their promise of not interrupting our Religion, to be in earnest, the
visible interest we are like to have in the next Reign, would engage them under
their present advantage to be obliged; and instead of making us jealous for our
Religion by taking off our Laws, would willingly consent to any farther
Securities that could be demanded: So that upon the whole we must conclude,
That giving up our Laws is not safe, though it might be Civil: A generous
Adversary will scorn to desire any thing that looks like undermining, and
therefore if any one would persuade us to dismiss our security and strength, we
ought to suspect that he designs to make advantage of our weakness.

The only Objection against the Tests that I ever yet met with, is, That they
are natural, in depriving Subjects of their natural right of serving their King
and Country. But this Objection is so vain and speculative, that surely it
would have never been offered, but by those men who in all their other dealings
with us, have showed themselves more apt to impose upon the understanding than
convince it: For what is more common in all Governments whatsoever than certain
Conditions required to qualify men for public Employments? And in our own
Nation what are those degrees that capacitate men both for the Bar and Pulpit,
but so many Humane Laws that exclude all others from the like advantages?

Indeed a Reverend Person has lately endeavored to strengthen this Objection
by the addition of three more: I shall only briefly repeat them to you, and
leave both the Author and his Reasons to the issue of a stricter Examination.

The first Reason is, That the Test ought to be abrogated, because of its
dishonorable Birth and Original, it being the First Born of Oates' s Plot and
brought forth on purpose to give Credit and Reputation to the Perjury.

Now let us suppose that the Plot was Oatesian, and that the whole of it was a
perfect Imposture, yet why must the Test suffer for these miscarriages? the
worst times generally give birth to the best Laws, and if this Law be at this
time thought reasonable, (I may say necessary) what need we enquire into the
occasion of its making? A Law may be continued for better, and perhaps juster
reasons, than those for which it was first Enacted. Indeed it is ill manners to
fall foul upon any thing for the faults of its Production; the reflection would
come home to him; for evensome men have been so unhappy in their Extraction
that they would deserve but little esteem, if the Blemishes of their birth were
always to be remembered.

His second Reason, Why the Test out to be abrogated, is, Because of the
incompetent Authority by which the Law was Enacted; it is a Law of an
Ecclesiastical Nature, made without the Authority of the Church, contrary to
the practice of the Christian World in all Ages, etc.

Tho by this Argument against the Test, this Reverend Author might have
imposed upon us as to the practice of other Countries in Laws of the like
nature; yet if he thought to delude us in the Customs of our own Nation, he
ought at least to have timed his Reasons so well, as not to have published them
in the same Gazette, wherein there is an eminent instant against him. We read
there an Order made by nine men, whereof six are Laymen (surely a much
inferior Authority to that by which the Test was Enacted) whereby feven and
twenty men of as liberal Education as any of their Successors, are made
incapable of being admitted into any Ecclesiastical Promotion, or receiving
Holy Orders: If any thing be of an Ecclesiastical nature, surely receiving
Holy Orders is: I am sure it has been longer in the Church than
Transubstantiation. In short, this Argument through the whole course of it, is
a little too severe upon the Honorable Persons that made the Order: and
whatever other men might think of their proceedings, it was unpardonable in him
to reflect upon a Court, by whose Authority he now enjoys the best part of his
sustenance: so that must either forsake his Argument, or leave his place: and
when he is left to such an easy choice, it is no hard matter to guess which
will be first relinquished.

The last Reason he brings against the Test is, Because of the uncertainty and
falsehood of the matters contained in the Declaration it self: as first, That
there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of our Savior's Body and
Blood. And 2ly, That the Invocation of Saints, and Mother of God, is Idolatry.

In handling of these points, which makes up a formal Treatise for
Transubstantiation (though he calls it Reasons for abrogating the Test) he has
indeed labouriously proved that he himself ought not to have taken the Tests,
but not why others of a different opinion should not. I must confess this
Reason above all the rest, seems to be the most designing: and though it be
here brought against the Test, it is really levelled against our Religion; for
the same Argument which proves, That because of the uncertainty of
Transubstantiation, the denial of it ought not to be made a Test, will as
directly conclude that it ought not to be made an Article; so that whenever
this Author and his Friends have thought they have proved the uncertainty and
falsehood of any of our established Doctrines, by parity of reason they will
expect we should consent that they may be abolished.

But since his Argument against the Test, depends upon the falsehood, as he
thinks of the matters contained in it, Our Nobility and Gentry are for that
very reason obliged to continue it; they must not be now for repealing the
Test, lest the World should believe they are likewise for Transubstantiation:
and that this Argument of all others cannot prevail upon them, since at the
same time they are made Repealers, they must be made Papists: And therefore I
hope our Prostant Nobility and Gentry will not hearken to such weak reasoning,
but think themselves bound to take care of their Religion, though this Author,
by the Specimen he has given of his Faith, does appear to lie under the same
Obligations.

If then, Sir, you should consent to repeal the Tests, I beseech you to
consider what persons you would disoblige by so fatal a condescension: As for
the Dissenters, I hope by this time they are generally convinced that our
Dangers are equal, and that therefore we ought to join for our common
security. Protestants of all sorts are included in the same sentence denounced
against Heretics: and if at this time there are some Acts of Kindness extended
to some divisions of them, they must look upon it no more than reprieving of
one Malefactor for the Execution of another.

The Dissenters have been always apprehensive of Popery, even when it lay at
farther distance; and surely they cannot now be so unreasonably courageous as
to fear no danger when the Leprosy does not only stick to our Walls, but is
come into our very Houses: they ought not to dwell so much upon their present
Ease, as to neglect all future Securities, and to be so prodigal of their
felicity during this Politic Cessation, as not carefully to distinguish
betwixt a short Truce, and a perpetual Alliance.

If they think that their endeavors in repealing the Tests, will secure them a
lasting interest in the Papists; it will require no great foresight in Affairs
to tell them that they will be mistaken; for if it were in the nature of Popery
to return kindnesses, the Church of England-Men have laid in a stock that
seemed to be inexhaustible; but we see, that as soon as they began to put a
stop to Popery, their vigorous opposing the Bill of Exclusion, and the
Rebellion in the West were soon forgotten; as if their Services and other men's
Faults had been put in the same Act of Oblivion.

But for once we will suppose that Popery is not ungrateful, and that
whatsoever becomes of the Church of England, their promises to the Dissenters
shall be unalterable: yet this will not justify the Dissenters for engaging in
any concern that may advance the Popish Interest; for all Protestants abroad
(who cast a diligent Eye upon our present Circumstances) must take offense at
so unseasonable an Alliance; and they who have so severely felt such contrary
effects of Popish Power, will have no reason to think well of those, who will
now contribute to advance it: So that the Dissenters cannot join with the
Papists without scandal, though they might do it with security; it would make
all different men fall in the opinion they had conceived of their Wisdom and
Integrity; and by so unskilful a management of their present Ease they would
lose all the pity and compassion, which their former Sufferings and extorted.

It Is indeed observed, that His Majesty's late Declaration has raised in some
of the Dissenters, an unusual affection for the contrivers of it, but to the
most thinking men of all sides, the publishing of this Instrument was so far
from being a surprise, that they wondered they had not seen it sooner; for
Toleration is so far from being any new contrivance to undermine our Religion,
that it is a juggle that has been long ago detected: And therefore 'twere worth
while for the most serious of the Dissenters, to advise the rest not to be
carried too far by these sudden heats; and not to enter into Covenants upon the
merit of such a slender engagement, before they have truly examined the
conditions of it on their side, and have taken time to consider, whether the
kindnesses expressed in it are real or only acted. Not to make an Estimate of
what they are to expect from this Indulgence, by the performance of that short
Paragraph in it that relates to the Church of England, I would have them
consider that this so much celebrated Liberty is only in matters of mere
Religion; by this Politic Reserve this Liberty is not so extensive as some may
imagine; for upon the first false step the Dissenters make in opposition to
Popery, how easy will it be to reduce them to the state of suffering: It Is but
tacking some pretended matters of State to their most innocent Assemblies, and
then if for their defense they represent their Case never so merely religious,
their Adversaries, who will be sure to oppose their Plea, will take care that
it shall not be received under so advantageous an abstraction.

And the Dissenters cannot stand so much in their own light, as not to see from
what side they are to expect the most lasting security. Protestants of all
sorts are now happily brought to a better understanding of one another; they
may easily prevent all future disputes, since they plainly see from whence
their division comes. In short, all things tend to a most amicable
Accommodation, unless some men be brought over by too plausible a pretense of a
little present ease, to involve themselves and others in a reversion of
Sufferings.

It may not be amiss, to consider what persons are now retained Advocates for
repealing our Laws, and to examine a little the complexion of the men, before
we are prevailed upon by their Arguments. The Papers that daily come about, are
drawn up either by known Papists, or chiefly such men, who have given all the
reason in the World to suspect that their labors are mercenary. They who were
not long since the great Sticklers for Property, are now become the Darlings of
Prerogative; the Packet of Advice from Rome is now improved into a closer
correspondence; to serve the present turn, they shamefully contradict all they
formerly had written, and call themselves Rogues perhaps for the only actions
of their lives that men has reason to believe them honest.

To conclude, our Laws are the only humane support we have for our selves, our
Liberties, and our Religion, and as long as our Title to these is continued,
whatever our present state may be, we need not doubt of a favorable reversion.
Nevertheless, our care for our Religion, shall not make us forget our duty to
our King: and if at any time we cannot obey his Commands, we shall, I hope,
convince the World, that it is not our fault but our misfortune: for we have
not yet learned implicit obedience either in Church or State; as the Scriptures
are our Rule in the one, so are our Laws our directions in the other; and as
long as we firmly keep to these measures of our obedience to God and the King,
we shall not be afraid to lose the Character of good Christians, or good
Subjects.

I am, Honored Sir, Your most humble and much obliged Servant. R. S.

Father La Chaise's PROJECT FOR THE EXTIRPATION OF HERETICS In a Letter from
him to Father P -- rs.
Worthy Friend,
I Received yours of the 20th. of June last, and am very glad to hear of your
good Success, and that our party gains Ground so fast in England. But
concerning the Question you have put to me, that is, What is the best course to
be taken to Root out all the Heretics? To which, I answer: There are diverse
ways to do that, but we must consider which is the best to make use of in
England; I am sure you are not ignorant how many thousand Heretics we have in
France, by the Power of our Dragoons, Converted in the space of one year; and
by the Doctrine of those booted Apostles, Turned more in one month than Christ
and his Apostles could in ten years. This is a most Excellent Method, and far
excels those of the great Preachers and Teachers, that have lived since
Christ's time: But I have spoke with diverse Fathers of our Society, who do
think that your King is not strong enough to accomplish his Design by such kind
of force, so that we cannot expect to have our Work done in that manner; for
the Heretics are too strong in the three Kingdoms, and therefore we must seek
to Convert them by fair means, before we fall upon them with Fire, Sword,
Halters, Gaols, and other such like Punishments: And therefore, I can give you
no better Advice than to begin with soft, easy means; wheedle them in by
promises of Profit, and Offices of Honor, till you have made them dip
themselves in Treasonable Actions, against the Laws Established, and then they
are bound to serve for fear. When they have done thus, turn them out, and serve
others so, by putting them in their Places; and by this way, gain as many as
you can. And for the Heretics, that are in places of Profit and Honor, turn
them out, or suspend them on pretense of Misbehaviour, by which their places
are forfeit, and they subject to what Judgment you please to give upon them.
Then you must form a Camp, that must consist of none but Catholics, this will
make the Heretics heartless, and conclude all means of Relief and Recovery is
gone. And lastly, take the short and the best way, which is to surprise the
Heretics on a sudden; and to encourage the Zealous Catholics, let them
Sacrifice them all, and wash their Hands in their Blood, which will be an
acceptable Offering to God. And this was the Method I took in France, which
has well, you see, succeeded, but it cost me many threats and promises, before
I could bring it thus far, our King being a long time very unwilling: But at
last, I got him on the Hip; for he had lain with his Daughter-in-Law, for which
I could by no means give him Absolution, till he had given me an Instrument,
under his own Hand and Seal, to Sacrifice all the Heretics in one day. Now as
soon as I had my desired Commission, I appointed the day when this should be
done, and in the mean time, made ready some thousands of Letters, to be sent
into all parts of France in one Post Night, I was never better pleased than
that time, but the King was affected with some compassion for the Hugonots,
because they had been a means to bring him to his Crown and Throne; and the
longer he was under it the more sorrowful he was, often complaining, and
desiring me to give him his Commission again, but that I would by no persuasion
do, advising him to repent of that heinous sin; and also telling him, that the
trouble and horror of his Spirit did not proceed from any thing of Evil in
those things that were to be done, but from that great wickedness which he had
done; and that he must resolve to undergo the severe burden of a troubled mind
for one of them or the other; and if he would remain satisfied as it was, his
Sin being forgiven, there would in few days, be a perfect atonement made for
it, and he perfectly reconciled to God again: But all this would not pacify
him, for the longer the more restless; and therefore I ordered him to retire to
his Closet, and there spend his time constantly in Prayer, without permitting
any one to interrupt him; and this was in the morning early, when the evening
following I was to send away all my Letters. I did indeed make the more haste,
for fear he should disclose it to any body, yet I had given him a strict charge
to keep it to himself, and the very thing that I most feared, to my great
sorrow, came to pass; for just in the nick of time, the Devil, who has always
his Instruments at work, sent the Prince of Conde to the Court, who asked for
the King; he was told that he was in his Closet, and would speak with no man;
he impudently answered, That he must, and would speak with him, and so went
directly to his Closet; he being a great Peer, no man durst hinder him. And
being come to the King, he soon perceived by his Countenance that he was under
some great trouble of mind, for he looked as if he had been going into the
other World immediately. Sir, said he, What is the matter with you? The King at
first refused to tell him, but he pressing harder upon him, at last, the King,
with a sorrowful complaint, burst out, and said, I have given Father La Chaise
a Commission under my own Hand, to Murder all the Hugonots in one day, and
this Evening will the Letters be dispatched to all Parts by the Post, for the
performing it; so that there is but small time for my Hugonot Subjects to live,
who have never done one any harm: Whereupon this cursed Rogue answered, Let him
give you your Commission again: The King said, How shall I get it out of his
hand, for if I send to him for it, he will refuse to send it? This Devil
answered, If your Majesty will give me order, I will quickly make him return
it: The King was soon persuaded, being willing to give ease to his troubled
Spirit, and said, Well, go then, and break his Neck, if he will not give it
you; whereupon, this Son of the Devil, went to the Post House, and asked if I
had not a great number of Letters there, and they said, Yes, more than I had
sent thither in a whole year before; then, said the Prince, By Order from the
King, you must deliver them all to me; which they durst not deny, for they knew
well enough who he was. And no sooner had he got into the Post House, and had
asked these Questions, but I came also in after him, to give order to the
Postmaster, to give notice to all those under him, in the several parts of the
Kingdom, that they should take care to deliver my Letters with all speed
imaginable. But I was no sooner entered the House, but he gave his Servants
order to secure the Door, and said confidently to me, You must, by Order from
the King, give me the Commission which you have forced from him: I told him I
had it not about me, but I would go and fetch it, thinking to get from him, and
so go out of Town, and send the Contents of those Letters another time; but he
said, You must give it me, and if you have it not about you, send some body to
fetch it, or else never expect to go alive out of my hands, for I have an Order
from the King, either to bring it or break your Neek: And I am resolved either
to carry that back to him in my hand, or your Hearts Blood upon the point of my
Sword. I would have made my escape, but he set his Sword to my Breast, and
said, You must give it me or die, therefore deliver it, or else this goes
through your Body.

So when I saw nothing else would do, I put my Hand in my Pocket and gave it
him. Which he carried immediately to the King, and gave him that and all my
Letters, which they burnt: And being all done, the King said, Now his Heart was
at ease; now how he should be eased by the Devil, or so well satisfied with a
false Joy I cannot tell: But this I know, that it was a very Wicked and Ungodly
Action, as well in his Majesty as the Prince of Conde, and did not a little
increase the burden and danger of his Majesty's Sins. I soon gave an account
of this Affair to several Fathers of our Society, who promised to do their
best to prevent the aforesaid Prince doing such another act; which was
accordingly done, for within the space of six days after the damned Action he
was Poisoned, and well he deserved it. The King also did suffer too, but in
another fashion, for disclosing the Design to the Prince, and hearkening to his
Council. And many a time since, when I have had him at Confession, I have shook
Hell about his Ears and made him sigh, fear, and tremble, before I would give
him Absolution; Nay, more than that, I have made him beg for it on his Knees,
before I would consent to absolve him. By this, I saw that he had still an
Inclination to me, and was willing to be under my Government, so I set the
baseness of the Action before him, by telling the whole story, and how wicked
it was; and that it could not be forgiven till he had done some good Action to
balance that, and expiate the Crime. Whereupon, he at last asked me what he
must do? I told him, that he must rout out all the Heretics from his Kingdom:
So, when he saw there was no rest for him without doing it, he did again give
them all into the Power of me and our Clergy, under this Condition, That we
would not Murder them, as he had before given orders, but that we should by
fair means, or force, Covert them to the Catholic Religion; to which end, he
gave us his Dragoons to be at our Devotion and Service, that we might use them
as we saw convenient, to Convert them to the true Religion. Now when we had got
the Commission, we presently put it in Practice, and what the issue of it has
been, you very well know. But now in England, the work cannot be done after
this manner, as you may perceive by what I have said to you, so that I cannot
give you better Council, than to take that course in hand wherein we were so
unhappily prevented; and I doubt not, but that it may have better success with
you than with us.

I would write to you of many other things, but I fear I have already detained
you too long; wherefore I shall write no more at present, but that I am,

Paris July the 8th 1688. Your Friend and Servant, La Chaise.

An Account of several PAPERS that have been Collected.
A Collection of Papers relating to the present Juncture of Affairs in England,
in Eight Parts.
1. COntains, 1. The Humble Petition of Seven Bishops to His Majesty. 2.
Articles recommended by the Archbishop of Canterbury, to all the Bishops and
Clergy in his Jurisdiction. 3 Proposals of the Archbishop and other Bishops to
His Majesty. 4 Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for Calling a Free
Parliament, with the King's Answer. The Prince of Orange's Letter to the
English Army. Lord Delamere's Speech to his Tenants. The Prince of Denmark, and
Lord Churchill's Letter to the King. The Princess Ann's Letter to the Queen.
The Prince of Orange's Declaration of the 28th. of November. from Sherborne
Castle, with Five more. II. An Enquiry into the Measures of Submission, to the
Supreme Authority. An Answer to a Paper, entitled, Reflections on the Prince
of Orange' s Declaration. Admiral Herbert's Letter to the English Seamen. An
Engagement of the Noblemen, Knights, etc. at Exeter to stand by the Prince of
Orange. The Declaration of of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty at
Nottingham, Nov. 22. 1688. with Two more. III. The Expedition of the Prince of
Orange for England. A further Account of the Prince's Army, in a Letter from
Exon, Nov. 24. Three Letters; 1. A Letter from a Jesuit at Liege, to a Jesuit
at Fribourgh. 2. A Letter from Father Petres to Father La Chaise. 3. The Answer
of Father La Chaise to Father Petres. Popish Treatises not to be relied on. IV.
The Prince of Orange's first Declaration from the Hague, October. 10. 1688 with
his Additional Declaration from the Hague, October. 24. 1688. The Bishop of
Rochester's Letter to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners. The Prince's Speech at
Exeter, Nov. 15. 1688. A true Copy of a Paper delivered by the Earl of
Devonshire to the Major of Darby, Nov. 20. 1688. with Eight more. V. The Hard
Case of Protestants under the Dominion of a Popish Prince. An humble and hearty
Address to all English Protestant in the Army: published by Mr. Johnson, An.
Dom. 1686. A Discourse of Magistracy; of Prerogative by Divine Right; of
Obedience, and of the Laws, with Five others. VI. A Character of the Prince of
Orange. A Letter to the Author of the Dutch Design Anatomized. A Declaration of
the Nobility, Gentry, etc. of the County of Stafford. Mr. Hale's Oration to Q.
Elizabeth; with several others. VII. Relating to Parliaments, and the Penal
Laws and Tests. A Letter from a Freeholder to the rest of the Freeholders of
England. The Project for Repealing the Penal Laws and Tests. Some Queries
concerning Liberty of Conscience, directed to W. Penn and H. Care.
Considerations proposed to W. Penn, concerning his new Magna Charta for Liberty
of Conscience, by a Baptist; with three more. VIII. The Trial and Examination
of the Test of the Church of Englands Loyalty. The Pedigree of Popery. A Letter
to a Person of Quality, occasioned by the News of the Ensuing Parliament, etc.
Six Papers by Dr. G. Burnet: to which is added, An Apology for the Chapter of
England, etc. An Enquiry into the Measures of Submission, etc. by the same
Author. Seven Papers, viz. The Grounds and Reasons of the Laws against Popery.
The Character of Popery. Heraclitus Ridens Redivivus, or a Dialogue between
Harry and Roger concerning the Times. The Growth, the Decay and Changes of
Government described by Polibius; with three more. Fourteen Papers. A Letter to
a Dissenter. The Anatomy of an Equivalent. A Letter to a Dissenter from his
Friend at the Hague. A plain Account of the Persecution laid to the Charge of
the Chapter of England. Reflections on a late Pamphlet, entitled, Parliamentum
Pacificum. An Enquiry into the Reasons for Abrogating the Test: offered by Sa.
Oxon. A Letter from a Clergyman in the City to his Friend in the Country,
containing his Reasons for not Reading the Declaration. An Answer to the City
Ministers Letter from his Country Friend; with six more. Their Highness the
Prince and Princess of Orange's Opinion about a General Liberty of Conscience,
etc. being a Collection of Four Papers: viz. 1. Mine Here Fagell's Letter to Mr.
Stewart. 2. Reflections on Monsieur Fagell's first Letter. 3. Fagell's Second
Letter to Mr. Stewart. 4. Some Extracts out of Mr. Stewart's Letters, etc. A
Collection of several Treatises concerning the Reasons and Occasions of the
Penal Laws, viz. 1. The Execution of Justice in England, not for Religion, but
for Treason: published by the Lord-Treasurer Burleigh, 1583. 2. Important
Considerations, by the Secular Priests, 1601. 3. The Jesuit's Reasons
unreasonable, 1662. The 3d. Edition.
FINIS.

