VOTES and RESOLVES OF THE COMMONS-HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT. June 15. July 13.
CAROLI Regis
THE House of COMMONS being on Friday last informed of a Scandalous and
Seditious Printed Paper or Pamphlet, entitled [ Sundry reasons humbly tendered
to the most Honorable House of PEERS, by some Citizens and Members of London,
and other Cities, Buroughs, Corporations and Ports against the new intended
Bill, for Governing and Reforming CORPORATIONS.] did appoint a Committee to
examine, and make inquiry touching the Author, Printers, and Publishers
thereof.

And upon Report this day made by Mr. Churchill of the Examination, and
Evidence before the Committee, touching the said Seditious Pamphlet; Mr Prynn
(being present, and confessing himself, to be the Author thereof, and that he
had caused the same to be Printed) was ordered to withdraw, And the House then
proceeding to debate the Matter,

Resolved upon the Question,

That the said Printed Paper entitled [ Sundry Reasons, humbly tendered to the
most Honorable House of PEERS, by some Citizens and Members of London, and
other Cities, Buroughs, Corporations and Ports; against the new intended Bill,
for Governing and Reforming CORPORATIONS.] is an Illegal, False, Scandalous,
and Seditious Pamphlet.

Resolved,

That Mr. Prynn be called into his Place, to receive the Reprehension and
Censure of the House, for Contriving the said Pamphlet, and causing it to be
Printed.

And Mr Prynn being accordingly called in, and being in his place, Mr Speaker,
did then acquaint him with the Judgment of the House, and gave him a Grave and
Severe Reprehension.

Whereupon Mr Prynn, did (with much Ingenuity and Reverence to the House,)
declare his Humble submission to, and concurrence with the Censure and
Judgment of the House, upon the said Printed Paper, and his hearty Sorrow for
his Offense, and did render humble Thanks to the House, for their Mercy and
Favor to him, above his Deserts.

Resolved upon the Question,

That this House being well satisfied with the Demeanor and acknowledgement of
Mr Prynn, does Remit his Offense.

ORdered that these Votes and Proceedings, be forthwith Printed and Published.

WILL. GOLDESBURGH Cler. Dom. Com.

LONDON Printed by R. Hodgkinson, 1661.


