A DEFENSE AND CONTINUATION Of the Discourse concerning the PERIOD OF HVMANE
LIFE.

BEING A Reply to a late Answer, Entitled, A Letter to a Gentleman, etc.

To which is added, AN APPENDIX, Wherein several Objections urged in private,
are considered, and Mr. Gales severe, but groundless Charge is Examined.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Enoch Wire, at the White Heart in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1678.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
IF Custom had not made it common to prefix Epistles to Books, I had freely
permitted thee to read the following Discourse without the trouble of a
preliminary Salutation: but the truth is, I like not to be either Singular or
Uncivil:

And yet, I confess I have but very little to acquaint thee with: for as I
intend not to court your kind acceptance of the following Discourse, so neither
do I design to disparage it, or discourage thee from perusing it.

Only if I can prevail, I heartily wish thou would read without prejudice,
and with that Candor that becomes an impartial and discreet Reader: and then,
either give, or deny it entertainment as you think fit; for I assure thee The
Author desires to impose nothing upon thy faith, but what is able to abide the
test. If he has erred, he is only ambitious to have no followers.

When I gave way to the publishing of the former Discourse, I expected not to
have met with so many Enemies. But I see the old saying holds good, veritas
odium parit. As for those severe censures some men have urged, I have
endeavored to remove them in the following Discourse, especially in the
Appendix. For personal reflections (the only weapons others have made use of;
although they be as Ignorant who I am, as I desire they should be,) these I may
very rationally contemn, without the fear of censure from the strictest Zoilus.

I confess next to no adversary, a fair and ingenuous one is the most
desirable; but whether it has been my Good fortune (or if you please to say
Fate) to be blessed with such, after thou have perused both what they and I say
thou will be able to judge.

And upon this account (though not only) I heartily wish thou would be
pleased to compare the Reply and Answer, and both with the First Discourse,
which accidentally (I assure thee not designedly) gave birth to them; in doing
of which if thou reapest no advantage thy self, yet I am sure thou shall oblige
the Booksellers to give thee thanks.

FAREWELL.
A DEFENSE OF THE BOOK, ENTITLED, A Discourse concerning the Period of HUMANE
LIFE.
THere never was any age in which the itching humor of writing many Books was
more truly visible, than in the present: we may now with the Poet regrate,
that, Scribimus indocti doctique, every man thinks himself fit enough to spin
out a discourse for the Press; hence is it, that the World is even ready to
complain of the Burden. I know it is usual to pretend the importunity of
necessity, a very fair and specious pretext, but I much doubt, if it be always
real and true.

BUT least I seem accessory to the fault I so much condemn, I here enter my
solemn protest; that as it was no piece of vanity that engaged me to write the
former discourse, so neither am I now acted by that principle to defend it: If
it had been any unworthy motive that did first animate me, I should now have
appeared in Sackcloth, with a free and ingenuous confession of the crime.

BUT having in the Preface to that discourse already satisfied the World
concerning the design, both of the Author, and of the Book: I shall now forbear
to give a more tedious account.

AND because I promised if the judicious should dislike any thing in the Book,
either to satisfy them, or yield to the force of their clearer discoveries: I
am now come to tell them, that I will keep my promise; and stand to that
engagement.

MUCH has been said in private Cabals against both Author and Book: that the
Author is an Arminian, is but a modest censure, which I assure them does not in
the least offend me. As for their more severe thundrings, in condemning the
Book to the flames, and the Author to the Pillory; it is good their power is
not able to effect what they please. I see if they cannot answer the Book, they
are resolved to make both it and the Author odious enough. But all the slanders
that malice can invent, shall never discourage me from defense of the Truth.

IF the great Captain of our Salvation was said to be a Samaritan, and to have
a Devil: It is but a small matter that I should meet with disingenuous men, who
yet brand me with more gentile crimes. If my own familiar friends should carry
themselves demurely toward me, this is no harder measure than what better men
than I have experienced. It is an old, but true saying, Veritas odium parit.
The great Apostle of the Gentiles did find it so, Am I become your Enemy
because I tell you the truth? And since this is also my lot, I shall bear those
various censures very patiently, not intending to render reviling for reviling,
but Blessing for Cursing: Lord, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

BUT that I may not be further tedious, I shall pass by all private censures,
and now only consider an Answer, which was sent me by the Gentleman who
published my former Books, with the following Letter.

SIR,
BEing informed that there was an Answer to your late discourse concerning the
Period of Humane Life, intended for the Press; I ceased not 'till I had spoke
with the person that had it: And although I had but small acquaintance with
him, yet his ingenuity was such, that I obtained a sight of it; but finding it
so long that I could not then peruse it, I earnestly desired to know if he had
the confidence to trust me with it; freely adding, that I knew how to
communicate it to you (not telling who you were,) at first he seemed to refuse,
but after I had showed him the reasonableness of my desire, he condescended.
Sir, The Answer is thought to be no ways despicable; therefore if your affairs
of greater concern can allow, I assure you your speedy answer to; and return of
these Papers, will be very acceptable to;

SIR, Your obliged Servant.
I have here set down this Letter, that men may know by what means I obtained a
sight of the answer before it was Printed.



The REPLY.
SIR,
SOME few days ago I received yours, with the bundle of Paper. I heartily thank
you for the pains you have taken in that particular. I have now perused those
Papers, which I find are bespattered with very much Gall and bitterness; it is
a severe challenge, that I have fallen upon very bad principles, and maintain a
position contrary both to the Doctrine of our Church, and of all sober and
Orthodox Divines. If this were true as it is false, the Author might be excused
for his over much zeal* but since the censure is altogether void of truth, he
must pardon me to say, that the calumny is inexcusable: but I love not to fling
Dirt upon those, who take the liberty to bespatter me with it; it were easy to
recriminate, but our great Master never taught any such lesson.

BUT as I do not know of what Church the Author is a Member, (for it may be, I
oppose, that Doctrine that is hotly taught in some particular Churches) so
neither do I know what Divines may be Orthodox in his account: Sure I am, that
both the best and most learned Writers of this and former ages, have maintained
the sentiments I have embraced.

WHETHER the Authors opinion or mine does best agree with the humors of bad
men, needs but very little judgment to determine. Pray, how can it gratify any
wicked man to tell him, that he may prolong his days (a thing the most vicious
and aptest to wish) if he would obey the Laws of Heaven? And upon the other
hand, that his days shall be shortened (a heavy and unpleasant message to bad
men, who have no other heaven but what they enjoy upon Earth) if he continues
in his wickedness? Methinks this principle is so far from encouraging men to
sin, that it quite opposes it; affording men most excellent encouragements to
promote piety, and to shun all manner of vices, which lead down to the Chambers
of Death.

BUT if we now enquire how the Doctrine of absolute and irresistible decrees do
encourage men to be holy, we shall weary our selves e're we find one reason to
prove it. There can be no Doctrine more pleasing to bad men, for indeed hereby
they labor to excuse themselves, telling us, that God has from Eternity
absolutely determined every thing they should do, and therefore they cannot
help it. O how luscious is the high relish of this Doctrine to bad men!

FROM all this it may appear, that the Gentleman might have very well spared
that Pathetick Query. Shall we let it abroad to infect men, without ever
discovering the danger of it? No sure Sir, that were a great fault; pray
involve not your self (by a sinful silence) in so much guilt: But alas! if I
should put the Author to tell me wherein lies the danger, I could hazard ten to
one that he should be puzzled to tell. But this must pass for current Coin, and
be as strongly believed, as if it were proved by ten thousand Mathematical
Demonstrations; else we will be called credulous, and not having so much Faith,
as a Grain of Mustard Seed.

I CONFESS the Author pretends to be very unwilling, to engage in the nice
speculations of controversial Divinity; but yet it seems he is of so good and
condescending a nature, that he cannot resist the great importunity of a noble
Friend; he will rather hazard one single look into things that (as he says) are
hid, than disoblige his Friend, or (and indeed this is a strong reason) suffer
the good cause to be ruined by his silence. And thus we see that by his
gracious condescension, he luckily bestows a couple of favors, one upon his
friend, and the other upon truth. Sure never was there any man more fortunately
happy; but I forgot it was his fate to do so, and no thanks to him for all this.

THE Gentleman needed not, I think, have troubled himself much with the state
of the controversy, since I had done it plainly enough; and I leave you to
guess if the Author has done it more clearly.

BUT passing lesser circumstances, I come now to examine the Arguments he
brings, to prove, that the Period of every man's life is unalterably fixed by
the Divine Decree: this is the grand point he maintains; a Doctrine long since
introduced by the Stoics, and of a later date, espoused by Mahomet and his
followers.

AND yet if we will believe the Author, this Doctrine is every whit consonant to
Scripture, and undoubtedly proved by reason: Well then, let us follow the
Author in his search, and see whether such an uncouth notion has a favorable
aspect from either of the two.

AS for Scripture, 1. he tells us, there are many plain Texts which do upon
that account, express a kind of propriety, that men may claim in this last
Period. O wonderful subtle disputer! I know no man could argue so profoundly if
not a Disciple of Voetius: but let us consider the Texts of Scripture he brings
to prove this; the first is Eccl. 9. 12. Man also knows not his time. Now the
Author makes this to be the import of the words: The Period (says he) of man's
life is fixed by one absolute Decree, and therefore he may call it [his time.]
This is indeed a very ingenious Comment, only it is faulty in that it is
singular; for I dare promise, few men ever thought this was the meaning of the
Text: If I had been in the Pulpit I had readily raised this Doctrine; that the
time of our Dying is very uncertain, and I had proved it by Solomon's words,
man also knows not his time. Another Text he brings, is Psalm. 39. 5. Lord,
make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days. But I remember I have
already showed how strangely this Text is brought to confirm a Doctrine it is
utterly unacquainted with; see The Period of Humane Life, page 109. Edit. 1. by
this brief reply the Author may easily guess what strength is in these or the
like Phrases to confirm his opinion.

THE next argument he urges is every whit as impertinent; for it is an old and
true saying, Omnis similitudo claudicat: this the Author seems to smell; but he
pretends that he is so wise, as to press them no farther than the scope of the
comparisons lead him; but whether this be so or not, I shall briefly examine.
First, Scripture (he says) frequently compares the life of man to the Grass;
the flourishing and decaying of which, is fixed and determined. Answ. It will
trouble the Author to prove, that all Grass does flourish in the Morning, and
decays in the Evening. But I shall grant that there are some Flowers that do;
yet this can never prove that the Period of Humane Life is fatally determined.
If I remember well, Commentators say, such similitudes are made use of to
denote the brevity of man's life. I shall instance but one sacred Text, to
prove this is the import of the similitude; the place is Job 14. 1, 2. Man that
is born of a Woman, is of few days and full of trouble, he comes forth as a
Flower, and is cut down. Secondly, He tells us, that the life of man is
compared to a Race, Heb. 12. 1. Answ. It is so, and that very aptly; but not
because the bounds are unalterably fixed, but because of the noble price that
is appointed for those who obey the Divine Precepts, and who do not faint in
well doing; and the only intent of the comparison is, that if we expect that
Heavenly reward, we must persevere in well doing; as those who run in a Race do
not faint and give over, if they expect to obtain the price. Thirdly, The life
of man (says he) is compared to a shadow. Answ. I know it is, but sure not
because it has determined limits, but because of its duration; for as a shadow
quickly passes away, so the days of man are but few. Hence Job tells us, He
flees as a shadow. cap. 14. 2. and the Psalmist speaking of himself says, I am
gone like a shadow when it declineth. But I have insisted too long in answering
such trivial arguments. I will now view if the plain (as he calls them,
implying that the former were not) Texts of Scripture he brings, be urged to
any better purpose.

THE first plain Text is Job 14. 5. Seeing his days are determined, etc. this
is indeed the most remarkable place of Scripture we have seemingly standing
against us; but in my former discourse I have fully shown, that it does no way
contradict any position I defend. I shall therefore now only consider what he
urges against what I there replied, and judge you which of us does succumb.

I cannot (says he) but admire the Author's impudence in making this Text the
Basis of his discourse. Good Sir, is this the effect of a mild and gentle
Spirit? but i will pardon this, since may be it is the result of your holy zeal;
but if you be not resolved to be an admirer, I will endeavor to cure that
distemper. The reason then why I made choice of that Text was, because I judged
it the main place urged in defense of the opinion you maintain; and if this
were well cleared and duly explained, and made to make nothing for you, I
easily foresaw how little difficulty there would be in answering other Texts.

LET us now view how artificially he draws Job's words in a Syllogystick fear,
If God (says he) has so determined man's days, that he cannot pass those
prefixed bounds, then the Period of Humane Life is not mutable; but the first
is unquestionable. Ergo. Answ. If the Author had but remembered how he had
stated the case, he had never made use of this argument* for he grants, that
both he and I may maintain, that the Period of Humane Life is both mutable and
immutable. I did not deny but our days are determined, see page 81. and the
Author must know, that all the debate is concerning the (...).

But (says the Author) I am heartily glad that he acknowledges the infinity of
the Divine knowledge. When I first did read this, I thought the Author had
forgot himself, for he is but seldom in so good an humor; but when I again
viewed what follows, I saw all was spoken Ironice; which will make me ever
afterward suspect his Complements: And if he kiss again, I shall be upon my
Guard that he do not betray.

HOW the Divine knowledge is not conjectural, although it be not founded on an
absolute Decree, has been briefly manifested in the first Discourse. But
because I must follow the Author, I shall forbear to speak of it here, because
it comes afterward to be considered.

A SECOND plain Text of Scripture is Psalm. 90. 3. Thou turnest man to
destruction, and say, return ye Children of men. I am the most deceived, if
this Text proves what it is brought for: Sure the only intent of the Royal
Psalmist here is to show, that God is the supreme Lord and Master of the
Universe; who exercises an uncontrolable Dominion, and who can according to
his pleasure either shorten or prolong the days of man; but there is not one
word here of any absolute Decree.

A THIRD plain Text equivalent to the former is Psalm. 68. 20. Unto God the Lord
belong the passage to Death. Now let us hear the Author's Comment, that is
(says he) the Period of every man's life is in the hand of God. Now this is
indeed very well said; but he sees better than his Neighbors; who says it is
spoken to the purpose. But further, what if he and Voetius have given a bad
Translation of the Text, if I might hazard to our English, (which I think is
one of the best Translations) I dare say it is so; for there we read, Unto God
the Lord belong the [issues from] Death.

THE last plain Text is Act. 17. 26. He has determined the bounds of our
Habitation. Strange! the Author can never find the word determine, but he
instantly concludes, that we are to understand an absolute and irrespective
Decree. He knows well enough that I grant that the Period of Humane life is
determined, why then does he urge these Texts against me?

IN the next place, the Author brings a great many instances to prove the
Period of those men's lives, who dye a casual and violent Death, is fixed and
determined; but he needed not to have put himself to so much trouble, since I
never maintained, that the World is left to its own casual revolutions. If he
had pleased, he might have viewed page 76. where he will find, I grant, that
the most seemingly usual periods of men, are ordered by an infinite Wisdom, and
fall under the Divine Rule and Dominion.

NEITHER needs the Author redouble his NOW, NOW we have the Author yielding;
because I said, we never doubted, but the great Governor of the World may make
what reserved cases he pleases from the general Rule, and the ordinary course
of things, page 111. This methinks is a very plain Truth; but that I may do all
I can to satisfy the Author, I shall add, that the reason why some men's lives
may be unalterably determined, and yet the Period of other men's may for
ordinary be left mutable, is, because the supreme Governor of the World thinks
fit it should be so. If this will not suffice the Author, let him choose as he
thinks best.

BUT to proceed, since the first step (says he) and moment of our Beings is
determined, it is but reasonable to think that the last is also fixed. Answ. It
is extremely reasonable, only we must take heed that we do not wrest Scripture:
to patronize our own self-chosen opinions: Now the Text brought to prove that
the first moment of our Being is determined, is Psalm. 139. 16. which is a very
odd Paraphrase of the Author's, for the Psalmist there is not speaking of the
Divine Decrees, but of the infinity of the Divine knowledge, which is a depth
he confesses he cannot Fathom. Now that God does know both the first and last
moments of our life, is a Truth I am as ready to defend as the Author.

BUT I see the Author is resolved to dispute with me, as if I were an enemy to
a particular Divine Providence; else to what purpose does he bring his
following troop of Arguments? As

1. All the actions and works, all the ways and steps of man, are ordered by
God. Answ. All this is confessed by me; if he urges them against any other,
let those concerned make answer.

2. All other animate Beings (says he) are determined. Answ. To what and how
are they determined? I know they have a Being, and that they are all dependent
Creatures. But do you seriously think that God from Eternity did by an absolute
Decree determine the Period of every Creature? Can you without a certain
reluctance say, that the supreme and adorable Being of whom we ought to
entertain noble and becoming thoughts, did by an absolute Decree determine the
particular Period of every Flea? Pray consider, Sir, what you say.

3. Inanimate Beings (says he) are also limited. Answ. When God first Created
the World, he put every thing in a fit and convenient Station; and so exactly
ordered every piece of the Creation, that it should be subservient to the
whole. Hence he set bounds to the Waters, and appointed the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, to be for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and Years; and according
to the Primitive Precept, every thing (Angels and Men excepted) stands
according as he ordered. But yet these inanimate things are not so fixed, as
that upon extraordinary occasions he cannot alter their course.

4. Do we not (says he) read of the determined Period of Kings and Kingdoms?
Answ. Undoubtedly we do, but what then? Do you imagine that God by an absolute
Decree did determine the Periods of particular Kings and Kingdoms? Pray consider
what the Majesty of Heaven has said, 1 Kings 9. 4, 5, 6, etc. If thou will
keep my Statutes and Judgments, then I will Establish the Throne of thy Kingdom
upon Israel for ever; but if you will not keep my Commandments and my Statutes,
then will I cut off Israel, etc. Surely the most High rules in the Kingdom of
men, he puts down one, and sets up another, and according as men obey his
Statutes, so he dispenses his favors to them.

5. It is a dangerous thing (says he) to grant, that the most inconsiderable
thing is exempted from the Hand of Divine Providence. Answ. I am very far from
thinking, that the Author is an Enemy to the Divine Providence; but truly of
the two opinions, that which he maintains seems to enervate it more than mine;
for if God has from Eternity absolutely decreed every thing, then a particular
providence whereby he superintends and governs all things, seems not to have
any place; but the opinion I maintain puts all things in the hands of God, who
may do in Heaven and in Earth as he thinks fit. He may shorten or prolong my
life, he may do with me as he pleases, for he is our Maker, and we the work of
his own hands. This encourages me to wait and depend upon him, because I know
he is the Governor of the World, and has so absolute a Dominion, that none can
stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou?

HENCE not only those things which sustain and uphold men in Being, but also
the Period of every man's life depends upon God: As he may either give or deny
those necessary things, so may he also shorten or prolong our life. And thus
there is no need of running to the absolute Decree.

6. It is (says he) an old and unquestionable Maxim of Philosophers, cujusque
contradictionis altera pars determinate vera est, altera falsa. Answ. The Maxim
is very true, but not very pertinently applied. For supposing there had never
been a World, and so no Decree concerning any thing future; yet this had been
true, both parts of a contradiction cannot be true. But now if the Author
means, that the operations of free Agents are all absolutely determined; this
he must prove by some other medium than that Philosophic Maxim, which only
infers that one part of the contradiction is true, but leaves us ignorant which
of the two.

AFTER all this he comes at length to Catechize me most severely. Will ye (says
he) have your recourse to a Stoical fate, or Turkish necessity? No, good Sir, I
assure you I will not, but I am afraid some others may. Will ye plead (says he)
from the fortuitous concourse of Epicurean Atoms? Or -- Pray Sir hold, for it
is so long since I was last examined, that I have almost forgot the trick of
answering. If I should permit you to proceed, I could only say No to all your
Questions; and I believe you knew well enough that I was as much an Enemy to
all these as your self.

BUT I see what you have yet said are but slender attempts, and only in order
to a more noble and grand design. It is well your small Shot, discharged in
these light Skirmishes, have not hurt us. Come let us proceed, and see the
event of the fight.

If God (says he) has not by an absolute Decree determined the Period of every
man's life; how can the certainty of the Divine foreknowledge be defended?
Answ. Could the Author be contented with it as the Scriptures leave it, there
need be little debate in the case. The Gentleman is pleased to say, that I seem
to be like a Ship tossed with a great Storm; but he might have more truly said,
that I think that it is a bold enquiry which concerns not us to know, the
depths of the Divine Wisdom are too profound for Mortals to measure; and since
Sacred Writ calls it a depth, I am sure it is safest to break out into that
ecstasy of admiration with the Apostle, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the Riches,
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments,
and his ways past finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who
has been his Counselor?

IF God had ever designed that we should know those secrets, he had certainly
disclosed them in his revealed Word; but since Scripture is silent, it is our
Wisdom to forbear a curious search into things which he has reserved within
his own peculiar Jurisdiction.

BUT I see this will not serve the Author's turn, he will have the very manner
of Gods knowledge of future things determined; and if I cannot tell, yet he can
unfold this Secret, by saying, that God has from Eternity absolutely Decreed
every thing, therefore he certainly knows every thing. And now because this is
the grand Doctrine he always repeats, I shall without being very tedious, first
show him, that we have no ground to believe that every future action is
absolutely decreed. And secondly, I shall endeavor to show, that the Divine
knowledge is notwithstanding certain and infallible.

1. WE have no ground to believe, that every future action is absolutely
decreed, because God does certainly know all sinful and criminal actions, and
yet we cannot rationally conclude that he has absolutely decreed those actions,
for this does neither agree with the justice nor goodness of God. Do you think
that a just and good God (who is the Judge of all the Earth) would punish men
with everlasting Torments, if he had by an absolute decree determined that they
should commit all these Sins? Methinks if this were the case of these
miscreants, they might reasonably excuse themselves before their Judge, by
alleging, that they could not do otherwise. But truly there is no ground for
this plea, for he has left men inexcusable, and does not tempt any man to Sin.

BUT I remember the Author distinguishes between an effective and permissive
decree. Answ. I could never yet well understand what they mean by a permissive
decree: If they say, God only permits Sin, they say right; but from thence they
can expect no sanctuary, for this cannot according to them be a ground to infer
any certain knowledge; for to permit Sin, is in this case only a not hindering
of men in their wicked courses and ways. If you yet add, that in that
permissive decree, the will of man, with all the circumstances of time and
place are included. I Answer, that the decree is not then absolute but
respective; since both persons and their qualifications are considered: And I
must confess this is very agreeable with several phrases of Scripture,
particularly with that Romans 8. 29. For whom he did foreknow, them also he did
predestinate. So that if we even run up to the knotty point of predestination,
we shall find that the Decrees, both of election and reprobation consider the
qualifications of persons, and that foreknowledge preceeds any Decree* and
indeed this was the opinion of all learned men before S. Augustin's time.
Scriptores veteres (says Melancthon, cited by Episcopius, in his second
Epistle to Bererovicius) omnes preter unum Augustinum, putarunt aliquam causam
electionis in nobis esse.

2. WE have clear evidences from Scripture informing us, that God did certainly
know many things which should have been really future, if the conditions upon
which their futurition depended had been placed. Our Savior Christ tells us,
that if the mighty works which were done in Chorazin and Bethsaida, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they had repented. God knew that if Cain had done well,
he should have been accepted. The whole tenor of the Scriptures abounds with
many such like instances. If Nineveh had not repented, God knew that they
should have been destroyed. It is not absurd to think that God would have
threatened to inflict that punishment which he did not know; as certainly he
would not, if their Doctrine concerning the absolute Decrees be true. But I
remember I have in the former discourse insisted upon this argument; I shall
therefore only now consider what the Author answers to the Texts of Scripture
there cited.

THE first Text is 1 Samuel 23. 11, 12. which plainly shows, that God did
certainly know, that if David had not departed from Keilah, the Keilites had
delivered him into the hands of Saul. To this he answers, That David was not
curiously inquisitive concerning the Divine Will, for that was a Secret* Reply.
This is a strange fancy, for is it not as certain as any thing can be, that
David enquired of the Lord whether Saul was come to Keilah, and if the Keilites
would deliver him up; which David had not known ('till it may be, too late) if
God had not revealed both. But he says, there was no prediction of any thing
which should be. Answ. It Is true, Saul did not come to Keilah, but certainly he
should have come, if David had remained. And thus the prediction is of what
should have happened, if David had not left Keilah. And do you think that God
would have foretold any thing but what he certainly knew? Again he adds, that
the prediction was not concerning David' s being delivered up, but concerning
the inclinations of the people. Answ. The Text speaks nothing of the
inclinations of the people, but of a thing future; They will deliver you up,
viz. if you stay with them: and so David does not inquire if Saul intends to
come up, neither does the Answer he receives imply any such thing.

THE other Text is 2 King. 13. 19. where the Prophet is angry with the King of
Israel, for smiting upon the ground but thrice; telling him, that if he had
smitten five or six times, he had smitten Syria, till he had consumed it. To
this he answers, that is is altogether groundless to imagine, that God had
decreed that Joash should smite the Ground more that thrice. Answ. We do not
say that God had absolutely decreed how often he should smite the Ground.
Scripture makes no mention of any Decree, only this he tells us, that if Ioash
had smitten five or six times, he had totally subdued Syria. And truly, since
we find the Prophet angry with him because he only smote thrice; we may
rationally suppose that God had not absolutely decreed that he should smite no
oftener. To suppose that the Revelation was general, is only a may be; and we
may more warrantably say, what if it was not general?

3. LET us now come to examine the dangerous effects of this Doctrine of this
absolute and unconditional Decrees, and the bad consequences which naturally
proceed from it. 1. I have showed that it destroys the freedom of Humane
nature. And 2. That it makes all lawful means unnecessary; see the Period of
Humane Life, page 103. 3. It leaves no place for praise to the learned
Physician, nor for dispraise to the unskillful Empyrick, page 105. And 4. If
this Doctrine be pursued to the uttermost, it engages men to expose themselves
like fools or mad men to any danger.

BUT 2. Although God has not absolutely Decreed every future action, yet he
has an universal and certain cognizance of every thing. For 1. That I may
argue (as they speak) ad hominem, I hope the Author will not deny that God
knows every thing that is possible, and yet no man ever said, that God decrees
what things are possible, and what not. God knew how to raise up Children unto
Abraham out of the Stones, and yet I think there was no Decree concerning this.
2. God knows whatsoever is true, but all future actions are true; if it be true
that Titius died this day, in such a place, and of such a malady; this was from
Eternity true, that he should dye this day, and in such a place. But ye say, an
action is not future, but because it is decreed. Answ. That I may quickly
dispatch this, I shall now freely impart what has fully for a long time
satisfied me.

THE great and wise Creator, out of his mere pleasure, freely Created this
World, and furnished it with varieties of Creatures, of different natures;
amongst those, Man made after the Image of his Maker, was created a free Agent.
Now since the Eternal Wisdom thought it expedient, that there should be such a
Creature as Man; we must not take from him that free principle bestowed upon
him in his Creation: And since it is the good pleasure of Heaven, that Man in
all his actions should act freely and without constraint, what reason have we
to think that there is any absolute Decree which is inconsistent with this
freedom? And thus, that there ever was such a Creature as Man, this is the mere
result of the Divine Will; that Man acts freely and without constraint, this is
also the effect of Divine Goodness: and thus all things depend upon the Divine
Will. And because the Divine Knowledge is infinite, he therefore knows every
thing that Man is to act; for whatsoever he acts is true, and so
consequentially was from Eternity true. This methinks is a plain and easy way,
to secure both the certainty of the Divine Knowledge, and the freedom of Humane
Nature.

HAVING thus dispatched these two things I proposed, I now return to the
Author; where first we find him fighting lustily with Molina and Fonseca, and
Cursing their Bastard (begotten, he says, in the dark, pardon this innocent
piece of Drollery) Scientia media, with Job's imprecation

ALTHOUGH it be a digression to discourse of this, yet since the Author thinks
he has thereby ruined and undermined all I have said, I shall follow the
Author, and briefly examine his arguments he urges against this Doctrine.

THE first assault he makes, is, That I have recourse to the Jesuitical Port.
Answ. He having before compared me to a Ship tossed with a great Storm, it is
no wonder though I be glad to get to any safe Haven; if it belongs to the
Jesuits, the business is not great, since the Port is secure. And I am sure
the Author's Doctrine of Physical predetermination is the invention of the
Dominicans; jam sumus ergo pares.

BUT are there no Protestant Divines, who own and maintain, that God knows that
many things should have been future, if such and such conditions had been
placed? Does the Author know, that Gomarus, Waleus, and many other Foreign
Theologs, have recourse to Scientia media: And at home, how many learned
Doctors do defend it? Nay indeed your own D. Twiss, who seems to be one of the
greatest Enemies to it, yet maintains a notion every whit as unconcieveable (as
you are pleased to call this) his Decretum generale de ciendis Creaturas agere,
congruenter ipsarum naturis, is, may be, not much different from this.

BUT if the opinion be true, it matters not much who defends it. Let us now
hear what he Objects. I shall (says he) only in a word or two manifest the
unconcieveableness of this position. Answ. I dare hazard for all this promise,
he shall have thirdly beloved, 'ere he has done. His first word is, Since
antecedently to the Decree all things are purely possible, how can God know
that such things are either absolutely or conditionally future? Answ. 1. I
confess God always knows things as they are, so that if there be nothing
future, he could not know them to be future. 2. I grant that it is only the
result of the Divine Goodness, that there was ever such a Creature as man. Yet
3. Since God did make man a free Agent, and gave him power to act without
constraint; not Physically predetermining his Will, nor by any absolute Decree
fatally overpowering his inclinations, leaving him no liberty for choice: Hence
it is, that all and every act that man elicits, is certainly fore-known,
although not absolutely determined. For by virtue of that Primitive Precept,
men act as freely, as rational Agents act necessarily.

AND thus that grand Objection does not militate against us. For we grant that
antecedently to the Decree, Man, and all his future actions were only possible;
but after Almighty God had decreed or purposed to make Man, all his future
actions, although not absolutely determined, were yet certainly known: and the
reason of both, is, because Man being made a free Agent, there can be no
absolute Decree everting and overthrowing his nature; and since he was to elect
such and such actions, an infinite understanding behoved to know them.

HIS second argument is, That all knowledge depending upon conditions, is first
suspended, and secondly conjectural. Answ. We do not say that Divine Knowledge
does depend upon conditions; all that we claim, is, that God knows that many
things should have been future, if the conditions had been placed: And this we
judge is altogether agreeable to Sacred Writ. So that it is only the futurition
of things, and not the Divine Knowledge, that depends upon conditions.

IT IS true, man being a free Agent, he may either act or not act, even then
when all things requisite for acting are placed: but yet it must be granted,
that the Will cannot always hang in an aequilibrio; since it is a
self-determining principle, it must either will or nill the doing of such a
thing, and this an infinite intellect does certainly know.

3. HE Objects, There is nothing conditionally future in respect of God: For
either the Condition is to be placed, and so it becomes absolutely future; or
else it is never to be placed, and so it is only possible. Answ. I have
frequently heard this argument urged, as if it were unanswerable; but I must
confess, if my judgment be any ways regardable, it is the only result of
ignorance. For first, those who urge it, seem to mistake what is meant, when
men distinguish betwixt things absolutely and conditionally future. Things
absolutely future, are those things which do not depend upon any condition: but
things conditionally future, are such things as are really future, if the
conditions be placed; and should not have been future, if they had not been
placed.

NOW although the condition be not placed, yet they differ hugly from things
which are merely possible; for the things merely possible, are not future upon
the placing of whatsoever condition: but things conditionally future, should
have been really future, if the conditions had been placed.

BUT the Author adds, That all conditions are included in the absolute Decree.
Answ. If there be any conditions included in the Decree, it cease to be
absolute, as every man's reason will easily teach him.

AFTER all this the Author tells me, it is not in his power to reconcile me
with my self. Strange! what an unknown quarrel is this? alas! have I been so
unwary as to contradict what I had formerly said; and is the Author willing,
but unable to take up the difference? Since he pretends he is not, I will essay
what may be done. First, We have no ground to think that God decrees every
future action. And the reason I said so, was, because there are many sinful
actions which the Majesty of Heaven forbids, and therefore does not absolutely
Decree them: And yet I grant, that the most contingent actions depend
immediately upon the Divine Will: Because the reason why Man was made a free
Agent, and acts without constraint, is, because God did Will both.

AND thus I have examined what the Author brings in defense of his own opinion.
I come now to survey what he answers to what I urge against it. And*

1. I TOLD, That this Doctrine is a good plea for wicked men. To this he
Answers, that in the Schools they speak of a twofold Decree, the one
effective, the other permissive. Reply. I have already discovered the
insufficiency of this Answer, and therefore shall not repeat.

2. I TOLD, That it is inconsistent with the freedom of Humane nature. In
Answer to this, he alleges, That the decree does not hinder, but helps Men to
act freely. Reply. Let us examine if it be so; you affirm that God has by an
absolute Decree, determined the Period of Titius his Life, and that he has also
as absolutely decreed every thing that he shall do; now I desire to know of
Titius, who is a free Agent, that can do any other thing but what is decreed,
or if he can do otherwise? If you say he cannot, then pray how is he left a
free agent, since he must do all that is decreed, and can do no other thing.

BUT he says, All kinds of necessity are not inconsistent with liberty. Answ.
What then, is there no kind of necessity inconsistent with it? And is not Man
become a necessary Agent, if he cannot but act so and so? Is there any
resisting of the decree? But he adds, We only plead for a determination of
events. Answ. The Will is then left free, and God only determins the thing, but
not the Will. Pray how absurd is this in this Authors own judgment.

3. I TOLD, That this opinion leaves no place for praise to the learned
Physician, nor for dispraise to the unskilful Empyrick. He Answers, That the
Physicians deserve praise, because they act as freely as if there were no
Decree. Reply. The Author had done well if he had made this plain, for that
which he alleges is all along denied by us; and the reason we gave, was,
because if the Physician does only prescribe those Medicaments, he was
absolutely decreed to ordain; and if he can prescribe no other, then he
deserves no praise, since he does no more but what he could not but do.

4. I TOLD, That this opinion by a genuine consequence induces men to expose
themselves to any danger: For if the Terminus vitae est immobilis; what need
men fear to run upon the mouth of the roaring Cannon; if it be their fate to
dye, they cannot by all their Art and Skill evite death; if it be not fatally
determined, then let us face any danger, we have good enough proof against it.
To this he answers, That it is just like that argument which Satan propounds to
our Lord Christ, Matthew. 4. 6. Reply. I am not advising any Man to cast himself
upon those dangers, only I tell what is the consequence of this Doctrine. Now
our blessed Master is justly offended with Satan, because of his malicious
design in urging that argument. But there is no question but the argument was
strong, and this Christ does not challenge.

But (says he) we must not make the secret determinations of the Divine Council
our rule. Reply. If they be secret Councels, we cannot make them our rule: But
sure they can no more be said to be secret, since so many Men pretend to know,
that God has absolutely determined every thing.

I HAVE quickly dispatched his Answers, because they are indeed slight and
inconsiderable. Now* let us hear how he vindicates his opinion from that unjust
(as he calls it) imputation I have cast upon it; namely, that I say, it is only
the opinion of the Stoics, dressed up in better apparel: The word Fate is
hateful (says he) in the Christian Schools. Reply. May be the Author will find
himself to be in a mistake here: I shall only recommend to him an Author, with
whom he seems to be intimately enough acquainted; and that is, Voetius de vitae
termino; in Answer to Object. 6. Apud Philosophos (says he) variae occurrunt
fati explicationes, quarum aliquae a veritate and pictate nihil alienum sonant.
-- Nec desunt inter antiquos et recentiores very Docti qui Stoicorum placitum
in dextram partem interpretentur.

AND indeed any man that compares the two opinions, will find them to be upon
the matter the same: the difference that the Author gives betwixt the two, is
the very same that I mentioned and told him of. But it is needless to insist
here, for the thing is palpable and cannot be denied.

IN the last place the Author comes to answer those arguments I urged in
defense of the mutability of the Period of Humane life. My first argument was,
upon the observance of the Divine Laws, there are many promises in Scripture
assuring us of length of days; and on the other side, there are many
threatenings of cutting short the days of the Wicked. In Answer to this, the
Author alleges many things.

1. HE tells us, The words prolong, shorten, etc. do not properly signify to
make longer or shorter, but only imply length or shortness of days. Reply. I
confess I do not well understand this distinction; but suppose the words were
to be understood as the Author takes them, yet all we plead for stands firm:
for those that obey the Statutes shall live long, which (with the Author's
leave) is the same with having their days prolonged.

2. In these promises (says he) God deals with Men, as Parents use to deal with
their sick Children: They promise them many things, rather to encourage them to
take the bitter potion prescribed, than out of a real intention to bestow such
things. Reply. This Answer is indeed unworthy to be considered, since it so
much reflects upon the Divine wisdom and goodness, of which we and all men
ought to entertain generous and becoming thoughts: His promises and threatenings
too, are real and serious. It is not to allure or flatter Men to live holily,
that he promises to lengthen their days; when he well knows he had absolutely
fixed the Period of their life.

3. HE says, A good life is a long life, and that Abraham died in a good old
age, because he was a good Man. Reply. I know not whether I should smile at the
wit and ingenuity of this Answer, or commend the Author for his happy
invention: But it matters not which of them we admire.

4. The wicked (says he) are said not to live out half their days, because
according to the ordinary course of nature, the date of their lives might have
been longer. Reply. But if the Period of their lives be absolutely determined,
this supervenient Decree takes away that supposed possibility of their living
longer. 2. This Answer is so slight and inconsiderable as to the end for which
it is produced, that it does not in the least agree with the words of the Text;
for in this sense, many godly Men may be said not to live out half their days.
But the Psalmist by such a phrase holds out, that the impiety of the wicked is
the cause that their days are shortened; which he could not have said, if their
days had been absolutely determined.

5. HE says, The wicked may be said not to live out half their days, in respect
of their hopes and expectations. Reply. The sacred Text makes no mention of the
hopes and expectations of the wicked; nor does this Paraphrase any ways agree
with the Psalmists intention.

1. THE Psalmists intention was to show, that wickedness is the reason and
cause of Men's short lives. Now if he had only meant their hopes and
expectation, he needed not have made any mention of the wicked; for this might
have been applicable to the most part of Men, both good and bad.

2. IT agrees not with the Text, for if their days be determined, they live out
their whole time, let them dye whenever: So that he could never have said,
They shall not live out half their days. And indeed this had been no great
punishment inflicted upon the wicked for their Sins, if it mean only their
hopes; for good Men may thereby be as well included: and the wicked are not a
whit more unhappy than others, if the case be so.

THE Author is angry with me, because I said, That if we consult experience, we
shall find the Religious and Virtuous Men enjoy ordinarily far the longest
lives. Truly I see no reason to repent what I said, nor does the wise Man's
Observation any ways contradict this; for all that he aims at there, is to
show, that a good Man's Righteousness will not be able to defend him from the
malice and cruelty of the Wicked, and that Wicked Men may pass on in their Sins
without control.

THAT the Divine promises are notable encouragements to live holy and devoutly,
is very plain and undoubtable: But yet it may be questioned whether, according
to some Men's principles, they be useful for the foresaid end.

A SECOND argument I did urge, was taken from the pious and devout Prayers of
the Righteous, and their turning from their Sins by an hearty Repentance. To
this he Answers, That the Divine Statutes, although they be irrepealable, yet
do not exclude the use of Prayer, because it is included in the Decree. Reply.
I have already told if there be any condition, the Decree is not absolute: But
because I find the Author has always recourse to this fancy, I shall briefly
evidence, that the Author cannot make use of such an evasion. Prayer and
Repentance (says the Author) are conditions absolutely decreed, and therefore
they are necessary. Reply. The Stoics may have recourse to this, as well as
you: For Prayer and Repentance are hereby made necessary, not because Men
elicit those acts as parts of their duty, but because they cannot do otherwise.
And thus the Prophet Daniel could not but pray, that Gods anger should be
removed from his people Israel; because it was absolutely before decreed. The
like was David's case, and others, mentioned by the Author.

BUT by this means, the promises of Scripture can be of no use to induce us to
live holily, for they are not conditional: Thus, if you obey the Divine
Statutes, ye shall live long; and if ye rebel, ye shall be punished. But you
shall obey the Divine precepts, and live long; and you shall live wickedly, and
have your days shortened.

THAT Prayer and Repentance have been the means of prolonging many Men's lives,
is obvious to experience; some few instances to confirm so plain a truth, I
laid down in the first discourse. I shall therefore now only examine the
Author's Answer.

THE first instance was concerning the case of Nineveh, where I told, That
their Repentance did prevent the Execution of the threatened Judgment. To this
he answers; 1. That Prayer and Repentance do not move God to change his Decree.
Reply. We do not say that they do, only we say, there was no absolute, but
conditional Decree in the case. 2. He says, That their Repentance was from
Eternity decreed. Reply. How then could the threatening be serious? Do you think
that a holy, wise, and just God would threaten to inflict a Judgment upon a
people, when he had absolutely decreed that such a Judgment should not be
inflicted? To this, which he could not but take notice of, he answers, That
such threatenings only imply, that the nature of the crime deserved to be
punished with this Judgment. Reply. I know the merit of every Sin is death, but
this is no Answer to the difficulty, for the threatening not only implies the
demerit of the offense, but also expressly declares, that the Judgment threatened
should be inflicted, if they did not by their Prayers and Repentance prevent
the Execution of it.

A SECOND instance I urged, was Hezekiah's recovery, etc. To this he Answers,
1. That we must distinguish between the threatenings and decrees of God. Reply.
Well, we shall observe this caution, but upon this proviso, that the Author
will not make the threatening inconsistent with the Decree: for if God had
absolutely decreed that Hezekiah should not dye 'till the fifteen years were
expired, then how could the threatening, Thou shall surely dye and not live, be
serious? But that the first was not absolutely decreed appears to be plain; for
otherwise, how could the fifteen years be said to have been added to his life?

2. HE says, The denunciation of death was a conditional commination absolutely
propounded, inducing Hezekiah to Repentance, having no respect to the absolute
Decree. Reply. This Answer is not conformed nor agreeable to the Author's
principles, for he alleges that both the threatening and Repentance are
absolutely decreed: now if the threatening had been an argument to engage
Hezekiah to Repentance, we must suppose that Repentance was not absolutely
decreed, but a thing depending upon Hezekiah's will; otherwise both the
threatening and Repentance were slight, and of no force: Nay indeed, since the
commination was only a Moral act, it might have been an inefficacious motive.
But since it had (as the Author will say) its efficacy from the internal
operation of the holy Spirit, hence is it, that Repentance can be no condition
required on Man's part, since it is not in his power not to Repent when God
works it in him. And truly this makes the threatening ridiculous, for how can it
be a motive to induce to Repentance, since Repentance is absolutely decreed,
and in time by a Physical predetermining act wrought in Man nill he will he.

HOW the Author will be able to absolve himself from having any respect to the
two dangerous opinions, he says we must by all means avoid, I wish he would
seriously consider.

I DO not well understand the meaning of one phrase the Author uses, viz. That
God did not Will that Hezekiah should dye when he threatened him; only he willed
that there should be such a threatening. This is indeed pretty subtle, but I
know not for what end it was brought: Sure it is not very pertinently alleged,
if he thinks hereby to prove, that there is no opposition between the Decree
and the threatening; as may appear by what I have already said.

3. WE must distinguish (says he) between the conjectural certainty of death,
inferred from the fatal events which frequently accompany dangerous Diseases;
and the infallible certainty of death, inferred from the Decree. Reply. The
distinction is without controversy good, and it is but reason we believe it;
but I assure the Author's application is not always allowable. I shall make
this out by considering how he applies this distinction. In respect of the
first (says he) Hezekiah' s death might have been said to be certain. Reply. We
are not to debate what might have been, but what really was. Now that
denunciation, Thou shall certainly dye and not live; was no conjecture taken
from the danger of the disease, but a prediction or prophecy revealed by God to
his servant Isaiah.

ANOTHER instance I urged, was Ier. 18. 7, 8. where we have a lively proof of
the virtue and efficacy of Prayer and Repentance. To this he repeats his old
answer, That they are therefore efficacious because included in the Decree.
Reply. If they be indeed as absolutely decreed as the end, then they are truly
efficacious, but not as conditions required of us to perform, but because they
cannot but be efficacious, because* decreed: And thus all things come to pass
fatally.

A THIRD argument to prove that our lives may be extended or shortened, I urged
from the use of Medicaments. To this he Answers, That it is a precarious
principle to separate the means from the end, since the Decree is of both.
Reply. If the Decree including both be absolute, then both the means and the
end must be: But then, as I already told, the means are placed not in reference
to the end, but because they could not but be placed. There were but two
consequences which we have always alternatively urged; namely, if the Period of
Humane life be absolutely determined, then either Humane care and industry is
needless, since all the Medicaments of the World cannot prolong our life one
moment beyond the Divine decree; nor the neglect thereof shorten our life: Or
else those Medicaments we must use are likewise absolutely decreed, and then we
must of necessity use them: And thus all care and choice, all consultation and
deliberation is quite destroyed. The skillful Physician upon this account
deserves no praise, nor the ignorant any challeng; for the necessity that is
placed excludes both.

NOW if the opinion the Author maintains does not condemn the use of
Medicaments, yet it introduces a fatal necessity, which is every whit as
repugnant as the former, and inconsistent with the principles of Reason and
Religion.

AND thus Abraham could not neglect the care of his Son Isaac; and Hezekiah
could not but use the means, notwithstanding he knew fifteen years should be
added to his life: for in the Author's judgment both were absolutely decreed.

4. I TOLD, Nothing is more evident, than that there are several things which
have a Physical efficacy, both in the prolonging and shortening of our lives.
He Answers, 1. That God does not hinder second causes from acting, according to
that power he has implanted in them. Reply. Although this be no Answer to the
argument, yet I shall take notice of it, as I have done of many things which
did not much deserve to be regarded. And 1. That God does not for ordinary
hinder second causes from acting, according to that power implanted in them in
their Creation, is true: But yet in extraordinary cases, the supreme Governor
of the World may overpower the Wills of the free Agents, and hinder them from
acting what their Wills are bent to commit, and he may impede natural Agents in
acting what naturally they are determined to do. But 2. How can the Author
imagine this to be reconcilable with his opinion? For it is the nature of a
free Agent to elicit actions freely; but if God has from the outgoings of
Eternity absolutely decreed every thing they shall do, they are no more left at
liberty to dod or not do, but they most of necessity elicit the act they are
determined to. But the Author adds, That all things which conduce, either to
the prolonging or shortning of our life, are included in the Decree. Reply. If
they be indeed included in the Decree, then it is not absolute but conditional,
and upon foresight of men's being placed in those circumstances; but if he say
that all circumstances are absolutely decreed, then I again tell him that he
must show us how all things come not to pass by a Fatal necessity.

THE last argument I urged, was, That many Men had lived longer, if they had
not foolishly exposed themselves to danger. To this he Answers, That Men's
exposing themselves to danger was included in the Decree. Reply. If the Author
means that God did foresee all the circumstances which Men are placed in, in
time, and then decreed the Period of their life; he may indeed say, that Men's
exposing of themselves to danger is included in the Decree: But if he thinks
that God did decree that Men should be exposed to those dangers which put a
Period to their lives; then he entertains unbecoming thoughts of God; and
wherever he learned this Doctrine, I am sure it has no Foundation in Scripture.
See this more fully cleared, Period of Humane Life, page 133, 134.

THERE remains no more now, but that I conclude with my earnest entreaty, that
Men would heartily comply with the last words of the Author's discourse;
namely, That it is our wisdom and advantage to live as those, who know that
e're long a Period shall be put to their Beings. If the Author be offended that
I have considered his Answer, I hope I shall please him by saying,

Non equidem vellem, sed me mea Fata trahebant.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX.
WHEREIN SEVERAL OBJECTIONS, URGED In private Conferences, are examined.
TOGETHER WITH A Survey of Mr. GALE'S severe, but groundless charge.
THE great desire I have to clear all doubts which can be urged against the
opinion I defend, has engaged me in several private conferences to try what
arguments men of better judgment than my self can produce.

But the truth is, instead of arguments, all I could hear urged was odious
censures, which as I have always accounted unquestionable evidences of a bad
cause, so do I apprehend that method very incongruous, either to convince
others, or to find out the truth.

And although I have no great desire to put my hand into a Hornets Nest, yet
because I now intend to put a close to this debate, I shall briefly examine all
those particular charges I have met with, hoping that henceforth men will show
more candor and ingenuity, and not rashly and inconsiderately calumniate an
Author they know not, nor condemn an opinion with hard words, when they can
urge nothing of reason against it.

The first heavy charge I met with, is, that the opinion I defend is not
Orthodox, and that the Author is an Arminian; this censure I have in part
already considered, I shall therefore now only desire to know by what rule they
measure an opinion to be true or false? If they will make Scripture judge, I am
sure their charge is false; see Period of Humane Life, page 118, 119, etc. Nay,
if they will but stand to the determination of reason, they will find
themselves at a loss; but if they run from Scripture and reason, and make their
own crooked fancy the rule, I cannot help the matter.

Common experience convinces us, that the most uncouth notion is judged
Orthodox by some men, and that the best opinion has not had the good hap to be
entertained by all men; but the odious censures of men is not enough to make a
good opinion bad, otherwise we should be continual seekers, but never find one
Truth.

I confess they are but little acquainted with the Writings of Orthodox
Divines, who say they oppose the mutability of the Period of Humane Life; for
my own part I could never find any condemn it but the Stoics of old and of
late Mr. Hobbs, and his Disciples, and those who run up to the absolute decrees
of Election and Reprobation. And although it be rejected and disallowed by
such, yet I hope they are not the only Orthodox Divines.

The present age (God be thanked) is wiser than to be affrighted with the word
Arminian; those who use such Objections may please themselves to dispute with
Children; but if they combat with Men, they will be but jeered and contemned. I
confess some few years since it was scandal enough to be called an Arminian;
but those dark days are gone, and I hope in after ages that which some men
account an opprobrious charge, shall be esteemed Honorable.

Notwithstanding all this, I do not say that I am an Arminian, nor am I
offended at others who call themselves Calvinists: But methinks it were more
Christian like to reject all such names which keep up differences amongst us,
than to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and a third distinct from both, I
am of Cephas.

2. Some men have told me, if the shortning or lengthening out of our life does
depend upon our use, or neglect of the means, then Gods particular providence
in Governing the World is enervated, if not quite destroyed.

Answ. I have been far rather induced to believe, that the Antithesis of the
opinion we defend, opposes the Divine providence; for truly if all things are
fatally fixed from Eternity by an absolute Decree, whether there be any
providence or not, things must come to pass according to that sempiternal
series and concatenation of causes; but by maintaining the mutability of the
Period of Human Life, the Divine providence does most conspicuously appear,
sometimes in removing those things which should have put a Period to our Being;
sometimes permitting us to be exposed to unseen and unexpected dangers. O how
wonderful, wise, and mysterious are the ways of God! His Providence is
universal, and extending to the most inconsiderable actions. But yet we must
not foolishly imagine, men are acted like mere Machins. The Divine providence
does not destroy the innate freedom of Human natures. It is indeed evident by
the light of nature, that the great Creator of the World should order and
govern it. No Parent is so regardless of his Children as to expose them to the
dangers of the World. The very Brutes by a natural instinct guard, secure, and
take care of their young. And can we think that our kind Creator who has
implanted these principles of Care and Kindness in his Creatures toward their
off spring, shall be less regardless of his own Creatures.

We then heartily accord that the Divine providence is vigilant and universal,
and the opinion we maintain gives us all the encouragements that can be, to
entertain so noble and generous thoughts of that adorable Being, who upholds us
in Being. How frequently had a Period been put to our lives, if his watchful
eye and careful providence had not red us from imminent dangers.

When I consider that the Period of my life is not immutably and absolutely
fixed, but may be Millions of ways shortened, this encourages me to cast my
self upon the Divine ear and providence. But for others who are of a contrary
opinion, I confess I cannot see how they have any motive to do so, for they
being once confirmed in that opinion, that their days can neither be extended
nor shortened, they need use no diligence for their safety; they cannot be
encouraged to address themselves to their Heavenly Father by Prayer, since all
Care, Diligence, Prayer, etc. are ineffectual, and cannot alter the
determination.

3. Others have told me, that I make the Creature independent.

Answ. They may as well say, I make the Creature the Creator, for both are
equally false. I confess it is not in my power to keep men from deducing
illegal consequences, and leading an opinion with inferences it is utterly
unacquainted with: yet, since they are pleased to observe this method, I will
first vindicate my own opinion, and then examine whether theires can be more
justly condemned.

First, then although I grant that the Period of Humane Life, is for Ordinary,
Mutable; yet, I constantly affirm, That God is the Supreme Moderator and
Governer of the world, and is this to make the Creator independent? nay,
Almighty God not only adhibets a general concurse, but he also in a more
special and particular providence, either affords or withdraws occasions of
Safety: It is in his power to Shorten or Prolong our lives, and this he does
many different ways, which because they are sometimes ordinary and common, we
but seldom regard them, but when by an extraordinary providence he affords us
unexpected deliverances, we are then more Sensible that his hand brought us
help; And is all this a deifying of the Creature?

That Man, Created a free agent should be absolutely and Physically
predetermined to act, is a harsh notion, quite contradictory to the common
sentiments of mankind, and yet by opposing this Predetermining influx, I do not
make man an independent Creature; for an independent Creature is a plain
contradiction; but it is evident enough, that it employed no contradiction, for
God to Create a free agent, who shall not stand in need to be Physically
predetermined to every act. Now this once being admitted, it may easily appear,
that the Period of Humane Life is not immutably fixed; for since man acts
freely, he may either choose or reject, this or the other means* upon which the
extention, or abbreviation, of his Life consists.

And yet Man is not hereby made an independent being; for as God has set
bounds to him, over which he cannot pass, It being appointed for all men once
to die; So has he also absolute rule of him, and may say, return ye Children
of men. And thus although man is made a free agent, yet he is not exempted from
the Divine Providence.

But, Those who defend the contrary opinion, although they grant that man does
in all his actions depend upon God, yet, they of necessity must deny that he
immediately depends upon him: for, besides the Divine eternal Volition, they
more over add a Physical predetermining influx, efficaciously and irresistably
moving the will, which must necessarily mediate between the Creator and Man.

And thus, although God has not absolutely decreed the Period of every Man's
Life, nor does by a Physical predetermining impulse move him to act, which
should make him rather a Machin than a Man, yet Man is not independent in
acting, but depends immediately upon the Divine Will, as I have already
explained.

Indeed he who thinks the Creature is independent, if it be not Physically
predetermined to act, entertains a strange notion of independency: for it is
certain that the Humane Will is not thus predetermined to sinful acts, and I
also desire to know if necessary agents be thus acted: methinks such a
superadded determination is very needless since that natural propention, which
the great Creator endued them with, is fixed and permanent and sufficient
enough to determine them to act: for instance the Fire, by it is natural
determination, necessary burns the wood, and it needs no impulse, or superadded
motion to determine it, and yet neither the Human Will nor free agent are
independent beings.

But not to insist in the refutation of such trivial censures, which the
Authors can never form in mode and figure against what I have laid down in that
discourse, I shall now in the close examine Mr. Gales severe charge laid down in
his Court of the Gentiles part 3. page.

As an Appendix (Says he) to natural Philosophy, we may add Medicine which has
had a powerful influence upon Atheism in this regard, because these proud
Naturalists observing by long experience many excellent qualities, virtues and
Medicinal influencies, in several Minerals, Stones, Plants, Animals, etc. hence
would fain persuade themselves and the World, the term of Man's Life was not
fixed but variable and determinable by their art and Medicaments, which piece of
Atheism continues to this very day very common.

Methinkes Mr. Gale if he had been so good natured, might have very well spared
this Scandalous language and not have treated those Learned men so
contemptuously; but I see it is his humor to make every thing have an influence
upon Atheism, and to quarrel with all Philosophy but his own Reformed Scheme:
and yet it is ten to one if some ill natured Inquisitive men find not out some
vanity, and malignity in his own, which whether it may arise from the vanity
and malignity of the object. Or 2. From the vanity and malignity of the
subject. Or, 3. from the curse of God or both, is an Enquiry I shall not
determine in, till I better understand what sense these phrases can admit.

But methinks it is a strange thing why he is so much offended with Pagan
Philosophers, since he alleadges as a prime cause of vain Philosophy, the
innate, congenite darkness or the native ignorance of the understanding; now
how unreasonable is it to challenge men for erring if ignorance be congenite or
native to the understanding? He may as well be angry with them because they had
not these clear revelations of the Divine mind we are now blessed with.

And yet, although there were many errors in their Philosophy, we must not
therefore condemn natural Philosophy nor reject all those arts and sciences
which have errors necessary (in this imperfect state) annexed to them; if we do
so we must reject all arts and sciences and even his (I had almost mistaken and
said) own reformed Philosophy. That Idolatry, Atheism, etc. are the effects of
natural Philosophy, is a dangerous position of the Authors; for by the dark
light of nature men may know that there is a God and that Divine worship and
adoration is only to be given to that Supreme and Adorable Being, and if
natural Philosophy be rejected how shall we be able to dispute with Atheists
who wickedly deride Sacred Writ.

But as natural Philosophy has no powerful influence upon Atheism, so neither
has Medicine, which he adds as an appendix to the former, however the Authors
unbounded Zeal transports him beyond the just bounds of civility and moderation.

And now, that I may more particularly examine this censure, I shall first show
that Mr. Gales memory is as weak as his judgment* and that he has quite forgot
that he makes this piece of Atheism the effect of Pagan Philosophy. Secondly, I
shall make it evident that those proud (as he imprudently and with more
arrogance calls them) Naturalists were neither proud in there observations he
contemns, nor proud in the inference deduced from thence: and Thirdly, I shall
make it plain that Mr. Gale may be justly charged with maintaining more
dangerous opinions.

I begin with the First, to show that Mr. Gale elsewhere seems to condemn
himself for saying, that it is the effect of Pagan Philosophy to say, the
Period of Humane Life is variable; to make out this I shall only desire him to
review part 4, page 455. Where he will find himself saying I am not ignorant
(the words are Mr. Gales) how much some of late, as well Divines as Physicians,
have essayed to exempt the Period or term of Humane Life from the immutable
determination of Divine providence; but how much this hypothesis contradicts
both Pagan and Sacred Philosophy, will be more fully evident, by what follows.

Now, methinkes the Author took too much pains to note, that an effect of Pagan
Philosophy, which he confesses, is contradicted by it: but not to take any
more notice of the Authors fighting with himself: I shall proceed to the
Second; Namely, that Physicians were neither Arrogant in there observations* he
is pleased to mention none yet in that inference deduced from hence.

First they were nor proud in their observations; for to take notice of the
excellent qualities and virtues of Herbs, Minerals, Animals, etc. is so far
from being discommended and reprehended, that it is rather to be regrated, that
men of learning and abilities should want encouragements to proceed in such
enquiries: and truly those who lay out there time in such a commendable study,
will unquestionably be celebrated by posterity, when the names of those who
discourage them shall be unsavory if not extinguished.

Can it be questioned by any, who pretends reason, that there are excellent
noble and specific virtues in some Plants, Animals, and Minerals against
several destempers? if this be doubted common experirience will abundantly
attest it; but since this is so plain and evident is it not lawful from hence
to infer that the Period of Human Life, is not absolutely fixed: for if this
were true it were needless to search out the virtues and effects of those
things, which can be used to no purpose.

But the great charge is, that to affirm the term of Men's lives is mutable, is
a piece of Atheism.

To prevent such calumnies there is no help but according to the old saying si
accusasse sat esset quis foret innocens? And I am sure the Scriptures teach us
another lesson and right reason too; as for Pagan Philosophy I confess I am not
so much concerned to examine it. I Know he has the Stoic Philosophers
Patronizing his notion, while in health, but I doubt if sickness does not alter
there judgments. It is indeed good company to see the most strict Stoic and
those of that persuasion, post away messingers for the Physician when under
diseases; which is evidence enough that they do not believe the truth of what
they maintain.

That the Hypothesis we defend contradicts neither natural nor Sacred
Philosophy, has been plainly enough demonstrated in our former discourse,
neither does Mr. Gale for all his promise, urge it with any argument, but in
stead of doing so he himself seems to be guilty of that which he injuriously
blames in others: And thus I am led to the third thing proposed to be
discussed; namely, that Mr. Gale may be justly charged with maintaining more
dangerous opinions; and to make good this charge I shall only (because of the
intended brevity) mention two particulars.

The first is laid down in the Court of the Gentiles page 367. where
distinguishing Gods Justice in Absolute and Ordinative he adds, that God by his
absolute justice and dominion can inflict the greatest torments even of Hell it
self on the most innocent Creature. This is indeed a morsel which sober men
cannot well swallow; it being so quite contrary to that common notion which all
mankind entertain of God, and to those excellent attributes of his glorious
nature; by which he has discovered himself to the world both by his word and
works.

That Almighty God is to be admired for his excellent power and works of
wonder, no sober man ever doubted, but to admit an unlimitted power
incompatible with the principle attributes and perfections of his Glorious
nature, such as his Goodness, Holiness, Mercy and Justice, this were instead of
exalting his excellent power, a denying of a Deity or at least a making him,
who is altogether Holy, merciful and Good, seem (it is horrid to speak it)
Savage and Cruel. The Divine goodness, truth and sanctity assure us that he can
do nothing that is unbecoming his Glorious nature nor repugnant to his chief
perfections displayed in his Sacred Word and daily evident by his Works.

Let us here appeal to judicious Mr. Calvin lib. de Etern. Dei predest.
Sorbonicum illud dogma in quo sibi plaudunt Papales Theologastri detestor, quod
potentiam absolutam Deo affingit: Solis enim lucem a calore evellere facilius
erit, quam Dei potentiam separare a justia and page 191. facessant ergo procul
a pijs mentibus, monstrosoe illoe Speculationes, plus aliquid Deum posse quam
conveniat, veleum sine modo ac ratione quicquam agere, etc.

Surely if to distroy the righteous with the wicked temporally was rejected by
Abraham as a piece of injustice, unbecoming the Divine goodness. Genesis 18 25.
That be far from thee to slay the righteous with the wicked, Shall not the
Judge of all the Earth do right: how much rather may we say so, when men tell
us that God can inflict the greatest torments even of Hell it self on the most
innocent Creature; it were easy to answer all the silly instances brought in
defense of this horrid Doctrine, but I have said enough in the passing against
it, only I must add that this is a most dangerous opinion inclining men to
entertain unworthy conceptions of a Deity. Plutarch lib. de Superst.
discoursing of the folly of the Pagans, to pacify there offended Gods
Sacrificed men and women to them, adds that Diagoras, and his Followers more
reasonably maintained the Being of such Gods than those who confessed a God,
and believed they could be appeased by such Savage cruelty.

The Second particular I shall instance, is laid down page 483. and frequently
else where, God (says he) is the prime efficient cause of the material entitive
act of Sin. I know some others have undertaken the defense of this infamous
Tenet, but patronize it who will, it is an uncouth opinion and charge the
Holy Lord, who is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, with Men's Sins.

I confess, I could never yet understand what more was asserted by those
blasphemous Heretics, who boldly affirmed that God was the Author of Sin; for
which pious antiquity did jointly condemn them; for if the evil or obliquity of
Sin be (as they say) either privation or relation, it is evident that they
necessarily result from the placing of such actions and cannot but follow their
acts.

It is indeed pity, that our Reformed Divines should be all blamed for the
faults only of a few who have imbibed this Dominican venom, and I have often
regrated to see the Jesuits so miserably baffle men, maintaining this odd and
uncouth notion, and yet it is but unhandsom dealing to charge that notion upon
all reformed Churches, which has been always condemned by the most Judicious
Writers we have.

But to dispatch this as quickly as I can, I shall only desire a satisfactory
Answer to the few following Queries.

First, If God be the prime efficient cause of the material entitive act (that
I may use his phrase) of Sin, does not God necessitate the Will to Sin? since
Man is hereby made the Instrumental cause and God the principal overruling
efficient cause; and do you think that the Instrumental cause, can resist when
the principle cause irresistably determins it to act?

Secondly, Is not the act prescinded from the object? A mere fancy and notion:
Can there be either Love or hatred when their is no object to terminate them
upon?

Thirdly, If the material act of Sin be Good, is not every sinful act Morally
Good as well as Morally Evil.

Fourthly, When we enquire if there be any thing in the hatred of God that is
good, do we not Speak of a particular act terminat upon its object, and not of
a Chimerical act which can have no being?

Fifthly, Is not that Sinful which is prohibited? but the act it self is
forbidden Men, or forbidden to do such and such things, and their doing or
acting makes them liable to punishment. Do not Men by doing or omitting that
which the Divine precepts forbid, become guilty? Is not Sin a transgression of
the Law, and do not men transgress and violate the Divine precepts when they
either commit or omit the forbidden action? Hence is it that very many Learned
Men rationally conclude that Sin is not a privation, but a positive thing,
since the act is always forbidden, and therefore it must be formally evil; and
I confess it is a hard matter to conjecture what can be the foundation of that
privation; or if the act be placed, how the obliquity does not necessarily
result.

Sixthly, To permit is properly a not hindering or impeding Men to act;
therefore the act is permitted, for what can be hindered cannot be properly
said to be permitted, but the obliquity is such.

Seventhly, If it were the obliquity and not the act that is permitted, then
neither Devils nor Men could tempt us to Sin, for they cannot do any more but
Entice and Allure us to the committing or omitting of the Acts, which being
placed, the obliquity does necessarily result.

Eigthly, Are Man any other ways said to be hindered from Sinning, but because
they are impeded from commiting the Act; how then can the Holy Lord, be the
prime efficient cause of the substrate matter, or material entitative Act of
Sin?

I have indeed seen an excellent M. S S. where this odious opinion, which has
made our Church is solidly rejected; till such time as that become public,
these few Arguments I have pitched upon, may be of use to convince us that Mr.
Gale is in a mistake.

I should now have proceeded to the consideration of those Arguments he brings
in defense of his opinion, but I find this will be more pertinent afterward,
when a more fit occasion may offer.

Now to conclude, it is my hearty desire that we may not, while we are
disputing about the Period of our Lives, forget our Mortality. Ere it be long a
Period will be put to our beings; and is it not our greatest concernment to
mind this in time, that when this Life is ended we may be admitted into that
glorious assembly of the Saints above, who Live, but can die no more?

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be Sold by Enoch Wire, at the White Heart in St.
Paul's Church Yard.
Folio.
CLARKS General Martyrology 1 l. 10 s.

Baylii Opera Chronolog. and Hist. Amsterdam. 1663. price 8 s.

Twisse de scientia Media, 1639. 7. s.

Quarto.
Strodes Doctrine of Combination of Qualities, price 1 s. 1677.

The Life of Herod the Great, Wherein his Inhumane Cruelties are briefly but
Accurately related. With an account of his fatal and miserable End.

Lightfoots Horae Hebraicae and Talmudicae, in Corinthios, quarto, Paris. 1677,
price 4 s.

A Letter to a Gentleman, in Answer to a late Book, Entitled, A discourse
concerning the Period of Humane Life.

Apollonius Magnus Gregorianus and Cardanus promotus a Tho. Baker. now in the
Press.

Octavo.
Galei Philosophia Generalis, 1677. price 9 s.

Eustathii Ethica 1677. price 1 s.

A discourse concerning the Period of Humane Life, whether mutable, or
immutable: By the Author of the Duty of Man, etc. the Second Edition, 1677. 1 s.

A Short Compendium of Chirurgy, containing, the Grounds and Principles
thereof, collected out of the best Authors, by J. S. M. D.

Twelves.
A Description of the Islands of Foerooe in the King of Denmarks Dominions,
illustrated with Maps, 1677. price 2 s.

Martials Epigrams for the use of Westminster. School. 1677. price 1 s. 6d.

Galei Idea Theologiae, 1676. price 3 s. 6 d.


