THE LIFE and REIGN OF Our SOVEREIGN LORD KING CHARLES the II, In a
compendious Chronicle relating both to his Majesty's Person and Affairs.

With the chief Transactions of State in the Three Kingdoms from his Birth to
this present.

By a Lover of his Prince and Country.

LONDON Printed by R. DANIEL for FRANCIS EGLESFIELD at the Marigold (...) ^t
Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

To the Happy Preserver of his Sacred Majesty, the LADY JANE LANE.
MADAME,
THis small Volume humbly Offered to your Hand contains part of the Life and
Reign of one of the Greatest Monarchs in the World: The rest, it is hoped, as
it will be the employment of a more elegant Pen, so it will not be accomplished
till it afford a Chronicle of more years Prosperities in these Nations then
this is of Miseries. That I have presumed to dedicate it to your Ladyship, if I
incur the censure of boldness, I am confident every one will commend the
fitness of my Choice: Since nothing could be more proper then to entitle your
Ladyship to the Relation of that Life, which, next under the Divine Providence,
you were chiefly instrumental to preserve. To you, Madame, we owe all that can
be owed from Christians, Subjects, or Men, to any person upon Earth; by whose
dangerous but ever memorable Fidelity we are at length restored to whatever is
dear to us in those three capacities; and which is no small consideration, to
the liberty of publishing the impartial truths (as far as the best Relations
afforded) in this Book. Nor is the present Age only obliged to you, but your
glory shall live upon Record, and your Name, (embalmea with praises) be
preserved in the memory of thankful Posterity. In all which respects, I have
thought it my duty both in testimony of my particular Loyalty and Gratitude to
present this Piece to your Ladyship as the Person that has the greatest right
to it, and withal publicly to acknowledge my self,

MADAME, Your Ladyships most devoted Servant and Eternal Honorer FR. EGLESFIELD.

A true and accurate Relation of the LIFE and REIGN Of our Sovereign Lord and
KING, CHARLES the II.
KING Charles the first of that name, having soon after his coming to the Crown
married Henrietta Maria youngest daughter of Henry the fourth, and sister of
Lewis the thirteenth, Kings of France* was blessed with a Son on the twenty
ninth day of May, one thousand, six hundred and thirty. Upon whose birth, as
the King was going in solemn manner to the Church of S. Paul in London, to
present his grateful devotions to God for his own and the Nations happiness,
in receiving so eminent a Pledge of his favor, there was observed a new Star
appearing in the time of midday; as if the Heavens seemed by an extraordinary
Production to aemulate the new splendour of the Earth The young Prince was
baptized at S. James's on the twenty seventh of July next ensuing by the hand
of Dr. Laud then bishop of London (Dr. Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury being
rendered incapable by an unhappy accident of shooting a man) and received his
Father's name, Charles: his Godfathers were his two Uncles, Lewis the
thirteenth, King of France, and Frederick King of Bohemia and Prince Elector
Palatine of the Rhine; whose absence occasioning them to depute their
substitutes, the late Duke Hamilton represented his Majesty of France, and the
Duke of Richmond the King of Bohemia. His Godmother was Marta de Medicis, Queen
dowager of France, represented by the Duchess of Richmond.

It deserves our notice, that he was born the greatest Prince that ever these
Nations knew; never any before him having been born heir apparent to the Crowns
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland; which was intimated in the Silver
coins made at the solemnity of his Baptism, on the reverse side whereof were
the Arms of those four Kingdoms with this Motto, Hactenus Anglorum nulli.

On the fourth day of November, one thousand, six hundred, thirty one, it
pleased the Divine Providence to enlarge the Royal Family by the birth of a
Daughter, the Lady Mary, who was afterward (viz. 2. May 1641.) married to
William of Nassau Prince of Orange, by whom she has a posthume Son, named
William: a Princess whose perfections qualified her for the bed of the
greatest Potentate in Christendom, had not the interest of Religion been more
considered in her match then amplitude of Territory or Title.

By the blessing of Heaven upon the Royal bed, the King became father to
another Son, the most illustrious and renouned James Duke of York, upon the
thirteenth of October, in the year One thousand, six hundred, thirty three; he
was solemnly baptized on S. James's day next following, and within a few days
after created Duke of York; Title born by his Father, during the life of Prince
Henry his elder brother.

This Prince has, though yet in his youth, so signalized himself by his valor
in the Armies of the Kings of Spain and France, that I think this Age (nor
perhaps any of old) cannot afford his parallel.

His Majesty likewise had another Son brought forth to him by his Royal Consort
upon the twentieth day of July 1640. who was Christened Henry, and created Duke
of Gloucester: And a Daughter at Excester, during the Wars upon the sixteenth
of June 1644. named after her Royal mother Henrietta Maria.

This is the surviving Issue of our late Sovereign of blessed memory: And
having thus briefly given an account of the Parentage and Birth of these
Illustrious Princes, I shall proceed to represent the Life of Him who is
particularly the Argument of this Relation, CHARLES Prince of Wales, now our
Sovereign Lord King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc.

The care of his Infancy was committed to the right honorable the Countess of
Dorset, wife to the last Earl; 'till, after some years, having out-grown
female conduct, the present Marquess of Newcastle was chosen by the King as a
fit person to imbue his Youth with all the accomplishments requisite to
greatness, and the Reverend Dr. Duppa Lord Bishop of Chichester and now of
Salisbury, as one able to form his tender mind to true Religion and Virtue.

Every year of his Childhood afforded new promises and hopes, and even in that
age, which usually has not the advantage of discretion either totally to subdue
or at least to dissemble the motions of passions, he expressed on all occasions
an extraordinary goodness and sweetness of nature, seeming to have been born
with that equal temper of mind, which few men render themselves capable of by
the help of Philosophy and Religion. Nor were his inclinations to Virtue more
remarkable then those he had to excellent and sol^d Arts, which the
composedness of his Genius rendered more acceptable to him then the levity of
the most exquisite divertisements.

In the ninth year of his Age he happened to break his arm, and was very sickly,
falling first into a Fever and shortly after into the Jaundies; but by the
favor of the divine providence, he happily overcame his distempers, and
afterward attained a firmer health.

When he came to sit in the House of Peers (1640*) his first action in public
affairs was the carrying the King's Letter to them, in favor of that noble but
unfortunate Lord, the Earl of Strafford; the King hoping that when all other
respects could not prevail upon them, at least the consideration of the dignity
and goodness of this Royal Messenger might something move them to reflect upon
the hard measure they had determined for him. But through the cruel fate of
this brave man (or rather that of these three Kingdoms) the heat of I know not
what strange zeal had made them so thirsty for his blood, that a day or two's
respite of execution of the severest sentence that ever was given, was more
then could be afforded to the desires of their King though presented by the
hands of their Prince. This repulse he suffered, was certainly the beginning
(if not the cause) of all his ensuing sufferings, and those of the Nation's
too. For soon after happened that fatal misunderstanding between the King and
the Parliament: which occasioning the King's withdrawing from London, he
commanded the Prince to attend him first at Greenwich, then at Hampton Court,
then at Theobalds; the incensed Parliament and City in the mean time regretting
his escape out of their hands, having designed to make advantage of his person
according as the contingency of their affairs should suggest to them. From
thence with the Duke of York he accompanies his Father to New Market, and from
thence into Yorkshire, where they all stood before the gates of Hull and were
denied admission by Sir John Hotham, 'till at length the two Princely brothers
were by his special favor permitted as children to see the Town.

At York, the Northern Nobility and Gentry offering their service to his
Majesty, received thanks for it, but were not made use of (for prevention of
jealousy) 'till a greater danger induced the King to neglect his fafety no
longer, and accordingly he selected a company of gallant and loyal persons for
his Life guard, which were commanded by the young Prince; His Majesty assuring
them they should hazard their lives no further in defense of their Countries
Laws and Liberties then himself; and that they should endanger themselves no
farther for his person then his own dear Child.

In this manner he accompanied the King from York to Newark in Nottinghamshire,
and from thence to Lincoln, and Leicester, and back again into Yorkshire: in
which progress the King endeavored to satisfy the Counties he passed through,
of the uprightness of his intentions for the good of the Nations, and
evidenced to them the desperate courses the Parliament engaging in order to
deprive him of the Royalty left him from his Predecessors, and this under
pretense of Liberty and Religion. At his return into Yorkshire, the King
informs the Gentlemen there of the Parliaments forwardness to a War, desires
them to spare him some Arms, and to complete Prince Charles's Regiment for the
guard of his person under the command of the Earl of Cumberland.

Not long after, the King having gathered a considerable Army, was met between
Kinton and Edgehill in Warwickshire by that of the Parliament under the
conduct of the Earl of Essex; There was the first considerable battle fought of
our civil Wars. The Prince was then in the field, and the Honorable Earl of
Lindsey (who was the King's General, and lost his life in the fight) looking
upon him very attentively a little before the conjunction of the Armies. I know
not by what Prophetical instinct uttered these words, There Is a Child, born to
end that War we now begin. Which how miraculously accomplished, we cannot but
gratefully acknowledge; the civil Wars having continued ever since; the Army
which had subdued the one Party, afterward turning their swords upon those
that first employed them, and the poor Nations being ruled by the sword, and
always in a state of War, and groaning under the miseries inflicted on it by
armed Oppressors.

After this the King retired with the Prince to Oxford, and committed him to
the Right Honorable the Marquess of Hertford, then and still Chancellor of
that University, who provided for him several worthy persons in the quality of
Tutors for his instruction in all such languages and Sciences as were
convenient for the accomplishment of a Prince. During his residence there it
pleased God to visit him with the Meazles, and that not without some danger of
death, which by the Divine mercy and indulgence to these Nations he avoided,
and is respited we hope for many years. Here he was very diligent in
commendable studies intermixed with ingenious and innocent pleasures; and upon
the King's summoning a Parliament thither, which convened the 22 of January
1644. himself with his noble Brother the Duke of York sat with the rest of the
Nobility in the Upper Schools which were designed for the House of Lords (as
the Convocation House was to the Commons) who were no inconsiderable number,
there being present at that Assembly, besides these two young Princes, the Lord
Keeper Littleton, the Lord Treasurer Cottington, the Duke of Richmond, the
Marquess of Hertford, nineteen Earls, three and twenty Barons, and a hundred
and forty Knights and Gentlemen.

The next year the Prince betakes himself into the field, being now about
fifteen years old; his first course was Westward, where by his Majesty's Order
he had attendants appointed him suitable to the grandeur and state of an heir
to three Crowns; He set up a Royal Court, and chose out a Retinue at his own
pleasure (the King though disapproving the action in a Letter to the Queen, yet
admiring his discretion in the Election of them) scarce inferior (as a great
observer affirmed) to that of his deceased Uncle Prince Henry. During this time
the King of Portugal sends over an Ambassador, who amongst several specious
proposals relating to his Majesty's present exigencies, tenders one for a
Marriage between the Daughter of that King and the Prince of Wales; which for
good reasons the King his father put off with a civil answer, importing a
denial of the proposition, though (as the policy of State Affairs often makes
it necessary to do) in words expressing no dislike of it.

After that fatal battle of Naseby. which turned the scale to the disadvantage
of the Royal Interest, several Overtures intervened between Prince Charles,
the Lord Goring, and the Parliamentarian General Fairfax; but the two former
always received the same answer from him, which signified nothing, viz. That
he was but a servant to the Parliament, and could not exceed his Commission,
which empowered him only to fight; therefore in r^ference to a Treaty,
application ought to be m^de to his Masters at Westminster. The Prince
accordingly writes to him again to grant the Lords, Hopton and Culpepper leave
to attend the King, and mediate with him for a Treaty with the Parliament: to
which the General upon grave consultation with his Committee of War returns his
desire, That his Highness would be pleased to disband his Army, and he would
conduct him with honor to the Parliament. This seeming too hard a condition,
the Lord Capel by the princes command replied by Letter,

That his Highness did not believe that his overture of engaging himself in
the mediation of a blessed Peace for this miserable Kingdom would have brought
him an inhibition to quit his duty to his Royal Father by dividing his Interest
from that of his Majesty; whereby he should render himself unworthy and
incapable of the fruit of that peace he labored for. If his proposition might
be consented to, he hoped God would so bless his sincere intentions and desires
as to make him a blessed Instrument to preserve this Kingdom from dissolution.
But if that be rejected, he should give the world no cause to believe, that he
would forfeit that honor which only can preserve him in a capacity of doing
that service, and should with patience attend God's good pleasure, until his
endeavors may be applied with preservation of his Innocence. This is all I
have in command from his Highness.

Your Servant, A. CAPEL.


Such were the honorable, loyal, and good intentions of this noble Prince, and
such was the insolence of the Victors, and the fate of this Nation, that no
mediation could be acceptable that might prevent its approaching total ruin:
so that this generous Letter received no other answer but silence.

Shortly after the Prince repairs to Oxford, and there reconciles his Cousins
the Princes, Rupert and Maurice, to his Father their Uncle. From thence also he
writes several Letters to the Speaker of the House of Peers, containing
Propositions for reconciliation and peace; which notwithstanding took no
effect. Therefore he departs into the West, with intent to raise the forces of
his Dukedom of Cornwall and the County of Devon for the relief of Exceter,
which was at that time besieged by Sir Thomas Fairfax. In order to which he
commits his own Army to the conduct of the Lord Hopton, who soon after resolved
to come upon the back of Fairfax, and accordingly advanced to Torrington with
5000. Horse, and 4000 Foot. Fairfax hearing this leave his siege, and marches
toward Torrington. The Battle began near the Town, which was after a sharp
encounter taken, and the Lord Hopton himself shot in the thigh, but escaped
away to Stratton. His Highness in the mean time was at Lanceston, but
understanding the Approach of Fairfax's Army, he quitteth it, leaving Colonel
Basset behind him with 500. Foot and Horse, who skirmished with the
Parliamentarians and being soon worsted, got off by the favor of the darkness
of the Night. The Prince in the mean time goes to Pendennis, where finding the
pursuit so hot, he imbarqued himself for the Isle of Scilly on the first of
March 1646. accompanied by the Lords Goring and Culpeper, and Sir Edward Hide.
Soon after his departure, the Lord Hopton finding Fairfax's successes daily to
increase, and himself unable to do any service to check them with those broken
Forces he had left, desires a cessation; but the General summons him to lay
down Arms; upon which ensued a Treaty at Tresilian Bridge, Sir Thomas Fairfax
quartering at Truro, and the Lord Hopton further west. ward; between whom it
was agreed, upon the thirteenth of March, That the Lord Hopton should disband
his Army in the west, and have fifty Horse of his own and fifty of General
Fairfax's, for his Convoy to Oxford: That all strangers should have passes to
go beyond Seas, and to carry with them what was their own without Horses and
Arms. That all English Officers should go home to their respective
habitations, or if they plea's, beyond Sea: each Colonel to have his horse, and
two men to wait on him; each Captain one man and horse; the Troopers 20 s. a
piece, and to go whither they pleased

Such was the Fate of the Royal Cause, under the conduct of this Heroical
Prince, who wanted fortune rather then virtue to be happy.

Hitherto we have with all succinctnesse and verity represented the adventures
and actions of his Highness from his infancy here in England. He was now about
sixteen years old, the last six of which he had been a spectatour of his
Father's calamities, and the ruin of his native Country, having been a
sufferer in both, as soon as he was become capable to distinguish between good
and evil. Most part of his tender age was spent in Armies, amongst the tumults
and noise of an unfortunate War; and now he finds himself enforced to quit the
Territory of England, leaving the King his Father with the Duke of York, and
the two Palatine Princes, Rupert and Maurice, closely besieged in Oxford by the
Parliaments Forces, and most of the other Garrisons of the King's ready to
surrender to the power of their victorious Armies. The sense of all which
certainly had been insupportable by a spirit less courageous and firm against
such heavy adversities then that of this young Hero. We must now follow him
into the Island of Scilly, where he had not been long, but a solemn message is
sent from the Parliament, to invite him to come to them, and to reside in such
places as they thought convenient, with such Attendants and Counselors as
should be by them appointed. It being no part of my design to comment upon any
passages of this History, but only to represent things nakedly as they were
done, I shall forbear to make any conjectures what the intentions of the
Parliament were in this invitation, leaving the Readers to their own judgment.
Indeed the Prince had inducements enough to move him to accept of their offer,
his Father's condition in a manner desperate, his own little better, having no
hopes left but those slender ones of foreign succor; it might have seemed the
best and safest course to a young Prince to secure his succession at least to
the Government to have gone to them upon honorable terms; according to the
example of Edward the 3. in the lifetime of his father Edward the 2. But
loyalty prevailed above all other considerations, and therefore upon 24. of
April he retur^s this prudent Answer; That it became him not to do any thing
in a matter of that concernment, without his Royal Father's privity, advice,
and free consent; and therefore before he could satisfy the Honorable House,
he desired that a pass might be granted for the Lord Capel to go to the King
at Oxford, to take his advice, and hearken to his Royal pleasure, and make
some overtures to him in order to a peace. Moreover he desired that the
Reverend Archbishop of Armagh, a person of transcendent learning, great
moderation, and of an unspotted and inoffensive life, might have liberty to
come to him. These proposals, though extreme fair and reasonable, were offered
to deaf ears, and took no effect,

In the mean time Fairfax having taken in the City of Exceter, and the town of
Barnstable upon Articles, marches against Oxford, which put the King upon
thoughts of providing for his own safety; and therefore on the 13. of April, he
went out of Oxford in a disguise with Parson Hudson, waiting upon Mr. John
Ashburnham, and upon the 6. os May got to the Scots Army before Newark. Soon
after which Sir Thomas Glenham surrendered the City of Oxford to General Fairfax
upon the 24. of June 1646. The Duke of York was carried from thence to Saint
James's, where he met with his Sister the Princess Henrietta Maria, who was
sent thither from the surrender of Exceter, but was shortly after conveyed from
Oatlands over to her Mother in France, by her Governesse the Lady Dalkeith.

From the Island of Scilly, the Prince removed to that of Guernsey, where he
had not long been, but an Ordinance is put out against him in the nature of a
Ban, prohibiting all persons to repair to him, or correspond with him by letter
or otherwise, upon pain of death without mercy. Whereupon his abode here being
so uncomfortable, he betakes himself for France, to visit his Mother and that
Court; there he was received with great demonstration of joy by all parties,
excepting the dissembling Cardinal Mazarine who though he pretended much
respect, yet was he inwardly glad to see him in distress and exile. From hence
the Queen being willing to comply with the active desires of her Son (which
inclined him to break through these clouds of misery and retirement, which
seemed wholly to obscure him) writes to the King by Major Bosvil, requesting
him to permit the Prince to go into the field with his Uncle, the Duke of
Orleans, that summer in the head of a French Army, that was then designed for
an expedition into Flanders against the Spaniard. To which his Majesty refused
to condescend, partly for that he judged it an employment below a Prince of
Great Britain to serve any other King but his own, whose pay and orders were
once received by a Roman Caesar, and partly because he knew not how soon his
service might be necessary for his own Couhtrey: and therefore he commands him
to wave that design, and await his further instructions.

In the mean time it pleased the King of kings to lay his hand upon him, and
visit him with an intermitting Fever, which continued upon him for the space of
some weeks; 'till by the divine blessing upon the Physitian's care, he was
recovered to perfect health. Soon after which he received a Commission from his
Royal Father to be Generalissimo of all the Loyal forces that survived of the
late unsuccessefull battles and garrisons. While he is advising about this
affair, the Kingdom of Scotland out of tenderness of the Prince's safety,
honor and conscience, move the King, That his Son, the present hope and future
happiness of these Nations, might not be exposed in his youth to the dangers
which encompassed him in the French Court, particularly in reference to his
Religion, the perversion of which might have fatal consequences in these three
Kingdoms. Whereupon his Majesty from Newcastle (whether the Scots, fearing
least General Fairfax should fall upon them and compel them to deliver him up,
retired with him) writes to him, That he should wait upon his Mother, and obey
her dutifully in all things, Religion only excepted, and that he should not
stir any whether without his directions. The Scots also (by their Committee of
Estates) write themselves to the Prince to invite him thither,

Professing that none of the late calamities (except those that had befallen
his Royal Father) afflicted them more then his Highnesse's absence: And seeing
their Forces had entered England to do their duty to Religion, his Majesty and
his Highness they humbly desire he would please to honor and countenance
their pious and loyal endeavors with his gracious presence, for whose honor,
safety and freedom they engage the public Faith of that Kingdom.

Signed, Crawford, Lindsey.


In Answer to this, he desires the Earl of Louderdail to return his
acknowledgements to the States of Scotland, and assure them he would do
nothing misbecoming a good Prince, or unsuitable to their civility.

But the Prince in pursuance of his instructions, negotiating in behalf of his
Father's affairs in the French Court, by his Mother's assistance, (whom her
nearness of blood, great deserts and low condition made powerful there)
prevails with the French to advance ten thousand pounds for the Marquess of
Ormond, toward the furtherance of his Majesty's affairs in Ireland, as an
earnest of greater matters. And some remainders of his Cornish Forces getting
to a head, others upon order marching to him out of Ireland, he goes to meet
them at the Island of Iersey, with such Forces as he had gotten together beyond
sea, especially in France by his Mother's means, and in Holland by the
mediation of his young Brother in Law, William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, who
about this time succeeded his Father Henry in the dignity of General and
Admiral of the United Provinces. He possessed himself likewise of some Vessels
in the Island, adding others to them which he hired in France.

While his Highness lay here, a Letter is sent to him from the Parliament by
the hands of Colonel Russel their Governor of Guernsey, which lies six or
seven Leagues distant from Iersey. The effect of it was, to desire him for his
Father's, his own and the three Kingdoms sake, to return to them, where he
should find all due respects Subjects could afford, or his H ghnesse expect.
The Design was to get the person of the Prince into their hands, as the Scots
had that of the King; but it took no effect; the Prince proceeding to manage
his affairs by sea and land to such advantage as might ^nable his Royal Father
to stand in the approaching Treaty on such terms as might consist with his
Conscience and his Honor.

On July the 27. following, sixteen General Propositions with sundry
Qualifications were presented to the King at Newcastle, by the Earls of
Pembroke, Suffolk, etc. who were limited to ten days; which the King judging
unreasonable refused to consent to, and defir'd to come to London and treat
personally. After which the Scots general Assembly send a Remonstrance to his
Majesty, desiring him to settle matters in England according to the COVENANT,
and to sign the Parliaments Propositions. And Chancellor Lowdon told him
plainly there was no other means for him to close with his Two Houses. And
moreover if he lost England, he should not be admitted to reign in Scotland.
But the King still persisting in his denial, the Scots who had hitherto some
what sharply disputed about the disposal of his Person, are content upon the
receipt of a good sum of Money, to depart home and leave the King in the power
of the Parliament; who voted him to Holmby House, and sent Commissioners to
receive and convey him thither, where he arrived on the 17. of February 1646/7.

The War was now totally finished, and dissentions brake out between the
Parliament and their Army; an accommodement of which is undertaken by
Commissioners chosen on both sides. But the Army judging it would be
advantageous for their concernments to get the King into their hands, sent
Cornet Joyce to Holmby with 500. Horse upon the fourth of June, who took the
King from thence by night, without the privity and consent of the Parliament,
or the General himself (as he professed in a Letter to them.) And now the
damnable Mystery of Iniquity begins to work; they march, up to S. Albans
against the Parliaments order, refuse to deliver the King's person to their
Commissioners, and among other insolences impeach eleven members of the House
of Commons. The Speaker (though he had the day before protested against such a
dishonorable Act in the Abbey Church at Westminster) flies to the Army with
several Members. The City stick to the remaining part of the Parliament, for
the restoring of the King, and declare against the Army. Fairfax marches up to
London which prepared to oppose him, enters the City with 20000. Horse and Foot
upon the 6. of August, re-establishes the Members, receives their thanks, puts
Tichbourn into the Tower of London as Lieutenant, takes up his Headquarters at
Kingston, and places the King Hampton Court. Within a few days after several
members of the House are accused of Treason, as Sir John Maynard, Denzil
Hollis, Sir William Waller, Major General Massey, etc. Sir John Gayer; and four
Aldermen, Culham, Bunce, Langham and Adams are committed to the Tower, and the
Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, Middlesex with the Lords Berkley, Maynard, Hunsdon
and Willoughby of Parham to the Black Rod. All the Works of the City are voted
to be cast down, upon pretense of bringing in the King; but indeed (according
to the design of the Army, sutably to whose pleasure they acted) to disable it
from resistance. Propositions are sent to the King, the same in effect with the
former of Newcastle. Agitators are set up by the Soldiers amongst themselves
to carry on their Interests. The Scots Commissioners send a Letter to the
Speaker of the House of Commons for a personal Treaty between his Majesty and
the Commissioners of both Nations. But whilst new Propositions are preparing,
the King being informed of designs against his Life, escapes from
Hampton Court, with intent to go to the Isle of Iersey, where the Prince still
lay. At his coming to the sea-shoar, he found himself disappointed of a ship,
and therefore goes with Col. Leg to Tedsworth to the Countess Dowager of
Southampton's house, and sends Sir John Berkley and Mr. Ashburnham (which three
accompanied him in his escape) to the Isle of Wight to L.G. Hammond, of whom he
had with no great reason entertained some hopes. Hammond goes with them and
fetches the King to Carisbrook Castle. Hence he sends a Letter to the
Parliament and the Scots Commissioners granting all they could desire.
Whereupon new propositions are sent to him, which the Scots protest against as
too derogatory to his Honor; and therefore they are refused. Hereupon the
incensed Commons vote no further Addresses to him; which presently endears them
to the Army again.

Affairs standing in this ill posture, the Prince with the Duke of York (who
had escaped in woman's apparel from S. James's and landed at Dort in Holland by
the help of Col. Bampfield sent over purposely on that design by the Queen)
Prince Rupert, the Lords Hopton, Wilmot, Willoughby, Brainford, Culpepper,
Ruthen, Sir Henry Palmer, etc. in his own ships and those that had revolted, in
all twenty sail, with 2000. men, moved to and fro in the Downs and upon the
southern Coast, to lay hold of any opportunity that might present it self for
the service of his Father, sending forth several Commissions to that purpose,
to persons of honor and trust who might promote his affairs by land; and to
the Marq of Ormond, the Lord Inchequin, and Montgomery in Ireland, to the
Committee of States in Scotland and their Officers; to the Lord Goring in Kent,
and the Lord Capel in Essex, to Sir Thomas Glenham and Sir Marmaduke Langdale
in the North, to Col. Poyer, Laughorn and Powel in Wales, as also to Sir Edw.
Hales, Sir Charles Lucas, the Duke of Buckingham, the Earls of Holland and
Peterborough. Letters of correspondency pass mutually between him and the
Scots, his Father and the City; whereof some are intercepted, in which the
City, the Lord and some Commons are intimated ready to contribute all
assistance possible.

For the better satisfaction of the World his Highness was pleased to publish
a most gracious Declaration which consisted of the ensuing Particulars: 1. For
the establishment of Religion according to his Majesty's agreement of the 26.
of December last, viz. That Presbytery should be continued for Three years,
and a free debate to be had, between the Divines assembled at Westminster, and
twenty whom his Majesty should appoint, about the settlement of Church
Government for the future. 3. For the performance of the said Agreement, and
pursuance of the concessions on the King's part: (which were, That the
Parliament should dispose of the Militia, and have the choice of his privy
Counselors during his Reign, etc. That the Arrears of the Army be paid, etc.
3. For restoring the King to a personal Treaty. 4. For the just Privileges of
Parliament. 5. for an Act of Oblivion. 6. For the Liberty of the Subject, and
the abolishing Excise, Taxes and Free Quarter, etc. 7. For disbanding of all
Armies and settling of Peace. 8. For the defense of the Narrow Seas, securing of
Trade, support of the Navy and Seamen, etc. This excellent Declaration was
seconded with a Letter from his Highness to the House of Peers, desiring, 1.
That a Personal Treaty be had in such place and manner as may consist with the
King's Honor, Safety and Freedom, that the Treaty be not blemished with any
appearance of a restraint. 2. That Scotland be included. 3. That in the mean
time there be a cessation of Arms, and an orderly moderate subsistence agreed
on for Forces on Foot on both sides by land and sea, to the Soldiers content
and the Subjcts ease.

Hereupon within a short time several attempts were made for the King's
service. April the 9. 1643. the London Apprentices made an insurrection, but
were suppressed by Fairfax the next day. Soon after Colonel Poyer, and Major
General Laughorn, and Powel, revolted, and reduced South Wales to his Majesty's
service. Sir John Owen also got together a party: but they were all routed and
enforced to surrender the places they had seized, and themselves prisoners. In
behalf of the two former, the Prince, under whose Commission they acted,
desired General Fairfax that they might have the terms and usage of soldiers
of war, as those had whom the fortune of war had made prisoners to his
Highness. But the General answered, It was not in his power to act further;
the Parliament ordering their trial, he dared not interpose against their
justice. So that they were afterward tried as Traytor's; but this favor was
extended toward them that they should cast lots for their lives: it happened to
be Poyer's fate to suffer, and he was shot to death, which he took with much
resolution.

The next party we meet with in Arms for the King's deliverance out of a
barbarous captivity, and admission to a personal Treaty, and the settlement of
the Nation in peace, were the inhabitants of Kent, who having seen the
Petitions presented to that purpose to the Parliament by the Counties of Essex,
Surrey, and the City of London slighted, and some of the Petitioners murdered,
resolved not to petition but with their swords in their hands. So they assemble
together in a considerable body upon Black Heath near Greenwich, about the
latter end of May 1648. under Sir Edward Hales, commissioned from his
Highness, Sir George Lisle, Sir Gamaliel Dudley, Sir William Compton, etc. I
shall crave leave to be a little more particular in relating the whole
management of this and some of the following enterprises, then I have
adventured to be hitherto, because it was carried on by authority derived
immediately from the Prince, and was of it self one of the most considerable.
General Fairfax himself with six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, marches
forth against the Kentish men, who were near ten thousand, but unadvisedly
parted their Forces, and sent away a Brigade to besiege Dover Castle. The first
intercourse between them was the offer of a Parley, to which the General sent
this answer.

Sirs,
I Received a Message from you for a Pass for some G ntlemen to come and treat
according to an Order of Parliament, but know no such Order of theirs, no
Authority of yours to appoint Commissioners for such a purpose: And finding you
and them in Arms against the Parliament, I cannot admit of a Treaty. But if ye
shall forthwiih lay down your Arms and return home, I doubt not of the
Parliaments mercy to such as have been deluded into this Rebellion, and their
exemplary justice upon the chief Actors therein.

Black heath, May 30. 1648 T. FAIRFAX.


To this harsh answer, by directions from the Prince they handsomely replied,

That they had taken Arms in obedience, 1. To an universal and perpetual
dictate of nature, even self-preservation, not to invade others right, but to
secure their own. 2. To an undoubted power over us, ordained of God, we do now
obey (say they) and neither tumult nor rebel. 3. To Providence, which has
given us that opportunity we dare not neglect; and we cannot lay them down
without forfeiture of our Reason and our Honor. As to the uncertain mercy you
hold forth for the deluded many, who (you think, know not why they are come
together) and the certain justice you threaten their Leaders with; Assure your
self there is but one soul in this great body, which is unanimously resolved to
stand or fall as one man, being not tempted with any hope, save that of
returning to our ancient Rights, Privileges, Governments and Settlements, and
incapable of any Fear, save only of relapsing again to our former slavery. The
fair manage of this business sufficiently manifests our inclination to peace.
Be pleased rather to make this County your Friend then your End, And we are

Your Servants PHIL. MASILDS. EDW. HALES.



The General being inflexible and they as resolute, they meet at a barricado'd
bridge between Craiford Heath, and Gravesend, and dispute the passage very
stoutly, which at length is gained by the Parliamentarians, and another at
Northfield: whereupon the Kentish retire to Maidstone. Fairfax reenforcing his
Army to the number of 10000. storms the Town on the 2. of June, but was twice
repulsed with loss; The third assault got him entrance, when the fight grew
more hot upon the Assailants then before, as well by the forces in the street,
as by continual shot from the houses. Nor was the victory accomplished till
after six hours fight, and much loss on both sides. Presently after this, the
City of Rochester was also yielded to the General's mercy. The Lord Goring with
the remainder of this Defeat, marches up in a body toward London, and
rendezvoused upon Black Heath, expecting some assistance from the City, which
hope failing, he crossed over Greenwich Ferry with five hundred men into Essex,
where he was met by Sir Charles Lucat, and the Lord Capel with two thousand
horse and foot, and they march together to the Town of Colchester. But soon
after General Fairfax leaving Colonel Rich and Hewson, who had already raised
the siege of Dover, to take in the other places of Kent which stood out,
crosses over into Essex after the Eenemy, and beleagures Colchester with a
potent Army.

The Prince with his Fleet, consisting, as I said, of twenty good men of War,
and two thousand soldiers (some of which were lately revolted with the
Parliaments Vice Admiral Batten, who was thereupon Knighted) put in at Yarmouth
Road, and would have landed there; bu^ finding no great alacrity in most part
of the people to receive him, and hearing of Colonel Scroop's coming against
him with a strong party of Horse and Foot, he sailed from thence to the Downs
in Kent, seizing what Merchants ships and goods he could meet withal. Whilst
he was here, he sent two Letters to the City of London, one to the
Common Council, expressing his Highness good affection to peace and to the
whole City, and his endeavors to vindicate his Father's Liberty and just
Prerogative and Rights; To restore the people their Laws, Liberties and
Properties; To free them from that bondage under which they were now held like
a conquered Nation; To ease them of Excise and Taxes; To settle Religion
according to his Father's Agreement made with the Scots, and to reduce all
things into their ancient and proper Channel. This Letter was accompanied with
his Declaration to the same purpose; the contents of which we mentioned above.
The other was to the Merchant Adventurers, informing them that he had made stay
of three of their ships, but without intent to make prize of any of them;
desiring to borrow 20000. l. of them to be repaid out of the Customs: and
requires their speedy Answer; The Copies of these two Letters were brought to
the House of Parliament by the Sheriffs of London and some of the Common
Council. Upon consideration of them, Colonel Harvey (first prolixly aggravating
many faul s in the King's Government, according to the scandalous Remonstrance
not long before published against him) said, The Prince was his Fath rs own
son, as like him as could be; That he had invited the Scots to come in, and had
declared for them, and had been formerly against the Parliament; That he was
but a Subject; And moved the House to declare him a Rebel and a Traitor. Sir
Peter Wentworth, Mr. Knightly, and Mr. Blakestone seconded him with much
earnestness; and so did Edward Ash, who farther moved, That the Common Council
and Merchants should give no Answer to his Letters, alleging, There was no
danger the Prince should make prize of their ships, for that he had engaged to
the States of the Low Countries to do no act prejudicial to Trade. At last the
debate was put off till the next day, when the Speaker putting the House in
mind of it again, it was earnestly called upon by the younger Sir John Evelin,
Scot, Weaver, Hollond, Boys, and almost all the godly gang. So the debate was
resumed, and Weaver went very high to try the Temper of the House. But the
debate interminis, That the Prince should be declared a R^bel and a Traitor,
was soon laid by (though violently pressed) chiefly for these reasons. 1. They
had not the Originals of the Princes Letters and Declaration (which the Common
Council still kept) but only Copies, not so much as attested upon Oath by any
authentic Clerk; therefore no legal Proceedings could be upon them. 2. It
world argue no peaceable inclination in them the same day when they sent
Messengers to invite the King his Father to a Treaty of Peace. 3. It could not
consist with the National Covenant. 4. It is High Treason by the Stat. 25. Edw.
3. to endeavor the destruction of the Prince, the King's eldest Son: but to
declare him a Rebel and a Traitor was to endeavor to destroy him, and
therefore High Treason, etc. But what they could not do expressly, they did
implicitly by Voting all that should adhere to, aid or assist the Prince,
Rebels and Traitors. Hereby they put a tie upon the City, not to redeem their
ships by lending 20000. l. to the Prince; and yet had a Pyrate taken them, it
had been lawful to redeem them. About this time also an Order passed the House
of Commons for the Earl of Warwick to fight the Prince at sea. It was sent up
to the Lords, and passed that House too; whereby it became an Ordinance: yet
some of the Lords entered a Protestation against it, as the Earls of Lincoln,
Suffolk, Lord North.

The Prince continued still in the Downs with his Fleet in a good condition,
waiting for that supply of Land forces his Brother the Prince of Orange was
very industriously raising for his service in Holland, and in the interim was
willing to do something for the relief of Deal Castle, which was besieged by a
party of Fairfax's Army left in Kent for that purpose. In order to which he
landed 500. men, who at first charged handsomely, but being overpowr'd by
number were beaten, several slain and taken, and the rest got aboard again.
Failing of this attempt, he was inclinable to hazard himself for the relief of
Colchester, which bravely held out against Fairfax's whole power; but from this
he was disswadeded, as a business of too apparent danger. Wherefore he
continued expecting the event of Hamilton's expedition in the North, who was
sent into England by the Parliament of Scotland with an Army of 21000. upon the
account of the Covenant, viz. for a restitution of his Majesty with safety and
honor, and settlement of Presbytery. On the 15. day of July, the House of
Commons (without the Lords) Vote the Scots that were come into England enemies,
and that they might covertly include the Prince, the Question was put, That all
such English as had invited the Scots under Duke Hamilton to come in hostile
manner into England should be declared Traitors? and carried in the affirmative.

He that shall consider the House of Commons was still in a manner entire, and
consisted of the very same men that so often and by so many Votes,
Remonstrances, Declarations, Protestations, Vows and Oaths pretended the
defense of the King's person and just authority, settlement of these Nations in
purity of Religion and preservation of the just Rights and Liberties of the
Subject (the very same things now petitioned for by several Counties, and
declared for by the parties up in Kent and Essex, and Duke Hamilton in the
North) cannot but wonder they should vote them Traitors and endeavor their
destruction (with that of the Nations consequently) who took up arms in the
greatest sincerity possible for those honorable purposes themselves alleged
to countenance their own against the King. But the truth is the two Houses sat
under a force ever since August 6. 1647. when Fairfax marched up with his Army
in hostile manner against the City. For from that time the lesser party of the
House (who together with some Officers of the Army had laid the blackest design
that ever was hatched by the instinct of the Devil) siding with the Army
over-awed all the Proceedings of Parliament, and at the same time held the King
and the major part of the House in suspense with unfaithful Treaties, and sent
their forces against such as desired the same things they would be believed
themselves intended. The House of Lords too, being strangely supine, in not
resenting the frequent sleighting and contempt of their Authority, and not
attempting any thing at all for the deliverance of their Sovereign, the
Vindication of their own Honor, that of the Nation with it is rights,
privileges and freedoms, against the Usurpation of an Army and corrupt
faction in that of the Commons. An insolence which I am persuaded, none of
their great Ancestors we find in Histories under the same Titles, but would
have ventured both lives and fortunes to the utmost, rather then have endured;
and certainly their posterity will wonder what they were doing all this while.
The Earl of Holland indeed, though no Soldier, yet dared well, and out of a
sense of Honor thought himself obliged to try his fortune in the Field, if
possible he might be an Instrument to avert the Destruction he saw threatened
his Sovereign, and the miseries of tyranny impendent over this poor Nation by
an armed power. By commission from the Prince he assembles together about 500.
Horse and Foot about Kingston heath, July 2. having with him the Duke of
Buckingham, and his Brother, the L. Francis Villers, and the Earl of
Peterborough. But he was soon routed by a stronger Party; himself taken, and
afterward put to death for his noble but unfortunate Attempt. Such were the
sins of this Nation, and thus the good Providence of God was pleased to bring
about the punishment of them, by frustrating all means and courses taken to
deliver it from the miseries of that threatened it. For soon after, viz. August
17. the great Army under Hamilton is defeated by Cromwell and Lambert at
Preston in Lancashire, and the Duke himself taken, and afterward beheaded by
the English Parliament for this action. This Defeat was followed by the
surrender of Colchester which had endured a sharp starving Siege of three
months upon hopes of relief from this Scottish Army. Thus all the Princes
Enterprises failing, and his Fleet being in great need of provision, he is
forced to give over further Action, and retires to the Hague in Holland to his
Sister the Princess of Orange in expectation and attendance upon Providence.
Shortly after, many Counties of England soliciting the Parliament for a Treaty
with the King, the honester and greater part take heart again, recall the Votes
of Non-Addresses, Vote a Treaty, send Commissioners with Propositions to the
King: All which his Majesty fully consented to, and there was no difference
between him and the Houses but concerni^g Presbytery, which he granted should
be established for three years. All men now hoped for a happy settlement. But,
alas! now begin the greatest of our woes. The Army who could not think their
greatness and power would be durable if the King lived, draw nearer to London,
petition for their Arrears, and for Justice upon the King as the Capital cause
of the Evils of the Civil War; to which effect also they publish a
Remonstrance, requiring withal that a peremptory Day be set for summoning the
Prince of Wales, and Duke of York; and if they refuse, to declare them
incapable of Government or succession, and to stand exiled as Traitors; and if
they render themselves, yet they to be proceeded against for satisfaction: with
other damands of the like strain. To bring their accursed design to pass,
Fairfax commands Colonel Hammond to deliver up his charge to Colonel Ewer, by
whom the King is conveyed out of the Isle of VVight to Hurst Castle, November.
30. contrary to the intentions and consent of the Parliament as they declared.
And thus the Treaty was violenty broken off. Yet the Lords Vote the King's
concessions a sufficient ground for Peace, and so do the major part of the
Commons. But the Army march up to London, discharge the Trained Bands from
guarding the Parliament, and order Pride's and Rich's Regiments to supply their
places, by whom above forty Members are seized on and confined, Major General
Brown, ninety odd Members, excluded the House. Then the Army form a new Model
of Government which they style The Agreement of the people, destructive to all
the Fundamental Laws of the Land, which was presented to the new molded House
by Sir Hardres Waller and 16. Officers. The House hereupon annull the Votes
against Non-addresses, and exclude all Members that will not join with them in
this proceeding. They then proceed to order the Trial of the King, and remove
him, though the Lords refused to concur, and declare no act of the Commons
binding without their consent. However force overcomes all Right and Reason. A
pretended High Court of Justice is erected, of which John Bradshaw (newly
created Sergeant at Law) is made President. The King is brought before them
upon Saturday the 20 of January 1648. on Monday the 22. on Tuesday the 23. and
on Saturday the 27. of the same month; where persisting with magnanimity and
reason to deny the power of the Court, and being most impudently and insolently
treated by Bradshaw, he is condemned to be beheaded for Tyranny, Treason, and
Murder. According to which sentence (having taken leave of his Children here is
England, and sent his blessing to his son in Holland, he was put to death
before White-hal Gate upon Tuesday the 30. of January. the Dutch and French
Ambassadors in behalf of his Majesty made intercession for his life; The
Scottish Parliament published a Remonstrance against the Parliaments
Proceedings; The Ministry of London declared their disallowance before God and
Men; The House of Peers offered themselves as pledges for his Sacred Majesty;
but all prevailed nothing. The barbarous Iuncto are inexorable, being made so
desperate by their own guilt that they thought nothing could secure their
former crimes but this impious, detestable and unparalled murder of their
Sovereign.

During his Majesty's trial, which was carried on with all expedition and
speed, the Prince who could not be satisfied of that strange turn from a Treaty
to a Trial, writ the following Letter to his Father by the Lord Seymour.

SIR,
HAving no means to come to the knowledge of your Majesty's affairs, but such
as I receive from the Prints, or (which is as uncertain) reports; I have sent
this bearer Seymour to wait upon your Majesty, and to bring me an account of
it; and that I may withal assure your Majesty I do not only pray for your
Majesty according to my duty, but shall always be ready to do all which shall
be in my power to deserve the blessing which I now humbly beg of your Majesty
upon,

Sir, Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient Son and Servant CHARLES.
Hague, Ian. 23. 1648.

But, alas! Sad were the tidings the Lord Seymour returned with into Holland,
the most inhumane, illegal and barbarous murder of the King of Great Britain
by the hands of his English Subjects: An Act which struck all Europe with
horror and amazement, and which certainly our Posterity will eternally detest.
To represent the sorrow and affliction of our Illustrious Prince, with his
Royal Brother the Duke of York, and his Sister of Orange, without doubt
surpasses all the power of words. No Prince ever lost a Father whom he was to
succeed in Royalty with greater regret; and indeed all circumstances
considered, I conceive no mortal man had ever greater occasion of grief.
Certainly had not the extraordinary grace of God supported him he could never
have borne up against it. I know not how better to resent his passionate
resentment, then by imitating the old Grecian Painter, who being to pourtray
Agamemnon present at the sacrifice of his Daughter, represented all his
followers weeping and lamenting, but drew a veil over the Father's face; as
hiding the transcendent passion his Pencil was unable to express.

A few days before the King's death, the Commons voted the style in Writs and
all Judicial proceedings to be altered from Carolus Dei gratia, etc. the Great
Seal with the Royal Scutcheon of England to be broken, and a new one made with
the Arms of England, and the Harp of Ireland with these words, The Great Seal
of England, engraven on one side, and on the Reverse the picture of the House
of Commons sitting, with these words, In the first year of Freedom by God's
blessing restored 1648. On the evening of that black day on which his Majesty
suffered, a Proclamation was set forth by the Iuncto prohibiting all persons
upon pain of High Treason to presume to declare or publicly to promote Charles
Stuart styled Prince of Wales, eldest son of the late King, or any of the rest
of his Children, to be King of England. In pursuance of which determination
having taken their King out of the way, they proceed against Kingship, and
constitute a select Number of themselves joined with the General and chief
Officers of the Army in the Supreme authority. The House of Peers is voted
dangerous and unnecessary, and an Act passed and proclaimed in the City of
London for the abolishing of Kingly Government and settling these Nations in
way of a Free State. It was also published, 1. That it should be Treason to
speak against this Form of Government. 2. That it should be Treason for any to
endeavor the exercise of Kingships in these Nations in his own Person, or
promote it in another; especially Charles the eldest, James the second, and
Henry the third, Sons of the late King. After which they proceed as far as they
could to abolish the very memory of his late Majesty; his Arms are ordered to
be defaced in all places throughout the Nations, and his Statues broken, all
the regalia sold and imbezil'd, the Crown Revenue to sale, and all the goods of
the Royal Family made prize on by those that had murdered and expelled the
Owners.

Nevertheless, there wanted not some in this sad consternation, who showed
themselves so resolute in asserting the Title of Prince Charles to the Crown of
these Nations, as to print and disperse this following Proclamation in several
places of the City of London.

WE, the Noblemen, Judges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Merchants,
Citizens, Yeo-men, Seamen, and other Free men of England, do according to our
Allegiance and Covenant by these present, Heartily, Joyfully and Unanimously
acknowledge and Proclaim the illustrious CHARLES, Prince of Wales, next Heir to
his Father King Charles (whose late wicked murder, and all Consenters
thereunto, We from our hearts abominate) to be by Hereditary Birthright and
lawful Succession rightful and undoubted King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland: And we will constantly and sincerely in our several places and
callings defend and maintain his Royal Person, Crown and Dignity with our
estates and lives against all Opposers, whom hereby we declare to be Enemies to
his Majesty and Kingdoms. In Testimony whereof we have caused these to be
Published throughout all Counties and Corporations of this Realm; The first day
of February in the first year of his Majesty's Reign.

But the Royal Party was so totally suppressed throughout this Nation, that they
wanted power to make good what their consciences assured them was just and
right. This endeavor testified their Loyalty, and withal their weakness. For
though the hearts of most of the Nation were as willing to promote the Son's
succession as to withstand the Father's destruction; yet were they as unable to
advance the one as they had been to prevent the other. Indeed Ireland was in a
manner wholly for his Majesty, in many places whereof he was by joint consent
both of Protestants and Papists proclaimed King. The Lord Marquess of Ormond,
the Lord Inchequin, and other great persons had considerable Forces in the
field for his interest, and all the Garrisons of that Island held out for him,
excepting the two most important, the Cities of Dublin and Londonderry, which
were kept from returning to their Allegiance, the former by Lieutenant General
Jones then Governor, and the latter by Sir Charles Coot, who maintained their
cause and authority who had barbarously murdered his Royal Father in England.
Besides the Islands of Iersey, Guernsey, Scilly and Man remained faithful to
him, though they were of no other advantage then to serve as places of retreat
for the small Fleet that was left, after the greatest part of it had again
revolted to the Parliaments Navy. The Parliament of Scotland, as I said, had
protested against the proceedings of the English against their common King: But
at this time that Nation was divided into four grand Factions or Parties. 1.
The first consisted of such as had confederated with the English Parliament
during the Wars, till they saw their accursed design of destroying the King,
and subverting the Government; these were the prevailing party who sent Duke
Hamilton with that numerous but unfortunate Army into England 1648. They were
willing though upon certain conditions to own and declare Prince Charles for
their King; only in this they sided with the English Independent Iuncto, That
they endeavored to the utmost to depresse and discountenance the Malignants
(as they called those who had adhered to his late Majesty) who make up the
second party. The third consisted of such as were so strictly devoted to the
Kirk and Convenant, that they only projected the advancement of them, and cared
not for any other interest either of King or Free State, but strenuously
opposed both; of which Faction Colonel S^^a^ghern and Colonel Kerre were two
great Sticklers. The fourth, and last, and worst were such as by unparalled
treachery to their Prince, their Native Country, and (as it appeared
afterward) to themselves too, held secret correspondence with the Sectarian
power and Army of England. This Division I have made will give much light to
the understanding of the reasons of the Scottish actions and their
consequences, when we come to relate them. At present, it may suffice to
intimate that this Discord among themselves retarded them from publicly
proclaiming and owning their lawful King.

In the mean time the King having been a while a close Mourner in Holland, and
received the condolements of the Lords States, (who also deputed an Orator Dr.
Lotius to represent their sad sense of the inhumane murder of his Royal
Father, which he performed in an elegant Latin Oration extant in Print he
committed the management of his affairs there to the care of his Brother and
Sister of Orange; and took a journey to France, both to visit his disconsolate
and forlorn Mother and to desire the assistance, which he might reasonably
conceive, that King obliged both in honor, consideration of consanguinity and
the general concernment of all Monarchs, to afford him. He was received in the
French Court with much respect, and after a short stay at Paris took up his
abode at St. Germains, having his Royal Brother the Duke of York with him.

He had not been long here, but contrary to the expectation^ as well as hopes
of himself and all his Loyal Subjects, news is brought him of the defeat of
the Army in Ireland under the Marquis of Ormond, then which a gallanter and
richer had scarce been seen during all the late Wars. The Marquis had laid
siege to Dublin on the 21. of June 1649. but that City being reinforced with a
supply of 3000. Horse and Foot from England, and encouraged with the
expectation of more, the Besieged made several Sallies out upon them from time
to time, and at length in one suppris'd the Marquis's maine Army, and totally
defeated it, himself not without much difficulty escaping by flight. It Is very
true, the Marquis had an Army of about 20000. men, but the greatest part of
them were Irish, and so such as he dared not trust; besides, I have heard it
creadibly reported, He might have taken Dublin if he had pleased, but forbore
to do it merely in tenderness to the numerous Protestants were in it, whom
the Irish would have without question unmercifully destroyed if they had taken
the place by assualt; and as yet there was no other way to take it, by reason
the besieged had high expectation of succor from England. This was the first
blow received by the young King, and a great one it was indeed, and so
important that it made way for the loss of all that Kingdom. About the same
time also Sir Chapter Coot issued out of Londonderry, and beat off Sir Rob. Stuart
and Col. Mervin that besieged it. And immediately upon this success Ol.
Cromwell landed in Ireland with the Title of Lord Lieutenant, and was followed
by his Son-in-Law Ireton with about 40. ships. The Royal Field. Army being
lost, Cromwell falls upon the Garrisons; the first place he attaqued was
Droghedah (or Tredagh) which he soon took by storm, and with a cruelty unknown
since the first rise of Christianity, put the Governor Sir Arthur Aston (a
noble Gentleman that had served the late King in England) and all Inhabitants
of the Town of all ages and sexes to the Sword. Thus was Providence pleased to
suffer wickedness to prosper. This success was followed with the loss of
many considerable Towns and Castles in all parts of Ireland, besides serverall
Field-battels obtained over the Lords Inchequin, Ardes and Clanduboys, and
Lieut. Genesis Farrell by the L. Broghill, Sir Chapter Coot, Col. Venables, Zanchy,
Renolds and Hewson. So that in less then the space of this year that Kingdom
was wholly lost, which in the beginning of it, his Majesty looked upon as so
considerably his own that he was almost persuaded to have gone thither in
person; but waved upon mature advice, and went to the Isle of Iersey, where he
was proclaimed by the Islanders immediately, and the L. Iermin Earl of
Yarmouth was made Governor and Sir Geo. Carteret his Deputy. His retinue at
his arrival in this place amounted to about 300. persons. A little before his
departue from St. Germains, the Duke of York came to him out of Holland, and
was visited by the French King and the Cardinal, of whom he humbly implored aid
in behalf of his Brother. Mazarini answered civilly, that he might assure
himself of all favor and assistance from the King of France as soon as he had
the power and opportunity to serve him: In the mean time the Duke is persented
with 100000. Crowns. From Iersey his Majesty sends his Summons to Guernsey
(which was wholly the Parliament's, saving Cornet Castle) to submit to his
obedience. But it was to no effect. It is reported by some his Majesty had some
expectation from the Levellers, who at that time had revolted from the rest of
the Parliament's Army: but whatever their design was, they were suppressed both
in the West and at Burford in Oxfordshire.

The English Plantations in the West Indies at this time under the Lord
Willoughby of Parham refused Obedience and Subjection to the Parliament, who
thereupon first interdicted them all Traffic and Commerce, and shortly after
reduced them with a Fleet sent from England under the Command of Sir Geo.
Ayscough.

The King at Iersey receiving intelligence of these unfortunate successes
following one upon the neck of another, his chief hopes and expectations lay
now in Scotland. He understood the several Factions there, and that the
Covenanters who were most considerable both for Power and Number, sought their
own advantage by him, and would cause much difficulty in his affairs there;
wherefore to balance them a little by the honest Royalists who were his and had
been his Father's friends, and whom the former endevour'd to keep under, as
also to bring them to more equitable Terms, he gives Commission to the noble
and valiant Lord Marquis of Montrosse to raise forces for him in Holland and
other parts. The Marquis in a short time sends some few forces into the Isle of
Orkney, and some few others landed in the North of Scotland under Sir Ia.
Montgomery. These the Committee of Estates resolve to oppose, though raised for
the King's service; and notwithstanding after long debate and contest between
the opposite factions, the best of which were infinitely scrupulous, at length
resolve upon a Letter of Propositions to his Majesty, and send it by Mr. Geo.
Windram Lord of Libberton upon the 25. of Sept. 1649. Upon the 30. of that
month he arrived at Iersey and presented his Majesty with these Propositions
from the States of Scotland.

1. That his Majesty would sign the solemn League and Covenant, and pass an Act
for all persons to take it throughout that Kingdom, and ratify all that had
been done concerning the same.

2. That he would ratify diverse Acts of Parliament of Scotland made by the two
last Sessions; viz. 1. For disclaiming D. Hamilton's last expedition. 2. For
receiving of the several Acts made by the English for the Militia. 3. For the
Kings of Scotland to have no Negative voice in their Parliament.

3. That his Maj^stie would recall the late Commissions given to Montrosse, etc.

4. That he would dismiss all Papists from about him, and let none be of his
Council but Protestants.

5. That he would appoint some place about Holland for a Treaty with their
Commissioners; whither they intended to send several Persons of Honor for
that purpose and take care for his Entertainment during that time suitable to
his Dignity.

6. That he would give a speedy answer to their Desires.

After some time of debate upon these proposalls, which were variously
entertained; some upon diffidence of the Scots fidelity dissuading his Majesty
from complying with them (as the Lords Byron, Cleveland, Gerard, etc.) others
on the contrary (as the Lords Piercy, Wentworth, Wilmot, and Sir Geo. Carteret)
counselling him not to put that to the hazard of war which might be obtained by
Treaty, (especially his strength being at that time so low, if he should
resolve only upon force,) Letters came to his Majesty from the Queen, urging
that if the Scots Propositions seemed at present too severe and unsupportable
he might have opportunity hereafter when possessed of that Kingdom to free
himself in some measure from the Inconvenience of them: Therefore she judged it
best to close with them. Montrosse also then in Holland writ to the King to the
same purpose, desiring his Majesty to hearken to the Scots Commissioners, so as
to admit of an Agreement with them which might settle his Majesty in that
Kingdom with safety and Honor; adding, That, as for himself, he should be
contented to be banished perpetually from his Native Country rather then be the
least cause of prejudice to his Majesty's affairs. Thus this incomparable
pattern of Loyalty preferred the Interest of his Prince above all respects of
his own. But his Majesty was too generous to admit of his offer, and therefore
answered him, That he had such assurance of his fidelity and so high a sense of
his services performed to his late Father and himself that he could not in
Justice or in Honor desert him, and therefore desired him to urge him no
further to it. At length the advice to close with the Scots seemed most safe
and reasonable, and proceeding from the greater number of suffrages, it was
resolved to follow it. The next thing therefore to be deliberated of, was what
answer should be returned to the Propositions; which requiring some time, Sir
Will. Flemming was dispatched before hand to Edenb. as Agent, till it could be
completed and sent by the Lair Libberton.

The New Commonwealth in England in the mean time was modeled thus. The House
of Peers as I said was voted down, the Commons reduced to about 100; and a new
kind of Senate set up, called a Council of State, who sat at Whitehall,
consisting of forty persons; these indeed, though derived from the Parliament,
grew to have greater authority then their creators; but though the supreme
Power seemed in appearance to be in these two Councils yet it was really in the
hands of the Army, the chief Officers of which ruled them that ruled the
Nations. Their principal business at Home was to fortify their new Government
by making several Acts of Treason, and to terrify others by putting to death
diverse of the Nobility as D. Hamilton, E. of Holland, L. Capel, etc. and such
of the Gentry who had opposed their Barbarous and Tyrannical Proceedings. They
also employed themselves in dividing the Patrimony of the Crown, having
murdered the Father and expelled the Son; the same course also they took with
many thousands of loyal persons, either confiscating and selling their
Estates, or putting them to redeem the same upon great compositions; by this
means and prodigious Taxes together, drawing all the Wealth of the Nation,
both Money and Lands, into their own hands, and sharing the same among
themselves and their Lords the Officers of the Army. His Majesty had small
hopes of doing any good immediately upon England, although he had friends
enough in it. However, two noble Gentlemen Sir John Berkly and Col. Slingsby
offered themselves to serve their Prince in England, and accordingly came from
Iersey into the West, and went about stirring up their Correspondents to Arms
for their King and Country; but they were both accidentally discovered and
taken.

The King had sent Ambassadors to several great Princes and States, as the
Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke of Moscovy, the State of Venice, the Grand
Seignor, and others, to solicit their aid and contribution for the recovery
of his Father's Kingdoms. But from the most of them he received only
complements and pretenses of their good will to help him. The most considerable
Embasse, and most probable to take effect was that to his Majesty of Spain by
the Lord Cottington, who at his Audience remonstrated in the name of his
Master, That the Parliament of England having been in Arms against his Father
had prevailed against him, and caused him to be put to death; That he being Son
and heir to the late King, was yet kept out of his Kingdoms by the said
Parliament; And therefore he desired his Aid and Assistance to establish him
into his Rights and Dignities in his Kingdoms. To this the King of Spain
answered, That he was sorry for his Father's ill success, wishing he had been
more prosperous; That he condol'd with him for his Father's death, and was much
affected with sorrow at the manner of it; That concerning the difference
between him and the Parliament, and the Rights on the one or the other side,
they being matters out of his Territories and Jurisdiction he could not take
cognizance of them, nor should he meddle therein: But for any thing within his
own Dominions, he should be ready to do him what lawful favor he could. But
such is the influence Self Interest has upon the minds even of the greatest
Potentates, that it many times excludes all considerations of generosity. Had
the Neighbour-States resented the unjustice done to this King and his Father,
as they ought, I am confident the Spirits of the Iuncto would have soon been
broken. But the course of the world, as I said, is otherwise, his Majesty of
Britain is an Exile, his Enemies are great and powerful, and therefore in
stead of sending assistance to the unfortunate Prince, the King of Spain sends
and Ambassador to court the new Common wealth of Rebels to a League.

The King hearing of a Fleet of Ships preparing by the Parliament for the
Island of Iersey, thought fit to dispatch his answer to the Committee of
Estates of Scotland in order to a Treaty, which being drawn up with a Letter
directed to the Committee of the Kirk. Assembly, the Lord Libberton departed
with it to Scotland. Soon after which, his Majesty to avoid all danger, went
from Iersey back again into France, where her resided with his Royal Mother
till the time for the Scotch Treaty drew near. Before his going thither, he
writ thus to the Lord Marq. of Montross.

Most Dear and well beloved Cousin,
We have received Letters from our Kingdom of Scotland, of which you receive
herewith a Copy; by which our subjects demand of us, that we would please to
acknowledge for lawful their Parliament, and particularly the two last
Sessions of that Assembly. Which being obtained of our Grace, they offer to
send us their Deputies with full Commission to Treat with us of the means to
reestablish Peace and obedience in that Kingdom. We have made them an Answer,
That we have made known to their Envoy the place where we desired their
Deputies should come to us with all diligence. And to the end you should not
apprehend that by our Letters or by the Treaty, we had any design to hinder the
affairs we h^ve committed to you, we have thought fit to let you know that as
we judge the Levies you have made for our service to have been a powerful
motive to oblige them to send their Deputies and to enter into Treaty with us:
So we also believe, that the Progrese you shall make in your generous Designs
will dispose them to Treat with the more moderation, to the end the whole Realm
may again happily return under our obedience. We assure you we have not the
least thought to derogate from that ample Commission which we have given you,
nor to diminish that Authority in which we have invested you by our Letters
Patents. And we do promise you also, if it shall come to pass that we shall
enter into any good Intelligence with our subjects, we shall have so much care
of your proper Interest, that all the world shall see how much we esteem your
Person and what confidence we have in your conduct and your Courage, whereof
not only the late King our Father, but Our self also have reciv'd Proofs both
by what you have done and suffered for Us. In the mean time, you shall
understand that we have qualified the Assembly of our Subjects with the
Appellation of the Committee of Estates; which we have done only for this
Treary: Which if it shall not succeed as we desire, As we know already this
Qualification of the Privy Signet does not at all authorize them to be such, so
we shall then forthwith declare for what we hold them, notwithstanding this
Title which we have given them, both for their own proper satisfaction and also
to make known to all the World, that we desire to bring back our Subjects of
the Kingdom of Scotland to their Duty, rather by ways of sweetness and amity
then by the rigor of our Arms, if their Obstinacy and the Injustice of their
Demands should constrain us to recover it by force. We therefore do hereby give
you full Power to proceed vigorously in your Enterprises, not doubting but all
our Loyal Subjects of Scotland will join themselves with you; and by that
means all those who are otherwise disposed will submit themselves to reason in
that Treaty which we we now accept; or shall be forced thereto by Arms.

To this, we permit you to publish these Presents, and to communicate them to
such as you shall judge fit. So we pray God to preserve you, most dear Cousin.


The Lord of Liberton being arrived at Edinburgh, where he was expected with
much impatience and longing, as soon as the Committeee of Estates and Assembly
of the Kirk were met, delivered his Majesty's Message and Letters to them,
informing them also by word of Mouth how greatly inclinable he found him to an
Agreement to their Desires; As, 1. That in reference to Ratifying all that the
Parliament of Scotland did in their two last Sessions he was willing there
should be passed a general Act of Oblivion 2. That such as had served under
the Marquess of Montross, and Duke Ham^lion in his last Expedition should be
incapable of all public Charge without conssent of Parliament. 3. That he had
designed Breda in Holland for the place of a Solemn Treaty upon the 15. of
March next ensuing, in order to a perfect Accommodation between himself and his
Subjects of Scotland.

His Majesty's Letter to the Committee of Estates was in these terms. For the
Committee of Estates of Scotland.
CHARLES R.

WE have received your Letters lately persented to us by Mr. VVindram Laired of
Liberton, and we accept graciously all the expressions of Affection and
Fidelity therein contained to wards us, with your tender resentment of our
present condition, and the just indignation which you profess to have against
the execrable murderers of our Father. And we believe that your intentions are
full of Candor toward us, as we are and always have been desirous to settle a
clear and right Itelligence between us and our Subjects of our ancient Kingdom
of Scotland, which may be an assured foundation of their happiness and peace
for the time to come, and an effectual means to root out all the seeds of
animosity and divisions caused by these late Troubles; and also to unite the
hearts and affections of our Subjects to one another, and of them all to us
their King to lawful Sovereign; To the end that by their obedience to our
Royal and just authority, we may be put into a condition to maintain them in
Peace and Prosperity, and to protect them in their Religion and Liberty, as it
appertains to us according to our Charge and Office of a King. And as we have
always resolved to contribute whatever is to be done by us to obtain these
good Effects, and for the just satisfaction of all our Subjects in this
Kingdom; We have now thought fit upon the return of Mr. Windram to command and
desire you to send unto us Commissioners sufficiently Authorized. To treat and
agree with us, both in Relation to the Interest and just satisfaction of our
Subjects there, as also concerning the Aid and Assistance which in all reason
we may expect from them to bring and reduce the Murderers of our late Most
dear Father of happy memory to condign punishment, and to recover our just
Rights in all our Kingdoms. And we will that they attend us on the fifteenth
day of the month of March at the Town of Breda, where we intend to be in order
thereunto. And in confidence of a Treaty, as also to make known to you and all
the World that we sincerely desire to be agreed, We have resolved to address
these unto you under the Name and Title of a Committee of Estates of our
Kingdom of Scotland; And will and expect that you use this grace no otherwise
for any advantage to the prejudice of us, or our Affairs, beyond what we have
given this Qualification and Title for, namely, Only for the Treaty and in
order to it; Although we have considerations sufficient and very important to
dissuade and oblige us to do nothing in this kind antecedently at this time.
Also we hope the confidence which we declare to have in your clear and candid
intentions toward us, will furnish you with strong Arguments to form in your
selves a mutual confidence in us, which by the blessing of God Almighty, by
your just and prudent moderation and by that great desire that we have to
oblige all our Subjects of that Kingdom, and by the means of the Treaty which
we attend and hope for, may be a good foundation of a full and happy peace, and
and assured security to this Nation for the time to come: Which we assure you
is wished of us with P^ssion, and we shall endeavor by all means in our power
to effect.


To the Committee of the Kirk likewise his Majesty writ a Le^^^ much to the
same purpose, wh^e^ as soon as they met was delivered to them. Those to the
Committee of Estate were first referred to a Subcommittee of nine Lords and
Burgesses. to present their Opinions thereupon to the Committee of Estates, who
were to receive their Reports and prepare the matter for the Parliament of
Scotland shortly to be convened. And moreover for the more expedition a Joint
Committtee was chosen out of that of the Estates and that of the Kirk by common
consent to consider to sending Commissioners and Propositions to the King. Much
was the debate and great the contestation in this Council; the insolent Kirkmen
rejecting all other accommodation, but such as might render his Majesty in a
condition wholly subservient to their pleasure, framed higher Propositions then
ever. Those of the Estates were more moderate, in comparison, though high
enough too; and at length became more prevalent. So Commissioners were jointly
chosen to be sent to his Majesty's. The Earl of Cassils, the Lord Lothian, the
Lord Burley and the Lord Libberton, Sir Io. Smith and Mr. Ieoffries for the
Estates; and Mr. Broady, Lawson, and VVood in behalf of the Kirk. These arrive
at Breda, before the King, and therefore the next day they went to meet him at
Berghe^^^op Zoom, and came together to Breda 16. March 1640. Three days after
they were conducted to audience by the Lord Wentworth Master of the Ceremonies
in the Kings Coach. The Earl of C^ssills made a short speech as from the
Estates, and Lawson for the Kirk; after which they showed their Commissions and
delivered the Propositions and Letters from the Estates and Kirk of Scotland.
The Propositions were these.

I. That all Excommunicate should be forbid the Court.

II. That the King would by Solemn Oath and under his Hand and Seal declare his
Allowance of the National Covenant of Scotland, and of the Solemn League and
Covenant of the three Nations.

III. That he would confirm all Acts of Parliament, enjoin the Solemn League
and Covenant, establish Presbytery, the Directory, the Conf^ssion of Faith and
Catechism in the Kingdom of Scotland, as they are already approved by the
General Assembly of the Kirk and the Parliament; and that he would observe the
same in his own family, and sw^ar never to oppose or endeavor the alteration of
the same.

IV. That he would consent that all Civil matters might be determined by the
present and subsequent Parliaments in Scotland, and all matters Ecclesiastical
by the ensuing general Kirk Assembly.

After the reading of these Propositions and the Letters his Majesty being
told these were all their instructions, answered; That he would take these
things into consideration, and doubted not to give them such a full answer, as
should give them and his Kingdom of Scotland ample satisfaction.

His Majesty and his Council deliberate very seriously upon these Heads of the
Treaty. Opinions were divided, some persons vehemently dissuading him from
trusting himself into the hands of the Scots. But the Covenant was the main
thing the King stuck at, and the Commissioners most urged. In the mean time he
withdraw to the Hague to consult with the Queen of Bohemia and the Prince of
Orange (who was visited by the Commissioners and entreated to be a Mediator
between them and his Majesty) and some other friends what course was best to
resolve on. And soon after the Earl of Carnwarth and Mr. Murrey arrive at
Breda from the Committee of Estates with further Instructions and Propositions;
as 1. That his Majesty should ra^ifie all that had been done in the Parliaments
of Scotland in some late Sessions; And consent, That Montrosse and his
Adherents be prohibited access into that Kingdom.

These conditions were sufficiently hard, but the posture his Majesty's
affairs then stood in seemed to most of his Counselors to afford an
invincible argument to persuade him to accept them. The Marquis of Montrosse,
as I said, was commissioned by the King to levy what force he could on that
side the Sea and to fall into the North of Scotland, upon hopes his appearance
there might induce the States to more moderation. In order to which he had
solicited the Princes of Germany for assistance, but he received little more
from any but promises and complements. Only from the Duke of Holstein he was
supplied with three or four very fair Vessels well armed and amn'd. And to
expedite his business he dispatched Col. John Ogilby to Amsterdam to intertain
such strangers as might be for his purpose. But the forgetting his Commission,
bestowed both money and pains in intertaining himself, suffering those who
upon any terms would have engaged to shift for themselves; there being a great
number who had fled out of England, and more who had lately deserted the
French, or been cashiered the Hollander's service. By which neglect those
goodly ships provided for service were lost, and a limb of the design broken.
Nor was this the only miscarriage that happened in the beginning of the
Marquis's enterprise. For Col. Cochran likewise who had been sent into Poland
to deal with the Scotch Merchants there for assistance, having procured very
considerable Sums of money upon that score and other provision, disposed of
the money to his own use, made sale of the Corn and provision together
transportation of it, and himself turned tail to the quarrel. And General
King (whom the Marquis expected out of Sweden with a considerable party of
Horse) either could not be ready so soon as was expected, or else delayed on
purpose. However, the Marquess fearing (as is supposed) he should have an
express command to desist from his purpose, because the Treaty betwixt his
Majesty and the Scots Commissioners was likely to come to a speedy conclusion,
whereby himself should be banished out of that Kingdom, fatally resolves to
proceed, notwithstanding all difficulties. So he set forth for the conquest of
a Nation settled in a posture of war, and forewarned of his intentions, with
about six or seven hundred men at most, strangers and all, about the tenth of
April 1650. He had sent him by the Queen of Sw^den for the arming such as upon
his arrival should betake themselves to his party, fifteen hundred Arms
complete for Horse, back, breast, etc. Carbi^^es, Pistols and Swords; all which
after his defeat in Cathanes were taken untoucht. Two of his ships with near
upon a third part were sent before and directed to stee^ for the Orcades; but
by storm of weather, which is both frequent and dangerous amongst those
Northern Islands, they were lost with all the men and Arms, nothing saved. This
was another check and a forerunner of the sad event which followed. However
nothing terrified with these unhappy presages, he arrived himself at the Isle
of Orkney, having with him several Scotch Gentlemen resolved to partake of his
fortune. Here he continued a considerable time to raise such forces and
recruits as the place would afford, which were poor, raw, untrain'd fellows,
making up the show of an Army, but wholly ignorant of war. With these he
embarques and lands at Cathanes the farthest point to the Northwest of
Scotland, expecting the coming of two thousand men raised in the Earl of
Seaforth's Territories. His arrival, and that with Foreigners, immediately
struck a terror into the whole Country as far as Edenburth, where the
Parliament then sitting forthwith order Lieutenant General David Lesley,
Colonel Straughan and Holborn to march against him with 7000. foot and 3.
Troops of Horse. In the mean time the Marquess moves but slowly, and to
prevent misapprehension (since all the world was much astonished at his
Invasion, whilst the King was upon a Treaty) puts forth a Declaration, to make
known, That his intention was only against some particular persons who had
against the Laws of the Kingdom raised and maintained a war against the King's
Father, and did now by their subtle practices endeavor to cir^umvent and
destroy the Son; That he intended nothing against the generality of the
Kingdom. And lastly, exhorted all Subjects of that Nation to endeavor to free
themselves from the Tyranny of those who for the present ruled the state, and
from the oppression of the Ministry. But the Country, partly through fear of
the danger, and partly being overawed by the Earl of Sunderland, did not come
to second him as he expected. Straughan who commanded a choice party of Horse,
advances before Lesley's body, whilst the Marquess had effected nothing
material besides the taking of Dumbath Castle. Upon Straughan's approach, a
party of 100. were drawn forth, who encountered his Forlorn hope, and put them
to retreat; but being immediately seconded by Straughan's whole body, who
charged upon that of the Marquess, the Islanders threw down their Arms and
were dispersed; only the Dutch Forces made an orderly retreat into some shrubs
hard by, where having very valiantly defended themselves a while, they were at
last enforced to yield. This was a total Defeat: of 1200. which were in the
field on the Marquesse's side, 200. were slain, and all the rest taken, saving
about a hundred who escaped by flight. Among the Prisoners of note were Major
General Sir John Vrrey, the Lord Frendraught, Sir Francis Hay of Dalketie,
Colonel Hay of Naughton, Colonel Gray, Lieutenant Colonel Stuart, with a great
number of other considerable officers and two Ministers. The Royal Standard was
also taken, in which was pourtrayed the Head of the late King, lying a
bleeding, and severed from the body, with this Motto, JUDGE AND REVENGE MY
CAUSE, O LORD. The Marquess himself when he saw the day loft, threw away his
Cloak which had the Star on it (having received the order of the Garter a
little while before) deserted his horse, changed his habit with a H^ghlander,
and fled. The news of this Victory was so welcome to the State and Kirk of
Scotland, that they rewarded Straughan with 1000. l. sterling, and gratified
other officers. And to assure it, they order narrow search to be made for
Montrosse, propounding a great sum to any that should apprehend him. He had
continued three or four days in the open fields without meat or drink, with
only one man in his company; till at lenght in this starving condition he
discoverd himself to the Lord Aston, who had formerly been a friend of his. But
his adversity and the promised reward made him now be looked upon under another
notion, so that either out of fear or covetousness, or both, this Lord sends
this Illustrious but unfortunate Hero with a strong guard to David Lesley, by
whom he was forthwith sent to Edinburgh, into which he was carried with all the
ignominy, malice, assisted with zeal could invent: all which he underwent with
extraordinary constancy and magnanimity. He was brought to the Towns end upon a
Cart-horse, and at the Gates he was met by some officers and the Executioner in
his Livery Coat. They put him into a high seat in fashion of a Chariot, and
bound him about the breast and arms with a cord into a Chair. The Executioner
(being so commanded) took off the Marquess his hat, and the chariot being
drawn with four horses, put on his own bonnet, mounted one of the first horses,
and so very solemnly drive along to the Tol booth. He had at that time many
wounds about him, but none uncurable. The Parliament had resolved beforehand
what sentence to pronounce upon him; but the more to disgrace him and to act
with formality and insolence. He was brought before them, where he appeared in
a rich attire with an undaunted countenance. His chief adversaries were Argile,
an inveterate enemy to loyalty and consequently to this Noble Marquis, Lowdon
the Chancellor, Ker, and Cassells who was gone in Commission to the King; but
especially the fleabitten Ministers of Edinburgh, a generation of people, whose
courses and practices are detested by all that understand any thing of the
sobriety of Christian Religion. Being brought to the Bar of the House, the
Chancellor told him first, That he must kneel at the Bar. Whereunto he
answered, My Lord, I shall with all my heart observe any posture you shall
appoint m^ to appear before you in, whereby I may minifest to you, that I
freely submit to the authority of Parliament, and to this present Parliament in
a more especial manner because you have concluded so near a Conjunction with
his Majesty my Master in the late Treaty. After which the Chancellor made a
Speech to him, the substance whereof was this.

SIR,

I am commanded to mind you of the last judgment of God befallen you for your
perfidious breaking of the Covenant, which might justly provoke God thus to
divert your counsels and affairs, for having been so eminent an Author and
Actor of mischief against this Nation. You abandoned the Covenant and despised
the Oath of God, invaded your Native Country, and with most inhumane and
barbarous cruelty burnt and wastest diverse parts thereof, and have spilt much
blood of his Majesty's good Subjects, taking advantage of that time when the
prime Commanders and forces thereof were employed elsewhere. For these Crimes
you were excommunicated by the Church, and sore-faulted by the Parliament of
this Kingdom, and yet still continued in the highest contempt against God
under that fearful sentence of excommunication; And to this day have you
remained without the least show of Repentance. And God by his Providence has
now justly brought you hither to receive the Sentence of your Condemnation.

Hereunto the Illustrious Prisoner, having defir'd and obtained liberty,
answered,

My Lord, I am glad that I may to answer for my self. Though I am here your
prisoner, yet my cause is good; Nor is there any breach of the Covenant on my
part, in which I swore to be true to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.
Concerning what I have done in relation to the Wars and affairs of this
Kingdom, I had not only a General Commission, but particular Orders for what
I have done from his Majesty, which I was engaged to obey by the said Covenant.
And concerning my coming over now, I was assertain'd that you had professed to
comply with his Majesty in the present Affairs in which he has employed me;
and upon that Account it was that I have acted. I desire to refer my self, and
to submit unto this present Parliament and the authority thereof to be my
Judges in this Case, whom I own as a true Parliament by authority from his
Majesty; and I shall be content, however it shall please God to deal with me.
As for my Life, if you take it away by this Authority, it is well known to the
World I regard it not: Death is a debt which all owe, and must once be paid
by every one; And I shall be willing and much rejoice to go the same way which
my Master passed before me; and it is the joy of my heart not only to do, but
also to suffer for him.

After he had pronounced this with a very composed gravity, even to the
admiration of all that heard him, he was commanded to withdraw. The Parliament
were not long in debate, but unanimously resolved upon this Sentence of
Condemnation, which, he being recalled, was pronounced against him.

You are to be carried back to the place from whence you came, and from thence
to morrow being the 21. of May (1650.) to Edinburgh Cross, there to be hanged
on a Gallows 30. foot high for the space of 3. hours, with your History and
Declaration about your neck, and then to be taken down, and your head cut off
upon the Scaffold, and set upon Edinburgh Talbooth, and your legs and arms
over the gates of the Cities of Sterling, Dundee, Glasgow, and Aberdeen, your
Trunk to be buried in the common place for Thieves and Robbers, except the K^rk
take off your excommunication.

This sentence aggravated by the Chancellor in the utmost terms of horror his
spleen could invent, was undismaiedly receive d by the noble Marquess, who
answered, That he took it for a greater to have his head stand on the Prison
gate for this quarrel, then to have his P cture in the King's Bedchamber. And
least his Loyalty should be forgotten, they had highly honored him in
designing lasting monuments to bear up his memorial to all posterity; wishing
he had flesh enough to have sent a piece to every City in Christendom to
witness his Loyalty to his King and Country.

The next day, having prepared his soul for Heaven, he marched magnanimously to
the Scaffold, and notwithstanding all the interruptions of the bitter spirited
Priests, having made a sober speech to the people underwent the cruel sentence
with all the ignominious circumstances, to his own perpetual glory and the
everlasting reproach of his Enemies.

Thus dyed this incomparable Marquis of immortal fame, a great example of
unfortunate Virtue, whose barbarous murder, I have more particularly related,
because it discovers the temper of that Covenanted party who put him to death.
Posterity certainly will esteem his memory, and account his Judges deserving a
more exquisite punishment for this and other their inhumane actions then that
they inflicted on him, if it be possible for the quintessence of malice to
invent a greater.

Within a few days after four other Noble Gentlemen suffered for the same
cause, Sir John Vrr y (notwithstanding he pleaded the benefit of quarter) Col.
Spotswood Lord of Darcy, Sir Francis Hay and Col. Sibbald; though they had the
favor to be beheaded.

Such was the fate of his Majesty's affairs in Scotland, and the brave persons
that managed them; and such was the unparalled insolence of the Scots, who
dared to murder his best friends, while they were in Treaty with him, upon a
base and ungenerous presumption, that the lowness of his condition would
enforce him to put up patiently so high and detestable an indignity. Which
indeed, he was constrained to do, as his affairs then stood. When the news
was brought to his Majesty at Breda, he was much st^rtled at it, and expressed
his Resentment of their proceedings by a Message sent them by Mr. Murrey That
he was grieved to hear it credibly reported that notwithstanding those hopeful
overtures of Peace lately made between him and them, they had shed the blood of
some of his best Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland; and that the manner
thereof according to Reports did extremely trouble him. But that he might
understand the Particulars more certainly he desired an account of the business
from themselves.

In answer to this they professed their affections were still real to him, and
their Hearts much joy'ed to hear of his willingness to concur with them in a
happy agreement; And desired him not to stumble at some seeming Obstacles, as
the Death of Montrosse, or their reducing of his Forces; Assuring him there was
nothing in what they did, but to accomplish his Ends and promote his Interests
to his best Advantage. (This zealous Nation does God and the King good service,
when they illegally and inhumanely murder their Fellow Christians and Subjects.)

These actions of the Scots and the business of the Covenant were the main
impediments of the Treaty. But the murder of Montrosse though it might justly
have deterred his Majesty from trusting himself into those hands which reak'd
with his best servants Blood, could not be redressed; and his necessities
enforced him to dissemble all further resentment of it. As for the Covenant, he
argued that it was the Subjects Covenant to bind them to their King, and not
for him to swear to; and therefore he thought it sufficient to pass an Act for
his People to take it. He likewise offered to confirm the Presbyterian
Government in Scotland; Provided that himself might have always three
Chaplains of his own Election; As also to confirm the Militia in the Hands of
the Estates for five years; Provided that afterward it might return to
himself. These particulars were agreed to; and so a conclusion put to the
Treaty. The news whereof being carried to Edinburgh, the Parliament forthwith
met, and the fourth Faction which I mentioned, viz. such as corresponded with
the Sectarian Iunto of England were so strangely and ridiculously impudent as
to put it to the Vote, whether any more Adddresses should be made to the King
(it seemed they desired to ape the abominable Monsters at Westminster, who
passed a Vote of Non addresses after his late Majesty had consented to all
their demands) there were 32. of these malevolent Negatives, but the major part
carried it in the Affirmative. Whereupon a Message was resolved upon to be sent
to him, wherein they invited him, To make all possible speed to come to his
Kingdom of Scotland, and protested. They would assist him with their lives and
fortunes to establish him in all his Dominions. Yet withal they forbore not to
advertise him, they had Testimonies to produce of his actings by Letters to
Montross (having belike intercepted 3. or 4.) contrary to his promise to them
at the Treaty at Breda, (as they pretended.) However they were willing (out of
special grace) to dispense with him for what was past, so that he would
without delay, according to the Articles of Agreement come over into Scotland,
and comply with the Parliament and the Kirk.

After this they betook themselves to make preparations for his Reception, Two
of the chiefest Houses in Edinburgh were richly furnished, and the Parliament
took into consideration the nominating Officers for his Majesty's Household,
which they did with much arrogance, not permitting those to wait upon him whom
he chiefly favored, and whom he judged best affected toward him, and by
Proclamation prohibiting several great Scotch Lords, as Duke Hamilton, the
Earls of Louderdale and S aforth, with many other persons of Quality who had
constantly attended on him in Iersey and Holland, from returning into Scotland.

Thus we have seen the deportment of the Covenanters toward his Majesty and
Friends during his absence, we now come to relate their actions after he took
possession personally of the Kingdom of Scotland: Which after the conclusion
of the Treaty he did not delay to do, but about the beginning of June he left
the Hague and took shipping at Scheveling in Holland. By the way he was in some
danger by reason of a tedious storm and certain English ships which plied about
the Coast to way-lay him; but with some difficulty he escaped both, and arrived
safe at a place called the Spey in the North of Scotland, whither some Lords
were sent to receive and accompany him to Edinburgh. All the way he was
entertained with the general joy and acclamations of the people. At Dundee new
Propositions were by Commissioners from the Parliament and Kirk presented to
him to sign, which after some reluctance he performed. The town presented him
of Aberdeen with 1500. l. But the Committee of Estates sent to several places
who had the same intentions, enjoining them whatever Plate or money they had to
bestow, to bring the same into such a Treasury as they should appoint. As if it
were unfit for his Majesty to be master of his own Purse. while they were in
expectation of his Arrival the Committee of Estates and Parliament consulted
about forming of an Army for his service as they pretended, and an Act was
passed for training every fourth man capable to bear Arms throughout the
Kingdom, and raising 16000. Foot and 6000. Horse; in which the Earl of Leven
was made General of the Foot, Holborn Major General, David Lesley Lieutenant
General of the Horse, and Montgomery Major General; the supreme Command being
reserved for his Majesty. Who arriving at Edinburgh was entertained with many
complements and congratulations, and on the 15 of July solemnly proclaimed King
at the Cross, and should have been Crowned in the ensuing month, had not
certain obstacles caused the deferring of that ceremony. He had not been long
there but the Estates and Parliament begin to busy themselves afresh about
modelling his Retinue, and clearing his Household of such Malignants (as they
termed them) as were in his Service, excluding them also from all employment
both about his Person and in the Army. As for himself, he had a strong Guard
continually about him to attend him and observe his motions.

The English pretended Parliament had all this while sufficient intelligence of
the Scots proceedings with his Majesty in the Treaty of Breda, together with
their engagement to assist him in the recovery of his Rights in England, and
this by the perfidiousnesse and treachery of some of the Fourth Faction I
mentioned in the Parliament of Scotland. And therefore by the solicitation of
these Traitors, and partly out of policy to prevent an invasion by making one,
whereby the Enemies Country would become the Seat of the War, they prepared an
Army against Scotland, and sent for Cromwell out of Ireland, on whom they
conferred the Command of Capt. General of all their Forces in the room of the
Lord Fairfax, who gave up his Commission, abhorring to be longer a servant to
such horrid designs as they had formerly put him upon.

About this time one Ascham whom the Iunto had sent Agent into Spain was
assassinated at Madrid together with his Interpreter Senior Riba by a
combination of six or seven men at Madrid, who after the fact took Sanctuary.
Dorislaus another Agent of the Upstart Republic had the same fate also, though
more deservedly, about a year before in Holland. It happened also during the
Treaty was on foot between his Majesty and his Scottish Subjects, that Prince
Rupert's Fleet having for a long time been protected by the King of Portugal
was utterly destroyed upon that coast by Blake the English Admiral.

On the 28. of June, Cromwell got all things in readiness for a War, advanced
toward Scotland in the head of 11000. Foot and 5000. Horse. And approaching to
the Borders sent the Scots a Declaration from the ptetended Parliament of
England, and another from himself, to justify these proceedings. The Scots
seemed much surprised at this invasion without warning given, and therefore
send to expostulate the Cause of it in a paper to Haslerig then Governor of
New Castle, in another to Cromwell, and a third to the Iunto; in which they
urged the Solemn League and Covenant and the former Union between the two
Nations. But it was answered by a Declaration. 1. That the Scots (contrary to
their agreement) had once already invaded England under D. Hamilton, and were
now ready for a second invasion; so that the English were advanced against them
only by way of prevention. 2. That they had made a Peace with the Common
Enemy, and promised him assistance to regain the other Kingdoms he pretended
to. 3. They had resolved to impose their form of Religion upon the English
Nation. These were the grounds the English alleged for their proceedings.
Accordingly Cromwell marches into Scotland taking all the Garrisons that lay in
his way, till he came to Muscleborough (a place famous for a signal defeat
given the Scots in the Reign of Edward the 6.) there he is set upon by Maj.
Genesis Montgomery and Col. Straughan; but the assailants were put to the worst.
After which the two main Armies having for some time moved at a small distance
one from another, the Scots declined engaging till they got the English at a
great disadvantage at Dunbar, who by the difficulties of the place were so
distressed for provision, that they began to think of an escape by Sea, and
would without doubt have taken that course, had not the Scots confidence of
Victory induced them to set upon them (contrary to the great prudent maxims of
War, viz. To make a bridge for a flying Enemy, and not to drive an enemy Army to
the utmost of despair) The event of this engagement was, that the Scots in
stead of an assured Victory received a total overthrow; 3000. of them being
slain in the field, amongst whom was the Lord of Libberton and Col. Lumsden,
about 8000. with Sir James Lumsden Lieut. Genesis of the Foot made prisoners, and
200. Colors (part of those that were afterward hung up in Westminster Hall)
15000. arms and 30. pieces of Ordnance taken.

The King in the mean time was withdrawn to St. Iohnston's, being so sensible
of the Scots unfaithfulness, that he apprehended as much danger from them as
from the Enemy. Here he received the news of this loss, which was followed
with a greater, that of the excellent Princess his Sister Elizabeth, who dyed
on the eight of Sept. 1650. at Carisbook Castle in the Isle of VVight; a Lady
of incomparable goodness and piety, and who deserved to have been born in a
better Age, and in a less Barbarous Nation. The execrable murder of her
Royal Father hastened her death; whither the same Villains at the helm of the
State contributed any thing toward it, though reported, I will not affirm.
Only I know they were enemies enough to that family and base enough, to
attempt as great a crime. It is recorded by some that the decease of this
Illustrious Princess afflicted his Majesty more then the loss of the Army at
Dunbar; and perhaps he had reason, since himself seemed least concerned in
this, the Forces having been raised, and ordered wholly by the States and
Kirk's command and for their interest. About this time also dyed the renowned
Prince of Orange, to the great grief of the King, leaving his Princess great
with her first child, of which she was safely delivered four days after being
a Son and his Father's Successor.

About this time Col. Eusebius Andrews having been found with a Commission
from his Majesty was condemned by a High-Court of Justice and beheaded on
Tower Hill.

Immediately after this notable Victory, Cromwell made himself master of
Edinburgh and of Leith; only the Castle of Edinburgh held out for a good while
after.

The King being unable to bear the imperiousness and hard impositions of the
Estates and Kirk, extorting a Declaration from him to condemn his own
proceedings and those of his best affected party, banishing his friends from
about him, and usurping the whole Government of all affairs both Ecclesiastical
and Civil into their own hands, and placing guards about his Person, etc.
secretly escapes from St. Iohnston's in much discontent (in order, as some
think, to going beyond Sea) accompanied only with four Horsemen toward the
North of Scotland, where the Marquis of Huntkey, the Earls of Athol and
Seaforth, Lords Ogleby and Newburgh with the Gourdons and the men of Athol were
ready to appear for him with a considerable force.

The Committee of Estates at St. Iohnston's were much surprised and troubled at
this departure of his Majesty, especially for that they feared he was gone to
May. Genesis Middleton and the Athol men, (who were purely for his interest,
disclaiming the Kirk's authority with that of Parliament and Estates) for the
appeasing of whom, an Act of Indemnity was offered them; which they
contemning, and falling upon and worsting Sir John Brows Regiment, Lieut. Genesis
Lesley is commanded forth against them. In the mean time while the Parliament
and Committee of Estates are consulting and debating what course to take with
the King, some propounding, That since he had deserted them, they should look
no more after him but leave him to his own ways; the more moderate judging it
fit rather to testify to his Majesty their sorrow for his departure and desire
him graciously to return: a different Faction of the Covenanters under the
command of Straughan and Kerr in the West set forth a Remonstrance to the
Committee of Estates taxing them of imprudence and temerity in hastening to
conclude a Treaty with, receiving and entertaining the King, before he had
given any convincing evidence of a real change, after his commissioning
Montrosse to invade Scotland; judging his profession of the Cause and the
Covenant merely counterfeit, as appeared by his favoring Scotch and English
Malignants (as they termed them.) And for these reasons they absolutely refused
to submit to his power and authority. Of this Faction bisides Kerr and
Straughan were the Lord VVarreston (lately a Member of our pretended Committee
of Safety) and Sir John Chiesy. An accommodation was endeavored to be made
between them and the Estates at St. Iohnston's; but they stood off, and
declared against King and Lords on the one side, and the Sectarian English Army
on the other. Thus was this poor Nation divided among themselves, whilst at the
same time a merciless foreign enemy was ravaging in the bowels of it. However
the Committee of Estates and Kirk (several of whose great sticklers were become
very inclinable to his Majesty) resolve at length to dispatch Maj. Genesis
Montgomery with a party of Horse after him, humbly to entreat his return.
Montgomery upon inquiry understanding that his Majesty was at the L. Dedup's
House in the North confines of Fife, hastens thither, and first surrounding the
House, enters and upon his knees acquaints the King what desires he brought
from the Committee of Estate. But he absolutely refused at first, as not
enduring the Subjection they had made him live in; The news whereof brought to
the Estates, set the Kirk Party and such as favou^'d the English Sectaries a
gog again, who hereupon were very violent for no more Addresses to be made to
him, whose motion began to have some influence upon the rest. In the mean time
his Majesty was urgently solicited by the Marq. of Huntly and the Athol men
that rose for him in the North to adhere solely to them, undertaking to secure
him against the Kirk and all others: To which invitation he seemed very prone
to hearken, so that the Breach betwixt him and the Covenanted Party who brought
him in, was near become irreconcilable. But the consideration of the danger
which might redound from the foreign Enemy by occasion of this division, the
concession of some propositions, together with the importunity of Montgomery
and the industry of some attendants about him, induced him to return back with
the Maj. Genesis to St. Iohnston's. And it was judged requisite to unite all
parties (if possible) against the common Enemy: to which purpose Huntly and
Middleton were treated with, who refused to submit, and marched up within a mile
of St. Iohnston's where they had like to have been engaged by David Lesley. But
upon some concessions (as to be admitted into places of Trust, etc.) a Treaty
was concluded. One would have thought now the service against the Common
Destroyer of, their Country would have been unanimously carried on; yet this
reconciliation begat another fewd (as if the zealots of this Nation had been
infatuated purposely for their own ruin.) The Ministers of Sterling were so
far trom consenting to this Treaty that they past the Sentence of
Excommunication upon Middleton, in defiance of the Estates at St. Iohnston's,
and being summoned thither to a general meeting to be held here consisting of
King, Lords, Barons, Burgesses, and Assembly of Ministers to consult for the
good and safety of the King, Kingdom and Kirk, they refused, and advised the
Estates to be at a greater distance from the King and his Council, and rather
to come to Sterling. But at length with much ado they were brought to go to
St. Iohnston's. Much time had been lost in these fatal differences, and the
public safety was neglected, whilst men minded the satisfaction of their own
perverse and malicious humors. It was now highly requisite to look about them,
and therefore Middleton was employed with a Commission and Instructions from
his Majesty (who well enough understood that the safety of himself and that
Nation depended wholly on the unanimity of his Subjects) to treat with some
forces in the H^ghlands who still refused to submit.

The grand Assembly convene, and as the first evidences of concord diverse
Scotch Lords formerly in disfavour with the Kirk were received into the Army or
the Parliament, as Duke Hamilton, the Lords Lauderdale, Buchaim, Leith, Dedup,
Crawford; and of the English, Major General Massey, was admitted to a command
in the Army.

Col. Ker in the West of Scotland who had stood off from all parties hitherto,
at length so far complied with the Kirk-Grandees, that he took Straughan
prisoner, who by Cromwell's inveglement inclined to side with the English (a
right Scot.) But not long after Kerr was defeated and taken by Maj. Genesis
Lambert; a just reward and consequence of his seditious discord. About the
beginning of October, some Gentlemen and others in Norfolk took Arms against
the Tyranny of the pretended Parliament, declaring for the restitution of the
Ancient Government of the Land by a King and the Laws; but the County Militia
and some Forces from Lin suddenly dispersed them, taking some whom afterward
by a solemn new way of murder first practiced at Westminster upon the late
King, and afterward in most places of England upon his friends, they put to
death at Norwich. A little before this they likewise executed at Tyburn one Mr.
Benson, for having been guilty of the same pretended Treason with Col. Eusebius
Andrews formerly beheaded.

On December. 24. Edinburgh Castle having endured a violent siege 3. Months
surrendered to Cromwell, and so did other strong Castles and places, as Nesbit,
Berthwick and Roswell, etc. so successful were their Impious Arms, by God's
providence, who was pleased to use them as a scourge for these sinful Nations.

Preparations in the mean time were made for the Coronation of his Majesty, for
the celebrating of which the 1. of January had been long before designed by the
Estates. The place was the Town of Scoon, where 150. Kings of that Nation had
formerly been Crowned. Thither therefore his Majesty, with the Nobility, Barons
and Burgesses in their robes, remove'd, the whole Scotch Army standing all the
way as a guard making a lane between those two places. The solemnity was
performed with as much Pomp and Ceremony as the present State of things would
permit, and with loud Acclamations, Bonefires, shooting of Guns, etc. His
Majesty having first heard a Sermon preached by Mr. Rob. Douglas, sitting upon a
Scaffold erected in the Church of Scoone, took the ordinary Coronation Oath and
subscribed the National Covenant with the solemn League and Covenant. After
which he ascended upon a Stage a little Higher then the former, and sat down
in the Throne; when the people being demanded four times by the King at Arms,
Whether they were willing to accept of King CHARLES for their King, and becom^
subject to his Commandments, expressed their consent with loud Acclamations,
God save King CHARLES the Second. This being done, his Majesty was clothed by
the Lord Chamberlain with his Royal Robes; the Crown was set upon his Head by
the Marquess of Argyle, and the Scepter put into his hand, the Sword was girt
about him by the Earl Marshall, and the Spurs put on by the Earl of
Eglington. Then the Nobility being called by the Herald, one by one swore
allegiance and fealty to his Majesty, touching the Crown upon his head with
their right Hand, in these Words, By the Eternal and Almighty God who lives
and reigns for ever. I shall support thee to the uttermost. The people also
holding up their hands swore obedience to hi^ M^^^sty according to the usual
Oath. And to conclude ^ll, an exhortatory Oration was made by Mr. Rob. Duglasse
and a Prayer. Which being done his Majesty and the Nobility departed out of the
Church in the former Order and Pomp, the Earl of Glencarn carrying the Sword
before him.

The Ceremonies being thus ended his Majesty and the Nobility were intertain'd
at a Stately and Magnificent Dinner; which done, they all returned to St.
Iohnston's in the same manner they came in; his Majesty's Guard consisting of
the Sons of diverse great Scotch Lords and other Members of Parliament, the
Captain whereof was the Lord of Lorne Son to Argile. I have omitted the full
relation of all the passages at his Majesty's Inauguration, because they have
been already frequently published, and lest they should add too much to the
bulk of this volume.

This business being over, it behoved his Majesty to provide for the defense of
his Crown and Kingdom; in order whereunto he set up his Standerd at Aberdeen,
to which a considerable number of men in a short time repaired, of whom himself
was General, Duke Hamilton Lieut. General of the Army, David Lesley Major
General, Middleton Lieut. Genesis of the Horse, and Massey Commander in chief of
all the English Forces.

The Parliament of Scotland which had adjourned during his Majesty's
Coronation, reassembled about the beginning of March and much contest there was
for several Lords of the Royal Party to be admitted to their Seats in the
House; which by reason of the opposition of the Kirk-assemblies at Sterling and
Aberdeen could not be obtained till they had passed the Stool of Repentance;
which Duke Hamilton did with some kind of splendor, having a Table placed
before him covered with black Velvet with a Cushion of the same, and making a
great Feast that day.

In this Session a Committee was appointed to consider of the State of Affairs,
and examine obstructions; by whom several persons that were found to hold
correspondence with the English Army had their Estates sequestered and some were
tried for their lives; Arguile at the same time and other Covenanteer Lords
repining at the admission of the Royal Lords into the Parliament and Army, as
if they should thereby become overpowered or utterly discarded. And indeed to
these two pernicious qualities, Treachery and particular Ambition (peculiar
almost to that Nation) his Majesty's and that Kingdome's ensuing misfortunes
ought to be ascribed.

In the mean time his Majesty was very active in modelling his new Army, whose
Rendezvouse was at the East of Fife, encouraging them many times with his
presence and speech, the English gain two very strong Castles, Hume and
Trimptallon lying between Berwick and Edinburgh, the former by Colonel Fenwick,
and the other by Colonel Monck. But to prevent their further progress, his
Majesty personally visited all the Garrisons of Fife, and put them in a posture
to hinder the English from landing on that side the Frith; after which he went
to the Assembly at Aberdeen to endeavor by his presence and authority to
compose Dissentions. And having taken this order at home, he employed the Earl
of Dumferling Ambassador into Holland, and Mr. Crofts into Russia, besides
others into other Nations to solicit for assistance. Thus he acquitted himself
as far as humane prudence could reach; but abroad his Ambassadors received
nothing but fruitless promises and empty complements, amongst whom Sir Henry
Hide Lieger at Constantinople had the worst fortune; for I know not upon what
contest between him and Sir Thomas Bendish that lay there in behalf of the New
State, Bendish got him into his hands, and sent him over into England, where
(as other Loyal Subjects had formerly been) he was formally tried before a
parcel of Murderers in apretended High Court of Justice, condemned and beheaded
near the Old Exchange in London on March 4. 1650. A person he was of great
parts, honesty and loyalty. Of the same cup also and from the same hands tasted
Captain Brown Bushel, an expert Seaman, who had lately done notable service for
his Majesty by sea. He was beheaded on Tower Hill on the 25. of April 1651.

But to proceed; No considerations could unite the dissenting Covenanted Scots;
The Clergy like fire brands were as eager to ruin their Country with their
tongues, as the Sectarian Army could be with the sword; Guthry, Cant, Duram,
Galespy, men of hot spirits, inflaming inconsiderable discontents to high
outrages, as if a spirit of division had wholly possessed them, and so
perverted their judgments, that petty animosities were prosecuted with greater
zeal then the public Cause. Malignants it seems had commands given them, and
grew potent; this was the ground of contest. Some covenanted Lords too, either
for that they were Kirk-ridden, or blinded with envy and ambition, began to be
dissatisfied: whereupon Louden was discharged from being Chancellor, and the
Lord Burleigh substituted. This begat ill blood. The Earl of Sutherland
assembled about 500. men, and seemed to intend them upon another account. What
course then should his Majesty take amidst this perverse Nation? However, he
omitted no means that the most prudent and diligent Prince could use, as well to
reconcile Differences as to complete his levies; to which purpose he obtained
an Act of the Parliament for levying fifteen thousand foot, and eight thousand
horse. Soon after which the Parliament adjourned till the seventeenth of April
devolving the Civil Power in the mean time into the Hands of a Select Council,
and the Military upon a Committee of War consisting of twenty persons chosen
out of each of the Three Estates. Special care was taken about the fortifying
of Sterling, the King himself going often to hasten the completing of them,
and shortly after removed his Court from St. Iohnston's thither. The 29. of
May, being his Majesty's Birthday was solemnized with great rejoicing
throughout Scotland, the Parliament adjourning and his Majesty dining that day
with most of the Nobility at a great Feast; and the Town of Dundee to express
their affections beyond all the rest, presented his Majesty with a rich Tent,
6. Fieldpieces of Ordnance, and advanced a brave Regiment of Horse for his
service at their own charges. Mean while the English pursue their advantages,
and Col. Monk takes Blackness a strong place between Edinburgh and Sterling by
surrender. Which loss was not so considerable as that of the Earl of
Eglington (a person of eminent worth and authority) who having been sent into
the West with some other Commanders to raise Forces, and coming to Dunbarton to
put his Commission in execution, was there surprised by a party of Horse sent
thither for that purpose by Col. Lilburne, together with his Son Col. Ia.
Montgomery, Lieut. Col. Colburn, etc. and carried to Edinburgh.

About this time also, the pretended Parliament of England, judging it
advantageous to get into their power those lesser Islands which held out for
his Majesty, sent their General Blake to that of Scilly, who with three hundred
Seamen in a short space reduced the most important places in it.

The Parliament of Scotland being reassembled at St. Iohnston's after their
adjournment, his Majesty sent a Message to them, desiring, 1. That the Act
about the Classes of Malignants might be repealed. 2. That no more mention
might be made of the name of Malignants amongst them. 3. That Duke Hamilton,
the Earls of Calendar and Seaforth and others might have full command m the
Army. These proposals which were of high importance to the common safety, and
consentaneous as well to Religion as season of State, were notwithstanding
vehemently opposed by Argyle and the Covenanted gang; yet the moderate party
prevailed, and they were carried in the affirmative. And having passed these
and the Act of Indemnity, and taken order for the pressing of men, they
dissolved about the beginning of June. For the expediting the Levies, Argyle,
Huntly and Seaforth were dispatched away to their several Territories. Cromwell
in the mean time had been very sick, so that there passed little of action
during that time; nor were the Scots willing to engage till their forces were
completed. Maj. Genesis Massey had received instruction to fall into England with
the English Horse and Foot under his command, and together with the Duke of
Buckingham and the Lord Wilmot to join with a party in Lancashire that were to
rise for the King. The design was chiefly promoted at London by some of the
Presbyterian Clergy, who held correspondence with Maj. Genesis Massey, and
contributed diverse sums of money to his assistance. But a ship bound for the
Isle of Man being driven into Air in Scotland, was taken and Letters found in
her which discovered the whole Confederacy: whereupon the chief heads of it in
London were apprehended, Mr. Cook, Gibbons, Love, Ienkins, Drake, and others;
Two of whom, viz. Mr. Love, and Mr. Gibbons had a formal trial before a
pretended High Court of Justice. and were beheaded on Tower Hill Au. 22. 1651.
The rest upon their repentance and supplications were afterward released. By
this means the intended Irruption and Insurrection were frustrated.

Cromwell being now recovered from his sickness, and having contracted all his
forces into a Body by drawing in his out-guards or petty Garrisons, and having
received great supplies of Ammunition from Berwick and 80000. l. from the Iunto
by Sea for his Soldiers, resolves upon a speedy encounter. His Forces
consisted of 14. Regiments of Horse and 12. Regiments of Foot, 6. Troops of
Dragoons and 16. pieces of Ordnance. With these about the latter end of June he
advances into Lithgow, and endevour'd to dare the Scots to an engagement, who
lay strongly encamped at Torwood within 3. miles of Sterling; But they thought
fit to decline battle till their Forces were completed. Wherefore to intercept
their supplies of provision Col. Overton was commanded with 1600. foot and 4.
Troops of Horse, to fall into the North of Fife; who accordingly embarking his
men in small Boats landed them at the North-Ferry in spite of all opposition;
Cromwell himself in the mean time marching with his whole Army close up to the
Scots, intending to fall upon their Rear in case they moved to disturb the
Enterprise. However, Maj. Genesis Sir John Brown and Maj. Genesis Holburn were
dispatched to drive the English out of Fife again; but before they could come up
to them, Lambert and Okey were joined with Overton with 2. Regiments of Horse
and two of Foot. And with this unexpected reinforcement, the English wholly
defeated the Scots, killing 2000. upon the place, and taking above 1200
prisoners, among whom was the Commander in chief Maj. Genesis Brown, who did not
long survive this loss, but dyed (as is conceived) of grief, having always
approved himself to his Majesty a person of much fidelity and courage. This
defeat was the bane of the Scotch affairs. For soon after the English took in
Garrisons almost as fast as they approacht them. Brunt Island and a strong
Forth called Innesgarvy situate in an Isle lying in the Frith were reduced by
Maj. Genesis Lambert; and within a few days after Cromwell took the Town of St.
Iohnston's after one days siege by surrender. This prodigious success caused
his Majesty to alter his Counsels, and design an irruption into England; which
was resolved upon out of probable hopes that many of his loyal Subjects there
would betake themselves to his assistance when they understood he was in the
head of an Army in it. This indeed was a desperate course; but (according to
that of the great Physician,) what matter's it whether the remedy be desperate
when there is but one? Scotland was in a manner already lost, the Army he had
levied were raw unexperienced men, and all the Garrisons round about were
possessed by the Enemy, whose Forces were far more numerous, and better provided
of Ammunition and able Horses, and besides had been animated by frequent
Victories, and the spoil of such places, as they had taken. Possibly in England
his Majesty might soon have forces competent to match them; at least he should
not be beset with so many difficulties, and one fortunate Field might wholly
turn the Scale. Accordingly, upon Thursday July 31. 1651. all things being in
readiness the Scotch Army left their Camp at Sterling (which was soon after
delivered to Lieut. Genesis Monk) and the sixth day after being about 16000.
entered England by the way of Carlisle. Upon intelligence of this sudden March,
Cromwell's Army (of which the greatest part was in Fife) forthwith cros'd the
Frith and first Lambert is sent with 5. Regiments of Horse and Dragoons to fall
upon the Scots rear; Cromwell himself soon after ( Aug. 6.) following with 8.
Regiments of Foot, 2. of Horse, and 8. great Guns, having left 6000. horse and
foot with Lieutenant General Monck to reduce the remaining garrisons of
Scotland. Major General Harrison being advanced the nearest England, with 3000.
horse and Dragoons attended the motion of the Scotch Army, and the Westminster
Iuncto suddenly bestir themselves to raise the Militia of the whole Nation, and
make an Act to forbid all relief and succor to be given to his Majesty or his
Forces under penalty of High Treason. Immediately the Militia's of most
Counties were drawn into the Field against him, and for the hindering of his
progress, 2000. of the County Militia of Staffordshire, and 4000. out of
Lancashire and Cheshire under Colonel Birch joined with Lambert and Harrison;
whose first attempt upon the Royal Army, was at VVarrington bridge, the passage
of which was very sharply disputed, but at length gained by the Scots with the
loss of some men. In the mean time a party in Wales began to rise for the
King, intending to have joined with the Earl of Derby from the Isle of Man;
but the design was crushed before it came to any thing. The march of the Scotch
Army was managed with extreme civility to the people as they past, no soldier
daring to plunder or steal the least thing whatever, having been terrified by
the punishment of one of their number who was shot to death for entering an
Orchard. But as this carriage of theirs, together with his Majesty's
invitations, did not so prevail upon the people to come in to him as he
expected, so by the way fear deprived him of about the fourth part of the Army
he brought out of Scotland. It was deliberated by bis Majesty's council whether
or no to march forthwith to London; but the way was too tedious, and the
soldiers were much wearied with their journey already, and it was hoped the
interest Major General Massey had in Glocestershire would procure a confluence
of men from those parts. Asson as the Army entered England, and afterward at
every Market Town his Majesty was proclaimed King of England by an English man
whom he had created King at Arms, with much satisfaction of the Country.
However, such was the fate of these Nations, for the punishment of whose sins a
severe yoke was reserved by Providence, (for I know not what apparent reason to
ascribe their actions to in this occasion) that in stead of assisting their
just and lawful Prince, they arose generally in Arms against him. The Lord
Fairfax (who till then had been believed sensible of some remorse for his
former proceedings) appeared in the F^eld with a formidable body to flank the
Royal Army as they marched, London poured out her numerous Militia, and the
adjacent Counties were by strict order of Parliament enjoined to set out Horse
and Men at their own charges. The King in the mean time received no
considerable supply, saving one Troop of Horse commanded by a noble young
Gentleman Sir Cecill Howard, son to the Lord Howard of Estrich. Nevertheless
there wanted not courage in the breasts of the Nobility and Gentry with his
Majesty, whose great resolutions made them hope even in the midst of despair.
From Tong-Norton his Majesty sent a Trumpetter with a Letter and Summons to
Col. Mackworth Governor of Shrewsbury which I shall venture to insert with the
Answer; His Majesty's Letter was in these words.

Col. Mackworth. Having sent you herewith a Summons to render into my hands my
Town with the Castle of Shrewsbury, I cannot but persuade my self you will do
it, when I consider you a Gentleman of an ancient House, and of very d fferent
principles (as I am informed) from those with whom your employment ranks you at
present. If you shall peaceably deliver them unto me, I will not only pardon
what is past, and protect you and yours in your persons and all that belongs to
you, but reward fo eminent and seasonable a Testimony of your Loyalty with
future Trust and Favor, and do leave it to your self to propose the
particular, being upon that condition ready to grant you presently any thing
you shall reasonably desire, and to approve my self your Friend, C. R.

The Summons also which accompanied this Letter was to the same effect. But
whether the Governor looked upon his Majesty's condition too forlorn to engage
on his side, or acted really out of an hostile principle, I will not determine:
but the answer he returned to his Sovereign Lord the King was in the following
terms directed,

To the Commander in chief of the Scottish Army.
SIR, By your Trumpetter I received two Papers; the one containing a
Proposition, the other a direct Summons for the rendition of the Town and
Castle of Shrewsbury, the custody whereof I have received by authority of
Parliament. And if you believe me a Gentleman (as you say you do) you may
believe I will be faithful to my trust, to the violation whereof neither
allurements can persuade me, nor threatenings of force, especially when but
paper ones, compel me. What Principles I am judged to be of, I know not; but I
hope they are such, as shall declare me honest, and no way differing herein (as
I know) from those engaged in the same employment with me, who should they
des^rt the Cause they are embarked in, I resolve to be found, as I am,
unremoveable; the faithful servant of the Commonwealth of England,

H. Mackworth.


About the same time also his Majesty sent the like summons to Sr Thomas
Middleton, Governor of Chirk Castle in Shropshire; but this Gentleman was not
altogether so civil as the former; for in stead of returning any answer at all,
he caused the Messenger to be seized and sent away prisoner to VVrexham, who
was afterward hanged at Chester for this service.

It having been resolved upon debate by his Majesty's Council rather to march
Westward then toward London, his Army accordingly entered the City of
Worcester upon Friday the 22. of August. 1651. after one or two repulses by
the Forces that kept the City; the Inhabitants not only not opposing the Scots
entrance but helping to beat the English Soldiers out. In his Majesty's March
hither he had sent a Copy of his Declaration (in which he offered pardon to all
that would return to their Allegiance) enclosed in a gracious Letter to the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, which by order of the Usurping
Iunto at Westminster was on the 26. of Aug publicly burnt at the old Exchange
by the Hangman. And a day or two after at a Muster of 14000. men in Moorfields
the insolent Speaker Lenthall repaired thither, and caused a fellow with a Link
to burn a Copy of his Majesty's Declaration in the head of every Regiment.

On Saturday the 23. of Aug. his Majesty was there proclaimed King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland by Mr. Thomas Lisens Mayor and Mr. James Bridges
Sheriff of the City, with the great acclamations and joy of the loyal
Citizens. And on the same day also his Majesty sent abroad a Declaration, given
at his City of Worcester, for summoning all the neighboring Nobility, Gentry
and others from sixteen years of age to sixty, upon their Allegiance, to appear
in their persons with Horse and Arms at Pitchcroft on Tuesday following the
26. of Aug. where his Majesty would be present. On which accordingly appeared
at the said Rendezvous these loyal persons following, Francis Lord Talbot (now
Earl of Shrewsbury) with about 60. Horse, Mervin TouchetEsq Sir John
Packington, Sir Walter Blunt, Sir Ralph Clare, Ralph Sheldon of BeolyEsq John
VVashburn of WitchingfordEsq with 40. Horse, Tho. ActonEsq Rob. Blount of
KentswickEsq Rob. W gmore of LuctonEsq Thomas Hornyold of Blackmore ParkEsq
with 40. Horse, Francis KnotsfordEsq and diverse others.

The works of this City had for the most part been slighted a while before, and
therefore all endeavors were used to fortify it again. About two or three
days before the King's arrival at Worcester, the Earl of Derby landed at
VVeywater in Lancashire with 250. Foot and 60. Horse from his Isle of Man;
which leaving with the King he returned into that County and his interest in it
got together a Body of 1500. with which he was hasting to Manchester to join
with 500. more, and would probably have increased his forces in a short time to
a greater number. But Col. Lilburn being ordered to prevent him with 3.
Regiments and some Horse out of Cheshire, was forced to an engagement by the
Earl; out of a purpose to hinder him from joining with other forces which were
sent against him. The contest was sharp and doubtful for an hour, till at
length the Earl's Forces were put to flight, and himself being wounded,
narrowly escaped to Worcester; several persons of quality were slain of his
Party, as the Lord VViddrington, Sir Tho. Tilsley, Col. Trollop. Col. Galliard
with some others of good note: Among the taken were Maj. Genesis Sir Will.
Throckmorton, Sir Timothy Fetherstonhaugh, Col. Matthew Bointon, Major Chester,
Col. Rich. Leg, Col. John Robinson, Col. Ratclif Gerard, besides other
Officers (some of which soon after dyed of their wounds) 400. private Soldiers
were taken with all the Arms and Ammunition, the Earls George, Garter and 3.
Cloaks with Stars, and about 60. slain. The Earl of Derby and Col. Roscarrock
after this overthrow, which was on the 25. of Aug. by the assistance of one Mr.
Snead and one Mr. Elliot got to his Majesty at Worcester; where nevertheless
his Majesty and the Forces with him were resolute against all disasters; the
Fortifications were carried on with all possible diligence, and the Mount at
the South-East end of the Town strongly secured.

On the other side the Parliament by their new levies had increased their
Forces to a prodigious number, which as their own writers record, amounted to
above 80000. About three days after the former Victory Cromwell marched up
before Worcester with 17000. Horse and Foot, besides the parties under the Lord
Gray of Groby, Lambert and Harrison, which in all made up above 30000. men. The
first encounter was at Vpton-Bridge 7. miles from Worcester, which the
Royalists had broken upon news of their coming, only one Plank (either
through negligence or treachery) was left of it; over which Lambert passed some
Redcoats, who perceiving the Scots took the alarm, fled into a Church.
Whereupon Maj. Genesis Massey gave a camisado to the Church; but in the mean time
Lambert having passed over a supply of Horse, fell upon the back of the
Royallists, and overpowering them put them to a retreat, which was performed by
Maj. Genesis Massey with much gallantry who was in the rear, sometimes marching
off and sometimes fighting, till he escaped to Worcester; in which service he
received a shot in the Arm and his Horse was slain under him.

After this the Enemies disposed themselves in the manner they conceived most
convenient to streighten the Town. To which purpose Fleetwood having left a
sufficient force to secure the pass at Vpton, approacht nearer the City, and
Cromwell gave order for two Bridges to be made, the one of boats over Severne
under Bun-hill a mile below the City, and the other over Teame a lesser River
that falls into Severn; and this, for the better conjunction of the Army.

On the 29. of Aug. Cromwell faced the City with a great body of Horse and Foot,
but drew off again and attempted nothing.

But on Saturday Aug. 30. It was resolved by his Majesty at a Council of War
to beat up the Enemies Quarters that night with 1500. choice Horse and Foot,
commanded by Maj. Genesis Middleton and Sir William Keyth, all of them wearing
their shirts over their Armor for distinction: the result was accordingly put
in execution, and might in all probability have proved importantly successful,
had not the design been most traitorously discovered to the Enemy by one Guyes
a Tailor in the City, who was rewarded with a Halter for his treachery; but the
Westminster Iunto to show how affectionately they regarded base and treacherous
actions, gave Guyes wife 200 l. down and 200 l. per annum during her life. This
sally was made with much gallantry and resolution; but the Enemy having
received intelligence of the design, were in readiness to receive the
Royalists; and nevertheless were unable to bear the shock, till bringing on
successively fresh forces, their number constrained the Assailants to retire.
In this Action Major Knox was slain, and some few made prisoners.

In this condition was his Majesty at Worcester having about 10000. Scots and
2000. English with him, and surrounded with a numerous Army of three to one in
an ill-fortified City. Which odds, being considered, I presume no rational man
will account it a Miracle for the better cause and lesser number to be worstest
by the greater. The Hearts of the besieged were as courageous as those of their
enemies, and no doubtless burnd'ned with less guilt. They were also animated
by the example of his Majesty's hero^cal resolution, who determined not be
behind any of his party in danger And now the fatal day appeared the third of
September, on which the year before, the Scots were so considerably overthrown
at Dunbar; which defeat occasioned the loss of that Kingdom.

In the morning his Majesty held a Council of War upon the Top of the
Colledge-Church Steeple, the better to view in what manner the Enemy lay From
whence perceiving the Enemie's new bridges, and a kind of a skirmish at Powick
bridge, he forthwith commanded all to their Arms, and marched thither himself,
where he gave order for the making good of that pass and opposing that of the
Enemy over Severne. Soon after his return to the City, the Enemy assaulted
Powick bridge furiously, which was valiantly defended by a Brigade of Horse and
Foot under Maj. Genesis Rob. Montgomery and Col. George Keyth, till the former
being dangerously wounded and his Ammunition spent, was forced to retire
disorderly into Worcester, and the latter was taken prisoner by the Enemy.

This place being won, there was no time to deliberate longer. Wherefore it was
resolved to engage Cromwell forthwith, who lay at Perry-wood within a mile of
Worcester. The onset was given with a great deal of fury by the Royallists,
insomuch that Cromwell's invincible Lifeguard was unable to bear the shock and
compelled to give ground in some disorder; their great Guns also were for some
time in the power of the Royalists. The Rebel Commanders had put the new
raised County forces to bear the first brunt of the encounter, of whom the
Royalists made a horrible slaughter.

His Majesty himself lead up the Scots Foot in this battle, and that with so
much courage and gallantry, that his inveterate enemy Cromwell could not but
applaud his valor. The Fight continued for the space of three or four hours
very sharp and fierce, during which his Majesty had his Horse twice shot under
him, and rallyed the Infantry himself; until by the successive supplies of
fresh forces they were in a manner all lost. The Rebels had great advantage not
only in being more numerous, but fighting both with Horse and Foot against his
Majesty's Foot only; for the Scotch Horse did not engage at all in this
encounter, which some impute to the treachery of David Lesley who in the mean
time commanded a brave body of Horse to stand still, and look on the ruin of
their King and Fellow Subjects, threatening the first man that stirred with
death. For the truth of which relation I dare not undertake; but it is certain
the Scotch Horse under Lesley were scarce any more then spectators of the
battle, nor is it incredible but that treachery might be practiced by a Scot,
and money employed by Cromwell for conquest as well as force. The remainder of
the forlorn Royal Army being put to flight were pursued into the Town by the
Victors; his Majesty was as one of the last in the field, and could hardly be
persuaded to outlive that day.

At Sudbury-gate, through which the routed Royalists fled, an Ammunition Wagon
was overthrown and lay cross the passage, so that his Majesty was enforced to
alight and enter into the City on foot. In the Friars street he to k ^ fresh
Horse, and perceiving many of his Foot throw down their Arms, and decline
fighting, he rode up and down among them, sometimes with his h^t in his hand,
entreating them to stand to their Arms, and sell their lives as dear as they
could. But seeing his encouragements ineffectuall, he said, I had rather you
would shoot me then keep me alive to see the sad consequences of this fatal
day. Nevertheless the Earl of Cleveland, Sir James Hamilton, Col. William
Carlis (then Major to the Lord Talbot) and some Officers rallyed what force
they could (which was unproportionable to that of the Assailants,) and gave a
check to to the Enemy as they were entering in at Sudbury Gate and valiantly
disputed that street with them. Which action was very important to secure his
Majesty's flight. In the mean time Fleetwood's men were on the o her side of
the City masters of St John's, and having wholly dispersed all opposers fell to
plunder. As Soon as Cromwell had made his way into Sudbury-street, whilst some
of his Forces were furiously k^lling and slaying all that were in the streets,
he hastened with some Regiments to the Fort Royal, commanded by Col. Drummond,
where he found courageous opposition, and lost 300. Cheshire men; but at length
reducing it with twice the number of the defenders, he put every man of them to
the sword, to the number of 1500. Then was there seen the saddest spectacle
that humane imagination is capable to conceive, the streets being all strewn
with carcasses and covered with blood, houses broken open and pillaged, and the
whole Town filled with the noise of the insolent Victors and the cries of the
poor inhabitants; till having satiated their cruelties and rapacious desires,
or rather tired themselves with barbarous executions and inhumanities, they
began to think of securing prisoners. The slain were reckoned about 4000.
amongst whom was Duke Hamilton, who being taken dyed so on after of his wounds,
a very Noble, courageous and loyal person, and worthy of immortal fame. The
Prisoners taken in the battle and the City were about 7000. in which number
were the Earls of Carnwarth, Rothes, Kelly, the Lord Synclare, Sir John
Packington, Maj. Genesis Montgomerry, Maj. Genesis Piscotty, Mr. Rich. F^nshaw his
Majesty's Secretary, the General of the Ordnance, the Adjutant General of the
Foot, and the Marshal General, besides several Colonels and others inferior
Officers, 158. Colors (which together with those taken the year before at
Du^bar were hung up in Westminster Hall) the King's Standard, his Collar of
Ss, Coach and Horses, with other things of great value.

How many of the Rebels fell in this fight, we h^ve no ^r^ditable relation;
their own Pamphlets mention only the loss of Quartermaster Genesis Mosely, Capt
Jones, and about 200. common Soldiers and 300. wounded, among whom was Charles
Howard, afterward Captain of Cromwell's Lifeguard, and another Captain.

This is the truest and most impartial account I can meet with of this
remarkable overthrow, which was then looked upon as the decision of the Cause
between King and Commonwealth. But it pleased God that in this great loss the
Forturne of England was preserved, whose blood was the only thing wanting to
cement the foundations of the new Republic. The manner of his Majesty's escape
was in a s^rict sense not miraculous, yet as near a miracle as almost any thing
that is barely possible by natural means. Certainly, he that shall deliberately
consider the paucity of such of the Nobility as escaped the fury of the fight,
and diligence of the pursuers (of all the Lords there, only the Duke of
Buckingham and the renowned Lord Wilmot getting undiscovered beyond Sea) the
instruments of his Majesty's preservation, such whom indigence or fear might
have induced to prefer reward or security before faithfulness to a Prince, who
in all humane probability was unlikely ever to requite them for their dangerous
loyalty; and the places where his Majesty was concealed, in the midst of his
enemies, and in such Counties as had raised most men against him in this
unfortunate expedition; He, I say, that shall consider no more but this, will
no doubt think himself obliged to adore the Divine Providence, which never
owned the Royal Cause more apparently then in this Deliverance, and which at
the same fastened the yoke of slavery upon the necks of these Nations and by an
extraordinary goodness preserved the Person from destruction, by whom alone
their lost Estate was possible to be restored. Many are the relations of the
manner of his Majesty's escape, and at this day almost as various and
different in published Histories, as the conjectures and rumors of people were
immediately after it. I shall endeavor to offer what the most credible authors
and reports have delivered concerning this particular, for obtaining the exact
knowledge of which I have omitted no industry, that might gratify the curiosity
which possesses all the World touching so extraordinary a Providence. It seems
not yet convenient to a Noble Person instrumental in it to discover all the
circumstances of it, though she is pleased to put us in hopes of obtaining that
favor from her after some short time. In the mean while, it is desired the
Readers would receive at least with alike candor what we have taken pains to
find out for their satisfaction, as the relation of theirs who make truth the
least of their care, and promiscuously take up any slight reports upon trust.

But to return to our purpose. His Majesty having kept the field till all was
lost, and being pursued to the Town-G^tes, (while the victorious Enemies were
disputing) Sudbury-street in Worcester with the Earl of Cleveland, Sir James
Hamilton, Col. William Carlis, and some other resolute and courageous
Royalists) he marched out at St. Martin's Gate about six a clock in the evening
with his main body of Horse, which had not engaged to any purpose, but yet were
in much confusion. When he was come to Barbon's bridge about half a mile out of
Worcester, he made several stands, and moved the Lords and Officers with him
that they might rally and try the fortune of another Fight. But many of the
Troupers being observed to throw off their Arms and shift for themselves,
there was no encouragement to proceed in that course. Whereupon, the chief and
only care was to preserve his Majesty's Person from the hands of those
blood-thirsty Sectaries, who accounted it the interest of their Religion and
new State to murder him. To which purpose it was resolved to march for
Scotland, and one Walker (formerly Scoutmaster to Col. Sands) undertook to be
the guide; but being come as far as Kniver-heath not far from Kederminster,
and daylight being gone, the guide was at a loss which way to go. Upon which
his Majesty making a stand, and being almost spent with his extraordinary
action in the field, and the wearisomness of his flight, advised with some
Lords whether he might march, only to take some few hours rest. The Earl of
Derby told his Majesty, that in his flight from Wiggan to Worcester (after he
had been defeated by Lilburn) he had met with a very faithful person and great
convenience of concealment at a place called Boscobel-house.

This House is seated in Shropshire, but upon the consines of Staffordshire,
and lies between Tong-Castle and Brewood; it is a very obscure habitation
though a fair building, and standing in a very lovely grove, was therefore so
called from Bosco bello which in Italian signifies Fairwood; it belongs to one
Mr. Fitz-Herbert, though himself lived not in it at that time. Thither his
Majesty resolved to go, being accompanied by the Duke of Buckingham, the Earls
of Derby and Lauderdail, the Lords Talbot and VVilmot, the Colonels Thomas
Blague, Edw. Roscarrock, Mr. Marmaduke Darcy, Rich. Lane, Will. Armorer (since
Knighted) Hugh May, Peter street, and Charles Giffard, who undertook to conduct
them by the assistance of Francis Yates his servant, and one very expert in the
ways of that Country. Lieut. Genesis Lesley with his Scotch Horse in the close of
the evening took the direct way Northward by Newport.

His Majesty and his Train upon deliberation marched through Sturbridge a
considerable Town in Staffordshire; but the better to prevent discovery order
was given for all persons to speak only the French Language. Boscobel was the
place intended; but that the Company might not know so much, his Majesty was
conducted by Mr. Giffard to a House within half a mile of it, called
VVhiteladies which name it has retained ever since it was a Monastery of
Cistertian Nuns, who were habited in white. Here they arrived about 3 a clock
in the morning, having rid 26. miles from Worcester; and being entered into
the House, which was kept only by Servants, a consultation was held how to
escape the fury of the blood-thirsty Enemies: the result of which was that all
possible care should be taken for his Majesty's concealment in that place till
he could have a safe opportunity to waft over into France, and that his Retinue
of loyal Lords and Gentlemen should shift for themselves some other way. In
the mean time the Servant that kept Boscobel House, called William Penderel,
was sent for, and a brother of his named Richard Penderel, who lived near hand
at Hobbal Grange. Who being come and conjured to fidelity, the next course
taken was to disguise his Majesty's Person. This was done by blacking his face
and hands, cutting of his hair, and exchanging his Buffe Coat and gray
breeches richly lac't for a Doc-skin doublet and green breeches of Richard
Penderels. His Majesty as he undressed himself gave a Spanner string being a
gold chain worth 300 l. to a servant of his then ready to depart. His clothes
were buried under ground for a long time after.

And now it behooved his loyal followers to forsake him, which they did with
sad hearts, being more sensible of his Majesty's hard fate, then solicitous
what destiny attended themselves only the L. Wilmot stayed and was conveyed by
Io. Penderel to Mr. Whitgreaves. Time it was for them to depart, for within
half an hour after, some of Col. Ashenhurst's Troop, who quartered at Cotsal 3.
miles distant, came to the House. But before that, Richard Penderel had
conducted his Majesty out at a backdore into a wood belonging to Boscobel house
called Spring Coppice, in the borders of which William, Humphrey and George (3.
of Richard's brothers) scouted about to bring intelligence.

The Lords and their company being about 40. Horse (of which number his
Majesty's pad-nag was one, and ridden by Mr. Lane one of the Bedchamber) took
the North road to Newport, in hope to have overtaken or met General Lesl^y who
was gone that way with the main body of Scotch Horse. But they had not
traveled far before a party of the Parliamentarians who were in pursuit of the
Lord Leviston (Captain of his Majesty's Lifeguard) overtook them. The Lords
resolutely faced about and stopped their speed, some of the pursuers being slain
and the rest put to flight. Nevertheless they had no long contentment in this
good success; for a little beyond Newport, some of Col. Lilburne's men met
them in the Front, and another party of Parliamentarians from Worcester fell in
upon their Rear; so that themselves and horses being extremely tired with the
former days service and the long and hasty march of the night without the
least refreshment or succor, the Noble Earl of Derby, and the Earl or
Lauderdail with Mr. Giffard their guide and some others were taken prisoners.
The Earl of Derby was carried to Chester and there tried by a Iunto of
Officers, and sentenced to be beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire. The Earl of
Lauderdail was carried to VVindsor-Castle and there kept prisoner for many
years. Mr. Giffard escaped not long after from an Inn in Bunbury in Cheshire.
In this conflict the Duke of Buckingham with the Lord Leviston, Col. Blague,
Mr. Darcy, and Mr. May fled into a by road, and got into Chessardine woods near
Newport; and there the Duke by the assistance of two honest Laborers put
himself into a disguise, and was by one Nath. Matthewes a Carpenter conveyed to
the house of a loyal Gentleman, Mr. Hawley, at Bilstrop in Nottingamshire,
from whence he went to that Lady Villiers house at Brooksby in Leicestershire,
and at length after various difficulties got secure to London, and passed into
France. The Lord Leviston and the other 3. Gentlemen having quitted their
horses, were concealed in little cottages by some loyal Countrymen, till they
had means to escape beyond the Seas. The Lord Talbot, after the routing of the
Noble Company, hasted toward his Father's house at Longford near Newport,
where he was by providence preserved in an. Out-house from being discovered by
some of the Enemies forces who had pursued him thither, and searched the house
four days together. These were the several fates of those noble persons that
accompanied his Majesty in his flight; let us now return to the place where we
left his sacred person, in the midst of Spring-Coppice near Boscobel house, on
Thursday morning Sept. 4. having a wood-bill in his hand, and accompanied only
with Richard Penderel, three other of the brothers being vigilant to descry the
approach of passengers. It happened to be a very rainy day, so that the Trees
afforded not sufficient shelter to keep his Majesty from the inconvenience of
the wet, nor was there any thing for him to sit on, till Richard stepped to a
neighbors for a bla^^^, which served for both uses. (...) ^lso caused the wife
of Francis Yates (above mentioned) to provide something for his Majesty to eat,
and bring it into the Wood. The fare was such as the place and time afforded; A
mess of milk and sugar, some Eggs, and a Dish of Butter. His Majesty being
something surpised at the presence of the Woman that brought his Dinner, said
to her, Good woman, Can you be faithful to a distressed Cavalier? To which she
answered very heartily, Yes Sir, I will rather die then discover you: which
words gave his Majesty great satisfaction. When night was come, his Majesty
went with these Corydons to Richard's house at Hobbal-Grange, where their old
mother was overjoyed to see his Majesty in safety, and that her sons had the
happiness to be instrumental to it. Further care was forthwith taken to
disgui^e his Majesty, and he took upon him the name of William Jones, and
pretended to be a Wood-cutter, newly come thither to work; and this, to the end
he might be unsuspected by the rest of the family. The good mother prepared his
Majesty a cleanly Fricasse of Bacon and Eggs, part of which being eaten by him,
and the rest by the Rusticks, his Majesty set forth with Richord Penderel on
foot for Wales, intending to go that night to the house of an honest
Gentleman of Richard's acquaintance at Madely in Shropshire, 5. miles from
VVhiteladies. When they had gone about 2. miles, an accident befell them
wherewith they were in some fear. For as they were passing Evelin Mill, the
Miller, who had then in his custody some considerable Royallists, hearing some
persons pass by, came out and demanded who is there? To which no answer was
given, but his Majesty and his conducter immediately left the way and waded
through a Brook, which something asswag'd the galling of his feet; and so they
got free of the Miller, who was on the other side no less fearful of them. As
they passed through the Water his Majesty was in some danger of loosing his
guide, had he not been directed by the rusling of his Calve-skin breeches (as
he afterward pleasantly observed) it being an extreme dark night. At midnight
they got to Mr. VVoolf's house, and were by him heartily entertained. But the
frequent passing of the Enemies forces through that Town, and consequently the
likelihood of their coming quarter at that house, made this Gentleman apprehend
it unsafe for his Majesty to lodge in it, and therefore he secured him and his
servant Richard in a hay-mow. During their stay Mr. VVoolf had intelligence
brought him by a trusty servant (sent abroad to that end) that all the bridges
over Severne were kept by guards of the Enemies and all the passage-boats
seized on. Whereupon by his advice having spent all that day (Friday) in the
barn, and being refreshed at evening in the house (where Mrs Woolf also made
him a lotion for his hands with boiled Walnuttree-leaves) he departed about 11.
a clock at night for Boscobel house, where he arrived about 3. on Saturday
morning. Col. Carlis (whom we formerly mentioned with honor for susteining the
brunt of the enemies in Sudbury street in Worcester till his Majesty got out of
the Town) was fled into these parts, near which he was borne (namely, at
Bromhall in Staffordshire within two miles of Boscobel) and having lain in the
wood for some time, was come that morning to the said house to get some relief
of his old Acquaintance, William Penderel; and by this means his Majesty and
the Colonel met together there; where congratulations being passed, they were
entertained with rustic fare, as bread and cheese and a Posset, and care taken
for refreshing his Majesty's feet which were much surbated and galled with
travel. After which his Majesty and the Colonel, conceiving the house less
safe then the wood, accordingly betook themselves thither, and by the help of
the Corydons climbed into a large Oak, the thickness of whose leaves
sufficiently concealed them from being discerned by any spectator from below.
Upon this Oak, being accommodated with two pillowes and some mean fare, they
continued all the day, his Majesty leaning in the Colonel's lap, and taking
some slumbring rest, of which he had had little or none the two preceding
nights; and in the mean time some of the loyal hearted Country people hovered
near the place, and others went abroad to get intelligence.

During his Ma estie's journey to Mr. Woolfs at Madely, the Lord VVilmot
understanding his departure from White-ladies removed from Mr. Whitgreaves
house at Mosely to that of Col. John Lane at Bently near VValsal, South-East
from Mosely about 4. miles, and intended to make use of an offer made him by
Mrs Jane Lane the Colonel's Sister to accompany her to Bristol in order to his
escape beyond Sea, she having by accident procured a Pass from a
Parliamentarian Officer for her self and a man to go thither to see her sister
who was then near her time of lying in.

His Majesty and the Colonel descended from the Oak at evening and entered into
Boscobel house, where William Penderel showed his Majesty the secret place in
which the Earl of Derby had been concealed after his overthrow at Wigan, which
the King liked so well that he resolved to make his abode in it, till further
opportunity were offered for his escape beyond Sea, and not to go more to the
Royal Oak, which afforded less convenience. Humphry Penderel the miller
having been that day at Shefnal a Town a few miles distant, where he was
examined by a Parliamentarian Colonel (who had heard of the Kings having been
at White-ladies) and threatened with the penalty of concealing his Majesty's
Person, which was death without mercy, and withal informed that the Iunto
propounded 1000 l. for a reward to any that should discover him. But this
true-hearted person was proof against all temptations to disloyalty, and
related this passage to his Majesty at night. Who having been entertained with
a dish of chickens took up his lodging upon a Pallet in the secret place. On
the Sunday morning, his Majesty being desirous of some mutton for that days
food, and all other ways being dangerous, Col. Carelis with the help of
William Penderel borrowed a sheep out of the neighboring flock, part of which
his Majesty and the Col. together cut into collops, and cookt it in a frying
pan for their own repast; after which his Majesty spent some part of the day in
reading, in a handsome tetir'd arbor in the garden, the loyal Brethren in the
mean time scouting abroad for intelligence. And whether it were through
particular providence or for that it was known that only some servants kept
Boscobel house, the same was never searched all the time of his Majesty's abode
there, but VVhiteladies upon a credible report his Majesty had been there,
often. On the same day his Majesty sent to inform the Lord VVilmot where he
was, who thereupon desired to meet his Majesty that night at a place appointed
in a field near Mr. VVhitgreave's house at Mosely which lay in the midway,
viz. five miles on the one side from Boscob^l, and five miles on the other from
Colonel Lane's house at Bently. His Majesty being disabled by his former travel
on foot, was forced to make use of Humphrey Penderel's Mill horse (which was
suitably accoutred) to go thither, leaving behind him the faithful and
renowned Colonel Carlis, who heartily prayed for his Majesty's preservation.
Upon the way his Majesty was attended by the five loyal Brothers, William,
John, Richard, Humphrey and George Penderel, and Francis Yates, each of them
being armed with a good Bill or Pike staff, and some with pistols, intending
to have used the same in case they should have met with a number not too great.
Two of them marched before, and one on each side of his Majesty's horse; the
other two at a distance behind: and they took all the by-ways they could. His
Majesty being arrived at the place appointed, met one Mr. Huddlestone, an
honest Gentleman, there, ready to conduct him into Mr. VVhitgreave's house. But
before he entered he gave William, Humphrey and George the honor to kiss his
hand, and thanking them for their fidelity, with promises to reward it, if it
pleased God, he dismissed them with the horse. My Lord Wilmot testified extreme
joy at the sight of his Majesty, who also embraced him, and after some
refreshment given to his Majesty, and civil expressions which he was pleased
to use toward the two loyal Gentlemen Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddlestone, he
was conducted to the secret place intended for his lodging, which was more
secure then commodious for his rest. Before the Lord Wilmot betook himself to
his repose, he consulted with the two Gentlemen concerning the watching of all
avenues, that timely notice might be given of the approach of any soldiers.
And if it should so fall out (said he) the Rebels have intelligence of your
harboring any of the King's party, and should therefore put you to any torture
for confession, Be sure you discover me first; which may perhaps stop their
further search, and preserve the King. Such was the Heroical generosity of that
noble Lord, and his superlative affection to his Prince.

On the afternoon of the next day notice was given to Mr. VVhitgreave that some
soldiers were in the neighborhood with intention to apprehend him for having
been with his Majesty at Worcester. This was a very surprising alarm. But Mr.
Whitgraeve forthwith secured his Royal Guest, who was laid upon Mr.
Huddlestone's bed, and the Lord Wilmot in the secret place; and then setting
open all the chamber-doors went boldly down to the Soldiers, convincing them
by the testimony of his neighbors that he had not been from his own house in
the last fortnight. Wherewith the Soldiers being satisfied went not up stairs
at all; and so this imminent danger was escaped. The same night the Lord Wilmot
repaired to Col. Lane's at Bently, in order to his Majesty's going thither
also; and during his absence his Majesty spent the next day in conversation
with Mr. Huddlestone, in which he intimated to him that his Councils had been
by some treacherous instruments very often discovered to the Rebels before they
were put in execution by his loyal Subjects. At midnight Col. Lane came from
Bently to attend his Majesty thither; whereupon he took leave of Mrs
Whitgreave, saluting her and giving her thanks for his entertainment: He
expressed himself also with much gratitude to Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddlestone,
advising them to be very careful of avoiding the dangers which might ensue to
them in case they should be discovered to have been instrumental in his
concealment; and therefore directed them to a Merchant in London, to receive
moneys for their transportation beyond Sea, if they thought fit. And lastly he
promised them to remember their civilities and fidelity to him, when ever it
should please God to restore him to his Dominions. Such was the goodness of
this excellent Prince, and his care for the preservation of his preservers.
After this, his Majesty gave them his hand to kiss, and they returned him
their zealous prayers and wishes for his safety. His Majesty being safely
arrived at Bently staid there but a short time, but took the opportunity of Mrs
Jane Lane's Pass, and rode before her to Bristol, in the quality of her
Servant, the Lord Wilmot riding for the most part at some distance from them.
There his Majesty hoped to have gotten convenience of transportation into
France; but his expectations failed him: for no Master of a Vessel durst
undertake to waft over any single person, unless he knew certainly beforehand
what he were. So that it being a Town of great resort, his Majesty was enforced
to depart from it. Whither he went afterward is not hitherto certainly known:
Nor has it pleased his Majesty or that Lady to discover to any. Several
passages are written to have happened indangering his discovery both at Bristol
and elsewhere, but the relators have not the least ground for any of them, and
have rather chosen to gratify vulgar readers with impertinent fictions then to
confess their ignorance of that which they did not and cannot yet know. The
loyal Lady in all her journeys with his Majesty comported her self with
extraordinary prudence and fidelity, expressing her observance as often as
opportunity safely permitted it, and at other times acting her part in the
disguise with much caution and discretion. A further relation of his Majesty's
progress in England, and the manner of his transportation into France, as soon
as it comes to our hands from the honorable person who, besides his Majesty, is
now alone able to impart it, shall be presented to the world. In the mean time
I am glad I can record that he took ship at Brighthempston in Sussex about the
end of October 1651. and having by the Divine Providence escaped the greatest
dangers imaginable, in England, and some too upon the Sea, landed safely at
Diep in Normandy, where he stayed not, but went forthwith to Roan, and from
thence dispatched Letters to Paris to give notice of his arrival; and in the
interim was furnished with accommodations befitting his quality by the Duke of
Longueville. Intelligence of his safe arrival being brought to Paris, the Duke
of Orleance his Majesty's noble and generous Uncle sent his own Coach for him,
which met him on the way as far as Magny, and coming nearer the City he was met
by a company of Nobles and Gentlemen and conducted to the Louvre. Entertainment
was there forthwith provided for him, and the Queen his Mother, and the Duke of
Orleance visited him the same night; The next day also the Duke of Orleance and
Mademoiselle his daughter visited him together with the Dukes of Beaufort and
Guise, Marshal Turein, and other of the great Peers and Nobles of France,
congratulating his happy deliverance; Nor was it long before the King of
France, and the Queen Mother did the like, expressing their regret for his
Majesty's disasters, and the great interest they took in his safety.

Thus I have drawn into as narrow compass as I could the particulars and
circumstances of his Majesty's preservation, in each of which is remarkable
his great patience and goodness, and withal his exemplary fortitude in
undergoing the greatest calamities that could befall a Prince on this side
death. I have perhaps made too long a story of it for this little Volume, but
it was for the Reader's sake, who I hope will be stirred up by it to praise the
King of kings that delivered his Anointed from becoming a prey to those that
thirsted after his blood. Certainly not only we, but even the succeeding
generations will have cause to bless the Divine Providence, for that in the
midst of his judgments upon these Nations, he was pleased to preserve so
precious a mercy for them in store; to the end that having been sufficiently
chasten'd with the Scorpions of bloody and tyrannical Governors for their sins
against their natural, pious and gracious Sovereign, they might in due time be
restored to the blessings which they had forfeited under the government of his
excellent Son and his posterity to the end of the world.

In the pursuit after this fatal battle were taken besides the Earls of D^rby,
Lauderdale, Cleaveland, and his son the Lord Wentworth, the Earl of Kenmore,
David L^^l^y, Lieutenant General Middleton, Major General Vandruske, the Lord
Spyne, Sir William Fleming, with many others of quality. Of 3000. horse which
fled, 1000. were taken about Beudley, in Staffordshire, more in other places,
partly by soldiers, and partly by rising parties of Country people, who
barberously knocked many stragglers on the head in Yorkshire, Cheshire,
Lancashire, Shropshire and Warwickshire. Major General Massey having with many
wounds upon him escaped out of the field, and finding himself unable for
flight, yielded himself to the civility and mercy of the Countess of Stamford;
to which he was induced upon the Account of former friendship, he having been
Major General under the Earl her husband in the Wars between his late Majesty
and the Parliament. How far this Lady's generosity extended, I know not; but
her son the Lord Gray of Groby understanding it, forthwith secured him as a
Prisoner till his wounds were cured, and then he was sent up to the Parliament,
and committed to the Tower, from whence he escaped not long after by an
ingenious wile, and went into France to his Majesty.

The news of this victory caused great rejoicing amongst the pretended
Parliament, who now looked upon their new Commonwealth as founded to Eternity.
And to tell the World that they were the Favorites of Heaven, and that God had
owned their cause, a day of solemn Thanksgiving was appoint'd throughout the
whole Nation. And indeed though there was nothing miraculous in the victory,
the Parliamentarians being six times the number of the Royallists; yet it may
be said to have been the Work of God, and they the instruments of his wrath
upon the people of this Land, and the scourges of God, as Attila, that terrible
destroyer of Christendom was once called Flagellum Dei. The only Miracle was
his Majesty's deliverance, in which the King of kings was pleased to remember
mercy in judgment, and give us cause to adore his Providence both in
afflicting this Nation in this excellent Prince, and suffering wicked Tyrants,
Murderers and Oppressors to prosper; in the mean time preserving him in whom
our hopes lay, from the hands of his bloodthirsty enemies.

And as if success attended impious Arms, the Garrisons of Scotland fell
every day into the power of the English. Sterling Castle was delivered to
Colonel Monck while Cromwell was at Worcester, and in it great store of
warlike Ammunition, with many of the Royal Ensigns. Old General Lesley Earl
of Leven, with several other Scotch Lords intending to have levied a party of
men for his Majesty, and to have raised the siege of that strong and loyal Town
Dundee, were surprised by a party of English horse; shortly after which the
Town was taken by storm, and the City of St. Andrews and Aberdeen, with other
Towns, Castles and Forts surrendered upon summons.

On the 12. of September Cromwell entered triumphantly into London (having sent
the poor captive Scots thither before him,) and on the 16. he went to the
Parliament House, and had a congratulatory Oration made to him by Lenthal, the
Speaker, and was the same day feasted by John Kendrick Mayor of London. From
whence he never after went forth upon any expedition.

About the latter end of October, the Island of Iersey was reduced by Colonel
Hain and General Blake from Sea, and the Isle of Man was surrendered to Colonel
Duckenfield upon Articles by the Countess of Derby, whose renowned, pious and
valiant Lord was at Chester adjudgeed to death for engaging with the King at
Worcester, by a Council of War, after quarter given, and beheaded at Bolton in
Lancashire on the 15. of October, with the tears and lamentations of most of
the Spectatours. Several executions were also done upon others by shooting or
hanging in diverse places for the same cause, as on Sir Timothy
Fetherstonehaugh, Captain Bendbow, etc.

They were tried upon the pretended Act made after the King's coming into
England, viz. Aug. 12. 1651. prohibiting correspondence with his Majesty or his
party under the penalty of High Treason.

His Majesty having upon his arrival at Paris been visited and congratulated by
the King, Queen and Nobles of France, had a Princely Attendance assigned him,
and lodgings in the Louvre, where he lead a retired life in expectation of some
happier opportunity which it might please Providence to present him with for
the recovery of his Kingdoms, which he had now small hopes to obtain by the
assistance of his own Subjects in either of them; England being so strictly
overaw'd by the numerous Army kept on foot for that purpose, and Scotland and
Ireland being in a manner wholly subdued by the English Arms. Yet in Scotland
there were still some small Forces up in the North, as the Marquis of Huntley
with about 1500. men, and the Lord Belcarris. The Marquis of Argyle also
fortified his houses at Ander-arran and Lorne and the Castles in Arran Island;
and was expected to join with 4000. with the former. Moreover the Clergy were
still very high against the English. But it seems the designs of the Noble
men were only to make themselves considerable, that they might treat upon
better terms; For shortly after the Marquis of Huntly made his peace, the Lord
Belcarris and diverse other Lords came in to the protection of Lieut. Genesis
Monck, and Argyle having made an attempt to summon a Parliament, and shuffled
off and on for some months at length submitted, and afterward testified under
his hand his agreement to the making of Scotland a Commonwealth with England,
and protested fidelity to it as established without King, or House of Lords,
etc. Upon which terms he was left at liberty with assurance to enjoy his
Estate. Had these Lords been cordial to the Royal interest, to which they had
so solemnly sworn a little while before, they might easily have maintained the
Highlands against all opposition, these places being naturally almost
inaccessible and invincible.

Notwithstanding this low posture of his Majesty's affairs, he was treated
with much honor by the Princes and Nobility in France, and Mademoiselle de
Orleans daughter to the late Duke of that Title, being a very rich Princess,
worth 60000. per annum and Sovereign Duchess of Montpensier, showed great
inclinations toward him in relation to marriage. It is also reported that
there was a match designed between his Majesty's Brother the Duke of York and
a daughter of the Duke of Longueville (a Prince descended from the Royal House
of France) who was by her mother heir to the rich possessions of the Count of
Soissons. But the great troubles arising about that time between the King and
the Princes of the Blood hindered the success, the Duke of Orleans and his
Daughter being far engaged with the Prince of Conde against the King of France
in a civil War, occasioned by the imperiousness of Cardinal Mazarine, who
during the King's minority, had by means of his great favor with the Queen
engrossed the whole Government of that Kingdom in a manner into his own hands,
usurped an inordinate power and all the grand offices, and had committed
several enormous, miscarriages during the Queen Mother's Regency. The Princes
of the Blood and generality of the Nation became so incensed against him
hereby, that an Arrest was passed by the Parliament of Paris for the banishment
of the said Cardinal, who thereupon retired to Colen, and all his goods were
confiscated. But the Queen having a great inclination to bring him back again
into France, the Duke of Orleance and Conde vehemently opposed it; and when no
accommodation could be made, the Prince withdrew his forces (which he commanded
for the King's service against the Spaniard) to Stenay, a strong Garrison,
where making great levies he got a considerable power into the field. The
Cities also of Paris and Bourdeaux owned the Prince's cause and quarrel.
Whereupon the King raised a great Army commanded by Marshal Turein and Count de
Harcourt. Several encounters passed between them, the Illustrious Duke of York
first serving as a Volunteer, and afterward commanding a Regiment at the siege
of Estampes, where he behaved himself extreme honorably in two conflicts. The
Cardinal in the mean time returned into France with 6000. men, and the Princes
on the other side invited the Duke of Lorrain, to their assistance who had a
mercenary Army of 10000. in the service of the King of Spain.

His Majesty of Great Britain understanding sufficiently the fatal effects of
civil combustions, partly out of sincere intentions for the good of France,
and partly out of the consideration of the advantageousnesse of its peace to
his own affairs, interceeded as a Mediator between the King and the
discontented Princes, and his motion was gratefully accepted of by both
Parties, and thereupon Deputies were sent several times by the Princes to
represent their grievances; but the King of France persisted resolute not to
part with the Cardinal, though the King of England urged him as far as
possible, to gratify his incensed subjects, if not by dismissing him
altogether, yet at least by sending him upon some honorable foreign
employment. Of all which generous endeavors this noble, prudent and Christian
Prince obtained no other fruit, but an extreme hatred from Mazarine.

At the same time his Majesty employed himself in reconciling the French King
and his subjects, upon hopes of those endeavors succeeding, he thought fit to
deal with the Duke of Lorrain to transport his Army into Ireland, where some
Garrisons still held out. Which affair was so far proceeded in, that Articles
were drawn up between the Duke of Lorrain, and the Lord Taaf on behalf of his
Majesty, by which it was agreed amongst other things, That the Duke should at
his own charges land an Army of 10000. for the reducing of Ireland to his
Majesty; That he should be invested with the Title of Protector Royal of
Ireland, and have four Towns put into his hands for security for his
disbursements, with restrictions and cautions. But these Articles never came to
be signed, partly because the Duke was conscious of his disability to go
through with the enterprise and defray the charges of it, and partly because he
was at the same time dealt with underhand by the King of France to relinquish
the Prince's party, and offered by him such terms as they were not able to
give him. And as ill fortune would have it, the manner of discovery of their
agreemen^ made the King of England be looked upon as the Agent and procurer of
it. For the French King's Army under Turenne marching into Brie in view of the
Lorrain Army, the Duke of Beaufort was extreme desirous to encounter with them.
To which purpose he went into the field, where he found King Charles and the
Duke of York with the Duke of Lorrain, who upon the approach of Beaufort,
presently withdrew. And then this Duke urging him of Lorrain to fight, found an
extreme coldness in him to the business, and presently after understood his
conjunction with the Court-interest. Whereupon the incensed Princes exclaimed
against the perfidiousnesse of the Duke of Lorrain, and against the English
Princes as the causes of it. Who though they made it sufficiently apparent that
their transactions with the Duke of Lorrain were wholly about another affair,
yet the indignation of the Princes and people for this collusion so blinded
their reasons, that they would not be convinced of the innocence of the King
and his Brother, but bitterly inveighed against them and the Queen Mother, whom
they also were resolved to believe had been instrumental in the business: so
that they were induced to withdraw from the Louvre to St. Germains, and the
Queen to Chaliot.

Shortly after the Victory at Worcester the pretended Parliament, as I said,
executed abundance of the Royal party; and such as were suffered to live, had
their Estates confiscated and were kept several years after in prison. Their
principal Acts passed the remainder of this year were, I. An Act for the
increase of shipping and encouragement of Navigation, in which it was enacted,
1. That no goods or commodities of the growth or manufacture of any places
whatsoever should be brought hither but only in English Ships, and that from
the very places of their growth and manufacture only; Also that no Fish, or
Oil made of Fish, or Whalebone, should be imported, but only such as should
be caught in English Vessels, nor any salted Fish exported in any other save
English Bottomes, etc. This Act was apprehended by the Dutch as highly
prejudicial to the Trade which they had driven with extreme advantage above us
during our intestine Wars, and proved a great cause of the War that shortly
followed between this State and the United Provinces. II. An Act to determine
the Session of this Parliament on Nov. 3. 1654. Their dissolution was a point
they did not love to think of; but being urged by the Army and several
Petitions for a new Representative, after many debates and delays they
resolved to continue their sitting 3. years longer; but they reckoned without
their Host, and received a quietus about a year and half after from Cromwell.
III. An Act of Oblivion, which was laden with many heavy provisoes and
exceptions. IV. An Act for incorporating Scotland into one Commonwealth with
England, the Government of which they invested in these Commissioners, Ol. St.
John, Sir Henry Vane, Maj. Genesis Lambert, Maj. Genesis Deane, Col. Fenwick,
Alderman Tichburne, Major Salwey, and Lieut. Genesis Monck. As for Ireland, the
Government of it having been wholly referred to Cromwell, he constituted his Son
in Law Ireton to command in chief there with the Title of Lord Deputy.

In December 1651. arrived at Paris the Gentlewoman, Mrs. Jane Lane, who had
been instrumental in his Majesty's deliverance after the overthrow at
Worcester; of which fearing danger by the discovery of some unfaithful
confidents, she went on foot in disguise to Yarmouth, and there took ship for
France. She was conducted into Paris with great honor, his Majesty himself
with the Queen his mother, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester going out to
meet her; upon the first sight, his Majesty took her by the hand and saluted
her, with this obliging term, VVelcome my Life. The French Court also regarded
her with much respect and honor, together with her Brother Col. Lane who
accompanied her thither.

About the Spring of the year 1652. broke out a furious War between the English
and the Dutch Commonwealths, after Ambassadors had been sent to no effect from
either. The first Act of Hostility was on the 19. of May 1652. After which many
bloody Sea Fights passed between them both in the British Sea, and the
Streights, with great loss of Ships and men on both sides; but the Dutch were
most commonly worstest. During this sharp War, his Majesty was as mindful of
his Interests, using all endeavors for an accommodation between the King of
France and the Princes, as also between the Kings of France and Spain; in the
mean time also sending Ambassadors to several Potentates to desire
assistance, as the Lord Wilmot, (whom he had created Earl of Rochester) to the
Imperial Diet at Ratisbone, the Lord Culpeper to the Hague, and the Lord
Wentworth to the King of Denmark. But the Catholic Princes were the colder in
gratifying his Majesty, for that he showed no pronesse to embrace their
Religion, as the Emperor once expressly signified to him. And indeed such was
his Majesty's constancy that no temptations of worldly advantages, no
resentment of adversity, nor the solicitations and arguments of several grand
Catholics, who endeavored to pervert him (as Mr. Montagu, Militiere, and
Salmonet) could prevail any thing upon him. He propounded to the Dutch that if
they would furnish him with a squadron of Ships, he would set up his own Flags
and command them in person. Some of the Provinces were very inclinable to the
motion, but that of Holland which stood out against the admitting of the young
Prince of Orange for Capt. Genesis was also backward to comply with his Majesty's
desires or undertake his interest; then which act nothing could have been more
honorable to them, nor perhaps more beneficial. All that he could bring them
to, was, that they granted liberty for his Ships to ride in their Ports with
their Fl^gs up, as King of Great Britain, etc. The King of Denmark professed
willingness enough to gratify his Majesty; but his affairs were then in a
doubtful Estate, and depended much upon the success of the Dutch, with whom
he had partly engaged.

On December 1652. the English Iunto, resolved to be rid of his Majesty's
younger Brother the Duke of Gloucester, and referred it to the Council of State
to consider with what accommodation and to what place to send him. The Council,
that they might seem to do something handsomely, ordered him to go into Holland
and gave him a Bill for 1000. l. to be paid to him upon his arrival; but such
was their honesty, that they took care that he should never receive one penny
of it. However, he was extremely respected at all the places he came at in the
Low Countries, as at Dunkirk, Antwerp, the Hague, Leyden, etc. And having been
for some time entertained by his Royal Sister, where he had the honor of the
Garter sent him from the King, he departed to the Court of France, being
attended by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Richard Greenvile; his Majesty
himself, the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, and others going two leagues out of
Paris to meet him.

Toward the latter end of the year 1652. his Majesty's hopes began to be
something desperate concerning any considerable succor from France; for that
King in stead of uniting with the Prince's his subjects, sent an Ambassador
Mr. de Bordeanx Neufville to treat a Peace with England, to which he was the
rather induced for that Admiral Blake had not long before beaten and destroyed
the French ships under the Duke of Vendosme that were going to the relief of
Dunkirk; which defeat occasioned the loss of that Town to the Spaniard. Nor
were his hopes likely to prove more successful in the united Provinces, for
they were so weary of the War, that they sent a Letter to England to cast about
for an accommodation. But before they effected any thing, Cromwell finding his
ambitious projects ripe, being emboldned with former successes, and backed with
a strong Army, on the 20. of April 1653. entered the Parliament House, attended
with some officers, where he represented to them that their Dissolution was
important to the public good and welfare of the Nation, with many reasons for
it; which none daring to oppose, the Members departed the House. To justify
which Action He and his Council of Officers put forth a Declaration, wherein it
was pretended, The Parliament was overruled by a corrupt Party, who intended to
perpetuate themselves, deluding the Nation from time to time with hopes of a
New Representative, notwithstanding the Petitions of the Army and several
Counties; That the Cause which God had so greatly blessed languisht in their
hands and was in danger to be lost by their negligence of the public and
self-seeking, with many more like crimes. And thus fell this great Idol of the
Nation, this Parliamentum Infame, which in a dozen years time had wrought more
mischief to these Kingdoms, then all the preceding Parliaments had ever done
good. After this Cromwell with his Officers took the administration of Affairs
into their own hands, the Armies in Scotland and Ireland, and the Fleet
assenting to their proceedings. But to gull the people a little longer and
render Parliaments more contemptible to them, Cromwell upon the 8. of June
following sent out a summons in his own name, to such persons as he pleased to
meet at Westminster on the 4. of July. Who accordingly appearing to the number
of six score, he empowered them by a writing under his Hand and Seal to be the
Supreme Authority and Governors of the three Nations, and that 40. of them
should be a Quorum to dispatch business. This Iunto of Sectaries and Officers
of the Army going into the Parliament House, in three days time gravely
resolved that they would be called the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, and that their Chairman Mr. Rous should be called Speaker, and that
they would have a Sergeant at Arms and a Mace. Thus they began ridiculously,
and continued in all their Actions for four months, in which they voted down
the High-Court of Chancery, made a silly Act for Marriages Births and Burials,
confirmed the unjust Bill for Sale of the Estate of Sir John Stowell Knight of
the Bath, ordered Sale of the remainder of the Royal Revenue, made a tax for
6. months at 120000 l. per mensem, struck fiercely at Tithes, and
Universities; and then being partly weary and partly ashamed of themselves,
some of Oliver's faction by underhand appointment repaired to Cromwell, and
resigned their power into his Hands, who at first seeming unwilling and
excusing his inability, was prevailed with by importunity to accept it; which
he did with the Title of Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland. The rest of the Sectarian Convention who refused to break
up the Parliament and do as their fellows had done, Cromwell sent Soldiers to
turn them out of the House; which was accordingly done, and the doors locked
against them, December. 2. 1653. And upon the 16. of the same month, having by
the advice of his Officers framed and published an Instrument of Government
consisting of 42. Articles, he sent for the Commissioners of the Great Seal,
the Major and Aldermen of London with the Judges and the Officers of the Army,
and was by them solemnly installed in Westminster Hall, taking an Oath to rule
according to his Instrument and the Laws of the Land, though nothing could be
more repugnant to the Laws then that Instrument.

In this last year, notwithstanding the former offer of Accommodation, several
encounters had been between the Ships of this Nation and those of the United
Provinces; in which the Dutch suffered much, so that the common people there
were in a great consternation. Two of the principal Battles were on the 3. of
June and the 29. of July. In the former the English got a remarkable Victory,
though with the loss of one of their Generals, Dean, by a great shot, taking
above 1300. prisoners and 11. Ships of War, besides 6. sunk. In the latter,
being the greatest blow the Dutch ever received from us, their Admiral Martin
Harper van Trump one of the most expert and renowned Seamen in the world was
slain with a Musket shot, and 2000. men more, 1000. Prisoners taken, and 27.
Ships of War sunk and fired. Which losses quite broke the spirits of the Dutch,
who thereupon began seriously to think of peace.

This Summer also it pleased God to visit his Majesty with a Fever which held
him for some time with violence; so that the London Pamphlets published it to
be mortal. But the Divine Providence intended better things to this Nation, and
about the latter end of August recovered him to perfect health. After which he
departed from the Court for some time to Chantilly not far distant from Paris,
for better air, being accompanied with Prince Rupert, who after various
fortunes at Sea and separation from his brother Prince Maurice by a Hericano
(who was never after heard off) put in with his Ships at Nantes at Britany, and
resided with his Majesty for a long time at Paris in the Palace Royal.

This year the Lord Hopton, who had commanded an Army for his late Majesty in
the Rebellion of England, dyed of a Fever after five days sickness, at Bruges
in Flanders; a person of great learning, piety, temperance and valor.

In the beginning of the next year his Majesty's hopes of doing any good upon
the United States were absolutely extinguished. He had used all possible means
by the intercessions of his friends to avert them from reconcilement with
England, and to that purpose was very active, upon the arrival of Monsieur
Boreel their Ambassador to negotiate a League with France to promote the
conclusion of it; but they had so deeply tasted of the English valor in the
Sea war, and were so impatiently desirous of peace and Trade, that all he could
gain of them in the end was a Letter of complemental civility. And accordingly,
applications being made to the new pretended Protector by two Dutch
Ambassadors, the Lords Newport and Yongstall, a Peace was concluded between
the two States, the Articles of which were proclaimed in London, April 26.
1654. Nor were his Majesty's solicitations for a Peace between France and
Spain more successful, though he prosecuted it with his utmost ardour, as
judging it the most important expedient, whereby he might obtain assistance
from these two Potent Monarchs; and other Princes also, together with the Pope
himself, interposed for a Reconciliation. For the politic reasons of Cardinal
Mazarine, who knew the peace of the Kingdom of France depended on his removal
out of it, induced him to venture the fortune of war, rather then be sacrificed
(though deservedly) to the tranquillity of that Kingdom. And having taken this
resolution, he judged it also his interest in the next place, to make a sure
friend of the new Protector of England, who being an Usurper too, he conceived
would be more willing to join interests. To which purpose, all considerations
of Honor, Generosity (yea of affinity and chariry) set aside, by the Cardinals
means, instructions were sent over to Monsieur de Bordeaux Neufville (who had
layen here a long time before, but had done little by reason of the
unsettledness of the Government) to treat a League and Confederacy with the
pretended Protector. Whether the Cardinal had any particular malice toward the
King of England (as some affirm) I cannot determine; but this has been
apparent in all his actions, That he will not stick to promote his own
ambitious interest by the ruin of that or any other whatsoever, being a
greater Politician then to stickle at such rules as the sense of Honor,
goodness, or justice it self may lay in the way of his proceedings. This his
Majesty sufficiently understood, and foresaw that by natural consequence the
Union of the English Mahomet and this Ecclesiastical Politician would produce
his Exclusion out of France. Wherefore, he thought it more honorable to depart
that Kingdom voluntarily, then stay till he were dismissed by Articles; and
accordingly on the 1. July 1654. took leave of the King and Queen of France,
and of his Royal Mother, with the French Grandees, from whom he received such
dissembling language as that ceremonious Nation uses on all occasions. He went
first to Chatillon a House belonging to the Prince of Conde, being accompanied
with his Illustrious Brother the Duke of York and his Cousins the Princes
Palatines Rupert and Edward; having made some stay here, his Royal Brother
returned to Paris, and from thence to the Army with the Title of Lieutenant
General under Marshall de Turenne, who then lay with his Forces besieging the
Archduke and the Prince of Conde with a numerous Spanish Army in their Trenches
before Arras. Prince Rupert also here kissed his Majesty's Hand and departed to
Heydelberg to his Brother's Court, and from thence to that of the Emperor, and
prince Edward went to Bourbon. From Chatillon about the latter end of the same
month his Majesty went to Cambray, and from thence passing through Liege to
the Spaw.

In the mean time Cromwell plays the Tyrant in England at a high rate, and on
Feb. 18. he sent 11. persons of quality to the Tower, for a conspiracy against
his Highnesse's person; but having no evidence against them, besides his own
guilty fears which suggested to him that most men wanted the power rather then
the will to dispatch him out of his Usurped dignity) they were soon after set
at liberty. The first Act of himself and Council was to repeal the engagement
made by the Infamous Parliament against a Single Person; which was done by an
Ordinance Ian. 19. next the style of public writings was altered from The
Keepers, etc. to Oliver Lord Protector, etc. Then an Ordinance was passed by
his Highness and Council, declaring Offenses of Treason; which were made of
three sorts, 1. Attempting any thing against Cromwell and his Government. 2.
Corresponding with, or promoting the right of his Majesty. 3. Declaring that
any Parliament was at present in being or had any continuance, etc. So we see
it came about that owning of the Commonwealth interest as they called it was
now as great an offense as malignancy. Moreover to gratify Sectaries he made an
Ordinance to eject scandalous Ministers, by which many worthy Ministers were
deprived of their livings in several Counties; and to show the more exquisite
malice, such ejected were not to be admitted ever after to any Ecclesiastical
preferment, nor to teach schole or officiate as Chaplains in the Houses of
persons of quality. He also set up an Inquisition for approbation of Ministers,
by whom ignorant Fanatics were preferred before grave and learned Divines, the
Commission running in terms that they should have especial regard to such as
were indue'd with gifts and graces though they wanted humane learning. Of these
Inquisitors were Rob. Tichburne, Hu. Peter's, Ph. Nigh, Th. Goodwin, St. Marshal,
Pet. Sterry, Syd. Simpson, and, others of the like stamp. And that he might
according to the course of Tyrants establish his power in blood, by deterring
all that loved their Country from attempting its deliverance, and removing some
of those he judged loyal and valiant enough to do it, upon the 20. of May a
Plot was discovered, for which several persons of quality were apprehended, as
Sir Gilbert Gerrard and Col. John Gerrard, Humphry Bagaley (Secretary to the
late Earl of Derby) Sidney Fotherby, Somerset FoxEsqrs, Mr. Tuder an
Apothecary and Mr. Vowel a Schoolmaster; there were also committed to the Tower
the Earl of Oxford, Maj. Baily, Col. Ashburnham, and amongst others Sir
Richard Willis. For the Trial of these Conspirators a High Court of Justice
was erected by an Ordinance of Cromwell's June 13 of which John Lisle was
President, and Steel, Tichburne, Sir Will. Roberts, and some twenty more (right
qualified for any murder it pleased the Protector to put them upon)
Commissioners. Of the Gentlemen committed only three were tried, June 30. Mr.
Gerard, Mr. Vowel, and Mr. Fox, who were adjudged within the new-made
Ordinance, and guilty of Treason, though by no Law of the Land, Glyn, Prideaux
and Ellis like good Instruments of a Tyrant, urging the Protectors will for
Law. Yet the latter of them was reprieved, and the two former suffered death
with much resolution and courage, Mr. Gerard being beheaded on Tower Hill and
Mr. Vowell hanged at Charing Cross, July 10.

Scotland was not yet so absolutely subdued, but that there appeared some still
in Arms for his Majesty in the Highlands; The Earls of Seaforth, Athol,
Glencarne, Kinoole, the young Marquis of Montrosse, the Lord Lorne, Sir Arthur
Forbes, and Sir Mungo Murrey having gathered together several parties of Horse
and Foot, and making several irruptions upon the English in the Low-lands:
whereby they much molested them in their new possessions, sometimes taking
considerable booty, and sometimes being worsted and flying into the Mountains
where the pursuers could not follow them. And thus they continued in
expectation of greater Levies and the arrival of Lieut. Genesis Middleton with
supplies out of the Low-Countryes. But in the mean time the English met with
the most considerable party under the Earl of Glencarn and defeated them, the
Earl himself hardly escaping; other like success also befell several other
parties; so that they could not unite into one Body as they intended. At length
Lieut. Genesis Middleton arrived out of Holland, with the expected provisions of
War, and a Commission to be General, and Monroe to be his Lieut. Genesis This
disposing of Commands so incensed Glencarne who had been employing his utmost
interest in levying Forces, which he now saw must be commanded by others, that
instead of conspiring together against the common Enemy, these great Officers
quarreled among themselves; Glencarne was contented to be Lieut. Genesis but
Monroe would not agree to it; whereupon a single combat ensued between them,
in which the Earl having wounded and disarmed his Adversary deserted the
service with about 500. Gentlemen and made composition with the Governor of
Dunbarton to live peaceably at home. The same course was also taken by others
by degrees. However Middleton stood out still with much resolution, till at
length being set upon a great disadvantage by Genesis Monck and Col. Morgan first
in Arguyl and then at Loughary about the midst of July, he was wholly
overthrown. Nevertheless he continued in the High lands with some Foot for some
time after, till he saw most of the Nobility were either taken or made their
submissions, and then he retired back into Holland. The Kirk of Scotland was
likewise concerned in the public desolation, being broken up by Col. Morgan,
and the petulant Ministry reduced to subjection.

As for Ireland, it was by the English Arms brought to such a condition, as
there was no fear of disturbance for the future; only some few Tories that
kept themselves in inaccessible places, sometimes made irruptions to steal and
plunder. The Parliament also erected a High-Court of Justice there, of which
Cook (so infamous for being an instrument in the murder of his late Majesty)
was President. By whose sentence a great number of the Natives (and amongst
them many of the ancient Irish Nobility) were sentenced and executed for being
found guilty of the bloody Massacre committed upon the Protestants in the
beginning of the Rebellion, and about 14000. were sold to the King of Spain,
and many transported into other foreign parts, who had rendered themselves upon
Proclamation: the rest were all driven into the Province of Cormaught, and
there circumscribed to inhabit. The other three Provinces, Vlster, Munster and
Leimster were allotted to the English, and all forfeited Lands divided among
such Adventurers as had advanced money toward the management of the Irish
affairs, and the soldiers for satisfaction of their Arrears. In the room of
Deputy Ireton who had succeeded Cromwell in the chief Command of that Nation,
and died of the pestilence at Limerick, Cromwell constituted Lieutenant General
Fleetwood who was become his son in-law by the marriage of his eldest daughter,
Bridget, Ireton's Widow.

His Majesty having for some months resided at the Spaw, where he enjoyed the
company of his Royal Sister the Princess of Orange, and having recived
200000. Ryxdollers from the Emperor and the Imperial College (who also
enacted that no scandalous book published against him should be bought or sold
in Germany under pain of death) departed from thence to Collen, where he
arrived with his Royal Sister on the sixth of October, the great Guns being
discharged at their entrance, and the Deputies of the City going forth to meet
them in solemn manner and conducting them to the Palace provided for them by
the chief Magistrates. On the 28. of the same month the said Magistrates
expressed their affections to his Majesty by entertaining him and the Princess
with a sumptuous collation; who also the next day upon invitation went to
Dussel-dorp, where the Duke of Newburgh treated them with all possible
magnificence for some days. After which the Princess Royal took her journey
toward Holland, and his Majesty having accompanied her on the way as far as
Bedinguen returned to Collen.

At his Majesty's departure out of France, he was over-intreated by the Queen
his Mother to permit the Duke of Gloucester to stay with her at the Palace
Royal but with condition that no attempt should be made upon him to pervert
him from his Religion. But shortly after (by the instigation of the French
Court and some English Catholics about her) the Queen was willing he should be
solicited to turn Catholic, and for that purpose permitted him to be carried
to Pontoise, where some bad Instruments taking advantage of Mr. Lovell his
Tutor's absence at Paris, set upon him with all motives they could invent both
spiritual and temporal to incline him to the Popish Religion; But the former
kind of Arguments were refell'd by his Highns with greater reason and
resolution then could prob^bly have been expected from a person of his years;
and for the temptations of worldly advancement, he rejected them with contempt,
and the danger of his Majesty's displeasure; urging withal the Queen's
promise to the King before his departure in this very particular, and
complaining of this unworthy advantage taken against him in the absence of his
Tutour, who was fittest to judge of their proposals. Wherefore he was removed
to Paris, to the House of Mr. Crofts, from thence to Pontoise again and the
instruction of Mr. Walter Montagu Abbot of Nanteul, and his former Tutor
dismissed. Of these attempts some cordial Protestants certifi'd his Majesty at
Colen with all possible speed, who resented them so highly, that being ready to
go to dinner, when the intelligence was brought him, he would not think of
eating till he had dispatched Letters away to Paris. In the mean time his
Highness was restlessely importuned with persuasions to return to the True,
Ancient, Apostolical, Roman Church, to embrace the Religion wherein most of his
Ancestors lived and di'd, and most of the Christian world, together with the
King of France, his Royal Mother, and her Alliance professed; which were also
backed with the allurements of the greatest Church-Dignities and Revenues, and
the Honors which that whole Nation would be ready to pay his Highness, etc.
All which he declined with very ingenious answers; and shortly after a
Gentleman went to his Highness with a Letter from his Majesty, and was
admitted to his presence; but not being able to deliver the same privately, he
caused it to be delivered by another hand. In that Letter his Majesty minded
him of the strict command he had laid upon him at his departure out of France,
of the horrid injury offered to his conscience, honor, and family, of the
vanity of his perswaders motives, and the falseness and emptiness of their
promises; He also declared to him the more eligiblenesse of any degree of
suffering, and urged to him the fidelity of God's promises, whose love he must
expect to loose, together with that of himself a most affectionate Brother, in
case he yielded to the inveiglements of his Temptours. Moreover, he desired him
to reflect on their dead Father's last charge, solemnly given him the day
before his Glorification, with the entail of his blessing annexed. And in
conclusion, added, That if he either changed his Religion, or put himself into
the Jesuits College, he had the last Letter from him, and must never look to
see England or his face again: And that if (which God forbid) their business
miscarried for ever, the whole ruining of their Family, and all the Nations
too, must be laid with all the consequent mischiefs at his door as the chief
cause of it. As Soon as his Highness had read this admonitory Letter, he
transcribed a copy of it, and sent it to the Queen, desiring her permission to
come to Paris, both in regard of these commands of the King and of his Brother
the Duke of York's approaching return from the Army. To which her Majesty
answered, that she should not cease wishing his eternal good by his
conversion, to which nevertheless she would not force him, but wished him to
hearken to what Mr. Montagu should further deliver to him, which was that he
would be willing to go to the Jesuits College, where he should have extreme
freedom in every thing. But all would not prevail upon his resolution; However
he returned to Paris; whereabout the 18. of November the Marquis of Ormond
arrived from Germany with Letters and new Instructions having taken a long and
dangerous voyage by reason (the lately dissolved French Army had betaken
themselves to the robbing of all passengers.) Before the intent of his journey
was known the Queen of France and the Cardinal very closely pressed him, and so
did her Majesty of England both her self apart, and by Mr. Montagu. Which
importunities proving fruitless, some severities were proceeded to, which
occasioned his Highness to leave the Palace Royal and go to the House of the
Lord Hatton's in the Fauxbourgs, where the former solicitations were renewed,
but with as little success. After which the Duke desired the favor to see the
Q. his Mother before his departure, but was refused; which denial having
received with much grief, he went away with my Lord of Ormond to Collen where
his Majesty resided.

But let us look back a little upon the actions of the Usurper of his
Majesty's Dominions. Cromwell's new Instrument enjoined the summoning of
Parliament every three years, and accordingly he sent out his new fashioned
Writs and new contrived Indentures for the returning of Members, and that after
a new way, ten or a dozen for most Counties, one or two for Cities and
Buroughs, and many of these left wholly out. The reason of which was because
it was easier to pack elections in Counties by the interest of Army Officers
and other Creatures, then in Borroughs. They assembled at Westminster on the 3.
of September. 1654. Cromwell meeting them in the Painted Chamber, made a Speech,
in which he indevor'd to show the necessity of his taking the Government upon
him, and recounted the excellencies of it, telling them also that he did not
design to be a Lord over them, but their Fellow Servants to the public. After
which they chose Lenthall for their Speaker, and betook themselves to their
business. The first debate was, Whether the Legislative Power should be in a
si^gle Person and a Parliament. It was bandied with some heat, till Cromwell
thinking them too busy in making a Question of that which he would have
believed sufficiently determined by his Instrument, resolved to make them
sensible of it; wherefore sending for them into the Painted Chamber about 8.
days after their first assembling, he checked them severely, telling them, 1.
That the Fundamentals in the Government (viz. such as were constituted by the
Instrument) could not be altered; whereof that which they d^bated was one; and
2. that the Militia was not to be trusted in any one hand or power, but so,
that the Parliament ought to have a check upon the Protector, and He upon Them.
3. That Parliaments should not be perpetual nor always sitting. 4. That there
ought to be Liberty of Conscience in Religion. Other things in the Government
were examinable and alterable according to the State of Affairs. For his own
part, his heart was even overwhelmed with grief, to see any of them should go
about to overthrow what was settled, (viz. by his Instrument) contrary to their
trust received from the people. After this Preface he delivered them a Paper
(called a Recognition) to be subscribed by such as intended to sit; in which
they were to engage to be faithful to the Lord Protector and the Commonwealth,
and not to propose or give consent to alter the Government, as it was settled in
one Person and a Parliament. Such as refused to subscribe were excluded from
sitting, the rest repaired again to the House; where they took the Instrument
in hand again, and prepared a Bill for the settling of the Government and some
others which they intended to present to the Protector to be signed together.
But he having information given him all the way of their proceedings by some
false Members, suffered them to spend 5. months allotted them by the Instrument
to sit without interruption, and the very next day after went to the Painted
Chamber, where upbraiding them with Parricide in not owning the Authority that
called them thither, and endeavoring to subvert the Government owned by God,
as being the dispensation of his Providence after 12. years War, he dissolved
this Parliament (as he had done two before) Ian. 22. 1654. Within two days
after their Dissolution a Plot was discovered, which Cromwell said was
occasioned, if not hatched by the Parliament it self. Sir Henry Littleton, high
Sheriff of Worcestershire and Sir John Packington of the same County were
committed to the Tower thereupon; and several persons more in the North and
Northwest Counties of England, where the design was laid for an Insurrection.
Shrewsbury and Chrik-Castle were to have been surprised, but it was prevented;
the discovery of the whole Conspiracy having been made to Cromwell by some
secret insinuating Agents of his from the first birth of it, till it was mature
to break out. At Shrewsbury the Lord Newport, and Sir Thomas Harris, who were
the chief there, was taken prisoners and sent up to London. Nevertheless
others were not deterred from attempting something for the deliverance of their
Native Country from Bondage; for upon the 11. of March 1654. a body of 200.
consisting most of Gentlemen surprised Salisbury and took away all the Horses.
From whence in expectation of greater Forces to join with them, they marched
toward Cornwall; but they were overtaken by one Capt. Crook with a party of
Sectarian Horse, at Southmolton in Devonshire, and after four hours sharp
conflict defeated. Sir Joseph VVagstaffe the chief of this loyal party
escaped; the three other most eminent Leaders, Col. John Penruddock, Capt Hugh
Groves, and Capt. Jones were taken with 50. others. Another rising was also in
Yorkshire at Hexham Moore; but of 4000. which should have met, not above 200.
appearing, they were soon dispersed by the Forces of Col. Lilburne, Sir Henry
Slingsby the chief taken, and Sir Rich. Maleverer with much d fficulty
escaping* At the same time likewise another attempt was made to rise at
Sherwood Forest in Nottinghamshire; but the Gentry that designed it were
suppressed by Col. Hacker. Nor were the Levellers less pleased with the
Tyrannical Usurpation of Cromwell, though their designs were not upon the
account of loyalty; For Maj. Gen Harrison, Mr. Carew, Rich. Courtney, and Maj.
Wildman were discovered to have framed a Plot against him, and secured: These
latter sort of Conspirators were in favor of the Sectaries and in
consideration of former assistance in Rebellion and the murder of his late
Majesty, more gently proceeded with; for Harrison was shortly after committed
to Portland Castle, Carew to St. Maur's in Cornwall, and Courtney to Carisbrook
Castle in VVight Island; But on March 31. 1655. a Commission was issued forth
for trial of the Gentlemen in the West, to Sergeant Thorp, Glyn, and Steel;
And another for trial of them in the North to Sergeant Newdigate, Nicolas,
Windham, Hatton; but of these persons Sergeant Newdigate and Thorp
conscientiously refusing to try any man for treason upon Cromwell's Declaration,
as Law, had writs of ease given them.

But the Protector wanted not instruments in the West to execute his bloody
pleasure: for at Salisbury, John Lisle, one of his Princes Murderers sentenced
Col. Penruddock and Capt. Grove to the block, and at Exceter seven other
persons to the Gallows. And now Cromwell resolved to rule only by the sword,
seeing the people so hated his Tyranny; to which purpose he constituted eleven
of his Officers to preside over all the Counties of England with the Titles of
Major Generals, allotting four or five Counties as Provinces to each, with
sufficient authority not only in Military affairs, but also in Civil and
Ecclesiastical. For the support of these Bashawes he made an Ordinance that all
Cavaliers or Gentlemen of the late Kings party, should (notwithstanding the
late Parliaments Act Oblivion, their former compositions, and their peaceable
demeanor since) pay the tenth part of their yearly revenue; which was
accordingly severely exacted by the Major Generals. He also, the better to
provide against future Insurrections, set up Auxiliaries in every County,
consisting of Horse and Foot, which Were to be ready upon all occasions within
an hours warning; their pay was 8 l. per annum to a Horseman and 3 l. to a
Footman; And finally that he might disenable all loyal persons from attempting
any thing for their Countries Liberty, he put forth an Ordinance to sense all
sorts of Arms found in the Houses of those he called Malignants. Such were the
courses he took to secure himself at home.

About the beginning of the year 1655. a great Fleet was sent against the King
of Spain's Territories in America. The design was kept secret till it came to
be executed upon the place, nor did he declare war against that King till
afterward, though the Marquess of Leyda, Governor of Dunkirk came over as
Extraordinary Ambassador to know his intentions. Many of such as had been
imprisoned for the late insurrections had been barbarously sold to foreign
plantation: some that were left, and several indigent people were by force sent
in this service together with diverse Regiments of old soldiers; Venables
commanding the Landforces, and Pe^ being General at Sea. But it pleased God to
check the Tyrants insolence by a considerable loss in the very first
enterprise, which was undertaken so unjustly and against the faith of Nations
(though the propagation of Religion was pretended, and other slight reasons for
it;) an Army consisting of 9700. Foot, besides a party of Horse by the Generals
indiscretion was landed in the Island Hispaniola at a place ten leagues from
the chief Town Sto. Domingo, whereby being ready to perish miserably with
thirst and the excessive heat of the Sands through which they marched, they were
shamefully routed by no greater a party then 70. Spaniards and Negroes, 1200.
were killed in the conflict and the pursuit, the rest escaped by flight. An
incredible thing, had not the faintness and weakness of the English rendered
it rather an execution then a fight. The remainder of this overthrow having
afterward endured extreme hardship for want of provision, even to the eating
of their horses, seized upon another Island called Iamaica, which though a
barren place, wants not some considerable advantages. But for the dishonor
occasioned to our Nation by this unfortunate expedition, amends was in part
made by General Blake, who entering Porto Ferino at Tunis with his Fleet, fired
nine Turkish Ships in it, notwithstanding the strong fortifications upon the
shore, and came off with the loss of only 25. men.

Whilst affairs were thus strangely managed in England by the violent
Protector, his Majesty resided at Colen, entertaining himself with such
studies as best became a Christian in his own and his Countries calamities,
such exercises as were befitting a Prince, and such company as his affection
made most pleasing to him, namely, that of his brother the Duke of Gloucester,
and the Princess Royal of Orange. The Duke of York continued still in France,
having only made a journey of no long stay to the French Leaguer before Pavia.
His Majesty to divert himself from the resentment of his unsuccesseful affairs,
made a progress of state and pleasure from Colen to Frankfort-Fair, being
accompanied with the Duke and the Pnncesse, and attended on by the Lord
Marquess of Ormond, the Earl of Norwith, the Lord Newburgh, the Lady Stanhop,
and several other persons of Honor; They went by Coach a little beyond Bonne
the Archbishop of Colen's Electoral Seat, where they entered into a Gondelo or
Pleasure boat; through every Princes Territories that they past, the chief
Officers of State were sent to complement them, and the great Guns saluted them
from all their Towns and Castles. More especially the Prince Elector of Mentz,
sent his grand Marshall to invite them to his Court; but his Majesty sent the
Lord Newburgh back with the grand Marshall to return his acknowledgements to
the Elector, and to promise him to accept of his civility as he came back from
Francfort. His Majesty being arrived there had intelligence that Christina.
Queen of Sweden (who had voluntarily resigned her Crown on Ian. 17. 1654. to
her Cousin Carolus Gustavus, and had for the most part since continued at
B^uxels) intended to pass that way to Italy; whereupon he sent one of his
Lords to her to signify his desire to wait upon her Majesty at what place she
should be pleased to nominate. To which message she returned thanks for the
honor his Majesty intended her, and appointed Coningstein, a village near
Francfurt in the Electorate of Mentz. for the place of Interview. His Majesty
was accordingly received there by her with many expressions of respect, and had
private conference with her alone for almost an hour; after which the Duke of
Gloucester was admitted to her presence alone, and then the Prince Elector
Palatine, and his Brother Prince Rupert, who came thither on purpose, and the
refst of the great Lords that attended the King. The Elector Palatine invited
his Majesty to his Court, but his Majesty waved his civility; and after many
complements between these Princes, his Majesty returned to Francfurt, the
Prince Elector and his Brother to Heidleberg, and the Queen of Sweden proceeded
without stay in her journey to Italy. At his Majesty's returning from
Francfurt which was by water, the Elector of Mentz having provided magnificent
entertainment for his reception, came inperson a great part of the way to meet
him, and conducted him to one of his Palaces, where he treated him for four
days in a most sumptuous and splendid manner; after which himself accompanied
him for some part of the way to Collen; in which City four Burgomasters were
appointed by the Magistrate to wait upon his Majesty and the Princes, and to
testify the satisfaction they took in their return thither. And thus we see
what respect his Majesty found in a foreign Country and in his lowest fortune,
the greatness of his virtues causing him to be every where extremely valued,
not for what he enjoyed but for what he truly deserved. Shortly after the
Princess Royal took leave of his Majesty and the Duke of Gloucester, and
departed for Holland.

In the mean time in England Cromwell's fears or his malice were restless; for
about June most of the Gentry in all parts of the Nation were clapped up by his
Major Generals; not would any securiry be taken for them, but rhey were kept in
Inns and such like places with guards of Soldiers at an excessive charge and
in convenience for many months together; Among others the Lord Falkland, Lord
Willoughby of Parham and the Lord Newport were committed to the Tower upon
suspicion of Treason; but it seems, it was rather his own guilt that induced
him to do thus then any reasonable cause which could he have found, no question
they had paid their lives for his security.

There having been this year a barbarous Massacre committed upon the
Protestants of the Valleys of Piedmont by the Soldiers of Charles Emanuel Duke
of Savoy, the Protector testified his resentment of it by appointing a solemn
day of Humiliation to be observed, and a large contribution to be gathered
throughout the Nation for their relief. The collections came to a vast sum; but
how well they were paid to those for whom they were pretended, is not unknown
to them that were employed about this affair into Savoy.

Also toward the latter end of this year Proposals were made to Cromwell by
Manasseh Ben-Israel a Jew in behalf of the Jewish Nation for their free
admission to trade and exercise of their Religion in England. They had been
excluded for the space of almost 400. hundred years; yet Cremwel out of a sense
of charity for their conversion and in consideration of 200000 l. was willing
to listen to their reentertainment. But the design was so vehemently opposed
by the Divines and Merchants that it took no effect.

In the beginning of the next year 1656. the King of Spain being sensible of
Cromwell's perfidiousness, solemnly proclaimed War against England. Whereupon
Cromwell entered into a strict league both Offensive and Defensive with the King
of France, who was then at Wars with the King of Spain both in Flanders, Italy
and Catalonia. One of the chief Articles of the Confederacy was, that his
Majesty with the Dukes of York and Gloucester and all his Relations and
Adherents (saving the Queen Mother) should be excluded out of France. In which
it is to be wondered with what sense of honor that King could consent to so
base and ignoble a proposal, made by one that had murdered his Uncle and
Usurped his Dominions, and withal to banish such Princes as were so near of
Blood to him, and came to him for succor and relief. But selt-interest (not
self-preservation for what could France fear from Cromwell, when he was engaged
with the King of Spain, and jealous every day of the people he tyrannis'd
over?) self-interest, I say, of not of the King of France, at least of Cardinal
Mazarine the Queen's creature, prevailed above all respects of honor, justice,
and the sense of humane calamities. The King wisely withdrew before, and the
Duke of Gloucester not long after; there remained only the Duke of York, who
during his service in the French Army had acquired to himself a great renown
and a high command. Nevertheless he had some small time respited for his stay,
in which he was visited, and honorably treated by Marshal Turenne (who
infinitely esteemed and loved him for his extraordinary courage and skill in
Martial affairs) and others of the French Lords as also by the Duke of Modena
(who was then occasionally in that Kingdom.) And shortly after he took his
leave of the King of France, the Queen his Mother and the rest of the Court,
and departed into Flanders. In the mean time the King of Spain partly out of a
noble generosity, and partly out of consideration that having engaged in a
War against Cromwell, his Majesty's interest might be of some advantage to
him, caused Don John, of Austria his Governor in the Low Countries to invite
his Majesty into his Territories, which invitation was made by the Count of
Fuensaldagne, a great Commander, and lately Governor of Milan. His Majesty
accepted of the offer, and departed from Colen to Bruges in Flanders, where he
was received with great expressions of honor and respect. Thither also the
Duke of York went to his Majesty, having taken Bruxels in his way, and been
extremely caressed by Don John and his Court, who expressed much joy in having
the most valiant Prince of his age in the world come to assist persona^ly in
the war.

In England Cromwell being much necessitated for money, and withal impatient to
tarry longer for a confirmation by the people (which although he could not
obtain of the preceding Parliament he hoped he might gain of another)
attempted once more to call a new Representative. But remembering the carriage
of some in the former, he gave private intimation to certain persons in several
Counties to obstruct (if possible) their Election again in the ensuing Session,
and writ Letters to some Sheriffs to the same purpose. Nevertheless though
they were chosen after the new mode, 10. in a County and 1. in a Borough, the
success of these practices did not so well please him, but that when they
assembled ( Sept. 17. 1656.) above seven score of the returned Members were
excepted against by the Protector; and when they addressed to the rest that
were admitted into House to have their Elections examined, the Parliament
unworthily betrayed their own Privileges, and referred them to Cromwell's
Council. Sir Thom. VViddrington was chosen Speaker. After this beginning, they
proceeded to make the following Acts. I. An Act for disannulling his Majesty's
Title to the Government of the three Nations, passed nemine contradicente. II.
An Act making it Treason for any to attempt compass, or imagine the
Protector's death; and appointing such Offenders to be tried not by a Jury of
12. sufficient men, but by a High Court of Justice. This Act was occasioned by
a Plot of one Syndercomb, who had designed to murder the Protector, and was
therefore tried at the King's Bench Bar, (his accuser being one Toope of
Cromwell's Lifeguard) and condemned to be hanged drawn and quartered. But the
night preceding the day appointed for his execution; he was poisoned either by
himself or some others. III. An Act for an Assessement for 60000 l. per mensem
for 3. years. IV. An Act for continuing Tonnage and Poundage. V. An Act for
preventing multiplicity of Buildings in and about the Suburbs of London. This
Act concerned not only such as were to be built hereafter, but also those that
had been reared upon new Foundations for almost 40. years before; for which the
owners were fined one year's Rent to Cromwell: and it extended to buildings ten
miles round about London. VI. An Act for Excise of Merchandise imported;
Hobby-horses, horses, Children's Rattles, and old shirts not exempted. But the
great Act of all was called An Humble Petition and Advice, in which the
Government was settled upon Cromwell for his life, and upon whom he should
nominate to succeed him. While it was in agitation it was moved in the House by
Alderman Pack (a Knight of Cromwell's making) that he might be desired to take
upon him the Title of King. The Iunno who knew his mind in part before,
presently prosecuted the motion, and appointed St. John, Glyn, VVhitlock,
Lisle, Fines, Lenthall, and others of the like stamp to be a Committee to
attend him to that purpose. These men courted him very eagerly to accept of
that Title; nor did he seem much averse, yea it is more then probable he
thirsted after it; and that the design was framed by himself; for Thurloe, his
Secretary openly promoted it. Nevertheless he shuffled off and on in many
conferences with them at White Hall; till at length, being deterred by the
noncompliance of the Army, he answered that he could not undertake the
Government with the Title of King. Whereupon it was resolved he should be still
termed Protector. By this Petition amongst many other things, it was enacted
there should be an Other House consisting of 70. persons to be nominated by
Cromwell himself, and summoned thither by writs, as the Peers of England were
wont to be. And this was designed by Cromwell as a way to gratify his great
Officers, whom he intended by this means to make Lords; as also to the end,
that having effected his desires by this Iunto who both established him in his
Government and gave him 1900000 l. per annum, besides all Crown Lands unsold,
with all other Emoluments, to maintain it for his life, if after Parliaments
should attempt to rescind these Acts, his other House, might perpetually check
them by their negative voice. These Acts being past by him, he was on June 26.
1657. solemnly sworn and invested with Robes of Purple Velvet by the Speaker of
the Iunto in Westminster Hall, having also a Sword, a Scepter and a Bible
delivered to him. In which formalities he returned home, and the Iunto
prorogued their sitting to the 20. of the next January.

In the Spring of this year Cromwell according to agreement made with the French
King sent over 6000. Foot under Col. Reynolds into Flanders to assist him there
against the Spaniard; these Auxiliaries did the taking of Montmedi and St.
Venant, two very advantageous places, and also not long after of the strong
Fort of Mardike. Which the Spaniards looking upon as a place of great
importance to the keeping of Dunkirk, resolved to employ their utmost efforts
to regain. His Majesty of Britain had an Army at that time consisting of 2000.
English, Scotch and Irish reformadoes, which despairing of any other occasion
to employ as yet, he permitted upon request to be made use of by the King of
Spain. They were commanded by the Duke of York, and amongst other Forces
appointed for the attempting of Mardike. Accordingly an assault was made upon
the place by night, with much resolution and courage; but the assailants were
forced after six hours conflict, to retire. The English and French hereupon
forthwith begirt Dunkirk with a straight siege, the former being commanded by
Col. Lockhart and the latter by Marshall Turenne. To oppose this design Don
John of Austria, the Duke of York, the Prince of Conde, and the Marquis of
Caracene assembled 7000. Foot and 9000. Horse, and brought them to Fuernes
Fort. The besiegers were indeed more numerous, and therefore left sufficient
Forces to secure their Trenches, and drew forth the rest to encounter the
Enemie's Army The first onset was made by a Forlorn hope of above three
hundred English Foot, who were seconded by the rest of their Countrymen under
Lockhart. They charged with such fury upon the Spanish Foot (who had
advantageously drawn up upon a Sand-Hill) that notwithstanding that difficulty,
they totally routed the whole Body. Whereupon the Spanish Horse also, seeing
their Infantry put to the rout, betook themselves to flight, nor could by any
endeavors be persuaded to make a stand. Upon which occasion, the French Horse
who had stood spectators only of the conflict, fell in upon pursuit of the
flying Enemy, from whom they found little opposition but what was made by the
Duke of York's Regiment, who put such a stop to the impetuous career of the
whole French Army, as conduced much for the safety of the routed Spaniards, who
otherwise had in all probability been totally cut off. Nevertheless at length
the numerousness of the pursuers overpowred the valor of these Resisters, so
that being much tired with the violence of the encounter, and no relief coming,
they were enforced to desert their station and betake themselves to flight. Few
of them escaped; among which were the Dukes of York and Gloucester; though the
first was not heard of till three days after; which gave occasion to a general
suspicion that he was taken by the French Forces, and secretly dismissed at a
fit opportunity by the Marshal of Turenne. In this battle of the Spaniards 800.
Officers were taken prisoners, and 2000. private Soldiers; the number of slain
was uncertain. The consequence of it was the loss of Dunkirk; the Marquis of
Leyda (Governor thereof) being slain in a Sally, it was surrendered upon
Articles, and by the King of France and the Cardinal in person put into the
hands of the English, June 25. 1658.

While these things were in agitation beyond Sea, the pretended Parliament
reassembled on Ian. 20. and those Members who had been excluded the last
Session were now admitted. There was also an assembly of Officers and some few
others in the House of Peers, summoned thither by Cromwell as Lords. But the
Commons, being now a full House, began to review the late Humble Petition and
Advice made by a packt Iunto, and refused to treat with the Other House as
Lords, Wherefore Cromw. in a great fury hasted to them in a Hackney Coach and
having rated them sufficiently dissolved them Feb. 4. yet with this word of
consolation to his Other House, My Lords! ye are Lords and shall be Lords. This
was the fourth Parliament he dissolved; having before violently turned out the
Long-Parliament, the little Parliament, the Recognition Parliament, and this
garbled Iunto. There goe's a saying concerning the three latter, which were
summoned by Cromwell himself; that the First was called but not chosen, the
Second did just nothing, and the Third did nothing just.

However, Cromwell resolved to maintain what he had gotten per fas and nefas. He
had called his eldest Son Richard out of the Country to inure him to a Court
life and Public Affairs, and placed his second, Henry, in Ireland the room of
Fleetwood, whom he recalled from thence, wanting, as he said, his Presence and
Counsel. Moreover he had married his two youngest Daughters in the foregoing
November, one to Mr. Rob. Rich. heir apparent to the Earldome of Warwick, and
the other to Thomas Viscount Faulconbridge. And having thus settled himself, he
resolved to rule at his pleasure, dispairing of ever having the compliance of a
full and free chosen Parliament. On the twelfth of March he sent for Tichburn
then Lord Mayor of London, the Aldermen and Common Council, and acquainting
them with the imminent danger of the Commonwealth by reason of secret
Machinations from some Ill-willers to his Government, gave them order for
settling the Militia. Whereupon the guards were doubled and a strict watch was
set in all parts of the City. Shortly after diverse persons were apprehended and
imprisoned; and among others Doctor John He wet Minister of St. Gregory's near
Paul's, Mr. John Russell brother of the Earl of Bedford, Sir William Compton
brother of the Earl of Northampton, Mr. John Mordant brother of the Earl of
Peterburgh, Sir Richard Willis, Sir William Leighton, and many more of less
quality. Hereupon followed a day of solemn Humiliation, and a High-Court of
Justice; before which was brought first S. Henry Slingsby of Yorkshire; he was
accused of Treason by one VVaterhouse and one Overton Officers in the Garrison
of Hull, for conspiring to seize upon that place for the King; Next him was
brought to Trial Dr. Hewet; he was impeached of Treason for holding
correspondence with the King, and delivering his Commissions to several persons
for levying Forces against the Government; But the Doctor refused to own the
authority of the Court. The same day Mr. Mordant was also arraigned before the
said High-Court for a treasonable design; but he made his innocence so apparent
against all the evidence, that he was acquitted. Sir Henry Slingsby and Doctor
Hewet received sentence of death (pronounced upon them by President Lisle) on
the 2. of June, and notwithstanding the intercessions of great friends, were
beheaded on Tower Hill on the 5. of the same month. A few days after one
Mallery, the betrayer of all the rest, was tried pro forma and condemned, but
reprieved. Other persons were also tried, whereof some were acquitt'd, some
condemned and reprieved; but three persons were dealt with in the greatest
rigor, being hanged, and quartered, namely Col. Edw. Ashton in Tower-street
over against Mark-lane end, John Bettely in Cheapside, and Edmund Stacy before
the old Exchange, July 17. These murders were ushered in with a Fast and
concluded with a day of Thanksgiving. Sad news was this to his Sacred Majesty,
who could not but be infinitely sensible of the sufferings of these loyal
persons, as well as of the calamitous state his interest was thereby brought
into. However he gave not himself up to pensiveness and unprofitable sorrow,
but repaired for a while to Antwerp with the two Dukes his Brothers and the
Princess his Sister, from whence also he went to Bruxels and resided there for
a good space, being entertained there splendidly by Don John of Austria and
desired to be present at most consultations for carrying on the War against the
French.

In August Elizabeth Cleypole daughter to Cromwell and wife to one John Cleypole
dyed at Hampton Court, much troubled in mind by reason of the bloody actions of
her Father (as was reported.) But whether it were so or no, this is certain
that Cromwell never enjoyed himself after her death, and did not survive her a
full month. He lay some while in a very sad condition with extreme torment and
pain in his bowels; nevertheless he could not endure to think of dying, but
said the night before his death, That God had revealed to him that he should
not dye, and that he had a great deal of glorious work for him still to do in
these Nations. But on Friday Sept. 3. he departed this life, or as some say on
Aug. 30. at what time was the most furious violent wind, that ever happened in
the memory of man. Immediately upon his death, his Council met, and upon the
affirmation of Dr. Goodwin that he nominated his son Richard to succeed him, or
for that they judged it the most expedient course, they ordered him to be
proclaimed Protector accordingly. Which was done the next day in the City of
London, and his new Highness took an Oath prescribed in the Humble Petition
and Advice. Richard's first care was the Interment of his Father, and search
was made into the Records to see what had been expended upon the burial of
former Kings, to the end greater cost might be bestowed upon his. All the
gaudry was not provided till the 23. of November. and then his Image was drawn in
great pomp to Westminster Abbey and laid in a stately Hearse. What became of
his carcass is not certainly known. Thus ended this great. Tyrant after almost
5. years usurpation, during which he spent vast sums of Treasure to maintain
his ill-gotten power, and yet his Funeral charges amounting to above 30000 l.
are unpaid for at this day. As Soon as the ceremonies were over young Cromwell
was urged by his wants of money and other pr^ssing occasions to call a
Parliament; to which end he sent forth writs, (not according to the Instrument
of Government, but after the old way, two in a County, etc.) In the mean time
many congratulatory addresses were made to him from Counties, Cities,
Buroughs, and Regiments of Soldiers, full of flattery and profanesse, some of
them comparing, the old Tyrant to Moses and his Impe to, Joshua, the Guides and
conductors of Gods people out of Egyptian thraldom. The chosen Members
assembled at Westminster on Ian. 27. and so did the Other House. Great debates
were amongst them touching the recognition of the Government, and transacting
with the Other House as Lords, (during which two Speakers successively died)
till the young Protector being undermined by a Caball of Officers, Fleetwood,
Desborough, etc. weakly yielded to the Dissolving of the Parliament on Friday
April 22. shortly after which (a Fast being solemnized) the remainder of the
Long Parliament who had been dissolved by Cromwell in April 20. 1653. were
invited by Lambert to sit again; which they did on the 7. of May, excluding by
violence such of their Fellow Members as they had before secluded in December.
1648. though they were the greater number. Richard was thereupon deprived of
his Government, and so was his brother Harry in Ireland. And now this old Iunto
being advanced again and congratulated (as other Governments had formerly been)
from Scotland, Ireland, and the Fleet, begin to act like subtle Politicians.
And to the end the Army might be kept in obedience to them, they made the
Speaker of the House General, cashir'd many Officers, and caused new
Commissions to be delivered by the Speaker in the House of Parliament to all
the Commanders both of Land and Sea-Forces. The affections of the people they
did not much value, so long as the Army would stand to them. To gratify whom
they imposed a whole years Tax at 35000. l. per mensem, to be paid immediately.
After which about July they passed an Act for settling the Militia of Counties
in such hands as they pleased: But Lambert and the other Officers (who intended
to have the whole guard of the Rump, and aimed at other designs) not relishing
this proceeding, it was laid aside.

Nothing could have been more odious to the Nation then this re-establishment
of the Rump-Parliament; who taking these courses to secure the perpetual
continuance of their sitting and resolving never to increase their number by
admitting their fellow members or new ones legally elected in their places,
awakened the spirits of most of the Gentry of the Nation to attempt something
for their Countries liberty by restitution of the ancient Government. A great
inclination there was in most Counties to take up Arms, and several Offers
were made in diverse places, but none was so considerable as that in Cheshire,
Lancashire, and the parts adjoining under Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas
Middleton, and other Gentlemen in those parts. They declared for a full and
free Parliament to be elected by the People. Sir George Booth had taken
Westchester, and was reported to be very numerous. Whereupon Lambert was sent
out against him with an Army of six or seven thousand men, and a train of
Artillery; moreover forces from all quarters were appointed to draw to him, so
that all meeting he had a very puissant Army. The party under Sir George Booth
had been in Arms a a good time before Lambert came against them in expectation
that other Counties would have done the like; but this hope failing, upon
Lambert's approach, many of them withdrew from him. The rest came to an
encounter with Lambert at Northwich, and were without much difficulty defeated.
The number of the slain was not many, but the Prisoners were in great
multitudes; Sir George Booth himself was also within a few days after taken in
a disguise in an Inn at Newport-Pagnel in Bedfordshire as he was coming up to
London. Persons of quality taken besides him were the Earl of Derby, the Lord
Kilmurrey, Major General Ranulph Egerton, Sir William Neile, Sir Thomas Powel
of Flintshire, Col. Massey of Cheshire, Major Peter Brook. The Earl of
Stamford and Sir Thomas Leventhorp were also imprisoned in other places with
some hundreds of Gentlemen for designing to levy war against the Commonwealth.
The Rump overjoyed with this success presented Lambert with 1000. l. to buy
him a jewel, but he thought it more suitable to his designs to distribute it
amongst his Army.

During these actions in England his Majesty privately withdrew from Bruxells
together with the Duke of York; it was imagined by many that they were come
concealed into England in expectation of the event, or at least lay upon the
Seacoasts ready to have transported some forces in a Fleet which rode upon the
Coast of Flanders, in case matters had succeeded prosperously. But not long
after the suppression of the Cheshire Insurrection, they appeared again at
Bruxells; from whence his Majesty dispatched an Ambassador to attend with
certain Proposals at the Interview of Cardinal Mazarini for the French King and
Don Lewis de Haro for the Spanish, who met upon the confines to treat a Peace
between the two Crowns and a Marriage between the King of France and the
Infanta of Spain. The Ambassador was entertained by the two grand Ministers
with very high testimonies of honor and respect, and promised to have his
Master's Interest taken into consideration as soon as the concernments of their
own would permit.

But in England the pretended Parliament fell eagerly to their old beloved
Trade of Sequestration, and determined, to exercise the utmost of severity upon
the actors in the late Insurrection. And no doubt they they would have
prosecuted their intentions, had not Providence diverted their malice by a
breach which fell out between them and the principal Officers of the Army.
Lambert (whose ambition instigated to him to be so active in the late change of
Government, and so popular in the management of his late expedition) together
with other grand Officers thought the Parliament so obliged to them for
restoring them to Power and preserving them in it, that they conceived none of
their demands ought to be denied. Whereupon at their return to London, a
Petition was presented to the House by Desborough, for a General. The Iunto
remembering how their former General had served them not only denied this
request, but vacated the Commissions of Lambert, Desborough and 7. others, and
voted the supreme command of the Army into the hands of seven Commissioners,
whereof two or three were Army-men, the others Members of Parliament. Lambert
and his Companions were so incensed herewith that upon the 11. of October. Forces
were drawn out on either side at Westminster; those for the Iunto commanded by
Haselrig, Morley and others; those for the Army, by Lambert himself,
Desborough, Berry, and other Colonels; and had not the Council of State
interposed, they had charged one another. Nevertheless the Army-party
prevailed, and turned the Rump out of doors, Oct. 13. Which being done the
great Officers being assembled in Council at Wallingford-house disposed of
commands among themselves, Fleetwood was made General, Lambert Lieutenant
General, Desborough General of the Horse, and that they might satisfy Genesis
Monck too, who governed Scotland, they made him Major General of the Foot. As
for civil Affairs they erected a Committee of Safety, consisting chiefly of
Army Officers and some Members of the dissolved Iunto, who cided with them, as
Vane, Salwey, etc. The council of Officers also for satisfaction of the people
put forth a Declaration concerning their late proceedings, charging the Rump
with high Crimes, and making void their late pretended Acts. Moreover they
appointed certain persons to frame a Model of Government: which no question
would have proved an excellent one, when only Swordmen and Tradesmen were to
be the contrivers. But that which checked their contentment in these courses
was the dissatisfaction of Genesis Monck in Scotland. Letters of expostulation
past to and fro between the General and Fleetwood; but the English Army in the
mean time prepared to march against him forthwith, and was led toward the
North by Lambert, consisting of about 12000. men. The General seeing them thus
beforehand with him, sent Commissioners to Westminster to treat, yet with all
marched Southward with what Forces he could raise and fortified Berwick upon
Tweed. The Commissioners going beyond their Instructions, the General was not
satisfied with the Treaty, and therefore soon after desired another at
New Castle; during which he called a Convention of Estates in Scotland, who not
only approved his undertaking but assisted him in it. While things stood thus,
the City of London, though they well enough liked the turning out of the Rump,
would by no means join with the Army; But about the beginning of December, the
Apprentices and some others framed a Petition to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
for a Free Parliament; the Soldiers understanding it interposed, and a great
hurly burly thereupon arose in the City, some being slain and others wounded.
Fleetwood was therefore desired to draw his Forces out of the City; but instead
of doing that he placed Garrisons in several parts of it, threatening to fire it
if the Citizens stirred. At the same time Haselrig, Morley and some other
Rumpers seized on Portsmouth, and declared against the Army; and part of the
Navy under Vice Admiral Lawson did the like, and blockt up the Thames. The City
in this condition would declare neither for Parliament nor Army, but still
desired a free Parliament, which at last was consented to upon diverse enslaving
qualifications and proclaimed by the Committee of Safety to begin on Ian. 24.
Upon the borders all this while nothing was done, the Treaty took no effect;
nevertheless Genesis Monck kept from engaging, nor was it possible for Lambert to
draw him to it, whose Forces quartered in a cold barren Country, unable to
march by reason of the hardness of the weather. At length Fleetwood having
treated with Lawson to no effect, and his soldiers being ready to mutiny for
want of pay, was forced out of apprehension of worser consequence, to give over
ruling; and the Rump slipped into the House again on December. 26. late in the
evening by Torch-light. Upon the news hereof Lambert's Army deserted him, and
General Monck entered into England with his, about the 6. of Ian.

Whilst affairs were thus turbulent in England, his Majesty being at Diepe in
Normandy received an invitation from Don Lewis de Haro the great Spanish
Minister at the Frontier of Spain. Which his Majesty accepting, rid post
incognito through France, being accompanied only with the Lord Marquis of
Ormond, and the Earl of Bristol. Upon information of his approach to Bayonne,
the Spanish Favorite went forth with a splendid Train to meet him, and upon
the first sight of him alighted from his Horse, and notwithstanding the
inconvenience of the place, in a very humble posture embraced his Majesty's
knees; from whence also he conducted him (riding all the way bareheaded) to the
best lodgings the place afforded. On the next day his Majesty was visited by
Mazarini, whom he entertained with that discreet wariness that he let him know
he sufficiently understood his projects. The result of his Majesty's
consultations with Don Lewis, was, that the Favorite in his Masters name
promised him all assistance both of men and money, as soon as the conclusion of
the French peace permitted. Whereupon his Majesty after high caresses and
treatments, returned privately by Post to Paris, where staying with the Queen
his Mother some few days, he departed to his former residence at Brussels.

This private journey occasioned so certain a belief in the Sectarians here in
power, that his Majesty and the Duke of York (who lay at Calis) were come over
into England, that many persons were apprehended for them and particularly one
Mr. Colt was taken and imprisoned for the Duke of York, and others also for his
Majesty.

We left Genesis Monck upon his march out of Scotland; all parties had their hopes
fixed upon him, the Rump presuming by his assistance to quell the refractory
City; and the Citizens, that he would enforce the Rump either to call in the
Members secluded in Dec. 1648. or to fill up the House with new Elections; yet
none knew certainly his intentions. During his March he was addressed to by
several Counties, for the same things that the City desired, who also sent
their Swordbearer as far as New Castle to congratulate his coming, and tender
the respects and affections of the City to him. Yet he gave such answers as
were not satisfactory to any. The Rump also sent two of their Members (
Robinson and Scot) to wait upon him, but indeed rather as spies to watch and
observe him. At St. Albans some Aldermen and Common Council men of London were
sent to him from the City to court him, but were returned, as all others, only
with thanks for their respects. On Friday Feb. 3. he marched into London, and
was lodged at White Hall; being much caressed by the Rump, and received their
thanks in the House. The City continuing still their refractoriness to the
Rump; and perceiving they so delayed the filling up of the House, as if they
never intended it, on Wednesday Feb. 8. passed a Vote in Common Council, not
to pay or levy any Taxes until such time as they might have a full and free
Parliament. This so enraged the Rump that they ordered the General to march
with his Army into the City, pull up the Chains and Posts, break down the Gates
and Portcullis, and imprison diverse Aldermen and Commissioners. Which was
accordingly executed the next day to the great terror and amazement, not only
of the City, but of the whole Nation when they heard the report of it.

But this consternation did not last long; for the General reflecting on the
odious service the Rump had put him upon, and apprehending their intentions to
retrench his power (which indeed his Commission being that day expired they did
accordingly, joining him with some of their Members and Officers in the supreme
command of the Army) on Saturday Feb. 11. drew his Army into Finsbury fields,
and presently after upon some conference with the Lord Mayor and some chief
Citizens, writ a Letter to the Iunto, as from White Hall, subscribed by
Himself and 14. of his chief Officers, wherein he told them with what regret he
had executed their late Orders in relation to the Chains, Posts and Gates of
the City, which he feared would be so far from answering the expected end, that
it would rather increase the discomposure of men's spirits in the Nations;
minding them also, That the ground of his coming into England was, not only to
return them to their trust, but also to vindicate the Liberties of the People,
etc. He also complained, That Lambert, Vane and others, impeached of Treason,
and that had acted in the illegal and tyrannical Committee of Safety, were yet
suffered to continue in and about the City, and some too in the House and in
the Army, etc. That they were contriving to take away the maintenance of the
Ministry; That they were framing another Oath to impose upon the people, and to
that purpose had countenanced a bold and dangerous Petition from the Fanatic
Party. And lastly he desired, That by the Friday following they would issue out
Writs for filling up the House upon due and reasonable Qualifications, and put
a certain and speedy period to their sitting, according to their frequent
Declarations. This Letter produced not greater regret in the Rump, then it did
joy to the City and whole Kingdom, which was testified at night by Bone-fires
and ringing of Bells, etc.

The time set for filling the House being expired, and nothing done by the Rump
in order thereunto, the formerly secluded Members upon address to the General,
and engageing to him not to be against a single person, were on Feb. 21.
permitted to take their seats in the House, after 11. years exclusion. The
House now augmented by above a 100. Members, take care for settling the
Nations; and first they constituted General Monck Commander in chief of all the
forces of England, Scotland and Ireland, Sir William Waller Lieutenant
General, Colonel Rossiter General of the Horse, General Montague Admiral af
Sea. Then they appointed a New Council of State consisting of Genesis Monck, the
Lord Fairfax, Mr. Annesley, Sir William Waller, Mr. Hollis, Genesis Montagu and
others to the number of 30. And with all speed they released several Gentlemen
imprisoned by the Rump, and amongst others Sir Geo. Booth; ordering also the
City Gate* to be repaired at the public charge. And lastly having made
provision for settling the Militiaa of the Kingdom, and calling a new
Parliament to convene at Westminster April 25. they dissolved themselves by Act
on Friday March 16. And thus ended that unhappy Long Parliment after almost 19.
years from their first assembling, having been interrupted for 5. years
together by Cromwell, and for ten weeks by Lambert.

His Majesty in the mean time removed from the Spanish Court at Brussels to
Bruges in Flanders, and resided there for a good space; but being now in fair
hopes of restitution to his Dominions departed from thence toward the latter
end of March to Breda, a handsome Town situate in Brabant, about 10. leagues
from Antwerp, and belonging to the Prince of Orange.

In this interval the Council of State prudently managed affairs* proclaiming
against all disturbers of the peace, under whatsoever pretense, and tendering an
engagement for peaceable demeanor to be subscribed by such as they suspected
of disturbance, which Lambert refusing, was committed to the Tower. The General
also purged his Army of Fanatics, both Officers and Soldiers, and sent down
two Colonels to displace Overton from the Garrison of Hull, which he pretended
to keep till the coming of Jesus Christ. But about the midst of April a great
disturbance had like to have happened. For Lambert having made an escape out of
the Tower, appeared in arms about Northampton in the head of a party, many
cashiered soldiers and fanatics repairing to him. But this danger was timely
removed by Col. Rich. Ingoldsby, who without fighting took Lambert with his own
hand, and sent him up to London prisoner, together with a son of Hasilrig's,
Col. Cobbet and Major Creed. They were brought by Coach through Hide Park on
April 24. at which time 20000. Horse and Foot of City Regiments and Auxiliaries
were training there.

The Parliament according to appointment assembled at Westminster, and chose
Sir Harbottle Grimstone Speaker, the Nobility also taking their places in the
upper-House by virtue of their Peerage, and choosing the Earl of Manchester
Speaker. Within a few days after their meeting, the Lord Viscount Mordant and
Sir John Greenvile one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber, arrived
at London with Letters from his Majesty dated at Breda April 4/14. One was to
the House of Peers, another to the House of Commons, another to Genesis Monck and
his Officers, and another to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of
London. These Letters were accompanied with a Declaration, and delivered
accordingly on May Day. The two Houses received them with great joy and loyal
affection, and so did his Excellency and the City; from whom Sir John Greenvile
received 200 l. and 500 l. from the Parliament, as a gratuity, to buy him a
Jewel. The Letters were full of very gracious expressions, and in the
Declaration his Majesty offered I. A Free and General Pardon to be passed under
the Great Seal to all persons whatsoever, who within 40. days after the
publication thereof shall sue it out; Excepting such as should be excepted by
the Parliament. II. A liberty to tender consciences in matters of Religion, so
as the peace of the Kingdom be not disturbed, and to pass such an Act to that
effect, as the Parliament should think fit to offer. III. The determination
concerning Sales and Purchases, to the Parliament. IV. And lastly, satisfaction
of Arrears to the Officers and Soldiers of Genesis Monck 's Army, and reception
of them into his own service upon as good pay and conditions as they now enjoy.
Hereupon the House of Commons Vote his Majesty's Letters and Declaration
satisfactory, and the Government to be in King, Lords and Commons; soon after
which both Houses ordered a certain number of their Members to go to his
Majesty with Letters, and to invite him to his Kingdoms; also 50000 l. was
ordered to be immediately sent to him, 10000 l. to the Duke of York and 5000 l.
to the Duke of Gloucester. The City also deputed several worthy Members to wait
upon his Majesty with a Letter, and 10000 l. as a present. Moreover Admiral
Montague was commanded to attend him upon the coasts of Holland with a squadron
of Ships. But the General first of all dispatched away his Brother Sir Thom.
Clerges with a Letter to his Majesty, wherein was enclosed an Address of the
Officers professing their Allegiance to his Majesty. On Tuesday, May 8. his
Majesty was solemnly proclaimed in London, and soon after in all Counties*
Cities, and Borroughs of England, and that with greater transports of joy then
had ever been known upon the like or any other occasion. In the mean time great
numbers of persons of quality daily flocked over to Breda to his Majesty, who
stayed not long there, but removed to the Hague, where himself and the English
Gentry were splendidly entertained at the charge of the States, who also
presented him with gifts of great value. From thence the Queen of Bohemia with
the Princess of Orange, and the young Prince, accompanied his Majesty and the
two Dukes to the Seaside, where they were entertained in the Naseby with a
magnificent collation, and so his Majesty took leave of them, and set sail for
England. At his landing at Dover he was met by the General, who immediately
kneeled to kiss his Royal hand; but his Majesty embraced him graciously and
took him with his two Brothers into his Coach to Dover, where after a Treatment
by the Magistrates, he rid to Canterbury, where he was met by the Mayor and
Citizens, who presented him a golden Cup full of gold; and the Ministers, who
presented him a Bible.

Having rested there on Sunday, the next day he went to Cobham-House, and on
Tuesday May 29. (being his Birthday) he came toward London, attended by the
Duke of Buckingham, the Earls of Northhampton, Norwich, Shrewsbury,
Litchfield, Cleaveland, the Lord Mordant, and Sir John Robinson, with their
several Troops of the chiefest Nobles and gentry of the Kingdom, and the
General with ten Regiments of his best horse, besides innumerable companies of
people that flocked from all the adjacent Counties. On Blackheath near
Greenwich he was met by Major Gener^l Brown with a gallant Company of young
Citizens and others, etc. and at Southwark he was met by the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and 300. Citizens in Velvet Coats and Gold Chains representing the
several Companies, and entertained with a Collation in a Tent erected on
purpose; and from thence about 5. a clock in the afternoon he rode into the
City between his two Brothers, the streets being on one side beset with the
several Companies in their Gowns and on the other with Soldiers, the windows
adorned with Tapistry and other hangings, the Conduits running with Wine and
the people testifying their joy with incessant shoutings and Acclamations.

Arriving at White Hall, the Speakers of both Houses congratulated his return
in two solemn Speeches, to which his Majesty answered that the People's
acclamation (together with his journey) though grateful to him as
demonstrations of affection, had so disordered him that he could not give such
an answer as he desired. But they should find him a sincere Defender of the
Laws and Liberties of the people, and the Parliament should not be more ready
to ask his consent to any thing fitting to be done then he would be to grant
it. After which he retired out of the Banqueting House to his Lodgings.

Thus we have traced out all the principal actions of this great King's Life,
in his Infancy, Youth,. and Manhood to this present, as well in his own
Territories as beyond the Seas, and withal given an account of the most
considerable events here in England during the Oligarchy of the late long
Parliament, and the Tyranny of Ol. Cromwell. In all which we have endeavored to
give an impartial Relation with as much brevity as the smalness of this Volume
(containing more strange occurrences then have happened in some Ages) would
permit. May the God of Heaven, who of his infinite and undeserved mercy toward
these poor Nations has restored his Majesty to his Dominions, long preserve
his Sacred Person for the good both of Church and Commonwealth, and multiply
the years of his Reign in Honor, and Prosperity.

Glory be to God on High; and on Earth Peace and good Will toward Men.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 118. l. 11. read greater honor.

Page 273. l. 8. for at Salisbury, read at Exeter.

Page 320. l. 24. read and Commoners.


