THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE HOUSE of COMMONS, Touching the Impeachment of EDWARD
Late EARL of CLARENDON, Lord High-Chancellour of England, Anno 1667. With the
many Debates and Speeches in the House. The Impeachment Exhibited against him.
His Petition in Answer thereto. As also the several Weighty Arguments
concerning the Nature of Treason, Bribery, etc. By Serj. Maynard, Sir Ed. S.
Sir T. L. Mr. Vaughan, Sir Rob. Howard, Mr. Hambden, and other Members of that
Parliament. TOGETHER, With the Articles of High Treason Exhibited against the
said Earl, by the Earl of Bristol in the House of Lords on the 10th of July,
1663. With the Opinion of all the Learned Judges therein.

The second Edition carefully Corrected.

Printed in the Year, 1700.

THE PREFACE, TO THE READER.
I Think there needs not much be said to recommend the following Sheets to the
Intelligent Reader. It has been the Opinion of the Wisest Men that Letters,
Memoirs, and Public Speeches, have ever been the Clearest and Most Exact
Histories of Times, and have given the truest Light into the Spirit and Bent of
a People, especially, where Liberty, that Darling of the Universe, that
sweetest Cordial of Mankind, bears Sway; and where shall We find it so justly,
Claimed so strenuously maintained as in our English Constitution? a
Constitution so exactly sitted for the Preserving that Inestimable Jewel, that
the Deepest Arts and Subtilties of the most Crafty Statesmen could never yet
Undermine, or Ravish our Envied Freedom from us; on the Contrary, They have
ever met their own Destruction, when They have been so Rash as to make the
Attempt; and I dare boldly say, that We our selves must give it away, if ever
We are not Masters of it; for it cannot be forced from us.

If We reflect on the Hardships other Nations Groan Under, and then consider
the Plenty and Ease We sensibly Enjoy, We must justly Honor the Memories of
our Glorious Ancestors, who have handed down so dear a Prize to us. If we look
backward, we shall find there have been great Attempts, both Open and Secret,
to break in upon, or lessen our just Rights and Privileges, but there have
ever been Persons of Generous Spirits and Unshaken Resolutions, Who have nobly
Opposed the bold Invaders, being neither to be Awed nor Brow-beaten by any
Higher Power, nor Bribed by the most Advantageous offers of Profit or Honor,
to betray so Glorious a Cause: We have never yet found a Wicked Counselor or
an Evil Minister that could Escape the Justice of a House of Commons. It Is true
in some former Reigns a Parliament was no very desirable Thing, and seldom
called, but whenever they met they bravely Attacked the Enemies of the Nation
though never so Potent, and brought down such as have thought themselves Secure,
and Out of Reach; and I trust, as we have not yet, we never shall, see Ill Men
in such a Station.

We live now (God be thanked) in a time when we need not fear Encroachments on
our Just Liberties and Properties; are we not Blessed with a King who has no
Design to Enslave or Burden his People? Have we not Ministers that Act with
Uprightness and Integrity? Are we not ruled by a Monarch who makes the Interest
of the Nation his own, and regards Merit only in the Choice of his Ministers?
do we see any Court-Minion or haughty Favorite Advanced? or any Man of worth
pass Unregarded and Despised? In short, have we not a King who only thinks
himself happy, because he sees his People so? And as the common Adage has it,
Regis ad exemplum. Do we not see our Grandees following their Great Masters
Steps? Are not Envy and Ambition now Banished the Palace Gates? What Courtiers
do we now find breaking their Promises, or giving only Words instead of just
Performances? Do they now covet Perferments to get vast Estates? Are they not
contented with their moderate Perquisites? What Ministers can the most
observing Eye find Guilty of Acting, or Advising, Ill? Or who amongst them are
afraid to stand the Test of the severest Scrutiny? Such is the Happiness we now
Enjoy, such are the Blessings of our Present Administration. But I have
wandered beyond my purpose, my Zeal to so much Goodness has carried me wide of
my Design, which was to say something by way of Preface of the following
Sheets, which were Published not to reflect on the Memory of any, but at the
desire of some very Judicious Persons, who thought it pity a Collection so
filled with Law and solid Sense should be kept secret; and I believe none, who
read it, but will highly applaud the Publishing. The World must own that the
Learned Persons, whose Speeches are contained in the following Pages, have been
famous for the depth of their Judgment, and profoundness of their Sense, and
many of them have been justly Esteemed the most eminent Lawyers of their Time:
I shall only add that several of our greatest Men have highly valued it in
Manuscript, and I doubt not but all who read it, will think it fit, not only
for a Lawyer's, but every English Gentleman's Study.

A COLLECTION Of Proceedings in the HOUSE of COMMONS, About Impeaching the EARL
of CLARENDON, Late Ld, CHANCELLOR. With the Debates and Speeches concerning
that Matter.
October 26th, 1667.
Mr. Ed. Seym. Charged him viva voce with many great Crimes, whereupon a Debate
arose what Proceeding ought to be had upon it, some moving to Impeach him in
the Name of the Commons till Articles should be prepared, others urged, that
Witnesses should be first examined to see how the Charge could be made good,
least failing, it should reflect on the Honor of the House; after long Debate,
a Committee was appointed to search Records for Parliamentary Proceedings in
the like Cases, and to make Report.

30th, The Report being made by Sir Tho. Litt. that various Proceedings were
found in several Parliaments, it occasioned a long Debate, several Members
speaking to the effect following,

Sir Tho. Litt. That in Cases Criminal, they find Proceedings to have been,
sometimes by Articles, sometimes by word of Mouth; but in Capital Crimes no
Proceedings appear till the Earl of Strafford's Case, against whom the House
carried up a general Impeachment, the Reason whereof seems to be this: Some
Votes were made in the House at which the King takes Offense, as if they would
proceed upon common Fame; whereupon they vindicate their Proceedings as done in
a Parliamentary way, and appoint a Committee to withdraw for about half an Hour
to consider the Matter for a Conference with the Lords about the Charge, and
upon their Report a general Charge is carried up to the Lords Bar; the
principal Charge then was for advising to bring over the Irish Army, and the
single Proof was Sir Henry Vane, so the Impeachment went up for High Treason,
though no Member would positively say he would make the Charge good.

So for the Bishop of Canterbury there was no Impeachment, but a Charge in
general.

And if you take not the same Course now, but insist upon examining Witnesses
first, the Difficulties will be unanswerable; for is it like that Men before
they shall see you in earnest will have their Names produced against the Earl
of Clarendon? If this be your proceeding, we must never expect to Impeach a
great Man more. If you think there is nothing in the Charge leave it, but if
you think it is worth your while take heed of making such a dangerous President
as by neglecting it to wound your Liberties; but proceed in the usual way with
a general Impeachment.


Serj. Mayn. I stand not up to give Advice, but to speak to matter of Fact in
the business of Strafford and Canterbury; I attended that business from the
beginning: Sir, John Clotworthy informed something against Strafford to be
direct Treason, that he had assumed an Arbitrary Power in Ireland, and
dispossessed one Savage by force of Arms, and undertook to prove it. Sir Henry
Vane also told them that he had a Note taken out of his Fathers Cabinet,
containing the Advice which Strafford gave the King in that Case. Namely, the
King wanting Money, and the Question being how he should supply it, he replied,
That if the Parliament was refractory and would not, you stand loosed and
absolved from Rules of Government; you have an Army in Ireland which you may
employ to reduce them.

Then there was a Debate whether they should accuse him of Treason. And Sir
Edward Herbert (the Attorney) said, if you are persuaded the Truth is, as is
pretended, you may, and so it was; but when the close Committee had examined
the business, they moved the House, that some Lawyers might be added to them,
and had they gone, when they said they were ready, they had not touched one
Hair of Strafford's Head. Then it was considered what was fit to be done: To
accuse him of Treason would be a dangerous President, as if out of many other
Crimes a Treason could be drawn, thereupon it was Resolved not to demand
Judgment from the Lords, because some Articles were not Treason. Then it was
propounded not to State what his Offenses were, lest it should give advantage
to inferior Courts so to proceed; but said he deserved to be accused of
Treason, and in conclusion a Proviso was added, not to make that Case a
President.

For the Bishop of Canterbury, the four Articles were general, and he was long
in Prison without any proceeding against him; but after long time he demurred,
then new Articles were framed, on which he dyed.


Mr. John Vaugh. You have had a Charge opened of a strange Nature, and I know
not what part of it can be proved, but the reputation of This House is at
Stake, and of the King too; For, where a Charge is brought in by some of your
Members, whereof one Article is, That he should say such words, of the King, as
by a Statue made by you is a Praemunire, and to give Council to levy War upon
the Kingdom; is it agreeable to our Duty to the King and Kingdom to let it die?

For the Person concerned, I know not which way his Honor can be whole without
his giving an Answer to his Charge; for Mark the Consequence, if the King
should take him to favor again before cleared, will not the World say a Person
is received to favor again, who gave the King Council against the Kingdom, and
traduced the King, and how can he be whole in his Honor this way;

Obj. But it will be said, we must have ground to put him to Answer.

Ans. Whether you have ground enough to prove I know not, but you have ground
enough to make him Answer to clear himself. Suppose those two Articles had been
Charged on a Member of this House, what would it have become that Member to do;
Should he sit still and say, I will make no Answer, but see whether the House
will make more proof; If he should do so, the not making an Answer is Reason
enough to Charge him.

I can give you Instances of Persons charged in Parliament, who, though not
nominated, yet being (as it were) pointed at, Petitioned that they might
Answer, and so would any Man; but when this is bruited up and down, will not
the World say? You never ask the party whether Guilty.

The Duke of Suffolk was Charged upon Common Fame, and if that were a ground
for a Charge then (which I do not say it was) so it is in this Case; but he
moved that he might be heard, and though it was desired he might be Committed,
yet it was justly rejectly till he had Answered: Then for the Nature of the
Charge, if it be true, it is very High, but whether it be Treason is another
Matter, it is brought to you under no Name, when you make the Charge, it
becomes you to say what it is; therefore Choose a Committee to reduce the
Accusation into Heads, and bring them to you, without which you cannot right
you selves, nor him, if Innocent.

For the way of it, it cannot be thought fit to publish your Witnesses and the
Matter beforehand; if in private Causes the Defendant and Plaintiff should
have a Publication before hand, no Cause would be rightly Judged, much less
when you have Publication of all which concerns the One, but nothing of the
Other. Again, if a Witness be examined concerning Matters in his own Knowledge,
if he gives Evidence, where he is not brought judicially to give it, if he has
testified any Thing which brings him within the Statute of false News, how can
he avoid the Penalty? For its not enough for him to say he knows it but he must
have others to justify it.

As for the Persons who bring the Charge, they are your own Members, which the
Writs return for honest and discreet Men, and if you are satisfied of that, how
can you reject their Complaint, though grounded upon Common Fame, as all
Accusations are, seeing they tell you, they can bring-Proof of what they say?

Then for Common Fame, if a Man spends largely, and has no visible way to get
an Estate, no Man accuses him to have gotten it unlawfully; yet he may be put
to clear himself from what Common Fame charge him with. Upon suspicion of
Felony, I may bring a Man before a Magistrate to clear himself, so in the
Course of Indictments, and Presentiments, a Charge is given of what Things are
to be Presented? then a Proclamation is made, That if any one can give
Evidence, he may be Sworn, but if no Evidence appear, yet they may Indict.

Then it will be said, the Oath is a Material Thing, but we are proceeding
without an Oath.

To this I Answer, What this House shall Charge is of more Authority than the
Oaths of ordinary Witnesses; Peers though not upon Oath are supposed to do right,
so are we upon the Reputation of our Honesty and Discretion.


Mr. L. H. I am sensible, the House may think me Partial, but I shall endeavor
to show my self not so much a Son of the Earl of Clarendon as a Member of this
House; and I assure you that if he shall be found Guilty, no Man shall appear
more against him than I; if not, I hope every one will be for him as much as I;
let every Man upon his Conscience think what of this Charge is true, for I
believe that if one Article be proved, he will own himself Guilty of all.


Sir Hen. Fin. An Impeachment there must be, if there be Cause; such
Accusations are not to be passed over in silence.

I believe not one truth in the Law more than this Proposition, That there is
no such thing as Treason by Common Law, or by Equity, and we hold our Lives by
that Law; before the 25th of Ed. the 3d. a Man could scarce speak any think but
it was Treason in Parliament or out, but no Man ought to die as a Traitor, who
has not literally offended that Law, or some other made since: There is indeed
in that Law a Proviso about the Parliaments declaring what is Treason, but note
the danger of taking declaratory Powers, which I fear has brought us into a
Reckoning of Blood, which we have not yet paid for.

The Power of Parliaments is double, Legislative, which has no bounds,
Declaratory, by pronouncing Judgments.

And though I know not what the Legislative Power of a Parliament cannot do, yet
it is not in the power of the Parliament, King, Lords, nor Commons, to declare
any thing to be Treason which is not in the Common Law Felony before. The
Proviso in Strafford's Case was (it is true) made for Inferior Courts; but I
hope we shall not so proceed as must needs draw after it a Netrahatur in
Exemplum, and your own Act this Parliament shows, That all done by Strafford,
apart, or together, was not Treason: And it behooves us to take heed we thwart
not our own Argument.

For the manner then, Consider how you should proceed if it were out of
Parliament, and how the bringing of it into the House alters it.

If it were out of Parliament, without doubt the Accusation should be proved
before hand, and those who discover it are guilty of Felony. This provides for
the Subject, that the Witnesses must be Two, and for the King, that none shall
discover the Evidence.

But suppose the Charge be for Misdemeanors, the Trial then is not to be by
the Lords, but by the Commons; for the Lords are his Peers only in Cases
Capital. How then does the bringing it in to Parliament alter the Case? If the
Parliament set aside Laws in this Case, we should be happy to see Law declaring
what is the power of Parliaments.

There is no President produced which is singly of Weight to guide you,
therefore if you proceed, let it be as near as possible by the good Old Laws;
Namely, That there be an Accusation founded upon an Oath and the Evidence kept
secret, I propose that way for the very reason that others oppose it ( viz).
The Accusation goes over the Kingdom, and it will bring dishonor to the House,
the King, and the Earl; For the Honor of the House, it will be hard to say,
the Charge was brought in upon misinformation; a Person accused for advising to
bring in Arbitrary Government, etc. And for saying the King is not fit to
Govern; If this be true, though it be not Treason in the formality of the Law, it
deserves no less Punishment then if it were; but if not found Guilty, Consider
the Case. If one say, A killed a Man and it is not so, must not he give
reparation? We have an accusation upon hearsay, but if it be not made good,
the blackest Scandal which Hell can invent, lies at our door.

Then Sir Tho. M -- rs moving to referr it to the Committee of Grievances.


Mr. Vaugh. You should have put the first Question before another had been
moved, the Earl of Middlesex ( Cranfield's Case) will not hold parallel; He was
accused of Bribery, which might be proved by their own Books, but this is for
Scandalizing the King, etc. And where shall the Committee of Grievances enquire
about it? you say let them hear the Persons.

But suppose they be of the Lords House, Can you send for them? Or if you do,
will they come and say it? The matter of this Accusation is such, that if it
lies in the knowledge of a single Person, if he delivers it extrajudicially
(which he does, if not upon Oath) he may be undone by it, and hazard his Person
too: At the Committee of Grievances the Persons must be known, and what they
can say, and then we may conclude what will follow: Besides, their Quality may
be such as they cannot be brought, or their Discretion such as they will not
answer.


Sir Rich. Temp. Tell but the Lords that a Man in public place has misbehaved
himself, and they will sentence him, if he purge not himself; Never yet were
Witnesses examined before the Trial in case of Treason or Felony, for then, if
there be two Witnesses, a way may be found by Poison, or some other way, to
take away one.


Serj. Mayn. No Man can do what is Just, but he must have what is true before
him; where Life is concerned you ought to have a moral Certainty of the Thing,
and every one be able to say upon this proof in my Conscience, This Man is
guilty. Common Fame is no ground to accuse a Man where matter of Fact is not
clear; to say an Evil is done, therefore this Man has done it, is strange in
Morality, more in Logic.

Upon the whole Debate it was Voted,

That the Committee do reduce the Accusation to Heads and present them to this
House.


November 6th, 1667.
Sir Tho. Litt. Reports that the Accusation was reduced to Heads, which he read
in his Place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table, which
are as followeth' viz.

I. THAT the Earl of Clarendon has designed a Standing Army to be raised and
to govern the Kingdom thereby, and advised the King to Dissolve this present
Parliament, to lay aside all Thoughts of Parliaments for the future, to govern
by a Military Power, and to maintain the same by Free Quarter and Contribution.

II. That he has, in the hearing of the King's Subjects, falsely and
seditiously said, That the King was in his heart a Papist, or Popishly,
Affected, or words to that effect.

III. That he has received great Sums of Money for the procuring of the Canary
Patent, and other illegal Patents; and granted illegal Injunctions to stop
proceedings at Law against them, and other illegal Patents formerly Granted.

IV. That he has Advised and Procured diverse of His Majesty's Subjects to be
Imprisoned against Law, in remote Islands, Garrisons, and other Places, thereby
to prevent them from the Benefit of the Law, and to produce Presidents for the
Imprisoning any other of His Majesty's Subjects in like manner.

V. That he procured His Majesty's Customs to be Farmed at under Rates,
knowing the same; and great pretended Debts to be paid by His Majesty, to the
payment of which, his Majesty was not in strictness bound: And afterward
received great Sums of Money for procuring the same.

VI. That he received great Sums of Money from the Company of Vintners, or
some of them or their Agents, for Inhauncing the Prizes of Wines, and for
freeing them from the payment of legal Penalties which they had incurred.

VII. That he has in a short time gained to himself a greater Estate than can
be imagined to be gained lawfully in so short a time, and contrary to his Oath,
he has procured several Grants under the Seal from His Majesty, to himself and
Relations, of several of His Majesty's Lands, Hereditaments and Leases, to the
disprofit of His Majesty.

VIII. That he has Introduced an Arbitrary Government in His Majesty's
Foreign Plantations, and has caused such as complained thereof before His
Majesty and Council, to be long Imprisoned for so doing.

IX. That he did reject and frustrate a Proposal and Undertaking, approved by
His Majesty for the preservation of Mevis, and St. Christophers, and reducing
the French Plantations to his Majesty's Obedience after the Commissions were
drawn for that purpose, which was the occasion of our great Losses and Damage
in those Parts.

X. That he held Correspondence with Cromwell and his Accomplices, when he was in
Parts beyond the Seas attending His Majesty, and thereby adhered to the King's
Enemies.

XI. That he advised and effected the Sale of Dunkirk to he French King, being
part of His Majesty's Dominions; together with the Ammunitions, Attillery, and
all sorts of Stores there, and for no greater value, than the said Ammunitions,
Artillery, and Stores were worth.

XII. That the said Earl did unduely cause Hii Majesty's Letters Patents, under
the Great Seal of England, to one Dr. Crowther, to be altered, and the
Enrolement thereof to be unduly rased.

XIII. That he has in an Arbitrary way examined and drawn into question diverse
of His Majesty's Subjects, concerning their Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattells,
and Properties, determined thereof at the Council Table, and stopped
Proceedings at Law by Order of the Councel-Table, and threatened some that
pleaded the Statute of 17 Car. 1.

XIV. That he has caused Quo Warranto's to be issued out against most of the
Corporations of England, immediately after their Charters were Confirmed by Act
of Parliament, to the intent he might require great Sums of Money of them for
renewing their Charters, which when they complied withal, he caused the said
Quo Warranto's to be Discharged, and Prosecution therein to cease.

XV. That he procured the Bills of Settlement of Ireland, and received great
Sums of Money for the same in most corrupt and unlawful manner.

XVI. That he has deluded and betrayed His Majesty and the Nation in all
Foreign Treaties and Negotiations relating to the late War, and betrayed and
discovered His Majesty's secret Councils to his Enemies.

XVII. That he was a principal Author of that fatal council of dividing the
Fleet; about June, 1666.

The Clerk having read them a second time it was moved, That in regard the
Articles were many, they might be referred to the Committee to see how far they
were true, because Fame is too slender a ground to bring a Man upon the Stage.

Sir Fran. Goodr. Seconds it, because new matter was now added to what was
formerly charged Viva voce in the House.

Sir Rob. How. Suppose the Earl of Clarendom Innocent, and yet Charged and
Imprisoned (which is the worst of the Case) he afterward appears Innocent and
is discharged, receiving no more hurt than other Subjects have done; Namely, D.
Buck.
one great Man lately.

Object. But why should you Commit him?

Answ. For proof, whether the Articles be true or not: Suppose Men for self
preservation will not venture to come, not knowing how they may trust
themselves, and so you have no Proof, He very guilty, and You not able to
proceed; is the Inconveniency greater for an Innocent Person (if he prove so)
to suffer a few days, than for you to loose your Repuation for ever. If this
Man be not brought to his Trial, it may force him to fly to that which he
Councelled, that is, that we may never have Parliament more.


Sir Fra. Goodr. I am not against proceeding, but unsatisfied to do it without
Witness, it being like Swearing in Verbo Magistri.


Sir John Holl. That the Committee undertake to make good the Charge, otherwise
examine Witnesses.


Mr. Vaugh. You admit the Accusation to be matter for a Charge, if the
Committee find proof; if you intend to make this a distinct Case I leave it to
you; but if this be to settle the Course of the Proceedings of the House, I am
against it; for this is ordering a way of Proceeding in the Earl of Clarendon's
Case, which shall not be a general Rule. Though I cannot say one of the Articles
to be true, yet I know them to be a full Charge if made good, and you are
prescribing a Course neither proper, nor ever practiced. A Witness who speaks
without Outh is subject to Damage; not so upon Oath, because the Law compells
him: And whereas it has been said, if Witnesses attest before the House of
Commons, what Judges dare middle in it? I answer, such Judges as meddled in the
Case of Sir John Elliot, etc. and the Ship Money.


Sir Rich. Temp. A Grand Jury is capable to present upon their own knowledge,
and are Sworn to keep the King's Council and their own, and I believe there is
not one Article of the Accusation but will be made good.


Sir Rob. How. As I am sensible of the danger of publishing Witnesses
beforehand, so I would have every one satisfied; therefore take the Articles
one by one, and according as you shall find what your Members may say for the
Truth, you may be induced to proceed or not.


Sir Tho. Osb. The House ought to have something to induce their belief, which
they have had from several Members, and I know how some will be made good.


Sir Tho. Littl. What Article Members of the House do not offer you matter to
induce you to believe, you may lay it aside; therefore hear what shall be said
and proceed accordingly.


Mr. John Tr. You connot expect Witnesses will appear before you, Lords will
not, nor can you expect Commoners should; for when you are up and gone, nothing
can protect a Commoner if this Information be not Judicial.


At last the Question was put whether to refer it to a Committee. Yeas, 128.
Noes, 194. 322.


Then the first Article was read to see what would be said to induce the House
to Impeach.

The First Article read.

Sir Rob. How. Lord Vaugh. Heard from Persons of Quality, That it would be
proved.

The Second Article was read.

Lord St. Ioh. Persons of great Quality have assured him to make it good, and
if they perform not, he will acquaint the House who they are.


The Third Article read.

Mr. Ed. Seym. Sufficient Persons will make it good, with this Addition, When
he received the Money, he said, So long as the King is King, and I Lord
Chancellor, the Patent will stand.


The Fourth and Fifth Articles read.

Sir Rich. Temp. Diverse have undertaken to make them good, if they do not I
will Name them.

About the receiving Money of Vintners.


Sir Rob. C -- r. That he knows who will prove it.

About his getting a great Estate so suddenly.


Mr. Ed. Seym. I suppose you need no proof the Sun shines at Noonday.


Sir Tho. Litt. The matter of Fact in the Article is easily made out, for his
Place as Chancellor could not be worth above 4 or 5000 1. per ann,

About introducing an Arbitrary Government in the Plantations.


Sir Tho. Litt. Sir Tho. Osh. One Farmer and others came from the Barbados to
complain of it, and lodged their Petion in this House, but were Imprisoned that
they might not be heard.

About frustrating Proposals for preserving Nevis, etc.


Sir Char. Wheel. My Lord Chancellor only opposed it.

About holding Correspondence with Cromwell.


Mr. Swinf. That is Pardoned by the Act of Indemnity.


Mr. Vaugh. The Committee were aware of that, but the Defendant may plead it,
and prove that he is not Out-lawed.


Sir Char. Wheel. I want not clearly to prove it.


Sir Rob. How. For such secret things as these, he ought to plead,
notwithstanding the Act of Oblivion, that the World may know who are
undiscerned Enemies.


Mr. Hamd. It is not only an Act of Parliament, but Oblivion; and no Man ought
to be so much as Accused for what was done before.


Mr. Vaugh. If the Pardon be general, the Judges and you are to Note it, but if
it has Qualifications (as that Act has) they are not to Note it; for you must
say there is no Indictment or Outlawry against him (for such the Act excepts)
or the Article is to stand.


Then the Act was read.

Mr. Swinf. The Clause for Pardon is Absolute, and any Man accused, pleading it
shall not be Sued, nor his Fault mentioned, and this is to Offenses and
Offenders; and for those who betrayed the King beyond Sea (who are excepted)
they must be Prosecuted within Two Years.

Object. You will say, he may plead that Act.

Answ. By the same rule, any Man who committed a Fault, during the Troubles,
may be put to plead it for Pardon.


Serj Mayn. We profess that there shall be Candor in our Proceedings, Do we
therefore believe this great Man is Out-lawed? If not, how shall we accuse him
of what we believe not true.


Mr. Vaugh. When I am satisfied of a thing I am not ashamed to own it; I find
now, having perused the Act, that it is within the Clause. The Indemnity is
general, and he is within it if not excepted, the Exception reaches those who
have held Intelligence with the King's Enemies, so as they be Prosecuted within
two Years, this he is not, therefore is clear.


So upon the Debate, the Article was expunged the Paper without a Vote.

About the Sale of Dunkirk.

Sir Tho. Osb. A great Lord told me that the Earl of Clarendon had made a
bragain for Dunkirk three quarters of a Year before it was known.


About Sealing Dr. Crowther's Patent.

Mr. Street. The King gives the Living to Crowther, in the Grant is a mistake
of a County, Crowther finds the mistake, and Petitions the King to amend it,
the King calls for the Chancellor and Seal, and in the King's presence it was
amended and Sealed.


Sir Tho. Littl. The Crime seems as great as a Chancellor could commit; the
King was to present by such a day, or not at all, the Error was found after the
day, so that the King (by Act of Parliament) had lost his right. The Chancellor
did alter the Patent, and the Record was fetched away by one of the
Chancellor's Servants, and brought back rased, and altered, which might be done
(and in other Cases is done) where a word only has been mistaken; but that is
in Case of something perfectly in the King's Power, and to save new sealing;
but here could be no new sealing the time being elapsed: It was to throw
another Man out of his Freehold, and is a great Crime.


About drawing Men's Lands into Question.

Mr. Thom. I shall be able to make it out.


About Quo Warranto's to Corporations.

Sir Tho. Litt. This is so Public a thing, that it need not be proved.


About the Settlement of Ireland.

Sir Rob. How. I doubt not but it will be made out.


About Foreign Treaties.

Sir Tho. Litt. This will appear by the Treaties themselves, putting us in
hopes of Peace, and so hindering the Fleets setting out.


About Miscarriage of the War.

Mr. Thom. I want not Persons to bring to bring to make it good.


Sir Tho. Litt. Sir Edward Sprag desires Money to give an Intelligencer, and
has it; Sprag brings the Intelligencer to the King, the King commands him to
meet him at the Chancellors, there he met the King, and then Order was given to
divide the Fleet.


Mr. Marvel Charged Mr. Seymour with saying in his Accusation, That the King
was insufficient for Government, which is now omitted in the Charge, and
desires he may declare where he had it.


Mr. Seym. The Party that told me at first, differed something afterward,
therefore I rather withdrew it than to trouble you with uncertainties; but a
Gentleman in the House can give you farther satisfaction in it.


Sir John Den. A Peer of the Land heard the Earl of Clarendon say in a Coach,
That the King was an unactive Person and indisposed for Government: This will
be made good.


Upon Debate it appearing probable that these words were spoken before the Act
of Oblivion, it passed over.

About the Customs.

Sir Rich. Temp. I have been Informed that he had a share for under-letting the
Customs and 40000 l. Bribe for getting pretended Debts from the King.


Sir Tho. Osb. The Earl of Clarendon said, Bid who would for the Customs, none
should have them but the Old Farmers.


Mr. P -- n. Having gone over the Articles, we should know where and when the
words were spoken.


Mr. Seym, That will be a way to Suppress the Evidence, I hope you will Impeach
him at the Lords Bar, and in due time produce your Witnesses.


Mr. P -- n. You must resolve to Impeach him of Treason, or Misdemeanour, and
name it accordingly.


Sir. Ed. Walp. You ought first to give a Title to your Impeachment; for if it
be for Treason, you will move for Commitment; if it be for Impeachment in
general, not.


Mr. Colem. What is laid before you is only by Hearsay, but no Assurance that
it will be made good; only that if they who reported it do not make it good,
you shall know who they are. In the Earl of Strafford's Case (the worst of
Presidents) the House proceeded not till one spoke in the House upon his own
Knowledge, and another engaged his Reputation to make it good.


Sir Rob. Atk. Those who have given you inducement to proceed, do it at third
hand, and though they may know the Credit and Impartiality of those that told
them, yet you do not.


Sir Tho. Litt. A Question should be put, Whether this House has sufficient
inducement to Impeach; Afterward Consider what the Title shall be, then
appoint a Committee to frame Articles.


Which Question being put, was carried in the Affirmative.

Then Adjourned.

November, 9.
The First Article read.
Sir John Goodr. Treason ought to terminate in an Overt Act, which designing is
not, therefore pray read the Statutes.


Thereupon sundry Statutes were read. 25 Ed. 3. 1 Hen. 4. Cap. 10. 1 Ed. 6.
Cap. 12. 1 Q. Ma. 13. Car. 2d. 14 Car. 2d. Cap. 29.


Mr. Stew. Declared it to be transcendant Misdemeanour but no Treason.

Mr. Vaugh. Two Questions will be considered, One, whether what is Charged in
the Article was Treason in Common Law before the 25 Ed. 3. That so we may
understand the nature of Treason; The other, Whether by any subsequent Act it
is made otherwise.


Mr. Wall. The Advice given to the King I look upon to be this. To establish a
New Government, To be Governed by Ianizaries instead of a Parliament, To have a
Divan and a great Minister of State, a Vizier-Bassau, a worse Plot than that of
the 5th of November; There, if the Lords and Commons had been destroyed, there
would have been Succession, but here both had been destroyed for ever. Then in
order to the Debate, consider how the Law looks on it; for though we may accuse
on less Evidence than she may Judge, yet we must be Cautious in naming the
Crime: What therefore does the Law call this before 25 Ed. 3? Then look whether
the power of Constructive Treason be taken away since.


Sir Fra. Goodr. The matter concerns Life, therefore we should be wary in the
Exercise of Legislative Power; you are not tied to Rules, but you are now a
step toward Judicature; The Common Law is Ius non Scriptum, and though every
Treason includes Felony, yet not every Felony Treason. 25 Ed. 3. There is a
Declaratory Power, whether a thing be Treason, or other Felony, not whether it
be Treason, and could not be declared Treason if not Felony before. In Cases
Capital at Common Law they might declare it Treason, but in Cases not Capital
at Common Law, they never exercised their Declaratory Power.

Among other things that Statute declares false Coined Money to be Treason,
which is but Felony at Common Law; afterward Money being imported, which was
not according to the Stamp, there was no Punishment for it, but as a
Misdemeanour: Therefore 4. Hen. 7. Provision is made against that Practice, and
it is made Treason, but if the Parliaments Declaratory-Power could have Made it
Treason, what needed a Statute on purpose? So that I cannot think the Article
before you is Treason, it not coming within the words of the Statute.


Mr. Vaugh. I shall speak to the first Question, whether this Article was
Treason at Common Law; and first remove what some have asserted, Namely, That
nothing is Treason but what was Felony before. 25 Ed. 3. where petty Treason is
spoken of, the Wife killing the Husband' etc. These words follow, If hereafter
it come into Question whether there be another Treason, it shall not be
resolved by the Judges, till the Parliament determine it; For in petty Treason,
if it be Treason, it must be Felony, because there is killing.

Then comes more, whether raising, etc. and it follows whether it be Felony or
Trespass; And the thing it self is more strange. None ever doubted, but that
all Treasons of 25. Ed. 3. was Treason before, and was so resolved 12 Q Eliz.
That by that Act the King declares what should be Treason; Namely, If any Man
Vitiates the King's Eldest Daughter, etc. But by this Doctrine if it were not
Treason, what was it? Either Adultry or Fornication, when it is only the Eldest
Daughter, not the Youngest.

It has been in all Ages a Reputation to Persons who have been Counselors to
Princes according to Emergencies to give Council to extricate out of danger.
and therefore hard to tax a Minister of State in a Case which he acquaints his
Master with; for there can be no Treason but against the King himself.

I will show you what I mean. It is true this is a Treason which cannot arise
from Misprision, because it was spoke to the King himself; but as a Minister of
State he has liberty to give Council for the King's safety. If a Person be able
to Inform his Master what Alliances are good for him, it his duty; so what
Trades are profitable, what not, etc. So where Men or Money are wanting, to
advise how to extricate is commendable; but when it comes to this, that he
breaks in upon the Laws, invading the Contract between the King and his
Subjects, it will be as if a Man advises, That if the King wants Money, he may
set up Highway Men to take it, and bring it to him, and so the skilfullest for
breaking the Law shall be esteemed the best Councellor; therefore, whoever
thinks to serve his Prince by breaking the Laws, he is so far from a wise Man,
that he is the highest Criminal. etc. then for the Nature of the thing, the
Treasons declared 2^ Ed. 3. were declared by the King's Commission, and the
Treasons were of that Nature which concerned Council, etc. they were not like
to be declared, and there is a passage in Glanvil, called Seductio Domini
Regis, that is, deceiving the King to what is pernicious to Him, and his People.

Now see the Nature of this Crime; if a Man Council his Prince, and practice it
such a way as shall render him Prince of Conscience, who has broken his Oath,
and all this to his Injury, so that he has no Assent to it. Compare this with
any Treason of 25 Ed. 3. consider it: Here is a person who gives the King
Advice, which at once must make his People see he has broken all his Faith to
his Kingdom (and is not the Counce of Governing by an Army such?) all the Laws
broken, to keep which the King has Sworn, and this the King put upon though not
inclined to, I assert not this upon the Earl of Clarendon, but upon the
Article, who does this, Councels the highest Treason against the Common Law,
because others are so; but if a Man will pretend to give Council, wherein many
shall have no benefit by the Law, he breaks all parts, and therefore I think
this Council was Treason at Common Law.


Mr. Colem. The Question is, Whether it be in your Power to declare this
Article Treason by 25 Ed. 3. If he advised an Army against the King's consent,
it is against the Statute; but I suppose that the Expression in the Article was
Advice to the King in Aid of his Government. Your Enacting Power is a kind of
Omnipotency, but in a Declaratory Power you can declare no more than is
committed to you, and with safety to the Subject you cannot declare this
Treason; Then what must be our Rule in Declaring I dare not say: For Scarce any
Man can tell what was Treason before 25 Ed. 3. was made to bring things to a
Certainty, and what was uncertain to them who made that Law can be certain to
us now. As the Judges can declare no other Treason, so in your Declaratory
Power neither can you declare Treason unless there be Resemblance to some other
like Case: The Advice said in the Article to be given the King, cannot be
within that Statute, unless the Counselor must run the hazard of his Advice.


Mr. Vaugh. The greatest Declarations of Treasons which ever were, equal not
those 22 Rich. 2. in Nottingham Castle: The Judges are called to deliver their
Opinions upon their Faith, and they declare the Acts to be Treason, because
Felony before, and tho'some of them were hanged for it, yet the Parliament
declared the same Thing.


Serj. Mayn. Was, what is mentioned, Treason by the Common Law, though so said by
the Lords? And what was so declared was repealed, H. 4.


Sir Tho. Litt. Pray resolve whether it was Treason by Common Law; and if so,
when made so. Some think not, because they find not the Parliament declaring
them Treasons, as being so at CommonLaw, and that that Statute was made to
bound them, but that was only to bound Inferior Courts, not themselves; for the
Parliament makes not a new Crime and then Condemns it, but the Crime was
before, and the Parliament declares it.


Sir Ed. Thur. Has the Parliament declaratory Power now? Yes, but it must be
by King and Parliament, so it was in the Case of the Genoua Ambassador. The
Judges would not conclude the Articles Treason, nor would the Lords alone; and
if you come to an equal declarative Power with them, you must examine
Witnesses, or go by a Bill.


Serj. Charl. The Question is, Whether it be Treason by the Practice of
England, the Common Law is the Custom of England, and the usuage is grounded
on Presidents, I know not one President where Words or Intentions were Treason
at Common Law, for they are not Treason where no Act follows.


Sir Rich. Temp. The Article is Treason by Common Law, and Judges have recourse
to Glanvil, etc. Who say, that giving Advice to overthrow the Realm is Treason
by Common Law.


Serj. Mayn. The Question is whether he shall be Impeached of Treason upon this
Article? If you go to Treason at CommonLaw before 25 Ed. 3. you fly out of
sight, for the word Seductio was soon after called Seditio, Seducing, but not
said to what; nor were those Authors ever reputed of Authority: It Is true they
are sometimes quoted for Ornament, but not Argument, and not one Case in one
hundred of Glanvil is Law; but when a Case comes that is the Sheet-Anchor of
Life and Estate, you should be wary; for by Wit and Oratory That may be made
Treason which is not, and this which is a great Crime, ought not because great,
to be made Treason.

Object. But it will be said, levying War against the Law, is against the King,
and here was an intent to alter the Law.

Answ. True, yet a design no levy War is not Treason within the Statute, here
is nothing of Act, but Words to that end; If a Councellor gives bad Advice, it
makes it not Treason, but by a Bill it may be made what you please. By that
Statute of 25 Ed. 3. are more Treasons than are metnioned; for it faith if any
Case happen, the Judges shall stay till the King and Parliament has declared,
so that there is a Power, but the Modus is the Question, whether by
Impeachment, or Bill; you may the latter, not the former. It, was done, but you
have Repealed it, and have said None of which pretended Crimes are Treason; and
what was pretended against him? Of Strafford.
That he had Traitorously Endeavored (which is worse than designed) to alter
the Government, etc. Now where is the Difference? Here is advice to Raise an
Army, there to use an Army Raised, and these you have called pretended Crimes,
and no Treason, which is not Comprechended by a Law; but to Impeach as a
Treason, and yet the thing No Treason is strange. In this House, other then by
Bill, you have no Power; you carry your Impeachment to the Lords, and they may
give Judgment without coming back to you; declaring by Bill is by way of
Judgment, but as an Impeachment, is only an Accusation: So that whatsoever the
Consequence is, the Lords judge it, and it never comes back to you, and if you
go by Bill you make it Treason, ex post sacto.


Mr. Vang. Concerning what you have declared about Straffords, that this Case
is, if not less, equal to it, and you have declared that not one Charge aganst
him is Treason is true thus far, when that Act was made I repaired to it,
because there were some Things which should not have passed so, if there had
not been something to secure such Charges as these; for there is no expression
of any Particular Charge, but that the Charge against the Earl of Strafford was
not in the particular, Treason, and in the Ciose of the Bill, it is said, that
the whole Proceeding shall be taken away, and if so, no Man should speak
against the Particulars, but look on it as Repealed.

Then this is said to be levying War, and its true, it must be Actual, and so
not within the Charge. And the Charge against Spencer was for Councelling the
King, etc, and is called levying War against the Kingdom, and the Judgment
against him was but Banishment; because the Sentence was mitigated at the
instance of the King.

And for Council, though Council is given but in Words, yet Words are more than
Council, and are an Action, otherwise a Counselor is Sworn to nothing.

But it may be thought I have not dealt ingenuously with the House, than which
I abhor nothing more; when the Case of Strafford was before the Lords, I was of
opinion the Parliament had no Declarative Power left, because 1 Hen. 4. there
was an abolishing of all declared Treason, and that no Treason, for the future,
should be so, and then the Treason about the Genoua Ambassador was gone, and
all declared Treasons were gone 1 Hen. 4. and no Statute has recovered them,
and if all Actual Treasons were taken away 1 Hen. 4. or if not then, 1 Ed. 6.
then what does the first of Q. M. do, unless it take away all declaratory
Treason?


Upon the whole, the Question was whether to accuse of Treason upon the first
Article. Yeas, 103. Noes, 172. 275.


November, 11.
The Second Article was read.
Mr. Pr -- n. Let the Act made by you about defending the King be Read, because
it limits Prosecution to a Time, to see if this be within Time.


Mr. Vaugh. In Things wherein there is a public Defaming the King, it becomes
no Man here to defend the Person accused, if the Charge be not proved, let the
Party himself plead it; you had that which induced you to Impeach him, and have
declared not to Impeach of Treason upon the first Article: And if any Man will
add to the rest of the Articles he may, but you ought to accuse.


Mr. Solicitor. None accuses but for Justice sake, and should be glad if the
Party accused prove himself Innocent. There is a Duty to the King, and to
Truth, and it is not fit that an Article of this Kind, brought into the House,
should be laid by, upou pre tence that the time is clapsed; for the Crime is
more than what is mentioned in the Act made by you; it is an Offense at
CommonLaw, and if it be prosecuted by Fine and Imprisonment, no time is limited.


The Third and Fourth Articles read, and Voted.

Mr. Vaugh. Your reading every Article is needless, unless it be to see whether
any one may be Charged as Treason, for if one may be objected against, so may
all as to Misdemeanors.


Fifth Article read.

Sir John Sh -- w. The old Farmers had not the Customs till others said they
would give no more, and they had no reason to thank the Chancellor, because
they gave more than others: And I declare upon my Life I know no reward given
him.


Sir Tho. Litt. It appears by the Farmers Confession, that they had it 50000 l.
under, besides time of Payment, which was 30000 l. more.


Mr. Seym. Your are at liberty to receive Objections to the Articles, but though
others bad more, they were told they should not have it, and had about 1000 l.
each given them to bid no more.


Sixth, seventh, Eight and Ninth Articles Read and Voted.

The Tenth.

Mr. Vaugh. This is an Article of an high Nature, Dunkirk was then as much a
Part of His Majesty's Dominions as Ireland, and if the Sale of it be nothing, I
know not what you would think of it if England should be Sold, you lately
debated whether on the first Article he should be accused of Treason, and found
by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. he could not, though it was absolute Treason at
Common Law, and its reported abroad that I said that the Right of the
Parliament in declaring Treason is taken away, which I did not, for there are
Treasons not mentioned in that Statute. Therefore it provided that the Judges
should not upon any one Treaso proceed to Judge, until declared before the
King and Parliament, and what is signisfied by it? If we think before the King,
Lords, and Commons, that is impossible, for how can the Commons possibly
declare before the King and Lords, nor was that the Case, but this, that there
is the ultimate Power of determining what the Law is in a doubtful Case. In
Writs of Error let them pass from Court to Court, at last they come to the
Lords, 24 Ed. 3. If the Judges cannot resolve what the Law is, it is to be
brought thither, that is, where it is questionable, but that is not in the
House of Commons, any more than in a Writ of Error: How than is the Case here?
If a Question be whether a Thing is Treason, or not, it shall be Resolved where
the Law uses to Resolve, that is, before the King in Parliament, that is in
the Lords House. Had the Words of the Act been these, there shall be no
Proceeding until Resolved by the King in the Lords House, and Suppose that
Clause taken away, That Treason shall not be Resolved, but suppose it shall not
be declared otherwise, does it follow it is taken away? No, if you charge
Treason which is not within the Statute, it is another Thing, but I said not,
there is no Treason at Common Law.


Mr. Solicitor, There was a great Mischief in the declaring Treason by
Parliaments; for Mortimer was made a Traitor for incroaching upon Royal Power,
which every Man, who incroacheth upon any Power, does. Hence the Commons
Petitioned the King to explain what incroaching upon Royal Power was, and when
no Answer could be gotten to it, 25. Ed. 3. They Petion'd it might be declared
certainly, and so Treasons were enumerated, and if the Judges be in doubt, it
is Provided and that the King and Parliament shall first declare it.

Declaration in Parliament, is a Declaration before the King, Lords, and
Commons. Would our Ancestors leave what is to be Resolved Treason to the Lords,
and themselves have no share in it? And Talbots being declared Treason by the
Lords is said to be no Treason by Judge Cook, because the Commons had no hand
in it, there is no Treason in Common Law, because there can be no Treason where
there is no way to Judge it, which is not at CommonLaw.


Mr. Vaugh. When the Law is made uncertain the Lords must declare it, it
appears there were Treasons at CommonLaw not mentioned 25 Ed. 3. It is one
Thing for a Matter to be Treason before, and the Parliament to declare it;
another, for the Parliament to make a Thing Treason which was not.


Sir Will. Lewis. I desire to be Resolved whether Dunkirk was annexed to
England, because a Bill to that end was carried, but not Passed.


Mr. Waller. To show that Dunkirk was annexed to England, consider we were
Passing a Bill for 1200000l. But when we were making a Preamble to the Bill, we
were to seek for Reasons for giving the Money, seeing we had no War, some said
to keep Dunkirk, but were told we should take heed of looking upon it as
annexed unto the Crown; but it was replied, Dunkirk, was looked upon as a
Frontier Town, and accordingly noted in the Bill. Therefore the Sale of it
Treason.


Mr. Coven. Had it been part of the Crown of England, what needed a Bill to
make it so?


Mr. Pr -- n. It cannot be Treason, because Sold by the King's consent.


Mr. Vaugh. If the King agreed to it, does it follow, that he, who advises the
King to a Thing destructive to his Kingdom and King, is not a Traitor? If any
part of the King's Dominions may be alienated, especially when a Parliament is
Sitting, for they concurring, it may be alienated, by the same Reason the King
may alienate Ireland or England too without the Parliament; For by what Act of
Parliament does the King hold Ireland or England? It is by Acquisition; I say
not Tangier, for that was part of his Portion, and is his own: But Dunkirk
would have been the Kingdoms if not thus disposed of, and though it might have
been alienated with the Parliament, it could no more without, than England or
Ireland.


Mr. Ed. Heart. The Act of Parliament for annexing was not This Parliaments, but
of the Convention, and came in thus; the King was pleased to tell me, that the
Spanish Ambassador might press him to part with it, which he had no mind to
do; therefore he would have a Bill to annex it to the Crown, which shows it was
the King's Will to have it annexed, accordingly this Parliament passed it, and
Dunkirk might have been as useful as Calice.


At length this Article was passed by, without determining whether Treason or
not.

Eleventh, Twelfth, Thirteenth and Fourteenth Articles read and Voted.

Fifteenth Article read,

Lord Vaugh. I brought in this Article His Betraying the King's Councels was to
the French King during the War, and that in the secrecy of State, which was the
occasion of the late Mischiefs.


Sir Tho. Osb. That is direct adhering to the King's Enemies, and so it is
Treason.


Mr. Solicit. This must be Treason if you have any inducement to believe it.


Sir Rob. How. I have heard it from an Eyewitness who told it me, and added
that we are neither to be trusted nor dealt with, who were so betrayed.


Serj. Mayn. Betraying the King's Council to his Enemies is, doubtless,
Treason, Corresponding is another Thing, Betraying must be without the King's
Knowledge, otherwise it is but delivering the King's Words to his Enemies?


Sir John Bramp. Did this Information come from a Subject, or from one of the
King's Enemies?


Sir Rob. How. I would not have brought you Information from one of the King's
Enemies, nor did I ever converse with them during the War.


Coll. Birch. We cannot accuse of Treason, except it be said, Betraying the
King's Council, or Corresponding with his Enemies.


Mr. Vaugh. You have declared that you have had inducement to Impeach, and
ought to put the Question, whether on this Article he shall be Impeached of
Treason.


Mr. Solicit. To betray the King's Council, taken generally, is not Treason,
for it may be to the King's Friends, but to his Enemies it is, If the Article
be so.


Lord Vaugh. Let it be put betraying His Majesty's secret Councels to his
Enemies during the War.


Then the Question was put whether these New Words delivered by the said Lord
Vaugh. should be added.

Carried in the Affirmative.

Sir John Holl. Was this Information given by an Enemy or by a Subject?


Mr. Vaugh. It must come from a Forreigner, or you could not know it, may not
the King have from a Forreigner a discovery of Treason against him; The end of
questioning it must be to know the Man, for it might as well be asked whether
his Beard be red or black.


Sir Tho. M -- rs. The words are discovered not betrayed, and discovering may
be with the King's consent.


Lord Vaugh. Add the word Betraying, for so I meant it.


Serj. Mayn. They who give the Information say not they had it from more than
one Witness, which Stat. Ed. 6. requires, and only one of them Names the Earl
of Clarendon.


Mr. Seym. This exception is proper to be made before the Judges.


Then the Question was put.

Whether to Impeach of Treason on this Article.

Yeas, 161. Noes, 89. 250.


Sir Tho. Litt. That an Impeachment of Treason and other Crimes and
Misdemeanors be carried up to the Lords against him by Mr. Scym.


Serj. Mayn. For Misdemeanour he may have Council, not for Treason: Therefore
so distinguish the Charge, that he may have Council,


Resolved, That a Charge be carried up.

Resolved, That the Speaker and the whole House carry it.

Novvember, 12.
It being considered that if the Speaker go up with the Charge, some dispute
might arise about carrying the Mace and otherwise.

It was Resolved, That Mr. Seym. carry it.

Accordingly he went; where at the Bar of the Lords House, the Lord Keeper
Bridgman being come to the Bar to meet him, he delivered himself to this
purpose.

My Lords,

THE Commons Assembled in Parliment, having, been informed of several
Traitorous Practices, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors committed by
Edward Earl of Clarendon a Member of this Honorable House, have Commanded me
to Impeach him, and I do accordingly Impeach him of High Treason and other
Crimes and Misdemeanors in the Name of the said Commons, and of all the
Commons of England: And they have farther Commanded me to desire your Lordships
to Sequester him from Parliament, and to Commit him to safe Custody, and in
convenient time they will exhibit Articles against him.

November, 15.
The Lords sent down to desire a Conference in the Painted Chamber.

At which the Earl of Oxford delivered a Paper in writing (without any Debate)
the Contents whereof were to this effect.

The Lords have not Committed the Earl of Clarendon, becase the Accusation is
only of Treason in general, without charging any thing in particular.

Mr. Garra. I had rather the House should loose the Punishment of this Man,
(though a great Offender) then that this House should loose its privilege; for
if this House may at no time Impeach a Lord without giving in particular
Articles, it may fall out to be at a time (as in the Duke of B -- s Case) where
a great Man by his Interest with the King procured the Dissolution of the
Parliament, and then the Accusation falls.


Mr. Vaugh. Either you can justify your Proceedings, so as to satisfy the
Lords what you have done, or you cannot; you must name a Committee as well to
consider what you are to do if your Reasons satisfy not, as to draw those
Reasons.


Mr. Solicitor, Without doubt this House was not mistaken in demanding that
the Party accused for Treason should be committed, That is, that Treason is
worthy of Commitment; and you can but find Presidents that Persons have been
accused of Treason, and thereupon have been committed: But the Case is this,
Treason is an Offense, for which Bail cannot be taken; the Lords tell you not
they will, or will not Commit: But it is true, Persons have been Committed for
Treason, and Persons accused of Treason Judges may Commit, or not.

Consider this Law. Let the Crime be what it will, an Imprisoning till the
Charge it given is but an Imprisoning to security, not to Punishment; otherwise
the Law is not Just, and if the Judges of the KingsBench have a Judgment of
Discretion, whether to Commit or not; can we wonder that the Lords have not
Imprisoned, till they know the Article, when they have Judgments of Discretion
though they knew it? You may find Presidents, but it is not an Argument it must
always be so: But as the Judges have a Latitude much more then the Lords, the
Impeachment from the Commons of England is properly the King's Suit, for there
is no Treason but against him, and if the Judges may Bail in that Case, may not
the Lords. But you are not told he shall be Balied, but they desire to know
what his Crime is, and then you shall know their Answer, the Resolution seems
reasonable, having gone no farther, I cannot except against it.


Sir Tho. Litt. The Long-Parliament had some good Presidents which we are not
to cast away least we smart for it.

Resolved, To Resume the Debate to Morrow.


Nov. 16.

Mr. Vaugh. The Lords do not say Commitments should follow because Treason is
Bailable by the King's Bench, its true, the King's Bench Bails for Treason, but
how? If Persons be brought thither for Treason directly there is no Bail, but
when a Commitment is by the Council Table for suspicion of Treason, then if the
Matter fall not be to what was expected they give notice to take Bail, else the
great Article of the Great Charter, Mamely that Justice should not be delayed
nor denied, would be to no purpose; and in such a Case a Man may be in Prison
for ever. On the other side, what is the Case of Committhing for Treason? when
a Person is Committed by the Councel-Table, they say, they do no more but by
special Command of the King, and that is the ground of his Committing, and were
not this so, what would follow? Intelligence would be given of a Treason
discovered, wherein many might be concerned, and if they who Commit should
Commit with the Treason, all the Accomplices would escape, and therefore sometime
they make it Treason General. Then for the Case, before you have gone up with a
Charge of Treason generally, which is to the Lords a Warrant sufficient for
Commitment, say they, we will know the Particulars; then will not the same
inconveniences follow, if other Persons beconcerned, and so the danger of all
exposed upon the nicety?

If a Business comes before this House, which concerns others, and may prove
Treason, if we go to the Lords (for we have not Jurisdiction except in Case of
our Privileges) but yet are not ready to bring up Particulars, and desire the
Lords to apprehend such Persons, would it be reasonable for them to refuse it,
there being no inconvenience like to follow the doing it, much the not doing
it? I say not to Commit them, and we not prosecute, for that is delay of
Justice.

Qu. But why do the Lords refuse?

Ans. Though I have great respect to the Lords, yet to clear something in point
of Privilege, the Lords have the same Privilege with us in point of Speech,
their Members, etc. as they are essential to pass Laws; but that great
Privilege which they often assumo as Peers, is as the King is there present in
the highest Court: How then will it fall out in respect of this Privilege? If
the King be there, there be many Things which the Lords as Peers cannot pretend
to; for the King has often sat there not only in passing Bills, but in
Judgment. Had this Charge then come before the King there, it had been reason
if the King should have said, I desire to know what this Treason is, we must
then have told it, because he, whom it concerned, required it, or if we desire
Commitment, he, who could Release or Pardon him, might say, let him be Bailed.
The Lords indeed retain this Privilege, but it is in the King's Right, not as
Peers.

Now we have carried a Charge, if the Lords Bail him, I know not what would
follow, for no Example can be given of it, and I think they will not do it, if
the King do not direct it.

On the other side, I would be glad we might be no more troubled than is
necessary, because others are listening what we do, and think there is nothing
in the Case: Therefore I am not for delay, but satisfying others that what we
have done is not barely for Imprisoning the Earl of Clarendon, but for Justice;
and if you go this way, give the Lords the Reasons why we sent the Charge as we
did, and yet keep up their Privileges, and declare so to them.

But than we must go up with more than that Head, on which we Resolved to
Impeach of Treason; for your Articles must be so formed as to make it a Charge
sit to be Answered for Time and Place, and that Article has something of that
which must be penned so as to make it more certain; for the Article goes but
thus; That there was Discovery and Betraying of the King's Councels to his
Enemies, and if you leave it there, those who scruple doing any Thing because
particular Treason is not mentioned, will say, you say he has discovered and
betrayed Councels to Enemies, but as we trust you not what is Treason, but we
will know it; so we know not whom you mean by Enemies; for we may think them
not so. Therefore appoint a Committee to form Articles.


Mr. Solicit. It is a great mistake to say, That the Power of the King's Bench
to take Bail for Treason is no other but what is asserted, as if the Judges
there had only Power from Magna Charta. When a Man is Committed upon suspicion
of Treason, and no Prosecution follows, and the Party bringing his Habeas
Corpus, the Bench Bails him because he should not lie there eternally, it is
not to be said the Judges Bail for Treasons, seeing no Crime is produced: For
when a Man has been accused of Treason for Coining false Money and brought to
the Bar, the Judges have Bailed him not because they ought, but from the
discretionary Power wherewith the Law trusts them; they may Bail if they will,
for no other Judicature, but they, can Bail in that Case: for seeing
Imprisonment before Trial is only that the Prisoner may be forthcomming, if
they see there is no danger of escaping they may take Bail, for he is a
Prisoner when Bailed, and the Bail is his Keeper; but there are few Cases of
this Kind wherein they will Bail; they have a fundamental Power to do it,
placed in them to preserve the Rights of the Crown, and the Lords will not
think themselves less trusted with the Rights of the Crown then the
King's Bench. Yet though the Lords may Bail, they will not exercise their
discretion when there is a probable Truth in the Impeachment; shall we then
refuse this Intimation from the Lords? Who saying, because they have not a
particular Article of Treason do not secure, seem to imply, that if they had
they would, though they might refuse. The Right of Bailing comes not from an
imaginary apprehension of the King's sitting there, tho some Kings have sat
there in Judicature, but from their Inherent Authority of being trusted with
the Right of the Crown: Let us do then what becomes us, and not let the
Impeachment miscarry upon a misunderstanding but draw up the Article. But how
is it possible to draw it as an Article which you expect he should be
imprisoned upon? For your Impeachment is in the Nature of an Indictment, and
must contain so much of Certainty as to put him to plead, that so he may not
Demur.

How may it then be Circumstantiated, so as that he may put to plead? if you do
it according to 25 Ed, 3. (for discovering the Thing's Secrets to his Enemies
is within that Statute.) The first part of the Article is not pleadable; for we
must show how he adhered to the King's Enemies, and wemust add what the Council
was that he betrayed, else he will deny to plead, and say, I can avoid it:
Therefore consider what kind of certainty this Article must have to make him
plead, for the other Articles, its enough to say them without proving Time or
Place, if the Facts were after the Act of Oblivion; but in Treason, the Matter
must appear in the Indictment, for he has liberty not only to plead not
Guilty, but to avoid it: Therefore prepare the Article accordingly.


Mr. Vaugh. What is Moved is to put you upon an impossible Business, for an
Article presented from the Parliament needs not that Certainty, as if it were
to be tried at the King's Bench.


Sir Tho. Litt. It is not for the Honor of this House to recede so easily from
such a Privilege, for, besides the Earl of Straffords Case, we have express
Presidents for, but none against us. We have heard that we must have no more
Impeachments, because they are dangerous and tend to Rebellion. Consider the
Archbishop of Canterbury's Case, Finch, Ratcliff, and others in the Long
Parliament, and we should not so easily part with them. William Delapool being
commonly reported to be no true Man, (which is a less Charge than Treason)
desired he might acquit himself, and the Lords required no special Matter
before they imprisoned him, and afterward he was accused more Specially.


Sir Rob. Atk. In the Case of Anselm ArchBishop of Cant. the Commons Accused
him but the Lords did not Commit him, and gave no other Reason for it, but that
he was a great Man, and yet afterward he was Condemned as a Traitor, though the
King reduced his Punishment only to be Banishment. Though a Privilege is much
spoken of, yet I shall never be fond of any Privilege which shall Entrench
upon my Liberty as a Subject.


Mr. Vaugh. I hear it Objected, That as you Charge a Lord generally, so may the
Lords a Commoner, but that cannot be; for the Lords cannot cause a Commoner to
be Committed though for Treason, without your consent: Therefore put a Question,
whether a Committee shall be named to draw up Reasons to justify what you have
done.

Resolved, That the Question shall be put.

Resolved, That a Committee shall draw Reasons.


November, 18.
The Committee brought in their Reasons.

First, What can or ought to be done by either House of Parliament is best
known by the Customs and Proceeding of Parliament in former times; And it does
appear by Example, that by the Course of Parliaments the Lords have Committed
such Persons, as have been generally Charged by the House Commons for High
Treason to safe Custody, though the particular Treason has not been specified at
the time of such Charge

Second. That a Commitment for High Treason in general, is a Legal Commitment,
and if the Party so Committed bring his Habeas Corpus, and the Cause of his
Commitment thereupon be returned for High Treason generally, he may lawfully be
remanded to prison by the Judges upon that Return.

Third. If before securing the Person the special matter of the Treason should
be Alleged, it would be a ready course that all Accomplices in the Treason might
make their Escape, or quicken the execution of the Treason intended, to secure
themselves the better there.

Fourth. If the House of Peers should require the particular Treason to be
Assigned before the Party Charged be secured, they leave the Common uncertain
and doubtful (and that from time to time) how particular they must make their
Charge to their Lordships satisfaction, before the Offenders be put under any
restraint.

Fifth, The Commons conceive, that if they should desire the Lords to secure a
Stranger, or Native Commoner, upon suspicion of Treason which the Commons had
of him, and which was by them under Examination to be Evidenced to their
Lordship in due time; their Lordships in Justice for the safety of the king and
People would secure such Person or Persons, upon the desire of the Commons, and
in such Case there would be no difference between a Lord and a Commoner so
desired to be secured.

Sixth, The Proceedings of inferior Courts, between the King and the Subject,
or Subject and Subject, and the discretion of Judges in such Courts is bounded
and limited by the discretion of the Parliament which trust them; and it is not
left to the discretion of the Judges in ordinary Jurisdiction to give the King,
or take from him, inconvenient Power for the Subject, nor to dispense the Law
partially between Subject and Subject for Malice or Affection; but the
discretion of the Parliament, which is the whole Public, comprehending the
King, Lords and Commons (for the Kings presence is supposed to be in the Lords
House) is, and ought to be unconsin'd for the safety and preservation of the
whole, which is it self.

It cannot be malicious to a part of it self, nor affect more Power than
already it has, which is absolute over it self and part, and may therefore do
for preservation of it self whatsoever is not repugnant to natural Justice.

Mr. Prynn I like not the first Reason, because it cannot be called a Custom
where only one Parliament has done it.


Mr. Swinf. The great strength lies upon this first Reason, and is like to be a
President; for exact Presidents I find none, except that of Michael Delapool,
and in the Long Parliament: But consider the reason why there was no express
President before, and what was the Custom of Parliaments before. The Parliament
was wont to proceed formerly by Bill, and thus that proceeding makes against
the Lords now, and for committing the Party accused; for then the proceedings
upon Treason were by Common Law, and because the Judges could not proceed,
therefore the Paliment went by Bill, and it cannot be supposed that the Parties
were at liberty all that while.


Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Reasons Voted, Sixth Read.

Mr. Solicit. I am against this Reason, not as a Reason, but unnecessary; for
if the former Reasons satisfy not, this will not, because it supposes things
not in question.

Our Debate must at last end in this Question, betwixt Privilege of Parliament
and former proceedings; and there being no privilege in Case of Treason, why
should not former proceedings Sway? Except we call that Treason which is not,
for otherwise no Privilege will help.

Therefore add this to your Reason, That there is no privilege for Treason,
and the Lords ought not to think that the Commons will call that Treason which
is not, or if they do, the Lords may by a speedy Trial determine it.


Resolved, That a Conference be desired with the Lords, and the Reasons carried
up.

November, 21.
The Lords sent down to desire a Conference about the Subject matter of the
last Conference. But the Commons doubting that if they should consent to it,
the Lords might afterward refuse a Free Conference, because the business in
dispute concerns Judicature, which belongs to the Lords, and so the Impeachment
generally falls.

Resolved, To send an Answer by Messengers of their own, and accordingly did,
with Order to acquaint the Lords how far they had proceeded, and they expected
they should rather have desired a free Conference.

November, 23.
The Debate about the freedom of Speech in Parliament was resumed.

And the Report Read of Proceedings abut Sir John Elliot, Mr. Holles, etc. 5
Car. 1.

Mr. Solic. If you are satisfied that the Judgment passed upon them was
Illegal, two ways you have to be safe; by taking notice of that Judgment,
giving your Opinion upon it, and carrying it up to the Lords, that Judgment
will be utterly Damned; else you may proceed by Act, but consider then the
Consequence: For if you go by Act, you bound the liberty of Speech, unless in
penning it you prevent it, but an unknown limitation is better than bounding,
for an Act it self is subject to exposition, but your Vote, and the Lords
Concurrence is not.


Mr. Vaugh. It is not safe for you to Circumscribe Privileges, therefore that
must be done which may take away what destroys them.

The Laws and Rights of this Kingdom are Rights by Common Law, or Act of
Parliament; what is an Act of Parliament may be Repealed by Parliament, what is
Common Law may be altered by Parliament, and whatever is both, may be altered
by a New Law; and how is it possible to do one, or the other without liberty to
speak about it? And how can there be any inconvenience about freedom of Speech,
about any Thing which cannot be a Law without passing King, Lords, and Commons.

Then it being moved to put the Question for confirming that Report.

And it being Replied that some passages in that Business, viz. about keeping
the Speaker in the Chair were not warrantable, and so not to be joined in the
Question with the rest.


Mr. Vaugh. That Business which is so much talked of, and Condemned, I shall
state to you.

The House is to adjourn it self, though sometimes the King advised them to
Adjourn themselves (as then he did) but the Adjournment is always made by a
Question, and without it the Speaker cannot leave the Chair.

The Speaker acquainting the House then with the King's Message, Sir John
Elliot stood up to Speak, but the Speaker would not hear him, but was going to
leave the Chair, whereupon some said, if you go out without a Question the
Parliament is Dissolved, upon which he was leaving the Chair; some kept him,
and told him, if this be a House, you as Speaker have no place in it but the
Chair, and this was all the Irregularity in that Business so much talked of.

Resolved. That the Judgment given against Sir John Elliot, etc. 5 Car. was an
illegal Judgment, and against the Freedom and Privilege of Parliaments.

The Lords sent for a present Conference, after which Report was made that the
Lords had Voted, the Commons denying them a Conference lately was contrary to
the Course of Parliamentary Proceedings, and gave Reasons why it was not yet
time for a free Conference.


Novvember, 25.
After Debate whereof, it was Resolved to grant them that the Commons agreed to
the Conference formerly desired.

At which the Lords declared that they had considered of the Presidents and
Reasons formerly sent them by the Commons, but were not satisfied to secure the
Earl of Clarendon, or to Sequester him from Parliament until some special
Treason be Assigned.

Novem. ^8. The Commons sent to the Lords to desire a free Conference upon the
Matter of the last Conference.

To which the Lords Concurring, Mr. Vaugh. Sir Rob. How. Sir Tho. Litt. and
others were appointed to manage it, who went up immediately to that end.

Mr. Vaugh. Made Report of the Conference with the Lords yesterday to the
purpose following.

The Lords told us, That no President can be against the Law.

We Answered.

If that can be made good, we shall press Presidents no more, but what they
most stood upon was the Petition of Right, where it is provided that none shall
be Committed without special Cause, whereby the Party may Answer according to
the Law, thence they infer that our Proceedings are against Law; because a
general Charge is against the Petition of Right.

Commons. The Case of the Petition of Right, rightly Stated, will clear this,
which was This: Some Persons were Committed by no other Warrant, but the King's
special Command, they bring their Habeas Corpus to the King's Bench to know the
Cause: This Cause was returned by the Judges, that they could not Bail a Man,
when so Committed, because they knew not the Cause, nor had any way to bring
him to his Trial.

Then the Petition of Right provides That the Cause should be returned, whereby
the Crime might appear, and that before and after the Petition of Right to this
Day, if upon bringing a Habeas Corpus, it be returned that the Party is
Imprisoned for Treason, the Judges ought to Remand, unless there be some
special Cause to make them take Bail. So that the Petition of Right was against
them, for they say, a Man ought not to be Imprisoned upon a general Charge,
because it is against the Petition of Right: We say it is not against the
Petition of Right, because the Judge may Remand the Party, if there be no
special Cause.

Then the Lords said, That the Reason why the Judges Remanded in that Case was,
because the Party Committed knew it was for Treason Therefore they Re-committed.

We owned it, because it was the Rule for the Judges to proceed by, but that
was no Rule for Proceedings of Parliament, for as a Magistrate Commits for
Treason, and is supposed to be acquainted with it; so also is he with the
probability upon the Proof: But the Lords insist not now upon that, but
specify Treason, and if the Course of Parliaments so much varied in such
Cases, that was no concluding Proof why they should have special Treason. And
for the other part,

That upon the Return, there should be a Cause Returned, that so the Party
might Answer; for when a Return is made, if the Cause be such as that the Party
ought not to be Imprisoned, the Judges free him, otherwise they leave him to
come to his Trial.

Then to the President about the Earl of Strafford, they Replied, That it was
made in bad times. And we Answered, That as good Laws were made before, in, and
after that time as any other; and if the Lords then might make such Laws, we
could not see, why it should be a good time to make Laws, and no good time to
Administer to Persons the Laws already made.

Farther, to their Objection, that in the time whence those Presidents were
brought, there was a Face of War. We Answered, That could not alter the Case,
for the Law calls no time a time of War, whilst the Courts of Justice have
freedom, as they had when Strafford, Finch, Canterbury and Ratcliff were
Impeached, and it was strange that in the Parliament House there should be such
a Consternation as to make their Proceedings invalid, when in other Courts
there were none: Besides, in Holland of many Years there was a constant Scene
for War, and can we imagine that there was not Justice done at that time.

Then they pressed Presidents against ours, One 14 Ed, 2. against the Spencers,
where a great Man moved the King to Commit one of them, and the King Answered,
it could not be unless Cause was showed. We Replied, This was a President like
that, a Man was Committed, because he was Committed, for there was no
Allegation of Treason.

Second President was 38 Hen. 8. against Lord Stanhope, the Commons moved the
King to Imprison him, and the King Answered he would consider of it. We
Answered, That was no denial, but a thing usual with the King, and that Motion
was to the King himself, which differs from this Case, for that was not
alleged to be Treason: Besides, had it been Treason, it was against the King
himself, and being an Offense against himself, he might (if he would) not
Imprison, because he may discharge a Man, or pardon him, though for Treason; but
this Case is not so, because the Lords Justice is but Ministered to the King.

21 R. 2 Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, who as they said was Impeached of
Treason, but not Committed.

Answer. The Case was this, There was a Commission Issued out by Ric. 2. That
that Bishop and others should regulate what was amiss by evil Government, and
the King was offended at the granting of it, and at Nottingham sent for the
Judges, and charged them upon their Allegiance to give true Answer to what
Questions he should ask them, and the first Question was, Whether that
Commission so granted, was not inva ding his Prerogative? They Answered, Yes,
Then he asked how they ought to be punished who procured it? They Answered, as
Traitors. In the 21 the Bishop is charged by the Commons, and the Treason
alleged is, That he had procured himself to be put into the Commission.

This being the Case, we said, That if a Fact be called Treason, which
afterward appears to be none, there could be no Commitment, for if a Man call
another Man's coming into his Ground Treason, it falls of it self; therefore the
Bishop was not Committed.

The Lords said farther, That all those Articles were declared to be Treason,
which before could not possibly be Treason to Commit a Man, because the Nature
of them must be Treason at Common Law, and till these Treasons were declared,
which was not till 21 Ed. 3. they were not Treason so as to Imprison, or Try
any Man for them.

We Replied, All that Parliament was Repealed, yet the President was the more
Authentic. But I think that Lord (it was the Earl of B -- ^) understood not
what he said, at least I did not.

Then about the Earl of Strafford's President, the Lords said, that the very
Impeachment was taken away by the Act of this Parliament, because the
Impeachment is recited in it. Namely, Whereas the Earl of Strafford was
Impeached etc. But every Clause in that Act of Attainder is taken away now,
therefore the Impeachment; and you cannot make use of any part of it.

We Replied, it is true, the Act of Attainder is taken away, but the very Act of
Repeal does recite that very Clause (whereas Thomas Earl of Strafford was
Impeached etc.) and the Act cannot take away any thing which strengthens its
own Supposition.

Then the Lords said, That they should be willing to comply with the Commons,
but that they must be tender of their own Judicial Proceedings.

Commons. Its true they ought, and we supposed that the Lords might be jealous
that we should Entrench on their Power, but the Commons were so far from that,
that they thought the Judicial Power better lodged with them then in the
Commons themselves could be; but we would open the Objection.

Their Lordships being the Judges in this Case might think, that for the
Commons to take upon them to know what was Treason, would be an assuming to
themselves what was only proper to the Lords, and that it was so now in
Charging the Earl of Clarendon generally.

Lords. The Objection is right.

Commons. For our knowing Treason, we have many among us, who are Justices of
Peace, trusted by Law to know and Commit, (and if the Parliament be not
Sitting) even to Commit a Peer himself for Treason, and the knowing what is
Treason is so far from being improper to the House of Commons, That every Man
in the Nation is bound to know it; for was it ever known, that Ignorance of the
Law could ever excuse a Man from breaking the Law? Laws are made to be known by
Subjects, especially those which concern the King; and unless they could find a
Reason, why the Parliment Embodyed should be more ignorant than particular
Persons, the present Case must be clear. That the Jealousy of the Lords arose
from a Fallacy, thus, The Lords have Judicial Power concerning Treason, and
mnst of necessity know in; the Common have no Judicial Power over it, therefore
cannot know it; that is, because the Commons know what Law is, therefore they
have Judicial Power over Law. To this was not any thing Replied.

Farther, We said that because they insisted upon to specify Treason, because
by Committing upon a general, they might wrong the Party by Committing him
without Cause, and because they themselves were not informed in their
Consciences what they did: They would do well to consider the many
Inconveniences which might follow, if the Charge of Treason was not general,
but particular; and suppose it was Special, their Lordships would know no more
by it. For suppose a Man Impeached for Counterfeiting the Great Seal, which is
express Treason, and he may be Impeached for it, yet neither their Lordships
nor the Party could have any advantage by that Specification, because there
might be as many Questions what is Counterfeiting the Great Seal, or what is
Treason.

For Instance. One Leak a Clerk in Chancery, intending to Forge a Patent, puts
together two pieces of Parchment, and had fitted them, and put them together
with Mouth-Glew, that they appeared as one: Then a Grant was written upon the
outmost, and a Seal affixed, so that the Great Seal is put to a true Thing,
then he cuts off the edges of the Parchment, so as to sever them, takes off the
written One, and leaves the Seal on the Blank, then Forgeth the Grant and makes
use of it. This was questioned before the Judges, whether 'twas Treason or not,
that is, whether Counterfeiting the Great Seal or not? If it were, it was
Treason, otherwise not. They Resolved, it was not Counterfeiting the Great
Seal, and so not, but Misprison. And if it had been Treason, they Resolved,
that an Indictment had been enough to Impeach him. Then suppose you have such
an Impeachment before you for Counterfeiting the Great Seal, you have Special
Treason, and Imprison him; but when it is brought to Question, it appears not
to be Treason, therefore he is wrong Imprisoned: And if your Lordships will
examine what knowledge you have of this Fact, you have no more then if it had
been a general Treason.

Lords. There is a Case put there, as we are content to take a Special Treason,
but expect not the Proof as there it was.

Commons. If it were a Case put, so is your Lordships Reply, for it was put ex
Concesso, because you agreed that if the Treason was Special, the Party was to
be Committed, and this Case was to show their Lordships, they were in no better
Case then, than if the Treason were general.

But the Lords still pressing that the Impeachment it self of the Earl of
Strafford, was Repealed in the Act about him.

Commons. We Replied one part of the Act ought to be severed from the other,
and that which is without exception shall stand, though the other be taken away:
For, suppose a Man Prosecutes in a Court of Justice, for what he apprehends to
be his right, and yet the Cause goes against him, and he has no effect of his
Suit, afterward the Party (being an evil minded Man, and thinking to reach his
Ends) Forgeth a Deed, or Suborns Witnesses, and then begins a Suit in some
other Court, and by those ways attains his Ends. Then a Bill comes before this
Parliament to Reverse the Judgment, reciting that such a Person has been a
Suborner of Witnesses, etc. so, and so, and therefore the Judgment is made
void; certainly though this Person is named to be an evil minded Person, yet this
lays no blemish on his first Proceedings. So that it appears by the Act, that
the Proceedings against the Earl of Strafford were legal at first, if those
afterward, when the times became tumultuous, were not, it is not to be applied
to what was well done and legal: Then we told them that we had pressed them
with four Presidents, and to three of them nothing was Replied.

Lords. They Answered the Reason why my Lord Finch was Committed, was because
of his Flight.

Commons. He was fled before the Impeachment, but it was Ordered, That he
should be Committed when found.

Then we told them, That we must Report to them, that be the Treason what it
would, we could not go to the Lords to have it punished without that
disadvantage, which the Publishing the Treason beforehand would expose us to
by making of Witnesses, escaping of Parties, and the like; then bad them
consider, whether if we should lay before them a Treason in every Thing
circumstanced as Gunpowder Treason, they would not Imprison the Party till the
whole Matter was opened.

Lords. They Answered to hear that Case put, for in Matter of State, other
Courses are to be taken, and they could see no inconveniency in Publishing that
to the Lords, which must be Published before 400 in the House of Commons.

Commons. The Commons may proceed with what secrecy or openness they please,
and the Lords are not to take Notice of their Proceedings, whether open or
secret.

Farther, That by a Matter of State must be understood, when a Parliament is
not Sitting, and we know not whether to resort, but when a Parliament is
particularly called to prevent the Mischiefs threatening the Kingdom, If that be
not capable of Remedying, no other Council could, or we are not bound to resort
to that, we are excluded ftom that to which we ought to resort.

Lords. That the Lords had us take heed of the Liberty of the Subjects, to
which they are now fain to have Regard, bidding us consider the Bishop of
Canterbury's long Imprisonment, without knowing the Cause, and they must
satisfy their Consciences, lest they should Commit for Treason, and it not
proved so.

Commons. It appears not that the Bishop of Canterbury should have lain less
time, had the Impeachment been Special; and for the Liberty of the Subject, we
know not how a Subject should have more Liberty by Special Matter than General;
Special being but adding a formal Title, and the subject goes to Prison, as
well for the one as the other.

For their Consciences. Suppose a Person accused generally, they are then to
know whether it be Treason, and is not it as much that they Commit an Innocent
Person so? as if the matter was Special.


December, 2.
The Lords sent down a Message to the Commons by two Judges, to this effect,
That upon the Report made to them of the last free Conference, they are not
satisfied to Commit or Sequester from Parliament the Earl of Clarendon without
the particular Treason be mentioned or assigned; who being withdrrwn.

Lord Torring. (General M -- cks Son) Moved not to part with any Privileges of
the Commons of England, but adhere to the General Impeachment.

Sir Rob. How. The Matter before us, is of as great concernment as ever came
before us; if there should be Malice supposed in a Nation against it self, it
might be exercised by giving a particular Charge, as well as a General, many of
the Lords are convinced by the Reasons we gave, and Concur, thinking our
Presidents good, and have entered their Protestation in the Lords House,
asserting the Rights of the Commons of England to Impeach generally; So that
(excepting the Spiritual Lords) I think I may say the Major part of the Lords
are for us; and should we give up this, we may be wrested out of all Right, and
the Commons have no way to proceed to an Impeachment, but some Men to be so
great, as not to be fairly reached. Therefore adhere.


Mr. Wall. The Lords are a noble Estate, but whatever the Matter is, they have
of late some Advice given them, which makes them proceed as they never did yet,
for scarce any Thing happens betwixt us, but they incroach upon us. The Militia
is now as burdensome to the Fifty Pound Man in the Country, almost as all
other Taxes, and the Lords have gotten this Advantage on us, that they touch
not the Burden of it with their Finger: So in time of the Plague, the Commons
must be shut up, but not they, insomuch that a good Act provided to that
purpose passed not; we Impeached the Lord Mordant, and could not bring him to
the Bar, (though formerly I have known an Earl and a Lord brought thither) you
desired a free Conference about it, but could not obtain one to this Day. Rome
was at first modest, and only meddled with Spirituals, but afterward concerned
themselves so much with other Matters, that every Thing almost was made to be
in Ordine ad Spiritualia, and many Kingdoms thereupon break from them. The
Lords now insist upon one Thing, because they say it is in order to their
Judicature, perhaps hereafter they will tell us we must come to them on our
Knees, because it is in order to their Judgment. Consider therefore whether
there be any hope of giving them satisfaction; then, whether you will adhere,
and what you will do afterward; for the present my Motion is to adhere.


Mr. Vaugh. It is truly said, the Business before you seems to be as great as
has been in Parliament, many of the Consequences being invisible; therefore
before you Resolve what to do take the whole Matter before you.

The difference between the Lords and us, is upon a general Impeachment of
Treason; the Lords after a Free Conference say, they will not Commit unless
Special Treason be mentioned or assigned, those whom you employed to Manage the
Conference were very unwilling to differ with them, but it seems it has
Produced nothing, and I have nothing to make me believe, but that the Reason
is, that the Lords were Resolved (say what we would) not to be satisfied; for I
know nothing which they Offered, but it was fully Answered, nor any thing left
undone to satisfy them if they would have been satisfied; what I have to say
now is to clear something which the Lords may make much sound of.

When we urged Presidents, and made them our principal Reason, we told them,
the way to decide what was in Difference betwixt the Houses, is, the usuage of
Parliaments; but to our Presidents we received no full Answer.

Then the Lords used this Reason, Namely, that they cared not for Presidents,
because it was against the Express Law of the Land.

I Answered them we would join with them, if they could show Law against it,
and expected what they would Answer, but heard nothing: Much discourse there
was, without Application, of the Great Charter, and of the Statute of 28 Ed. 3.
but not applied; so that I thought Law in a Lords Mouth, was like a Sword in a
Ladies Hand, the Sword might be there, but when it comes to cut, itwould be
awkward and useless.

But I hear since, that their meaning was this, (which must be cleared by
mentioning some Laws) that by Magna Charta, it is provided, That no Man shall
be taken or Imprisoned, or Condemned but by the Law; and thence they infer,
That no Man may be Imprisoned, but it must be by the Peers, or by the Law of
the Land.

Again, 5. Ed. 3. No Woman shall be attached upon Accusation, or be adjudged of
Life or Limb, but according to the Law.

25. Ed. 3. No Man shall be taken by a Petition to the King or his Council,
unless by Indictment of lawful People, or by process of Writ at Common Law, and
(say they) this Case is to none of these.

28 Ed. 3. No Man shall be Imprisoned without due Process according to the Old
Law of the Land: But this Case being neither by Presentment nor Indictment, the
Lords would not stand upon our Presidents, but relied on this, as if it were
enough in Bar of all our Presidents.

Therefore to open this, and the danger of the Consequence, there are in the
Land many different Laws, and proceedings in these Laws, and Imprisonment upon
them; and yet not one of them by Presentment, Indictment, or Trial by Peers,
tho the Lords thought this was the Law and there was no other.

1. It is known that the Crown-Law, or Prerogative, is distinct Law from that
between Party and Party.

2. There is the Law and Custom of Parliament, called a Law, ab omnibus
quaerenda, a multis ignorata, and a paucis Cognita.

3. Then the Cannon-Law, (and it is much the Bishops forgot that) and there is
nothing in that Law, more than standing in a White Sheet, which proceeds not by
Indictment or Presentment, yet there is Imprisonment even in that Law.

4. There is the Law of Admiralty, and the Articles of Cleron, where there is
proceedings of another Nature, and by Imprisonment.

5. The Law of Merchants, or of the Staple.

6. The Law of Arms, where is Imprisonment and Death, and yet different
proceedings from the Common Law in the Great Charter: Now no Man thinks that
all those Courses of Proceedings are taken away by the Common Law, and it is
gross Ignorance to think it.

7. The Law of the Forest, which is most different: So that to urge Magna
Charta to this purpose, as if all Proceedings in those Cases must be according
to the Common Law, is absurd.

Then there are diverse Writs in the Register.

One, When a Man has received the King's Money to serve him, and went not,
then there is a Writ to Arrest him upon a Certificate from the Captain under
whom he was to serve.

Then the ordinary Writ, which belongs to the Law Ecclesiastic, de
Excommunicato Capiendo.

Another, de Apostata Capiendo, to recover a Regular Runaway from his Convent.

Another, called ne exeat Regno, to Imprison a Man, who will not give Security
not to go out of the Kingdom, and this is not Traversable any where, because it
suggests that he will Machinat somewhat hurtful to the Kingdom, and upon that
Suggestion he is Imprisoned.

Another, when a Man has a Leprosy.

Another, to burn Heretics, which concerned the Bishops also, if they had
pleased to think of it.

These Proceedings are no way agreeable to those mentioned in the Common Law

Then consider how this Resolution of the Lords strikes at the Law of
Parliaments.

1. It is certain that all Imprisonment by Parliament is not by Presentment,
Indictment, etc. So that by this means that Power is taken away.

2. Contempt against Parliamentary Authority, whosoever he is to appear before
them, and disobeys them, they may Imprison him in the Tower, and yet it is not
against Magna Charta.

Whither therefore tends this?

The Conclusion must be, that no Impeachment by the Commons must go on, unless
it be by Presentment, and so there is an end of all that for which the
Parliament is principally called, unless we are part of those 500 contemptible
Ones, who are only fit to give Money; That may be reserved for us, but nothing
else; though 23 Ed. 3. says, For redress of grievances in the Kingdom a
Parliament shall be called every Year. I would know which way we should redress
Abuses, if we are so far from remedying in Parliament, that we must be shut out
to the Common Courses in other Courts?

Obj. The Lords may say, if you find the Statutes broken, and short, you shall
have New.

Answ. And when these New Ones are broken, then we shall have a Remedy, so rise
up Remedy, and go to the Remedy, ad infinitum, for there is no more Reason to
think that a Second Law shall be maintained more than the First, and what way a
Mischief shall be Redressed, other than by Parliament, I know not.

So that by this Resolution of the Lords, and denying to Commit upon this
Ground (for they showed no other) every Thing for which a Parliament is useful
is denied us.

After all this come to the very Case.

If a Treason be Committed, and the Fame is that A. B. is guilty of it, it is
lawful to Apprehend him for it. If Hue and Cry pursue a Man, though he be not of
evil Fame, yet he may lawfully be Imprisoned: If it proves false, he has his
Remedy; but that obstructs not the Law to bring him to Trial: Any Watchman may
Arrest a Night-Walker, and has a Warrant in Law for it, and this is as good
Process in Law, as any original Writ.

And after all this, Consider with what Kind of Color, when there are weighty
Reasons why we should not mention special Treason, and that mentioning it
generally, answers the Petition of Right, the whole Commons of England (who are
in no degree represented by the Lords, They only represent their own Persons)
should be denied the Securing a Person Impeached unless a particular charge be
given how prejudicial so ever to the Kingdom.

Another thing, there is no Right which a Man has in this Land, or any part of
the World, but his Right is such, that if it be kept from him, he has a means
to come to it, otherways it is Damnum sine Injuria; for where the Law gives no
remedy, there is but a supposition of Right: By the same measure it will
follow, that there is no civil wrong can be done to any Man, but the Law
provides a Remedy if that wrong be done; and if by the Law there is no Remedy,
it is no wrong, consider then this Case.

There are in this Kingdom in the Civil State of it, three Estates, which the
King has then in making Laws: There are three Estates, whereof the King is
Principal; sometimes they are mentioned as the King's three Estates, and he
none of them: The Estates in general are, the Commons of the Kingdom, (who are
perfectly represented in this House) the Lords another, and the King another,
and these are such, that there is no Petitory Action, nor the Laws directed to
any one of them, but the Laws you make are to distribute Justice in other
Courts.

For Instance, If all the Commons of England (who are one of the Estates)
should Accuse one of themselves, the Party can have no wrong, because the
Parliament can have no Action brought against them, nor can they be supposed to
do any thing for Malice.

It is the same between the Body of the Lords and Commons; and there is no Law
either to Vindicate the one or the other; but they stand as if there were no
communicable Law betwixt them; but the measure between them is that which is
good for the whole; for they are the makers of Laws for others, but no Laws can
be fancied to reach the whole of the Commons, or of the Lords.

So that it is easily to be seen, how it has been put upon us; so that now we
are in such a Case, we know not to what end we shall proceed upon this or any
other Impeachment; for by this Judicial power, you shall be excluded from any
proceedings by Laws of Parliaments, and so you take away the whole Right of the
Kingdom.

Quest. But now what shall you do?

Ans. I see many Inconveniences which may happen both ways, but I see so many
this way, that if any Man gave such Council as is Charged upon the Earl of
Clarendon, it is not so dangerous as the Case before you; for the
Inconveniences attending that Council would quickly show it self by the Misery
following: But this is a small thing begun with, which, like a Canker, may eat
till it be uncurable, and that is as absolutely justifiable as this.

And now I have said this, I am perplexed what to say more, for all can bear me
witness, what respect I have endeavored to preserve to the House of Peers, but
I am so sensible of this, that though I cannot forget my respect to them, yet I
must lament the Condition into which they have brought themselves first, and us
next, for they cannot think to avoid it.

The House of Peers is but a New Style, called so, as Jurors are called Peers,
from the Word Par; for every Commoner has his Peers as Lords have; and the
whole Style formerly was Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, etc. But Pares Regni is
a new Style. It is called the Upper House, and is to be looked upon with
Reverence. The Lords have a jurisdiction, but in this Case, I must be plain,
their granted Jurisdiction arises from the House of Common, if you Impeach not
there your Judicial Power will be very little. If a Lord be to be Tried for
Treason, the Lords are but his Jurors; and though they Try him upon Honor, not
upon Oath, yet they are no more his Tryers, than as out of Parliament: The
Judge of Treason in the Lords House, is Constituted by the King, as a Lord
High-Steward, and there is no other Judge, therefore I know not the Judicature
they speak so much of.

There is another for Writs of Error, which are there determined, but the
Jurisdiction of that is very little, for the Inconveniency of the Lords
determining what could not be determined in other Courts, is so found out 25
Eliz. They are to be brought first into the Exchequer Chamber.

There is another way when Persons carry Complaints to the Lords, which is a
Question, for Commoners ought not to carry Complaints there, except in some
Cases from Chancery; therefore this Matter of Jurisdiction, which they talk of,
is not such a wonderful thing as they would make it.

Therefore whatever we shall do after it, your Rights being so much concerned
that you know not where the stay will be, it is necessary that you make a
Committee to draw up a Protestation to be made by this House concerning this
Matter, The Invasion of your Right in it, and the danger to the Kingdom by it.


Mr. Colem. The Lords say, That committing upon a general Impeachment is
against Law, and I think it will appear so; I deny not, but a Mittimus without
special Cause is legal, and grounded upon the Petition of Right, the Reason of
which is to secure Men against Commitment by a special Warrant, and a Judge
ought not to discharge where Treason is alleged, but in this Case it is
different; The Judges cannot discharge a Man Committed after Examination, but
the Lords ought not to Commit a Man, except there be particular Treason.

If I come before a Justice of Peace, and say, I accuse this Man of Treason,
will any wise Man Commit him? he makes his Warrant indeed, but he that accuses
must go farther and make it more particular, and the special Matter must appear
before he Commits, and this is the present Case.

The Common Law is, That no Man ought to be Committed without particular Cause;
because no Man can Commit in Capital Matters, without taking Examination before
hand, otherwise no Man can justify a Commitment: Therefore I am not satisfied
that the Lords had not reason to deny. The Commons are in the nature of a
Grand-Iury to present, but the Lords are the Judges; Commitment is not the
Judgment but in order to it, and the Lords have a discretionary Power in the
Case: The Lords say not that they will not Commit, but that they are not
satisfied to do it without special Matter, therefore we ought to send it up.


Sir Rob. How. I have attended the Reasons given against making a Protestation,
and whatever is said, is but levelling a House of Commons with every private
Accuser; a Justice of Peace (it is said) must have Evidence before he Commit,
and this House has had Inducements to Impeach, and may not a House of Commons
Judge what is Treason as well as Justice of Peace?

The Inconveniences and Dangers laid before you, if you proceed, are nothing
in comparison of those on the other side.

Had the Lords Imprisoned, they had before this had the Particular Charge, and
the Protestation is not to stop it, but to make way for it some other way; for
it will resolve into a Remonstrance, by which you may give the Nation an
Account of your Proceedings to come to a Trial of this Business.


Mr. Vaugh. By the Protestation spoken of, is meant to preserve the Rights of
this House upon the whole Matter, and to give the Reasons of your Proceedings.


Sir Tho. M -- rs. What is said, not being explained; I know not what is meant
by the Protestation; if it be but to enter it into our Book, I am not against
it, if it be an Appeal to the Nation, pray consider what you do.


Mr. Vaugh. This way of Protestation differs from entering in our Books, but the
best way is to draw it up, and to bring it to you, and then any Man may take
Exceptions against it; for the meaning is, that this House Claims its Rights.


Mr. Garaw. First make your Protestation, and then Appeal to the King.


Mr. Vaugh. None can surmize that you mean an Appeal to the People by what is
moved, for what is done, must be done to some part of the Parliament; the King,
Lords, or your selves: And they who speak of it (if it were done with evil
intent) deserve to be called to the Bar; when it is brought before you for your
Approbation, you may either retain, or reject it.


Sir Walt. You. I desire that the House may know before hand to whom they are
to Remonstrate, and on what ground, and therefore to Adjourn their Debate now.


Mr. Trev. What Appeal you make ought to be to the King, but bring it in hither
and give it what Name you please.


Sir Rob. Atk. As I would be tender of your Privileges, so, of giving Offense
to the Lords, therefore we shall endeavor to be Unanimous in this House; a
Protestation is Named, I am a stranger to it, and would understand clearly what
is is before we do it; That it is a Course warranted by Presidents and
Proceedings of Parliaments, considering what effect it has had in late times,
therefore we may do well to adjourn the Debate and Consider of it.


Sir Tho. Litt. This Protestation will be like that in the Lord Maynard's Case,
but somewhat longer, and ought to go farther then to one of the Estates, and be
kept within the walls.


Mr. Swinf. You sent up a Charge to the Lords in general, desiring that the
Earl of Clarendon should be secured, and in covenient time you would send up
Articles; from that time it has not been done, and the Lords have passed
several Votes about it since, but you have not passed one.

First they Voted, that they had not complied with your desires for want of
particular Treason; Then you give them Reasons, they are not satisfied with
them; then a Free Conference, they are still unsatisfied; and all this while
you have not come to any resolution: So that till you come to a Vote, no Man
knows but that you are satisfied with their Answer; for when the Matter of the
Protestation is brought in, we shall not be ready for it till we have resolved,
that what the Lords Insist on, is an obstruction of Justice, and you cannot
agree with them without great Inconvenience to the Nation; Therefore put a
Question, That the Lords, not having agreed to Secure the Earl of Clarendon
upon the general Impeachment, have obstructed the Public Justice of the
Kingdom in proceedings of Parliament, and is of dangerous Consequence: This is
necessary, because the Lords have heard nothing from you, but endeavor to
satisfy them.


Sir John Good. This Question will be a greater Accusation of the whole House
of Lords, than the other is of the Earl of Clarendon. If you will go by way of
Protestation, and keep it within your own Walls, I like it better than this
Question.


Sir Rob. How. The putting this Question is no Charge upon the House of Lords;
and therefore if that Gentleman thinks it so great an one, sure he thinks the
Charge against the Earl Clarendon to be a very small one. Is there any
Obstruction to Justice? If not, Why do we not Comply? If there be, we cannot it
seems Complain without Charging the Lords. Keeping it within your own Walls, is
but like a Man, when he is alone, muttering Arguments to himself, and
Commending himself for it. If you meet with any Obstructions, pray first put
the Question, whether you are obstructed.


Sir Rob. Atk. It is no light matter to Charge the Lords with Obstructing
Justice; therefore the thing being new, pray adjourn it till to morrow, that we
may be more of one Mind.

Then the Question was stated, Namely,

That the Lords not having complied with the desire of the Commons in
Committing the Earl of Clarendon, and Sequestring him from Parliament upon the
Impeachment from this House, is an Obstruction to the public Justice of the
Kingdom, and is a President of evil and dangerous Consequence.


Resolved, That the Question be Put,

And being put, Resolved in the Affirmative.

Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to draw up a Declaration to Vindicate
the Proceedings of this House.

Decemder, 3.
A Message from the Lords by two Judges, That they have received a large
Petition from the Earl of Clarendon, which Intimates that he is withdrawn.

Sir Tho. Tompk. Moved to take care to get the Seaports stopped.


Sir Tho. Lit. I believe he is now past stopping, but we should do it, though it
have no effect; lest it look as though we would have him escape.


Sir Rob. How. The Lords seem now mistaken in their Opinion at the Conference,
they said there was no fear of his Running away, and in our House it has been
Jested that he was not like to Ride Post. Besides the Expression in the Message
is (withdrawn) which may be an inward Chamber, therefore it is fit to desire to
see the Petition, and Command some Members to prepare something to Vindicate
your selves in discharge of your Duty.


Mr. Seym. You cannot take Notice to the Lords of the Petition, unless they
think good to Communicate to you, but make the Declaration


Mr. Vaugh. I look upon what the Lords say as doubtful, therefore beware lest
you do something misbecoming you. They only say, that he is withdrawn, but not
what is his Petition; for the saying that he is withdrawn, is not the Matter of
a Petition. Perhaps he is gone into the Country, the Message seems light, and
you are to take no notice of it. If it be of Moment, and they think us
Concerned, they should let us know it; and I cannot think so of the Lords, that
they would use that word, if he were fled: therefore send a Message, to know
whether fled or withdrawn.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When a Delinquent signifies to his Judges, that he is withdrawn,
it cannot signify any thing, but that he is withdrawn from their Judgment.
None but a mad Man will tell them that he is fled fearing what may follow; it
would be well if their Care would prevent his flying, but you cannot Answer it,
if you hear they do nothing, and so seem to say, fare him well.

Upon all which Motions, Ordered,

That Sir Tho. Cliff. (Comptroler of the King's Household) be sent to the King,
to desire the Ports may be stopped.


December, 4
The Lord Fitzharding makes Report from the King, that the Message for stopping
the Ports being delivered him, he had taken Care accordingly.

A Message from the Lords to desire a speedy Conference:

From which Mr. Solicitor Reports.

We attended the Lords at the Conference, which was delivered by the Duke of
Buck. who said to this purpose.

That the Lords had Commanded him to deliver to us that Scandalous and
Seditious Paper sent from the Earl of Clarendon, desiring us to present it to
you; and to desire you in convenient time to send it to them again, for it had
a Style which they were in love with, and desired to keep it.

Which said Paper was read, and is as follows, viz.

TO THE Right HONORABLE THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, IN Parliament
ASSEMBLED. The humble Petition and Address of Edward Earl of Clarendon.
May it please Your Lordships,
I Cannot express the unsupportable Trouble and Grief of Mind I sustain under
the Apprehension of being Misrepresented to Your Lordships, and when I hear how
much of Your Lordships time has been spent upon the mention of me, as it is
attended with more public Consequences, and of the differences of Opinion
which have already, or may probably arise between Your Lordships and the
Honorable House of Commons; whereby the great and weighty affairs of the
Kingdom may be obstructed in the time of so general a dissatisfaction.

I am very unfortunate to find my self to suffer so much under two very
disadvantageous Reflections, which are in no degree applicable to me.

The First from the greatness of my Estate and Fortune, collected and made in
so few Years, which if it be proportionable to what is reported, may very
reasonably cause my Integrity to be suspected.

The Second, That I have been the sole Manager and chief Minister in all the
Transactions of State since the King's return into England, to August last, and
therefore that all Miscarriages and Misfortunes ought to be imputed to me and
my Councels.

Concerning my Estate, Your Lordships will not believe, that after Malice and
Envy has been so inquisitive and so sharp sighted I will offer any thing to
Your Lordships, but what is exactly true; and I do assure Your Lordships, in
the first place, That (excepting from the King's Bounty) I have never received
nor taken one Penny but what was generally understood to be the just lawful
Perquisites of my Office, by the constant Practice of the best Times, which I
did in my own Judgment conceive to be that of my Lord Coventry, and my Lord
Elsmore; the Practice of which I constantly observed, although the Office in both
their Times was lawfully worth double to what it was to me, and I believe now
is.

That all the Courtesies and Favors which I have been able to obtain from the
King for other Persons in Church or State, or in Westminster Hall, have never
been worth me Five Pounds: So that Your Lordships may be confident I am as
innocent from Corruption as from any disloyal Thought, which after near Thirty
Years Service of the Crown, in some Difficulties and Distresses, I did never
expect would be objected to me in my Age.

And I do assure Your Lordships, and shall make it very Manifest, That the
several Sums of Money, and some Parcels of Land, which His Majesty has
Bountifully bestowed upon me since his return into England, are worth more than
all I have amounts unto; so far I am from advancing my Estate by indirect
means. And though this Bounty of his has very far exceeded my Merit, or my
expectation, yet some others have been as fortunate at least in the same Bounty
who had as small pretenses to it, and have no great Reason to envy my condition.

Concerning the other Imputation of the Credit and Power of being chief
Minister, and so causing all to be done that I had a mind to, I have no more to
say, than that I had the good fortune to serve a Muster of a very great
Judgment and Understanding, and be always joined with Persons of great Ability
and Experience, without whose Advice and Concurrence, never any thing has been
done.

Before His Majesty's coming into England, he was constantly attended by the
then Marquess of Oumond, the late Lord Culpeper, and Mr. Secretary Nicholas,
who were equally trusted with my self, and without whose Joint Advice and
Concurrence, when they were all present (as some of them always were) I never
gave any Council. As soon as it pleased God to bring His Majesty into England,
he Established his Privy Council, and shortly, out of them he Choose a Number
of Honorable Persons of great Reputation (who for the most part are still
alive) as a Committee for Foreign Affairs and Consideration of such things as
in the Nature of them required much Secrefie, and with these Persons he
vouchsafed to Ioyn me: And I am confident this Committee never transacted any
thing of Moment (His Majesty being always present) without presenting the same
first to the CouncilBoard, and I must appeal to them concerning my Carriage,
and whether we were not all of one Mind, in Matters of Importance.

For more than two Years I never knew any Differences in the Councils, or that
there were any Complaints in the Kingdom, which I wholly impute to His
Majesty's great Wisdom, and the entire Concurrence of his Councillors, without
the Vanity of assuming any thing to my self; and therefore I hope I shall not
be singly charged with any thing that has since fallen out amiss. But from the
time Mr. Secretary Nicholas was removed from his Place, there were great
Alterations; and whosoever knew any thing of the Court and Councils, know well
how much my Credit has since that time been diminished, though His Majesty
graciously vouchsafed still to here my Advice in most of his Affairs: nor has
there been, from that time to this, above one or two Persons brought to the
Council, or preferred to any considerable Office in the Court who have been of
my intimate Acquaintance, or suspected to have any kindness for me; and most of
them, most Notoriously known to have been very long my Enemies, and of
different Judgment and Principles from me, both in Church and State, and have
taken all opportunities to lessen my Credit with the King, and with all other
Persons, by Mis-representing and Mis-reporting all that I said or did, and
persuading Men I have done them some prejudice with His Majesty, or crossed
them in some of their Pretensions; Though His Majesty's Goodness and Justice was
such, that it made little Impression upon him.

In my humble Opinion, the great Misfortunes of the Kingdom have proceeded from
the War, to which it is Notoriously known that I was always most averse, and
may without vanity say, I did not only foresee, but declare the Mischiefs we
should run into, by Entering into a War, before any Alliances made with the
Neighboring Princes, and that it may not be imputed to His Majesty's want of
Care, or the Negligence of his Counselors, that no such Alliances were entered
into, I must take the boldness to say, His Majesty left nothing unattempted in
order thereunto; and knowing very well, that France Resolved to begin a War
upon Spain, as soon as his Catholic Majesty should depart this World, which
being much sooner expected by them, They had in the two Winters before been at
great Charges in providing plentiful Magazeens of all Provisions upon the
Frontiers, that they might be ready for the War, His Majesty used all possible
means to prepare and dispose the Spaniard with that apprehension, offering his
Friendship to that degree, as might be for the Benefit and Security of both
Crowns.

But Spain flattering it self. That France would not break with them, at least,
that they would not give them any Cause by Administering Matter of Jealousy to
them, never made any real approach toward a Friendship with His Majesty, but,
both by their Ambassadors here, and to His Majesty's Ambassador at Madrid,
always persisted, as Preliminaries, upon the giving up of Dunkirk, Tangier and
Jamaica.

Though France had an Ambassador here, to whom a Project of a Treaty was offered,
and the Lord Hollis, His Majesty's Ambassador at Paris, used all endeavors to
pursue and prosecute the said Treaty, yet it was quickly discerned, That the
principal Design of France was to draw His Majesty into such a nearer Alliance
as might advance their Design; without which, they had no mind to Enter into
the Treaty proposed.

And this was the State of Affairs when the War was Entered into with the Dutch,
from which time, neither Crown much considered the making any Alliance with
England.

As I did from my Soul abhor the Entering into this War, so I presumed never to
give any Advice or Council for the way of managing it, but by opposing many
Propositions, which seemed to the late Lord Treasurer and my self to be
unreasonable, as the payment of the Seamen by Tickets, and many other
Particulars which added to the Expense.

My Enemies took all occasions to enveigh against me, and making their
Friendship with others out of the Council, of more licencious Principles, and
who knew well enough how much I disliked and complained of the Liberty they
took to themselves of reviling all Councils and Councillors, and turning all
things Serious and Sacred into ridicule, They took all ways imaginable to
render me ungrateful to all sorts of Men, (whom I shall be compelled to Name in
my Defense) persuading those that miscarryed in any of their Designs, That it
was the Chancellours doing; whereof, I never knew any thing. However, they
could not withdraw the King's Favor from me, who was still pleased to use my
Service with others, nor was there ever any thing done but with the joint
Advice of at least the Major part of those who were consulted with. And as His
Majesty commanded my Service in the late Treaties, so I never gave the least
Advice in private, nor wrote one Letter to any one Person in either of those
Negotiations but upon the Advice of the Council, and also after it was read in
Council, or at least by the King himself, and some other; and if I prepared any
Instructions or Memorials, it was by the King's Command, and the request of the
Secretaries who desired my Assistance; nor was it any wish of my own, that any
Ambassador should give me any account of the Transactions, but to the
Secretaries, to whom I was always ready to advise; nor am I conscious to my
self of ever having given Advice that has proved mischievous or inconvenient
to His Majesty; and I have been so far from being the sole Manager of Affairs,
that I have not in the whole last Year been above twice with His Majesty in any
Room alone, and very seldom in the two or three Years preceding.

And since the Parliament at Oxford, it has been very visible, that my Credit
has been very little, and that very few things have been hearkened to, which
have been proposed by me, but contradicted, eo nomine, because proposed by me.

I most humbly beseech Your Lordships to remember the Office and Trust I had
for seven Years, in which, in Discharge of my Duty I was obliged to stop and
obstruct many Men's pretenses, and refused to set the Seal to many Pardens and
other Grants, which would have been profitable to those who procured them, and
many whereof, upon my Representation to His Majesty, were for ever stopped, which
naturally have raised many Enemies to me: And my frequent concurring, upon the
desires of the late Lord Treasurer, (with whom I had the Honor to have a long
and vast Friendship to his Death) in Representing several Excesses and
Exorbitances, the yearly Issue so far exceeding the Revenues, provoked many
Persons concerned, of great Power and Credit, to d^ me all the ill Offices they
could. And yet I may faithfully say, That I never meddled with any part of the
Revenue or the Administration of it, but when I was desired by the late Lord
Treasurer to give him my Assistance and Advice, having had the Honor formerly
to serve the Crown as Chancellor of the Exchequer, which was for the most part
in His Majesty's presence. Nor have I ever been in the least degree concerned,
in point of Profit, in letting any part of His Majesty's Revenue; nor have ever
Treated or Debated it, but in His Majesty's presence, in which my Opinion
concurred always with the Major part of the Councillors who were present.

All which, upon Examination, will be made manifest to Your Lordships, how much
soever my Integrity is blasted by the Malice of those who I am confident do not
believe themselves. Nor have I in my Life, upon all the Treaties, or otherwise,
received the value of one Shilling from all the Kings or Princes in the World,
(excepting the Books of the Louvre Print sent me by the Chancellor of France
by that Kings direction) but from my own Master, to whose entire Service, and
the Good and Welfare of my Country, no Man's Heart was every more devoted.

This being my present Condition; I do most humbly beseech Your Lordships to
entertain a favorable Opinion of me, and to believe me to be Innocent from
those foul Aspersions, until the contrary shall proved; which I am sure can
never be by any Man worthy to be believed: And since the Distempers of the
Times, and the Difference between the two Houses in the present Debate, with
the Power and Malice of my Enemies, Who gave out that I should prevail with His
Majesty to Prorogue or Dissolve this Parliament in Displeasure, and threaten to
expose me to the Rage and Fury of the People, may make me to be looked upon as
the Cause which obstructs the Kings Service, and Unity and Peace of the Kingdom.

I most humbly beseech Your Lordships, that I may not forfeit Your Lordships
Favor and Protection, by Withdrawing my self from so powerful a Persecution,
in hope that I may be able, by such withdrawing, hereafter to appear, and make
my Defense, when His Majesty's Justice (to which I shall always submit) may not
be Obstructed, or Controled, by the Power and Malice of those who have sworn my
Destruction.

CLARENDON.


Mr. Vaugh. I think it not convenient to loose more time about this Paper.
Since the time of the Earl of Clarendons Name being mentioned here, I had
nothing to Charge him with till now, but most of the Heads of this Charge are
so weighty, that I am confident, they will be easily and thoroughly proved,
though I know not how; so that I admire at his Confidence, to Charge this House,
and so the Nation, as his Persecutors, and that in such a Condition, as he
hopes to vindicate himself. Its the first time that ever I heard an Innocent
Man run away under the greatest Charge, with hopes to return again and
vindicate himself.

Then mark one Expression; he says, he is as far from Corruption, as from
Disloyalty: If he said he was guilty of neither, he had said something; but by
that Expression he may be guilty of both: So insolent a Paper I never met with
in this Kingdom, nor have I ever read the like in any other; so inconsiderable
a part of the Nation as he is to lay it upon the Nation, who, if innocent,
might defend himself, if Guilty, why does he Charge the Nation with
persecuting? Therefore without troubling your selves with it, do, as the Lords
have done; who deliver it to you as a Scandalous and Seditious Paper; it has
Malice in it, and is the greatest Reproach upon the King and the whole Nation,
that ever was given by Man. Therefore put the Question whether his Paper shall
not have the Character, that it is a Scandalous and Malicious Paper, and a
Reproach to the Justice of the Nation.


Resolved upon the Question.

That the Paper sent to the Lords by the Earl of Clarendon, and by them sent
down to the House of Commons, and now read, is Scandalous and Seditious, and
does Reproach the King and the Public Justice of the Nation.

Sir Rob. How. You have voted this Paper Scandalous, and therefore it should
not live, wherefore I move it should be burnt by the Hangman.


Mr. Garraw. The Paper is the Lords, and you must send it to them, but enter it
into your Books, and your Vote upon it.


Resolved, To have it burnt.

Sir Rob. Car. The Paper is the Lords, therefore move them to Concur that it
may be burnt.


Sir Rob. How. The meaning of my Motion is, because the Duke of Buckingham
desired the Paper again for the admirableness of the Style, it is entered into
their Books already, and they need it not to that end; therefore desire the
Lords Concurrence to burn it.


Resolved, To send it to the Lords to that end.

December, 5.
A Motion being made to send to the Lords in pursuance of the Vote about
burning the Paper.

Mr. Vaugh. I am against sending up to the Lords to that purpose, because you
have Ordered to enter the Paper into your Books, and when a Paper is burnt, it
is not to stand upon Record, but should be rased out; which two Things are a
perfect Contradiction, therefore let it rest as it is; We have Voted it
Scandalous, etc. The Lords tell us not that they have done any such Thing, though
they ought to have done it first.

As for the Earl of Clarendon, he being now gone, if such a like occasion
should fall out, we are in a worse Condition than we were; for there is this
President against us, in a Case now Manifest: And it becomes us to do something
in Order to the Lords Concurring, that so a good Understanding may be got;
therefore I shall propound this to you, to be sent up to them to that end.

Namely, when any Subject shall be Impeached by the Commons before the Lords in
Parliament with desire to secure him, such Person by the Law of the Land ought
to be secured accordingly. This you have in effect Voted already, in saving the
Justice of the Kingdom is obstructed by their not doing it.

Secondly, when such Impeached Persons shall be secured, the Lords may limit a
certain time for bringing in the Charge, to prevent delay of Justice.

This may Salve all, and prevent such ways, as may be displeasing to the Lords.
and perhaps us also, in some Cases here after.


Mr. Swin. I am perswded that according to Rules of Parliament, when you Charge
by Impeachment generally, and promise in due time to send up your Charge, they
ought to secure, but they not having done it, I question whether you could do
what you have, but the Earl of Clarendon flying, it is Manifest Justice was
obstructed; for he might have been brought to his Trial, if the Lords had
secured him; but now your Vote is made good, which seems to lay the advantage
on your side.


Sir Rob, How. I think this Message to the Lords will destroy the way of
vindicating our selves by Declaration; therefore finish the Declaration, and
then Resolve before you publish it, whether to send up this Message.


Mr. Vaugh. If the Lords agree with us, we may spare the Declaration, but if
they agree not now, they will much less hereafter: Your Declaration, can amount
to no more but this, make a Narrative of the invalidity of the Lords
Presidents, but then you must of necessity do something more, else your Labor
is in vain; therefore this Message with these Votes are necessary.


Sir Rich. Temp. I expected that when the Earl of Clarendon had been fled, the
Lords would have desired the King to Issue out a Proclamation to apprehend him,
seeing they have been the occasion of his Escape; therefore now desire their
Concurrence to go to the King to that end, and if they Concur, they have upon
the Matter granted Commitment upon a general Impeachment.


Mr. Vaugh. I thought it my Duty to offer you what I have done, if you like it
not, I desire to be excused in serving you in the Declaration, and that they
who think it necessary would be pleased to take the pains to do it.


Sir Tho. Lee. If you declare, it will beget an Answer, and where will that
end? If you send up your Votes, and the Lords agree, your end is Answered; for
it is a yielding that which they have yet denied: Your declaring, and entering
it upon the Journal, will be to no purpose; it is but like a Man, who having
been beaten publicly, in the Chamber calls him who did it Rogue.


Mr. Hampd. I desire that the Words (Law of the Land) may be left out, and the
Words (Law of Parliament, or, Vsuage of Parliament) put instead of them; for it
has been showed us, that there are several ways of Impeachment besides
CommonLaw.


Mr. Vaugh. Those Words were purposely put in, because at the free Conserence,
when we pressed the Law of Parliaments, the Lords pressed the Law of the Land
by way of Negative, as if the Law of the Land were otherwise, but rather than
that shall be any obstruction, put it by Law.


Mr. Stew. Leave out the Words (by Law) for if a Man be secured, it is Employed
by them who do Commit that it is according to Law.

Then it being Moved to draw both Votes in one.


Sir Tho. Litt. Though you should put both Votes into one, It will not Answer
your end, for the Lords will not Concur with the first Part, and yet may make
use of what Part you grant of it, that is the last, and so have advantage
against you; but there is another Reason, why you should forbear these Votes,
Namely, Prudence.

The Earl of Clarendon being gone, there is an expectation that a Bill should
be prepared to do something farther, wherein I hope both Houses will join; if
you send up this, you will give disturbance to that Bill, and if you should
enter this in your Books, in Order to send it up hereafter, they will hear of
it, as done to make them swallow their former Resolves. Therefore defer it for
the present.


Mr. Trev. Consider whether the Matter hetwixt you and the Lords is not well as
it is: You have Voted, That when a Man is generally Impeached, he ought to be
secured, and that the Lords not having done it, is an obstruction to Justice;
and what will it signify to carry it to the Lords? what has since fallen out,
justifies you, and lays the disadvantage upon the Lords: The World expects now
what you will do farther, and that must be by Concurring with the Lords.


Sir Tho. Cliff. We all agree to these Votes, in Order to justify your Rights;
but what is the use of it? You have already done it in your Books, and you
cannot expect the Lords should go so much against their own Votes, this
therefore will but widen the Gap, it being telling them they must eat their
words.


Sir Tho. Litt. Those, who have had a hand in the charge against the Earl of
Clarendon, have been thought sometimes too Violent, sometimes too Remiss, as
not able to make out the Charge: But what I speak now, is for your Honor,
which will be wronged in this Proceeding; I am for bringing the Impeachment to
something; and therefore against these Votes: Now you make a Declaration of
your own Rights, and Enter it upon your Books, that not only the Vote may
appear, but the Ground of it, but not to declare to the Lords, which will beget
an Answer and exasperate. It is now unseasonable to make the Lords retract,
therefore lay it aside; for though I am confident that Gentleman did it to no
such end, yet if I would Design any Thing to the Earl of Clarendon's advantage,
I could not take a better way than this.


Mr. Vaugh. This is but the affirming all which has a been done already, and I
am for none of those, who are contriving for any Thing out of the House.


Sir Will. Covent. This Question is not now seasonable, though it is a better
expedient than the Declaration as Things now stand, and considering what has
past, I am apt to think the Lords may do it of their own accord, and you would
not willingly have a Negative to your Votes. Therefore seeing your Votes may be
of use hereafter, put no Question at all, but adjourn the Debate to a proper
Season.


Mr. Vaugh. I am against the Adjourning of it, and have given Testimony, that I
have done nothing to be thought to do that which is so much for the advantage
of the Earl of Clarendon, and shall take heed of doing any Thing hereafter to
be so reflected on.


Sir Tho. Litt. I hope I avoided any such Reflection nor speak any Thing to
such purpose, I do not believe, nor ever did think any such Thing, and hope
that Gentleman himself believes that no Man in this House has more Honor for
him than I.


Sir Job Charle. Let the World see that you do not intend to restrain your
proceedings to the Earl of Clarendon, but make it a general Care; and therefore
are concerned in Honor to put the Question.


Resolved upon the Question.

That the Question be put.

Resolved, That both the Questions propounded by Mr. Vaugh. and put singly in
the Affirmative, be carried up to the Lords.

December, 13.
A Bill was brought from the Lords, to Banish the Earl of Clarendon, and read.

After reading, several Objections being made, and it being Alleged, that it
was an abuse put upon the Commons by the Lords, and that a Bill of Attainder
being propounded, after some Debate, the House passed this Vote.

Resolved, That this House taking notice of the flight of the Earl of
Clarendon, being under an Impeachment of High Treason by this House; the King's
Majesty be humbly desired to Issue out his Proclamation for Summoning the said
Earl to appear by a Day, and to apprehend him in Order to his Trial.

Resolved, To send to the Lords for their Concurrence to this Vote.

December, 14.
A Message from the Lords for a Conference, at which they delivered two
Reasons, why they could not Concur.

1. First, for that they conceive a Proclamation in the way proposed, would be
ineffectual, since it is not supaena Convictionis, which cannot be till
particulars in Order to Trial be declared.

2. That, what the House of Commons has proposed, and do propose at present,
is intended in Order to a judicial way of Proceeding; but since the Earl of
Clarendon's Flight, their Lordships upon Consideration of the whole State of
Affairs, and of the Kingdom, have upon Grounds of Prudence and Justice, thought
fit for securing of King and Kingdom, to proceed in a Legislative way against
the said Earl, and have to that end, past and sent down to them a Bill of
Banishment and Incapacity against him, with which this Vote is inconsistent.

December, 16.
The said Reasons from the Lord being Reported and Considered, and it being
Moved that the House would declare themselve unsatisfied with them.

Sir Tho. Cliff. I am against passing a Vote at present upon the Lords Reasons,
but read the Bill sent down from thence, and Summons him by it to appear by a
Day.


Mr. Trev. Some are against the Bill, because it goes too far, Condemning
before Hearing, others would have it to go farther. Summons is in Order to
Hearing, Trial, and Judgment; of those he has made himself incapable by
Flight, and has in his Paper told you, That he will neither be heard, nor
tried by you: Though you expected to have him secured by a general Accusation,
yet you never expected Judgment upon it. Then it is said, This Banishment falls
short of Treason, but we are not to pass Sentence for Crimes but as a Council
propound to the King what is necessary in this Case: Then consider whether this
Bill will Answer our Ends, and if it does, delay will make it worse; I think we
should make it reach them. What if he has Life in other Parts, his Family
Untainted, and his Children alive, and enjoy his Estate?


Sir Rob. Carr. You have Ordered to consider the Reasons from the Lords,
therefore do it.


Mr. Hen. Covent. The Motion to read the Bill is not against your Order,
because part of the Reasons given by the Lords is, That you have a Bill, and
till you have read the Bill, you cannot lay by the Reasons. The Earl of
Clarendon is fled, you have a tie upon him in having his Innocent Relations,
and by Proceeding farther, you make him desperate, you are now in an even way
with the Lords; therefore read the Bill.


Mr. Swins. You may go upon the Reasons, and yet not reject the Bill; for when
you sent to the Lords about a Proclamation, and went not upon the Bill, it was,
because what the Bill drives at is the highest Punishment next to Death.
Therefore Consider what weight is in the Reasons; One of them seeming to put
you upon the Bill, they put you thereupon on a Legislative Way; they will
neither Secure nor Summon him, but will Condemn him Unheard. They cannot Secure
him upon a Charge of Treason, nor yet Summon him, but they can Condemn him; and
this they put you upon, which is against Honor and Justice, especially to do
it up on Reason of State. The Legislative Power of Parliaments is great, it
has no bound but the Integrity and Justice of Parliaments. If Reason of State
be a Motive of Parliament to Banish one Man, so it may be for many. If you go
in this Legislative way, you bring upon your selves all the Dishonor of the
Business, but the Lords will have some excuse, which you cannot, for they
looked upon the Charge so flight, as not to Imprison him; the party is gone,
because he was not Secured, apprehending (he says) fear of the Multitude, not
of his Trial, so that the Lords not giving Credit to your Charge against him,
he says, he flies not from justice. Now, if upon this Bill you shall Banish
him, it would be said you could not make good the Charge; and therefore laid
this Sentence upon him.

The President is also dangerous, if having gone so far in a Judicial Way, you
should now go in a Legislative. If upon Reason of State Lords may be Banished,
it may be by dozens: As you proceed Justly, so you will be Justified.

Nor is the Danger greater if the Lords go by Proclamation, and he be put into
Custody when he comes, if he can practice any Thing, will not he be less
capable when under the Proclamation, than when this Bill is Passed, which
Condemns him without Hearing, and I am not for any Punishment till Heard. In
Cromwells Case, who Moved in Hen. VIII. time, to Attaint a Lord Unheard, the
Judges declared they might, and it would stand, afterward the said Cromwell was
Attainted and Condemned Unheard, and such Council usually falls upon those that
Counseled it.


Sir Rob. How. The Earl of Clarendon says, That he does not withdraw from your
Justice, but fear of Tumults; but that Reason any Man may give for his flying,
if it will be an excuse; but he might have secured himself from Tumults by
rendering himself, and his Innocence upon his Trial would have cleared him. This
at last may come to a free Conference, then you may be left to go along with
the King; the House rises and does nothing, and then the World will see that
this Business will assure the King of France, That he has a Man with him so
Great, as to hinder us from doing any Thing against him: Therefore as you ought
to do something against him, see whether it may not be done by the Bill by
resuming his Lands, etc, if he come not in by a Day.

An Exception may be against this way, Namely, That there is no Attainder, but
if there had been such a Bill, the Thing which should sway me should be the
Duke of York's Marriage: So, that if you Commit this Bill, you may add all
Severities, except that of Attainder, and if he come by a Day, then all to be
void. If you go by Proclamation, the Lords may not Concur and you loose your
Ends. By this Bill all favor that he can expect is showed, and this way will
be the best Confutation of the Lords Reasons; therefore Commit the Bill.


Mr, Secretary Morr. I am for Committing the Bill, though it be condemning
Unheard; because he could not but conclude it would be so. Et volenti non fit
Injuria.


Sir Ric. Temp. You have proceeded against this Earl in all ordinary ways, and
have been baffled by the Lords. In Edward the Third's Reign, Adam de Berry
fled, and a Proclamation went against him, and the Commons neither did, nor
ever were bound to deliver their Articles till the Party appeared, and in that
Case they delivered not their Articles till the last Day, when he not appearing
was Convicted. When you would go by Attainder, they tell you, Deliver special
Matter, and we will Summon him; when you ask a Proclamation, they tell you,
Deliver special Matter: If you declare the Matter to the Court, it is upon
Record, and all may know it. You have tried all ways Legal and Regular, and
they will do you Justice in neither. Now what can you do? except you and the
Lords combine in Justice together, he must escape, and if you can be made to
differ, he goes away in a Smoke. If you go to the King for a Proclamation, you
must return to the Lords for Justice. I am sorry the Ivey has been so near the
Oak, that you cannot touch it, without touching that. There remains a Bill
before you, and in that you are upon equal Terms with the Lords; therefore give
him a Day to be Heard, and if he come, let him, but then his Penalties are too
low for his Crimes; therefore read the Bill, go higher, degrade him of Honors,
Forfeit his Lands, and whether you will go so far, I leave with you.


Mr. Soll. Gene. It is not possible to agree with the Lords in their Reasons,
but the Reason must be because the Bill is good. But if any Man thinks it is
good upon the Lords Reasons he is mistaken; and therefore my Advice is to
proceed upon the Bill, though not upon the Reasons from the Lords. Some think the
Punishment in the Bill too little for the Crime, others too much, because not
Summoned; so that it must fall out, That a Person Impeached by the House of
Commons must see the House rise without any marks of displeasure upon him: Can
any Man be Heard, who will not be Heard? Why should not you proceed in such a
way against him, as whose very Flight amounts to a Confession? And have you not
burnt his Paper for refiecting upon the House? and can you think he will appear
who is departed in despair of the Court? and now you are contending to give him
time.

Then consider the Thing in it self. Suppose the King had a mind to Attaint
him, the King can do it without your help, for he may be Outlawed for
High Treason; for though that be Reversable at Common Law, if he be beyond Sea,
yet by two express Acts of Parliament it is otherwise, but the King cannot
Banish him without your Concurrence: Suppose him Fled and Attainted, so that
the Question is not upon his Life, but his Estate, suppose your Justice
satisfied in that, is it not past all manner of Consideration that the King
cannot upon Application restore it? So, that all you looked for by Attainder, is
done by this Bill of Banishment, for his Life is saved by Flight, as would his
Estate by Compassion; but there is something in this Bill, which, without it,
you can never get, that is, you put him under your Displeasure, which, the King
cannot Pardon; and and will you have it thought abroad, that the Earl of
Clarendon, fled as he is, has been something too hard for the Two Houses?


Sir Tho. Litt. If there be a necessity of differing with the Lords, and I
thought the difference would produce such Effects, I should not speak, but they
only tell you it is unnecessary and ineffectnal. You have Impeached, and are now
told if you proceed, it will make difference; but I fear another greater Danger
than this difference. The World will say you were willing he should fly,
because you could not prove by flying he has Forfeited his Estate; if the King
give it him again it is his Mercy; but do you Justice: Therefore press for a
Proclamation, for the Bill is inconsistent with your Honor.


Mr. Vaugh. I have listened with much attention to this Discourse, and
understand it as little now as at the beginning, the Discourse being nothing
adequate to that end. You have Reasons from the Lords why They agree not with
you, and if you agree with the Reasons, the Sum is to read the Bill; but if
you agree not, you must desire a Conference, and if they Concur, you may have a
Proclamation, if not (as I think they will not) you are where you were: We
suppose him not to be in England, and if so, what is the Proclamation more than
the King's Writ? it reaches no Man out of the Kingdom. Its true, in some
Cases, if the Persons are gone out of the Land they are Summoned, and if they
come not, their Lands are Seized, but it is not by Proclamation, which
signifies nothing if the Party be gone.

Then go on, suppose the Lords Join in desiring a Proclamation, the end of
which is Appearing and Apprehending, possibly you gain one part, that if he be
apprehended, they do Imprison him upon a general Impeachment; but if they agree
not, what benefit have you by it? None: But if he appears, to what is it? there
is no Charge, if apprehended, to Answer the general Charge.

Then the Third way is, if the Lords agree not, that you should go to the King,
and there is a more dangerous Rock in that, than in any thing; for we never
heard of a Commitment per ipsum Dominum Regem, but per mandatum Domini Regis,
because against the King lies no Damages: What then must you do? many think it
injustice to proceed, if he be not called by Proclamation. But it is plain, if
you proceed upon this Bill, you go not upon your Impeachment, but because he is
fled from the Justice of the Land, wherewith you have Charged him in burning
his Paper; and it imports little, that he says he is Innocent; for why then
does he fly? Shall we abate him of what he ought to suffer for his saying so?
He is fled from the Justice of the Parliament, and therefore is proceeded with,
and for what others say, you ought not to regard popular Reasons, but to pursue
your own; it is enough for you to hear some Proofs made: When was it known in
any Court, that Proofs should be taken only on one side? So that you cannot
acquit your own Justice, nor bring him any ways to Answer, he being gone, nor
can you have any effect of the Proclamation, though the Lords join in it:
Therefore unless you will have nothing done after all this, (for he may not be
Guilty of all Charged, who yet has made himself Guilty of what is Charged by
flying) Read the Bill.


At last the Question was put, whether the Bill should be Read and Committed.

109 for it. 55 against it. 164


December, 18.
The Bill for Banishing the Earl of Clarendon was Reported from the Committee,
and Read.

Sir Rob. How. I desire that to the Preface of the Bill this addition may be
made.

That whereas the Earl of Clarendon was Impeached of Treason by the Commons,
who desired he might be secured, but was not, and thereupon is fled.

And this to the end the protesting Lords may be gratified, who took so much
Care of the Commons.


Sir Rob. Carr. Seconds the Motion.


Sir John Talb. I cannot Concur with that Motion, because we cannot take Notice
of what the Lords do.


Sir Rich. Temp. We may take notice of Things in the Lords Books which are
Records, and there the Protest is entered; and though not to gratify them who
owned our Right, yet we ought to take Care of our own Right: And that the World
may see we have some Cause to Pass this Bill, neither deal so modestly with a
Man who flies from Justice, as to use his own Word (withdrawn) but call it
flying.


Sir Tho. Gow. Let the Words be, that having been Impeached, and Moved to be
Secured, has withdrawn himself.


Mr. Solicitor. The word Moved, destroys the Bill it self, the word of the Bill
is to Unite the Two Houses, and this Amendment tends to destroy that End, for
the addition to the Preface being insisted on, the Lords will add the Reasons
for not Committing, and so revive the whole Matter again.

Let the Lords add in their Books what they will, your Books will as much
justify you, as theirs them.


Sir Hum. Win. Let the Words be added whether the Lords agree, or not, that it
may appear upon our Books.


Mr. Hugh Boscow. The Preface is but History, yet add the Words, and let the
Lords insert what they please, I should rather Concur with them, than leave out
those Words.


Mr. Vaugh. Put no Question upon these Words, but whether the Preface shall go
as it is; The Bill in all probability is a safe Bill, because it came from
them: But if you begin an Alteration, you your selves render it unsafe; for if
you put in these Words, then the Lords will add, for want of Special Matter,
and so it will come to nothing.

Then the Bill was read the Third time.


Mr. Vaug. I am against the Word Withdrawn, and for the Word Flight instead of
it, and in regard the Justice of this Bill depends upon the Word (Flight) put
it expressly.


Sir Rob. Carr. I am against this Bill, though I was as earnest in the Matter as
any one while I thought there was Proof, but now none appearing, I am against
the Bill, because you are Confirming what the Lords have done.


Mr. Vaug. Many Men wonder that no Reason is given for passing this Bill, but
the Question is mistaken, the Bill is grounded upon his Flight after his
Impeachment, and his flying Implys some Guilt, if none, it is the safest
Argument for any Man to run away, and then there is nothing to catch him. A
Proclamation to a Man out of the Kingdom signifies nothing. But in the whole it
is plain, that he says, that finding the King's Justice obstructed in
Parliament, he is fled.

Obj. But it will be said upon bare Flight, never was any Man Punished.

Answ. If one Man kills another and flies, though upon his Trial he shall be
acquitted, yet he shall never recover his Goods because of his Flight.

There has been several Acts of Banishment, Spencer, etc. And in this, is
something more severe than in them, Namely, that none shall Correspond with
him, then there is some advantage, Namely, that if he come in by the First of
February, all shall be void; but when the Crime is laid, and his Flight makes
him Guilty, he ought not to have a Day.


Then the Question was put for passing the Bill.

65 For it. 42 Against it. 107


And then the House Adjourned,

ARTICLES OF HIGH TREASON, And other Heinous MISDEMEANORS: Exhibited against
Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord HighChancellour of England, in the House of
Lords; on the Ioth of July, 1663. By the Earl of Bristol.
1. THAT being in Place of highess Trust and Confidence with His Majesty, and
having arrogated a Supreme Direction in all His Majesty's Affairs, both at Home
and Abroad, has Wickedly, and Maliciously, and with a Traitorous Intent to
draw Scandal and Contempt upon His Majesty's Person, and to alienate from him
the Affections of his Subjects abused the said Trust in manner following, viz.

That he has Traitorously and maliciously endeavored to Alienate the Hearts
of His Hajesty's Subjects from him by words of his own, and by artificial
Insinuations of his Creatures and Dependances, that His Majesty was inclined to
Popery, and had a Design to alter the Religion Established in this Kingdom.

That in pursuance of that Traitorous Intent, he has to several Persons of His
Majesty's Privy Council, held Discourses to this effect, viz.

That His Majesty was dangerously corrupted in his Religion, and inclined to
Propery.

That Persons of that Religion had such Access, and such Credit with him, that
unless there were a careful Eye had unto it, the Protestant Religion would be
overthrown in this Kingdom; and in pursuance of the said Wicked and Traitorous
Intent, upon His Majesty's admitting Sir Henry Bennet to be Principal Secretary
of State, in the Place of Mr. Secretary Nicholas, he has said these words, or
words to this effect.

That His Majesty had given 10000l. to remove a zealous Protestant, that he
might bring into that Place of High Trust a concealed Papist, notwithstanding,
that the said Sir Henry Bennet is known to have ever been both in his
Profession and Practice constant to the Protestant Religion.

That in pursuance of the same Traitorous Design, several near Friends and
known Dependances of his, have said aloud, that were it not for my Lord
Chancellours standing in the Gap, Popery would be introduced in this Kingdom,
or words to that effect.

That in pursuance of the aforesaid Traitorous Design, he has not only advised
and persuaded the King to do such things contrary to his own Reasons and
Resolutions as might confirm and increase the Scandal, which he had endeavored
to raise upon His Majesty as aforesaid, of his favor to Popery, but more
particularly to allow his Name to be used to the Pope and several Cardinals in
the solicitation of a Cardinals Cap for the Lord Aubigney, one of his own
Subjects, and great Almoner at present to his Royal Consort the Queen.

That in pursuance of the same Wicked and Traitorous Design, he had recommended
to be employed to the Pope one of his own Domestics, Mr. Rich. Bealing, a
Person (tho an avowed Papist) known to be trusted and employed by him in
Dispatches and Negotiations concerning Affairs of greatest Concernment to the
Nation.

That in pursuance of the said Traitorous Design, he being chief Minister of
State, did himself write by the said Mr. Rich. Bealing Letters to several
Cardinals, pressing them in the King's Name to induce the Pope to Confer a
Cardinals Cap on the said Lord Aubigny, promising, in Case it should be
attained, exemption to the Roman Catholics of England from the Penal Laws in
force against them; by which Address unto the Pope for that Ecclesiastical
Dignity for one of His Majesty's Subjects and Domestics, he has, as far as
from one Action can be inferred, traitorously acknowledged the Popes
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty, contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom.

That in pursuance of the same traitorous Design, he has called unto him
several Priests and Jesuits, whom be knew to be Superiors, of Orders here in
England, and desired them to write to their Generals at Rome, to give their
help for the obtaining from the Pope the Cardinals Cap for the Lord Aubigny, as
aforesaid, promising great Favor to Papists here, in Case it should be
effected for him.

That he has promised to several Papists he would do his endeavor, and said
he hoped, to compass the taking away all Penal Laws against them, which he did
in pursuance of the traitorous Design aforesaid; to the end they might presume
and grow vain upon his Patronage, and by their publishing their hopes of a
Tolleration, increase the Scandal endeavored by him, and by his Emissaries, to
be raised upon His Majesty throughout the Kingdom.

That in pursuance of the same traitorous Design, being entrusted with the
Treaty betwixt His Majesty, and His Royal Consort the Queen, be concluded it
upon Articles scandalous and dangerous to the Protestant Religion.

That in pursuance of the same traitorous Design, he concluded the same
Marriage, and brought the King and Queen together, without any settled
Agreement in what manner the Rights of Marriage should be performed, whereby
the Queen refusing to be married by a Protestant Priest, in case of her being
with Child, either the Succession should be made uncertain for want of the due
Rights of Matrimony, or else His Majesty to be exposed to a suspicion of having
been married in his own Dominions by a Romish Priest, whereby all the former
Scandals endeavored to be raised upon His Majesty by the said Earl, as to
point of Popery might be confirmed and heightened.

That having thus traitorously endeavored to Alienate the Affections of His
Majesty's Subjects from him upon the score of Religion, he has endeavored to
make use of all the malicious Scandals and Iealousies, which he and his
Emissaries had raised in His Majesty's Subjects, to raise from them unto
himself the popular Applause of being the zealous Vpholder of the Protestant
Religion, and a promoter of new Severities against Papists.

That he has traitorously endeavored to Alienate the Affections of His
Majesty's Subjects from him, by venting in his own Discourse, and by the
Speeches of his nearest Relations and Emissaries, opprobrious Scandals against
His Majesty's Person and course of Life, such as are not fit to be mentioned,
unless necessity in the way of Proof shall require it.

That he has traitorously endeavored to Alienate the Affections of his
Highness the Duke of York from His Majesty, by suggesting unto him Iealousies
as far as in him lay, and publishing abroad by his Emissaries, that His Majesty
intended to Legitimate the D. of Monmouth.

That he has Wickedly and Maliciously, contrary to the Duty of a
Privy-Councellour of England, and contrary to the perpetual and most important
Interest of this Nation, persuaded His Majesty against the Advice of the Lord
General to withdraw the English Garrisons out of Scotland, and to demolish all
the Forts built there, at so vast a Charge to this Kingdom.

That His Majesty having been graciously pleased to communicate the Desires of
the Parliament of Scotland for the remove of the laid Garrisons to the
Parliament of England, and to act their Advice therein, the said Earl of
Clarendon, not only persuaded His Majesty actually to remove those Garrisons,
without expecting the Advice of his Parliament of England concerning it, but
did by Menaces of His Majasty's displeasure, deter several Members of
Parliament from moving the House, as they intended, to enter upon consideration
of that Matter.

That he had Traitorously and Maliciously endeavored to Alienate His Majesty's
Affections and Esteem from this his Parliament, by telling His Majesty that
there was never so weak and inconsiderable a House of Lords, nor never so weak
and so heady a House of Commons, or words to that effect, and particularly,
that it was better to sell Dunkirk, than to be at their Mercy for want of
Money, or words to that effect.

That he has Wickedly and Maliciously, contrary to his Duty of Counselor,
and to a known Law made last Sessions, by which Money was given, and
particularly applied for the maintaining of Dunkirk, advised and effected the
Sale of the same to the French King.

That he has contrary to Law, enriched himself and his Treasures by the Sale
of Offices.

That contrary to his Duty he has wickedly and corruptly Converted to his own
use, great and vast Sums of public Money raised in Ireland by way of Subsidy,
private and public Benevolences, and otherwise, given and intended to desray
the Charge of Government in that Kingdom. By which means a supernumerary and
disaffected Army has been kept up there, for want of Money to pay them off,
occasioned it seems to be because of the late and present Distempers of that
Kingdom.

That having arrogated to himself a supreme Direction of all His Majesty's
Affairs, be has, with a malicious and corrupt Intention, prevailed to have His
Majesty's Customs Farmed at a far lower Rate than others do offer, and that by
Persons, with some of whom he goes a share in, that, and other parts of Money
resulting from His Majesty's Revenue.

July 10th, 1663. BRISTOL.

The Earl of Bristol having Exhibited against the Lord Chancellor, Articles of
HighTreason, and other Misdemeanors. This Order was made by the House of Peers.
Die Veneris, 10 July, 1663.
ORDERED, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That a
Copy of the Articles or Charge of High Treason Exhibited this Day by the Earl
of Bristol, against the Lord Chancellor, be delivered to the Lord
Chief-Iustice; who, with all the rest of the Judges are to consider whether the
said Charge has been brought in regularly and legally, and whether it may be
proceeded in, and how, and whether there be any Treason in it or no, and make
Report thereof to this House on Monday next if they can, or else as soon after
as possibly they may.

Whereupon, all the Judges met at Serjeauts-Inn in Fleet Street, and my Lord of
Bristol repaired to us thither, desiring to see the Order, which being Read, he
told us he came out of respect to know of us whether we were informed how it
came into the House of Peers, whether as a Charge or not; but one of the
Judges, who had been present when it was delivered in, saying, we were tied up
by our Order, his Lordship took some exception at the manner of his Expression,
as if his Lordships Address was unnecessary at that time, anb taking it as a
rebuke unto him, went away; but according to our Order, which supposed it to be
a Charge of High Treason, and not mentioning Misdemeanour, we did upon
Consideration unanimously agree upon this ensuing Answer, which on Monday the
13th of July, the Lord Chief-Iustice Foster did deliver in, viz.

We conceive that a Charge of High Treason cannot by the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm be originally Exhibited by one Peer against another unto the House
of Peers, and that therefore a Charge of High Treason by the Earl of Bristol
against the Lord Chancellor, mentioned in the Order of Reference to us of the
10th of this Instant July, has not been regularly and legally brought in, and
if the Matters alleged in the said Charge, were admitted to be true, although
alleged to be traitorously done, yet there is no Treason in it.

Which Answer being given in, the Earl of Bristol took some exceptions at it,
and some of the Lords inferred thence, that if it were Irregularly and
Illegally brought in, it was a Libel; but we satisfied them that it was not
under Consideration of us, whether it came in as an Information or Charge; our
Order required us to give Answer to it as a Charge.

Secondly, We did not meddle with any thing concerning accusing him of
Misdemeanour, for our Order reached only to Treason.

Thirdly, It did not follow that if this Charge were Irregular, or Illegal,
that therefore he was Criminal: There might be Presidents to give Color to
such kind of Proceedings, for which, till it be declared or known that they are
Illegal, they are Titular, and ought not to be punished.

But it was much insisted on, That we should deliver the Reason of our
Opinions, the Lord of Bristol and his Friends seeming unsatisfied.

We Replied, That it was never known, that when the Justices to whom Questions
were referred from Parliament had unanimously agreed in their Opinions, that
Reasons were required from them. Yet, notwithstanding, it being the desire of
the Lords after some things premised, and a desire that this should not be
drawn into an Example, (which the Lords assented unto as I took it, for no
Order was entered concerning it, there being no Order as I think for delivering
our Reasons entered) and it was agreed amongst us, that no Note should be
reduced, least we might be required to deliver our Reasons in writing, nor had
I time to digest it in writing, having only Monday Night after Conference with
my Brethren to think upon it, I did on the next Tuesday, being the 14th of
July, deliver the Reasons of all the Judges, of their Opinions, by their
Consents. To the first Point, That a Charge of High Treason cannot originally
be Exhibited by one Peer against another unto the House of Peers, the Emphasis
of the word originally was showed.

For First, an Indictment of Treason against a Peer may be removed up to the
Lords House to be tried, as it was in the 31 H. 6. in the Earl of Devonshir's
Case, but a Steward was then to be made.

Secondly, If an Impeachment came from the House of Commons unto the Lords
House, we did not take upon us the Consideration, whether this could be
proceeded in or not, for it was not the Case to which we were required to give
Answer.

We Replied, Upon the Statute 1 H. 4. Chap. 14. which recits the many great
Inconveniences and Mischiefs by Appeals, and provides that all Appeals of
Things within the Realm, shall be Tried and Determined by the good Laws of the
Realm made and used in the time of the King's noble Progenitors, and Appeals of
Things out of the Realm before the Constable and Marshal: But We relied upon
the Clause ensuing, and thereupon it is accorded and assented, That no Appeals
be from thenceforth made, or in any wise pursued in Parliament in time to come.
I showed Appeals in this Statute, and Accusations by single Persons were one
and the same Thing, and that this Statute reached to all Appeals, Charges,
Accusations or Impeachments delivered in, in Parliament, whereupon the Person
Accused was to be put to his Answer, and that they were but several Names of
the same Thing, I showed first Historically, that the Appeals the 11 R. 2. and
21 R. 2. were but Accusations by those Lords of Felons against the other, and
differed from the Case of the Duke of Hereford and Norfolk, which was to be
tried as 21 R. 2. Pl. Cor. in Parl. No. 19. is by the Course of the Civil Law,
and thereupon Batle was waged. That though it concerned H. 4. in Interest to
confirm the 11 R. 2. and Repel the 21 R. 2. he being Appellant in the former,
yet he saw the Mischief so great, that he himself made Provision against them
for the time to come; and indeed, the Mischief was so great, that it ceased not
after the destruction of many Lords and Families (there being lex talionis in
that 21 R. 2. used toward most of those Appellants in the 11 R. 2.) till it
tumbled King R. 2. First out of his Throne, and then into his Grave.

That there were but two sorts of Proceedings in Capitalibus, the Suit of the
Party which was called an Appeal, or the Suit of the King, who ought to proceed
by Indictment, and so to Trial by virtue of Magna Charta. Nec super eam ibimus,
etc. and that, in an Appeal, being the Suit of the Party, there was no
Prerogative of appearance if it were an Appeal at the Common Law, 10 Ed. 4.
Lord Gray's Case. That an Appeal was taken in our Law Books frequently for an
accusation by the Party, I scited Westminster. the 1st, Cap. 14. where the words
Appeal reaches to Indictment. And 9 Cook, 119. Lord Zanchar's Case, that an
Appeal of two significations, one general and frequent in our Books for an
Accusation, and Stamford, 142. In Case of an Approver, the Felon after
Confession may Appeal, that is, (says he) accuse others, Coadjutors with him
to do the Felony. C. C. 189. Appellant, comes from the French word Appeller,
which signifies to accuse, or appeach, and C. C. 287. Appel signifies an
Accusation; and therefore to Appeal a Man is as much as to accuse, and in
ancient Books he that does Appeal a Man is called accusator, vide 9 Ed. 2.
Articuli Cleri, Cap. 16. That I knew no reason why in those tumbling Times of
R. 2. (which caused this Statute, for the Statute-Roll is comant ad autermant
este us en temps la darren Roy, R. 2.) They should proceed by way of Appeal,
but because they were then allowed at the Suit of the Party, to accuse any
other of Treason, but at the King's Suit there ought to be an indictment, and
an Indictment could not be found but by Jury.

That in all other Cases, an Appeal was to be brought by the Party concerned,
the Wife or Heir, or Party Robbed, etc. But in Case of Treason, any Man may
Appeal another, and therefore in all reason it must be understood of an
Accusation, and any Man might accuse another of Treason; and if it can be
proved by Witnesses, it must not be Tried by Battle, as other Appeals may. I
concluded that the 8 H. 6. No. 38. this Statute, the 1 H. 4. Cap. 14. is
recited, and desired it should be duly kept and put in Execution, which was
granted, that Stamford 78. See Pl. Cor. 31. 132. agree that Appeals of
HighTreasons were not commonly used to be Sued in Parliament, till the 1 H. 4.
Cap. 14. Since which time this manner of Appeal has gone out of use; and I
said, I had searched many Presidents, and though of late, there may be a
President (as it was of the Earl of Bristols Father against the Duke of
Buckingham, of some kind of Impeachment) yet I did confidently believe there
was not since that Statute, 1 H. 4. Cap. 14. any one President of such an
Impeachment at the Party-Suit whereupon there was any Indictment: In truth in
the Earl of Bristol's Case, the Commons's House did Impeach the Duke of
Treason, and so the Earl of Bristol's Impeachment proceeded not.

For the Seeond Point, That there was no Treason in the Charge, though the
Matters in it are alleged to be Traitorously done. I said we had perused each
Article Seriatim, and we had found no Treason in them, the great Charge, which
is endeavored to be proved by many Particulars, was, That he did Traitorously,
and Maliciously, to bring the King into Contempt, and with an intent to Alien
the Peoples Affections from him, say, etc. Such and such words, etc.

And so it runs on, That in pursuance of the Traitorous Intent, etc. he did,
etc. and that in farther pursuance of the said Traitorous Design, etc. And in
like manner was most of the Articels upon which the Characters of Treason
seemed to be fixed. I said that it is a transcendant Misprision or offense to
endeavor to bring the King into Contempt, or to endeavor to Alienate the
Peoples Affections from him, but yet it was not Treason. This Statute, 13 Car.
2. Cap. 1. makes Treason during the King's Life: But if a Man calls the King
Heretic, or Papist, or that he endeavors to introduce Popery, (which is more
in express Terms than the Article of that kind insinuates) or by Words,
Preaching, Prayer, to stir up the People to hatred or dislike of the Person of
His Majesty, or the Established Government; the Penalty is only Disability to
enjoy any Place Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, and subject to such
Penalties as by the Common Law or Statute of this Realm may be inflicted in
such Case, (which is Fine and Ransom, with Imprisonment) and it limits a time
and manner of Prosecution.

There was an Objection made yesterday upon the 25 E. 3. That this being in
Parliament, the King and Parliament had Power to declare Treason, and then we
ought to have delivered our Opinions with a qualification, unless it be
declared Treason by Parliament where this Charge is depending; to this I
Answered.

1. It Is not Treason in praesenti, and if such a Declaration should be non
constat, whether it would relate to the time past?

Secondly, That I conceived that the Statute as touching that Declaratory
Power, extended but to such Cases as were clearly Felony, as Single Acts, if
not Treason. (the words being) Whether it be Treason or other Felony; but in
respect of the doubts of Escheats, which, if Treason, belonged to the King, if
Felony, to the Lords of the fee, it was left to the Parliament. I did not say
we Resolved the Point.

Thirdly, That admitting the Declaratory Power did extend to other Cases than
such as were before the Judges, and was not taken away by 1 M. Cap. or any
other Statute, yet I read my Lord Cooks Opinion at large, Pl. Cor. Fol. 22.
That this Declaration must be by the King, Lords and Commons, and by any two of
them alone; and we were now in a judicial way before the House of Peers only;
and I did affirm as clear Law, that by this judicial way no Treason could be
declared nor adjudged, but as were expressly within the Letter of the 25 E. 3.
and said, That Statute 25 E. 3. was a second Magna Charta, and that their
Ancestors thought it their greatest Security to narrow, and not to enlarge
Treason, and Cited 1 H. 4. Cap. 10. to which in the Parliament Roll is added
Rot. No. 17. (it coming of the King's Free Grace) That the Lords did much
rejoice and humbly thank the King: And I read the Statute 1 M. Cap. 1.

That the now Earl of Bristol in my Lord of Sraffords Case, was the great
Assertor of the Law against Constructive and Accumulative Treason, which if
admitted, their Lordships could better suggest unto themselves, than I expressed,
how great a Door they would let open to other Inconveniences and Mischiefs to
the Peerage. I concluded with reading the Act, 14 Car. 2. for Reversing the
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford; the first part whereof I read to them,
wherein is expressed, That they who Condemned him, did purposely make an Act of
Parliament to Condemn him upon an Accumulative Treason, none of the pretended
Crimes being Treason apart, and so could not be in the whole, if they had been
proved.

After I had spoken to this effect, the Earl of Bristol seemed to acquiesce,
insomuch as concerned our Opinions as the Case was delivered to us, but it
being to be put to the Question, whether the Lords did Concur with the Judges
Opinions, and himself being concerned in the Illative, that therefore the
Charge was Illegal and Irregular; yet not being intended by him, as he said, as
a Charge, but an Information he desired (though as the Case was put to us, it was
a good Inference) that the Voting of that might be spared till it was Resolved
by the Lords whether he delivered it in as a Charge, or only as an Information
for the Matter of the Charge if it should be thought fit for their Lordships to
proceed in it: After some Debate upon the Question, the Lords Resolved the same
Day according to our Opinions.

First, That a Charge of High Treason cannot by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm be originally Exhibited by one Peer against another, unto the House of
Peers.

Secondly, That in these Articles, if the Matters alleged in them were
admitted to be true, there is no Treason in them, and because the Lords
unanimously Concurred in them, (my Lord of Bristol. freely (...) (...) any
other) it was by order entered, that these Votes were Nemine Con(...)

Note, That in Judge Hattons Reports, Fol. the Resolution of the Judges is
expressed to be, That a Peer cannot be Impeached but by Indictment, and Mr.
Rushworth in his Collections, Fol. 272. expresses such an Opinion to be
delivered by the Judges in 1 or 2 Car. but upon search it was found to be
entered in the Journal of Parliament of that time, but it was cautions referring
to the Common Law only. But that, for Proceedings in Parlitament, did not
belong to them to Determine, or to that effect; but no mention of 1 H. 4. Cap.
14. It has been credibly reported that some of the Judges in my Lord of
Strafford's Case, being asked some Questions, did with the like Caution deliver
their Opinions, and did speak with Reservaions, (as the Case is put) though they
upon Hearing, did know the Case misput; which, after, troubled the Conscience
of one of them, ( ut audivi) being a grave learned Man. Vide Peacocks Case,
Cook Fol. But we, having the Case referred to us in Parliament upon Articles
Exhibited in Parliament, did Resolve to deliver our Opinions without any such
Reservation; and the Act of 1 H. 4. being expressed against Appeals in
Parliament, (and of Acts of Parliaments after they are once made, none under
the King, and without him are Interpreters but the Judges. See Kings Answer
Printed, in the old Print of 3 Car. 3. at the end of the Petition.) And
therefore did deliver these Opinions which I conceive of great Benefit to the
Lords themselves, and a just ground for farther enquiry to be made, whether
such Impeachments may be in the House of Peers for other Misdemeanors, without
the King's leave, or being Exhibited by his Attorney.

And secondly to take into Consideration the Validity of Impeachments of
Treason by the House of Commons, notwithstanding the late Presidents which yet
ended in a Bill, and so in the Legislative, not Judiciary Way.

FINIS.

