IMMOTA TRIUMPHANS

Clarior e tenebris

CRESCIT SUB PONDERE VIRTUS

Coe^i ^^pecto

Asperam at Levem.

Gratia

Christi Tracto

IN VERBO TUO SPES MEA.

Beatam et Eternam

Gloria

Splendidam at Gravem

Vanitas

Mundi (...)

Guil^^ Marshall Sculpsit



Eikon asilike.

THE POVRTRAICTVRE OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY IN HIS SOLITVDES AND SVFFERINGS.

ROMANS 8. More then Conqueror, etc. Bona agere, and mala pati, Regium est. M.
DC. XLVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
1. UPon His Majesty's calling this last Parliament. p. 1. 2. Upon the Earl of
Strafford's death. 6. 3. Upon His Majesty's going to the House of Commons. 12.
4. Upon the Insolency of the Tumults. 17. 5. Upon His Majesty's passing the
Bill for the Trienniall Parliaments: And after settling this, during the
pleasure of the two Houses. 26. 6. Upon His Majesty's retirement from
Westminster. 34. 7. Upon the Queens departure, and absence out of England. 41.
8. Upon His Majesty's repulse at Hull, and the fates of the Hothams. 47. 9.
Upon the Listing, and raising Armies against the King. 54. 10. Upon their
seizing the Kings Magazines, Forts, Navy, and Militia. 66. 11. Upon the 19.
Propositions first sent to the King; and more afterward. 75. 12. Upon the
Rebellion, and troubles in Ireland. 89. 13. Upon the Calling in of the Scots,
and their Coming. 100. 14. Upon the Covenant. 110. 15. Upon the many
Iealousies raised, and Scandals cast upon the King, to stir up the People
against Him. 122. 16. Upon the Ordinance against the Common-Prayer-Booke. 138.
17. Of the differences between the King, and the 2 Houses, in point of
Church Government. 147. 18. Upon Vxbridge-Treaty, and other Offers made by the
King. p. 166. 19. Upon the various events of the War; Victories, and Defeats.
172. 20. Upon the Reformations of the Times. 181. 21. Upon His Majesty's
Letters, taken, and divulged. 189. 22. Upon His Majesty's leaving Oxford, and
going to the Scots. 197. 23. Upon the Scots delivering the King to the English;
and His Captivity at Holmeby. 201. 24. Upon their denying His Majesty the
Attendance of His Chaplains. 206. 25. Penitential Meditations and Vows in
the KING'S solitude at Holmeby. 218. 26. Upon the Armies Surprisall of the KING
at Holmeby, and the ensuing distractions in the two Houses, the Army, and the
City. 223. 27. To the Prince of Wales. 232. Meditations upon Death, aft^r the
Votes of Non-Addresses, and HIS MAJESTY'S closer Imprisonment in
Carisbrooke-Castle. p. 252.
ERRATA.
Page 12. l. 11. r. O make me. l. 12. r. of joy. p. 14. l. 9. r. attended me.
p. 21. l. 16. r. in any man. p. 28. l. 10. r. Honor. p. 33. l. 13. r. for my
sins. p. 34. l. 4. r. to Sea by a storm. p. 37. l. 20. r. obtrusions p. 51. l.
21. r. perpetrations. p. 52. l. 1. r. for as his death. p. 58. l. 27. r. was
the Bill. p. 61. l. 24. r. knew. p. 68. l. 17. r. power, so. p. 87. l. 19. for
thy r. the. p. 112. l. 5. r. populacy. p. 114. l. 24. r. cross not their. p.
131. l. 18. r. no me^. p. 142. l. 1^. r. b^ expected. p. 186. l. 19. r. ever
will. p. 205. l. 27. r. Saviors. p. 233. l. 27. r. le Bon.

EIKON ASILIK.
1. Upon His Majesty's calling this last Parliament.
THis last Parliament I called, not more by others advise, and necessity of My
affairs, then by My own choice and inclination; who have always thought the
right way of Parliaments most safe for My Crown, and best pleasing to My
People: And although I was not forgetful of those sparks, which some men's
distempers formerly studied to kindle in Parliaments, (which by forbearing to
convene for some years, I hoped to have extinguished) yet resolving with My
self to give all just satisfaction to modest and sober desires, and to redress
all public grievances in Church and State; I hoped by My (freedom and their
moderation) to prevent all misunderstandings, and miscarriages in this: In
which as I feared affairs would meet with some passion and prejudice in other
men, so I resolved they should find least of them in My self; not doubting,
but by the weight of Reason I should counterpoize the over-ballancings of any
factions.

I was, indeed, sorry to hear, with what partiality and popular heat Elections
were carried in many places; yet hoping that the gravity and discretion of
other Gentlemen would allay and fix the Commons to a due temperament, (guiding
some men's wel-meaning zeal by such rules of moderation as are best both to
preserve and restore the health of all States and Kingdoms:) No man was better
pleased with the convening of this Parliament, then My self; who knowing best
the largeness of My own Heart toward My Peoples good and just contentment,
pleased My self most in that good and firm understanding, which would hence
grow between Me and My People.

All Jealousies being laid aside, My own and My Childrens Interests gave me
many obligations to seek and preserve the love and welfare of my Subjects. The
only temporal blessing that is left to the ambition of just Monarchs, as
their greatest honor and safety, next Gods protection; I cared not to lessen
My self in some things of My wonted Prerogative; since I knew I could be no
loser, if I might gain but a recompense in My Subjects affections.

I intended not only to oblige My friends, but Mine enemies also: exceeding
even the desires of those, that were factiously discontented, if they did but
pretend to any modest and sober sense.

The odium and offenses which some men's rigor or remissness in Church, and
State, had contracted upon My Government, I resolved to have expiated by such
Laws, and regulations for the future, as might not only rectif^e what was
amiss in practice, but supply what was defective in the constitution: No man
having a greater zeal to see Religion settled, and preserved in Truth, Unity,
and Order, then My self; whom it most concerns both in piety, and policy; as
knowing, that, No flames of civil dissentions are more dangerous then those
which make Religious pretensions the grounds of Factions.

I resolved to reform, what I should by free and full advice in Parliament be
convinced to be amiss; and to grant whatever My Reason and Conscience told Me,
was fit to be desired; I wish I had kept My self within those bounds, and not
suffered My own Judgment to have been over-borne in some things, more by
others Importunities, than their Arguments; My confidence had less betrayed My
self, and My Kingdoms, to those advantages, which some men sought for, who
wanted nothing but power, and occasion to do mischief.

But our sins being ripe, there was no preventing of Gods Justice, from
reaping that glory in our Calamities, which we robbed him of in our Prosperity.

For thou (o Lord) have made us see, that Resolutions of future Reforming do
not always satisfy thy Justice, nor prevent thy Vengeance for former
miscarriages.

Our sins have overlaid our hopes; Thou have taught us to depend on thy
mercies to forgive, not on our purpose to amend.

When thou have vindicated thy glory by thy Judgments, and have showed us, how
unsafe it is to offend thee, upon presumptions afterward to please thee; Then
I trust thy mercies will restore those blessings to us, which we have so much
abused, as to force thee to deprive us of them.

For want of timely repentance of our sins, Thou give us cause to Repent of
those Remedies we too late apply.

Yet I do not Repent of My calling this last Parliament; because, o Lord, I
did it with an upright intention, to Thy glory, and My Peoples good.

The miseries which have ensued upon Me and My Kingdoms, are the Just effects
of thy displeasure upon us; and may be yet (through thy mercy) preparatives of
us to future blessings, and better hearts to enjoy them.

O Lord, though thou have deprived us of many former comforts; yet grant Me and
My people the benefit of our afflictions, and thy chastisements; that thy rod
as well as thy staff may comfort us: Then shall we dare to account them the
strokes not of an Enemy, but a Father: when thou give us those humble
affections, that measure of patience in repentance, which becomes thy Children;
I shall have no cause to repent the miseries this Parliament has occasioned,
when by them thou have brought Me and My People, unfeignedly to repent of the
sins we have committed.

Thy Grace is infinitely better with our sufferings, then our Peace could be
with Our sins.

O thou sovereign goodness and wisdom, who Over-rulest all our Counsels;
overruled also all our hearts; That the worse things we suffer by thy Justice,
the better we may be by thy Mercy.

As our sins have turned our Antidotes into Poison, so let thy Grace turn
our Poisons into Antidotes.

As the sins of our Peace disposed us to this unhappy War, so let this War
prepare us for thy blessed Peace.

That although I have but troublesome Kingdoms here, yet I may attain to that
Kingdom of Peace in My Heart, and in thy Heaven, which Christ has purchased,
and thou will give to thy Servant (though a Sinner) for my Saviors sake, Amen.

2. Upon the Earl of Straffords death.
I Looked upon my Lord of Strafford, as a Gentleman, whose great abilities
might make a Prince rather afraid, then ashamed to employ him, in the greatest
affairs of State.

For those were prone to create in him great confidence of undertakings, and
this was like enough to betray him to great errors, and many enemies: Whereof
he could not but contract good store, while moving in so high a sphere, and
with so vigorous a luster, he must needs (as the Sun) raise many envious
exhalations, which condensed by a popular odium, were capable to cast a cloud
upon the brightest merit, and integrity.

Though I cannot in My Judgment approve all he did, driven (it may be) by the
necessities of times, and the Temper of that People, more then led by his own
disposition to any height and rigor of actions: yet I could never be convinced
of any such criminousnesse in him, as willingly to expose his life to the
stroke of Justice, and malice of his enemies.

I never met with a more unhappy conjuncture of affairs, then in the business
of that unfortunate Earl: when between My own unsatisfiednesse in Conscience,
and a necessity (as some told me) of satisfying the importunities of some
people; I was persuaded by those, that I think wished me well, to choose rather
what was safe, then what seemed just; preferring the outward peace of My
Kingdoms with men, before that inward exactness of Conscience before God.

And indeed I am so far from excusing or denying that compliance on My part
(for plenary consent it was not) to his destruction, whom in My Judgment I
thought not, by any clear Law, guilty of death: That I never bare any touch of
Conscience with greater regret: which, as a sign of My repentance, I have
often with sorrow confessed both to God and men, as an act of so sinful
frailty, that it discovered more a fear of Man, than of God, whose name and
place on Earth no man is worthy to bear, who will avoid inconveniences of
State, by acts of so high injustice, as no public convenience can expiate or
compensate.

I see it a bad exchange to wound a man's own Conscience, thereby to salve
State sores; to calm the storms of popular discontents, by stirring up a
tempest in a man's own bosom.

Nor has Gods Justice failed in the event and sad consequences, to show the
world the fallacy of that Maxim, Better one man perish (though unjustly) then
the people be displeased, or destroyed. For,

In all likelihood, I could never have suffered, with My People, greater
calamities, (yet with greater comfort) had I vindicated Strafford's innocence,
at least by denying to Sign that destructive BILL, according to that Justice,
which My Conscience suggested to Me, then I have done since I gratified some
men's unthankful importunities with so cruel a favor. And I have observed,
that those, who counseled Me to sign that Bill, have been so far from
receiving the rewards of such ingratiatings with the People, that no men have
been harassed and crushed more than they: He only has been least vexed by
them, who counseled Me, not to consent against the vote of My own Conscience;
I hope God has forgiven Me and them, the sinful rashness of that business.

To which being in My soul so fully conscious, those Judgments God has
pleased to send upon Me, are so much the more welcome, as a means (I hope)
which his mercy has sanctified so to Me, as to make Me repent of that unju^t
Act, (for so it was to Me) and for the future to teach Me, That the best rule
of policy is to prefer the doing of Justice, before all enjoyments, and the
peace of My Conscience before the preservation of My Kingdoms.

Nor has any thing more fortified My resolutions against all those violent
importunities, which since have sought to gain alike consent from Me, to Acts,
wherein my Conscience is unsatisfied, then the sharp touches I have had for
what passed Me, in My Lord of Strafford's Business.

Not that I resolved to have employed him in My affairs, against the advice of
My Parliament, but I would not have had any hand in his Death, of whose
Guiltlesnesse I was better assured, then any man living could be.

Nor were the Crimes objected against him so clear, as after a long and fair
hearing to give convincing satisfaction to the Major part of both Houses;
especially that of the Lords, of whom scarce a third part were present, when
the Bill passed that House: And for the House of Commons, many Gentlemen,
disposed enough to diminish My Lord of Straffords greatness and power, yet
unsatisfied of his guilt in Law, durst not Condemn him to die: who for their
Integrity in their Votes, were by Posting their Names, exposed to the popular
calumny, hatred, and fury; which grew then so exorbitant in their clamours for
Justice, (that is, to have both My self and the two Houses Vote, and do as
they would have us) that many ('it is thought) were rather terrified to concur
with the condemning party, then satisfied that of right they ought so to do.

And that after Act vacating the Authority of the precedent, for future
imitation, sufficiently tells the world, that some remorse touched even his
most implacable enemies, as knowing he had very hard measure, and such as they
would be very loath should be repeated to themselves.

This tenderness and regret I find in my soul, for having had any hand (and
that very unwillingly God knows) in shedding one man's blood unjustly, (though
under the color and formalities of Justice, and pretenses of avoiding public
mischeifes) which may (I hope) be some evidence before God and Man, to all
Posterity, that I am far from bearing justly the vast load and guilt of all
that blood which has been shed in this unhappy War; which some men will
needs charge on Me, to ease their own souls, who am, and ever shall be, more
afraid to take away any man's life unjustly, then to lose my own.

But thou, O God of infinite mercies, forgive me that act of sinful
compliance, which has greater aggravations upon Me then any man. Since I had
not the least temptation of envy, or malice against him, and by my place
should, at least so far, have been a preserver of him, as to have denied my
consent to his destruction.

O Lord, I acknowledge my transgression, and my sin is ever before me.

Deliver me from blood guiltiness O God, thou God of my salvation, and my
tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Against thee have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, for thou saw
the contradiction between my heart and my hand.

Yet cast me not away from thy presence, purge me with the blood of my
Redeemer, and I shall be clean; wash me with that precious effusion, and I
shall be writer then snow.

Teach me to learn Righteousness by thy Judgments, and to see my frailty in
thy Justice: while I was persuaded by shedding one man's blood to prevent
after-troubles, thou have for that, among other sins, brought upon me, and
upon my Kingdoms, great, long, and heavy troubles.

Make me to prefer Justice, which is thy will, before all contrary clamours,
which are but the discoveries of man's injurious will.

It is too much that they have once overcome me, to please them by displeasing
thee: O never suffer me for any reason of State, to go against my Reason of
Conscience, which is highly to sin against thee, the God of Reason, and Judge
of our Consciences.

What ever, O Lord, thou see fit to deprive me of, yet restore unto me the
joy of thy Salvation, and ever uphold me with thy free Spirit; which subjects
my will to none, but thy light of Reason, Justice, and Religion, which shines
in my Soul, for Thou desire Truth in the inward parts, and Integrity in the
outward expressions.

Lord hear the voice of thy Sons, and my Saviors Blood, which speaks better
things; of make me, and my People, to hear the voice and Joy and Gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice in thy salvation.

3. Upon His Majesty's going to the House of Commons.
MY going to the House of Commons to demand Justice upon the 5 Members, was an
act, which My enemies loaded with all the obloquies and exasperations they
could.

It filled indifferent men with great jealousies and fears; yea, and many of
My friends resented it as a motion rising rather from Passion then Reason, and
not guided with such discretion, as the touchinesse of those times re-required.

But these men knew not the just motives, and pregnant grounds, with which I
thought my self so furnished, that there needed nothing to such evidence, as I
could have produced against those I charged, save only a free and legal
Trial, which was all I desired.

Nor had I any temptation of displeasure, or revenge against those men's
persons, further then I had discovered those (as I thought) unlawful
correspondencies they had used, and engagements they had made, to embroyle my
Kingdoms: of all which I missed but little to have produced writings under
some men's own hands, who were the chief contrivers of the following Innovations.

Providence would not have it so, yet I wanted not such probabilities as were
sufficient to raise jealousies in any Kings heart, who is not wholly stupid and
neglective of the public peace, which to preserve by calling in Question half
a dozen men, in a fair and legal way (which God knows was all my design)
could have amounted to no worse effect, had it succeeded, then either to do Me,
and my Kingdom right, in case they had been found guilty; or else to have
cleared their Innocence, and removed my suspicions; which, as they were not
raised out of any malice, so neither were they in Reason to be smothered.

What flames of discontent this spark (though I ^ought by all speedy and
possible means to quench it) soon kindled, all the world is witness: The
aspersion which some men cast upon that action, as if I had designed by force
to assault the House of Commons, and invade their privilege, is so false, that
as God best knows, I had no such intent; so none that attended could justly
gather from any thing I then said, or did, the least intimaon of any such
thoughts.

That I went attended with some Gentlemen, as it was no unwonted thing for the
Majesty and safety of a King so to be attended, especially in discontented
times; so were my followers at that time short of my ordinary Guard, and no way
proportionable to hazard a tumultuary conflict. Nor were they more scared at my
coming, then I was un-assured of not having some affronts cast upon me, if I
had none with me to preserve a reverence to me; For many people had (at that
time) learned to think those hard thoughts, which they have since abundantly
vented against Me, both by words and deeds.

The sum of that business was this.

Those men, and their adherents were then looked upon by the affrighted vulgar,
as greater protectors of their Laws and Liberties, then my self, and so
worthier of their protection. I leave them to God, and their own Consciences,
who, if guilty of evil machinations; no present impunity, or popular
vindications of them will be subterfuge sufficient to rescue them from those
exact Tribunalls.

To which, in the obstructions of Justice among men, we must religiously
appeal, as being an argument to us Christians of that after un-avoidable
judgment, which shall rejudge, what among men is but corruptly decided, or not
at all.

I endeavored to have prevented, if God had seen fit, those future commotions,
which I foresaw, would in all likelihood follow some men's activity (if not
restrained) and so now has done to the undoing of many thousands; the more is
the pity.

But to overawe the freedom of the Houses, or to weaken their just Authority
by any violent impressions upon them, was not at all my design: I thought I
had so much Justice and Reason on my side, as should not have needed so rough
assistance; and I was resolved rather to bear the repulse with patience, then
to use such hazardous extremities.

But thou, O Lord, art my witness in heaven, and in my Heart: If I have
purposed any violence or oppression against the Innocent: or if there were any
such wickedness in my thoughts.

Then let the enemy persecute my soul, and tread my life to the ground, and
lay mine Honor in the dust.

Thou that see not as man sees, but look beyond all popular appearances,
searching the heart, and trying the reins, and bringing to light the hidden
things of darkness, show thy self.

Let not my afflictions be esteemed (as with wise and godly men they cannot be)
any argument of my sin, in that matter: more then their Impunity among good men
is any sure token of their Innocence.

But forgive them wherein they have done amiss, though they are not punished
for it in this world.

Save thy servant from the privy conspiracies, and open violence of bloody and
unreasonable men, according to the uprightness of my heart, and the innocence
of my hands in this matter.

Plead my cause, and maintain my right, O thou that sit in the Throne,
judging rightly, that thy servant may ever rejoice in thy salvation.

4. Upon the Insolency of the Tumults.
I Never thought any thing (except our sins) more ominously presaging all these
mischeifes, which have followed, then those Tumults in London and Westminster,
soon after the Convening of this Parliament; which were not like a storm at
Sea, (which yet wants not its terror) but like an Earthquake, shaking the very
foundations of all; then which nothing in the world has more of horror.

As it is one of the most convincing Arguments that there is a God, while his
power ^ets bounds to the raging of the Sea: so it is no less, that he restraines
the madness of the people. Nor does any thing portend more Gods displeasure
against a Nation, then when he suffers the confluence and clamours of the
vulgar, to pass all boundaries of Laws, and reverence to Authority.

Which those Tumults did to so high degrees of Insolence, that they spared not
to invade the Honor and Freedom of the two Houses, menacing, reproaching,
shaking, yea, and assaulting some Members of both Houses, as they fancyed, or
disliked them: Nor did they forbear most rude and unseemly deportments both in
contemptuous words and actions, to My self and My Court.

Nor was this a short fit or two of shaking, as an ague, but a quotidian
fever, always increasing to higher inflammations, impatient of any
mitigation, restraint, or remission.

First, they must be a guard against those fears, which some men scared
themselves and others withal; when indeed nothing was more to be feared and
less to be used by wise men, then those tumultuary confluxes of mean and rude
people, who are taught first to petition, then to protect, then to dictate, at
last to command and overawe the Parliament.

All obstructions in Parliament (that is, all freedom of differing in Votes,
and debating matters with reason and candor) must be taken away with these
Tumults: By these must the Houses be purged, and all rotten Members (as they
pleased to count them) cast out: By these the obstinacy of men resolved to
discharge their Consciences must be subdued, by these all factious, seditious,
and schismatic proposalls against Government Ecclesiastical or Civil, must
be backed and abetted, till they prevailed.

Generally, who ever had most mind to bring forth confusion and ruin upon
Church and State, used the midwifery of those Tumults: whose riot and
impatience was such, that they would not stay the ripening and season of
Counsels, or fair production of Acts, in the order, gravity, and
deliberatenesse befitting a Parliament; but ripped up with barbarous cruelty,
and forcibly cut out abortive Votes, such as their Inviters and Incouragers
most fancyed.

Yea, so enormous and detestable were their outrages, that no sober man could
be without an infinite shame and sorrow to see them so tolerated, and connived
at by some, countenanced, encouraged, and applauded by others.

What good man had not rather want any thing he most desired, for the Public
good, then obtain it by such unlawful and irreligious means? But men's
passions and Gods directions seldom agree; violent designs and motions must
have suitable engines, such as too much attend their own ends, seldom confine
themselves to Gods means. Force must crowd in what Reason will not lead.

Who were the chief Demagogues and Patrones of Tumults, to send for them, to
flatter and embolden them, to direct and tune their clamorous importunities,
some men yet living are too conscious to pretend ignorance: God in his due time
will let these see, that those were no fit means to be used for attaining his
ends.

But, as it is no strange thing for the Sea to rage, when strong winds blow
upon it; so neither for Multitudes to become insolent, when they have Men of
some reputation for parts and piety to set them on.

That which made their rudeness most formidable, was, that many Complaints
being made, and Messages sent by My self and some of both Houses; yet no order
for redress could be obtained with any vigor and efficacy, proportionable to
the malignity of that now far-spread disease, and predominant mischief.

Such was some men's stupidity, that they feared no inconvenience; Others
petulancy, that they joyed to see their betters shamefully outraged, and
abused, while they knew their only security consisted in vulgar flattery: So
insensible were they of Mine, or the two Houses common safety and Honors.

Nor could ever any order be obtained, impartially to examine, censure, and
punish the known Boutefeus, and impudent Incendiaries, who boasted of the
influence they had, and used to convoke those Tumults as their advantages
served.

Yea, some (who should have been wiser Statesmen) owned them as friends,
commending their Courage, Zeal, and Industry; which to sober men could seem no
better then that of the Devil, who goes about seeking whom he may deceive, and
devour.

I confess, when I found such a deafness, that no Declaration from the
Bishops, who were first foully insolenced and assaulted; nor yet from other
Lords and Gentlemen of Honor; nor yet from My self could take place for the
due repression of these Tumul^s; and securing not only Our freedom in
Parliament, but Our very Persons in the streets; I thought My self not bound
by My presence, to provoke them to higher boldness and contempts; I hoped by
My withdrawing to give time, both for the ebbing of their tumultuous fury, and
others regaining some degrees of modesty and sober sense.

Some may interpret it as an effect of Pusillanimity for any man for popular
terrors to desert his public station. But I think it a hardiness, beyond
true valor, for a wise man to set himself against the breaking in of a Sea;
which to resist, at present, threatens imminent danger; but to withdraw, gives
it space to spend its fury, and gains a fitter time to repair the breach.
Certainly a Gallant man had rather fight to great disadvantages for number and
place in the field, in an orderly way, then skuffle with an und^sciplined
rabble.

Some suspected and affirmed that I meditated a War, (when I went from
Whitehall only to redeem My Person, and Conscience from violence) God knows I
did not then think of a War. Nor will any prudent man conceive that I would
by so many former, and some after Acts, have so much weakened My self, if I had
purposed to engage in a War, which to decline by all means, I denied My self
in so many particulars: It Is evident I had then no Army to fly unto, for
protection, or vindication.

Who can blame Me, or any other, for a withdrawing our selves from the daily
baitings of the Tumults, not knowing whether their fury and discontent might
not fly so high, as to worry and tear those in pieces, whom as yet they but
played with in their paws? God, who is My sole Judge, is My Witness in
Heaven, that I never had any thoughts of going from My House at Whitehall, if I
could have had but any reasonable fair Quarter; I was resolved to bear much,
and did so, but I did not think My self bound to prostitute the Majesty of my
Place and Person, the safety of My Wife and Children, to those, who are prone
to insult most, when they have objects and opportunity most capable of their
rudeness and petulancy.

But this business of the Tumults (whereof some have given already an account
to God, others yet living know themselves desperately guilty) Time and the
guilt of many has so ^mothered up, and buried, that I think it best to leave
it, as it is; Only I believe the just Avenger of all disorders, will in time
make those men, and that City, see their sin in the glass of their
punishment. It Is more then an even-lay that they may one day see themselves
punished by that way they offended.

Had this Parliament, as it was in its first Election and Constitution, sat
full and free, the Members of both Houses being left to their freedom of
Voting, as in all reason, honor, and Religion, they should have been; I doubt
not but things would have been so carried, as would have given no less content
to all good men, then they wished or expected.

For, I was resolved to hear reason in all things, and to consent to it so
far as I could comprehend it: but as Swine are to Gardens and orderly
Plantations, so are Tumults to Parliaments, and Plebeian concourses to public
Councels, turning all into disorders and sordid confusions.

I am prone sometimes to think, That had I called this Parliament to any other
place in England (as I might opportunely enough have done) the sad consequences
in all likelihood, with Gods blessing, might have been prevented. A Parliament
would have been welcome in any place; no place afforded such confluence of
various and vicious humors, as that where it was unhappily convened. But we
must leave all to God, who orders our disorders, and magnifies his wisdom
most, when our follies and miseries are most discovered.

But thou O Lord art My refuge and defense, to thee I may safely fly, who
rulest the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the People.

The floods, O Lord, the floods are come in upon me, and are ready to
overwhelme me.

I look upon My sins, and the sins of My people, (which are the tumults of
our souls against thee O Lord) as the just cause of these popular inundations
which thou permittest to overbeare all the banks of loyalty, modesty, Laws,
Justice, and Religion.

But thou that gatheredst the waters into one place, and made the dry land to
appear, and after did assuage the flood which drowned the world, by the
word of thy power; Rebuke those beasts of the people, and deliver Me from the
rudeness and strivings of the multitude.

Restore, we beseech thee, unto us, the freedoms of our Councels and
Parliaments, make us unpassionately to see the light of Reason, and Religion,
and with all order, and gravity to follow it, as it becomes Men and Christians;
so shall we praise thy name, who art the God of order and co^nsell.

What man cannot, or will not repress, thy omnipotent Justice can and will.

O Lord, give them that are yet living, a timely sense and sorrow for their
great sin, whom thou know guilty of raising or not suppressing those
disorders: Let shame here, and not suffering hereafter be their punishment.

Set bounds to our passions by Reason, to our errors by Truth, to our
seditions by Laws duly executed, and to our schisms by Charity, that we may
be, as thy Jerusalem, a City at unity in it self.

This grant, O My God, in thy good time for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

5. Upon His Majesty's passing the Bill for the Trienniall Parliaments: And
after settling this, during the pleasure of the two Houses.
THat the world might be fully confirmed in My purposes at first, to
contribute, what in Justice, Reason, Honor, and Conscience, I could, to the
Happy success of this Parliament, (which had in Me no other design but the
General good of My Kingdoms) I willingly passed the BILL for Trienniall
Parliaments: which, as gentle and seasonable Physic, might (if well applied)
prevent any distempers from getting any head or prevailing; especially, if the
remedy proved not a disease beyond all remedy.

I conceived, this Parliament would find work with convenient recesses for the
first three Years; But I did not imagine that some men would thereby have
occasioned more work then they found to do, by undoing so much as they found
well done to their hands. Such is some men's activity that they will needs make
work rather then want it; and choose to be doing amiss, rather then do
nothing.

When that first Act seemed too scanty to satisfy some men's fears, and
compass public affairs; I was persuaded to grant that BILL of Sitting
during the pleasure of the Houses, which amounted in some men's sense to as much
as the perpetuating this Parliament. By this Act of highest confidence, I hoped
for ever to shut out, and lock the door upon all present Jealousies, and future
mistakes: I confess I did not thereby intend to shut My self out of doors, as
some men have now requited me.

True, It was an Act unparalleled by any of My Predecessors; ^et cannot in
reason admit of any worse interpretation then this, of an extreme confidence I
had, that My Subjects would not make ill use of an Act, by which I declared so
much to trust them, as to deny My self in so high a point of My Prerogative.

For good Subjects will never think it just or fit that My condition should be
worse by My bettering theirs: Nor indeed would it have been so in the events,
if some men had known as well with moderation to use, as with earnestness to
desire advantages of doing good, or evil.

A continual Parliament (I thought) would but keep the Commonweal in tune,
by preserving Laws in their due execution and vigor, wherein My interest lies
more than any man's, since by those Laws, My Rights as a KING, would be
preserved no less than My Subjects; which is all I desired. More than the Law
gives Me I would not have, and less the meanest Subject should not.

Some (as I have heard) gave it out, that I soon repented Me of that settling
Act: and many would needs persuade Me, I had cause so to do; but I could not
easily nor suddenly suspect such ingratitude in Men of Honors. That the more I
granted them, the less I should have, and enjoy with them. I still counted My
self undiminished by My largest concessions, if by them I might gain and
confirm the love of My People.

Of which, I do not yet despair, but that God will still bless Me with
increase of it: when Men shall have more leisure, and less prejudice; that so
with unpassionate representations they may reflect upon those, (as I think) not
more princely then friendly contributions, which I granted toward the
perpetuating of their happiness, who are now only miserable in this, That
some men's ambition will not give them leave to enjoy what I intended for their
good.

Nor do I doubt, but that in Gods due time, the Loyal and cleared affections
of My people will strive to return such retributions of Honor, and love to
Me, or My Posterity, as may fully compensate both the acts of My confidence and
My sufferings for them; which (God knows) have been neither few, nor small,
nor short; occasioned chiefly by a persuasion I had, that I could not grant too
much, or distrust too little, to Men, that being professedly My Subjects,
pretented singular piety, and religious strictness.

The Injury of all Injuries is, That which some men will needs load Me withal;
as if I were a wilful and resolved Occasioner of My own and My Subjects
miseries; while (as they confidently, but (God knows) falsely divulge) I
repining at the establishment of this Parliament, endeavored by force and open
hostility to undo what by My Royal assent I had done. Sure it had argued a
very short sight of things, and extreme fatuity of mind in Me, so far to
bind My own hands at their request, if I had shortly meant to have used a
Sword against them. God knows, though I had then a sense of Injuries; yet not
such, as to think them worth vindicating by a War: I was not then compelled, as
since, to injure My self by their not using favors, with the same candor
wherewith they were confer^ed. The Tumults indeed threatened to abuse all Acts
of Grace, and turn them into wantonn^sse; but I thought at length their own
fears, whose black arts first raised up those turbulent Spirits would force
them to conjure them down again.

Nor if I had justly resented any indignities put upon Me, or others, was I
then in any capacity to have taken just revenge in an Hostile and Warlike way
upon those, whom I knew so well fortified in the love of the meaner sort of the
people, that I could not have given My enemies greater, and more desired
advantages against Me, then by so unprincely Inconstancy, to have assaulted
them with Arms, thereby to scatter them, whom but lately I had solemnly settled
by an Act of Parliament.

God knows I longed for nothing more then that My self, and My Subjects might
quietly enjoy the fruits of My many condescendings.

It had been a Course full of sin, as well as of Hazard, and dishonor for Me
to go about the cutting up of that by the Sword, which I had so lately
planted, so much (as I thought) to my Subjects content, and Mine own too, in
all probability: If some men had not feared where no fear was, whose security
consisted in scaring others.

I thank God I know so well the sincerity and uprightness of My own heart, in
passing that great Bill, which exceeded the very thoughts of former times; That
although I may seem less a Politician to men, yet I need no secret
distinctions or evasions before God. Nor had I any reservations in My own
Soul, when I passed it; nor repentings after, till I saw that My letting some
men go up to the Pinnacle of the Temple, was a temptation to them to cast Me
down headlong.

Concluding, that without a miracle, Monarchy it self, together with Me, could
not but be dashed in pieces, by such a precipitious fall as they intended. Whom
God in mercy forgive, and make them see at length, That as many Kingdoms as
the Devil showed our Savior, and the glory of them, (if they could be at once
enjoyed by them) are not worth the gaining, by ways of sinful ingratitude and
dishonor, which hazards a Soul worth more Worlds then this has Kingdoms.

But God has hitherto preserved Me, and made Me to see, That it is no strange
thing for men, left to their own passions, either to do much evil
themselves, or abuse the overmuch goodness of others, whereof an ungrateful
Surfeit is the most desperate and incurable disease.

I cannot say properly that I repent of that Act, since I have no reflections
upon it as a sin of my will, though an error of too charitable a judgment:
Only I am sorry other men's eyes should be evil, because mine were good.

To Thee (O my God) do I still appeal, whose All-discerning Justice sees
through all the disguises of men's pretensions, and deceitful darknesses of
their hearts.

Thou gave me a heart to grant much to My Subjects; and now I need a Heart
fitted to suffer much from some of them.

Thy will be done, though never so much to the crossing of ours, even when we
hope to do what might be most conformable to thine and theirs too; who
pretended they aimed at nothing else.

Let thy grace teach me wisely to enjoy as well the frustratings, as the
fulfillings of My best hopes, and most specious desires.

I see while I thought to allay others fears, I have raised Mine own; and by
settling them, have unsettled My self.

Thus have they requited Me evil for good, and hatred for My good will toward
them.

O Lord be thou My Pilot in this dark and dangerous storm, which neither
admits My return to the Port whence I set out, nor My making any other, with
that safety and honor which I designed.

It Is easy for Thee to keep Me safe in the love and confidence of My people;
nor is it hard for Thee to preserve Me amidst the unjust hatred and jealousies
of too many, which thou have suffered so far to prevail upon Me, as to be able
to pervert and abuse My acts of greatest Indulgence to them, and assurance of
them.

But no favo^rs from Me can make others more guilty then My Self may be, of
misusing thos^ many and great ones, which Thou, O Lord, have conferred on Me.

I beseech Thee give Me and them such Repentance, as thou will accept, and such
Grace as we may not abuse.

Make Me so far happy as to make a right use of others abuses, and by their
failings of Me, to reflect, with a reforming displeasure, upon My offenses
against Thee.

So, although by My sins I am by other men's sins deprived of thy temporal
blessings, yet I may be happy to enjoy the comfort of thy mercies, which often
raise the greatest Sufferers to be the most glorious Saints.

6. Upon His Majesty's retirement from Westminster.
WIth what unwillingnesse I withdrew from Westminster, let them judge, who,
unprovided of tackling, and vi^tuall, are forced by Sea to a storm; yet better
do so, then venture splitting or sinking on a Lee shore.

I stayed at Whitehall, till I was driven away by shame more than fear; to see
the barbarous rudeness of those Tumults who resolved they would take the
boldness to demand any thing, and not leave either My self, or the Members of
Parliament the liberty of our Reason, and Conscience to deny them any thing.

Nor was this intolerable oppression My case alone, (though chiefly Mine) For
the Lords and Commons might be content to be over-voted by the major part of
their Houses, when they had used each their own freedom.

Whose agreeing Votes were not by any Law or reason conclusive to My Judgment;
nor can they include, or carry with them My consent, whom they represent not in
any kind; Nor am I further bound to agree with the Votes of both Houses, then I
see them agree with the will of God, with My just Rights, as a King, and the
general good of My People. I see that as many men they are seldom of one
mind; and I may often see, that the major part of them are not in the right.

I had formerly declared to sober and moderate minds, how de^irous I was to
give all just content, when I agreed to so many Bills, which had been enough to
secure and satisfy all: If some men's Hydropick in^atiablenesse had not learned
to thirst the more by how much more they drank; whom no fountain of Royal
bounty was able to overcome; so resolved they seemed, either utterly to exhaust
it, or barbarously to obs^ruct it.

Sure it ceases to be Council; when not Reason is used, as to men to persuade;
but force and terror as to beasts, to drive and compel men to assent to what
ever tumultuary patrones shall project. He deserves to be a slave without
pity, or redemption, that is content to have the rational sovereignty of his
Soul, and liberty of his will, and words so captivated.

Nor do I think My Kingdoms so considerable as to preserve them with the
forfeiture of that freedom; which cannot be denied Me as a King^ because it
belongs to Me as a Man, and a Christian; owning the dictates of none, but God,
to be above Me, as obliging Me to consent. Better for Me to die enjoying this
Empire of My Soul, which subjects Me only to God, so far as by Reason or
Religion he directs Me, then live with the Title of a King, if it should carry
such a vassalage with it, as not to suffer Me to use My Reason and Conscience,
in which I declare as a King, to like or dislike.

So far am I from thinking the Majesty of the Crown of England to be bound by
any Coronation Oath, in a blind and brutish formality, to consent to what ever
its subjects in Parliament shall require; as some men will needs infer; while
denying Me any power of a Negative voice as King, they are not ashamed to seek
to deprive Me of the liberty of using My Reason with a good Conscience, which
themselves, and all the Commons of England enjoy proportionable to their
influence on the public; who would take it very ill to be urged, not to deny,
whatever My self, as King, or the House of Peers with Me should, not so much
desire as enjoin them to pass. I think My Oath fully discharged in that point
by My Governing only by such Laws, as My People with the House of Peers have
Chosen, and My self have consented to. I shall never think My self
conscientiously tied to go as often against My Consci^nce, as I should consent
to such new Proposalls, which My Reason, in Justice, Honor, and Religion bids
Me deny.

Yet so tender I see some men are of their being subject to Arbitrary
Government, (that is, the Law of another will, to which themselves give no
consent) that they care not with how much dishonor and absurdity they make
their King the only man, that must be subject to the will of others, without
having power left Him, to use His own Reason, either in Person, or by any
Representation.

And if My dissentings at any time were (as some have suspected, and
uncharitably avowed out of error, opinion, activenesse, weakness, or
wilfulness, and what they call Obstinacy in Me (which not true Judgment of
things, but some vehement prejudice or passion has fixed on My mind;) yet can
no man think it other then the Badge and Method of Slavery, by savage
rudeness, and importunate detrusions of violence, to have the mist of His
Error and Passion dispelled, which is a shadow of Reason, and must serve those
that are destitute of the substance. Sure that man cannot be blameable to God
or Man, who seriously endeavors to see the best reason of things, and
faithfully follows what he takes for Reason: The uprightness of his
intentions will excuse the possible failings of his understanding; If a Pilot
at Sea cannot see the Pole Star, it can be no fault in him to steer his course
by such stars as do best appear to him. It argues rather those men to be
conscious of their defects of Reason, and convincing Arguments, who call in the
assistance of mere force to carry on the weakness of their Counsels, and
Proposalls. I may, in the Truth and uprightness of My heart, protest before
God and Men; that I never wilfully opposed, or denied any thing, that was in a
fair way, after full and free debates propounded to Me, by the two Houses,
Further then I thought in good reason I might, and was bound to do.

Nor did any thing ever please Me more, then when My Judgment so concurred with
theirs, that I might with good Conscience consent to them: yea, in many things
where not absolute and moral necessity of Reason, but temporary convenience on
point of Honor was to be considered. I chose rather to deny My self, then
them; as preferring that which they thought necessary for My Peoples good,
before what I saw but convenient for My self.

For I can be content to recede much from My own Interests, and Personal
Rights, of which I conceive My self to be Master; but in what concerns Truth,
Justice, the Rights of the Church, and My Crown, together with the general
good of My Kingdoms; (all which I am bound to preserve as much as morally lies
in Me;) here I am, and ever shall be fixed and resolute, nor shall any man gain
My consent to that, wherein My Heart gives My tongue or hand the Lie; nor will
I be brought to affirm that to Men, which in My Conscience I denied before
God. I will rather choose to wear a Crown of Thorns with My Savior, then to
exchange that of Gold (which is due to Me) for one of lead, whose embased
flexiblenesse shall be forced to bend, and comply to the various, and often
contrary dictates of any Factions; when instead of Reason, and Public
concernments, they obtrude nothing but what makes for the interest of parties,
and flows from the partialities of private wills and passions.

I know no resolutions more worthy a Christian King, then to prefer His
Conscience before His Kingdoms.

O my God, preserve thy servant in this Native, Rational and Religious
freedom; For this I believe is thy will, that we should maintain: who, though
thou do justly require us, to submit our understandings and wills to thine;
whose wisdom and goodness can neither err, nor misguide us, and so far to
deny our carnal reason, in order to thy sacred Mysteries, and commands, that
we should believe and obey rather then dispute them; yet do thou expect from
us, only such a reasonable service of thee, as not to do any thing for thee,
against our consciences; and as to the desires of men, enjoynest us to try all
things by the touchstone of Reason and Laws, which are the rules of Civil
Justice; and to declare our consents to that only which our Judgments approve.

Thou know, o Lord, how unwilling I was to desert that place, in which thou
have set me, and whereto the affairs of My Kingdoms at present did call me.

My People can witness how far I have been content for their good, to deny My
self, in what thou have subjected to My disposal.

O Let not the unthankful importunities, and tumultuary violence of some men's
Immoderate demands, ever betray Me to that degenerous and unmanly slavery,
which should make Me strengthen them by My consent in those things which I
think in My Conscience to be against thy glory, the good of My subjects, and
the discharge of My own duty to Reason and Justice.

Make Me willing to suffer the greatest indignities, and injuries they press
upon Me, rather then commit the least sin against My Conscience.

Let the just liberties of My people be (as well they may) preserved in fair,
and equal wayes^ without the slavery of My soul.

Thou that have invested Me by thy favors, in the power of a Christian King,
suffer Me not to subject My Reason to other men's passions, and designs, which
to Me seem unreasonable, unjust, and irreligious: So shall I serve thee in the
truth and uprightness of My heart, though I cannot satisfy these men.

Though I be driven from among them, yet give Me grace to walk always
uprightly before thee.

Lead Me in the way of Truth and Justice, for these, I know, will bring Me at
last to peace and happiness with thee; though for these I have much trouble
among men.

This I beg of thee for My Saviors sake.

7. Upon the Queens departure, and absence out of England.
ALthough I have much cause to be troubled at My Wifes departure from Me, and
out of My Dominions; yet not Her absence, so much, as the scandal of that
necessity, which drives her away, does afflict Me. That She should be compelled
by My own Subjects, and those pretending to be Protestants, to withdraw for
Her safety: This being the first example of any Protestant Subjects, that have
taken up Arms against their King, a Protestant: For I look upon this now done
in England, as another Act of the same Tragedy which was lately begun in
Scotland; the brands of that fire being ill quenched, have kindled the like
flames here. I fear such motions (so little to the adorning of the Protestant
profession) may occasion a farther alienation of mind, and divorce of
affections in Her, from that Religion, which is the only thing wherein me
differ.

Which yet God can, and I pray he would in time take away; and not suffer these
practices to be any obstruction to Her judgement^ since it is the motion of
those men, (for the most part) who are yet to seek and settle their Religion
for Doctrine, Government, and good manners, and so not to be imputed to the
true English Protestants; who continue firm to their former settled Principles
and Laws.

I am sorry My relation to so deserving a Lady, should be any occasion of her
danger and affliction; whose merits would have served her for a protection
among the savage Indians; while their rudeness and barbarity knows not so
perfectly to hate all Virtues, as some men's subtilty does; among whom I yet
think few are so malicious as to hate Her for Her self. The fault is, that
she is My wife.

All justice then as well as affection commands Me, to study her Security, who
is only in danger for My sake; I am content to be tossed, weather-beaten, and
shipwrackt, so as she may be in safe Harbor.

This comfort I shall enjoy by her safety in the midst of My Personal dangers,
that I can perish but half, if she be preserved: In whose memory, and hopeful
Posterity, I may yet survive the malice of My enemies, although they should be
satiated with My blood.

I must leave her, and them, to the Love and Loyalty of My good Subjects; and
to his protection, who is able to punish the faults of Princes, and no less
severely to revenge the injuries done to Them, by those who in all duty and
Allegiance, ought to have made good that safety, which the Laws chiefly
provide for Princes.

But common civility is in vain expected from those, that dispute their
Loyalty: Nor can it be safe (for any relation) to a King, to tarry among them
who are shaking hands with their Allegiance, under pretense of laying faster
hold on their Religion.

It Is pity so noble and peaceful a soul should see, much more suffer, the
rudeness of those who must make up their want of justice, with inhumanity, and
impudence.

Her sympathy with Me in My afflictions, will make her virtues shine with
greater luster, as stars in the darkest nights; and assure the envious world,
that she loves Me, not My fortunes.

Neither of us but can easily forgive, since We do not much blame the
unkindnesse of the Generality, and Vulgar; for we see God is pleased to try
both our patience, by the most selfe-punishing sin, the Ingratitude of those,
who having eaten of our bread, and being enriched with Our bounty, have
Scornfully lift up themselves against Us; and those of Our own Household are
become Our enemies. I pray God lay not their sin to their charge: who think to
satisfy all obligations to duty, by their Corban of Religion: and can less
endure to see, then to sin against their benefactours as well as their
Sovereigns.

But even that policy of my enemies is so far venial, as it was necessary to
their de^^gnes, by scandalous articles, and all irreverent demeanor, to seek
to drive her out of My Kingdoms; lest by the influence of her example, eminent
for love as a Wife, and Loyalty, as a Subject, she should have converted to, or
retained in their love, and Loyalty, all those whom they had a purpose to
pervert.

The less I may be blessed with her company, the more I will retire to God, and
My own Heart, whence no malice can banish Her. My enemies may envy, but they
can never deprive Me of the enjoyment of her virtues, while I enjoy My self.

Thou O Lord, whose Justice at present sees fit to scatter us, let thy merc^^
in thy due time, reunite us, on earth, if it be thy will; however bring us both
at last, to thy heavenly Kingdom.

Preserve us from the hands of our despitefull and deadly enemies; and prepare
us by our sufferings for thy presence.

Though we differ in some things, as to Religion, (which is my greatest
temporal infelicity) yet Lord give, and accept the sincerity of our
affections, which desire to seek, to find, to embrace every Truth of thine.

Let both our Hearts agree in the love of thy self, and Christ crucified for
us.

Teach us both what thou would have us to know, in order to thy glory, our
public relations, and our souls eternal good, and make us careful to do
what good we know.

Let neither Ignorance of what is necessary to be known, nor unbelief, or
disobedience to what we know, be our misery or our wilful default.

Let not this great Scandal of those my Subjects, which profess the same
Religion with me, be any hindrance to her love of any Truth thou would have
her to learn, nor any hardening of her, in any error thou would have cleared
to her.

Let mine, and other men's constancy be an Antidote against the poison of their
example.

Let the Truth of that Religion I profess, be represented to her Judgment,
with all the beauties of Humility, Loyalt^^ Charity, and Peaceablenesse; which
are the proper fruits, and ornaments of it: Not in the odious disguises of
Levity, Schism, Heresy, Novelty, Cruelty, and Disloyalty, which some men's
practices have lately put upon it.

Let her see thy sacred and saving Truths, as Thine; that she may believe, love
and obey them as Thine, cleared from all rust and dross of humane mixtures.

That in the glass of thy Truth she may see thee, in those mercies which thou
have offered to us, in thy Son Jesus Christ, our only Savior, and serve
thee in all those Holy duties, which most agree with his holy doctrine, and
most imitable example.

The experience we have of the vanity, and uncertainty of all humane Glory, and
greatness in our scatterings and Eclypses, let it make us both so much ^he
more ambitious to be invested in those durable honors, and perfections, which
are only to be found in thy self, and obtained through Jesus Christ.

8. Upon His Majesty's repulse at Hull, and the fates of the Hothams.
MY repulse at Hull seemed at the first view an act of so rude disloyalty, that
My greatest enemies had scarce confidence enough to abe^t, or own it: It was
the first overt Essay to be made, how patiently I could bear the Loss of My
Kingdoms.

God knows, it affected me more with shame and sorrow for others, then with
anger for My self; nor did the affront done to Me trouble Me so much as their
sin, which admitted no color o^ excuse.

I was resolved how to bear this, and much more, with patience: But I foresaw
they could hardly contain themselves within the compass of this one unworthy
act, who had effrontery enough to commit, or countenance it. This was but the
hand of that cloud, which was ^oone after to overspread the whole Kingdom, and
cast all into disorder and darkness.

For it is among the wicked Maxims of bold and disloyal undertakers: That bad
actions must always be seconded with worse, and rather not be begun then not
carried on, for they think the retreat more dangerous then the assault, and
hate repentance more then perseverance in a Fault.

This gave Me to see clearly through all the pious disguises, and soft
palliations of some men; whose words were sometime smoother then oil, but now
I saw they would prove very Swords.

Against which I having (as yet) no defense, but that of a good Conscience,
thought it My best policy (with patience) to bear what I could not remedy: And
in this (I thank God) I had the better of Hotham, that no disdain, or emotion
of passion transported Me, by the indignity of his carriage, to do or say any
thing, unbeseeming My self, or unsuitable to that temper, which, in greatest
injuries, I think, best becomes a Christian, as coming nearest to the great
example of Christ.

And indeed, I desire always more to remember I am a Christian, then a King;
for what the Majesty of one might justly abhor, the Charity of the other is
willing to bear; what the height of a King tempts to revenge, the humility of
a Christian teaches to forgive. Keeping in compass all those impotent
passions, whose excess injures a man, more then his greatest enemies can; for
these give their malice a full impression on our souls, which otherways cannot
reach very far, nor do us much hurt.

I cannot but observe how God not long after so pleaded, and avenged My cause,
in the eye of the world, that the most wilfully blind cannot avoid the
displeasure to see it, and with some remorse and fear to own it as a notable
stroke, and prediction of divine vengeance.

For, Sir John Hotham unreproached, unthreatned, uncursed by any language or
secret imprecation of Mine, only blasted with the conscience of his own
wickedness, and falling from one inconstancy to another, not long after paies
his own and his eldest Sons heads, as forfeitures of their disloyalty, to
those men, from whom surely he might have expected another reward then thus to
divide their heads from their bodies, whose hearts with them were divided from
their KING.

Nor is it strange that they who employed them at first in so high a service,
and so successful to them, should not find mercy enough to forgive Him, who
had so much premerited of them: For, Apostasy unto Loyalty some men account the
most unpardonable sin.

Nor did a solitary vengeance serve the turn, the cutting off one head in a
Family is not enough to expiate the affront done to the head of the
Co^mon-weale. The eldest Son must be involved in the punishment, as he was
infected with the sin of the Father, against the Father of his Country: Root
and branch God cuts off in one day.

These observations are obvious to every fancy: God knows, I was so far from
rejoicing in the Hotham's ruin, (though it were such as was able to give the
grea^est thirst for revenge a full drought, being executed by them who first
employed him against Me) that I so far pitied him; as I thought he at first
acted more against the light of his Conscience, then I hope many other men do
in the same Cause.

For, he was never thought to be of that superstitious sowrenesse, which some
men pretend to, in matters of Religion; which so darkens their judgment that
they cannot see any thing of Sin and Rebellion in those means, they use,
with intents to reform to their Models, of what they call Religion, who think
all is gold of piety, which does but glister with a show of Zeal and fervency.

Sir John Hotham was (I think) a man of another temper, and so most liable to
those downright temptations of ambition, which have no cloak or cheat of
Religion to impose upon themselves or others.

That which makes me more pity him is, that after he began to have some
inclinations toward a repentance for his sin, and reparation of his duty to
Me, He should be so unhappy as to fall into the hands of their Justice, and not
My Mercy, who could as willingly have forgiven him, as he could have asked that
favor of Me.

For I think clemency a debt, which we ought to pay to those that crave it,
when we have cause to believe they would not after abuse it, since God himself
suffer us not to pay any thing for his mercy but only prayers and praises.

Poor Gentleman, he is now become a noteable monument of unprosperous
disloyalty, teaching the world by so sad and unfortunate a spectacle, that the
rude carriage of a Subject toward his Sovereign carries always its own
vengeance, as an unseperable shadow with it, and those often prove the most
fatal, and implacable Executioners of it, who were the first Imployers in the
service.

Aftertimes will dispute it, whether Hotham were more infamous at Hull, or at
Tower Hill; though it is certain that no punishment so stains a man's Honor, as
wilful preparations of unworthy actions; which besides the conscience of the
sin, brands with most indelible characters of infamy, the name and memory to
posterity, who not engaged in the Factions of the times, have the most
impartial reflections on the actions.

But thou, O Lord, who have in so remarkable a way avenged thy Servant, suffer
me not to take any secret pleasure in it, for his death has satisfied the
injury he did to me, so let me not by it gratify any passion in me, lest I
make thy vengeance to be mine, and consider the affront against me, more than
the sin against thee.

Thou indeed, without any desire or endeavor of mine, have made his mischief
to return on his own head, and his violent dealing to come down on his own
pate.

Thou have pleaded my cause, even before the sons of men, and taken the
matter into thine own hands; that men may know it was thy work, and see that
thou, Lord, have done it:

I do not, I dare not say, so let mine enemies perish O Lord! yea Lord, rather
give them repentance, pardon, and impunity, if it be thy blessed will.

Let not thy justice prevent the objects and opportunities of my mercy; yea,
let them live and amend who have most offended me in so high a nature; that I
may have those to forgive, who bear most proportion in their offenses to those
trespasses against thy majesty, which I hope thy mercy has forgiven me.

Lord lay not their sins (who yet live) to their charge for condemnation, but
to their consciences for amendment: Let the lighting of this thunderbolt, which
has been so severe a punishment to one, be a terror to all.

Discover to them their sin, who know not they have done amiss, and scare
the^ from their sin, that sin of malicious wickedness.

That preventing thy judgments by their true repentance, they may escape the
strokes of ^^^ne eternal vengeance.

And do thou, O Lord, establish the Thro^e of thy servant in mercy, and truth
meeting ^^^^^gether; let my Crown ever flourish in rig^^^^ousnesse, and peace,
kissing each other.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, who have taught us to pray for, to do good to, and
to love our enemies, for thy sake; who have prevented us with offertures of thy
love, even when we were thine enemies, and have sent thy Son Jesus Christ to
die for us, when we were disposed to crucify him.

9. Upon the listing, and raising Armies against the KING.
I Find that I am at the same point and posture I was, when they forced Me to
leave White Hall: what Tumults could not do, an Army must; which is but
Tumults lifted, and enrolled to a better order, but as bad an end: My recesse
has given them confidence that I may be conquered.

And so I easily may as to any outward strength, which, God knows, is little
or none at all: But I have a Soul invincible through Gods grace enabling Me;
here I am sure to be Conqueror, if God will give Me such a measure of
Constancy, as to fear him more than man: and to love the inward peace of My
Conscience, before any outward tranquillity.

And must I be opposed with force, because they have not reason wherewith to
convince me? O my Soul! be of good courage, they confess their known
weakness, as to truth, and Justice, who chose rather to contend by Armies,
than by Arguments.

Is this the reward and thanks that I am to receive for those many Acts of
Grace I have lately passed, and for those many Indignities I have endured? Is
there no way left to make Me a glorious KING but by My sufferings?

It is a hard and disputable choice for a King, that loves his People, and
desires their love, either to kill his own Subjects, or to be killed by them.

Are the hazards and miseries of Civil War in the bowels of My most flourishing
Kingdom, the fruits I must now reap after 17 years living and reigning among
them, with such a measu^e of Justice, Peace, Plenty, and Religion, as all
Nations about either admired, or envied? notwithstanding some miscarriages in
Government, which might escape; rather through ill counsel of some men driving
on their private ends, or the peevishness of others envying the public
should be managed without them, or the hidden and insuperable necessities of
State, then any propensity, I hope, of my self either to injuriousness or
oppression.

Whose innocent blood during My Reign have I shed, to satisfy My lust, anger,
or covetousness? what Widows or Orphans tears can witness against me; the
just cry of which must now be avenged with My own blood? For the hazards of
War are equal, nor does the Cannon know any respect of Persons.

In vain is My Person excepted by a Parenthesis of words, when so many hands
are armed against Me with Swords.

God knows how much I have studied to see what Ground of Justice is alleged
for this War against Me; that so I might (by giving just satisfaction) either
prevent, or soon end so unnatural a motion; which (to many men) seems rather
the productions of a surfeit of peace, and wantonness of minds, or of private
discontents, Ambition and Faction (which easily find, or make causes of
quarrel) then any real obstructions of public Justice, or Parliamentary
Privilege.

But this is pretended, and this I must be able to avoid and answer before God
in My own Conscience, however some men are not willing to believe Me, lest
they should condemn themselves.

When I first withdrew from White Hall, to see if I could allay the insolency
of the Tumults, (the not suppressing of which, no account in Reason can be
given, (where an orderly Guard was granted but only to oppress both Mine and
the Two Houses freedom of declaring and voting according to every man's
Conscience) what obstructions of Justice were there further then this, that
what seemed just to one man, might not seem so to another?

Whom did I by power protect against the Justice of Parliament?

That some men withdrew, who feared the partiality of their trial, (warned by
My Lord of Straffords death) while the vulgar threatened to be their Oppressors,
and Judgers of their Judges, was from that instinct, which is in all creatures
to preserve themselves. If any others refused to appear, where they evidently
saw the current of Justice and Freedom so stopped and troubled by the Rabble,
that their lawful Judges either durst not come to the Houses, or not declare
their sense with liberty and safety; it cannot seem strange to any reasonable
man when the sole exposing them to public odium was enough to ruin them,
before their Cause could be heard or tried.

Had not factious Tumults overborne the Freedom and Honor of the two Houses;
had they asserted their Justice against them, and made the way open for all the
Members quietly to come and declare their Consciences: I know no man so dear
to Me, whom I had the least inclination to advise either to withdraw himself,
or deny appearing upon their Summons, to whose Sentence according to Law (I
think) every Subject bound to stand.

Distempers (indeed) were risen to so great a height, for want of
timely^repressing the vulgar insolences; that the greatest guilt of those
which were Voted and demanded as Delinquents was this, That they would not
suffer themselves to be over-awed with the Tumults, and their Patrones; nor
compelled to abet by their suffrages, or presence; the designs of those men
who agitated innovations, and ruin, both in Church and State.

In this point I could not but approve their generous constancy and
cautiousnesse; further then this I did never allow any man's refractorinesse
against the Privileges and Orders of the Houses; to whom I wished nothing
more, then Safety, Fullness, and Freedom.

But the truth is, some men, and those not many, despairing in fair and
Parliamentary ways by free deliberations, and Votes to gain the concurrence of
the Major part of Lords and Commons, betook themselves (by the desperate
activity of factious Tumults) to sift and terrify away all those Members whom
they saw to be of contrary minds to their purposes.

How often was the business of the Bishops enjoying their Ancient places, and
undoubted Privileges in the House of Peers, carried for them by far the
Major part of Lords. Yet after five repulses, contray to all Order and Custom,
it was by tumultuary, instigations obtruded again, and by a few carried, when
most of the Peers were forced to absent them-themselves.

In like manner, as the Bill against Root and Branch, brought on by tumultuary
Clamours, and schismatic Terrors, which could never pass, till both Houses
were sufficiently thinned and overawed.

To which Partiality, while in all Reason, Justice and Religion, My conscience
forbids Me by consenting to make up their Votes to Acts of Parliament; I must
now be urged with an Army, and constrained either to hazard My own, and My
Kingdoms ruin, by my Defense; or prostrate My Conscience to the blind
obedience of those men, whose zealous superstition thinks, or pretends, they
cannot do God and the Church a greater service, than utterly to destroy that
Primitive, Apostolical, and anciently Universal Government of the Church by
Bishops.

Which if other men's judgments bind them to maintain, or forbids them to
consent to the abolishing of it; Mine much more; who, besides the grounds I
have in My judgment, have also a most strickt and indispensable Oath upon My
Conscience, to preserve that Order, and the Rights of the Church; to which,
most Sacrilegious and abhorred Perjury, most un-beseeming a Christian King,
should I ever by giving My Consent be betrayed, I should account it infinitely
greater misery, then any has, or can befall Me^ in as much as the least sin
has more evil in it then the greatest affliction. Had I gratified their
Anti-episcopall Faction at first in this point, with My consent, and sacrificed
the Ecclesiastical Government, and Revenues, to the fury of their
covetuousnesse, ambition, and revenge, I believe they would then have found no
colorable necessity of raising an Army to fetch in, and punish Delinquents.

That I consented to the Bill of putting the Bishops out of the House of Peers,
was done with a firm persuasion of their contentednes to suffer a present
diminution in their Rights, and Honor for My sake, and the Common-weals, which I
was confident they would readily yield unto, rather then occasion (by the least
obstruction on their part) any dangers to Me, or to My Kingdom. That I cannot
add My consent for the total extirpation of that Government (which I have
often offered to all fit regulations) has so much further tie upon My
Conscience, as what I think Religious and Apostolical; and so very Sacred and
Divine, is not to be dispensed with, or destroyed, when what is only of civil
Favor, and privilege of Honor granted to men of that Order, may with their
consent, who are concerned in it be annulled.

This is the true state of those obstructions pretended to be in point of
Justice and Authority of Parliament; when I call God to witness, I knew none
of such consequence as was worth speaking of a War, being only such as
Justice, Reason, and Religion had made in My own and other men's Consciences.

Afterward indeed a great show of Delinquents was made; which were but
consequences necessarily following upon Mine, or others withdrawing from, or
defense against violence: but those could not be the first occasion of raising
an Army against Me. Wherein I was so far from preventing them, (as they have
declared often, that they might seem to have the advantage and Justice of the
defensive part, and load Me with all the envy and injuries of first assaulting
them) that God knows, I had not so much as any hopes of an Army in My thoughts.
Had the Tumults been Honorably and Effectually repressed by exemplary Justice,
and the liberty of the Houses so vindicated, that all Members of either House
might with Honor and Freedom, becoming such a Senate, have come and
discharged their Consciences, I had obtained all that I designed by My
withdrawing, and had much more willingly, and speedily returned then I retired;
this being My necessity driving, the other My choice desiring.

But some men know, I was like to bring the same judgment and constancy, which
I carried with Me, which would never fit their designs: and so while they
invited Me to come, and grievously complained of My absence, yet they could not
but be pleased with it: especially when they had found out that plausible and
popular pretext of raising an Army to fetch in Delinquents: when all that while
they never punished the greatest and most intolerable Delinquencie of the
Tumults, and their Exciters, which drove My self, and so many of both Houses
from their places, by most barbarous indignities, which yet in all Reason and
Honor, they were as loath to have deserted, as those others were willing they
should, that so they might have occasion to persecute them with the Injuries of
an Army, for not suffering more tamely the Injuries of the Tumults.

That this is the true state, and first drift and design in raising an Army
against Me, is by the sequel so evident, that all other pretenses vanish. For
when they declared by Propositions, or Treaties, what they would have to
appease them; there was nothing of consequence offered to Me, or demanded of
Me, as any original difference in any point of Law, or order of Justice. But
among other lesser Innovations, this chiefly was urged, The Abolition of
Episcopal, and the Establishment of Presbyterian Government.

All other things at any time propounded were either impertinent as to any
ground of a War, or easily granted by Me, and only to make up a number, or
else they were merely consequentiall, and accessory, after the War was by them
unjustly began.

I cannot hinder other men's thoughts, whom the noise and show of piety, and
heat for Reformation and Religion, might easily so fill with prejudice, that
all equality and clearness of judgment might be obstructed. But thi^ was, and
is, as to my best observation, the true state of affairs between us, when
they first raised an Army, with this design, either to stop My mouth, or to
force My consent: and in this truth, as to My conscience, (who was (God knows)
as far from meditating a War, as I was in the eye of the world from having any
preparation for one) I find that comfort, that in the midst of all the
unfortunate successes of this War, on My side, I do not think My Innocence
any whit prejudiced or darkened; Nor am I without that Integrity, and Peace
before God, as with humble confidence to address My Prayer to Him.

For Thou, O Lord, see clearly through all the cloudings of humane affairs;
Thou judge without prejudice: Thy Omniscience eternally guides thy unerrable
Judgment.

O my God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men
have sought after my soul, and have not set Thee before their eyes.

Consider My enemies, O Lord, for they are many, and they hate me with a deadly
hatred without a cause.

For Thou know, I had no passion, design or preparation to embroyle My
Kingdoms in a Civil War; whereto I had least temptation; as knowing I must
adventure more then any, and could gain least of any by it.

Thou, O Lord, art my witness how often I have deplored, and studied to divert
the necessity thereof, wherein I cannot well be thought so prodigally thirsty
of my Subjects blood, as to venture my own Life, which I have been often
compelled to do in this unhappy War; and which were better spent to save
then to destroy my People.

O Lord, I need much of thy grace, with patience to bear the many afflictions
thou have suffered some men to bring upon me; but much more to bear the unjust
reproaches of those, who not content that I suffer most by the War, will
needs persuade the world that I have raised first, or given just cause to raise
it.

The confidence of some men's false tongues is such, that they would make me
almost suspect my own innocence: Yea, I could be content (at least by my
silence) to take upon me so great a guilt before men, If by that I might allay
the malice of my Enemies, and redeem my People from this miserable War;
since thou O Lord know my Innocence in this thing.

Thou will find out bloody and deceitful men; many of whom have not lived out
half their days, in which they promised themselves the enjoyment of the fruits
of their violent and wicked Counsels.

Save, O Lord, thy servant, as hitherto thou have, and in thy due time scatter
the people that delight in War.

Arise O Lord, lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine Enemies, which
increases more and more. Behold them that have conceived mischief, traveled
with iniquity, and brought forth falsehood.

Thou know the chief design of this War is, either to destroy My Person,
or force My Judgment, and to make me renege my Conscience and thy Truth.

I am driven to cross David's choice and desire, rather to fall into the hands
of men, by denying them, (though their mercies be cruel) then into thy hands
by sinning against My Conscience, and in that against thee, who art a consuming
fire; Better they destroy Me, then thou should damn Me.

Be thou ever the defense of My soul, who wilt save the upright in heart.

If nothing but My blood will satisfy My Enemies, or quench the flames of My
Kingdoms, or thy temporal Justice, I am content, if it be thy will, that it
be shed by Mine own Subjects hands.

But o let the blood of Me, though their King, yet a sinner, be washed with the
Blood of My Innocent and peacemaking Redeemer, for in that thy Justice will
find not only a temporary expiation, but an eternal plenary satisfaction; both
for my sins, and the sins of my People; whom I beseech thee still own for
thine, and when thy wrath is appeased by my Death, O Remember thy great mercies
toward them, and forgive them! O my Father, for they know not what they do.

10. Upon their seizing the Kings Magazines, Forts, Navy, and Militia.
HOw untruly I am Charged with the first raising of an Army, and beginning this
Civil War, the eyes that only pity Me, and the Loyal hearts that durst
only pray for Me, at first, might witness, which yet appear not so many on My
side, as there were men in Arms listed against Me; My unpreparednesse for a War
may well dis-hearten those that would help Me; while it argues (truly) My
unwillingnes to fight; yet it testifies for Me, that I am set on the defensive
part; having so little hopes or power to offend others, that I have none to
defend My self, or to preserve what is Mine own from their proreption.

No man can doubt but they prevented Me in their purposes, as well as their
injuries, who are so much beforehand in their preparations against Me, and
surprisalls of My strength. Such as are not for Them, yet dare not be for Me;
so over-awed is their Loyalty by the others numbers and terrors. I believe My
Innocence, and unpreparednesse to assert My Rights and Honor, makes Me the
more guilty in their esteem; who would not so easily have declared a War
against Me, if I had first assaulted them.

They knew My chiefest Arms left Me, were those only, which the Ancient
Christians were wont to use against their Persecutors, Prayers and Tears.
These may serve a good man's turn, if not to Conquer as a Soldier, yet to
suffer as a Martyr.

Their preventing of Me, and surprising my Castles, Forts, Arms, and Navy,
with the Militia, is so far best for me, That it may drive me from putting
any trust in the arm of flesh, and wholly to cast my self into the protection
of the living God, who can save by few, or none, as well as by many.

He that made the greedy Ravens to be Elias Caterers, and bring him food, may
also make their surprisall of outward force and defense, an opportunity to show
me the special support of his power and protection.

I thank God I reckon not now the want of the Militia so much in reference to
My own protection as My Peoples.

Their many and sore oppressions grieve Me, I am above My own, what I want in
the hands of Force and Power, I have in the wings of Faith and Prayer.

But this is the strange method these men will needs take to resolve their
riddle of Making Me a glorious King, by taking away my Kingly power: Thus I
shall become a support to My Friends, and a Terror to My Enemies by being
unable to succor the one, or suppress the other.

For thus have they designed, and proposed to Me, the new modelling of
Sovereignty and Kingship, as without any reality of power, or without any
necessity of subjection and obedience: That the Majesty of the Kings of England
might hereafter, hang like Mahomets Tomb, by a magnetique Charm, between the
Power and Privileges of the two Houses, in an aerie imagination of Regality.

But I believe the surfeit of too much Power, which some men have greedily
seized on, and now seek wholly to devour, will ere long make the Commonwealth
sick both of it and them, since they cannot well digest it; Sovereign Power in
Subjects seldom agreeing with the stomachs of fellow Subjects.

Yet I have even in this point of the constant Militia sought, by satisfying
their fears, and importunities, both to secure My Friends, and overcome Mine
Enemies, to gain the peace of all, by depriving My self of a sole power to
help, or hurt any: yiedling the Militia (which is My undoubted Right no less
than the Crown) to be disposed of as the two Houses shall think fit, during My
time.

So willing am I to bury all Jealousies in them, of Me, and to live above all
Jealousies of them, as to My self; I desire not to be safer than I wish them
and My People; If I had the sole actual disposing of the Militia, I could not
protect My People, further than they protected Me, and themselves: so that the
use of the Militia is mutual. I would but defend My self so far, as to be able
to defend My good Subjects from those men's violence and fraud, who conscious to
their own evil merits and designs, will needs persuade the world, that none
but Wolves are fit to be trusted with the custody of the Shepherd and his
Flock. Miserable experience has taught My Subjects, since Power has been
wrested from Me, and employed against Me and Them! that neither can be safe if
both be not in such a way as the Law has entrusted the public safety and
welfare.

Yet even this Concession of Mine as to the exercise of the Militia, so vast
and large, is not satisfactory to some men; which seem to be Enemies not to Me
only, but to all Monarchy; and are resolved to transmit to posterity such
Jealousies of the Crown, as they should never permit it to enjoy its just and
necessary Rights, in point of Power; to which (at last) all Law is resolved,
while thereby it is best protected.

But here Honor and Justice due to My Successors, forbid Me to yield to such a
total alienation of that power from them, which civility and duty (no less
then justice and honor) should have forbad them to have asked of Me.

For, although I can be content to Eclypse My own beams, to satisfy their
fears; who think they must needs be scorched or blinded, if I should shine in
the full luster of Kingly Power, wherewith God and the Laws have invested Me:
yet I will never consent to put out the Sun of Sovereignty to all Posterity,
and succeeding Kings; whose just recovery of their Rights from unjust
usurpations and extortions, shall never be prejudiced or obstructed by any Act
of Mine, which indeed would not be more injurious to succeeding Kings, than to
My Subjects; whom I desire to leave in a condition not wholly desperate for the
future; so as by a Law to be ever subjected to those many factious
distractions, which must needs follow the many-headed Hydra of Government;
which as it makes a show to the People to have more eyes to foresee; so they
will find it has more mouths too, which much be satisfied: and (at best) it
has rather a monstrosity, than any thing of perfection, beyond that of right
Monarchy; where counsel may be in many as the senses, but the Supreme Power
can be but in One as the Head.

Happily where men have tried the horrors and malignant influence which will
certainly follow My enforced darkness and Eclypse, (occasioned by the
interposition and shadow of that body, which as the Moon receives its
chiefest light from Me) they will at length more esteem and welcome the
restored glory and blessing of the Suns light.

And if at present I may seem by My receding so much from the use of My Right
in the Power of the Militia, to come short of the discharge of that trust to
which I am sworn for My Peoples protection; I conceive those men are guilty of
the enforced perjury, (if so it may seem) who compel Me to take this new and
strange way of discharging My trust, by seeming to desert it; of protecting My
Subjects by exposing My self to danger or dishonor, for their safety and quiet.

Which in the conflicts of Civil War and advantages of Power cannot be
effected but by some side yiedling; to which the greatest love of the public
Peace, and the firmest assurance of Gods protection (arising from a good
conscience) does more invite Me, than can be expected from other men's fears;
which arising from the injustice of their actions (though never so successful)
yet dare not adventure their Authors upon any other way of safety then that of
the Sword and Militia; which yet are but weak defenses against the strokes of
divine vengeance, which will overtake; or of men's own Consciences, which
always attend injurious perpetrations.

For My self, I do not think that I can want any thing which providentiall
necessity is pleased to take from Me, in order to My Peoples tranquillity and
Gods glory, whose protection is sufficient for me; and he is able by his being
with Me, abundantly to compensate to Me, as he did to Job, what ever honor,
power, or liberty the Caldeans, the Sabeans, or the Devil himself can deprive
Me of.

Although they take from me all defense of Arms and Militia, all refuge by
land, of Forts, and Castles, all flight by Sea in my Ships, and Navy; yea,
though they study to rob me of the Hearts of my Subjects, the greatest Treasure
and best ammunition of a King, yet cannot they deprive me of my own innocence,
or Gods mercy, nor obstruct my way to Heaven.

Therefore, O my God, to thee I fly for help, if thou will be on my side, I
shall have more with me then can be against me.

There is none in Heaven, or in Earth, that I desire in comparison of thee: In
the loss of all, be thou more than all to me: Make have to succor me, thou
that never failest them, that put their trust in thee.

Thou see I have no power to oppose them that come against me, who are
encouraged to fight under the pretense of fighting for me: But my eyes are
toward thee.

Thou need no help, nor shall I, if I may have thine; If not to conquer, yet
at least to suffer.

If thou delightest not in my safety, and prosperity, behold here I am willing
to be reduced to what thou will have me; whose Judgments often begin with thy
own Children.

I am content to be nothing, that thou may be all.

Thou have taught me, That no King can be saved by the multitude of an Host;
but yet thou can save me by the multitude of thy mercies, who art the Lord of
Hosts, and the Father of mercies.

Help me, O Lord, who am sore distressed on every side, yet be thou on my side,
and I shall not fear what man can do unto me.

I will give thy Justice the glory of my distress.

O let thy mercy have the glory of my deliverance from them that persecute my
Soul!

By my sins have I fought against thee, and robbed th^e of thy glory, who am
thy subject, and justly may thou, by my own Subjects, strip me of my
strength, and eclypse my glory.

But show thy self, O my hope, and only refuge! Let not mine enemies say,
There is no help for him in his God.

Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

Keep me as the apple of thine eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

Show thy marveilous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand
them that put their trust in thee, from those that rise up against them.

From the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies that compass me
about.

Show me the path of life. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right
hand there are pleasures for evermore.

11. Upon the 19. Propositions first sent to the KING; and more afterward.
ALthough there be many things, they demand, yet if these be all, I am glad to
see at what price they set My own safety, and My Peoples peace; which I cannot
think I buy at too dear a rate save only the parting with My Conscience and
Honor. If nothing else will satisfy, I must choose rather to be as miserable,
and inglorious, as My enemies can make or wish me.

Some things here propounded to Me have been offered by Me; Others are easily
granted; The rest (I think) ought not to be obtruded upon Me, with the point of
the Sword; nor urged with the injuries of a War; when I have already declared
that I cannot yield to them, without violating My Conscience: it is strange,
there can be no method of peace, but by making war upon My soul.

Here are many things required of Me, but I see nothing offered to Me, by the
way of grateful exchange of Honor; or any requital for those favors, I
have, or can yet grant them.

This Honor they do Me, to put Me on the giving part, which is more
princely and divine. They cannot ask more than I can give, may I but reserve
to My self the Incommunicable Jewel of my Conscience; and not be forced to
part with that, whose loss nothing can repair or requite.

Some things (which they are pleased to propround) seem unreasonable to me,
and while I have any Mastery of my Reason, how can they think I can consent to
them? Who know they are such as are inconsistent with being either a King, or a
good Christian. My yiedling so much (as I have already) makes some men
confident I will deny nothing.

The love I have of my Peoples peace, has (indeed) great influence upon me;
but the love of Truth, and inward peace has more.

Should I grant some things they require, I should not so much weaken my
outward state of a King; as wound that inward quiet of my Conscience, which
ought to be, is, and ever shall be (by Gods grace) dearer to me then my
Kingdoms.

Some things which a King might approve, yet in Honor and Policy are at some
time to be denied, to some men, lest he should seem not to dare to deny any
thing; and give too much encouragement to unreasonable demands, or
importunities.

But to bind my self to a general and implicit consent, to what ever they
shall desire, or propound, (for such is one of their Propositions) were such a
latitude of blind obedience, as never was expected from any Freeman, nor fit
to be required of any man, much less of a King, by His own Subjects; any of
whom he may possibly exceed as much in wisdom, as He does in place and power.

This were as if Sampson should have consented, not only to bind his own
hands, and cut off his hair, but to put out his own eyes, that the Philistines
might with the more safety mock, and abuse him; which they chose rather to do,
then quite to destroy him, when he was become so tame an object, and fit
occasion for their sport and scorn.

Certainly, to exclude all power of denial, seems an arrogance, least of all
becoming those who pretend to make their addresses in an humble and loyal way
of petitioning; who by that sufficiently confess their own inferiority, which
obliges them to rest, if not satisfied, yet quieted with such an answer as the
will and reason of their Superior thinks fit to give; who is acknowledged to
have a freedom and power of Reason, to Consent, or Dissent, else it were very
foolish and absurd to ask, what another having not liberty to deny, neither
has power to grant.

But if this be My Right belonging to Me, in Reason, as a Man, and in Honor as
a Sovereign King, (as undoubtedly it does) how can it be other then extreme
injury to confine my Reason to a necessity of granting all they have a mind to
ask, whose minds may be as differing from Mine both in Reason and Honor, as
their aims may be, and their qualities are; which last God and the Laws have
sufficiently distinguish^, making me their Sovereign, and them my Subjects:
whose Propositions may soon prove violent oppositions, if once they gain to be
necessary impositions upon the Regal Authority. Since no man seeks to limit
and confine his King, in Reason, who has not a secret aim to share with him,
or usurp upon him in Power and Dominion.

But they would have me trust to their moderation, and abandon mine own
discretion; that so I might verify what representations some have made of me
to the world, that I am fitter to be their Pupil then their Prince. Truly I am
not so confident of my own sufficiency, as not willingly to admit the Counsel
of others: But yet I am not so diffident of my self, as bru^ishly to submit to
any men's dictates, and at once to betray the Sovereignty of Reason in my Soul,
and the Majesty of my own Crown to any of my Subjects.

Least of all have I any ground of credulity, to induce me fully to submit to
all the desires of those men, who will not admit or do refuse, and neglect to
vindicate the freedom of their own and others, sitting and voting in
Parliament.

Besides, all men that know them, know this, how young Statesmen (the most
part) of these propounders are; so that, till experience of one seven years
has showed me, how well they can Govern themselves, and so much power as is
wrested from me, I should be very foolish indeed, and unfaithful, in my Trust,
to put the reins of both Reason and Government, wholly out of my own, into
their hands, whose driving is already too much like Iehues; and whose
forwardness to ascend the throne of Supremacy pretends more of Phaeton then of
Phoebus; God divert the Omen if it be his will.

They may remember, that at best they sit in Parliament, as my Subjects, not my
Superiors; called to be my Counselors, not Dictatours: Their Summons extends
to recommend their advice, not to command my Duty.

When I first heard of Propositions to be sent Me, I expected either some good
Laws, which had been antiquated by the course of time, or overlayd by the
corruption of manners, had been desired to a restoration of their vigor and
due execution; or some evil customs preterlegall, and abuses personal had
been to be removed: or some injuries done by My self, and others, to the
Commonweal, were to be repaired: or some equable offertures were to be
tendered to Me, wherein the advantages of My Crown being considered by them,
might fairly induce Me to condescend, to what tended to My Subjects good,
without any great diminution of My self, whom nature, Law, Reason, and
Religion, bind Me (in the first place) to preserve: without which, it is
impossible to preserve My People according to My Place.

Or (at least) I looked for such moderate desires of due Reformation of what
was (indeed) amiss in Church and State, as might still preserve the foundation
and essentialls of Government in both; not shake and quite overthrow either of
them, without any regard to the Laws in force, the w^sdome and piety of former
Parliaments, the ancient and universal practice of Christian Churches; the
Rights and Privileges of particular men: Nor yet any thing offered in lieu, or
in the room of what must be destroyed, which might at once reach the good end
of the others Institution, and also supply its pretended defects, reform its
abuses, and satisfy sober and wise men, not with soft and specious words,
pretending zeal and special piety, but with pregnant and solid reasons both
divine and humane, which might justify the abruptness and necessity of such
vast alterations.

But in all their Propositions I can observe little of these kinds, or to these
ends: Nothing of any Laws dis^jointed, which are to be restored; of any right
invaded; of any justice to be un-obstructed; of any compensations to be made;
of any impartial reformation to be granted; to all, or any of which, Reason,
Religion, true Policy, or any other humane motives, might induce me.

But as to the maine matters propounded by them at any time, in which is either
great novelty, or difficulty. I perceive that what were formerly looked upon as
Factions in the State, and Sch^smes in the Church, and so^ punishable by the
Laws, have now the confidence, by vulgar clamours, and assistance (chiefly) to
demand not only Tolerations of themselves, in their vanity, novelty, and
confusion; but also Abolition of the Laws against them: and a total
extirpation of that Government, whose Rights they have a mind to invade.

This, as to the maine; other Proposi^ions are (for the most part) but as waste
paper in which those are wrapped up to present them somewhat more handsomely.

Nor do I so much wonder at the variety, and horrible novelty of some
Propositions, (there being nothing so monstrous, which some fancies are not
prone to long for.)

This casts me into, not an admiration, but an ecstasy, how such things should
have the fortune to be propounded in the name of the two Houses of the
Parliament of England: among whom, I am very confident, there was not a fourth
part of the Members of either House, whose judgments free, single, and apart
did approve or desire such destructive changes in the Government of the Church.

I am persuaded there remains in far the Major part of both Houses, (if
free, and full) so much Learning, Reason, Religion, and just moderation, as to
know how to sever between the u^e and the abuse of things; the institution, and
the corruption, the Government and the Mis-government, the Primitive Patterns,
and the aberrations or blottings of after Copies.

Sure they could not all, upon so little, or no Reason (as yet produced to the
contrary) so soon renounce all regard to the Laws in force, to antiquity, to
the piety of their reforming Progenitors, to the prosperity of former times in
this Church and State, under the present Government of the Church.

Yet, by a strange fatality, these men suffer, either by their absence, or
silence, or negligence, or supine credulity (believing that all is good, which
is gilded with shows of Zeal and Reformation) their private dissenting in
Judgment to be drawn into the common sewer or stream of the present vogue
and humor; which has its chief rise and abetment from those popular clamours
and Tumults: which served to give life and strength to the infinite activity of
those men, who studied with all diligence, and policy, to improve to their
Innovating designs, the present distractions.

Such Armies of Propositions having so little, in My Judgment, of Reason,
Justice, and Religion on their side, as they had Tumult and Faction for their
rise, must not go alone, but ever be backed and seconded, with Armies of
Soldiers: Though the second should prevail against My Person, yet the first
shall never overcome Me, further than I see cause; for, I look not at their
number and power so much, as I weigh their Reason and Justice.

Had the two Houses first sued out their livery, and once effectually redeemed
themselves from the Wardship of the Tumults, (which can be no other than the
Hounds that attend the cry, and hollow of those Men, who hunt after Factious,
and private Designs, to the ruin of Church and State.)

Did My judgment tell Me, that the Propositions sent to Me were the Results of
the Major part of their Votes, who exercise their freedom, as well as they
have a right to sit in Parliament: I should then suspect My own judgment, for
not speedily and fully concurring with every one of them.

For, I have charity enough to think, there are wise men among them: and
humility to think, that, as in some things I may want; so it is fit I should use
their advise, which is the end for which I called them to a Parliament. But yet
I cannot allow their wisdom such a compleatnesse and inerrability as to
exclude My self; since none of them has that part to Act, that Trust to
discharge, nor that Estate and Honor to preserve as My self; without whose
Reason concurrent with theirs (as the Suns influence is necessary in all
natures productions) they cannot beget, or bring forth any one complete and
authoritative Act of public wisdom, which makes the Laws.

But the nnreasonablenesse of some Propositions is not more evident to Me than
this is, That they are not the joint and free desires of those in their Major
number, who are of right to Sit and Vote in Parliament.

For, many of them savor very strong of that old leaven of Innovations, masked
under the name of Reformation; (which in My two last famous Predecessors
days, heaved at, and sometime threatened both Prince and Parliaments:) But, I
am sure was never wont so far to infect the whole mass of the Nobility and
Gentry of this Kingdom; however it dispersed among the Vulgar: Nor was it
likely so suddenly to taynt the Major part of both Houses, as that they should
unanimously desire, and affect so enormous and dangerous innovations in Church
and State, contrary to their former education, practice, and judgment.

Not that I am ignorant, how the choice of many Members was carried by much
faction in the Countries; some thirsting after nothing more, than a passionate
revenge of what ever displeasure they had conceived against me, my Court, or
the Clergy.

But all Reason bids me impute these sudden and vast desires of change to those
few, who armed themselves with the many-headed, and many-handed Tumults.

No less does Reason, Honor, and Safety both of Church and State command me,
to chew such morsels, before I let them down; If the straitness of my
Conscience will not give me leave to swallow down such Camels, as others do of
Sacrilege, and injustice both to God and man, they have no more cause to
quarrel with me, than for this, that my throat is not so wide as theirs. Yet
by Gods help I am resolved, That nothing of passion, or peevishness, or list
to contradict, or vanity to show my negative power, shall have any byas upon my
judgment, to make me gratify my will, by denying any thing, which my Reason
and Conscience commands me not.

Nor on the other side, will I consent to more than Reason, Justice, Honor,
and Religion persuade me, to be for Gods glory, the Churches good, my Peoples
welfare, and my own peace.

I will study to satisfy my Parliament, and my People; but I will never, for
fear, or flattery, gratify any Faction, how potent soever; for this were to
nourish the disease, and oppress the body.

Although many men's loyalty and prudence are terrified from giving me, that
free, and faithful counsel, which they are able and willing to impart, and I
may want; yet none can hinder me from craving of the counsel of that mighty
Counselor, who can both suggest what is best, and incline my heart steadfastly
to follow it.

O thou first and eternal Reason, whose wisdom is fortified with omnipotency,
furnish thy Servant, first with clear discoveries of Truth, Reason, and
Justice, in My Understanding: then so confirm My will and resolution to adhere
to them, that no terrors, injuries, or oppressions of my Enemies may ever
enforce me against those rules, which thou by them have planted in My
Conscience.

Thou never made me a King, that I should be less than a Man; and not dare
to say, Yea, or Nay, as I see cause; which freedom is not denied to the
meanest creature, that has the use of Reason, and liberty of speech.

Shall that be blameable in Me, which is commendable veracity and constancy in
others^

Thou see, O Lord, with what partiality, and injustice, they deny that
freedom to Me their KING, which Thou have given to all ^en; and which
Themselves pertinaciously challenge to themselves; while they are so tender of
the least breach of their privileges.

To Thee I make my supplication, who can guide us by an unerring rule,
through thy perplexed Labyrinths of our own thoughts, and other men's
proposalls; which, I have some cause to suspect, are purposely cast as snares,
that by My granting or denying them, I might be more entangled in those
difficulties, wherewith they lie in wait to afflict Me.

O Lord, make thy way plain before Me.

Let not My own sinful passions cloud, or divert thy sacred suggestions.

Let thy glory be my end, thy word my rule, and then thy will be done.

I cannot please all, I care not to please some men; If I may be happy to
please thee, I need not fear whom I displease.

Thou that make the wisdom of the world foolishness, and take in their
own devices, such as are wise in their own conceits, make me wise by thy
Truth, for thy honor, my Kingdoms general good, and my own souls salvation,
and I shall not much regard the worlds opinion, or diminution of me.

The less wisdom they are willing to impute to me, the more they shall be
convinced of thy wisdom directing me, while I deny nothing fit to be granted,
out of crosnesse, or humor; nor grant any thing which is to be denied, out of
any fear, or flattery of men.

Suffer me not to be guilty, or unhappy, by willing or inconsiderate advancing
any men's designs, which are injurious to the public good, while I confirm
them by my consent.

Nor let me be any occasion to hinder or defraud the public of what is best,
by any morose or perverse d^ssentings.

Make me so humbly charitable, as to follow their advise, when it appears to
be for the publ^que good, of whose affections to me, I have yet but few
evidences to assure Me.

Thou can as well bless honest errors, as blast fraudulent counsels.

Since we must give an account of every evil and idle word in private, at thy
Tribunal; Lord make me careful of those solemn Declarations of my mind which
are like to have the greatest influence upon the Public, either for woe, or
weal.

The less others con^ider what they ask, make me the more solicitous what I
answer.

Though Mine own, and My Peoples pressures are grievous, and peace would be
very pleasing; yet Lord, never suffer Me to avoid the one, or purchase the
other, with the least expense or wast of my Conscience; whereof thou O Lord
only art deservedly more Master than My self.

12. Upon the Rebellion, and troubles in Ireland.
THe Commotions in Ireland were so sudden, and so violent, that it was hard at
first either to discern the rise, or apply a remedy to that precipitant
Rebellion.

Indeed, that sea of blood, which has there been cruelly and barbarously shed,
is enough to drown any man in eternal both infamy and misery, whom God shall
find the malicious Author or Instigator of its effusion.

It fell out, as a most unhappy advantage to some men's malice against me; that
when they had impudence enough to lay any thing to my charge, this bloody
opportunity should be offered them, with which I must be aspersed. Although
there was nothing which could be more adhorred to me, being so full of sin
against God, disloyalty to my self, and destructive to my Subjects.

Some men took it very ill not to be believed, when they affirmed, that what
the Irish Rebels did, was done with my privity (at least) if not by my
Commission: But these knew too well, that it is no news for some of my Subjects
to fight, not only without my Commission, but against my Command, and Person
too; yet all the while to pretend, they fight by my Authority, and for my
Safety.

I would to God the Irish had nothing to allege for their imitation against
those, whose blame must needs be the greater, by how much Protestant Principles
are more against all Rebellion against Princes, then those of Papists. Nor will
the goodness of men's intentions excuse the scandal, and contagion of their
Examples.

But who ever fail of their Duty toward me, I must bear the blame; this Honor
my Enemies have always done me, to think moderate injuries not proportionate
to me, nor competent trialls, either of my patience under them, or my pardon of
them.

Therefore with exquisite malice they have mixed the gall and vinegar of
falsity and contempt, with the cup of my Affliction; Charging me not only with
untruths, but such, as wherein I have the greatest share of loss and dishonor
by what is committed; whereby (in all Policy, Reason, and Religion, having
least cause to give the least consent, and most grounds of utter de^estation) I
might be represented by them to the world the more inhumane and barbarous: Like
some Cyclopick monster, whom nothing will serve to eat and drink, but the flesh
and blood of my own Subjects; in whose common welfare my interest lies as much
as some men's does in their perturbations: who think they cannot do well but in
evil times, nor so cunningly as in laying the odium of those sad events on
others, wherewith themselves are most pleased, and whereof they have been not
the least occasion.

And certainly, it is thought by many wise men, that the preposterous rigor, and
unreasonable severity, which some men carried before them in England, was not
the least incentive, that kindled, and blew up into those horrid flames, the
sparks of discontent, which wanted not pre-disposed fuel for Rebellion in
Ireland; where despair being added to their former discontents, and the fears
of utter extirpation to their wonted oppressions, it was easy to provoke to an
open Rebellion, a people prone enough, to break out to all exorbitant violence,
both by some Principles of their Religion, and the natural desires of liberty;
both to exempt themselves from their present restraints, and to prevent those
after rigours, wherewith they saw themselves apparently threatened, by the
covetous zeal, and uncharitable fury of some men, who think it a great Argument
of the truth of their Religion, to endure no other but their own.

God knows, as I can with Truth wash my hands in Innocence, as to any guilt in
that Rebellion; so I might wash them in my Tears, as to the sad apprehensions
I had, to see it spread so far, and make such waste. And this in a time, when
distra^^ions, and jealousies here in England, made most men rather intent to
their own safety, or designs they were driving, then to the relief of those,
who were every day inhumanely butchered in Ireland: Whose tears and blood
might, if nothing else, have quenched, or at least for a time, repressed and
smothered those sparks of Civil dissentions, and Jealousies, which in England
some men most industriously scattered.

I would to God no man had been less affected with Irelands sad estate then my
self; I offered to go my self in Person upon that expedition; But some men
were either afraid I should have any one Kingdom quieted; or loath they were
to shoot at any mark here less then my self; or that any should have the glory
of my destruction but themselves. Had my many offers been accepted, I am
confident neither the ruin had been so great, nor the calamity so long, nor
the remedy so desperate.

So that, next to the sin of those, who began that Rebellion, theirs musts
needs be: who either hindered the speedy suppressing of it by Domestic
dissentions, or diverted the Aides, or exasperated the Rebels to the most
desperate resolutions and actions, by threatening all extremities, not only to
the known heads, and chief incendiaries, but even to the whole community of
that Nation; Resolving to destroy Root and Branch, men, women and children;
without any regard to those usual pleas for mercy, which Conquerours, not
wholly barbarous, are wont to hear from their own breasts, in behalf of those,
whose oppressive faces, rather then their malice, engaged them; or whose
imbecility for Sex and Age was such, as they could neither lift up a hand
against them, nor distinguish between their right hand and their left: Which
preposterous, and (I think) un-evangelicall Zeal is too like that of the
rebuked Disciples, who would go no lower in their revenge, then to call for
fire from Heaven upon whole Cities, for the repulse or neglect of a few; or
like that of Jacobs sons, which the Father both blamed and cursed: choosing
rather to use all extremites, which might drive men to desperate obstinacy,
then to apply moderate remedies; such as might punish some with exemplary
Justice, yet disarme others, with tenders of mercy upon their submission, and
our protection of them, from the fury of those, who would soon drown them, if
they refused to swim down the popular stream with them.

But some kind of Zeal counts all merciful moderation, luke-warmnesse; and
had rather be cruel then counted cold, and is not seldom more greedy to kill
the Bear for his skin, then for any harm he has done. The confiscation of
men's estates being more beneficial, then the charity of saving their lives, or
reforming their Errors.

When all proportionable succors of the poor Protestants in Ireland (who were
daily massacred, and overborne with numbers of now desperate Enemies) was
diverted and obstructed here; I was earnestly entreated, and generally advised
by the chief of the Protestant party there, to get them some respite and
breathing by a cessation, without which they saw no probability (unless by
miracle) to preserve the remnant that had yet escaped: God knows with how much
commiseration and solicitous caution I carried on that business, by persons of
Honor and Integrity, that so I might neither encourage the Rebels Insolence,
nor discourage the Protestants Loyalty and Patience.

Yet when this was effected in the best sort, that the necessity and difficulty
of affairs would then permit, I was then to suffer again in my reputation and
Honor, because I suffered not the Rebels utterly to devour the remaining
handfuls of the Protestants there.

I thought, that in ^ll reason, the gaining of that respite could not be so
much to the Rebels advantages (which some have highly calumniated against me)
as it might have been for the Protestants future, as well as present safety; If
during the time of that Cessation, some men had had the grace to have laid
Irelands sad condition more to heart; and laid aside those violent motions,
which were here carried on by those, that had better skill to let blood than to
stanch it.

But in all the misconstructions of my actions, (which are prone to find more
credulity in men to what is false, and evil, than love or charity to what is
true and good) as I have no Judge but God above me, so I can have comfort to
appeal to his omniscience, who does not therefore deny my Innocence, because
he is pleased so far^e to try my patience, as he did his servant Job's.

I have enough to do to look to my own Conscience, and the faithful
discharge of my Trust as a KING; I have scarce leisure to consider those
swarms of reproaches, which issue out of some men's mouths and hearts, as
easily as smoke, or sparks do out of a furnace; Much less to make such prolix
Apologies, as might give those men satisfaction: who conscious to their own
depth of wickedness, are loath to believe any man not to be as bad as
themselves.

It Is Kingly to do well, and hear ill: If I can but act the one, I shall not
much regard to bear the other.

I thank God I can hear with patience, as bad as my worst enemies can falsely
say. And I hope I shall still do better than they desire, or deserve I should.

I believe it will at last appear, that they who first began to embroyle my
other Kingdoms, are in great part guilty, if not of the first letting out, yet
of the not-timely stopping those horrid effusions of blood in Ireland.

Which (whatever my Enemies please to say, or think) I look upon, as that of
my other Kingdoms, exhausted out of my own veins; no man being so much
weakened by it, as my self; And I hope, though men's unsatiable cruelties never
will, yet the mercy of God will at length say to his justice, It is enough: and
command the Sword of Civil Wars to sheath it self: his merciful justice
intending, I trust, not our utter confusion, but our cure: the abatement of our
sins, not the desolating of these Nations.

O my God, let those infinite mercies prevent us once again, which I and my
Kingdoms have formerly abused, and can never deserve, should be restored.

Thou see how much cruelty among Christians is acted under the color of
Religion; as if we could not be Christians, unless we crucify one another.

Because we have not more loved thy Truth, and practiced in charity, thou have
suffered a Spirit of Error and bitterness, of mutual and mortal hatred to
rise among us.

O Lord, forgive wherein we have sinned, and sanctify what we have suffered.

Let our Repentance be our recovery, as our great sins have been our ruin.

Let not the miseries I and my Kingdoms have hitherto suffered seem small to
thee: but make our sins appear to our consciences, as they are represented in
the glass of thy judgments; for thou never punishest small failings with so
severe afflictions.

O therefore, according to the multitude of thy great mercies, pardon our
sins, and remove thy judgments which are very many, and very heavy.

Yet let our sins be ever more grievous to us, than thy judgments; and make
us more willing to repent, than to be relieved; first give us the peace of
penitent consciences, and then the tranquillity of united Kingdoms.

In the sea of our Saviors blood drown our sins, and through this red sea
of our own blood bring us at last to a state of piety, peace, and plenty.

As my public relations to all, make Me share in all My Subjects suff^rings;
so give Me such a pious sense of them, as becomes a Christian King, and a
loving Father of My People.

Let the scandalous and unjust reproaches cast upon Me, be as a breath, more to
kindle my compassion; Give me grace to heap charitable coals of fire upon their
heads to melt them, whose malice or cruel Zeal has kindled, or hindered the
quenching of those flames, which have so much wasted my three Kingdoms.

O resc^e and assist those poor Protestants in Ireland, whom thou have
hitherto preserved.

And lead those in the ways of thy saving Truths, whose ignorance or errors
have filled them with rebelli^us and destrustive principles; which they act
under an opinion, That they do^ thee good service.

Let the hand of thy justice be against those, who maliciously and despitefully
have raised, or fomented those cruel and desperate Wars.

Thou that art far from destroying the Innocent with the Guilty, and the
Erroneous with the Malicious; Thou that had pity on Niniveh for the many
Children that were therein, give not over the whole stock of that populous and
seduced Nation, to the wrath of those, whose covetousness makes them cruel;
nor to their anger, which is too fierce, and therefore justly cursed.

Preserve, if it be thy will, in the midst of the furnace of thy severe justice
a Posterity, which may praise thee for thy mercy.

And deal with Me, not according to man's unjust reproaches, but according to
the Innocence of my hands in thy sight.

If I have desired, or delighted in the woeful day of my Kingdoms calamities,
if I have not earnestly studied, and faithfully endeavored the preventing and
composing of these bloody distractions^ then let thy hand be against me, and my
Fathers house. O Lord, thou see I have e^emies enough of men; as I need not,
so I should not dare thus to imprecate thy curse on me and mine, if my
Conscience did not witness my integrity, which thou O Lord know right well;
But I trust not to my own merit, but thy mercies^ spare us O Lord, and be not
angry with us for ^ver^

13. Upon the Calling in of the Scots, and their Coming.
THe Scots are a Nation, upon whom I have not only common ties of Nature,
Sovereignty, and Bounty, with My Father of blessed memory; but also special
and late obligations of favors, having gratified the active Spirits among them
so far, that I seemed to many, to prefer the desires of that Party, before My
own interest and Honor. But, I see, Royal bounty emboldens some men to ask,
and act beyond all bounds of modesty and gratitude.

My charity, and Act of Pacification, forbids Me to reflect on former passages;
wherein I shall ever be far from letting any man's ingratitude, or
inconstancy, make Me repent of what I granted them, for the public good: I
pray God it may so prove.

The coming again of that Party into England, with an Army, only to conform
this Church to their late New model, cannot but seem as unreasonable, as they
would have thought the same measure offered from hence to themselves.

Other errand I could never understand, they had, (besides those common and
vulgar flourishes for Religion and Liberty) save only to confirm the
Presbyterian Copy they had set, by making this Church to write after them,
though it were in bloody Characters.

Which design and end, whether it will justify the use of such violent
means, before the divine Justice: I leave to their Consciences to judge, who
have already felt the misery of the means, but not reaped the benefit of the
end, either in this Kingdom, or that.

Such knots and crosnesse of grain being objected here, as will hardly suffer
that form which they cry up, as the only just reformation, and settling of
Government and Discipline in Churches, to go on so smoothly here, as it might
do in Scotland; and was by them imagined would have done in England, when so
many of the English Clergy, through levity, or discontent, if no worse passion,
suddenly quitted their former engagements to Episcopacy, and faced about to
their Presbytery.

It cannot but seem either passion, or some self-seeking, more then true Zeal,
and pious Discretion, for any foreign State or Church to prescribe such
medicines only for others, which themselves have used, rather successefully
then commendably; not considering that the same Physic on different
constitutions, will have different operations; That may kill one, which does
but cure another.

Nor do I know any such tough and malignant humors in the constitution of the
English Church, which gentler applications then those of an Army, might not
easily have removed: Nor is it so proper to hew out religious Reformations by
the Sword, as to polish them by fair and equal disputations among those that
are most concerned in the differences, whom not force, but Reason ought to
convince.

But their design now, seemed rather to cut off all disputation here, then to
procure a fair and equal one: For, it was concluded there, that the English
Clergy must conform to the Scots pattern before ever they could be heard,
what they could say for themselves, or against the others way.

I could have wished fairer proceedings both for their credits, who urge things
with such violence; and for other men's Consciences too, who can receive little
satisfaction in these points which are maintained rather by Soldiers fighting
in the Field, than Scholars disputing in free and learned Synods.

Sure in matters of Religion those truths gain most on men's Judgments and
Consciences, which are least urged with secular violence, which weakens Truth
with prejudices; and is unreasonable to be used, till such means of rational
conviction has been applied, as leaving no excuse for ignorance, condemns
men's obstinacy to deserved penalties.

Which no charity will easily suspect of so many learned and pious Churchmen
in England; who being always bred up, and conformable to the Government of
Episcopacy, cannot so soon renounce both their former opinion and practice,
only because that Party of the Scots will needs, by force assist a like Party
here, either to drive all Ministers, as sheep into the common fold of
Presbytery, or destroy them; at least fleece them, by depriving them of the
benefit of their Flocks. If the Scotch sole Presbytery were proved to be the
only institution of Jesus Christ, for all Churches Government; yet I believe it
would be hard to prove that Christ had given those Scots, or any other of my
Subjects, Commission by the Sword to set it up in any of my Kingdoms, without
my Consent.

What respect and obedience Christ and his Apostles paid to the chief
Governors of States, where they lived is very clear in the Gospel; but that
he, or they ever commanded to set up such a parity of Presbyters, and in such a
way as those Scots endeavor; I think is not very disputable.

If Presbytery in such a supremacy be an institution of Christ; sure it differs
from all others; and is the first and only po^nt of Christianity, that was to
be planted and watered with so much Christian blood; whose effusions run in a
stream so contrary to that of the Primitive planters, both of Christianity and
Episcopacy, which was with patient shedding of their own blood, not violent
drawing other men's; sure there is too much of Man in it, to have much of
Christ, none of whose institutions were carried on, or begun with the
temptations of Covetousness or Ambition; of both which this is vehemently
suspected.

Yet was there never any thing upon the point, which those Scots had by Army or
Commissioners to move me with, by their many Solemn obtestations, and pious
threatenings, but only this; to represent to me the wonderful necessity of
setting up their Presbyt^ry in England, to avoid the further miseries of a
War; which some men chiefly on this design at first had begun, and now
further engaged themselves to continue.

What hinders that any Sects, Schisms, or Heresies, if they can get but
numbers, strength and opportunity, may not, according to this op^nion and
pattern, set up their ways ^y the like methods of violence? all which
Pre^bytery seeks to suppress, and render odious under those names; when wise
and learned men think, that nothing has more marks of Schism, and Sectarisme,
then this Presbyterian way, both as to the Ancient, and still most Universal
way of the Church Government, and specially as to the particular Laws and
Constitutions of this English Church, which are not yet repealed, nor are like
to be for me, till I see more Rational and Religious motives, then Soldiers
use to carry in their Knapsacks.

But we must leave the success of all to God, who has many ways (having
first taken us off from the folly of our opinions, and fury of our passion) to
teach us those rules of true Reason, and peaceable Wisdom, which is from
above, tending most to Gods glory, and his Churches good; which I think my self
so much the more bound in Conscience to attend, with the most judicious Zeal
and ^are, by how much I esteem the Church above the State, the glory of Christ
above mine Own; and the salvation of men's Souls above the preservation of
their Bodies and Estates.

Nor may any men, I think, without sin and presumption, forcibly endeavor to
cast the Churches under my care and tuition, into the moulds they have fancied,
and fashioned to their designs, till they have first gained my consent, and
resolved, both my own and other men's Consciences by the strength of their
Reasons.

Other violent motions, which are neither Manly, Christian, nor Loyal, shall
never either shake or settle my Religion; nor any man's else, who knows what
Religion means: And how far it is removed from all Faction, whose proper
engine is force; the arbitrator of beasts, not of reasonable men, much less of
humble Christians, and loyal Subjects, in matters of Religion.

But men are prone to have such high conce^ts of themselves, that they care not
what cost they lay out upon their opinions; especially those, that have some
temptation of gain, to recompense their losses and hazards.

Yet I was not more scandalized at the Scots Armies coming in against my will,
and their forfeiture of so many obligations of duty, and gratitude to me: then
I wondered, how those here, could so much distrust Gods assistance; who so much
pretended Gods cause to the People, as if they had the certainty of some divine
Revelation; considering they were more then competently furnished with my
Subjects Arms and Ammunition; My Navy by Sea, my Forts, Castles, and Cities
by Land.

But I find, that men jealous of the Justifiablenesse of their doings, and
designs before God, never think they have humane strength enough to carry
their work on, seem it never so plausible to the People; what cannot be
justified in Law or Religion, had need be fortified with Power.

And yet such is the inconstancy that attends all minds engaged in violent
motion, that whom some of them one while earnestly invite to come into their
assistance; others of them soon after are weary of, and with nauseating cast
them out: what one Party thought to rivet to a setledness by the strength and
influence of the Scots, that the other rejects and contemnes; at once,
despising the Kirk Government, and Discipline of the Scots, and frustrating the
success of so chargable, more then charitable assistance: For, sure the Church
of England might have purchased at a far cheaper rate, the truth and
happiness of Reformed government and discipline (if it had been wanting)
though it had entertained the best Div^nes of Chr^stendome for their advice in
a full and free Synod; which, I was ever willing to, and desirous of, that
matters being impartially settled, might be more satisfactory to all, and more
durable.

But much of Gods justice, and man's folly will at length be discovered, through
all the filmes and pretensions of Religion, in which Politicians wrap up their
designs; In vain do men hope to build their piety on the ruins of Loyalty.
Nor can those considerations or designs be durable, when Subjects make bankrupt
of their Allegiance, under pretense of setting up a quicker trade for Religion.

But, as My best Subjects of Scotland never deserted Me, so I cannot think that
the most are gone so far from Me, in a prodigality of their love and respects
toward Me, as to make Me to despair of their return; when besides the bonds
of nature and Conscience, which they have to Me, all Reason and true Policy
will teach them, that their chiefest interest consists in their fidelity to the
Crown, not in their serviceablenesse to any Party of the People, to a neglect
and betraying of My Safety and Honor for their own advantages: However the
less cause I have to trust to men, the more I shall apply My self to God.

The Troubles of My Soul are enlarged, O Lord, bring thou me out of My
distress.

Lord direct thy Servant in the ways of that pious simplicity, which is the
best policy.

Deliver Me from the combined strength of those, who have so much of the
Serpents subtilty, that they forget the Doves Innocence.

Though hand join in hand, yet let them not prevail against My soul, to the
betraying of My Conscience, and Honor.

Thou, O Lord, can turn the hearts of those Parties in both Nations, as thou
did the men of Judah and Israel, to restore David with as much loyal Zeal,
as they did with inconstancy and eagerness pursue Him.

Preserve the love of thy Truth and uprightness in Me, and I shall not
despair of My Subjects affections returning toward Me.

Thou can soon cause the overflowing Seas to ebb, and retire back again to
the bounds which thou have appointed for them.

O My God, I trust in thee; let me not be ashamed; let not My enemies triumph
over Me.

Let them be ashamed who transgress without a cause; let them be turned back
that persecute My Soul.

Let integrity and uprightness preserve Me, for I wait on thee O Lord.

Redeem thy Church, O God, out of all its Troubles.

14. Upon the Covenant.
THe Presbyterian Scots are not to be hired at the ordinary rate of
Auxiliaries; nothing will induce them to engage, till those that call them in,
have pawned their Souls to them, by a Solemn League and Covenant:

Where many engines of religious and fair pretensions are brought chiefly to
batter, or raze Episcopacy; This they make the grand evil Spirit, which, with
some other Imps purposely added, to make it more odious, and terrible to the
Vulgar, must by so solemn a charm and exorcism be cast out of this Church,
after more than a thousand years possession here, from the first plantation of
Christianity in this Island, and an universal prescription of time and
practice in all other Churches since the Apostles times till this last Century.

But no Antiquity must plead for it, Presbytery, like a young Heir, thinks the
Father has lived long enough, and impatient not to be in the Bishops Chair
and Authority (though Laymen go away with the Revenues) all art is used to
sink Episcopacy, and lanch Presbytery in England; which was lately boyed up in
Scotland by the like artifice of a Covenant.

Although I am unsatisfied with many passages in that Covenant (some referring
to My self with very dubious and dangerous limitations) yet I chiefly wonder
at the design and drift touching the Discipline and Government of the Church;
and such a manner of carrying them on to new ways, by Oaths and Covenants,
where it is hard for men to be engaged by no less, then swearing for, or
against those things, which are of no clear moral necessity; but very
disputable, and controverted among learned and godly men: whereto the
application of Oaths can hardly be made and enjoined with that judgment, and
certainty in ones self, or that charity and candor to others of different
opinion, as I think Religion requires, which never refuses fair and equable
deliberations; yea, and dissentings too, in matters only probable.

The enjoining of Oaths upon People must needs in things doubtful be
dangerous, as in things unlawful, damnable^ and no less superfluous, where
former religious and legal Engagements, bound men sufficiently, to all
necessary duties. Nor can I see how they will reconcile such an Innovating Oath
and Covenant, with that former Protestation which was so lately taken, to
maintain the Religion established in the Church of England: since they count
Discipline so great a part of Religion.

But ambitious minds never think they have laid snares and ginnes enough to
catch and hold the Vulgar credulity: for by such politic and seemingly pious
stratagems, they think to keep the popularity fast to their Parties under the
terror of perjury: Whereas certainly all honest and wise men ever thought
themselves sufficiently bound by former ties of Religion, Allegiance, and
Laws, to God and man.

Nor can such after-Contracts, devised and imposed by a few men in a declared
Party, without My consent, and without any like power or president from Gods or
man's laws, be ever thought by judicious men sufficient either to absolve or
slacken those moral and eternal bonds of duty which lie upon all My Subjects
consciences both to God and Me.

Yet as things now stand, good men shall least offend God or Me, by keeping
their Covenant in honest and lawful ways; since I have the charity to think,
that the chief end of the Covenant in such men's intentions, was, to preserve
Religion in purity, and the Kingdoms in peace: To other then such ends and
means they cannot think themselves engaged; nor will those, that have any true
touches of Conscience endeavor to carry on the best designs, (much less such
as are, and will be daily more apparently factious and ambitious) by any
unlawful means, under that title of the Covenant: unless they dare prefer
ambiguous, dangerous and un-authorized novelties, before their known and
sworn duties, which are indispensable, both to God and My self.

I am prone to believe and hope, That many who took the Covenant, are yet firm
to this judgment, That such later Vows, Oaths, or Leagues, can never blot out
those former gravings, and characters, which by just and lawful Oaths were
made upon their Souls.

That which makes such Confederations by way of solemn Leagues and Covenants
more to be suspected, is, That they are the common road, used in all factious
and powerful perturbations of State or Church: When formalities of
extraordinary zeal and piety are never more studied and elaborate, then, when
Politicians most agitate desperate designs against all that is settled, or
sacred in Religion, and Laws, which by such s^rues are cunningly, yet forcibly
wrested by secret steps, and less sensible degrees, from their known rule and
wonted practice, to comply with the humors of those men, who aim to subdue
all to their own will and power, under the disguises of Holy Combinations.

Which cords and wythes will hold men's Consciences no longer, then force
attend^ and twists them: for every man soon grows his own Pope, and easily
absolves himself of those ties, which, not the commands of Gods word, or the
Laws of the Land, but only the subtilty and terror of a Party casts upon
him; either superfluous and vain, when they were sufficiently tied before; or
fraudulent and injurious, if by such after-ligaments they find the Imposers
really aiming to dissolve, or suspend their former, just, and necessary
obligations.

Indeed, such illegal ways seldom, or never, intend the engaging men more to
duties, but only to Parties; therefore it is not regarded how they keep their
Covenants in point of piety pretended, provided they adhere firmly to the Party
and Design intended.

I see the Imposers of it are content to make their Covenant like Manna (not
that it came from Heaven, as this did) agreeable to every man's palate and
relish, who will but swallow it: They admit any men's senses of it, the diverse
or contrary; with any salvoes, cautions, and reservations, so as they cross
not though chief Design which is laid against the Church, and Me.

It is enough if they get but the reputation of a seeming increase to their
Party; So little do men remember that God is not mocked.

In such latitudes of sense, I believe many that love Me, and the Church well,
may have taken the Covenant, who yet are not so fondly and superstitiously
taken by it, as now to act clearly against both all piety and loyalty: who
first yielded to it, more to prevent that imminent violence and ruin, which
hung over their heads in case they wholly refused it, than for any value of it,
or devotion to it.

Wherein, the latitude of some general Clauses may (perhaps) serve somewhat to
relieve them, as of Doing and endeavoring what lawfully they may, in their
Places and Callings, and according to the Word of God: for, these (indeed)
carry no man beyond those bounds of good Conscience, which are certain and
fixed, either in Gods Laws, as to the general; or the Laws of the State and
Kingdom, as to the particular regulation and exercise of men's duties.

I would to God such as glory most in the name of Covenanters, would keep
themselves within those lawful bounds, to which God has called them: Surely
it were the best way to expiate the rashness of taking it: which must needs
then appear, when besides the want of a full and lawful Authority at first to
enjoyne it, it shall actually be carried on beyond and against those ends which
were in it specified and pretended. I willingly forgive such men's taking the
Covenant, who kee^ it within such bounds of Piety, Law, and Loyalty, as can
never hurt either the Church, My self, or the Public Peace: Against which, no
man's lawful Calling can engage him.

As for that Reformation of the Church, which the Covenant pretends, I cannot
think it just or comely, that by the partial advise of a few Divines, (of so
soft and servile tempers, as disposed them to so sudden acting and compliance,
contrary to their former judgments, profession, and practice) such foul
scandals and suspicions should be cast upon the Doctrine and Government of the
Church of England, as was never done (that I have heard) by any that deserved
the name of Reformed Churches abroad, nor by any men of learning and candor at
home: all whose judgments I cannot but prefer before any men's now factiously
engaged.

No man can be more forward than My self to carry on all due Reformations, with
mature judgment, and a good Conscience, in what things I shall (after
impartial advise) be, by Gods Word, and right reason, convinced to be amiss,
I have offered more than ever the fullest, freest, and w^sest Parliaments did
desire.

But the sequel of some men's actions makes it evident, that the maine
Reformation intended, is the abasing of Episcopacy into Presbytery, and the
robbing the Church of its Lands and Revenues: For, no men have been more
injuriously used, as to their legal Rights than the Bishops, and Churchmen.
These, as the fattest Dear, must be destroyed; the other Rascal-herd of
Schisms, Heresies, etc. being lean, may enjoy the benefit of a Toleration:
Thus Naboth's Vineyard made him the only Blasphemer of his City, and fit to
die. Still I see, while the breath of Religion fills the Sails, Profit is the
Compass, by which Factious men steer their course in all seditious Commotions.

I thank God, as no men lay more open to the sacrilegious temptation of
usurping the Churches Lands, and Revenues, (which issuing chiefly from the
Crown, are held of it, and legally can revert only to the Crown with My
Consent) so I have always had such a perfect abhorrence of it in My Soul,
that I never found the least inclination to such sacrilegious Reformings: yet
no man has a greater desire to have Bishops and all Churchmen so reform^d,
that they may best deserve and use, not only what the pious munificence of My
Predecessors has given to God and the Church, but all other additions of
Christian bounty.

But no necessity shall ever, I hope, drive Me or Mine to invade or sell the
Priests Lands, which both Pharaoh's divinity, and Ioseph's true piety abhorred
to do: So unjust I think it both in the eye of Reason and Religion, to deprive
the most sacred employment of all due encouragements; and like that other
hard-hearted Pharaoh, to withdraw the Straw, and increase the Task; so
pursuing the oppressed Church, as some have done, to the red sea of a Civil
War, where nothing but a miracle can save either It, or Him, who esteems it
His greatest Title to be called, and His chiefest glory to be The Defender of
the Church, both in its true Faith, and its just fruitions; equally abhorring,
Sacrilege, and Apostasy.

I had rather live as my Predecessor Henry 3. sometime did, on the Churches
Alms, then violently to take the bread out of Bishops and Ministers mouths.

The next work will be Ieroboam's reformation, consecrating the meanest of the
People to be Priests in Israel, to serve those Golden Calves who have enriched
themselves with the Churches Patrimony and Dow^y; which how it thrived both
with Prince, Priests, and People, is well enough known: And so it will be here,
when from the tuition of Kings and Queens, which have been nursing Fathers and
Mothers of this Church, it shall be at their allowance, who have already
discovered, what hard Fathers, and Stepmothers they will be.

If the poverty of Scotland might, yet the plenty of England cannot excuse the
envy and rapine of the Churches Rights and Revenues.

I cannot so much as pray God to prevent those sad consequences, which will
inevitably follow the parity and poverty of Ministers, both in Church and
State; since I think it no less than a mocking and tempting of God, to desire
him to hinder those mischiefs whose occasions and remedies are in our own
power; it being every man's sin not to avoid the one, and not to use the other.

There are ways enough to repair the breaches of the State without the ruins
of the Church; as I would be a Restorer of the one, so I would not be an
Oppressor of the other, under the pretense of Public Debts: The occasions
contracting them were bad enough, but such a discharging of them would be much
worse; I pray God neither I, nor Mine, may be accessory to either.

To thee, O Lord, do I address My prayer, beseeching thee to pardon the
rashness of My Subjects Swearings, and to quicken their sense and observation
of those just, moral, and indispensable bonds, which thy Word, and the Laws
of this Kingdom have laid upon their Consciences; From which no pretensions of
Piety and Reformation are sufficient to absolve them, or to engage them to any
contrary practices.

Make them at length seriously to consider, that nothing violent and injurious
can be religious.

Thou allowest no man's committing Sacrilege under the Zeal of abhorring Idols.

Suffer not sacrilegious designs to have the countenance of religious ties.

Thou have taught us by the wisest of Kings, that it is a snare to take things
that are holy, and after Vows to make enquiry.

Ever keep thy Servant from consenting to perjurious and sacrilegious rapines,
that I may not have the brand and curse to all posterity of robbing Thee and
thy Church, of what thy bounty has given us, and thy clemency has accepted
from us, wherewith to encourage Learning and Religion.

Though My Treasures are Exhausted, My Revenues Diminished, and My Debts
Increased, yet never suffer Me to be tempted to use such profane Reparation^;
lest a coal from thine Altar set such a fire on My Throne and Conscience as will
be hardly quenched.

Let not the Debts and Engagements of the Public, which some men's folly and
prodigality has contracted, be an occasion to impoverish thy Church.

The State may soon recover, by thy blessing of peace upon us; The Church is
never likely, in times, where the Charity of most men is grown so cold, and
their Religion so illiberall.

Continue to those that serve Thee and thy Church all those encouragements,
which by the will of the pious Donours, and the justice of the Laws are due
unto them; and give them grace to deserve and use them aright to thy glory, and
the relief of the poor; That thy Priests may be clothed with righteousness,
and the poor may be satisfied with bread.

Let not holy things be given to Swine; nor the Churches bread to Dogs; rather
let them go about the City, grin like a Dog, and grudge that they are not
satisfied.

Let those sacred morsels, which some men have already by violence devoured
never digest with them, nor theirs; Let them be as Naboth's Vineyard to Ahab,
gall in their mouths, rottenness to their names, a moth to their Families, and
a sting to their Consciences.

Break in sunder, O Lord, all violent and sacrilegious Confederations, to do
wickedly and injuriously.

Divide their hearts and tongues who have bandyed together against the Church
and State, that the folly of such may be manifest to all men, and proceed no
further.

But so favor My righteous dealing, O Lord, that in the mercies of thee, the
most High, I may never miscarry.

15. Upon the many Iealousies raised, and Scandals cast upon the KING, to
stir up the People against Him.
IF I had not My own Innocence, and Gods protection, it were hard for Me to
stand out against those stratagems and conflicts of malice, which by Falsities
seek to oppress the Truth; and by Jealousies to supply the defect of Real
causes, which might seem to justify so unjust Engagements against Me.

And indeed, the worst effects of open Hostility come short of these Designs:
For, I can more willingly loose My Crowns, than My Credit; nor are My
Kingdoms so dear to Me, as My Reputation and Honor.

Those must have a period with My life; but the^e may survive to a glorious
kind of Immortality, when I am dead and gone: A good name being the embalming
of Princes, and a sweet consecrating of them to an Eternity of love and
gratitude among Posterity.

Those soul and false aspersions were secret engines at first employed against
My peoples love of Me: that undermining their opinion and value of Me, My
enemies, and theirs too, might at once blow up their affections, and batter
down their loyalty.

Wherein yet, I thank God, the detriment of My Honor is not so afflictive to
Me, as the ^in and danger of My peoples souls, whose eyes once blinded with
such mists of suspicions, they are soon misled into the most desperate
precipices of actions: wherein they do not only, not consider their sin and
danger, but glory in their zealous adventures; while I am rendered to them so
fit to be destroyed, that many are ambitious to merit the name of My
Destroyers, Imagining they then fear God most, when they least honor their
King.

I thank God, I never found but My pity was above My anger; no^ have My
passions ever so prevailed against Me, as to exclude My most compassionate
prayers for them, whom devout errors more than their own malice have betrayed
to a most religious Rebellion.

I had the Charity to interpret, that most part of My Subjects fought against
My ^upposed Errors, not My Person; and intended to mend Me, not to end Me: And
I hope that God pardoning their Errors, has so far accepted and answered
their good intentions, that as he has yet preserved Me, so he has by these
afflictions prepared Me, both to do him better service, and My people more
good, than hitherto I have done.

I do not more willingly forgive their seductions, which occasioned their
loyal injuries, then I am ambitious by all Princely merits to redeem them from
their unjust suspicions, and reward them for their good intentions.

I am too conscious to My own Affections toward the generality of My people, to
suspect theirs to Me; nor shall the malice of My Enemies ever be able to
deprive Me of the comfort, which that confidence gives Me; I shall never
gratify the spightfulnesse of a few with any sinister thoughts of all their
Allegiance, whom pious frauds have seduced.

The worst some men's ambition can do, shall never persuade Me, to make so bad
interpretations of most of My Subjects actions; who possibly may be Erroneous,
but not Heretical in point of Loyalty.

The sense of the Injuries done to My Subjects is as sharp, as those done to My
self; our welfares being inseparable; in this only they suffer more then My
self, that they are animated by some seducers to injure at once both themselves
and Me.

For this is not enough to the malice of My Enemies, that I be afflicted; but
it must be done by such instruments, that My afflictions grieve Me not more,
then this does, that I am afflicted by those, whose prosperity I earnestly
desire, and whose seduction I heartily deplore.

If they had been My open and foreign Enemies, I could have borne it; but
they must be My own Subjects, who are next to My Children, dear to Me: And for
the restoring of whose tranquillity, I could willingly be the Jonah; If I did
not evidently foresee, that by the divided Interests of their and Mine Enemies,
as by contrary winds the storm of their miseries would be rather increased then
allayed.

I had rather prevent My peoples ruin then Rule over them; nor am I so
ambitious of that Dominion which is but My Right, as of their happiness; if it
could expiate, or countervail such a way of obtaining it, by the highest
injuries of Subjects committed against their Sovereign.

Yet I had rather suffer all the miseries of life, and die many deaths, then
shamefully to desert, or dishonourably to betray My own just Rights and
Sovereignty; thereby to gratify the ambition, or justify the malice of My
Enemies; between whose malice, and other men's mistakes, I put as great a
difference, as between an ordinary Ague and the Plague; or the Itch of Novelty,
and the Leprosy of Disloyalty.

As Liars need have good memories, so Malicious persons need good inventions;
that their calumnies may fit every man's fancy; and what their reproaches want
of truth, they may make up with number and show.

My patience (I thank God) will better serve Me to bear, and My charity to
forgive, then My leisure to answer the many false Aspersions which some men
have cast upon Me.

Did I not more consider My Subjects Satisfaction, then My own Vindication; I
should never have given the malice of some men that pleasure, as to see Me take
notice of, or remember what they say, or object.

I would leave the Authors to be punished by their own evil manners, and
seared Consciences, which will, I believe, in a shorter time then they be aware
of, both confute and revenge all those black and false Scandalls, which they
have cast on Me; And make the world see, there is as little truth in them, as
there was little worth in the broaching of them, or Civility, (I need not say
Loyalty) in the not-suppressing of them; whose credit and reputation, even with
the people, shall ere long be quite blasted by the breath of that same furnace
of popular obloquy, and detraction, which they have studied to heat and inflame
to the highest degree of infamy, and wherein they have sought to cast and
consume My Name and Honor.

First, nothing gave Me more cause to suspect, and search My own Innoce^^y;
then when I observed so many forward to engage against Me, who had made great
professions of singular piety; For this gave to vulgar minds so bad a
reflection upon Me, and My Cause, as if it had been impossible to adhere to Me,
and not withal part from God; to think or speak well of Me, and not to
Blaspheme him; so many were persuaded that these two were utterly inconsistent,
to be at once Loyal to Me, and truly Religious toward God.

Not but that I had (I thank god) many with Me, which were both Learned and
Religious, (much above that ordinary size, and that vulgar proportion, wherein
some men glory so much) who were so well satisfied in the cause of My
sufferings, that they chose rather to suffer with Me, then forsake Me.

Nor is it strange that so religious Pretensions as were used against Me,
should be to many well-minded men a great temptation to oppose Me; Especially,
being urged by such popular Preachers, as think it no sin to lie for God, and
what they please to call Gods Cause, cursing all that will not curse with them;
looking so much at, and crying up the goodness of the end propounded, that
they consider not the lawfulness of the means used, nor the depth of the
mischief, chiefly plotted and inten^ed.

The weakness of these men's judgments must be made up by their clamours and
activity.

It was a great part of some men's Religion to scandalize Me and Mine, they
thought theirs could not be true, if they cried not down Mine as false.

I thank God, I have had more trial of his grace, as to the constancy of My
Religion in the Protestant profession of the Church of England, both abroad,
and at home, than ever they are like to have.

Nor do I know any exception, I am so liable to, in their opinion, as too
great a fixednesse in that Religion, whose judicious and solid grounds, both
from Scripture, and Antiquity, will not give My Conscience leave to approve or
consent to those many dangerous and divided Innovations, which the bold
Ignorance of some men would needs obtrude upon Me, and My People.

Contrary to those well tried foundations both of Truth, and Order, which men
of far greater Learning, and clearer Zeal, have settled in the Confession and
Constitution of this Church in England, which many former Parliaments in the
most calm, and unpassionate times, have often confirmed; In which I shall ever,
by Gods help, persevere, as believing it has most of Primitive Truth and Order.

Nor did My using the assistance of some Papists, which were my Subjects, any
way fight against My Religion, as some men would needs interpret it: especially
those who least of all men cared whom they employed, or what they said, and
did, so they might prevail.

It Is strange that so wise men, as they would be esteemed, should not conceive,
That differences of persuasion in matters of Religion may easily fall out,
where there is the samenesse of duty, Allegiance, and subjection. The first
they own as men, and Christians to God; the second, they owe to Me in Common,
as their KING; different professions in point of Religion cannot (any more than
in civil Trades) take away the community of relations either to Parents, or to
Princes: And where is there such an Oglio or medley of various Religions in the
world again, as those men entertain in their service (who find most fault with
me) without any scruple, as to the diversity o^ their Sects and Opinions?

It was, indeed, a foul and indelible shame, for such as would be counted
Protestants, to enforce Me, a declared Protestant, their Lord and King, to a
necessary use of Papists, or any other, who did but their duty to help Me to
defend My self.

Nor did I more than is lawful for any King, in such exigents to use the aid
of any his Subjects.

I am sorry the Papists should have a greater sense of their Allegiance, than
many Protestant Professors; who seem to have learned, and to practice the
worst Principles of the worst Papists.

Indeed, it had been a very impertinent and unseasonable scruple in Me, (and
very pleasing no doubt to My Enemies) to have been then disputing the points of
different beliefs in My Subjects when I was disputed with by Swords points: and
when I needed the help of My Subjects as men, no less then their prayers as
Christians.

The noise of My Evil Counselors was another useful device for those, who
were impatient any men's counsels but their own, should be followed in Church
or State; who were so eager in giving Me better counsel that they would not
give Me leave to take it with freedom, as a Man; or honor, as a King; making
their counsels more like a drench that must be powered down, than a draught
which might be fairly and leisurely drank, if I liked it.

I will not justify beyond humane errors and frailties My self, or My
Counsellours^ They might be subject to some miscarriages, yet such as were
far more reparable by second and better thoughts, than those enormious
extravagances, wherewith some men have now even wildred, and almost quite lost
both Church and State.

The event of things at last will make it evident to My Subjects, that had I
followed the worst Counsels, that My worst Counselors ever had the boldness
to offer to Me, or My self any inclination to use; I could not so soon have
brought both Church and Sta^e in three flourishing Kingdoms, to such a Chaos
of confusions, and Hell of miseries^ as some have done; out of which they
cann^t^ or will not in the midst of their many (...) advantages, redeem either
Me, or My Subjects.

No even were more willing to compl^in, than I was to redress what I saw in
Reas^n was either done or advised am^^se; and th^s I thought I had done, even
beyond the expectation of moderate men: who were sorry to see Me prone even to
injure My self, out of a Zeal to relieve My Sub^ects.

But other men's insatiable desire of revenge upon Me, My Court, and My Clergy;
has wholly beguiled both Church and State, of the benefit of all My, either
Retractations, or Concessions; and withal, has deprived all those (now so
zealous Persecutors) both of the comfort and reward of their former pretended
persecutions, wherein they so much gloried among the vulgar; and which, indeed,
a truly humble Christian will so highly prize, as rather not be relieved, then
be revenged, so as to be bereaved of that Crown of Christian Patience, which
attends humble and injured sufferers.

Another artifice used to withdraw My peoples affections from Me, to their
designs, was, The noise and o^tentation of liberty, which men are not more
prone to desire, then unapt to bear in the popular sense; which is to do what
every man likes best.

If the Divinest liberty be to will what men should, and to do what they so
will, according to Reason, Laws, and Religion; I envy not My Subjects that
liberty, which is all I desire to enjoy My self; So far am I from the desire
of oppressi^^ theirs: Nor were those Lords and Gentlemen which assisted Me so
prodigal of their liberties, as with their Lives and Fortunes to help on the
enslaving of themselves and their posterities.

As to Civil Immunities, none but such as desire to drive on their Ambitious
and Covetous designs over the ruins of Church and State, Prince, Peers, and
People, will ever desire greater Freedoms then the Laws allow; whose bounds
good men count their Ornament and Protection; others their Menacles and
Oppression.

Nor is it just any man should expect the reward and benefit of the Law, who
despises his rule and direction; losing justly his safety while he seeks an
unreasonable liberty.

Time will best inform My Subjects, that those are the best preservers of
their true liberties, who allow themselves the least licentiousness against,
or beyond the Laws.

They will feel it at last to their cost, that it is impossible those men
should be really tender of their fellow subjects liberties, who have the
hardiness to use their King with so severe restraints; against all Laws, both
Divine and Humane, under which, yet, I will rather perish, then complain to
those, who want nothing to complete their mirth, and triumph, but such music.

In point of true conscientious tenderness (attended with humility and
meekness, not with proud and arrogant activity, which seeks to hatch every
egg of different opinion to a Faction or Schism) I have often declared, how
little I desire My Laws and Scepter should entrench on Gods Sovereignty, which
is the only King of men's Consciences; and yet he has laid such restraints upon
men, as commands them to be subject for Conscience sake, giving no men l^berty
to break the Law established, further then with meekness and patience, they
are content to suffer the penalties annexed, rather then perturb the public
Peace.

The truth is, some men's thirst after Novelties, others despair to relieve the
necessities of their Fortunes, or satisfy their Ambition, in peaceable times,
(distrusting Gods providence, as well as their own merits) were the secret (but
principal) impulsives to these popular Commotions, by which Subjects have been
persuaded to expend much of those plentiful Estates they got, and enjoyed
under My Government, in peaceable times; which yet must now be blasted with all
the odious reproaches, which impotent malice can invent; and My self exposed to
all those contempts, which may most diminish the Majesty of a King, and
increase the ungrateful insolences of My People.

For Mine Honor, I am well assured, that as Mine Innocence is clear before
God, in point of any calumnies they object; so My reputation shall like the Sun
(after Owls and Bats have had their freedom in the night and darker times)
rise and recover it self to such a degree of splendor, as those ferall birds
shall be grieved to behold, and unable to bear. For never were any Princes more
glorious, than those whom God has suffered to be tried in the furnace of
afflictions, by their injurious Subjects.

And who knows but the just and merciful God will do Me good, for some men's
hard, false, and evil speeches against Me; wherein they speak rather what they
wish, than what they believe, or know.

Nor can I suffer so much in point of Honor, by those rude and scandalous
Pamphlets (which like fire in great conflagrations, fly up and down to set
all places on like flames) than those men do, who pretending to so much piety,
are so forgetful of their duty to God and Me: By no way ever vindicating the
Majesty of their KING against any of those, who contrary to the precept of God,
and precedent of Angels^ speak evil of dignities, and bring railing
accusations against those, who are honored with the name of Gods.

But it is no wonder if men not fearing GOD, should not Honor their KING.

They will easily contemn such shadows of God, who reverence not that
Supreme, and adorable Majesty, in compar^son of whom all the glory of Men and
Angels is but obscurity; yet has he graven such Characters of divine
Authority, and Sacred power upon Kings, as none may without sin seek to blot
them out. No^ shall their black veiles be able to hide the sh^ning of My face,
while God gives Me a heart frequently and humbly to converse with him, from
whom alone are all the traditions of true glory and majesty.

Thou, O Lord, know My reproach, and My dishonor, My Adversaries are all
before thee.

My Soul is among Lions, among them that are set on fire, even the Sons of
Men; whose teeth are spears and arrows; their tongue a sharp sword.

Mine enemies reproach Me all the day long, and those that are mad against Me
are sworn together.

O My God, how long shall the sons of men turn My glory into shame? how long
shall they love vanity, and seek after lies?

Thou have heard the reproaches of wicked men on every side. Hold not thy
peace, lest My E^emies prevail against me, and lay mine Honor in the dust.

Thou, O Lord, shall destroy them that speak l^es; the Lord will abhor both
the bloodthirsty, and deceitful men.

Make my righteousness to appear as the light, and mine innocence to shine
forth as the Sun at noone day.

Suffer not my silence to betray mine innocence, ^or my displeasure, my
patience; That after my Saviors example, being reviled, I may not revile
again; and being cursed by them, ^ may bless them.

Thou that would not suffer Shimei's tongue to go unpunished; when by thy
judgments on David he might seem to justi^^e his disdainful reproaches, give
me grace to intercede with thy mercy for these my enemies, that the reward of
false and lying tongues, even hot burning coals of eternal fire, may not be
brought upon them.

Let my prayers, and patience, be as water to cool and quench their tongues,
who are already set on fire with the fire of Hell, and tormented with those
malicious flames.

Let me be happy to refute, and put to silence their evill-speaking by
well-doing; and let them enjoy not the fruit of their lips, but of my prayer
for their repentance, and thy pardon.

Teach me David's patience and Hezekiah's devotion, that I may look to thy mercy
through man's malice, and see thy justice in their sin.

Let Sheba's seditious speeches, Rabshekah's railing, and Shimei's cursing,
provoke, as my humble prayer to thee, so thy renewed blessing toward me.

Though they curse, do thou bless, and I shall be blessed; and made a
blessing to my people.

That the stone, which some builders refuse, may become the head-stone of the
corner.

Look down from heaven, and save me, from the reproach of them that would
swallow me up.

Hide me in the secret of thy presence, from the prid^ of man, and keep me from
the strife of tongues.

16. Upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer-Booke.
IT is no news to have all Innovations ushered in with the name of Reformations
in Church and State, by those, who seeking to gain reputation with the Vulgar
for their extraordinary parts, and piety, must needs undo whatever was
formerly settled never so well and wisely.

So hardly can the pride of those that study Novelties, allow former times any
share or degree of wisdom or godliness.

And because matter of prayer and devotion to God justly bears a great part in
Religion, (being the Souls more immediate converse with the divine Majesty)
nothing could be more plausible to the People than to tell them, They served God
amiss in that point.

Hence our public Liturgy, or Forms of constant Prayers must be (not
amended, in what upon free and public advice might seem to sober men
inconvenient for matter or manner, to which I should easily consent, but)
wholly cashiered, and abolished, and after many popular contempts offered to
the Book, and those that used it according to their Consciences, and the Laws
in force, it must be crucified by an Ordinance, the better to please either
those men, who gloried in their extemporary vein and fluency: (...) others,
who conscious to their own formality in the use of it, thought they fully
expiated their sin of not using it aright, by laying all the blame upon it, and
a total rejection of it as a dead letter, thereby to excuse the deadness of
their hearts.

As for the matter contained in the Book, sober and learned men have
sufficiently vindicated it against the cavils and exceptions of those, who
thought it a part of piety to make what pro^ane objections they could against
it; especially for Popery and Superstition; whereas no doubt the Liturgy was
exactly conformed to the doctrine of the Church of England; and this by all
Reformed Churches is confessed to be most sound and Orthodox.

For the manner of using Set and prescribed Forms, there is no doubt but that
wholesome words being known and fitted to men's understandings, are soonest
received into their hearts, and aptest to excite and carry along with them
judicious and fervent affections.

Nor do I see any reason why Christians should be weary of a wel-composed
Liturgy (as I hold this to be) more than of all other things, wherein the
Constancy abates nothing of the excellency and usefulness.

I could never see any Reason, why any Christian should abhor, or be
forbidden to use the ^ame Forms of prayer, since he prays to the same God,
b^lieves in the same Savior, professes the same Truths, reads the same
Scriptures, has the same duties upon him, and feels the same daily wants for
the most part, both inward and outward, which are common to the whole Church.

Sure we may as well beforehand know what we pray, as to whom we pray; and in
what words, as to what sense; when we desire the same things, what hinders we
may not use the same words? our appetite and disgestion too may be good when we
use, as we pray for, our daily bread.

Some men, I hear, are so impatient not to use in all their devotions their
own invention, and gifts, that they not only disuse (as too many) but wholly
cast away and contemn the Lords Prayer; whose great guilt is, that it is the
warrant and original pattern of all set Liturgies, in the Christian Church.

I ever thought that the proud ostentation of men's abilities for invention, and
the vain affectations of variety for expressions, in Public prayer, or any
sacred administrations, merits a greater brand of sin, than that which they
call Coldness and Barrenness: Nor are men in those novelties less subject to
formal and superficial tempers (as to their hearts) than in the use of
constant Forms, where not the words, but men's hearts are too blame.

I make no doubt but a man may be very formal in the most extemporary variety;
and very fervently devout in the most wonted expressions: Nor is God more a God
of variety, than of constancy: Nor are constant Forms of Prayers more likely
to flat, and hinder the Spirit of prayer, and devotion, than un-premeditated
and confused variety to distract, and lose it.

Though I am not against a grave, modest, discreet, and humble use of Ministers
gifts, even in public, the better to fit, and excite their own, and the
Peoples affections to the present occasions; yet I know no necessity why
private and single abilities should quite justle ou^, and deprive the Church of
the joint abilities and concurrent gifts of many learned and godly men; such as
the Composers of the Service-Booke were; who may in all reason be thought to
have more of gifts and graces enabling them to compose with serious
deliberation and concurrent advise, such Forms of prayers, as may best fit the
Churches common wants, inform the Hearers understanding, and stir up that
fiduciary and fervent application of their spirits (wherein consists the very
life and soul of prayer, and that so much pretended Spirit of prayer) than any
private man by his solitary abilities can be presumed to have; which, what they
are many times (even there, where they make a great noise and show) the
affectations, emptiness, impertinency, rudeness, confusions, flatnesse,
levity, obscurity, vain, and ridiculous repetitions, the senseless, and
oft-times blasphemous expressions; all these burdened with a most tedious and
intolerable length, do sufficiently convince all men, but those who glory in
that Pharisaick way.

Wherein men must be strangely impudent, and flatterers of themselves, not to
have an infinite shame of what they so do and say, in things of so sacred a
nature, before God and the Church, after so ridiculous, and indeed, profane a
manner.

Nor can it expected, but that in duties of frequent performance, as
Sacramental administrations, and the like, which are still the same; Ministers
must either come to use their own Forms constantly, which are not like to be
so sound, or comprehensive of the nature of the duty, as Forms of Public
composure; or else they must every time affect new expressions when the subject
is the same; which can hardly be presumed in any man's greatest sufficiencies
not to want (many times) much of that compleatnesse, order, and gravity,
becoming those duties; which by this means are exposed at every celebration to
every Ministers private infirmities, indispositions, errors, disorders, and
defects, both for judgment and expression.

A serious sense of which inconvenience in the Church unavoidably following
every man's several manner of officiating, no doubt, first occasioned the
wisdom and piety of the Ancient Churches, to remedy those mischiefs, by the
use of constant Liturgies of Public composure.

The want of which I believe this Church will sufficiently feel, when the
unhappy fruits of many men's un-governed ignorance, and confident defects, shall
be discovered in more errors, schimes, disorders, and uncharitable
distractions in Religion, which are already but too many, the more is the pity.

However, if violence must needs bring in, and abett those innovations, (that
men may not seem to have nothing to do) which Law, Reason, and Religion
forbids, at least to be so obtruded, as wholly to justle out the public
Liturgy.

Yet nothing can excuse that most unjust and partial severity of those men,
who either lately had subscribed to, used and maintained the Service Book; or
refused to use it, cried out of the rigor of Laws and Bishops, which suffered
them not to use the liberty of their Consciences, in not using it.

That these men (I say) should so suddenly change the Lyturgie into a
Directory, as if the Spirit needed help for invention, though not for
expressions; or as if matter prescribed did not as much stint and obstruct the
Spirit, as if it were clothed in, and confined to, fit words: (So slight and
easy is that Legerdemain which will serve to delude the vulgar.)

That further, they should use such severity as not to suffer without penalty,
any to use the Common Prayer Book publicly, although their Consciences bind
them to it, as a duty of Piety to God, and Obedience to the Laws.

Thus I see, no men are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exacters
upon others to conform to their illegal novelties, then such, whose pride was
formerly least disposed to the obedience of lawful Constitutions; and whose
licentious humors most pretended Conscientious liberties, which free^dome,
with much regret they now allow to Me, and My Chaplains, when they may have
leave to serve Me, whose abilities, even in their ex^emporary way comes not
short of the others, but their modesty and learning far exceeds the most of
them.

But this matter is of so popular a nature, as some men knew it would not bear
learned and sober debates, lest being convinced by the evidence of Reason, as
well as Laws, they should have been driven either to sin more against their
knowledge, by taking away the Liturgy; or to displease some faction of the
people by continuing the use of it.

Though I believe they have offended more considerable men, not only for their
numbers and estates, but for their weighty and judicious piety, than those are,
whose weakness or giddiness they sought to gratify by taking it away.

One of the greatest faults some men found with the Common Prayer Book, I
believe, was this, That it taught them to pray so often for Me; to which
Petitions they had not Loyalty enough to say Amen, nor yet Charity enough to
forbear Reproaches, and even Cursings of Me in their own forms, instead of
praying for Me.

I wish their Repentance may be their only punishment; that seeing the
mischiefs which the disuse of public Liturgies has already produced, they
may restore that credit, use, and reverence to them, which by the ancient
Churches were given to Set Forms of sound and wholesome words.

And thou, O Lord, which art the same God, blessed for ever: whose mercies are
full of variety, and yet of constancy; Thou deniest us not a new and fresh
sense of our old and daily wants; nor despisest renewed affections joined to
constant expressions.

Let us not want the benefit of thy Churches united and wel-advised Devotions.

Let the matters of our prayers be agreeable to thy will, which is always the
same, and the fervency of our spirits to the motions of thy holy Spirit in us.

And then we doubt not, but thy spiritual perfections are such, as thou art
neither to be pleased with affected Novelties for matter or manner, nor
offended with the pious constancy of our petitions in them both.

Whose variety or constancy thou have no where either forbidden or commanded,
but left them to the piety and prudence of thy Church, that both may be used,
neither despised.

Keep men in that pious moderation of their judgments in matters of Religion;
that their ignorance may not offend others, nor their opinion of their own
abilities tempt them to deprive others of what they may lawfully and devoutly
use, to help their infirmities.

And since the advantage of Error consists in novelty and variety, as Truths
in unity and constancy: Suffer not thy Church to be pestered with errors, and
deformed with undecencies in thy service, under the pretense of variety and
novelty. Nor to be deprived of truth, unity, and order, under this fallacy,
That constancy is the cause of formality.

Lord keep us from formal Hypocrisy in our own hearts, and then we know that
praying to thee, or praising of thee (with David, and other holy men) in the
same forms cannot hurt us.

Give us wisdom to amend what is amiss within us, and there will be less to
mend without us.

Evermore defend and deliver thy Church from the effects of blind Zeal, and
over-bold devotion.

17. Of the differences between the KING and the two Houses, in point of
Church Government.
TOuching the GOVERNMENT of the Church by Bishops, the common Jealousy has
been, that I am earnest and resolute to maintain it, not so much out of piety,
as policy, and reason of State.

Wherein so far indeed reason of State does induce Me to approve that
Government above any other, as I find it impossible for a Prince to preserve
the State in quiet, unless he has such an influence upon Churchmen; and they
such a dependence on Him, as may best restrain the seditious exorbitancies of
Ministers tongues; who with the Keys of Heaven have so far the Keys of the
Peoples hearts, as they prevail much by their Oratory to let in, or shut out,
both Peace and Loyalty.

So that I being (as KING) entrusted by God, and the Laws, with the good both
of Church and State; I see no Reason I should give up, or weaken by any change,
that power and influence which in right and reason I ought to have over both.

The moving Bishops out of the House of Peers (of which I have elsewhere given
an account) was sufficient to take off any suspicion, that I incline to them
for any use to be made of their Votes in State affairs: Though indeed I never
thought any Bishop worthy to sit in that House, who would not Vote according to
his Conscience.

I must now in Charity be thought desirous to preserve that Government in its
right constitution, as a matter of Religion; wherein both My judgment is fully
satisfied, that it has of all other the fullest Scripture grounds, and also
the constant practice of all Christian Churches; till of late years, the
tumultuarinesse of People, or the factiousnesse and pride of Presbyters, or the
covetousness of some States and Princes, gave occasion to some men's wits to
invent new models, and propose them under specious titles of Christ's
Government, Scepter, and Kingdom; the better to serve their turns, to whom the
change was beneficial.

They must give Me leave, having none of their temptations to invite Me to
alter the Government of Bishops, (that I may have a title to their Estates) not
to believe their pretended grounds to any new ways: contrary to the full, and
constant testimony of all Histories, sufficiently convincing unbiased men; that
as the Primitive Churches were undoubtedly governed by the Apostles and their
immediate Successors the first and best Bishops; so it cannot in reason or
charity be supposed, that all Churches in the world should either be ignorant
of the rule by them prescribed, or so soon deviate from their divine and holy
pattern: That since the first Age, for 1500 years not one Example can be
produced of any settled Church, wherein were many Ministers and Congregations,
which had not some Bishop above them, under whose jurisdiction and government
they were.

Whose constant and universal practice agreeing with so large, and evident
Scripture-directions, and examples, are set down in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, for the settling of that Government, not in the persons only of Timothy
and Titus, but in the succession; (the want of Government being that, which the
Church can no more dispense with, in point of wel-being, than the want of the
word and Sacraments, in point of being.)

I wonder how men came to look with so envious an eye upon Bishops power and
authority, as to oversee both the Ecclesiastical use of them, and Apostolical
constitution: which to Me seems no less evidently set forth as to the maine
scope and design of those Epistles, for the settling of a peculiar Office,
Power, and Authority in them as President-Bishops above others, in point of
Ordination, Censures, and other acts of Ecclesiastical discipline; then those
shorter characters of the qualities and duties of Presbyter-Bishops, and
Deacons, are described in some parts of the same Epistles; who in the latitude
and community of the name were then, and may now not improperly be called
Bishops; as to the oversight and care of single Congregations, committed to
them by the Apostles, or those Apostolical Bishops, who (as Timothy and Titus)
succeeded them in that ordinary power, there assigned over larger divisions, in
which were many Presbyters.

The humility of those first Bishops avoiding the eminent title of Apostles, as
a name in the Churches style appropriated from its common notion (of a
Messenger, or one sent) to that special dignity which had extraordinary call,
mission, gifts, and power immediately from Christ: they contented themselves
with the ordinary titles of Bishops and Presbyters, until use, (the great
arbitrator of words, and master of language) finding reason to distinguish by a
peculiar name those persons, whose power and office were indeed distinct from,
and above all other in the Church, as succeeding the Apostles in the ordinary
and constant power of governing the Churches, the honor of (whose name they
moderately, yet commendably declined) all Christian Churches (submitting to
that special authority) appropriated also the name of Bishop, without any
suspicion or reproach of arrogance, to those, who were by Apostolical
propagation rightly descended and invested into that highest and largest power
of governing even the most pure and Primitive Churches: which, without all
doubt had many such holy Bishops, after the pattern of Timothy and Titus; whose
special power is not more clearly set down in those Epistles (the chief
grounds and limits of all Episcopal claim, as from divine right) then are the
characters of these perilous times, and those men that make them such; who not
enduring sound doctrine, and clear testimonies of all Churches practice, are
most perverse Disputers, and proud Usurpers, against true Episcopacy: who, if
they be not Traitors and Boasters, yet they seem to be very covetous, heady,
high-minded; inordinate and fierce, lovers of themselves, having much of the
form, little of the power of godliness.

Who, by popular heaps of weak, light, and unlearned Teachers, seek to over-lay
and smother the pregnancy and authority of that power of Episcopal Government,
which, beyond all equivocation and vulgar fallacy of names, is most
convincingly set forth, both by Scripture, and all after Histories of the
Church.

This I write rather like a Divine, than a Prince, that Posterity may see (if
ever these Papers be public) that I had fair grounds both from
Scripture-Canons, and Ecclesiastical examples, whereon My judgment was stated
for Episcopal Government.

Nor was it any policy of State, or obstinacy of will, or partiality of
affection, either to the men, or their Function which fixed Me: who cannot in
point of worldly respects be so considerable to Me as to recompense the
injuries and losses I, and My dearest relations with My Kingdoms have
sustained, and hazarded, chiefly at first upon this quarrel.

And not only in Religion, of which, Scripture is the best rule, and the
Churches Universal practice the best commentary, but also in right reason, and
the true nature of Government, it cannot be thought that an orderly
Subordination among Presbyters, or Ministers, should be any more against
Christianity, then it is in all secular and civil Governments, where parity
breeds Confusion and Faction^

I can no more believe, that such order is inconsistent with true Religion,
then good features are with beauty, or numbers with harmony.

Nor is it likely that God, who appointed several orders, and a Prelacie, in
the Government of his Church, among the Jewish Priests, should abhor or forbid
them among Christian Ministers; who have as much of the principles of schism
and division as other men; for preventing and suppressing of which, the
Apostolical wisdom (which was divine) after that Christians were multiplied
so many Congregations, and Presbyters with them, appointed this way of
Government, which might best preserve order and union with Authority.

So that I conceive it was not the favor of Princes, or ambition of
Presbyters, but the wisdom and piety of the Apostles, that first settled
Bishops in the Church; which Authority they constantly used, and enjoyed in
those times, which were purest for Religion, though sharpest for Persecution.

Not that I am against the managing of this Presidency and Authority in one
man, by the joint Counsel and consent of many Presbyters: I have offered to
restore that, as a fit means to avoid those Errors, Corruptions, and
Partialities, which are incident to any one man; Also to avoid Tyranny, which
becomes no Christians, least of all Churchmen; be^ides, it will be a means to
take away that burden, and odium of affairs, which may lie too heavy on one
man's shoulders, as indeed I think it formerly did on the Bishops here.

Nor can I see what can be more agreeable both to Reason and Religion, then
such a frame of Government which is paternall, not Magisteriall; and wherein
not only the necessity of avoiding Faction and Confusion, Emulations and
Contempts, which are prone to arise among equals in power and function; but
also the differences of some Ministers gifts, and aptitudes for Government
above others, does invite to employ them, in reference to those Abilities,
wherein they are Eminent.

Nor is this judgment of Mine touching Episcopacy, any pre-occupation of
opinion, which will not admit any oppositions against it: It is well known I
have endeavored to satisfy My self in what the chief Patrons for other ways
can say against this, or for theirs: And I find they have, as far less of
Scripture grounds, and of Reason; so for examples, and practice of the Church,
or testimonies of Histories, they are wholly destitute, wherein the whole
stream runs so for Episcopacy, that there is not the least rivulet for any
others.

As for those obtruded examples of some late reformed Churches, (for many
retain Bishops still) whom necessity of times and affairs rather excuses,
then commends for their inconformity to all Antiquity; I could never see any
reason why Churches orderly reformed and governed by Bishops should be forced
to conform to those few, rather then to the Catholic example of all Ancient
Churches, which needed no Reformation: And to those Churches at this day, who
Governed by Bishops in all the Christian world, are many more then
Presbyterians or Independents can pretend to be; All whom the Churches in My
three Kingdoms lately Governed by Bishops, would equalize (I think) if not
exceed.

Nor is it any point of wisdom or charity, where Christians differ, (as many do
in some points) there to widen the differences, and at once to give all the
Christian world (except a handful of some Protestants) so great a scandal in
point of Church Government; whom, though you may convince of their Errrours in
some points of Doctrine, yet you shall never persuade them, that to complete
their Reformation, they must necessarily desert, and wholly cast off that
Government, which they, and all before them have ever owned as Catholic,
Primitive, and Apostolical: So far, that never Schismatics, nor Heretics
(except those Arians) have strayed from the Unity, and Conformity of the Church
in that point; ever having Bishops above Presbyters.

Besides, the late general approbation and submission to this Government of
Bishops, by the Clergy, as well as the Laity of these Kingdoms, is a great
confirmation of My Judgment; and their inconstancy is a great prejudice against
their novelty; I cannot in charity so far doubt of their learning or integrity,
as if they understood not what heretofore they did; or that they did conform
contrary to their Consciences; So that their facility and levity is never to be
excused, who, before ever the point of Church Government had any free and
impartial debate, contrary to their former Oaths and practice, against their
obedience to the Laws in force, and against My consent, have not only quite
cried down the Government by Bishops; but have approved and encouraged the
violent and most illegal stripping all the Bishops, and many other Churchmen,
of all their due Authority and Revenues, even to the selling away, and utter
alienation of those Church Lands from any Ecclesiastical uses: So great a
power has the stream of times, and the prevalency of parties over some men's
judgments; of whose so sudden and so total change, little reason can be
given, besides the Scots Army coming into England.

But the folly of these men will at last punish it self, and the Desertors of
Episcopacy will appear the greatest Enemies to, and Betrayers of their own
interest: for Presbytery is never so considerable or effectual, as when it is
joined to, and crowned with Episcopacy. All Ministers will find as great a
difference in po^nt of thriving, between the favor of the People, and of
Princes, as plants do between being watered by hand, or by the sweet and
liberal dews of Heaven.

The tenuity and contempt of Clegy-men will soon let them see, what a poor
carcass they are, when parted from the influence of that Head, to whose
Supremacy they have been sworn.

A little moderation might have prevented great mischiefs; I am firm to
Primitive Episcopacy, not to have it extirpated, (if I can hinder it.)
Discretion without passion might easily reform, whatever the rust of times, or
indulgence of Laws, or corruption of manners have brought upon it. It being a
gross vulgar error to impute to, or revenge upon the Function, the faults of
times, or persons; which seditious and popular principle, and practice, all
wise men abhor.

For those secular additaments and ornaments of Authority, Civil Honor and
Estate, which My Predecessors, and Christian Princes in all Countries have
annexed to Bishops and Churchmen; I look upon them, but as just rewards of
their learning, and piety, who are fit to be in any degree of
Church Government; also enablements to works of Charity, and Hospitality, meet
strengthenings of their Authority in point of respect, and observance; which in
peaceful times is hardly paid to any Governors by the measure of their
virtues, so much, as by that of their Estates; Poverty and meannesse exposing
them and their Authority to the contempt of licentious minds, and manners,
which persecuting Times much restrained.

I would have such men Bishops, as are most worthy of those encouragements, and
best able to use them: if at any time My judgment of men failed My good
intention made My error venial: And some Bishops, I am sure, I had, whose
learning, gravity, and piety, no men of any worth or forehead can deny: But, of
all men, I would have Churchmen, especially the Governors to be redeemed from
that vulgar neglect; which (besides an innate principle of vicious opposition,
which is in all men against those that seem to reprove, or restrain them) will
necessarily follow both the Presbyterian parity, which makes all Ministers
equal; and the Independent inferiority, which sets their Pastors below the
People.

This for My judgment touching Episcopacy, wherein (God knows) I do not
gratify any design or passion with the least perverting of Truth.

And now I appeal to God above, and all the Christian world, whether it be
just for Subjects, or pious for Christians, by violence, and infinite
indignities, with servile restraints to seek to force Me their KING and
Sovereign, as some men have endeavored to do, against all these grounds of
My Judgment, to consent to their weak and divided novelties.

The greatest Pretender of them desires not more than I do, That the Church
should be governed, as Christ has appointed, in true Reason, and in Scripture;
of which, I could never see any probable show for any other ways: who either
content themselves with the examples of some Churches in their infancy and
solitude; when one Presbyter might serve one Congregation, in a City or
Country; or else they deny these most evident Truths, That the Apostles were
Bishops over those Presbyters they ordained, as well as over the Churches they
planted; and that, Government being necessary for the Churches wel-being, when
multiplied and sociated, must also necessarily descend from the Apostles to
others, after the example of that power and superiority, they had above others;
which could not end with their persons; since the use and ends of such
Government still continue.

It is most sure, that the purest Primitive and best Churches flourished under
Episcopacy; and may so still, if ignorance, superstition, avarice, revenge, and
other disorderly and disloyal passions had not so blown up some men's minds
against it, that what they want of Reasons or Primitive Patterns, they supply
with violence and oppression; wherein some men's zeal for Bishops Lands,
Houses, and Revenues has set them on work to eat up Episcopacy: which
(however other men esteem) to Me is no less sin, than Sacrilege; or a robbery
of GOD (the giver of all we have) of that portion which devout minds have
thankfully given again to him, in giving it to his Church and Prophets;
through whose hands he graciously accepts even a cup of cold water, as a
libation offered to himself.

Furthermore, as to My particular engagement above other men, by an Oath
agreeable to My judgment, I am solemnly obliged to preserve that Government,
and the Rights of the Church.

Were I convinced of the unlawfullnesse of the Function, as Antichristian,
(which some men boldly, but weakly calumniate) I could soon, with Judgment,
break that Oath, which erroneously was taken by Me.

But being daily by the best disquisition of truth, more confirmed in the
Reason and Religion of that, to which I am Sworn; How can any man that wishes
not My damnation, persuade Me at once to so notorious and combined sins, of
Sacrilege and Perjury? besides the many personal Injustices I must do to
many worthy men, who are as legally invested in their Estates, as any, who seek
to deprive them; and they have by no Law, been convicted of those crimes, which
might forfeit their Estates and Lively-hoods.

I have often wondered how men pretending to tenderness of Conscience, and
Reformation, can at once tell Me, that My Coronation Oath binds Me to Consent
to whatsoever they shall propound to Me, (which they urge with such violence)
though contrary to all that Rational and Religious freedom which every man
ought to preserve; and of which they seem so tender in their own Votes; yet at
the same time these men will needs persuade Me, That I must, and ought to
dispense with, and roundly break that part of My Oath, which binds Me agreeable
to the best light of Reason and Religion I have) to maintain the Government,
and legal Rights of the Church. It Is strange My lot should be valid in that
part, which both My self, and all men in their own case, esteem injurious and
unreasonable, as being against the very natural and essential liberty of our
souls; yet it should be invalid, and to be broken in another clause, wherein I
think My self justly obliged, both to God and Man.

Yet upon this Rack chiefly have I been held so long, by some men's ambitious
Covetousness, and sacrilegious Cruelty; torturing (with Me) both Church and
State, in Civil distentions; till I shall be forced to consent, and declare
that I do approve, what (God knows) I utterly dislike, and in My Soul abhor;
as many ways highly against Reason, Justice, and Religion: and whereto, if I
should shamefully, and di^honourably give My consent; yet should I not by so
doing, satisfy the d^vided Interests and Opinions of those Parties, which
contend with each other, as well as both against Me and Epi^copacy.

Nor can My late condescending to the Scots in point of Church Government, be
rightly objected against Me, as an inducement for Me, to consent to the like in
My other Kingdoms, For it should be considered that Episcopacy was not so
rooted and settled there, as it is here; nor I (in that respect) so strictly
bound to continue it in that Kingdom as in this; for what I think in My
judgment best, I may not think so absolutely necessary for all places, and at
all times.

If any shall impute My yiedling to them, as My failing and sin, I can easily
acknowledge it; but that is no argument to do so again, or much worse; I being
now more convinced in that point: nor indeed has My yiedling to them been so
happy and successful as to encourage Me to grant the like to others.

Did I see any thing more of Christ, as to Meekness, Justice, Or^er, Charity,
and Loyalty in those that pretend to other modes of Government, I might suspect
My judgment to be biassed, or fore^stalled with some prejudice and wontednesse
of opinion; but I have hitherto so much cause to suspect the contrary in the
manners of many of those men, that I cannot from them gain the least reputation
for their new ways of Government.

Nor can I find that in any Reformed Churches (whose paternes are so cried up,
and obtruded upon the Churches under My Dominion) that e^ther Learning, or
Religion, works of P^ety or Charity, have so flourished beyond what they have
done in My Kingdoms (by Gods blessing) which might make Me believe either
Presbytery or Independency have a more benign influence upon the Church and
men's hearts and lives, than Episcopacy in its right constitution.

The abuses of which, deserve to be extirpated, as much as the use retained;
for I think it far better to hold to primitive and uniforme Antiquity, than
to comply with divided novelty.

A right Episcopacy would at once satisfy all just desires and interests of
good Bishops, humble Presbyters, and sober People; so as Church affairs should
be managed neither with tyranny, parity, nor popularity; neither Bishops
ejected, nor Presbyters despised, nor People oppressed.

And in this integrity both of My Judgment and Conscience, I hope God will
preserve Me.

For Thou, O Lord, know my uprightness, and tenderness, as thou have set
me to be a Defender of the Faith, and a Protector of thy Church, so suffer me
not by any violence, to be overborne against my Conscience.

Arise O Lord, maintain thine own Cause, let not thy Church be deformed, as
to that Government, which derived from thy Apostles, has been retained in
purest and primitive times, till the Revenues of the Church became the object
of secular envy; which seeks to rob it of all the encouragements of Learning
and Religion.

Make me, as the good Samaritan, compassionate, and helpful to thy afflicted
Church; which some men have wounded and robbed; others pass by without regard,
either to pity, or relieve.

As my power is from thee, so give me grace to use it for thee.

And though I am not suffered to be Master of my other Rights as a KING, yet
preserve me in that liberty of Reason, love of Religion, and thy Churches
welfare, which are fixed in my Conscience as a Christian.

Preserve, from Sacrilegious invasions, those temporal blessings, which thy
providence has bestowed on thy Church for thy glory.

Forgive their sins and errors, who have deserved thy just permission, thus
to let in the wild Boar, and subtle Foxes, to wast and deform thy Vineyard,
which thy right hand has planted, and the dew of Heaven so long watered to a
happy and flourishing estate.

O let me not bear the infamous brand to all Posterity of being the first
Christian KING in this Kingdom, who should consent to the oppression of thy
Church, and the Fathers of it; whose errors I would rather, with Constantine,
cover with silence, and reform with meekness, than expose their persons, and
sacred Functions, to vulgar contempt.

Thou, O Lord, see how much I have suffered with, and for thy Church, make no
long tarrying O my God, to deliver both me, and it, from unreasonable men;
whose counsels have brought forth, and continue such violent confusions, by a
precipitant destroying the ancient boundaries of thy Churches peace; thereby
letting in all manner of errors, schisms, and disorders.

O thou God, of order, and of truth, in thy good ^ime, abate the malice, aswage
the rage, and confound all the mischievous devices of thine, mine, and thy
Churches enemies.

That I, and all that love thy Church, may sing praises to thee, and ever
magnify the salvation, even before the sons of men.

18. Upon Vxbridge-Treaty, and other Offers made by the KING.
I Look upon the way of Treaties, as a retiring from fighting like Beasts, to
arguing like Men; whose strength should be more in their understandings, than
in their limbs.

And though I could seldom get opportunities to Treat, yet I never wanted
either desire or disposition to it; having greater confidence of My Reason,
than My Sword: I was so wholly resolved to yield to the first, that I thought
neither My self, nor others, should need to use the second, if once we rightly
understood each other.

Nor did I ever think it a diminution of Me, to prevent them with Expresses of
My desires, and even importunities to Treat: It being an office, not only of
humanity, rather to use Reason, than Force; but also of Christianity to seek
peace and ensue it.

As I am very unwillingly compelled to defend My self with Arms, so I very
willingly embraced any thing tending to Peace.

The events of all War by the Sword being very dubious, and of a Civil War
uncomfortable; the end hardly recompencing, and late repairing the mischief of
the means.

Nor did any success I had ever enhaunce with Me the price of Peace, as
earnestly desired by Me as any man; though I was like to pay dearer for it than
any man: All that I sought to reserve was, Mine Honor, and My Conscience; the
one I could not part with as a KING, the other as a Christian.

The Treaty at Uxbridge gave the fairest hopes of an happy composure; had
others applied themselves to it with the same moderation, as I did, I am
confident the War had then ended.

I was willing to condescend, as far as Reason, Honor, and Conscience, would
g^ve Me leave; nor were the remaining differences so essential to My Peoples
happiness; or of such consequence; as in the least kind to have hindered My
Subjects either security, or prosperity; for they better enjoyed both^ many
years, before ever those demands were made, some of which, to deny, I think the
greatest Justice to My self, and favor to My Subjects.

I see, Jealousies are not so easily allayed, as they are raised: Some men are
more afraid to retreat from violent Engagements, than to Engage: what is
wanting in equity, must be made up in pertinacy. Such as had little to enjoy in
peace, or to lose in war, studied to render the very name of Peace odious and
suspected.

In Church affairs, where I had least liberty of prudence, having so many
strict ties of Conscience upon Me; yet I was willing to condescend so far to
the settling of them, as might have given fair satisfaction to all men, whom
faction, covetousness, or superstition had not engaged more, than any true
zeal, charity, or love of Reformation.

I was content to yield to all that might seem to advance true piety; I only
sought to continue what was necessary in point of Order, Maintenance, and
Authority to the Churches Government; and what I am persuaded (as I have
elsewhere set down My thoughts more fully) is most agreeable to the true
Principles of all Government, raised to its full stature and perfection, as
also to the primitive Apostolical pattern, and the practice of the Universal
Church conform thereto.

From which wholly to recede, without any probable reason urged or answered,
only to satisfy some men's wills and fantasies (which yet agree not among
themselves in any point, but that of extirpating Episcopacy, and fighting
against Me) must needs argue such as softness, and infirmity of mind in Me, as
will rather part with Gods Truth, than Man's Peace, and rather lose the Churches
honor, than cross some men's Factious humors.

God knows, and time will discover, who were most too blame for the
un-succesfulnesse of that Treaty, and who must bear the guilt of
after-calamities. I believe, I am very excusable both before God, and all
unpassionate men, who have seriously weighed those transactions, wherein I
endeavored no less the restoration of Peace to My people, than the
preservation of my own Crowns to my Posterity.

Some men have that height, as to interpret all fair Condescendings, as
Arguments of feebleness, and glory most in an unflexible stiffness, when they
see others most ^upple and inclinable to them.

A grand Maxim with them was always to ask something, which in reason and
honor must be denied, that they might have some color to refuse all that was
in other things granted; setting Peace at as high a rate, as the worst effects
of War; endeavoring first to make Me destroy My self by dishonorable
Concessions, that so they might have the less to do.

This was all which that Treaty, or any other produced, to let the world see,
how little I would deny, or they grant, in order to the Public peace.

That it gave occasion to some men's further restivenesse, is imputable to their
own depraved tempers, not to any Concessions or Negations of Mine: I have
always the content of what I offered, and they the regret, and blame, for what
they refused.

The highest tide of success set me not above a Treaty, nor the lowest ebb
below a Fight: Though I never thought it any sign of true valor, to be
prodigal of men's lives, rather then to be drawn to produce our own reasons,
or subscribe to other men's.

That which made Me for the most part presage the unsuccesfulnesse of any
Treaty, was, some men's unwillingnesse to Treat: which implied some things were
to be gained by the Sword, whose unreasonablenesse they were loath to have
fairly scanned, being more proper to be acted by Soldiers, than by
Counselors.

I pray God forgive them that were guilty of that Treaties breaking; and give
them grace to make their advantages gotten by the Sword a better opportunity to
use such moderation, as was then wanting; that so though Peace were for our
sins justly deferred, yet at last it may be happily obtained; what we could not
get by our Treaties, we may gain by our Prayers.

O Thou, that art the God of Reason, and of Peace, who disdainest not to Treat
with Sinners, preventing them with offers of atonement, and bese^ching them to
be reconciled with thy self: who want not power, or justice, to destroy
them; yet aboundest in mercy to save: soften our hearts by the blood of our
Redeemer, and persuade us to accept of Peace with thy self, and both to procure
and preserve peace among our selves, as Men and Christians, How often have I
entreated for Peace, but when I speak thereof, they make them ready to War.

Condemn us not to our passions^ which are destructive, both of our selves,
and of others.

Clear up our understandings, to see thy Truth, both in Reason, as Men; and in
Religion, as Christians: and incline all our hearts ^o hold the unity of the
Spirit, in the bond of Peace.

Take from us that enmity which is now in our hearts against thee: and give us
that charity which should be among our selves.

Remove the evils of War we have deserved, and bestow upon us that Peace,
which only Christ our great Peacemaker can merit.

19. Upon the various events of the War; Victories, and Defeats.
THe various Successes of this unhappy war, have at least, afforded Me variety
of good Meditations: sometimes God was pleased to try Me with Victory, by
worsting My Enemies, that I might know how with moderation and thanks to own,
and use his power, who is only the true Lord of Hosts; able when he pleases to
repress the confidence of those, that fought against Me, with so great
advantages for power and number.

From small beginnings on My part he let Me see, that I was not wholly forsaken
by My peoples love, or his protection.

Other times God was pleased to exercise My patience, and teach Me not to trust
in the arm of Flesh, but in the living God.

My sins sometimes prevailed against the justice of My Cause: and those that
were with Me wanted not matter and occasion for his just chastisement both of
them, and Me: Nor were My enemies less punished by that prosperity, which
hardened them to continue that injustice by open hostility, which was began by
most riotous and unparliamentary Tumults.

There is no doubt but personal and private sins may oft-times over-balance
the Justice of Public engagements; nor does God account every gallant Man (in
the worlds esteem) a fit instrument to assert in the way of War a righteous
Cause; The more men are prone to arrogate to their own skill, valor and
strength, the less does God ordinarily work by them for his own glory.

I am sure the event or success can never state the Justice of any Cause, nor
the peace of men's Consciences, nor the eternal fate of their Souls.

Those with Me had (I think) clearly and undoubtedly, for their Justification
the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land, together with their own Oaths; all
requiring obedience to My just Commands; but to none other under Heaven without
Me, or against Me, in the point of raising Arms.

Those on the other side are forced to fly to the shifts of some pretended
Fears, and wild fundamentals of State (as they call them) which actually
overthrow the present fabric, both of Church and State; being such imaginary
Reasons for self-defence as are most impertinent for those men to allege, who
being My Subjects, were manifestly the first assaulters of Me and the Laws:
first by unsuppressing the Tumults, after by listed Forces: The same
Allegations they use, will fit any Faction that has but power and confidence
enough to second with the Sword, all their demands against the present Laws
and Governors; which can never be such as some side or other will not find
fault with, so as to urge what they call a Reformation of them to a Rebellion
against them, some parasitick Preachers have dared to call those Martyrs, who
died fighting against Me, the Laws, their Oaths, and the Religion Established.

But sober Christians know, That glorious Title, can with Truth be applied only
to those, who sincerely preferred Gods Truth, and the^r duty in all these
particulars before their lives, and all that was dear to them in this world;
who having no advantageous designs by any Innovation, were religiously
sensible of those ties to God, the Church, and My self, which lay upon their
Souls, both for obedience and just assistance.

God could, and I doubt not but he did through his mercy, crown many of them
with eternal life, whose lives were lost in so just a Cause; The destruction
of their bodies being sanctified, as a means to save their Souls.

Their wounds, and temporal ruin serving as a gracious opportunity for their
eternal health and happiness; while the evident approach of death did,
through Gods grace, effectually dispose their hearts to such Humility, Faith,
and Repentance, which together with the Rectitude of their present engagement,
would fully prepare them for a better life then that, which their enemies
brutish and disloyal fierceness could deprive them of; or without Repentance
hope to enjoy.

They have often indeed, had the better against My side in the Field, but
never, I believe, at the bar of Gods Tribunal, or their own Consciences;
where they are more afraid to encounter those many pregnant Reasons, both from
Law, Allegiance, and all true Christian grounds, which conflict with, and
accuse them in their own thoughts, then they often were in a desperate bravery to
fight against those Forces, which sometimes God gave Me.

Whose condition conquered, and dying, I make no question, but is infinitely
more to be chosen by a sober man, (that duly values his duty, his soul, and
eternity, beyond the enjoyments of this present life) then the most triumphant
glory, wherein their and Mine Enemies supervive; who can hardly avoid to be
daily tormented by that horrid guilt, wherewith their suspicious, or now
convicted Consciences do pursue them, especially since they and all the world
have seen, how false and un-intended those pretensions were, which they first
set forth, as the only plausible (though not justifiable) grounds of raising a
War, and continuing it thus long against Me, and the Laws established; in
whose safety and preservation all honest men think the welfare of their Country
does consist.

For, and with all which, it is far more honorable and comfortable to
suffer, then to prosper in their ruin and subversion.

I have often prayed, that all on My side might join true piety with the sense
of their Loyalty; and be as faithful to God and their own souls, as they were
to Me. That the defects of the one might not blast the endeavors of the other.

Yet I cannot think, that any shows, or truth of piety on the other side were
sufficient to dispense with, or expiate the defects of their Duty and Loyalty
to Me, which have so pregnant convictions on men's Consciences, that even
profaner men are moved by the sense of them to venture their lives for Me.

I never had any victory which was without My sorrow, because it was on Mine
own Subjects, who, like Absalom, died many of them in their sin: And yet I
never suffered any Defeat, which made Me despair of Gods mercy and defense.

I never desired such Victories, as might serve to conquer, but only restore
the Laws and Liberties of My people; which I saw were extremely oppressed,
together with My Rights by those men, who were impatient of any just restraint.

When Providence gave Me, or denied Me Victory, My desire was neither to boast
of My power, nor to charge God foolishly; who I believed at last would make all
things to work together for My good.

I wished no greater advantages by the War, then to bring My Enemies to
moderation, and My Friends to peace.

I was afraid of the temptation of an absolute conquest, and never prayed more
for victory over others, than over My self. When the first was denied, the
second was granted Me, which God saw best for Me.

The different events were but the methods of divine justice, by contrary winds
to winow us: That, by punishing our sins, he might purge them from us; and by
deferring peace, he might prepare us more to prize, and better to use so great
a blessing.

My often Messages for Peace showed, that I delighted not in War: as My
former Concessions sufficiently testified, how willingly I would have prevented
it; and My total unpreparednesse for it, how little I intended it.

The conscience of My Innocence forbade Me to fear a War; but the love of My
Kingdoms commanded Me (if possible) to avoid it.

I am guilty in this War of nothing, but this, That I gave such advantages to
some men, by confirming their power, which they knew not to use with that
modesty, and gratitude, which became their Loyalty and My confidence.

Had I yielded less, I had been opposed less; had I denied more, I had been
more obeyed.

It Is now too late to review the occasions of the War; I wish only a happy
conclusion, of so unhappy beginnings: The unevitable fate of our sins was (no
doubt) such, as would no longer suffer the divine justice to be quiet: we
having conquered his patience, are condemned by mutual conquerings, to destroy
one another: for, the most prosperous successes on either side, impair the
welfare of the whole.

Those Victories are still miserable, that leave our sins un-subdued;
flushing our pride, and animating to continue injuries.

Peace it self is not desirable, till repentance have prepared us for it.

When we fight more against our selves, and less against God, we shall cease
fighting against one another; I pray God these may all meet in our hearts, and
so dispose us to an happy conclusion of these Civil Wars; that I may know
better to obey God, and govern My People, and they may learn better to obey
both God and Me.

Nor do I desire any man should be further subject to Me, then all of us may
be subject to God.

O my God, make me content to be overcome, when thou will have it so.

Teach me the noblest vistory over my self, and my Enemies by patience; which
was Christ's conquest, and may well become a Christian King.

Between both thy hands, the right sometimes supporting, and the left
afflicting; fashion us to that frame of piety thou likest best.

Forgive the pride that attends our prosperous, and the repinings, which follow
our disastrous events; when going forth in our own strength thou withdrawest
thine, and go not forth with our Armies.

Be thou all, when we are something, and when we are nothing; that thou may
have the glory, when we are in a victorious, or inglorious condition.

Thou O Lord know, how hard it is for me to suffer so much evil from my
Subjects, to whom I intend nothing but good; and I cannot but suffer in those
evils which they compel me to inflict upon them; punishing my self in their
punishments.

Since therefore both in conquering, and being conquered, I am still a
Sufferer; I beseech thee to give me a double portion of thy Spirit, and that
measure of grace, which only can be sufficient for me.

As I am most afflicted, so make me most reformed: that I may be not only
happy to see an end of these civil distractions, but a chief Instrument to
restore and establish a firm, and blessed Peace to my Kingdoms.

Stir up all Parties pious ambitions to overcome each other with reason,
moderation, and such self-denial, as becomes those, who consider, that our
mutual divisions are our common distractions, and the Union of all is every
good man's chiefest interest.

If O Lord, as for the sins of our peace, thou have brought upon us the
miseries of war; so for the sins of war ^hou should see fit still to
deny us the blessing of peace, and so to keep us in a circulation of miseries;
yet give me thy Servant, and all Loyal, though afflicted Subjects, to enjoy
that peace which the world can neither give to us, nor take from us.

Impute not to me the blood of my Subjects, which with infinite unwillingnesse
and grief, has been shed by me, in my just and necessary defense; but wash me
with that precious blood, which has been shed for me, by my great Peacemaker,
Jesus Christ. Who will, I trust, redeem me shortly out of all my troubles: for,
I know the triumphing of the Wicked is but short, and the joy of Hypocrites is
but for a moment.

20. Upon the Reformations of the Times.
NO Glory is more to be envied than that, of due Reforming either Church or
State, when deformities are such, that the perturbation and novelty are not
like to exceed the benefit of Reforming.

Although God should not honor Me so far, as to make Me an Instrument of so
good a work, yet I should be glad to see it done.

As I was well pleased with this Parliaments first intentions to reform what
the Indulgence of Times, and corruption of manners might have depraved; so I am
sorry to see after the freedom of Parliament was by factious Tumults
oppressed, how little regard was had to the good Laws established, and the
Religion settled; which ought to be the first rule and standard of reforming:
with how much partiality, and popular compliance the passions, and opinions of
men have been gratified, to the detriment of the Public, and the infinite
scandal of the Reformed Religion.

What dissolutions of all Order, and Government, in the Church; what novelties
of Schisms, and corrupt opinions; what undecencies and confusions in sacred
administrations; what sacrilegious invasions upon the Rights and Revenues of
the Church; what contempt and oppressions of the Clergy; what injurious
diminutions and persecutings of Me, have followed, (as showers do warm gleames)
the talk of Reformation, all sober men are Witnesses, and with My self, sad
Spectators hith^rto.

The great miscarriage I think is, that popular clamours and fury, have been
allowed the reputation of Zeal, and the public sense; so that the study to
please some Parties has indeed injured all.

Freedom, moderation, and impartiality are sure the best tempers of reforming
Councels, and endeavors: w^^t is acted by Factions, cannot but offend more,
than it pleases.

I have offered to put all differences in Church affairs and Religion to the
free consultation of a Synod or Convocation rightly chosen; the results of
whose Counsels as they would have included the Votes of all, so its like they
would have given most satisfaction to all.

The Assembly of Divines, whom the two Houses have applied ^in an unwonted way)
to advise of Church Affairs, I dislike not further, then that they are not
legally convened and chosen; nor Act in the name of all the Clergy of England;
nor with freedom and impartiality can do any thing, being limited and
confined, if not overawed, to do and declare what they do.

For I cannot think so many men cried up for learning and piety, who formerly
allowed the Liturgy and Government of the Church of England, as to the maine,
would have so suddenly agreed quite to abolish both of them, (the last of
which, they knew to be of Apostolical institution, at least; as of Primitive
and Universal practice) if they had been left to the liberty of their own
suffrages, and if the influence of contrary Factions had not by secret
encroachments of hopes, and fears, prevailed upon them, to comply with so
great and dangerous Innovations in the Church; without any regard to their own
former judgment and practice, or to the common interest and honor of all the
Clergy, and in them of Order, Learning, and Religion against examples of all
Ancient Churches; the Laws in force, and My consent; which is never to be
gained, against so pregnant light, as in that point shines on My understanding.

For I conceive, that where the Scripture is not so clear and punctual in
precepts, there the constant and Universal practice of the Church, in things
not contrary to Reason, Faith, good Manners, or any positive Command, is the
best Rule that Ch^istians can follow.

I was willing to grant, or restore to Presbitery, what with Reason or
Discretion it can pretend to, in a conjuncture with Episcopacy; but for that
wholly to invade the Power, and by the Sword to arrogate, and quite abrogate
the Authori^y of that Ancient Order, I think neither just, as to Episcopacy,
nor safe for Presbitery; nor yet any way convenient for this Church or State.

A due reformation had easily followed moderate Counsels; and such (I believe)
as would have given more content, even to the most of those Divines, who have
been led on with much Gravity and Formality, to carry on other men's designs:
which no doubt many of them by this time discover, though they dare not but
smother their frustrations, and discontents.

The specious and popular titles, of Christ's Government, Throne, Scepter, and
Kingdom (which certainly is not divided, nor has two faces, as their parties
now have, at least) also the noise of a through Reformation, these may as
easily be fined on new models, as fair colors may be put to ill-favored
figures.

The breaking of Church-windowes, which Time had suffic^ently defaced; pulling
down of Crosses, which were but civil, not Religious marks; defacing of the
Monuments, and Inscriptions of the Dead, which served but to put Posterity in
mind, to thank God, for that clearer light, wherein they live; The leaving of
all Ministers to their liberties, and private abilities, in the Public service
of God, where no Christian can tell to what he may say Amen; nor what adventure
he may make, of seeming, at least, to consent to the Errors, Blasphemies, and
ridiculous Undecencies, which bold and ignorant men li^t to vent in their
Prayers, Preaching, and other Offices. The setting forth also of old
Catechismes, and Confessions of Faith new dressed, importing as much, as if there
had been no sound or clear Doctrine of Faith in this Church, before some four
or five years consultation had matured their thoughts, touching their first
Principles of Religion.

All these, and the like are the effects of popular, specious, and deceitful
Reformations, (that they might not seem to have nothing to do) and may give
some short flashes of content to the vulgar, (who are taken with novelties, as
children with babies, very much, but not very long) But all this amounts not
to, nor can in Justice merit the glory of the Churches through Reformation;
since they leave all things more deformed, disorderly, and discontented, then
when they began, in point of Piety, Morality, Charity, and good Order.

Nor can they easily r^compense or remedy the inconveniences and mischiefs,
which they have purchased so dearly, and which have, and every will necessarily
ensue, till due remedies be applied.

I wish they would at last, make it their Unanimous work, to do Gods work, and
not their own: Had Religion been first considered (as it merited) much trouble
might have been prevented.

But some men thought, that the Government of this Church and State, fixed by
so many Laws, and long Customs, would not run into their new moulds, till
they had first melted it in the fire of a Civil War; by the advantages of
which they resolved, if they prevailed, to make My self and all My Subjects
fall down, and worship the Images they should form and set up: If there had
been as much of Christ's Spirit, for meekness, wisdom, and charity, in men's
hearts, as there was of his name used in the pretensions, to reform all to
Christ's Rule, it would certainly have obtained more of Gods blessing, and
produced more of Christ's Glory, the Churches good, the Honor of Religion, and
the Unity of Ch^istians.

Public Reformers had need first Act in private, and practice that on their
own hearts, which they purpose to ^rie on others; for Deformities within, will
soon betray the Pretenders of public Reformations, to such private designs as
must needs hinder the public good.

I am sure the right Methods of Reforming the Church cannot consist with that
of perturbing the Civil State, nor can Religion be justly advanced by
depressing Loyalty, which is one of the chiefest Ingredients, and Orn^ments of
true Religion, for next to fear God, is, Honor the King.

I doubt not but Christ's Kingdom may ^e ^et up without pulling down Mine; nor
will any men in impartial times appear good Christians, that approve not
themselves good Subjects.

Christ's Government will confirm Mine, not overthrow it, since as I own Mine
from Him, so I desire to rule for his Glory, and his Churches good.

Had some men truly intended Christ's Government, or knew what it meant, in
their hearts, they could never have been so ill governed in their words, and
actions, both against Me, and one another.

As good ends cannot justify evil means, so nor will evil beginnings ever
bring forth good conclusions; unless God, by a miracle of Mercy, create Light
out of Darkness, order out of our confusions, and peace out of our passions.

Thou, O Lord, who only can give us beauty for ashes, and Truth for
Hypocrisy; suffer us not to be miserably deluded with Pharisaicall washings,
instead of Christian reformings.

Our greatest deformities are within, make us the severest Censurers, and first
Reformers of our own souls.

That we may in clearness of judgment, and uprightness of heart be means to
reform what is indeed amiss in Church and State.

Create in us clean hearts, O Lord, and renew right spirits within us; that we
may do all by thy directions, to thy glory, and with thy blessing.

Pity the deformities, which some rash and cruel Reformers have brought upon
this Church and State; Quench the fires which Factions have kindled, under the
pretense of Reforming.

As thou have showed the world by their divisions, and confusions, what is the
pravity of some men's intentions, and weakness of their judgments; so bring us
at last more refined out of these fires, by the methods of Christian and
charitable Reformations; wherein nothing of ambition, revenge, covetousness,
or sacrilege, may have any influence upon their counsels, whom thy providence
in just and lawful ways shall entrust with so great, good, and now most
necessary work. That I and my People may be so blessed with inward piety, as may
best teach us how to use the blessing of outward peace.

21. Upon His Majesty's Letters taken and divulged.
THe taking of My Letters was an opportunity, which, as the malice of Mine
enemies could hardly have expected; so they know not how with honor and
civility to use it: Nor do I think with sober and worthy minds any thing in
them, could tend so much to My reproach, as the odious divulging of them did to
the infamy of the Divulgers: The greatest experiments of virtue and Nobleness
being discovered in the greatest advantages against an enemy, and the greatest
obligations being those, which are put upon us by them, from whom we could
least have expected them.

And such I should have esteemed the concealing of My Papers; The freedom and
secrecy of which, commands a civility from all men, not wholly barbarous; nor
is there any thing more inhumane than to expose them to public view.

Yet since providence will have it so, I am content so much of My heart (which
I study to approve to Gods omniscience) should be discovered to the world,
without any of those dresses, or popular captations, which some men use in
their Speeches, and Expresses; I wish My Subjects had yet a clearer sight into
My most retired thoughts:

Where they might discover, how they are divided between the love and care I
have, not more to preserve My own Rights, than to procure their peace and
happiness, and that extreme grief to see them both deceived and destroyed.

Nor can any men's malice be gratified further by My Letters, than to see My
constancy to My Wife, the Laws, and Religion. Bees will gather Honey where the
Spider sucks Poison.

That I endeavor to avoid the pressures of my Enemies, by all fair and just
correspondencies; no man can blame, who loves me, or the Commonwealth, since
my Subjects can hardly be happy if I be miserable, or enjoy their peace and
liberties while I am oppressed.

The world may see how soon men's design, like Absoloms, is by enormous actions
to widen differences, and exasperate all sides to such distances, as may make
all reconciliation desperate.

Yet I thank God I can not only with patience bear this, as other indignities,
but with Charity forgive them.

The integrity of My intentions is not jealous of any injury, My expressions
can do them, for although the confidence of privacy may admit greater freedom
in writing such Letters, which may be liable to envious exceptions; yet the
Innocence of My chief purposes cannot be so obtained, or mis-interpreted by
them, as not to let all men se^, that I wish nothing more then an happy
composure of differences with Justice and Honor, not more to My own, then My
peoples content, who have any sparks of Love or Loyalty left in them: who, by
those My Letters may be convinced, that I can both mind and act My own, and My
Kingdoms Affairs, so as becomes a Prince; which Mine Enemies have always
been very loath should be bel^eved of me, as if I were wholly confined to the
Dictates and Directions of others; whom they please to brand with the names of
Evil Counselors.

Its probable some men will now look upon me as my own Counselor, and having
none else to quarrel with under that notion, they will hereafter confine the^r
anger to my self: Although I know they are very unwilling I should enjoy the
liberty of my own Thoughts, or follow the light of my own Conscience, which
they labor to bring into an absolute captivity to themselves; not allowing me
to think their Counsels to be other then good for me, which have so long
maintained a War against Me.

The Victory they obtained that day, when my Letters became their prize, had
been enough to have satiated the most ambitious thirst of popular glory among
the Vulgar; with whom prosperity gains the greatest esteem and applause; as
adversity exposes to their greatest slighting and dis-respect: As if good
fortune were always the shadow of Virtue and Justice, and did not oftener
attend vicious and injurious actions, as to this world.

But I see no secular advantages seem sufficient to that cause, which began
with Tumults, and depends chiefty upon the reputation with the vulgar.

They think no Victories so effectual to their designs as those, that most
rout and waste my Credit with my People; in whose hearts they seek by all
means to smother and extinguish all sparks of Love, Respect and Loyalty to Me,
that they may never kindle again, so as to recover Mine, the Laws, and the
Kingdoms Liberties, which some men seek to overthrow: The taking away of my
Credit is but a necessary preparation to the taking away of my Life, and my
Kingdoms; First I must seem neither fit to Live, nor worthy to Reign; By
exquisite methods of cunning and cruelty, I must be compelled, first to follow
the Funerals of my Honor, and then be destroyed: But I know Gods un-erring
and impartial Justice can, and will overrule the most perverse wills and
designs of men; He is able, and (I hope) will turn even the worst of mine
Enemies thoughts and actions to my good.

Nor do I think, that by the surprise of my Letters, I have lost any more then
so many papers: How much they have lost of that reputation, for Civility and
Humanity (which ought to be paid to all men, and most becomes such as pretend
to Religion) besides that of respect and Honor, which they owe to their KING,
present, and aftertimes will judge. And I cannot think that their own
consciences are so stupid, as not to inflict upon them some secret impressions
of that shame and dishonor, which attends all unworthy actions, have they
never so much of public flattery, and popular countenance.

I am sure they can never expect the divine approbation of such indecent
actions, if they do but remember how God blessed the modest respect and filial
tenderness, which Noah's Sons bare to their Father; nor did his open
infirmity justify Chams impudency, or exempt him from that curse of being
Servant of Servants; which curse must needs be on them who seek by
dishonorable actions to please the Vulgar, and confirm by ignoble acts, their
dependence upon the People.

Nor can their malicious intentions be ever either excusable, or prosperous;
who thought by this means to expose Me, to the highest reproach and contempt of
My People; forgetting that duty of modest concealment, which they owed to the
Father of their Country, in case they had discovered any real uncomelinesse;
which, I thank God they did not; who can, and I believe has made Me more
respected in the hearts of many (as he did David) to whom they thought, by
publishing My private Letters, to have rendered Me as a Vile Person, not fit to
be trusted or considered, under any Notion of Majesty.

But thou, O Lord, whose wise and all-disposing providence, orders the
greatest contingences of humane affairs; make me to see the constancy of thy
mercies to me, in the greatest advantages thou seem to give the malice of my
Enemies against me.

As thou did blast the counsel of Achitophel, turning it to David's good, and
his own ruin: so can thou defeat their design, who intended by publishing
my private Letters, nothing else, but to render me more odious and contemptible
to My People.

I must first appeal to thy Omniscience, who can witness with my integrity,
how unjust and false those scandalous misconstructions are, which my enemies
endeavor by those Papers of mine to represent to the world.

Make the evil they imagined, and displeasure they intended thereby against
me, so to return on their own heads, that they may be ashamed, and covered
with their own confusion, as with a Cloak.

Thou see how mine Enemies use all means to cloud mine Honor, to pervert my
purposes, and to slander the footsteps of thine Anointed.

But give me an heart content to be dishonored for thy sake, and thy Churches
good.

Fix in me a purpose to honor thee, and then I know thou will honor me,
either by restoring to me the enjoyment of that Power and Majesty, which thou
have suffered some men to seek to deprive me of; or by bestowing on me that
crown of Christian patience, which knows how to serve thee in honor, or
dishonor, in good report or evil.

Thou, O Lord, art the fountain of goodness, and honor; thou art clothed
with excellent Majesty; make me to partake of thy excellency for wisdom,
justice, and mercy, and I shall not want that degree of Honor, and Majesty,
which becomes the Place in which thou have set Me; who art the lifter up of My
head, and My salvation.

Lord, by thy Grace, lead Me to thy Glory, which is both true and eternal.

22. Upon His Majesty's leaving Oxford, and going to the Scots.
ALthough God has given Me three Kingdoms, yet in these He has not now left
Me any place, where I may with Safety and Honor rest my Head: Showing me that
himself is the safest Refuge, and the strongest Tower of defense, in which I
may put my Trust.

In these extremities, I look not to man so much as to God, He will have it
thus; that I may wholly cast my self, and my now distressed affairs upon his
mercy, who has both hearts and hands of all men in his dispose.

What Providence denies to Force, it may grant to Prudence: Necessity is now my
Counselor, and commands me to study my safety by a disguised withdrawing from
my chiefest strength, and adventuring upon their Loyalty, who first began my
Troubles. Happily God may make them a means honorably to compose them.

This my confidence of Them, may dis-arme and overcome them; my rendering my
Person to Them, may engage their affections to me, who have often professed, They
fought not against Me, but for Me.

I must now resolve the riddle of their Loyalty: and give them opportunity to
let the world see, they mean not what they do, but what they say.

Yet must God be My chiefest Guard; and My Conscience both My Counselor and
My Comforter: Though I put My Body into their hands, yet I shall reserve My
Soul to God, and My self; nor shall any necessities compel Me, to desert Mine
Honor, or swerve from My Judgment.

What they sought to take by force, shall now be given them in such a way of
unusual confidence of them, as may make them ashamed not to be really such, as
they ought, and professed to be.

God sees it not enough to desert Me of all Military power to defend My self;
but to put Me upon using their power, who seem to fight against Me, yet ought
in duty to defend Me.

So various are all humame affairs, and so nece^sitous may the state of
Princes be, that their greatest danger may be in their supposed safety, and
their safety in their supposed danger.

I must now leave those, that have Adhered to Me, and apply to those that have
Opposed Me; this method of Peace may be more prosperous, than that of War,
both to stop the effusion of blood, and to close those wounds already made: and
in it I am no less solicitous for My Friends safety, than Mine own; choosing
to venture My self upon further hazards, rather than expose their resolute
Loyalty to all extremities.

It is some skill in play to know when a game is lost; better fairly to go
over, than to contest in vain.

I must now study to reinforce My judgment, and fortify My mind with Reason
and Religion; that I may not seem to offer up My Souls liberty, or make My
Conscience their Captive; who ought at first to have used Arguments, not Arms,
to have persuaded My consent to their new demands.

I thank God no success, darkens or disguises Truth to me; and I shall no
less conform my words to my inward dictates now, than if they had been, as
the words of a KING ought to be among loyal Subjects, full of power.

Reason is the divinest power. I shall never think my self weakened while I may
make full and free use of that. No eclypse of outward fortune shall rob me of
that light; what God has denied of outward strength, his grace, I hope, will
supply with inward resolutions; not morosity to deny, what is fit to be
granted; but not to grant any thing, which Reason and Religion bids me deny.

I shall never think my self less than my self while I am able thus to
preserve the Integrity of my Conscience, the only Jewel now left me, which is
worth keeping.

O thou Sovereign of our Souls, the only Commander of our Consciences;
though I know not what to do, yet mine eyes are toward thee: To the protection
of thy mercy I still commend my self.

As thou have preserved me in the day of Battle, so thou can still show me
thy strength in my weakness.

Be thou unto me in my darkest night, a pillar of fire, to enlighten and direct
me; in the day of my hottest affliction, be also a pillar of cloud to
overshadow and protect me; be to me, both a Sun and a Shield.

Thou know, that it is not any perverseness of will, but just persuasions of
Honor, Reason, and Religion, which have made me thus far to hazard my
Person, Peace, and Safety, against those, that by force have sought to wrest
them from Me.

Suffer not my just resolutions to abate with my outward Forces; let a good
Conscience always accompany Me, in My solitude and desertions.

Suffer me not to betray the powers of Reason, and that fortress of My Soul,
which I am entrusted to keep for thee.

Lead Me in the paths of thy righteousness, and show me thy salvation.

Make my ways to please thee, and then thou will make Mine Enemies to be at
peace with Me.

23. Upon the Scots delivering the KING to the English; and His Captivity at
Holmeby.
YEt may I justify those Scots to all the world in this, that they have not
deceived me; for I never trusted to them further, than to men: if I am sold by
them, I am only sorry they should do it; and that my price should be so much
above my Saviors.

These are but further Essays, which God will have me make of man's uncertainty,
the more to fix me on himself; who never fails them that trust in him; Though
the Reeds of Egypt break under the hand of him that leans on them: yet the
Rock of Israel will be an everlasting stay and defense.

Gods providence commands me to retire from all to himself, that in him I may
enjoy my self, which I lose, while I let out my hopes to others.

The solitude and captivity, to which I am now reduced, gives me leisure enough
to study the worlds vanity, and inconstancy.

God sees it is fit to deprive me of Wife, Children, Army, Friends, and
Freedom, that I may be wholly his, who alone is all.

I care not much to be reckoned among the Unfortunate, if I be not in the black
List of irreligious, and sacrilegious Princes^

No Restraint shall ensnare my Soul in sin; nor gain that of me, which may
make my Enemies more insolent, my Friends ashamed, or my Name accursed.

They have no great cause to triumph, that they have got my Person into their
power; since my Soul is still my own: nor shall they ever gain my Consent
against my Conscience.

What they call obstinacy, I know God accounts honest constancy, from which
Reason and Religion, as well as Honor, forbid me to recede.

It Is evident now, that it was not Evil Counselors with me, but a good
Conscience in me, which has been fought against; nor did they ever intend to
bring me to my Parliament, till they had brought my mind to their obedience.

Should I grant what some men desire, I should be such as they wish me; not
more a King, and far less both Man and Christian.

What Tumults and Armies could not obtain, neither shall Restraint; which
though it have as little of safety to a Prince, yet it has not more of danger.

The fear of men shall never be my snare; nor shall the love of any liberty
entangle my soul: Better others betray me, than my self: and that the price of
my liberty should be my Conscience; the greatest injuries my Enemies seek to
inflict upon me, cannot be without my own consent.

While I can deny with Reason, I shall defeat the greatest impressions of their
malice, who neither know how to use worthily, what I have already granted; nor
what to require more of me but this, That I would seem willing to help them to
destroy My self and Mine.

Although they should destroy me, yet they shall have no cause to despise me.

Neither liberty nor life are so dear to me, as the peace of my Conscience,
the Honor of my Crowns, and the welfare of my People; which my Word may
injure more than any War can do; while I gratify a few to oppress all.

The Laws will, by Gods blessing, revive, with the love and Loyalty of my
Subjects; if I bury them not by my Consent, and cover them in that grave of
dishonor, and injustice, which some men's violence has dug for them.

If my Captivity or death must be the price of their redemption, I gr^dge not
to pay it.

No condition can make a King miserable, which carries not with it, his Souls,
his Peoples, and Posterities thraldom.

Aftertimes may see, what the blindness of this Age will not; and God may at
length show my Subjects, that I choose rather to suffer for them, than with
them; happily I might redeem my self to some show of liberty, if I would
consent to enslave them: I had rather hazard the ruin of one King, than to
confirm many Tyrants over them; from whom I pray God deliver them, whatever
becomes of Me, whose solitude has not left Me alone.

For thou, O God, infinitely good, and great, art with Me, whose presence is
better than life; and whose service is perfect freedom.

Own Me for thy Servant, and I shall never have cause to complain for want of
that liberty, which becomes a Man, a Christian, and a King.

Bless Me still with Reason, as a Man; with Religion, as a Christian; and with
Co^stancy in Justice, as a King.

Though thou suffer Me to be stripped of all outward ornaments, yet preserve
Me ever in those enjoyments, wherein I may enjoy thy self; and which, cannot
be taken from Me against my will.

Let no fire of affliction boil ^ver My passion to any impatience, or sordid
fears.

There be many say of Me, There is no help for Me: do thou lift up the Light
of thy Countenance, upon Me, and I shall neither want safety, liberty, nor
Majesty.

Give Me that measure of patience and Const^ncy, which my condition now
requires.

My strength is scattered, My expectation from Men defeated, My Person
restrained: O be not thou far from Me, lest My Enemies prevail too much
against Me.

I am become a wonder, and a scorn to many: O be thou my Helper and Defender.

Show some token upon me for good, that they that hate me may be ashamed,
because thou Lord have helped and comforted me: establish me with thy free
Spirit, that I may do, and suffer thy will, as thou would have me.

Be merciful to me, O Lord, for my Soul trusts in thee: yea and in the
shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge until these calamities be overpast.

Arise to deliver me, make no long ^arrying, O my God. Though thou killest me,
yet will I trust in thy mercy, and my Savior merit.

I know that my Redeemer lives; though thou leadest me through the vayl and
shadow of death, yet shall I fear none ill.

24. Upon their denying His Majesty the Attendance of His Chaplains.
WHen Providence was pleased to deprive Me of all other civil comforts and
secular attendants, I thought the absence of them all might best be supplied by
the attendance of some of My Chaplains; whom for their Function I reverence,
and for their Fidelity I have cause to love. By their learning, piety, and
prayers, I hoped to be either better enabled to sustain the want of all other
enjoyments, or better fitted for the recovery and use of them in Gods good
time: so reaping by their pious help a spiritual harvest of grace amidst the
thorns, and after the plowings of temporal crosses.

The truth is, I never needed or desired more the service and assistance of men
judiciously pious, and soberly devout.

The solitude they have confined Me unto, adds the Wilderness to my
temptations; For the company they obtrude upon Me, is more sad than any
solitude can be.

If I had asked My Revenues, My Power of the Militia, or any one of My
Kingdoms, it had been no wonder to have been denied in those things, where the
evil policy of men forbids all just restitution, lest they should confess an
injurious usurpation: But to deny Me the Ghostly comfort of My Chaplains
seems a greater rigor and barbarity, then is ever used by Christians to the
meanest Prisoners, and greatest Malefactors; whom though the Justice of the Law
deprive of worldly comforts, yet the mercy of Religion allows them the benefit
of their Clergy, as not aiming at once to destroy their Bodies, and to damn
their Souls.

But My Agony must not be relieved with the presence of any one good Angel;
for such I account a Lear^ed, Godly, and discreet Divine: and such I would have
all Mine to be.

They that envy My being a King, are loath I should be a Christian; while they
seek to deprive Me of all things else, They are afraid I should save my Soul.

Other sense, Charity it self can hardly pick out of those many harsh Repulses
I received, as to that Request so often made for the attendance of some of My
Chaplains.

I have sometime thought the Unchristiannesse of those denialls might arise
from a displeasure some men had to see me prefer my own Divines before their
Ministers: whom, though I respect for that worth and piety which may be in
them; yet I cannot think them so proper for any present comforters or
Physicians; Who have (some of them at least) had so great an influence in
occasioning these calamities, and inflicting these wounds upon Me.

Nor are the soberest of them so apt for that devotionall compliance, and
juncture of hearts, which I desire to bear in those holy Offices, to be
performed with Me, and for Me; since their judgments standing at a distance
from me, or in jealousy of me, or in opposition against me, their Spirits
cannot so harmoniously accord with mine, or mine with theirs, either in Prayer,
or other holy duties, as is meet, and most comfortable; whose golden Rule, and
bond of Perfection consists in that of mutual Love and Charity.

Some remedies are worse then the diseas^, and some comforters more miserable
then misery it self; when like Jobs friends, they seek not to fortify ones
mind with patience; but persuade a man by betraying his own Innocence, to
despair of Gods mercy; and by Justifying their injuries, to strengthen the
hands, and harden the hearts of Insolent Enemies.

I am so much a friend to all Churchmen, that have any thing in them beseeming
that ^acred function, that I have hazarded my own Interests, chiefly upon
Conscience and Constancy to maintain their Rights; whom the more I looked upon
as Orphans, and under the sacrilegious eyes of many cruel and rapacious
Reformers; so I thought it my duty the more to appear as a Father, and a
Patron for them and the Church. Although I am very unhandsomly requited by some
of them; who may live to repent no less for My sufferings, than their own
ungrateful errors, and that injurious contempt and meannesse, which they have
brought upon their Calling and Persons.

I pity all of them, I despise none: only I thought I might have leave to make
choice of some for My special Attendants, who were best approved in My
Judgment, and most suitable to My affection. For, I held it better to seem
undevout, and to hear no men's prayers, than to be forced, or seem to comply
with those petitions, to which the heart cannot consent, nor the tongue say
Amen, without contradicting a man's own understanding, or belying his own
soul.

In Devotions, I love neither profane boldness, nor pious non-sense^ but such
an humble and judicious gravity as shows the Speaker to be at once considerate
both of Gods Majesty, the Churches honor, and his own Vileness; both knowing
what things God allows him to ask, and in what manner it becomes a Sinner to
supplicate the divine Mercy for himself, and others.

I am equally scandalized with all prayers, that sound either imperiously, or
rudely, and passionately; as either wanting humility to God, or charity to men,
or respect to the duty.

I confess I am better pleased, as with studied and premeditated Sermons, so
with such public Forms of Prayer, as are fitted to the Churches and every
Christians daily and common necessities; because I am by them better assured,
what I may join My heart unto, than I can be of any man's extemporary
sufficiency; which as I do not wholly exclude from public occasions, so I
allow its just liberty and use in private and devout retirements; where neither
the solemnity of the duty, nor the modest regard to others, do require so
great exactness as to the outward manner of performance. Though the light of
understanding, and the fervency of affection, I hold the maine and most
necessary requisites both in constant, and occasional, solitary, and sociall
Devotions.

So that I must needs seem to all equal minds with as much Reason to prefer the
service of My own Chaplains before that of their Ministers, as I do the Liturgy
before their Directory.

In the one, I have been always educated and exercised; In the other, I am not
yet Catechized, nor acquainted: And if I were, yet should I not by that, as by
any certain rule and Canon of devotion, be able to follow or find out the
indirect extravagancies of most of those men, who highly cry up that as a piece
of rare composure and use; which is already as much despised and disused by
many of them, as the Common Prayer sometimes was by those men; a great part of
whose piety hung upon that popular pin of railing against, and contemning the
Government, and Liturgy of this Church. But, I had rather be condemned to the
woe of Vae soli, than to that of Vae vobis Hypocritis, by seeming to pray what
I do not approve.

It may be, I am esteemed by My Denyers sufficient of My self to discharge My
duty to GOD as a Priest, though not to Men as a Prince.

Indeed, I think both Offices, Regal and Sacerdotall, might well become the
same Person; as anciently they were under one name, and the united rights of
primogeniture: Nor could I follow better presidents, if I were able, than those
two eminent Kings, David, and Solomon; not more famous for their Scepters and
Crowns, than one was for devout Psalms and Prayers; the other for his divine
Parables and Preaching: whence the one merited and assumed the name of a
Prophet, the other of a Preacher. Titles indeed of greater honor, where
rightly placed, than any of those the Roman Emperors affected from the Nations
they subdued: it being infinitely more glorious to convert Souls to Gods
Church by the Word, than to conquer men to a subjection by the Sword.

Yet since the order of Gods wisdom and providence has, for the most part,
always distinguished the gifts and offices of Kings, of Priests, of Princes
and Preachers; both in the Jewish and Christian Churches: I am sorry to find My
self reduced to the necessity of being both, or enjoying neither.

For such as seek to deprive Me of Kingly Power and Sovereignty; would no less
enforce Me to live many Months without all Prayers, Sacraments, and Sermons,
unless I become My own Chaplain.

As I owe the Clergy the protection of a Christian KING, so I desire to enjoy
from them the benefit of their gifts and prayers; which I look upon as more
prevalent than My own, or other men's; by how much they flow from minds more
enlightened, and affections less distracted, than those, which are encombred
with secular affairs: besides, I think a greater blessing and acceptablenesse
attends those duties, which are rightly performed, as proper to, and within the
limits of that calling, to which God and the Church have specially designed and
consecrated some men: And however, as to that Spiritual Government, by which
the devout Soul is subject to Christ, and through his merits daily offers it
self and its services to GOD, every private believer is a King and Priest,
invested with the honor of a Royal Priesthood; yet as to Ecclesiastical
order, and the outward polity of the Church, I think confusion in Religion will
as certainly follow every man's turning Priest or Preacher, as it will in the
State, where every one affects to rule as King.

I was always bred to more modest, and I think more pious Principles: the
consciousnesse to My spiritual defects makes Me more prize and desire those
pious assistances, which holy and good Ministers, either Bishops or Presbyters,
may afford Me; especially in these extremities, to which God has been pleased
to suffer some of My Subjects to reduce Me; so as to leave them nothing more,
but My life to take from Me: and to leave Me nothing to desire, which I thought
might less provoke their jealousy and offense to deny Me, than this of having
some mean^s afforded Me for My Souls comfort and support.

To which end I made choice of men, as no way (that I know) scandalous, so
every way eminent for their learning and piety, no less than for their
Loyalty: nor can I imagine any exceptions to be made against them, but only
this, that they may seem too able and too well affected toward Me and My
service.

But this is not the first service (as I count it the best) in which they have
forced Me to serve My self; though I must confess I bear with more grief and
impatience the want of My Chaplains, than of any other My Servants; and next
(if not beyond in some things) to the being sequestered from my Wife and
Children, since from these indeed more of humane and temporary affections, but
from those more of heavenly and eternal improvements may be expected.

My comfort is, that in the enforced (not neglected) want of ordinary means,
God is wont to afford extraordinary supplies of his gifts and graces.

If his Spirit will teach Me and help My Infirmities in prayer, reading and
meditation (as I hope he will) I shall need no other, either Orator or
Instructor.

To Thee therefore, O My God, do I direct My now solitary prayers; what I want
of others help, supply with the more immediate assistances of thy Spirit, which
alone can both enlighten My darkness, and quicken My dullness.

O thou Sun of righteousness, thou sacred Fountain of heavenly light and
heat, at once clear and warm my heart, both by instructing of me, and
interceding for me: In thee is all fullness: From thee all sufficiency: By thee
is all acceptance. Thou art company enough, and comfort enough: Thou art my
King, be also my Prophet and my Priest. Rule me, teach me, pray in me, for me;
and be thou ever with me.

The single wrestlings of Jacob prevailed with thee, in that sacred Duel, when
he had none to second him but thy self; who did assist him with power to
overcome thee, and by a welcome violence to wrest a blessing from thee.

O look on me thy Servant, in infinite mercy, whom thou did once bless with
the joint and sociated Devotions of others, whose fervency might inflame the
coldness of my affections toward thee; when we went to, or met in thy House
with the voice of joy and gladness, worshipping thee in the unity of spirits,
and with the bond of Peace.

O forgive the neglect, and not improving of those happy opportunities.

It is now thy pleasure that I should be as a Pelican in the wilderness, as a
Sparrow on the house top, and as a coal scattered from all those pious
glowings, and devout reflections, which might best kindle, preserve, and
increase the holy fire of thy graces on the Altar of my heart, whence the
sacrifice of prayers, and incense of praises, might be duly offered up to thee.

Yet O thou that breakest not the bruized Reed, nor quenchest the smoking
Flax, do not despise the weakness of my prayers, nor the smotherings of my
soul in this uncomfortable lonenesse; to which I am constrained by some men's
uncharitable denialls of those helps, which I much want, and no less desire.

O let the hardness of their hearts occasion the softnings of mine to thee,
and for Them. Let their hatred kindle my love, let their unreasonable denials
of my Religious desires the more excite my prayers to thee. Let their
inexorable deafness incline thine ear to me; who art a God easy to be
entreated; thine ear is not heavy, that it cannot, nor thy heart hard, that it
will not hear; nor thy hand shortened, that it cannot help Me thy desolate
Supplyant.

Thou permittest men to deprive me of those outward means, which thou have
appointed in thy Church; but they cannot debar me from the communion of that
inward grace, which thou alone breathest into humble hearts.

O make me such, and thou will teach me; thou will hear me, thou will help me:
The broken and contrite heart I know thou will not despise. Thou, O Lord can
at once make me thy Temple, thy Priest, thy Sacrifice, and thine Altar; while
from an humble heart I (alone) daily offer up in holy meditations, fervent
prayers, and unfeigned tears my self to thee; who preparest me for thee,
dwell in me, and acceptest of me.

Thou O Lord did cause by secret supplies and miraculous infusions, that the
handful of meal in the vessel should not spend, nor the little oil in the
cruise fail the Widow during the time of drought and dearth.

O look on my soul, which as a Widow, is now desolate and forsaken: let not
those saving Truths I have formerly learned now fail my memory; nor the sweet
effusions of thy Spirit, which I have sometime felt, now be wanting to my heart
in this famine of ordinary and wholesome food for the refreshing of my Soul.

Which yet I had rather choose than to feed from those hands who mingle my bread
with ashes, and my wine with gall; rather tormenting, than teaching me; whose
mouths are proner to bitter reproaches of me, than to hearty prayers for me.

Thou know, O Lord of truth, how often they wrest thy holy Scriptures to My
destruction, (which are clear for their subjection, and my preservation) O let
it not be to their damnation.

Thou know how some men (under color of long prayers) have sought to
devour the houses of their Brethren, their King, and their God.

O let not those men's balmes break my head, nor their Cordialls oppress my
heart, I will evermore pray against their wickedness.

From the poison under their tongues, from the snares of their lips, from the
fire, and the swords of their words ever deliver Me, O Lord, and all those
Loyal and Religious hearts, who desire and delight in the prosperity of my
soul, and who seek by their prayers to relieve this sadness, and solitude of
thy servant, O my King and my God.

25. Penitential Meditations and Vows in the KING'S solitude at Holmeby.
GIve ear to my words o Lord, consider my Meditation, and hearken to the voice
of my cry, my King and my God, for unto thee will I pray.

I said in my haste I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes; nevertheless
thou hear the voice of my supplication, when I cry unto thee.

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who can abide
it? But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared; therefore shall
sinners fly unto thee.

I acknowledge my sins before thee, which have the aggravation of my condition;
the eminency of my place adding weight to my offenses.

Forgive, I beseech thee, my Personal, and my Peoples sins; which are so
far mine, as I have not impr^ved the power thou gave me, to thy glory, and
my Subjects good: Thou have now brought me from the glory and freedom of a
King, to be a Prisoner to my own Subjects: Justly, o Lord, as to thy
overruling hand, because in many things I have rebelled against thee.

Though thou have restrained my Person, yet enlarge my heart to thee, and thy
grace toward Me.

I come far short of David's piety; yet since I may equal David's afflictions,
give me also the comforts and the sure mercies of David.

Let the penitent sense I have of my sins, be an evidence to me, that thou have
pardoned them.

Let not the evils, which I and my Kingdoms have suffered, seem little unto
thee; though thou have not punished us according to our sins.

Turn thee (O Lord) unto me; have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and
afflicted.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged; O bring thou me out of my troubles.

Have thou forgotten to be gracious, and shut up thy loving kindness in
displeasure?

O remember thy compassions of old, and thy loving kindnesses, which have been
for many generations.

I had utterly fainted, if I had not believed to see thy goodness in the land
of the living.

Let not the sins of our prosperity deprive us of the benefit of thy
afflictions.

Let this fiery trial consume the dross, which in long peace and plenty we
had contracted.

Though thou continuest miseries, yet withdraw not thy grace; what is wanting
of prosperity, make up in patience and repentance.

And if thy anger be not to be yet turned away, but thy hand of justice must be
stretched out still; Let it I beseech thee be against me, and my Fathers house;
as for these sheep, what have they done?

Let my sufferings satiate the malice of mine, and thy Churches Enemies.

But let their cruelty never exceed the measure of my charity.

Banish from me all thoughts of Revenge, that I may not lose the reward, nor
thou the glory of my patience.

As thou give me a heart to forgive them, so I beseech thee do thou forgive
what they have done against thee and me.

And now, o Lord, as thou have given me an heart to pray unto thee; so hear and
accept this Vow, which I make before thee.

If thou will in mercy remember Me, and my Kingdoms; In continuing the light
of thy Gospel, and settling thy true Religion among us.

In restoring to us the benefit of the Laws, and the due execution of Justice.

In suppressing the many Schisms in Church, and Factions in State.

If thou will restor^ me and mine to the Ancient rights and glory of my
Predecessors.

If thou will turn the he^rts of my people to thy self in Piety, to me in
Loyalty, and to one another in Charity.

If thou will quench the flames, and withdraw the fuel of these Civil Wars.

If thou will bless us with the freedom of public Counsels, and deliver the
Honor of Parliaments from the insolency of the vulgar.

If thou will keep me from the great offense of enacting any thing against my
Conscience; and especially from consenting to sacrilegious rapines, and
spoilings of thy Church.

If thou will restore me to a capacity to glorify thee in doing good, both to
the Church and State.

Then shall my soul praise thee, and magnify thy name before my People.

Then shall thy glory be dearer to me then my Crowns; and the advancement of
true Religion both in purity and power be my chiefest care.

Then will I rule my People with Justice, and ^y Kingdoms with equity.

To thy more immediate hand shall I ever own as the rightful succession, so
the merciful restoration of My Kingdoms, and the glory of them.

If thou will bring Me again with peace, safety, and honor, to My chiefest
City, and my Parliament.

If thou will again put the Sword of Justice into My hand to punish and
protect.

Then will I make all the world to see, and my very Enemies to enjoy the
benefit of this Vow and resolution of Christian charity, which I now make unto
thee O Lord.

As I do freely pardon for Christ's sake those that have offended me in any
kind; so my hand shall never be against any man to revenge what is past, in
regard of any particular injury done to me.

We have been mutually punished in our unnatural divisions; for thy sake O
Lord, and for the love of my Redeemer, have I purposed this in my heart, That I
will use all means in the ways of amnesty, and indemnity, which may most
fully remove all fears, and bury all jealousies in forgetfulness.

Let thy mercies be toward me and mine, as my resolutions of Truth and Peace
are toward my People.

Hear my prayer O Lord, which goes not out of feigned lips.

Blessed be God, who has not turned away my prayer; nor taken his mercy from
me.

O my soul, commit thy way to the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass.

But if thou will not restore me and mine, what am I that I should charge thee
foolishly?

Thou O Lord have given, and thou have taken, Blessed be thy name.

May my People and thy Church be happy, if not by me, yet without me.

26. Upon the Armies Surprisall of the KING at Holmeby, and the ensuing
distractions in the two Houses, the Army, and the City.
WHat part God will have me now to act or suffer in this new and strange scene
of affairs, I am not much solicitous; some little practice will serve that
man, who only seeks to represent a part of honesty and honor.

This surprise of Me tells the world, that a KING cannot be so low, but He is
considera^le; adding weight to that Party where he appears.

This motion, like others of the Times, seems excentrique and irregular, yet
not well to be resisted or quieted: Better swim down such a stream, than in
vain to strive against it.

These are but the struglings of those twins, which lately one womb enclosed,
the younger striving to prevail against the elder; what the Presbyterians have
hunted after, the Independents now seek to catch for themselves.

So impossible is it for lines to be drawn from the center, and not to divide
from each other, so much the wider, by how much they go farther from the point
of union.

That the Builders of Babel should from division fall to confusion, is no
wonder; but for those that pretend to build Jerusalem, to divide their tongues
and hands, is but an ill ^men; and sounds too like the fury of those Zealots,
whose intestine bitterness and divisions were the greatest occasion of the
last fatal destruction of that City.

Well may I change my Keepers and Prison, but not my captive condition, only
with this hope of bettering, that those who are so much professed Patrons for
the Peoples Liberties, cannot be utterly against the Liberty of their KING;
what they demand for their own Consciences, they cannot in Reason deny to Mine.

In this they seem more ingenuous, than ^^e Presbyterian rigor, who, sometimes
complaining of exacting their conformity to laws, are become the greatest
Exactors of other men's submission to their novell injunctions, before they are
stamped with the Authority of Laws, which they cannot well have without My
con^ent.

It Is a great argument, that the Independents think themselves manumitted from
their Rivals service, in that they carry on a business of such consequence, as
the assuming My Person into the Armies custody, without any Commission, but
that of their own will and power. Such as will thus adventure on a King, must
not be thought over-modest, or timorous to carry on any design they have a
mind to.

Their next motion menaces, and scares both the two Houses and the City: which
soon after acting over again that former part of tumultuary motions, (never
questioned, punished, or repented) must now suffer for both; and see their
former sin in the glass of the present terrors and distractions.

No man is ^o blind as not to see here^n the hand of divine justice; they that
by Tumults first occa^ioned the raising of Armies, must now be chastened by
their own Army for new Tumults.

^o ha^dly can men be content with one ^in, but add sin to sin, till the
latter punish the former; such as were content to see Me and many Members of
both Houses driven away by the first unsuppressed Tumults, are now forced to
fly to an Army, or defend themselves against them.

But who can unfold the riddle of some men's justice? the Members of both Houses
who at first withdrew, (as My self was forced to do) from the rudeness of the
Tumults, were counted Desertors, and outed of their Places in Parliament.

Such as stayed then, and enjoyed the benefit of the Tumults, were asserted for
the only Parliament Men: now the Fliers from, and Forsakers of their Places,
carry the Parliamentary power along with them; complain highly against the
Tumults, and vindicate themselves by an Army: such as remained and kept their
stations, are looked upon as Abettors of tumultuary insolences, and Betrayers
of the freedom and honor of Parliament.

Thus is Power above all Rule, Order, and Law; where men look more to present
Advantages than their Consciences, and the unchangeable rules of Justice; while
they are Judges of others, they are forced to condemn themselves.

Now the plea against Tumults holds good, the Authors and Abbettors of them
are guilty of prodigious insolences; when as before, they were counted as
Friends and necessary A^sistants.

I see Vengeance pursues and overtakes (as the Mice and Rats are said to have
done a Bishop in Germany) them that thought to have escaped and fortified
themselves most impregnably against it, both by their multitude and compliance.

Whom the Laws cannot, God will punish, by their own crimes and hands.

I cannot but observe this divine Justice, yet with sorrow and pity; for, I
always wished so well to Parliament and City, that I was sorry to see them
do, or suffer, any thing unworthy such great and considerable bodies in this
Kingdom.

I was glad to see them only scared and humbled, not broken by that shaking: I
never had so ill a thought of those Cities as to despair of their Loyalty to
Me; which mistakes might eclipse, but I never believed malice had quite put out.

I pray God the storm be yet wholly passed over them; upon whom I look, as
Christ did sometime over Jerusalem, as objects of my prayers and tears, with
compassionate grief, foreseeing those severer ^catterings which will certainly
befall such as wantonly refuse to be gathered to their duty: fatal blindness
frequently attending and punishing wilfulness, so that men shall not be able
at last to prevent their sorrows who would not timely repent of their sins; nor
shall they be suffered to enjoy the comforts, who securely neglect the counsels
belonging to their peace. They will find that Brethren in iniquity are not
far from becoming insolent enemies, there being nothing harder then to keep
ill men long in one mind.

Nor is it possible to gain a fair period for those notions which go rather
in a round and circle of fancy, than in a right line of reason tending to the
Law, the only center of public consistency; whither I pray God at last bring
all sides.

Which will easily be done, when we shall fully see how much more happy we are,
to be subject to the known Laws, than to the various wills of any men, seem
they never so plausible at first.

Vulgar compliance with any illegal and extravagant ways, like violent
motions in nature, soon grows weary of it self, and ends in a refractory
^ullennesse: Peoples rebounds are often in their faces, who first put them upon
those violent strokes.

For the Army (which is so far excusable, as they act according to Soldiers
principles, and interests, demanding Pay and Indemnity) I think it necessary,
in order to the public peace that they should be satisfied, as far as is just;
no man being more prone to consider them than My self: though they have fought
against Me, yet I cannot but so far esteem that valor and gallantry they
have sometime showed, as to wish I may never want such men to maintain My
self, My Laws, and My Kingdoms, in such a peace, as wherein they may enjoy
the^r share and proportion as much as any men.

But thou, O Lord, who art perfect Unity in a sacred Trinity, in mercy behold
those, whom thy Justice has divided.

Deliver Me from the strivings of My People, and make Me to see how much they
need My prayers and pity, who agreed to fight against Me, and yet are now ready
to fight against one another^ to the continuance of My Kingdoms distractions.

Discover to all sides the ways of peace, from which they have swarved: which
consists not in the divided wills of Parties, but in the poin^ and due
observation of the Laws.

Make Me willing to go whither thou will lead Me by thy providence; and be thou
ever with Me, that I may see thy constancy in the worlds var^ety and changes.

Make me even such as thou would have Me, that I may at last enjoy that
safety and tranquillity which thou alone can give Me.

Divert, I pray thee, O Lord, thy heavy wrath justly hanging over those
populous Cities, whose plenty is prone to add fuel to their luxury, their
wealth to make them wanton, their multitudes tempting them to security, and
their security exposing them to unexpected miseries.

Give them eyes to see, hearts to consider, wills to embrace, and courage to act
those things which belong to thy glory and the public peace, lest their
calamity come upon them as an armed man.

Teach them, That they cannot want enemies who abound in sin, nor shall they
be long undisarmed and un^destroyed, who with a high hand persisting to fight
against thee and the clear convictions of their own consciences, fight more
against themselves, than ever they did against Me.

Their sins exposing them to thy Justice, their riches to others injuries,
their number to Tumults, and their Tumults to confusion.

Though they have with much forwardness helped to destroy Me, yet let not my
fall be their ruine^

Let Me not so much consider, either what they have done, or I have suffered,
(chiefly at first by them) as to forget to imitate My crucified Redeemer, to
plead their ignorance for their pardon; and in My dying extremities to pray to
thee O Father to forgive them, for they knew not what they did.

The tears they have denied Me in My saddest condition, give them grace to
bestow upon themselves, who the less they were for Me, the more cause they
have to weep for themselves.

O let not My blood be upon them and their Children, whom the fraud and faction
of some, not the malice of all, have excited to crucify Me.

But thou, O Lord, can, and wilt (as thou did My Redeemer) both exalt and
perfect Me by My sufferings, which have mo^e in them of thy mercy, than of man's
cruelty or thy own justice.

27. To the Prince of Wales.
SOn, if these Papers, with some others, wherein I have set down the private
reflections of My Conscience, and My most impartial thoughts, touching the
chief passages, which have been most remarkable, or disputed in My late
troubles, come to your hands, to whom they are chiefly designed; they may be so
far useful to you, as to state your judgment aright in what has passed;
whereof, a pious is the best use can be made; and they may also give you some
directions, how to remedy the present distempers, and prevent (if God will) the
l^ke for time to come.

It is some kind of deceiving and lessening the injury of My long restraint,
when I find My leisure and solitude have produced something worthy of My self,
and useful to you; That neither you, nor any other, may hereafter measure My
Cause by the Success; nor My Judgment of things by My misfortunes; which I
count the greater by far, because they have so far lighted upon you, and
some others, whom I have most cause to love as well as My self; and of whose
unmerited sufferings I have a greater sense then of Mine own.

But this advantage of wisdom you have above most Princes; that you have
begun, and now spent some years of discretion, in the experience of troubles,
and exercise of patience, wherein Piety, and all Virtues, both Moral and
Political, are commonly better planted to a thriving (as trees set in winter)
then in the warmth, and serenity of times; or amidst those delights, which
usually attend Princes Courts in times of peace and plenty; which are prone,
either to root up all plants of true Virtue and Honor; or to be contented only
with some leaves, and withering formalities of them, without any real fruits,
such as tend to the Public good; for which Princes should always remember
they are born and by providence desig^ed.

The evidence of which different education the holy Writ affords us in the
contemplation of David and Rehoboam: The one prepared, by many afflictions for
a flourishing Kingdom, the other softened by the unparalleled prosperity of
Solomon's Court; and so corrupted to the great diminution, both for Peace,
Honor, and Kingdom, by those flatteries, which are as unseparable from
prosperous Princes, as Flies are from fruit in summer; whom adversity, like
cold weather, drives away.

I had rather you should be Charles le Bow, then le Grand, good, then great; I
hope God has designed you to be both, having so early put you into that
exercise of his Graces, and gifts bestowed upon you, which may best weed out
all vicious inclinations, and dispose you to those Princely endowments, and
employments, which will most gain the love, and intend the welfare of those,
over whom God shall place you.

With God I would have you begin and end, who is King of Kings; the Sovereign
disposer of the Kingdoms of the world, who pulls down one, and sets up
another.

The best Government, and highest Sovereignty you can attain to is, to be
subject to him, that the Scepter of his Word and Spirit may rule in your heart.

The true glory of Princes consists in advancing Gods Glory in the maintenance
of true Religion, and the Churches good; Also in the dispensation of civil
Power, with Justice and Honor to the public Peace.

Piety will make you prosperous; at least it will keep you from being
miserable; nor is he much a loser, that loses all, yet saves his own soul
at last.

To which Center of true Happiness God, I trust, has and will graciously
direct all these black lines of Affliction, which he has been pleased to draw
on me, and by which he has (I hope) drawn me nearer to himself. You have
already tasted of that cup whereof I have liberally drank, which I look upon as
Gods Physic, having that in healthfulnesse which it wants in pleasure.

Above all, I would have you, as I hope you are already; well-grounded and
settled in your Religion: The best profession of which, I have ever esteemed
that of the Church of England, in which you have been educated; yet I would
have your own Judgment and Reason now seal to that sacred bond which education
has written, that it may be judiciously your own Religion, and not other men's
custom or tradition, which you profess.

In this I charge you to persevere, as coming nearest to Gods Word for
Doctrine, and to the primitive examples for Government, with some little
amendment, which I have other where expressed, and often offered, though in
vain. Your fixation in matters of Religion will not be not more necessary for
your souls then your Kingdoms peace, when God shall bring you to them.

For I have observed, that the Devil of Rebellion, does commonly turn h^mself
into an Angel of Reformation; and the old Serpent can pretend new Lights: When
some men's Consciences accuse them for Sedition and Faction, they stop its mouth
with the name and noise of Religion; when Piety pleads for peace and patience,
they cry out Zeal.

So that, unless in this point You be well settled, you shall never want
temptations to destroy you and yours, under pretensions of reforming matters of
Religion; for that seems, even to worst men, as the best and most auspicious
beginning of their worst designs.

Where, besides the Novelty which is taking enough with the Vulgar, every one
has an affectation, by seeming forward to an outward Reformation of Religion,
to be thought zealous; hoping to cover those irreligious deformities, whereto
they are conscious by aseverity of censuring other men's opinions or actions.

Take heed of abetting any Factions, or applying to any public Discriminations
in matters of Religion, contrary to what is in your Judgment, and the Church
well settled; your partial adhering, as head, to any one side, gains you not
so great advantages in some men's hearts (who are prone to be of their Kings
Religion) as it los^th you in others; who think themselves, and their
profession first despised, then persecuted by you: Take such a course as may
either with calmnes and charity quite remove the seeming differences and
offenses by impartiality, or so order affairs in point of Power that you shall
not need to fear or flatter any Faction. For if ever you stand in need of them,
or must stand to their courtesy, you are undone: The Serpent will devour the
Dove: you may never expect less of loyalty, justice, or humanity, than from
those, who engage into religious Rebellion; Their interest is always made
Gods; under the colors of Piety, ambitious policies march, not only with
greatest security, but applause, as to the populacy; you may hear from them
Jacob's voice, but you shall feel they have Esau's hands.

Nothing seemed less considerable than the Presbyterian Faction in England,
for many years; so compliant they were to public order: nor indeed was their
Party great either in Church, or State, as to men's judgments: But as soon as
discontents drove men into Sidings (as ill humors fall to the disaffected
mart, which causes inflammations) so did all, at first, who affected any
novelties, adhere to that Side, as the most remarkable and specious note of
difference (then) in point of Religion.

All the lesser Factions at first were o^ficious Servants to Presbytery their
great Master: till time and military success discovering to each their
peculiar advantages, invited them to part stakes, and leaving the joint stock
of uniforme Religion, pretended each to drive for their Party the trade of
profits and pre^erments, to the breaking and undoing not only of the Church
and State, but even of Presbytery it self, which seemed and hoped at first to
have engrossed all.

Let nothing seem little or despicable to you in matters which concern
Religion and the Churches peace, so as to neglect a speedy reforming and
effectual suppressing Errors and Schisms, which seem at first but as a
handbredth, by seditious Spirits, as by strong winds are soon made to cover and
darken the whole Heaven.

When you have done justice to God, your own soul and his Church, in the
profession and preservation both of truth and unity in Religion: the next main
hinge on which your prosperity will depend, and move, is, that of civil
Justice, wherein the settled Laws of these Kingdoms, to which you are rightly
Heir, are the most excellent rules you can govern by; which by an admirable
temperament give very much to Subjects industry, liberty, and happiness; and
yet reserve enough to the Majesty and prerogative of any King, who ownes his
People as Subjects, not as Slaves; whose subjection, as it preserves their
property, peace, and safety, so it will never diminish your Rights, nor their
ingenuous Liberties; which consists in the enjoyment of the fruits of their
industry, and the benefit of those Laws to which themselves have consented.

Never charge your Head with such a Crown, as shall by its heaviness oppress
the whole body, the weakness of whose parts cannot return any thing of
strength, honor, or safety, to the Head, but a necessary debilitation and
ruin.

Your Prerogative is best showed, and exercised in remitting, rather than
exacting the rigor of the Laws; there being nothing worse than legal Tyranny.

In these two points, the preservation of established Religion, and Laws, I
may (without vanity) turn the reproach of My sufferings, as to the worlds
censure, into the honor of a kind of Martyrdom, as to the testimony of My
own Conscience; The Troublers of My Kingdoms having nothing else to object
against Me but this, That I prefer Religion, and Laws established before
those alterations they propounded.

And so indeed I do, and ever shall, till I am convinced by better Arguments,
than what hitherto have been chiefly used toward Me, Tumults, Armies, and
Prisons.

I cannot yet learn that lesson, nor I hope ever will you, That it is safe for
a King to gratify any Faction with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is
wrapped up the public Interest, and the good of the Community.

How God will deal with Me, as to the removal of these pressures, and
indignities, which his justice by the very unjust hands of some of My Subjects,
has been pleased to lay upon Me, I cannot tell: nor am I much solicitous what
wrong I suffer from men, while I retain in My soul, what I believe is right
before God.

I have offered all for Reformation and Safety, that in Reason, Honor, and
Conscience I can; reserving only what I cannot consent unto, without an
irreparable injury to My own Soul, the Church, and My People, and to You also,
as the next and undoubted Heir of My Kingdoms.

To which if the divine Providence, to whom no difficulties are insuperable,
shall in his due time after My decease bring You, as I hope he will; My
counsel and charge to You, is, That You seriously consider the former, real,
or objected miscarriages, which might occasion My troubles, that You may avoid
them.

Never repose so much upon any man's single counsel, fidelity, and discretion,
in managing affairs of the first magnitude, (that is, matters of Religion and
Justice) as to create in Your self, or others, a diffidence of Your own
judgment, which is likely to be always more constant and impartial to the
interests of Your Crown and Kingdom than any man's.

Next, beware of exasperating any Factions by the crosnesse, and asperity of
some men's passions, humors, or private opinions, employed by You, grounded
only upon the differences in lesser matters, which are but the skirts and
suburbs of Religion.

Wherein a charitable connivence and Christian toleration often dissipates
their strength, whom rougher opposition fortifies; and puts the despised and
oppressed Party, into such Combinations, as may most enable them to get a full
revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly assisted by
that vulgar commiseration, which attends all, that are said to suffer under the
notion of Religion.

Provided the differences amount not to an insolent opposition of Laws, and
Government, or Religion established, as to the essentials of them, such motions
and minings are intolerable.

Always keep up solid piety, and those fundamental Truths (which mend both
hearts and lives of men) with impartial favor and justice.

Take heed that outward circumstances and formalities of Religion devour not
all, or the best encouragements of learning, industry, and piety; but with an
equal eye, and impartial hand, distribute favors and rewards to all men, as
you find them for their real goodness both in abilities and fidelity worthy
and capable of them.

This will be sure to gain You the hearts of the best, and the most too; who,
though they be not good themselves, yet are glad to see the severer ways of
virtue at any time sweetened by temporal rewards.

I have, You see, conflicted with different and opposite Factions; (for so I
must needs call and count all those, that act not in any conformity to the
Laws established, in Church and State) no sooner have they by force subdued
what they counted their Common Enemy, (that is, all those that adhered to the
Laws, and to Me) and are secured from that fear, but they are divided to so
high a rivalry, as sets them more at defiance against each other, than against
their first Antagonists.

Time will dissipate all factions, when once the rough horns of private men's
covetous and ambitious designs, shall discover themselves; which were at first
wrapped up and hidden under the soft and smooth pretensions of Religion,
Reformation, and Liberty: As the Wolf is not less cruel, so he will be more
justly hated, when he shall appear no better than a Wolf under Sheeps
clothing.

But as for the seduced Train of the Vulgar, who in their simplicity follow
those disguises; My charge and counsel to You, is, That as You need no
palliations for any designs, (as other men) so that you study really to exceed
(in true and constant demonstrations of goodness, piety, and virtue, toward
the People) even all those men, that make the greatest noise and ostentations
of Religion; so You shall neither fear any detection, (as they do, who have
but the face and mask of goodness) nor shall You frustrate the just
expectations of Your People; who cannot in Reason promise themselves so much
good from any Subjects novelties, as from the virtuous constancy of their King^

When these mountains of congealed factions shall by the sunshine of Gods
mercy, and the splendour of Your virtues be thawed and dissipated; and the
abused Vulgar shall have learned, that none are greater Oppressors of their
Estates, Liberties, and Consciences, than those men, that entitle themselves,
The Patrones and Vindicators of them, only to usurp power over them; Let then
no passion betray You to any study of revenge upon those, whose own sin and
folly will sufficiently punish them in due time.

But as soon as the forked arrow of factious emulations is drawn out, use all
princely arts, and clemency to heal the wounds; that the smart of the cure may
not equal the anguish of the hurt.

I have offered Acts of Indemnity, and Oblivion; to so great a latitude, as
may include all, that can but suspect themselves to be any way obnoxious to the
Laws; and which might serve to exclude all future Jealousies and insecurities.

I would have You always propense to the same way, when ever it shall be
desired and accepted, let it be granted, not only as an Act of State Policy
and necessity, but of Christian charity and choice.

It is all I have now left Me, a power to forgive those, that have deprived Me
of all; and I thank God, I have a heart to do it; and joy as much in this
grace, which God has given Me, as in all My former enjoyments; for this is a
greater argument of Gods love to Me, than any prosperity can be.

Be confident (as I am) that the most of all sides, who have done amiss, have
done so, not out of malice, but misinformation, or mis-apprehension of things.

None will be more loyal and faithful to Me and You, than those Subjects, who
sensible of their Errors, and our Injuries, will feel in their own Souls
most vehement motives to repentance; and earnest desires to make some
reparations for their former defects.

As Your quality sets You beyond any Duel with any Subject; so the nobleness
of Your mind must raise You above the meditating any revenge, or executing Your
anger upon the many.

The more conscious You shall be to Your own merits, upon Your People, the
more prone You will be to expect all love and loyalty from them; and to inflict
no punishment upon them for former miscarriages: You will have more inward
complacency in pardoning one, than in punishing a thousand.

This I write to you, not despairing of Gods mercy, and my Subjects affections
toward You; both which, I hope You will study to deserve, yet We cannot merit
of God, but by his own mercy.

If God shall see fit to restore Me, and You after Me, to those enjoyments,
which the Laws have assigned to Us; and no Subjects without an high degree of
guilt and sin can divest Us of; then may I have better opportunity, when I
shall be so happy to see You in peace, to let You more fully understand the
things that belong to Gods glory, Your ow^ honor, and the Kingdoms peace.

But if You never see My face again, and God will have Me buried in such a
barbarous Imprisonment and obscurity, (which the perfecting some men's designs
require) wherein few hearts that love me are permitted to exchange a word, or a
look with Me; I do require and entreat You as your Father, and your KING, that
You never suffer Your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection
from the true Religion established in the Church of England.

I tell You I have tried it, and after much search, and many disputes, have
concluded it to be the best in the world; not only in the Community, as
Christian, but also in the special notion, as Reformed; keeping the middle way
between the pomp of superstitious Tyranny, and the meannesse of fantastique
Anarchy.

Not but that (the draught being excellent as to the maine, both for Doctrine
and Government, in the Church of England) some lines, as in very good figures,
may happily need some sweetning, or polishing; which might ^ere have easily
been done by a safe and gentle hand; if some men's precipitancy had not
^^olently demanded such rude alterations, as w^^ld have quite destroyed all the
beauty and proportions of the whole.

The scandal of the late Troubles, which some may object, and urge to You
against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to
them, or Your own thoughts in this, That scarce any one who has been a
Beginner, or an active Prosecutor of this late War against the Church, the
Laws, and Me, either was, or is a true Lover, Embracer, or Practiser of the
Protestant Religion, established in England: which neither gives such rules,
nor ever before set such ^xamples.

It Is true, some heretofore had the boldness to present threatening Petitions
to their Princes and Parliaments, which others of the same Faction (but of
worse Spirits) have now put in execution: but let not counterfeit and
disorderly Zeal abate Your value and esteem of true piety, both of them are to
be known by their fruits; the sweetness of the Wine and Fig Tree is not to be
despised, though the Brambles and Thorns should pretend to bear Figs and
Grapes, thereby to rule over the Trees.

Nor would I have You to entertain any aver^ation, or dislike of Parliaments;
which in their right constitution with Freedom and Honor, will never injure
or diminish Your greatness, but will rather be as interchangings of love,
loyalty, and confidence, between a Prince, and his People.

Nor would the events of this black Parliament have been other than such
(however much biassed by Factions in the Elections) if it had been preserved
from the insolences of popular dictates, and tumultuary impressions: The sad
effects of which will no doubt, make all Parliaments after this more cautious
to preserve that Freedom, and Honor, which belongs to such Assemblies (when
once they have fully shaken off this yoke of Vulgar encroachment) since the
public interest consists in the mutual and common good both of Prince and
People.

Nothing can be more happy for all, than in fair, grave, and Honorable ways
to contribute their Counsels in Common^ enacting all things by public
consent; without tyranny or Tumults. We must not starve our selves, because
some men have ^urfeited of wholesome food.

And if neither I, nor You, be ever restored to Our Rights, but God in his
severest justice, w^ll punish My Subjects with continuance in their sin, and
suffer them to be deluded with the prosperity of their wickedness; I hope God
will give Me, and You, that grace, which will teach and enable Us, to want, as
well as to wear a Crown, which is not worth taking up, or enjoying upon
^ordid, dishonorable, and irreligious terms.

Keep You to true principles of piety, virtue, and honor, You shall never want
a Kingdom.

A principal point of Your honor will consist in Your deferring all respect,
love, and protection to Your Mother, My Wife; who has many ways deserved well
of Me, and chiefly in this, that (having been a means to bless^ Me with so many
hopeful Children; (all which, with their Mother, I recommend to Your love, and
care) She has been content with incomparable magnanimity and patience to
suffer both for, and with Me, and You.

My prayer to God Almighty is^ (whatever becomes of Me, who am, I thank God,
wrapped up and fortified in My own Innocence, and his Grace) that he would be
pleased to make You an Anchor, or Harbor rather, to these tossed and
weather-beaten Kingdoms; a Repairer by Your wisdom, justice, piety, and
valor, of what, the folly and wickedness of some men have so far ruined, as
to leave nothing entire in Church or State; to the Crown, the Nobility, the
Clergy, or the Commons; either as to Laws, Liberties, Estates, Order, Honor,
Conscience, or lives.

When they have destroyed Me, (for I know not how far God may permit the
malice and cruelty of My Enemies to proceed, and such apprehensions some men's
words and actions have already given Me) as I doubt not but My blood will cry
aloud for vengeance to heaven; so I beseech God not to pour out his wrath upon
the generality of the People, who have either deserted Me, or engaged against
Me, through the artifice and hypocrisy of their Leaders, whose inward horror
will be their first Tormenter, nor will they escape exemplary judgments.

For those that loved Me, I pray God, they may have no miss of Me, when I am
gone; so much I wish and hope, that all good Subjects may be satisfied with the
blessings of Your presence and virtues.

For those that repent of any defects in their duty toward Me, as I freely
forgive them in the word of a Christian KING, so I believe You will find them
truly Zealous, to repay with interest that loyalty and love to You, which was
due to Me.

In sum, what good I intended, do You perform; when God shall give You
power: much good I have offered, more I purposed to Church and State, if times
had been capable of it.

The deception will soon vanish, and the V^zards will fall off apace; This
mask of Religion on the face of Rebellion (for so it now plainly appears,
since My Restraint and cruel usage, that they sought not for Me, as was
pretended) will not long serve to hide some men's deformities.

Happy times, I hope, attend You, wherein Your Subjects (by their miseries)
will have learned, That Religion to their God, and Loyalty to their King,
cannot be parted without both their sin and their infelicity.

I pray God bless You, and establish Your Kingdoms in righteousness, Your
Soul in true Religion, and Your honor in the love of God and Your people.

And if God will have disloyalty perfected by My destruction; let My memory
ever, with My name, live in you; as of Your Father, that loves You: and once a
KING of three flourishing Kingdoms; whom God thought fit to honor, not only
with the Scepter and Government of them, but also with the suffering many
indignities, and an untimely death for them; while I studied to preserve the
rights of the Church, the power of the Laws, the honor of My Crown, the
privilege of Parliaments, the liberties of My People, and My own Conscience,
which, I thank God, is dearer to Me than a thousand Kingdoms.

I know God can, I hope he yet will restore Me to My Rights. I cannot despair
either of his mercy, or of My Peoples love and pity.

At worst, I trust I shall but go before You to a better Kingdom, which God
has prepared for Me, and Me for it, through My Savior Jesus Christ, to whose
mercies I commend You and all Mine.

Farewell, till We meet, if not on Earth, yet in Heaven.

Meditations upon Death, after the Votes of Non-Addresses, and HIS MAJESTY'S
closer Imprisonment in Carisbrooke-Castle.
AS I have leisure enough, so I have cause more than enough, to meditate upon,
and prepare for My Death: for I know, there are but few steps between the
Prisons and Graves of Princes.

It is Gods indulgence, which gives Me the space, but Man's cruelty, that gives
Me the sad occasions for these thoughts.

For, besides the common burden of mo^tality, which lies upon Me, as a Man; I
now bear the heavy load of other men's ambitions, fears, jealousies, and cruel
passions, whose envy or enmity against Me makes their own life's seem deadly to
them, while I enjoy any part of Mine.

I thank God, My prosperity made Me not wholly a Stranger to the contemplations
of mortality:

Those are never unseasonable, since this is always uncertain: Death being an
eclipse, which often happens as well in clear, as cloudy days.

But My now long and sharp adversity has so reconciled in Me those natural
Antipathies between Life and Death, which are in all men, that I thank God, the
common terrors of it are dispelled; and the special horror of it, as to My
particular, much allayed: for, although My death at present may justly be
represented to Me with all those terrible aggravations, which the policy of
cruel and implacable enemies can put upon it, (affairs being drawn to the
very dregs of malice) yet I bless God, I can look upon all those stings, as
unpoysonous, though sharp; since My Redeemer has either pulled them out, or
given Me the antidote of his Death against them; which as to the immaturity,
unjustice, shame, scorn, and cruelty of it exceeded, whatever I can fear.

Indeed, I never did find so much, the life of Religion, the feast of a good
Conscience, and the brazen wall of a judicious integrity and constancy, as
since I came ^o these closer conflicts with the thoughts of Death.

I am not so old, as to be weary of life; nor (I hope) so bad, as to be either
afraid to die, or ashamed to live: true, I am so afflicted, as might make Me
sometime even desire to die; if I did not consider, That it is the greatest
glory of a Christians life to die daily^ in conquering by a lively faith, and
patient hopes of a better life, those partial and quotidian deaths, which kill
us (as it were) by piece-meales, and make us overlive our own fates; while We
are deprived of health, honor, liberty, power, credit, safety, or estate; and
those other comforts of dearest relations, which are as the life of our lives.

Though, as a KING, I think My self to live in nothing temporal so much, as in
the love and good will of My People; for which, as I have suffered many deaths,
so I hope I am not in that point as yet wholly dead: notwithstanding, My
Enemies have used all the poison of falsity and violence of hostility to
destroy, first the love and Loyalty, which is in My Subjects; and then all that
content of life in Me, which from these I chiefly enjoyed.

Indeed, they have left Me but little of life, and only the husk and shell (as
it were) which their further malice and cruelty can take from Me; having
bereaved Me of all those worldly comforts, for which life it self seems
desirable to men.

But, O My Soul! think not that life too long, or tedious, wherein God gives
thee any opportunities, if not to do, yet to suffer with such Christian
patience and magnanimity in a good Cause, as are the greatest honor of our
lives, and the best improvement of our deaths.

I know that in point of true Christian valor, it argues pusillanimity to
desire to die out of weariness of life; and a want of that heroic greatness
of spirit which becomes a Christian in the patient and generous sustaining
those afflictions, which as shadows necessarily attend us, while we are in this
body; and which are lessened or enlarged as the Sun of our prosperity moves
higher, or lower: whose total absence is best recompensed with the Dew of
Heaven.

The assaults of affliction may be terrible, like Sampson's Lion, but they
yield much sweetness to those, that dare to encounter and overcome them; who
know how to overlive the witherings of their Gourds without discontent or
peevishness, while they may yet converse with God.

That I must die as a Man, is certain; that I may die a King, by the hands of
My own Subjects, a violent, sudden, and barbarous death; in the strength of My
years; in the midst of My Kingdoms; My Friends and loving Subjects being
helpless Spectators; My Enemies insolent Revilers and Triumphers over Me,
living, dying, and dead, is so probable in humane reason, that God has taught
me not to hope otherwise, as to man's cruelty; however, I despair not of Gods
infinite mercy.

I know My Life is the object of the Devils and wicked men's malice; but yet
under Gods sole custody and disposal: Whom I do not think to flatter for
longer life by seeming prepared to die; but I humbly desire to depend upon him,
and to submit to his will both in life and death, in what order soever he is
pleased to lay them out to Me. I confess it is not easy for Me to contend
with those many horrors of death, wherewith God suffers Me to be tempted;
which are equally horrid, either in the suddenness of a barbarous
Assasination; or in those greater formalities, whereby My Enemies (being more
solemnly cruel) will, it may be, seek to add (as those did, who Crucified
Christ) the mockery of Justice, to the cruelty of Malice: That I may be
destroyed, as with greater pomp and artifice, so with less pity, it will be
but a necessary policy to make My death appear as an act of justice, done by
Subjects upon their Sovereign; who know that no Law of God or Man invests them
with any power of Judicature without Me, much less against Me: and who, being
sworn and bound by all that is sacred before God and man, to endeavor My
preservation, must pretend Justice to cover their Perjury.

It is, indeed, a sad fate for any man to have his Enemies to be Accusers,
Parties, and Judges; but most desperate, when this is acted by the insolence of
Subjects against their Sovereign; wherein those, who have had the chiefest
hand, and are most guilty of contriving the public Troubles, must by shedding
My blood seem to wash their own hands of that innocent blood, whereof they are
now most evidently guilty before God and man; and I believe in their own
consciences too, while they carried on unreasonable demands, first by Tumults,
after by Armies. Nothing makes mean spirits more cowardly-cruell in managing
their usurped power against their lawful Superiors, than this, the Guilt of
their unjust Usurpation; notwithstanding, those specious and popular
pretensions of Justice against Delinquents, applied only to disguise at first
the monstrousness of their designs, who despaired, indeed, of possessing the
power and profits of the Vineyard, till the Heir, whose right it is, be cast
out and slain.

With them, My greatest fault must be, that I would not either destroy My self
with the Church and State by My Word, or not suffer them to do it unresisted
by the Sword; whose covetous ambition no Concessions of Mine could ever yet,
either satisfy, or abate.

Nor is it likely they will ever think, that Kingdom of brambles, which some
men seek to erect (at once, weak, sharp, and fruitless, either to God or man)
is like to thrive till watered with the Royal blood of those, whose right the
Kingdom is.

Well, Gods will be done, I doubt not but My Innocence will find him both My
Protector, and My Advocate, who is My only Judge, whom I own as King of
Kings, not only for the eminency of his power and majesty above them; but also
for that singular care and protection, which he has over them: who knows them
to be exposed to as many dangers (being the greatest Patrones of Law, Justice,
Order, and Religion on earth) as there be either Men or Devils, which love
confusion.

Nor will he suffer those men long to prosper in their Babel, who build it with
the bones and cement it with the blood of their Kings.

I am confident they will find Avengers of My death among themselves: the
injuries I have sustained from them shall be first punished by them, who agreed
in nothing so much as in opposing Me.

Their impatience to bear the loud cry of My blood, shall make them think no
way better to expiate it, than by shedding theirs, who with them, most thirsted
after Mine.

The sad confusions following My destruction, are already presaged and
confirmed to Me by those I have lived to see since My troubles; in which, God
alone (who only could) has many ways pleaded My cause; not suffering them to
go unpunished, whose confederacy in sin was their only security; who have
cause to fear that God will both further divide, and by mutual vengeance,
afterward destroy them.

My greatest conquest of Death is from the power and love of Christ, who has
swallowed up death in the victory of his Resurrection, and the glory of his
Ascension.

My next comfort is, that he gives Me not only the honor to imitate his
example in suffering for righteousness sake, (though obscured by the foulest
charges of Tyranny and Injustice) but also, that charity, which is the noblest
revenge upon, and victory over My Destroyers: By which, I thank God, I can both
forgive them, and pray for them, that God would not impute My blood to them
further then to convince them, what need they have of Christ's blood to wash
their souls from the guilt of shedding Mine.

At present, the will of My Enemies seems to be their only rule, their power
the measure, and their success the Exactor, of what they please to call
Justice; while they flatter themselves with the fancy of their own safety by
My danger, and the security of their lives designs by My Death: forgetting,
that as the greatest temptations to sin are wrapped up in seeming
prosperities, so the severest vengeances of God are then most accomplished,
when men are suffered to complete their wicked purposes.

I bless God, I pray not so much, that this bitter cup of a violent death may
pass from Me, as that of his wrath may pass from all those, whose hands by
deserting Me, are sprinkled, or by acting and consenting to My death are
embrued with My blood.

The will of God has confined, and concluded Mine; I shall have the pleasure
of dying, without any pleasure of desired vengeance.

This I think becomes a Christian toward his Enemies, and a King toward his
Subjects.

They cannot deprive Me of more than I am content to lose, when God sees fit by
their hands to take it from me; whose mercy I believe, will more then
infinitely recompense what ever by man's injustice he is pleased to deprive me
of.

The glory attending my death will far surpass all I could enjoy, or
conceive in life.

I shall not want the heavy and envied Crowns of this world, when my God has
mercifully crowned and consummated his graces with glory; and exchanged the
shadows of my earthly Kingdoms among men, for the substance of that heavenly
kingdom with himself.

For the censures of the world; I know the sharp and necessary tyranny of my
Destroyers will sufficiently confute the calumnies of tyranny against me; I am
persuaded I am happy in the judicious love of the ablest and best of my
Subjects, who do not only pity and pray for me, but would be content even to
die with me, or for me.

These know, how to excuse my failings, as a man, and yet to retain, and pay
their duty to me as their King; there being no religious necessity binding any
Subjects by pretending to punish, infinitely to exceed, the faults and errors
of their Princes; especially there, where more then sufficient satisfaction
has been made to the public; the enjoyment of which, private ambitions have
hitherto frustrated.

Others, I believe, of sof^er tempers, and less advantaged by my ruin, do
already feel sharp convictions, and some remo^se in their consciences; where
they cannot but see the proportions of their evil dealings against me in the
measure of Gods retaliations upon them, who cannot hope long to enjoy their
own thumbs and toes, having under pretense of paring others nails been so
cruel as to cut off their chiefest strength.

The punishment of the more insolent and obstinate may be l^ke that of Korah
and his Accomplices (at once mutining against both Prince and Priest) in such a
method of divine justice, as is not ordinary; the earth of the lowest and
meanest people opening upon them, and swallowing them up in a just disdain of
their ill-gotten and worse-used Authority: upon whose support and strength they
chiefly depended for their building and establishing their designs against Me,
the Church, and State.

My chiefest comfort in death consists in my peace, which I trust, is made with
God; before whose exact Tribunal I shall not fear to appear, as to the Cause
so long disputed by the Sword, between me and my causlesse Enemies: where I
doubt not, but his righteous judgment will confute their fallacy, who from
worldly success (rather like Sophisters, than sound Christians) draw those
popular conclusions for Gods approbation of their actions; whose wise
providence (we know) often permits many events, which his revealed Word (the only
clear, safe and fixed rule of good actions and good consciences) in no sort
approves.

I am confident the Justice of my Cause, and clearness of My Conscience before
God and toward my people will carry me, as much above them in Gods decision, as
their successes have lifted them above me in the Vulgar opinion: who consider
not, that many times those undertakings of men are lifted up to Heaven in the
prosperity and applause of the world, whose rise is from Hell, as to the
injuriousnesse and oppression of the design. The prosperous winds which often
fill the sails of Pirates, does not justify their piracy and rapine.

I look upon it with infinite more content and quiet of Soul, to have been
worsted in my enforced contestation for, and vindication of the Laws of the
Land, the freedom and honor of Parliaments, the rights of my Crown, the just
liberty of my Subjects, and the true Christian Religion in its Doctrine,
Government and due encouragements, then if I had, with the greatest advantages
of success, overborne them all; as some men have now evidently done, whatever
designs they at first pretended.

The prayers and patience of my Friends and loving Subjects will contribute
much to the sweetning of this bitter cup, which I doubt not but I shall more
cheerfully take, and drink as from Gods hand (if it must be so) than they can
give it to me, whose hands are unjustly and barbarously lifted up against me.

And, as to the last event, I may seem to owe more to my Enemies, than my
Friends; while those will put a period to the sins and sorrows attending this
miserable life; wherewith these desire, I might still contend.

I shall be more than Conqueror through Christ enabling me; for whom I have
hitherto suffered: as he is the Author of Truth, Order, and Peace; for all
which, I have been forced to contend against Error, Faction, and confusion.

If I must suffer a violent death, with my Savior, it is but mortality crowned
with martyrdome^ where the debt of death, which I owe for sin to nature,
shall be raised, as a gift of faith and patience offered to God.

Which I humbly beseech him mercifully to accept; and although death be the
wages of my own sin, as from God, and the effect of others sins, as men,
both against God and me; yet as I hope my own sins are so remitted, that they
shall be no ingredients to imbitter the cup of my death, so I desire God to
pardon their sins, who are most guilty of my destruction.

The Trophies of my charity will be more glorious and durable over them, than
their ill-managed victories over me.

Though their sin be prosperous, yet they had need to be penitent, that they
may be pardoned: Both which, I pray God they may obtain; that my temporal
death unjustly inflicted by them, may not be revenged by Gods just inflicting
eternal death upon them: for I look upon the temporal destruction of the
greatest King, as far less deprecable, than the eternal damnation of the
meanest Subject.

Nor do I wish other, than the safe bringing of the ship to shore, when they
have cast me overboard; though it be very strange, that Mariners can find no
other means to appease the storm, themselves have raised, but by drowning
their Pilot.

I thank God, my Enemies cruelty cannot prevent my preparation; whose malice in
this I shall defeat, that they shall not have the satisfaction to have
destroyed my Soul with my Body; of whose salvation, while some of them have
themselves seemed, and taught others to despair, they have only discovered
this, that they do not much desire it.

Whose uncharitable and cruel Restraints, denying me even the assistance of
any of my Chaplains, has rather enlarged, than any way obstructed my access
to the Throne of Heaven.

Where thou dwell, O King of Kings; who fillest Heaven and Earth, who art
the fountain of eternal life, in whom is no shadow of death.

Thou O God art both the just Afflicter of death upon us, and the merciful
Savior of us in it, and from it.

Yea, it is better for us to be dead to our selves, and live in thee; than by
living in our selves to be deprived of thee.

O make the many bitter aggravations of My death as a Man, and a King, the
opportunities and advantages of thy special graces and comf^rts in My Soul,
as a Christian.

If thou Lord wilt be with Me, I shall neither fear nor feel any evil, though
I walk through the valley of the shadow of death.

To cont^nd with death is the work of a weak and mortal m^n; to overcome it,
is the grace of thee alone, who art the Almighty and immortal God.

O My Savior, who know what it is to die with Me, as a Man; make Me to know
what it is to pass through death to life with thee My God.

Though I die, yet I know, that thou my Redee^er live for ever: though thou
slayest Me, yet thou have encouraged me to trust in thee for eternal life.

O withdraw not thy favor from me, which is ^^tter than life.

O be not far from me, for I know not how near a violent and cruel death is
to me.

As thy Omniscience, O God, discovers, so thy Omnipotence can defeat the
designs of those, who have, or shall conspire my destruction.

O show me the goodness of thy will, through the wickedness of theirs.

Thou give me leave ^s a man to pray, that this cup may pass from me; but
thou have taught Me as a Christian by the example of Christ t^ add, not My
will, but thine be done.

Yea Lord, let our wills be one, by wholly resolving mine into thine: let not
the desire ^f life in me be so great, as that of doing or suffering thy ^ill in
either life or death.

As I believe thou have forgiven all the errors of my life, so I hope thou will save me from the terrors of my death.

Make me content to leave the worlds nothing, that I may come really t^ enjoy
all in thee, wh^ have made Christ unto me in life, gain; and in death,
advantage.

Though my Destroyers forget their duty t^ thee and me, yet do not thou, O
Lord, forget to be merciful to them.

For, what profit is there in my blood, or in their gaining my Kingdoms, if
they lose their own S^ules?

Such as have not only resisted my just Power, but wholly usurped and turned
it against my self, though they may deserve, yet let them not receive to
themselves damna^ion.

Thou made thy Son a Savior to many, that Crucified Him, while at once he
suffered violently by them, and yet willingly for them.

O let the voice of his blood be heard for My Murderers, louder than the cry
of mine against them.

Prepare them for thy mercy by due convicti^ns of their sin, and let them not
at once deceive and damn their own Souls by fallacious pretensions of
Justice in destroying me, while the conscience of their unjust usurpation of
power against me, chiefly tempts them to use all extremities against me.

O Lord, thou know I have found their mercies to me as very false, so very
cruel; who pretending to preserve me, have meditated nothing but my ruin.

O deal not with them as bloodthirsty and de^eitfull men; but overcome their
cruelty with thy compassion and my charity.

And when thou make inquisition for My blood, O sprinkle their polluted, yet
penitent Souls with the blood of thy Son, that thy destroying Angel may
pass over them.

Though they think my Kingdoms on earth too little to entertain at once both
them and me, yet let the capacious Kingdom of thy infinite mercy at last
receive both me and my enemies.

When being reconciled to thee in the blood of the same Redeemer, we shall live
far above these ambitious desires, which beget such mortal enmities.

When their hands shall be heaviest, and cruellest upon me, O let me fall into
the arms of thy tender and eternal mercies.

That what is cut off my life in this miserable moment, may be repaied in thy
ever-blessed eternity.

Lord, let thy Servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen thy salvation.

Vota dabunt, quae bella negarunt. FINIS.

