THE Reasons and Narrative OF PROCEEDINGS Betwixt the TWO HOUSES: Which were
delivered by the House of Commons, to the Lords, at the Conference touching the
Trial of the Lords in the Tower. On Monday the 26 th. of May, 1679.
THe Commons have always desired, that a good Correspondence may be preserved
between the Two Houses.

There is now depending between your Lordships and the Commons, a Matter of the
greatest Weight: In the Transactions of which, your Lordships seem to apprehend
some Difficulty in the Matters proposed by the Commons.

To clear this, the Commons have desired this Conference; and by it they hope
to manifest to your Lordships, that the Propositions of the House of Commons,
made by their Committee, in relation to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower,
have been only such as are well warranted by the Laws of the Parliament, and
Constitutions of the Government, and in no sort entrench upon the Judicature of
the Peers; but are most necessary to be insisted upon, that the Ancient Rights
of Judicature in Parliament may be maintained.

The Commons readily acknowledge, that the Crimes charged upon the Earl of
Po^^^, Viscount Stafford, Lord Petre, Lord Arundel of Wardour, and Lord
Bellasis, are of deep Guilt, and call for speedy Justice: But withal, they
hold, That any Change in Judicature in Parliament, made without Consent in full
Parliament, to be of pernicious Consequence, both to his Majesty, and his
Subjects; and conceive themselves obliged to transmit to their Posterity, all
the Rights which of this kind they have received from their Ancestors, by
putting your Lordships in mind of the Progress that has already been between
the Two Houses, in relation to the Propositions made by the Commons, and the
Reasonableness of the Propositions themselves: They doubt not to make it
appear, that their Aim has been no other, than to avoid such Consequences, and
preserve that Rights and that there is no delay of Justice on their Part. And
to that end, do offer to your Lordships the ensuing Reasons and Narrative: That
the Commons in bringing the Earl of Danby to Justice, and in discovery of that
Execrable and Traitorous Conspiracy, (of which the five Popish Lords now stand
impeached, and for which some of their wicked Accomplices have already
undergone the Sentence of the Law, as Traitors and Murderers) have labored
under many great Difficulties, is not unknown to your Lordships.

Nor is it less known to your Lordships, That upon the Impeachment of the House
of Commons, against the Earl of Danby for High Treason, and other High Crimes,
Misdemeanors, and Offenses, even the Common Justice of sequestring him from
Parliament, and forthwith Committing him to safe Custody, was then required by
the Commons, and denied by the House of Peers, though he then Sat in their
House: of which, your Lordships have been so sensible, that at a free
Conference the Tenth of April last, your Lordships declared, That it was the
Right of the Commons, and well warranted by Presidents of former Ages; That
upon an Impeachment of the Commons, a Peer so Impeached, ought of Right to be
ordered to withdraw, and then to be Committed. And had not that Justice been
denied to the Commons, a great part of this Session of Parliament, which has
been spent in framing and adjusting a Bill, for causing the Earl of Danby to
appear, and answer that Justice from which he was fled; had been saved, and had
been employed for the Preservation of His Majesty's Person, and the Security of
the Nation, and in Prosecution of the other five Lords. Neither had he had the
Opportunity for procuring for himself that Illegal Pardon, which bears date the
First of March last past, and which he has now pleaded in Bar of his
Impeachment: Nor of wasting so great a proportion of the Treasure of the
Kingdom, as he has done, since the Commons exhibited their Articles of
Impeachment against him.

After which time thus lost by reason of the Denial of that Justice, which of
right belonged to the Commons upon their Impeachment, the said Bill being ready
for the Royal Assent, the said Earl then rendered himself; and by your Lordships
Order of the Sixteenth of April last, was Committed to the Tower. After which,
he pleads the said Pardon; and being pressed, did at length declare, He would
rely upon, and abide by that Plea; which Pardon pleaded, being illegal and
void, and so ought not to bar, or preclude the Commons from having Justice upon
the Impeachment. They did thereupon, with their Speaker, on the Fifth of May
instant, in the Name of Themselves, and all the Commons of England, demand
Judgment against the said Earl, upon their Impeachment: Not doubting, but that
your Lordships did intend in all your Proceedings upon the Impeachment, to
follow the usual Course and Method of Parliament.

But the Commons were not a little surprised by the Message from your
Lordships, delivered them on the Seventh of May; thereby acquainting them, That
as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, had ordered, that the Tenth of May
instant, should be the Day for hearing the Earl of Danby, to make good his Plea
of Pardon. And that on the Thirteenth of May, the other Five Lords Impeached,
should be brought to their Trial: And that your Lordships had addressed to His
Majesty, for naming of a Lord High Steward, as well in the Case of the Earl of
Danby, as the other five Lords.

Upon consideration of this Message, the Commons found, that the admitting of
the Lords Spiritual to exercise Jurisdiction in these Cases, was an Alteration
of the Judicature in Parliament; and which extended as well to the Proceeding
against the Five Lords, as the Earl of Danby. And that if a Lord High-Steward
should be necessary upon Trial on Impeachments of the Commons the Power of
Judicature in Parliament, upon Impeachments, might be defeated, by suspending
or denying a Commission to Constitute a Lord High-Steward.

And that the said days of Trial appointed by your Lordships, were so near to
the time of your said Message, that these Matters, and the Method of proceeding
upon the Trial, could not be adjusted by Conference betwixt the Two Houses,
before the Day so nominated. And consequently the Commons could not then
proceed to Trial, unless the zeal which they have for speedy Judgment against
the Earl of Danby, (that so they might proceed to Trial of the other Five
Lords) should induce them at this Juncture, both to admit the enlargement of
your Lordships Jurisdiction, and to sit down under these or any Hardships,
though with the hazard of all the Commons Power of Impeaching for time to come)
rather than the Trial of the said Five Lords should be deferred for some short
time, whilst these matters might be agreed on and settled.

For reconciling Differences in these great and weighty Matters, and for saving
that time which would necessarily have been spent in Debates and Conferences
betwixt the two Houses, and for expediting the Trial, without giving up the
Power of Impeachment, or rendering them ineffectual.

The Commons thought fit to propose to your Lordships, that a Committee of both
Houses might be appointed for this purpose. At which Committee (when agreed to
by your Lordships,) it was first proposed, that the time of Trial of the Lords
in the Tower should be put off till the other Matters were adjusted, and it was
then agreed, that the Proposition as to the time of the Trial, should be the
last thing considered. And the effect of this Agreement stands reported upon
your Lordships Books.

After which, the Commons communicated to your Lordships, by your Committee, a
Vote of theirs, (viz.) That the Committee of the Commons should insist upon
their former Vote of their House, That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have
any Vote in any Proceedings against the Lords in the Tower, and that when that
Matter should be settled, and the Method of Proceedings adjusted, the Commons
would then be ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Pardon of the Earl of
Danby, against whom they had before demanded Judgment, and afterward to the
Trial of the other Five Lords in the Tower. Which Vote extended as well to the
Earl of Danby, as the other Five Lords; but the Commons as yet received nothing
from your Lordships toward an Answer of that Vote, save that your Lordships
have acquainted them, that the Bishops have asked leave of the House of Peers,
that they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said Five Lords, with
liberty of entering their usual protestation.

And though the Commons Committee have almost daily declared to your Lordships
Committee, that that was a necessary point of Right to be settled before the
Trial, and offered to debate the same; your Committee always answered, that
they had not any Power from your Lordships, either to confer upon, or to give
any Answer concerning that Matter.

And yet your Lordships, without having given the Commons any satisfactory
Answer to the said Vote, or permitting any Conference or Debate thereupon, and
contrary to the said Agreement, did on Thursday the Twenty second of May, send
a Message to the Commons, Declaring, That the Lords Spiritual as well as
Temporal, had ordered that the Twenty Seventh of this instant May be appointed
for the Trial of the Five Lords.

So that the Commons cannot but apprehend, that your Lordships have not only
departed from what was agreed on, and in effect laid aside that Committee which
was constituted for preserving a good Understanding betwixt the Two Houses, and
better dispatch of the weighty Affairs now depending in Parliament: but must
also needs conclude from the Message, and the Votes of your Lordships on the
fourteenth of May, That the Lords Spiritual have a Right to stay and sit in
Court, till the Court proceeds to the Vote of Guilty or not Guilty. And from
the Bishops asking leave (as appears by your Lordships Books two days after
your said Vote) that they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said
Lords, with liberty of entering their usual Protestation, and by their
persisting still to go on and give in their Votes Proceedings upon the
Impeachment; That their desire of leave to withdraw at the said Trial, is only
an Evasive Answer to the beforementioned Vote of the Commons, and chiefly
intended as an Argument for a Right of Judicature in Proceedings upon
Impeachment and as a Reserve to Judge upon the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon,
and upon these and other like Impeachments; although no such Power was ever
claimed by their Predecessors, but is utterly denied by the Commons. And the
Commons are the rather induced to believe it so intended, because the very
asking leave to withdraw, seems to imply a Right to be there, and that they
cannot be absent without it.

And because by this way, they would have it in their Power, whether or no for
the future, either in the Earl of Danby's Case, or any other, they will ever
ask leave to be absent, And the Temporal Lords a like power of denying leave,
if that should once be admitted necessary.

The Commons therefore are obliged not to proceed to the Trial of the Lords on
the Twenty Seventh of this instant May, but to adhere to their aforesaid Vote:
And for their so doing, besides what has been now and formerly by them said to
your Lordships, do offer you these Reasons following.
REASONS.
I.
BEcause your Lordships have received the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon, with
a very long and unusual Protestation; wherein he has aspersed His Majesty by
false Suggestions, as if His Majesty had Commanded or Countenanced the Crimes
he stands charged with; and particularly suppressing and discouraging the
Discovery of the Plot, and endeavoring to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical way of Government: Which remains as a scandal upon Record against
His Majesty, tending to render His Person and His Government odious to His
People; against which it ought to be the first and principal care of both
Houses to vindicate His Majesty, by doing justice upon the said Earl.

II.
The setting up a Pardon to be a Bar of an Impeachment, defeats the whole use
and effect of Impeachments; and should this point be admitted, or stand
doubted, it would totally discourage the exhibiting any for the future: Whereby
the chief Institution for the preservation of the Government, (and consequently
the Government it self) would be destroyed. And therefore the Case of the said
Earl, (which in consequence concerns all Impeachments whatsoever) ought to be
determined before that of the said Five Lords, which is but their particular
Case.

And without resorting to many Authorities of greater Antiquity: The Commons
desire your Lordships to take notice, (with the same regard they do) of the
Declaration which that Excellent Prince, King Charles the First of blessed
Memory, made in this behalf, in His Answer to the Nineteen Propositions of both
Houses of Parliament: Wherein, stating the several parts of this regulated
Monarchy, he says: The King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons, have
each particular Privileges: And among those which belong to the King, he
reckons power of Pardoning. After the enumerating of which, and other his
Prerogatives, His said Majesty adds thus: Again, That the Prince may not make
use of this High and perpetual Power, to the hurt of those for whose good he
has it, and make use of the name of public necessity, for the gain of his
private Favorites and Followers, to the detriment of his people; The House of
Commons, (an Excellent Conserver of Liberty, etc.) is solely entrusted with the
first Propositions concerning the Levies of Moneys, and the Impeaching of
those, who, for their own ends, though countenanced by any
surreptitiously-gotten Command of the King, have violated that Law, which he is
bound (when he knows it) to protect, and to the protection of which they were
bound to advise him, at least not to serve him in the contrary. And the Lords
being trusted with a Judicatory Power, are an excellent skreen and bank between
the Prince and People, to assist each against any Encroachments of the other;
and by just Judgments to preserve that Law, which ought to be the Rule of every
one of the three, etc. Therefore the power legally placed in both Houses, is
more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny, etc.

III.
Until the Commons of England have right done them against this Plea of Pardon,
they may justly apprehend, that the whole Justice of the Kingdom, in the Case
of the Five Lords, may be obstructed and defeated by Pardons of like nature.

IV.
An Impeachment is virtually the voice of every particular Subject of this
Kingdom, crying out against an oppression, by which every Member of that Body
is equally wounded: And it will prove a matter of ill Consequence, that the
universality of the people should have occasion ministered and continued to
them, to be apprehensive of utmost danger from the Crown, from whence they of
right expect protection.

V.
The Commons Exhibited Articles of Impeachment against the said Earl, before
any against the Five other Lords, and demanded Judgment upon those Articles:
Whereupon, your Lordships having appointed the Trial of the said Earl to be
before that of the other Five Lords, Now your Lordships having since inverted
that Order, gives a great cause of doubt to the House of Commons, and raises a
jealousy in the Hearts of all the Commons of England, that, if they should
proceed to the Trial of the said Five Lords in the first place, not only
Justice will be obstructed in the Case of those Lords, but that they shall
never have right done them in the matter of this Plea of Pardon; which is of so
fatal consequence to the whole Kingdom, and a new device to frustrate public
Justice in Parliament.

Which Reasons and Matters being duly weighed by your Lordships; the Commons
doubt not but your Lordships will receive satisfaction concerning their
Propositions and Proceedings: And will agree, That the Commons ought not, nor
can, without deserting their Trust, depart from their former Vote communicated
to your Lordships; That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote in any
proceedings against the Lords in the Tower; and when that matter shall be
settled, and the Methods of Proceedings adjusted the Commons shall then be ready
to proceed upon the Trial of the Earls of Danby, (against whom they have
already demanded Judgment) and afterward to the Trial of the other Five Lords
in the Tower.

FINIS.

