England Undeceived.

IN ANSWER TO A LATE PAMPHLET, (ENTITLED, Some WAYS for Raising of MONEY,
Humbly offered to the Consideration of the PARLIAMENT, By a Person of Quality)
Humbly presented to the same PARLIAMENT.

By an English Gentleman of IRELAND.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Maidenhead over against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street, 1691.

ENGLAND UNDECEIVED: IN ANSWER to a Pamphlet, etc.
IN the midst of the Great and Weighty deliberations, wherein the Parliament
are busied to find out Expedients to promote our present Security, and insure
our future Success; some officious Gentleman (either secretly warped to the
French, and Popish Interest, or invincibly ignorant of the Affairs* and
Interest of Ireland) has Published a Paper shrouded under the Parentage of a
Person of Quality: Which being an Expression somewhat ambiguous, I am inclined
to suspect the Honor of the Writer, and to conclude with my self, That it is
no commendable Quality in him, so grossly to reflect on the King, to prevaricate
with the Parliament, and cajole the People of England, by Some ways for raising
of Money, humbly offered to the consideration of the Parliament.

If the Author had subscribed his Name, possibly the knowledge of his Person and
Principles, might convince the Reader of his design, to promote the Interest of
the late King; and then there would be no need to refute his Positions, and sly
Insinuations for the poor Irish (as he tenderly calls them): But since he
conceals himself, and with so much boldness Addresseth himself to the Great
Council of the Nation, in favor of their, and our irreconcilable Enemies; and
so unseasonably, when it seems to be their Sense and Judgment, That the Irish
Estates should be confiscated; I account it my Duty, as an English Man of
Ireland, to show, at least, the Errors and Mistakes of this Irish Champion.

At his first entrance he dallies with the people, amusing them with
unpracticable Notions about Excise: So they, who go to catch Whales, do first
tire them, by throwing among them some empty Cask. I might as positively assert
(in pure Contradiction to him) That this way of Excise is not the best way of
all others; nor the most effectual: nor yet used by all wise, and civilized
Nations. I might cavil with his particular Instances, and demonstrate how
improper, and how incongruous they are; But as he intended them only as a
Pretext to Usher in a Design, so I shall pass them over without any farther
Remarks; and take notice only of the two ways offered by him to advance a
present sum.

The first is, A Review of the Taxes of One Shilling, and Three Shillings in
the Pound.

I am unwilling to be bitter, or to fix a harsh Character upon a Person of
Quality, utterly unknown to me; but I must profess, when I consider seriously
the two ways offered to advance a present Sum of Money (by a Review of the
Taxes, and a Composition for the Irish Estates) my Jealousy is terminated in a
plain conviction, That the Propounder of these Expedients retains a more eager
inclination to embroyl us in mutiny and discontent, than to extricate us from
the difficulties which we now lie under: There can be no way so disingenious,
so ungrateful, and so pernicious, as to make an invidious retrospect, and
reflection on things past and done. To Arraign the Prudence, Integrity, and
Impartial Justice of the Commissioners and Assessors of the late Taxes, (which
scrutiny will reach the whole House of Commons) must of necessity grate upon
the Credit and Reputation of the honest and substantial Inhabitants of every
Parish in London, and of the eminent Gentlemen in every County in England; and
if possible, and fit to be put in practice, it were but to inhance the odious
Office of Informers, and to disoblige all Men, who have escaped the severity of
the Imposition by such an unusual Review; a proceeding more agreeable to the
undertaking of Empson and Dudly, and could better become the Accomplices of
Jack C^de, or Wat Tyler. And if the Gleanings of the Tax will come to three or
four hundred thousand pounds, what would the whole Harvest do? Surely this Tax
alone might serve to defray all Charges of the War, without any farther
Impositions.

But I am verily persuaded, that what has been before suggested by the
Proposer, is only to amuse the Reader with preliminary pretenses; when as the
main scope and intriegue of the Project is to enforce the Chymera of A
Composition for the Irish Estates: Therefore I shall wave all further Censure
upon the precedent Paragraphs, and only apply my self to the due consideration
of that, which in naked terms is thus digested, That all King James 's
Adherents in that Kingdom, who shall come in by such a time, be Pardoned, and
have their Lands, paying two years Purchase of their true value, as it was
three years agone, some few of the most notorious and mischievous being
excepted. This fair and smooth-faced Proposal is supported by certain plausible
Considerations, which shall be gradually inquired into.

And first, It is suggested, That this way of Composition, rather than by
Confiscation and Sale, is the more merciful, and consequently the more
Christian way. To which I must say, that Mercy, when it is not grounded upon
Inducements of Reason and Prudence, does often prove a cruelty to him that
dispenses it. They who have their Portions in that unfortunate Country, have
had too sensible an experience, how often Lenity and Forgiveness have been
misapplied; and the most flagitious Criminals bardned into an impenitency, and
a desperate repetition of Plots and Contrivances, against the Lives and Estates
of the Protestants in that Kingdom. In every Age, nay in every Reign of the
respective Monarchs of England, since the first Conquest of that Country, the
Natives have industriously endeavored to shake off their Obedience to their
Lawful Prince by Intestine Insurrections and Rebellions; which being always
concluded by Victory, and an abject submission of the vanquished; the
Generosity of the English has as constantly defeated them of their due
Advantages, by too benign a condescension, and too easy listening to a
Composition. If upon the settlement of Ireland, after that horrid Rebellion in
1641. the Estates of the Rebels had been confiscated, and either vested in the
Crown, or disposed for the satisfaction of those that suffered, or conquered;
there had been in all probability no opportunity for the late revival of Irish
Barbarity, or any necessity for the English to extend their Mercy now in so
Christian a way, as the Projector has recommended. But since on the contrary,
King Charles the Second was wrought upon by such Arguments (whereof the
Pamphlet now before me seems to be the Transcript) to restore some Rebels to
their former Estates, and to confer on others much more than ever was possessed
by their Ancestors (paying Quit-Rent and a years value) nay, even absolving
many of them from the payment of Quit-Rent, while it lay heavy upon the
Protestants.) It has only administered an opportunity to that ungrateful, and
incorrigible Nation, to wage War with their Benefactors, and to endeavor the
utter extirpation of the English Blood. This indeed were but to repeat the Old
Game, to make the Irish Gainers by their Rebellion, and the English the Losers.
For what equality of reason can there be in it, to accept of two years value of
the Irish Estates, who have for above two years enjoyed the Profits, not only
of their own, but of all the Protestant Estates almost through the Kingdom? And
with what face can this person of Quality pretend this to be the more merciful
and Christian way, to indemnify the Papists for all their Rapine and Barbarity,
upon a slender Composition for two years Rent; and never think of the poor
Protestants, who have for two years been driven into Exile, and forceably
deprived of their Estates, and from whom so much has been plundered in Money,
Plate, Household Stuff and Stock, and so much damage done in burning their
Houses and Towns, and destroying their Plantation, that if all the Estates of
the Papists in Ireland were sold at ten years purchase, and distributed toward
their satisfaction, it would be so far from affording a due Recompense and
Reparation, that it would not make amends for the fourth part, beside the
Charge of the War: certainly no indifferent man can pronounce this to be the
more merciful, and the more Christian way, to indulge our implacable Enemies by
a Composition (who have truckled to the French, and abetted their Interest) and
to project no Provision, or Reparation to our Friends, who have suffered beyond
Example, for adhering to a Protestant King.

Neither will it be impertinent to animadvert, how the Protestants upon the
last Settlement were treated in a way not so Christian, nor so merciful. For
King Charles the Second, having by his Declaration from Bredah confirmed to the
Adventurers, and Soldiers, all the Estates they were possessed of in May 1659.
Nevertheless many of them were dispossessed by the Irish. (who were restored by
the Court of Clayms) others were turned out of their Estates by such Persons as
His Majesty thought fit to restore by Provisoes, and Letters. Now for the
satisfying, and reprising such Adventurers and Soldiers, the gratifying of
some favored Irish, and for the hope of a future settlement, all Adventurers
and Soldiers were forced to retrench a third part of all their Estates (which
at twelve years purchase, is worth four) and also to pay one years full value
of what their Estates were really, and bona fide, set for; which with above two
years Rent, which they have lately lost, will amount to more than seven years
purchase of the Lands they have been lately dispossessed of by the Irish Nay, I
have seen it computed, that the Adventurers did, viis and modis, pay 70 five
years Purchase for their Estates, and the Soldiers a hundred and fifteen

And I would ask the Projector, how long, how often shall Overtures of Mercy be
given to them? Is not five hundred years, in point of Time, and Pardons
extended almost every forty years, in point of Grace, sufficient to make an
experiment, whether a Nation be reclaimable, or not? But if hitherto such
Lenitives as these had no other effect, than to animate them to new Rebellions;
why shall it not be deemed not only Justice to our selves, but even a Mercy to
the Irish, to apply more effectual, tho more Churlish Remedies? What he is
pleased to add in the illustration of his Argument, by Instances from the
French King, may perhaps be historically true (tho I must confess I never heard
before, that he had subdued Savoy) but certainly are no way applicable to the
Subject in hand, nor urged with the relation of such Circumstances, as make the
case quite disserent: If we do not hear of Confiscations, or Extirpations in
Savoy; I am persuaded it is because it is too soon to alienate, or destroy that
Country, before he be in possession of it: so then in matter of fact it may
not be true, that they are subdued; and if it be true, it is no way pertinent;
for the Savoyards, not being Subjects to the French King, tho they may be
conquered by him, yet they cannot be subject to forfeiture, since they owed him
nothing, nor were before under his Allegiance. If the French King has so nobly
indulged the Gentlemen of Estates, where he has extended his Conquests in
Flanders, I am apt to think it proceeds more from Policy, than Christian
Compassion, the Conquest of that Country being not entire, and therefore
unseasonable for him to show his Resentments. And well may he boast of Cardinal
Richlieus Treatment of the Protestants of Rochel; it is the first time that
ever any of his Religion expressed any tenderness, or humanity to the
Professors of the other: but alas, this is but quoting part of the Text,
without the coherence. Every man knows, that knows History, how indispensable a
necessity lay upon the French King at that time, to oblige him to a compliance
with those Capitulations.

Secondly, It is offered, that these Peoples Crime is not so horrible, as some
would suppose it. And in this Argument is a manifest Collusion. The Author
laboring to palliate their Villainy by a pretext of inflexible Loyalty, and
adherence to the Interest of their Natural King: whereas in very Deed their
fighting under the Banner of King James, was but in order to the Accomplishment
of that long premeditated Design, to extirpate the Protestant Religion, and
English Nation; and by this means they had an opportunity to effect that by
Arms, and open War, which they could not bring to pass by Secret Plots, and
Massacres. King James, by abdicating the Kingdom of England, as is plainly
granted by the Author, did implicitly, and consequentially abdicate Ireland;
and the Government which he retained there, first by his Lieutenant, and then
in person, was after our present King (upon the Adjudication of a vacant
Throne) was proclaimed through England, and in all the Northern parts of
Ireland. In the mean time the Spontaneous Abdication of the Late King, and his
voluntary parting with the Prerogatives of the Crown, do render the Oath of
Allegiance contradictory, and unpracticable. We do not blame Subjects for
adhering to their Natural Prince (which indefinitely taken, is a virtue) but we
blame them for adhering to him in the prosecution of such a Cause, as did
utterly subvert the fundamental Constitution of these Kingdoms, which the
Subjects, as well as Prince, stands obliged not to violate. In this Case they
ought to have deserted, as knowing, that whoever adheres to a Prince in the
abetting of a Cause which overthrows the Laws, is punishable by the Laws of
that very Prince. But to say, they were hardly prevai'd upon to engage and
declare, is directy contrary to the knowledge of the persons that were then
upon the place. For whereas the Late King did not arrive in Ireland till about
the middle of March, the Irish Nation were long before fermented into outrage,
and Revenge; they began an early Violence in the County of Mead; before the
precedeing February, they had plundered the Protestants in Co^^aught: forced
the Houses, se^z'd the Arms and Horses, and driven away the persons of the
Protestants in Munster; and in a word, Universally through the Land accepted of
Commissions: and were trained up in Military Discipline; so that in December,
1688, Thirty Nine New and Levied Regiments were added to the Standing Army; and
Fifty Thousand of the Rabble, armed with Half-pikes and Skeins; and obliged to
it by command from the the Priests, under the pain of Excommunication. And so
far were they from being hardly prevailed upon to engage, and declare, that
never Christians engaged in a Crusade for conquering the Holy Land with so
impatient a Zeal, as the Couardly Irish ^^^ck'd to Dublin, and adored (...),
and strugled for Commissions, exchanging their Fri^ze Coats into Scarlet and
Blew, and jumping out of Brogues into Jackboots. And in very truth, as the
difference was not, so the Dispute ought not to be, Concerning Obedience to a
Natural Prince; because those very persons who were robbed and plundered, were
in peaceable subjection to the same King, to whom the Robbers professed an
Allegiance.

But by this Person of Quality's Logic, if we can hardly blame them for what
they have done, the whole World must blame us for what we have done: It had
been more ingenuous to say, The English have been the first Aggressors; and
because King James did not seem to forsake Ireland, but retained the Government
there, therefore King William is an Usurper, and all that contributed either in
purse or person, for the Reduction of Ireland, are Rebels and Traitors. And
whereas he slily insinuates, that they were left to themselves for many Months,
and to the practices and persuasions of King James his Agents, that no Power
but King James 's appeared in Ireland, and we in England were wholly taken up
with settling our Government; it is not to be doubted, but this Argument was
skrew'd in on purpose to reflect on the Government, and to arraign the King and
his Council of supine negligence, in not applying an early, and easy remedy at
the beginning of those Distractions.

The third Consideration cannot be answered civilly. It does not become a
Person of Quality to obtrude upon the World so notorious a Falsehood, That these
are the Ancient Inhabitants and Proprietors of the Country; for howsoever
among the Vulgar, and meaner sort of the People, there be many of the Ancient
Irish Extraction; yet it is manifest, that few or none of the Lords and
Gentlemen in that Kingdom are originally Irish, but descended of English Blood:
As for instance, Butler, (the Head of which Family, the Illustrious House of
Ormond, have in all times been famous for their unshaken Fidelity to the
English Crown and Interest) Fitzgerald, Burgh, Fitz-Williams, Fitz-Maurice,
Fitz-Patrick, Talbot, Preston, Bermingham, Plunket, Sarsfield, Nettervile,
Lutterel, Bagnal, Lucy, Dillon, and many more; tho by the influence of their
Religion, many of them have long since degenerated into the barbarous
Inclinations of the Native Irish. So that if all the original Natives of Irish
Extraction (who are distinguished by Mac and O) were restored to the Estates
they enjoyed in 1688. the Composition for two years value would be very
inconsiderable. But if a plenary Conquest (repeated upon the extinction of
several Rebellions) a Possession for 500 years, frequent for forfeitures, a
submission so the Laws, a Recognition of the Title, a derivation of their
Parents for their Estates, and a general incorporating of Families, be not
sufficient Arguments to entitle England to the Sovereignty of that Kingdom, and
to demonstrate that the English are the Proprietors of it; what shall we say of
the Race of King Pepin? how injuriously has the King of Spain dealt with the
Moors? the Emperor with the Hunus? the Northern Kings with the Goths and
Vandals? In a word, The Ancient Inhabitants and Proprietors of that Country,
who are now in Arms against England, are either of the mere Irish Race, or of
the English Stock. If they are of the Irish Sort, what Obligations can lie upon
the King, or Parliament of England, to own their Propriety, or Title, who have
by so many re-iterated Acts of Defection from their Allegiance, forfeited all
Pretensions to Mercy? If they are of the other sort, descended from the
English, I would fain know how they came by their Estates: were they not
granted to them by the Kings of England, upon the Forfeitures of the Native
Irish? And if it were just and reasonable for their Ancestors to take the
Estates of the poor harmless Irish (only for a little Rebellion) what hardship
is it, or what injustice to dispossess them, who have relapsed into the same
Crime? I do think indeed, that in time they may be reclaimed (as the Author
does hint) but not by such Methods as he insinuates; not by restoring them to
their Lands, and compounding for two years value; but by imposing such a yoke
upon them, as they shall never be in a capacity to rebel again. The
Interrogatory, ( How many Civil Protestant Families are there already in
Ireland of mere Irish Extraction) I answer in one word, There is only one of
any Quality, or Title, or at least three or four Families of one Name, or Sept,
and that is of the O Bryens.

The fourth Consideration is, That men's not submitting to a new Established
Government, is not so heinous a Crime, as the rebelling against a Government
they were born under, or to which they have submitted. Supposing this Apothegm
to be true, what relation has this to the Case in hand? The Author must not
think with his Sophistry to impose upon our Reason so, that we may not
distinguish between a Government, and a Governor. If the Irish were not born
under the Government of King William, yet they were born under the Government
of the King of England, and submitted to it. And by the Laws of that Land,
whosoever is de Facto possessed of the Throne of England, is ipso facto and
also de Jure, King of Ireland. And though it is not strange, that some
differences and disorders should be upon a dissolution of a Government; yet it
is to be admired, and with everlasting horror to be remembered, that in full
Peace, and the uninterrupted Exercise of the Government, the greatest
differences and disorders happened in Ireland that ever were known in any
Christian Kingdom. Did not the Irish, in the Reign of the late King James*
violate the Laws of the Nation, and infringe the Act of Settlement? They
Arbitrarily divested the Officers of the Army, because they were Protestants,
Cashiered the Soldiers, and with all the Circumstances of Scorn and Inhumanity,
stripped them to their Shirts, and exposed them to the necessity of Begging or
Starving; they reformed the Privy Council according to their own Cue; they
turned the Judges out of the Courts, and the Justices of Peace out of the
Commission, and Protestants from acting in the Public Revenue; they
Constituted Popish Sheriffs through the Kingdom; they applied the Revenue of
vacant Bishoprics to the support of the Popish Clergy; and took away some that
were full; they Established Romish Priests in every Parish, Erected Fryeries
and Nunneries; and publicly celebrated Mass in every Town; they issued Quo
Warranto's against all Corporations, and filled them with Magistrates and
Members utterly incapable by the Law; they Disarmed all Protestants through the
Kingdom, and seized upon their Horses, and by pretended Plots brought them in
question for their Lives: And all this under the Government they were born
under, and to which they had submitted, and in manifest contempt, and
rebellious infraction of the known Laws of the Land; which enormous proceedings
admit of no extenuation, by what the Person of Quality alleges* That these
things were done by, or under their Natural King of their own Religion, and
their constant Friend and Patron: So that if there was a dissolution of the
Government, it was brought to pass by their Natural Prince, to whom they
adhered and not by him whom they resisted From all which it appears, how little
Mercy is due to them on this account; for though we should grant it to be no
Crime in them, not to submit to a new established Government; yet doubtless it
is a Crime of the deepest dye, to subvert an old established Government.
Suppose (as he supposes) that a part of England, in a great Revolution, should
not readily conform with the rest; why, it is very probable, that brotherly
Compassion and Charity would interpose in their excuse: But suppose that a part
of Ireland, or Ireland as a part of England, should overturn the Laws; set up
Popery, Disarm their fellow Subjects, Plunder and Murder their Neighbors, and
call in the French to their assistance; Would England be accounted severe, if
they should destroy and extirpate such Miscreants, or make their Estates a
Prey? No, God and Nature require it; Law and Justice do enjoin it; And in such
a case (I do agree with him) there is as much Mercy due to Irish -men, as there
is to us English.

The Fifth Consideration is no way cogent or persuasive. They who have despised
such Gracious Offers of Favor from a Merciful Prince, eluded his Protections,
and resisted him so desperately in the conclusion of his Conquest; will never
make his Clemency beneficial to us, though it may be of advantage to them, in
putting a sudden end to the War, that so there may be a sufficient Stock lest
to propagate another Rebellion in the next Generation. And it is worth the
noting, what a considerable Person of the Irish Nation (who upon the Settlement
after the last Rebellion, was General Agent for the Irish) said to a Friend,
who asked him not long since, Why he would engage in so desperate a Cause, when
he could not in reason but think, that England would in time subdue them? Tush,
says he, We depend upon our Allies; but if they should fail, we know that at
last we shall have Terms given us.

I must not pass by his bold reflection on the King, That since the Victory at
the Boyn, we have been fighting for Irish Lands. Not so, Sir, we have been
Fighting for English Lands, for the Inheritance of English Men, from which by
force they have been dispossessed, and subjected to a Forfeiture by a formal
Attainder in a Mock-Parliament; and to which we cannot expect to be restored,
without the Effusion of more Blood and Treasure: And it is to be hoped, that in
time the Irish Lands shall contribute to our Reimbursement.

The Sixth Consideration is a vae vobis, a perfect denunciation of Ruin and
Destruction; lest we be destroyed our selves by the French King, by being too
obstinately bent to destroy the Irish: But I am neither convinced by his
Reasons, nor dismayed by his Threats. Tho we are to encounter Gog and Magog;
tho the French Turk be united to the Ottoman Turk, yet, by the Mercy of God,
the Confederate Christians shall not fail of success, but triumph in time over
the Association of Infidels and Atheists. And tho this Person of Quality takes
upon him to censure the Emperor, for not making Peace with the Turk last
Winter, and to advise our King to a Voyage Royal into France; yet since he
raises an Inference from that Error, and supports that advice, by discouraging
the continuance of the War in Ireland; I am mightily deceived, if he be not a
secret Advocate for the French Interest; for if the prosecution of the War in
Ireland should be discontinued, a hasty Peace hudled up, the Irish Gentlemen
restored to their Estates, and the English Army withdrawn; the Protestants
there can be in no possible capacity to maintain their Ground against their
insolent Enemies, having no Rents to maintain them, nor Stocks to feed them,
nor Houses to shelter them; but must inevitably be exposed to the Cruelty of
the Irish, if their dear Allies in France should prosper in their attempts
against the Confederates.

In the last Consideration, This Person of Quality pretends to a great intimacy
and knowledge in the present Councils and Policy of Europe: That it is the
passionate desire of our Friends and Confederates, that we would make up with
the Irish upon any reasonable Terms. And this he enforces with a Supposition,
That we might assail the French with all the Force we can make; at the same
time inculcating an implicit Danger, lest himself in the mean time may beat us
out of the Sea, overbear our Confederates at Land, and even invade England it
self. This is a tacit Rhodomontade, and is doubly fallacious; and looks more
like a Desire, than a Fear, that things should so come to pass. As we do not
apprehend an unavoidable Destruction impending over us from the Invasion of the
French; so we do not understand any indispensable necessity for making Terms
with the Irish: For tho the last year the great Leviathan took his pastime in
the Waters, and insulted on our Coasts, (with foam shame to us, and no
advantage to himself) yet we doubt not but in a short time an inextricable Hock
will be put into his Nose: And as for the shattered Remnant of the Irish (whose
late Valor did arise from Despair, who have made some resistance, when driven
to the Wall; and who never would stand a Fight, but when there was no
possibility to escape by running away) they are not worthy of so solemn a
consultation, Why should the King be interrupted in the carier of his success?
and the Victor advised to so tame a condescension to the vanquished party, when
the surviving Body of them are crowded into a corner of the Land, of whom the
major Part are a Rabble of Rapperees and Tories, ill Armed poorly Clad, and
miserably Fed; who in all probability cannot subsist till the next Campagn, or
upon the advance of it, must fall, and be entirely subdued? Add, that this will
be but a skinning of the Sore, which after may Fester and destroy the Body. For
by a Composition, the Irish will be enabled to join with the French upon the
first fit occasion; whereas by a Conquest, they will be rendered incapable to
abet such an Attempt. I grant, that the Reduction of Ireland is of
unexpressible importance to England, and to the prosperity of the Confederates:
But let no Man think, that to effect that, there needs so mighty application; I
dare confidently say, the King might at his pleasure remand the greatest part
of his Army in Ireland to the pursuit of his foreign Wars, and securely expect
a speedy and plenary Conquest of that perfidious and ungrateful People, by the
Industry and Courage of the remainder, being well seconded by the Protestants
of that Kingdom well Armed, which in all likelihood would not at this time be
subject to a dispute, had not the Violent Rains, and approaching Winter,
intercepted the current of his Victory at Lymerick.

I shall now own the Objections, which the Author has raised, and in the
maintenance of them, endeavor to enervate the force of his respective Answers.

First, That Ireland is a subordinate Kingdom to England; and must therefore
comply with whatever we do. The Respondent seems only to Nibble at this, and
granting (or not denying) Ireland to be subordinate to England, he only snarls
at the Consequence, to comply with whatever we do: But this Argumentation soon
comes to nothing, if we consider Ireland as a Member, or Province of England.
It is granted by him, That Ireland is subordinate to England; (tho what this
has to do with the business of Mercy, I do not apprehend) but the Author denies
the Inference, that therefore Ireland must comply with England, which, he says,
is not true in all Cases (and I say so too) of which he gives an Instance; for,
says he, If England rebel, must Ireland rebel too? No surely: But tho Ireland
is not obliged to comply with England in all Cases, yet that Kingdom stands
obliged to comply in some. The Author grants, That what England did in these
late Revolutions, was upon grounds so righteous, as were justifiable to all the
World: And it is in this Case, tho not in every Case, that Ireland ought to
comply with England. And it is strange, that Ireland, being a subordinate
Conquered Kingdom, should not be obliged to comply with the Conquering Nation,
in all such Matters, as the Author acknowledges to be just and righteous.

Secondly, The Irish will never be quiet. The Author in his whole Pamphlet has
not so stumbl'd upon Ingenuity, as in his Answer to this Objection. They must
be quiet (says he) since they will not be in a condition to be otherwise: which
is as much as to say, it is not any Principle of Loyalty, Justice, or Honesty,
that disposes them to be quiet; but plain Necessity, since they have no
strength, or opportunity to be otherwise; and if they could be otherwise, they
would not be quiet. He that consults History, and turns over the Chronicles of
England and Ireland, will fully agree with the Respondent, and be convinced,
That since the first Conquest of that Land, the Natives have been retained in
obedience and quiet, no longer than while they remained under an incapacity to
be otherwise. Witness more than a hundred Provincial Insurrections, or
Universal Rebellions in the space of 500 years, since they first swore Fealty
to the Crown of England. Witness the causeless and unprovoked Rebellion in
1641. when by a Barbarity transcending the most exquisite Villainy of any Age,
or Country, they most inhumanly murdered their Neighbors, Gossips, and
Fellow Subjects, with whom they participated equally in the benefits of Peace,
the Protection of the Laws, and a favorable Connivence to their Religion.
Witness their unparalleled Insolence in the Reign of the Late King, when it
was not enough for them to displace the Magistrates, to change the Civil List,
to turn out the Officers, and disband the Soldiers, only because they were
Protestants, and to fill many places with the very Persons attainted for their
horrid Rebellion and Murders in 1641. or their black Issue: when it did not
suffice to erect Popish Convents, and publicly to celebrate Mass, contrary to
the Established Laws of the Land; but having all in their hands, they began to
plunder, and seize the Goods of the Protestants, the meaner sort declaring,
that, As the Lord Tyrconnel, and other Great Men, were possessed of all Civil
and Military Employments, so it belonged to them to become Masters of the
English, and to possess their Estates and Goods.

Thirdly, We cannot live with comfort, intermixed with the Irish. Tho by two
dismal Experiments in 1641. and 1688. there is too sensible Reason to start
that Objection, yet the most impudent of the Irish cannot say, that the
behavior of the English toward them has ever administered the least umbrage
for such a Supposition. The Objection is coined by the Author, but was never
thought of by us: We have lived with comfort among them, and may do so again,
so they be not Masters, or be too powerful for us. But such an Inference as the
Objector has raised, could never proceed from the mouth of an Englishman, or
Protestant. What could a French Jesuit say more, than, Truly we must then come
away from them, and leave them their Country by themselves. That is in plain
terms, we must come away, and not only leave them their own, but our Estates
also. The Visor is now taken off, and the Person of Quality has palpably
displayed himself. What! must we come away from them out of weariness, or fear,
because we cannot live in comfort with them? must we by a shameful, and
unconstrained Retreat own their Title to that Country, and proclaim our selves
Intruders? for so he intends by that Malicious Insinuation, That we have thrust
our selves in among them: We are not Intruders, we did not thrust our selves
among them; the first Entrance of the English into Ireland was upon a fair
Invitation. I have hardly patience to reflect on this most injurious
Expression, so contradictory to Truth, and History. It is now above 500 years,
since England has made Ireland their Country, by the dearest Acquisition in
the World, of inestimable Treasure, and vast effusion of blood, repeated, and
repurchased in every Age and Generation. The Parliaments there have from time
to time recognized their Submission, and protested their Homage and Fealty to
the Crown of England. There is not a man in Ireland that has a Freehold in an
Acre of Land, but what he holds mediately, or immediately from the Crown. There
are very few of the Natural and Original Irish, who have a Propriety in any
Estate, their Ancestors having in every Reign successively forfeited them by
Treason and Rebellion. The Owners of all, or most of the Estates there, are
either the Ancient, or Modern English, and Scots; of the first sort whereof,
tho many have degenerated into Irish manners, and apostatized from the
Religion; yet they cannot extinguish their Names, or alienate their descent, or
deny the honor of their Consanguinity with the English Nation. And now after
all this, after a plenary Conquest by the Sword, and an Establishment by Law,
after a long Prescription, and undisputed Possession for 500 years; Shall that
be called their Country? Shall the English be affronted with the opprobrious
Name of Intruders, who thrust our selves in among them? This indeed is too
insolent, and void not only of all Humanity (as he is pleased to say on the
other side) but repugnant to Truth, Honesty and Justice.

Fourthly, Our Army must be rewarded out of their Lands. If this had been
Prophetically spoken, as it is invidiously mentioned, I should not have opposed
my Prayers to the accomplishment. If it pleases the King and Parliament so to
dispose of the forfeited Estates, I shall not grudge at the Exchange of the
Proprietors. But when I first cast my Eye on this Cavil, I expected another
application to be made by this Person of Quality, so compassionate to the poor
Irish; and that is, not that the Army should be rewarded out of their Lands,
but that they should be distributed among the poor Protestants of Ireland,
whose Loss and Damage by burning, plundering, and universal devastation, is
almost irreparable. But the Author evidently appears partial, and prejudicated
in his tenderness to the poor Irish, without any regard or sense of the utter
ruin of the Protestants. But why does he make it such a wonder, that our Army
should be thus rewarded? were not the English Armies thus rewarded in the last
Settlement? in the days of Queen Elizabeth? and of all the preceding Kings of
England since the Conquest?

Fifthly, They called in the French, which is never to be forgiven. In the
Answer to this Objection he becomes a perfect Advocate for the Irish Nation: he
supposes that they did not call in the French; or if they did, that it was no
Capital Crime to make use of Foreign Aid for their own preservation. To the
declarative part I say, they did call in the French, for by their Ambassadors,
dispatched by Ty^connel in January 1688. they solemnly applied themselves to
the French King for Aid and Succor (as they formerly did to the King of Spain,
and to the Duke of Lorain) and importunately solicited King James to come among
them, who could no way descend to their protection, but being accompanied by
the French. Nay, the King in his Proclamation declares the same, and the Author
knows it, as appears by his Quotation. To the Argumentative part, I shall only
answer, That if that Suggestion be allowed, there needs no Apology to be made
for any intestine Rebellion: and I have just reason to think, that this Person
of Quality held some Intelligence with the French Fleet last Summer, and would
not have opposed that Invasion, but kindly made use of Foreign Aid. In a word;
If the Irish lived in peace, enjoyed an equal benefit of the Laws, and an
undisturbed possession of their Estates and Properties; (as is undeniable)
where then was their Hazard? what needed any thing to be done for their
Preservation? what occasion was there for them to make use of Foreign Aid?

Sixthly, There was a full pardon once granted to the Irish, which they did not
accept, nor come in upon it. I say so too; and with the favor of the
Respondent I do aver (in contradiction to what he alleges) that it was before
King James was in Ireland, and among them, and in Power. For the King's
Proclamation bore date in February 1688. and the Indulgence of it expired about
the 10th of April following; but King James did not land in Ireland before the
11th of March. This Person makes bold to reflect upon the Conduct of the King,
in that after the Victory at the Boyn, a full pardon was not granted, or
tolerable Conditions offered. But (if I be not as saucy in giving my sense of
it) I would say, That though such an Act might have appeared generous, it would
hardly have been interpreted prudent, or seasonable. And tho indeed it might
have been a high Complement to our Roman Catholic Allies, if the King (after
so unexampled hazard of his person, and the effusion of his Royal Blood) had
embraced his Enemies, and caressed them for their opposition to his Government,
it had carried little kindness to his Friends, and Protestant Confederates, to
receive his Enemies into mercy, reaking with the blood, and enriched with the
Spoil of his martyred Subjects, leaving them in a condition a hundred times
worse, than when he first appeared for their Deliverance. But if King James
gave them leave to submit, when he fled from them, and they have since not
submitted, it only shows, that they are an incorrigible Generation, and that
Rebellion is so rooted in them, that they are utterly incurable. And if they be
grown desperate, as well as obstinate, let them take their Chance in the Event
of War; they first despoiled the Protestants, drove some into Exile, and
tyrannized over such as continued in subjection to them; and if their nefarious
Crimes be recompensed by stripping them of their Estates, and throwing them
into misery and beggary, let them thank themselves; they are the Authors of
their own perdition. And common Equity, as well as the Common Law of the Land,
provides, that every* Aggressor, or Trespasser, shall make amends, and satisfy
the Damages of the Party on whom he committed the Trespass. But though he
maliciously and mutinously insinuates, that we fight to get their Estates: that
our Allies are run down by the French: that we in England lie under such Taxes
as never were known; that our severe Resolutions were against His Majesty's
merciful inclinations; yet all serious and unprejudiced Men will understand,
that we fight to recover the Estates of the Protestants, which the Irish in
their late Parliament, with so much precipitancy and injustice Condemned;
Attainting all persons of all Ages, Degrees and Sexes, present or absent, dead
or alive, without Reason or Distinction* and obliging Men to impossibilities,
to preserve their Lives and Fortunes: All that Love, and Favor the present
Government, will believe, that our Allies are not run down by the French, and
will hope there is no danger of it. Modest and well-principled Men will not
Grumble, or say, We lie under such Taxes as never were known; when the
revolving of the Modern Histories of England, and appealing to the Testimony of
many living Men, will plainly confute the Assertion; by fresh Instances in the
time of the late Usurpation, and the late Reign of Charles the second: And tho
I will neither presume to be privy to the King's Inclinations, or tax the
severity of such Resolutions, I may modestly and justly say, That as no other
Methods have hitherto been prosperous in Ireland; so there does not appear any
way more certainly conducing to the everlasting settlement of that Kingdom,
than to Confiscate the Estates of all who have wilfully appeared in Arms
against the Government of England; and to transfer them into the hands of
English Protestants.

Seventhly, They have a perfect aversion and hatred to the English Government,
and will never submit. In his Objection he would fain be taken for an
Irishman; in his Answer to it, he talks like an English-Papist. For howsoever
they may have accidentally an Aversion to the English Government, because it
comprehends a prejudice to their Religion (in which they are above all Nations
most superstitious) yet they have ever owned a satisfaction and complacency in
their subjection to the English: In the demonstration of which, I do not so
much rely on Public Declarations and Acts of Parliament, as on the suffrage of
that People, in their Contentment and Joy to live under English Landlords,
rather than to be enslaved under their own Lords, and Heads of Clans. And
suppose the Natural Irish (who in Quality or Estate are no way considerable) do
retain a perfect Aversion and Hatred to the English Government; it does not
follow, that those who are of English Blood, and descended from the English
(tho differing in Religion) should retain the same sentiments. But what a
snarling reflection is this, That the English Crowd into their Country, and
Grow upon them, and Cut them out? If that be still their Country, because the
Mercy of the Conquerors has permitted some of the Natives to remain there;
England must renounce all Title and Propriety to Virginia, New England, and to
the Continent and Islands in America. And tho the Irish had not Authority and
Preferments, it was not denied them, quatenus Irish; when any of them were
qualified by embracing the Protestant Religion, they were advanced and
entrusted without distinction; which being agreeable to the Laws and Usage of
England, it is easy to conjecture from what Quiver this Arrow came, and that
this Person of Quality projects an Indulgence to Popish Recusants in both
Kingdoms; at least it is a provocative to the Papists in England, to take the
first opportunity to Rebel, since by the Laws of the Land they are rendered
incapable of Authority and Preferments. The rest of the Paragraph is a nauseous
Repetition of what he has before urged more than once, by an ungrateful
Impeachment of the Government, as if their Proceedings were founded on
Greediness and Avarice, managed by Severity and Cruelty; and representing them
to disadvantage, by an impertinent and odious Comparison with the Dealings of
the French (where by the way, if the French King has suffered the Estates of
Protestants to go to the next of kin, that are, or will turn Papists; May not
the King of England, by the same equity, give the Estates of Papists to the
next of kin, that are, or will turn Protestants?) But this being a Language
fitter for the Cognizance of the King's Bench, and the Inquisition of a Jury, I
shall remit the Author to his deserved Fate, hoping that in due time he may be
discovered.

FINIS.

