Englands Glory.
BY THE Benefit of Wool Manufactured therein, from the Farmer to the Merchant;
and the Evil Consequences of its Exportation Unmanufactured. Briefly Hinted,
With Submission to better Judgments.
THere is no King nor Prince in the World, known by experience, or upon Record,
that has such means to support their Splendor and Greatness as his Majesty of
great Britain, nor has any Country or Nation such variety of staple Commodities
within it self, and in such abundance, as has the Kingdom of England, which
are said by some to be a Hundred Native Commodities, which produces a Thousand
sorts of Manufactures: So that if those advantages were duly improved, England
might be a general Mart for the whole World, and then by consequence be the
glory thereof. That those advantages are not improved is too too obvious to all
that look into it, by the sore complaints that are frequently made of the great
proverty and decay thereof; and indeed (which is worst of all) by that general
desperation of spirit which will not put forth a hand to help, support, or
prevent the total desolation of our Country, upon a prepossest opinion, that
all endeavors will be rendered fruitless and abortive.

The consideration whereof has greatly prompted me (who must confess my self
the meanest of Thousands more concerned) to use the utmost of my little skill,
and unwearied diligence (though but as the Woman's mite) to the right management
of so great an undertaking; that the threatened ruin of all may be prevented,
and (of possible) some good part of what is lost may be recovered. And whereas
many have taken in hand to set forth these things, some treating of one thing,
and other of another, which if all was collected and harmonized, it might very
much conduce to the promoting of this weighty affair, of so public a value: I
shall confine my self to those things only, whereof I have had not only
credible information, but a considerable (though a sad) experimental knowledge;
and in a more particular and especial manner that of Wool, and of its
Manufacture and Consequences; which amongst many, is the Richest Treasure in
his Majesty's Dominions, the flower, strength, and sinews of this Nation; a
Land uniting the People into Societies, for their own Utility; it is the Milk
and Honey to the Grazier and Country Farmer; the Gold and Spices of the East
and West Indies to the Merchant, and Citizens, the continued supply of Bread to
the Poor: and in a word, the Exchequer of wealth, and staple of protection to
the whole, both abroad and at home; and therefore of full merit to be had in
perpetual remembrance, defense, and encouragement for the most advantageous
improvement thereof.

The Wools of England (before it was manufactured within it self) have ever
been of great account and esteem abroad, sufficiently testified unto, by the
great amity, which it begat, and for many Hundred Years (inviolably)
maintained, between the King of England and Dukes of Burgundy, only for the
great benefit, that (from that Commodity) did accrue to that People, insomuch
that the English Wools, they received at 6 d. per Pound, they returned again
(through their industrious manufacture thereof) in Cloth, at 10 s. per Yard, to
the great enriching of that State, both in the advancement of the Revenues of
their Sovereign, and in a full employment (thereby) continued among the People;
whereby the Merchants of this Nation were occasioned, (as a People unwilling to
be wholly dispriviledged of so great a benefit) to transport themselves (with
their Families (in great numbers) into Flanders, from whence they held a
constant Commerce with most parts of the World; this continued without
intermission, between England and Burgundy, until King Edward the 3d. made his
mighty Conquests over France, and Scotland, and as a suitable improvement of so
great a mercy, did wisely project, and also accomplish the manufacture of Wools
within the Bowels of this Kingdom, to the great enriching of his own People,
and also to the Peopling of his new Conquered Dominions; the memory of whose
wisdom and care for his People, is worthy to be had in remembrance by English
Men, unto the Worlds end.

The said King having thus settled the manufacture of Wools within the Kingdom
of England, confined it by a penal Statute, which (at first) reached not only
to Goods, Chattels, and Land, but also to Members, and Life it self; but in a
short time repealed the two latter thereof, continuing the other in its full
force to remain to future Generations: which exceeding great advantage to the
prosperity of the English Trade, has now continued these Three Hundred Years,
by the vigilance of the Kingdoms Monarchs, and the protection of its Laws, in
the continued careful execution thereof upon offenders, with more than a little
diligence to provide against the thirsting desires of Foreiners to wrest this
Native privilege (of so great a moment) out of English hands, which by the
providence of God (through the great care of our Ancestors) has been (for many
Ages) enjoyed by the Nation, as it is indeed its proper right: But so it is,
that (for some years past) the diligence of Foreiners, to enrich themselves
upon us, has so much exceeded our care to preserve our selves, that it is now
come to, if not beyond a question, Who have the greatest benefit of the
manufacture of English Wools, they who have no right unto it, or they to whom
of right it does belong?

That this is indeed so, will appear, by considering that not only Holland,
Flanders, and Zealand have long sucked the sweetness of the sinews of our
Trade; but France is likewise learning to be too hard for us, as is manifest by
the great quantities of Wools, that (of late years) have been transported from
England and Ireland thither; how injurious it must be to us, is also
unquestionable, if we consider the consequence thereof, which was (without
question) much in the Eye of our Ancestors, as appears by what is above hinted
in Edward the 3ds time, and in several Kings Reigns since.

Every Pack of Wool sent to France, does prevent us (not only) of the benefit
of the manufacture thereof, but of two Packs more besides it self, viz. Thus,
it being combing, and combed Wool (for the most part) exported thither, the
French (having no Wools of their own, but such as are very course) are not able
to make Cloth, or fine Stuff, without the conjunction of ours therewithal;
there being none (to my best information) fit for that purpose in all the
World, but ours only, all other being likewise course, but Spanish, and that
much too fine (especially for Worsted Stuffs, and not in any wise fit for
combing; so that without English or Irish Wools there can be no fine Worsted
Stuffs, nor a middle sort of Cloth made, in the whole World; neither will any
Wools be well mixed together, but English and Spanish, (only for Cloth) because
the Spanish is with the English of one nature, being formerly English Sheep,
though now much finer, from the alteration of the Climate, and the nature of
the Land whereon it is fed, as by good experience appears here in England,
both near, and at a farther distance.

Wherefore the exportation of English Wools into France must of necessity be
greatly prejudicial to this Nation, not only in the quantity sent over, but
also in the advantage which is thereby given them to manufacture a double
portion of their own Wool, (which formerly was little worth) into such
commodities, as spoils us of the a vantage of our proper Trade, not only
thither, but also into other parts, viz. in these three respects.

First, The combed of the English Wool makes Wooffe for the Warpes of the
French Wool, and so takes up (it may be) as much as the quantity above
specified, to every Pack of English Wool, without which, they can (only) with
their Wool make Rugs, and at the best, Cloth for Seamen, and the like.

2dly. Their combings or pinnions, viz. the short Wool that is combed out of the
Worsted, serves for their Linen warp to make some of their Druggets, because
their Linen being fine spun, and colored, is not discernable to all Persons,
to be that we call Linsie Woolsie.

3dly. The finest short English Wool is mixed with the lowest of Spanish Wool,
called short Wool, for some of their best Druggets, that is woove for Worsted
Chanies, and also for a middle sort of Broad-cloth, about 10 s. or 12 s. per
Yard. This is the cause (I judge) that short Spanish Wool is so scarce here in
England.

Now if we consider these things together, the damage of the exporting of this
one Pack from England to France, at about 10 l. or 12 l. Sterling, preventing
the manufacturing of two Packs more in England, which would be worth one 100 l.
Englands loss (in the whole) by the exportation of a Pack of Wool, is little
less than 90 l. in its first exportation, moreover considering the Custom paid
when exported (if manufactured in England) with the Frait and Custom where it
is imported; the product of all these charges augmenting the 100 l. when sold
there, laid out in another commodity beyond Sea, the Custom whereof being paid
there, with Frait and Custom (when imported) in England, it is much, if it do
not more than double the first principal.

Now, if it be so, that the exportation of one Pack of English wool, exported
at 10 l. or 12 l. be near 200 l. damage to the King and Kingdom in general, is
the consequence; what will be the loss in the exporting of 10. or 15 Thousand
Packs into France (in two Years time) is easily accounted (by such) as are
concerned in the affairs: And although this evil is almost incredible to many,
yet it is too manifest, to such as have made (something) their business to look
into it; and not only so, but these further inconveniences must (by this means)
arise upon us.

First, The spoiling of our Trade with France in all our Woollen manufactures,
as does already appear, by the Impost put upon the same, there, from 20. to 40.
per Cent. since so great quantity of our VVools is exported thither, whereunto
woeful experience may be a sufficient witness.

And secondly, In time it will capacitate the French, as well as the Dutch, (if
not much better) to under-sell our English Merchants, in Foreign Parts, nay
(possibly) in our own Country, (to this, I shall only mention the words of a
Merchant in Flanders, by Letter to another here, treating on this matter thus,
We English have our throats cut, with our own Weapons, wondering at the
stupidity of the English here, that they should so long omit, to possess the
King's Majesty with this deplorable and dangerous case, in respect to the
present and future inconveniences thereof.) by reason whereof (as in time the
French will not only prevent our English woollen manufactures, to be sold in
France (as before minded) and also in other Foreign Parts, but also bring
theirs into England, and sell them for four times the value here, to the great
enriching of themselves, and to the impoverishing of the English, only by new
fantastic sopperies; for which the English pay not less than some hundred
thousands in a year, to get themselves into the French mode. So much (indeed)
have we been deceived (in this matter) to our shame, as well as to our apparent
loss; that whereas (in time of the late War) with the Dutch and French, those
French Druggets were thereby much prevented, many English striped broad-cloths
rent through into three parts (about 10 s. per Yard, price) being put into the
form of French Druggets, were sold in each part at 8 s. per Yard; and so (in
the whole) came to 1 l. 4 s. per Yard. So likewise it is certainly true, that
many of those Druggets made here in England go for French, and in order
thereunto, directed to French Men in some of our Southern parts, have from
thence been conveyed unto London (and there sold for French Goods) to have
colored the business with the Custom-house Officers, to save the Custom of
French Druggets. And this continued long, before the cheat could be discovered;
but being once found out by the Clothier, (who could not (to his own private
advantage) conceal such an apparent injury to his Country, it was soon
prevented: whereby we may come to see (with clearness) the advantage, that that
People makes upon our English fancies, by overselling us in the same kind of
commodities, that they make out of our English Wools, joined (as before minded)
with their own; having also an advantage thereunto, by the cheapness of the
manufactures thereof, beyond what we can do (the French being very populous,
and living harder than we can in England; as is evident by their Linnens, that
Paying Freight and Custom with profit to the Merchant, yet can be afforded
cheaper than can be made in England.

But so it is, that the advantage we give them, besides, in the mixture of our
Wools with theirs, is such, that whereas their Wool of it self, is not worth
above 4 l. per Pack, being mixed with ours, becomes so fit for Worsted Stuffes,
as that it comes to be worth no less than 12 l. per Pack. So that all those
things considered, it becomes obvious to every Eye, (that does not (wilfully)
close it self) that the exportation of Wool from England and Ireland is of a
dangerous and destructive nature to the very being of the Trade of this
Kingdom. Whatever objections have been made (with respect to the Graziers
present advantage) thereunto, whose loss may possibly be supposed (by
prohibiting exportation) to be about 20 s. in every Pack of Wool that is so
exported: In answer whereunto, I have this to say, That though it may be
granted, it will be so for a time in this one particular commodity, yet such
will (thereby) be the spoil of the general Trade of the Nation, that what is
gotten in one, will be lost in every other commodity, as Corn, Beefs, and
Muttons; on each of which, with the Wools, the Farmers and Graziers advantage
does much more than equally depend; besides the inevitable danger of the ruin
of our Trade, and so consequently the starving of our Poor, without some
extraordinary means for their support; who while the privilege of our Trade is
kept inviolate with other Nations, we have money plentifully to expend for the
advancement of the Farmers and the Graziers; for that is that which chiefly
advances the Grazier and Farmer, which is Flesh and Corn, and not the quantity
of Wool, as afterward will more fully appear.

And it has always been observed (in former and latter times) hitherto, that
when the Clothiers have had the best Trade at London, the Farmer did not loose
his share in the advantage thereof in the Country; according to the dispose of
providence, who has ordered Nations, but more especially the People of every
Nation, (in matters of this kind) to depend upon each other, and so to rise or
fall together, as they are designed to mercy, or to judgment, by the hand of
God. These things considered, with a little deliberation, it will manifestly
appear, that the exporting of our English Wool, will not only prove the spoil
of our Merchants and Clothiers Trade, and so consequently expose the Poor to
desperate straits for subsistence, but (in short time) must of necessity make
the Country-mens employments (of every kind) to come to little, and so make
them incapable of paying Rent.

For, if it be so, that while we have but a little Trade, we can hardly live
one by another, What may be expected, if our Trade should be taken away? which
is now more in danger (by the French) than it has been these 300. Years past
-- And then we may consider, what the price of Wool may be in England, when we
by our remisness shall lose our Trade, by the skill and circumventing practices
of Foreiners, and we helping forwards for a supposed profit; For there was not
more art and skill in our Ancestors, to bring home the work at first to the
Wool, and prohibiting the exportation thereof, and settling the manufacturing in
England, than is now to export the materials thereof unmanufactured. The
necessary consequence will be to bring the Price of Wool (as it was 300. Years
agon, when most was exported) to 6 d. per Pound, as appears in a little Piece,
called, The Golden Fleece, written by W. S. Gent.) in the Year, 56. although
the Cloth made in Flanders of our Wools, at 6 d. per Pound, was then sold here
in England at 10 s. per Yard, when at this Day the Cloth made in England of
Wool, worth 12 d. per Pound will hardly yield 7 s. per Yard, which is above 30.
per Cent. worse to the English Trade now, than it was to the Flemmings formerly.

And though for the present, the price of Wool be risen by its exportation, yet
if the quantity lately exported (being no less than 20. Thousand Packs) had
been kept in England, the quantity (if not with 10. Thousand Packs more) would
in time have been exported in the particular manufactures. For if the Wool was
not exported to those places beyond the Seas, there to be manufactured, they
must of necessity have our Woollen manufacture, and then could not have those
advantages (as before hinted) by our Wools, to improve the French wool, and
short Spanish wool, and their fine-spun Linnens.

By all which, it is so obvious, that in time to come, the VVools in England
would be much cheaper, because by the aforesaid means, less Wool would be used
in England; and besides that which would be used, the manufacture would be so
low, that it could not bear up any price (as is begun already in France, and
will suddenly follow in England) for it is generally reported, that Wool is as
cheap in France at this Day, as it is in some parts where it is used in
England. And if it be so now, what in reason can be expected, as the effects of
these two things? viz. The first, when the great quantity that is lately
exported to France, with those three additions before hinted, that the 20.
Thousand Packs helps to work out, and especially most making VVorsted Stuffs,
which goes as far by that means, as 40. Thousand Packs of Wool would if used in
England, because it would be made more into substantial Clothes, which consumes
more Wool, than those light and thin Stuffes do: which is a sufficient Answer
to that Objection, that the great quantity of any commodity, that is exported,
must be of scarcity, and so consequently raise the price: which I must confess,
if it was a consumptive commodity, but it is quite contrary in this. For as our
experience is, when the Wool was all used in England, (or very little
exported) then it was 18 d. per Pound, and when all, or the greatest part was
exported, it was at 6 d. per Pound.

The wise Man says, What is, has been; and, what has been, may be again; and
so no new thing.

I shall conclude with a short review of the Graziers and Farmer, present loss:
In the greatest Commodity, which pays his Rent, (...) was formerly hinted.
Suppose, through want of Trade, Mutton be sold but at 6 d. per Quarter (which
is but little) being 2 s. per Sheep; and there being some Sheep that one 100.
will but produce a Pack of Wool (though some less) that comes to 10 l. which is
the worth of the Pack of Wool, (and so proportionably as to Beefs) which is
wholly lost to the Grazier.

And for the Corn (as I suppose) there may be about 50 ls. worth, (as far as I
can judge in my travels, to One Hundred S^^^p throughout the Nation, which for
want of a Trade, it may (...) (at some seasons) come to Thirty or Forty at
most; and if a (...) Trade, it may be worth Sixty or Seventy: By which means
(...) easily be demonstrated, how the Farmers come to be impovrished.

The advantage of the Tenant consists in the advance of the greatest Commodity
that pays his Rent, which is not in Wool, but in Corn: and it is a necessary
consequence; that there being so many Thousand Families depending upon the
Clothing Trade, which (as before hinted) was instrumental to advance the price
of Corn, that wherever Trade is, there People are most populous, and when
those Persons are deprived of their Trade, depending wholly upon it, they must
unavoidably come to the Parishes: which is in many Places begun already, and
Daily increasing; and feared in time will so increase, that the Poor will be
expecting more than there will be to contribute to them. And as there be in
many Country Parishes Ten that live on the Trade, for One that can live of
himself. What will become of those Parishes, when the Trade is gone? So that
it may easily be concluded that the Farmers loss for want of Trade is fourfold
greater than the Pack of Wool, by the lowness of the price of Corn. And this
is the true reason: for those Persons that formerly, when there was a Trade,
could lay out Ten Shillings in Corn, have now but Five Shillings, which being
multiplied by Hundreds of Thousands in the Nation, it will be no difficult
point to see which way the Grazier and Farmer come to be undone, and so are
forced to give up their Lands into their Landlords hands: For it is not so much
the super-abounding Crops that lessens the price of Corn, but the want of
Money. For I have known as much Corn grow Yearly, formerly, as is now, (when
Trade was good) to be 20. or 30. per Cent. dearer than now.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. in the Year 1669.

SInce the foregoing papers were printed, I met with an Objection against what
was asserted page the 4th. (viz.) The French having that advantage of our
English Wool, to help work up theirs being worser; and likewise, that according
to my best Information, there was none fit for such purposes in all the world,
(viz.) for fine Worsteds, or a middle sort of Cloth, but English and Irish
(which is all one;) The Objection were, that there was Wools in most parts of
the world; therefore why not proper for those purposes? Answer, that there is
Wools was never gainsaid, but that there is such Wool for fineness and
substance in all the world, except Spanish, I cannot as yet ever receive, (as
before I hinted) any satisfactory account. For the better satisfaction of the
Reader, I shall give some account of the natures of Wools in England, but first
of Spanish Wools: They are the finest in all the world for Cloth, but not so
fit for Worsted, being too fine and short, and those Wools also are one in
nature with our English, being at first from Sheep that were English
Transported thither; and though that be much finer by reason of the Climate,
yet is it still one in nature; next to it is Lempster Wool, almost as fine as
Spanish; then next part of Shropshire and Staffordshire, part of
Gloucestershire, Wilts, Dorset, Hampshire, part of Sussex, and part of Kent,
Summerset, Devon, and Cornwall, most part for Cloth, some small parts for
Worsteds. Amongst all these Counties, there is 9. d. per pound difference in
the prises of one place, (viz.) Lempster, from some other parts; but then again
part of Sussex and Surrey, Middlesex, Hertfordshire, and some other Counties 2.
d. 3. d. per pound cheaper then the lowest of the abovementioned Counties; but
then for Barkeshire, Buckingham, Warwick, Oxford, Leicester, Nottingham,
Northampton, and Lincoln, part of Kent called Rumney Marsh, most part of the
last mentioned Counties, and part of Irish Wools is so proper for Worsted
Stuffs, that all the world cannot be compared with it. And hence it is, that
the cares of our Ancestors have been such, (ever since King Edward the 3 d. in
most Kings Reigns) there have been some Laws made or altered, and in some
Kings Reigns altered three or four times to make it effectual: and for a
memorial to future Generations, are the Wool-packs in the Lords House in
Westminster for Seats, to put them in mind of what is the foundation of the
Riches of the Kingdom, that it is by the various streams of the Manufactures
thereof, as formerly in the Front briefly hinted from the farmer to the
Merchant. I shall now endeavor to give some particular account how all are
conserved; And before I do this, give me leave to insert the Observation of a
worthy Author Sir Walter Rawleigh, that I have met withal since the former
Papers were Written, who says, That, then which was in King James's Reign,
about fourscore thousand undrest and undyed Clothes yearly were Transported:
whereby it was evident that the Kingdom has been yearly deprived of about
400000. l. which in fifty five years is near 20 Millions, that would have been
gained by the labor of poor Workmen in that time, with the Merchants gains for
bringing in dying Stuffs, and returns of Clothes dressed and dyed, with other
benefits to the Realm, besides exceeding inlargeing of Traffic, and increase
of Ships and Mariners.

There would have been gained in that time, about three Millions by increase of
Customs upon Commodities returned for Clothes dressed and dyed, and for dying
Stuffs which would have been more plentifully brought in and used for the same.

There has been also Transported in that time yearly, by Bays, Northern and
Devonshire Kerzyes white, about 50000. Clothes counting three Kersyes to a
Cloth, whereby has been lost about five Millions by those sorts of Clothes,
in that time which would have come to poor Workmen for their labor, with
Customs for dying Stuffs, and the peoples prosit for bringing them in with
returns of other Commodities and Fraights for shipping.

Bays are Transported white into Amsterdam, and being there dyed and dressed,
are shipped into Spain, Portugal, and other Kingdoms, where they are sold in
the name of Flemish Bays, setting their own Town Seals upon them; so that we
lose the very name of our homebred Commodities, and other Countries get the
Reputation and Credit thereof. Lamentable it is that this Land should be
deprived of so many abovementioned Millions, as that our Native Commodities of
Cloth, ordained of God for the natural Subjects, being so Royal and rich in it
self, should be driven to so small advantage of Reputation and Profit to your
Majesty and People, and so much improved and intercepted by Strangers;
considering that God has enabled and given your Majesty power to advance
dressing and dying, and Transporting all your Clothes within a year or two: I
speak it knowingly, to show how it may be done laudibly, lawfully, and approved
to be Honorable, feaseable, and profitable.

He observes also the increase of his Majesty's Customs, by bringing in and
spending of dying Stuffs, as also strength in shipping, and setting so many
thousands of poor on work; also noting that in the Low-Countrys, where these
Clothes are dressed and dyed, they stretch them to such unreasonable length,
contrary to our Law, that they prevent and forestale our Markets, and cross the
just prohibition of our State and Realm, by their Agents, and Factors, lying in
diverse places with our own Clothes, to the great decay of this Kingdom in
general, and discredit to our Clothes in particular. Again, he adds, that if
the accounts were truly known, it would be found that they make not clear
prosit only by Cloth Transported rough, undrest, and undyed, sixty thousand
pounds a year; but it is most apparent your Majesty, in your Customs, your
Merchants in their Sales and Prizes; your Subjects in their Labors, for lack
of dressing and dying; your Ships and Mariners in not bringing in of dying
Stuffs, spending of Alum (if not Copperas) are hindered yearly near a Million
of pounds: So that Trade is driven to that great hinderance of your Majesty and
People, by permitting your Native Commodities to pass rough, undrest, and
undyed. Thus Sir Walter Rawleigh.

Now if it was thus with England so long ago, when the Wool was spun and made
here into substantial Cloth; and that for want only of dressing and dying,
many Millions were lost to the King and Kingdom: What then has been the loss
of so many thousand Packs of Wool exported (without any improvement; especially
that to France, the consequence of which is more prejudicial (as has been
demonstrated) than can be imagined (accounting but one hundred pounds damage
by one Pack of Wool,) of which there are no less than ten thousand yearly, if
not much more exported, by which there is damage a Million of pounds sterling,
yearly to this Kingdom, (besides the suffering of the Poor for want of
Employment) out of which his Majesty's damage cannot be less then 100000.
pound yearly: The lessening of Shipping, and discouragement of Mariners; the
Walls of this Kingdom hereby deserve also to be considered.

Next then to his Majestyes loss, is that of the Merchant* and Cloathier; after
which must follow detriment to all other persons depending on Trade, there
being such a Connection of Trades one to another, and (the whole of Trade being
enlarged by the abounding of Laborious People. Those supply the Farmers and
Graziers with money, for you to supply the Gentry. They again scatter it
amongst the Tradesmen, as may be witnessed by the building of the City of
London, how Provision and all Consumptive goods are advanced by it: by which
circulation all degrees are either employed, enriched, or both; and hence
naturally comes Content, Harmony, and Pleasure, one in another; the Poor being
by Employment delivered from fear of want, the Gentry, Merchant, and Tradesmen,
by the establishment of Trade therein. This Rationally is the strength of any
People, Poverty and Idleness brings their shame and Ruin, which would
unavoidably follow want of Trade. And so much the more where the greatest Trade
has been; if it fails, the greater Poverty is and will be. And to instance, as
here, in London, the Trade in Provision is the more, so by Consequence it must
be dear, and so best for all; so of the other hand, if the City should be
forced to keep so many thousands, when all their work is done, as is now in the
Building, it would be a great burden: so the case is in England in this
particular, where great Trade have been formerly kept, and drawn several
Families thither, and have raised Commodities there; but when it sails, it is a
miserable state and condition those places are in. To return, in short there is
such Connextion and dependency one upon another in England, that if one fail,
all the rest more or less, either more near, or remotely are concerned; as in
the natural body; when any member fails, the whole suffers thereby; and as all
Trades and degrees of men may suffer by one mistake in Trades, and in none more
probably. I will say then this of Wool, as Merchants, Artificers, Farmers,
Seamen, Fishermen, being the people, which by their study and labor do
principaly, if not only bring in, or give occasion to the bringing in of wealth
to the Nation, and other kind of people (viz.) Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers,
Physicians, Scholars of all sorts; Shopkeepers are they that receive from
these, and distribute it again, and all are consequently concerned in this rich
Treasure of Wool, because this being a Manufacture at home, sets more hands at
work than half the Nation.

May I not with modesty and within Compass, say three parts of Laborious and
Industrious people? considering that most of the shipping is employed in this
affair, and also so many Trades that depend immediately upon this of Clothing,
that most of other Trades are but for Provision, either in Food or
Conveniences for Clothing: and so from his Majesty to the meanest, all are
more or less concerned, The King mostly; not only in that his People are by
that most employed and provided for, nor in that such a Staple Trade, the like
whereunto the world has not with good Advantage thereby is maintained; but
because so great a Revenue comes directly into him upon the Trade, occasioned
thereby: Thus as the King gains, or suffers most, so the persons that have the
greatest Estates or Trades, and so all proportionably to the Beggar. And also
considering that an accustomary thing begets such an habit that is hard to
reduce; as in our rough and undrest Cloth to Holland, so it will be with all
our Manufactures in France; nay I am informed that the French has not only
imposed a great Tax upon our Woollen Manufactures, from twenty to forty per
cent, but have also (as is affirmed, beside that their imposition) absolutely
prohibited our Clothes coming there. I am the more large in the demonstration
of this affair, not only because this has cost me many years labor and study
to consult all sorts of concerned persons, besides mine own experience about
it; nor because it is so hard to convince people of the meanst capacity, but
some of the wiser sort, how to cure this dismal malady: which some despairing
of, have rather thoughts of setting up some other Manufacture in Lieu of
endeavors to prevent the exportation of Wool and Manufacturing of that at
home, looking thereon as a thing not to be overcome, (as that of Linnens in
some capable parts of England) and a better improvement in the product of
sorrein plantations, which may also be set upon together herewith as an
addition; so as several sorts of persons may be set better on work, not capable
of this employment, and yet no prejudice to this of Clothing: for all other
Countries have the advantage of England, or are equal to us in other
Manufactures proper to their Countries, but not in this of Clothing: and it
will be found that all Trades in England, wholly distinct from this of
Clothing, bring not the tithe of advantage that this does.

Since men cannot rationally believe the effects to be greater than the cause,
the most of other Manufactures either is in being, or brought to use, by the
Manufactures of Wool; even from the Farmer to the Merchant all are concerned in
this of Wool, as may hereafter more appear. It now remains that we sum up
Englands loss by the exportation of our Wool to Foreign Parts; not only in the
advantage we might have by the Manufactureing thereof, here in England, as
formerly noted; but also in the importing af Dutch Cloth, and more in French
Manufactures, because England improves not their own Wools; and of the humor
of English people, in putting such a value upon French fancies, when themselves
are in a better capacity, if improved, to produce the like, or better, and save
the following sums.

1. One Million of pounds Sterling yearly, in the Exportation of our Wool.

2. Five hundred thousand pounds in rough Cloth, which is but half what Sir
Walter Rawleigh observes in his time.

3. One hundred thousand pound yearly, in Importing French Manufactures
superfluous.

4. Many thousand pounds in Importing Dutch Cloth.

5. And lastly, the evil consequences thereof in loseing our Shipping, which
would be encouraged thereby, and are the strength or Walls of our Kingdom, as
more particularly does appear hereafter.

Having now discovered the damage, it is to England, in the Transportation of
Wool from the King to the meanest, I shall endeavor also to discover the
methods how it is done; and before I shall prescribe Remedy (for it is not
enough to know distempers, especially such that are so Consumptive,) it is
requisite to know the cause of those distempers; or else the supposed Remedies
will in time come to be a disease, as it is too much in this case at this day
in England: where the causes are mistaken, the Remedies are consequently
misapplyed, whereby a disease in supposition becomes one in effect; the methods
or ways of this evil are -- First, in Rumny Marsh in Kent, where the greatest
part of rough Wool is exported from England, put aboard French Shallops by
night, ten or twenty men well armed to guard it; some other parts there are, as
in Sussex, Hampshire, and Essex, the same methods may be used, but not so
conveniently. The same for coombed Wool from Canterbury, they will carry it ten
or fifteen miles at night toward the Sea, with the like guard as before; but
for other parts it must be done partly by the Remisness of the Officers of his
Majesty's Customs, and easy Composition for the forfeitures of the Bonds, as
more shall appear anon.

And then for coombed Wool in other parts, some is shipped off from London for
Bales of Drapery; nay some at Lime, and also at Exon, where there is ten
thousand pounds Sterling weekly laid out in the woollen Manufactury, which is
most for Workmens wages: I know no place clear; and then another reason, why
persons are not detected, is, because all the wools that have been taken in
those parts, where most has been exported, have been suffered to go off at the
same places after Judgments past, and by the Officers, to the same persons at a
low rate, being under rated to those very men that intended to ship it at
first: so that the evil is never like to be avoided that way; only that which
is taken, happily may be a little the dearer, to keep the Trade going; for I
have enquired, and cannot understand, but of two parcels of wool that have been
seized on in Kent, that have been used in England, but all sent away, and so
his Majesty's providence is cheated, who keeps Servants at great wages to
prevent such abuses.

And then another cheat is under a pretense of wool from Hampton, to the
Islands of Jersey and Gernsey, and sometimes from other parts which is against
the Law; for there is no wool to be exported to those Islands, but only from
Hampton, and that by Law should be by weight: but now it goes by gross, by the
pack when it should be weighed, but I believe not one pack in ten is weighed,
for three packs is put into one. Then from Ireland, which is the greatest
mischief of all to England, and much increased since the Act was in force
against Cattle, the Irish wool can be sold as cheap in France, Holland, and
Flanders, as it is in those places where wool is used in England, which is a
great augmentation to us of prejudice for Foreiners to have our wool so cheap
as we in England, having other conveniences to underwork us as formerly
hinted. The ways there must be by the carelessness of the Officers, in not
taking solvant security and exactness in the weight of wool, and true
examination of the returns of their Certificates, and partly by easy
compositions, if not before bonds are forfeited, and happily much combed Wool
there packt up as before, as bailes of Cloth, or barrels of Beef, and shiped
as Irish Cloth; and in all points so cunningly carried, as they are seldom
discovered, and never sealed as the Statutes in that case made and provided, do
strictly require.

Here see what W. S. says: Now to show you more particularly these abuses, how
the Laws are crossed and daily obstructed to such as endeavor to serve their
Country, by such as ought to encourage the prosecutors; sure there will be very
many practices of evil consequents discovered; for first in the Custom-House,
where bonds are taken, to the intent that these prohibited Commodities pass not
by means of Mariners out of the Nation, but only from Port to Port for
accommodation of such parts as want such Commodities; they are very Remiss and
careless in taking of the Sea-mens discharge of their Obligatory Conditions;
where also it is usual with the Seamen to bring fradulent Certificates, and so
to cheat the Kings Providence, who keeps Servants at great wages purposely to
prevent such abuses; or if there be a regular return of there Bonds, yet there
is commonly a fraudulency in giving them, for the Masters of ships will so
continue their design, as he who is Master at giving the Bonds, and is legally
bound, shall immediately pass his Interest to another man, who taking charge of
the Vessel and Voyage, is notwithstanding not engaged in the Poart Bond; and
therefore, neither is he accomptable for breach of their condition, again, when
the Port bonds are justly taken, and as justly returned; yet to prevent the
true and real detection of the offender, and to dishearten the legal
prosecutor, some friends of the offender will clap an information against him,
purposely to hinder and divert others, and soon after will let the Prosecution
fall at his pleasure; nay, it has been said, and peradventure not unjustly,
that such preventing informations have been amidated to the overthrow of the
regal information; but when all is granted, and a full and formal hearing, and
decree passed to the just condemnation of the offender: Yet when judgments and
inquieries are granted, and do without errors of the Clarks, (which is not
always,) empower the Sheriffs and their Bailiffs to see Execution thereof made;
it is familiar with those Officers to return a non est inventus, ^or a mortus
est, viz. Not to be found, or dead, even then when the Offenders and the
Officers have been known to be drinking together, at that very time when the
Writ should have been executed.

After all this, one step farther will show how charrety it self abuses
Justice; for let all the former proceedings be granted, and be candid, and
clear, and that the Law be indeed justly and legally executed; the offender in
custody, and nothing remaining; but that he honestly discharge hiasself with
money, seeing Bail will not be admitted; nevertheless upon a lamentable
Petition, and urging a great charge of Children to the Bench, the Offender is
usually admitted to compound for Ten in the Hundred, or less, when by his
offense he has gained a Hundred for Ten, or more, and peradventure has undone
a hundred Famelies or more in so doing: Yet all this while the honest
Prosecutor, the only man that appears for the good of his Country, who ought by
the Law to have the full benefit and advantage of the Law gratis, it being
enough that he spend his time for the promotion of the public Weal, after it
has cost him seral great sums of money, and large expense of time, to bring
the Offender to Trial and Conviction, is dismissed with little or no
satisfaction, unless he be rewarded with the brand of an informing Knave:
Surely they who made these Laws for the benefit of themselves and their own
Country, did intend a more current and just passage toward them, than thus to
be obstructed and baffeled. Such abuses as these made Theodosius say as it is
Recorded, that a wise man did himself injustice by hazarding his Wisdom and
Estate for the benefit of his Nation; and therefore some have not spared to
urge that Customs and Impost, and Toles and Taxes might be taken away from
honest laborious hazardous Trades and Adventurers, and be put upon litigious
Suits at Law, and such as make benefit of their corrupt breath, that is to say
upon such Lawyers as abuse their Clyents, and such malicious Clyents as abuse
the name of a just innocent Defendent. Nor is the Loss in these by their
Transportation all the injury, but when honest men well affected to the good of
their Country, do detect these Caterpillars of the Commonwealth, who make so
vast gain, as has been denoted upon the materials so carefully prohibited,
when they do endeavor by due course of Law to make stoppage thereof, and to
have the offenders punished; so many are the evasions, such combinations and
interest in the Officers, who ought to punish the Offenders; such favor have
they in Courts of Justice, and deceptions in the Return of Writs, and in
general such affronts and discouragements as the dearest Lover of his Country,
or most entrusted in Trade, dares not attempt to prevent that mischief which
his eyes behold to fall upon his Nation, or which his own person feels to pick
his pocket. Thus far Mr. W. Smith.

To prevent all these inconveniences, it cannot be done without some alteration
of some Laws, which is an Act of State; and I do presume his Majesty does
already, and the Parliament will also consider of it; as to accept of any helps
that may be contributed to them. In short, I am of opinion, that if four things
were done, there would be in a few months such an alteration, which, if I
should now insert, would be Incredible: yet I shall hint it; 1. To revive some
former Act made in Parliament for a certain season, as in the 4th. of Hen: 7.
and revived thrice afterward, which was done upon the same complaint, as now
is; which if in force with some alteration, would be one stop: A second is, for
all persons to be accomptable for their wool, because there is time after it is
bought to be wayed up, and setched away out of those Countries, where the
danger is for to get acquaintance for those persons, and to give security, as
it is, from Port to Port, then being the same danger near the Sea. Thirdly, for
Ireland, to have it confined to convenient Ports, both in Ireland and England.
And when all is done, there must be some persons of known Integrity, and not
mercenary men that must have the care and inspection over all. Fourthly, In
those Countries where no Clothing is, it would be requisite for a Storehouse
for small parcels of Wool, and a Bond given that none be sold to Foriners which
is of so eminent advantage, as is by some said to the Dutch, to be profit to
the public, Millions of pounds Sterling per annum; and to instance one case
Sir Walter Rawleigh accounts by this in his remains, page the 173, and 174.
that in one year and half was drawn to the Hollanders, Hamburgers, and
Embdenors, at the least two Millions of pounds Sterling, from England for Corn,
in a time of scarcity in England.

And if a Bond is so advantageous for such Commodities that are liable to he
much impared in long lying; it is doubtless abundantly more advantagous in such
a stable Commodity as wool is; and if practiced would be of such a use to
England, that I think would enrich England more than I will now stand to
account.

I may add a fifth, which is, that there may be a short and quick Trial of
Offenders, and that in such place as the Offender may have least oppertunity
for Evasions.

We will conclude the whole with a short survey of some particular Immunities
which Clothing has conferred, upon England with which the glory of it extends
to the very utmost inhabited parts of the world, and without which, the Ark of
Gods mercy, and the glory of this Land is like to depart.

First, the reducing of Clothing to England in Manufacture as well as in
Materials (which must a thousand times repeat Englands gratitude to the memory
of that ever renowned King Edward the Third) has produced such opulent and
magnificent societies of Merchants, as the whole world cannot again
demonstrate, that is to say, first, the Merchant Adventurers Company, whose
Governors, President, Consults, and the like chief Officers are not of less
esteem, where they please no seat themselves, then are the Residentiaries of
the greatest Princes, and so much the more Cordial is their welcome, as each
man's profit leads his affection beyond his Reverence to public Embassies,
because Proximity to a man's personal interest sits nearer in his thoughts then
when he is involved in the public concernment.

This Company has by their Policy and Order, supplanted those societies of the
Hance Towns (as they are called) who vending an inconsiderable number of
Clothes, and at low rates, did never the lesss account England obliged to them
for their Markets and Shipping: Whereas at this day the Merchant Adventurer do
utter ten times as many Clothes Annually in the same Markets at far better
prices; And in answer to the shipping which England had in those times from
those Countries at dear entertainment, this Trade of Clothing, and this
particular Company of Merchants, have furnished the Navy Royal from time to
time, and upon all occasions with such strengths as they have not feared, if
they have not awed the greatest Naval Forces sailing upon the Ocean, he that
may have the favor to peruse their Records, shall find what oppertune Service
they did for their Country in the year Eighty-Eight, and since upon all
military occasions wherein this Nation has been embroyled with any other*

Next, the East-Land Company has planted the Trade of Clothing all about the
Baltic Seas, which at this day imployes many Warlike Ships, and gives at great
increase of Mariners to the no small growth of Englands strenth at Sea.

The Muscovia Company have discovered the passage by the North Cape, and the
great Trade of Greenland, what wealth occurs to England by the Turkey and
East India Company, is not easy to be numbered; their shipping also being as
strong, and rich as any that swim upon the Seas. How one of them has by the
trade of Clothing only engrossed all manner of wealth coming from the Levant
Seas; And how the other of them has established the rich Trades of Silks,
Spices, Jewels, etc. In the Southern parts of the world, is by all Admired,
though by none to be valued, and what strength of shipping these two Companyes
have produced, as they have been wonderful, so they have been formedable to all
Nations: what Contribution the Clothing Trade with Spain and France has given
to Englands maritin power, is by those Countries themselves feared, as well as
by England found to its great security: And as these unvaluable blessings have
befallen England by the Trade of Clothing, politickly and providently drawn
into Societies, Companyes, and Corporations; so the loose Transactions of Trade
in other for the Countries have rendered them so poor at Sea; as were it not
shipping of England and Holland, the very life of Commerce would perish, would
return to the same Wilderness; and uselessness as it is now in Greenland and
the West Indies, where civil Government has not once been heard of.

Again, If comparison be made for richness of Trade between Clothing and any,
or all other substances of Merchandises, whereby any Nation, but more
especially England, may be enriched, neither the Silks nor Furs, nor Wines, nor
Spices, nor Bullion it self or all other Countries can render that account of
its own, or can in proportion equalize England, in Clothing, Food, Shipping,
Strength of people, and wealth of money.

About the Manufactureing of Wool.
THat this rich Treasure in it self, of far more worth than the Golden Mines of
India to England, is so much degenerated, or adulterated in the Manufactureing
thereof by many of the Manufactors, some of which wanting skill, others
principles of honesty, the Laws in that case being so much, neglected in
England, and want of some new Laws for the new Drapers, has occasioned the
woollen Manufacture to be rendered contemptible both at home and abroad, and so
much the more, or the rather, because the Dutch, Flemins, ( and it is feared in
time the French also) do by care and industry endeavor to excel our English;
the consequence is to loose our English Trade, and this principally by a
liberty taken, so that honest and conscientious persons come to damage by some
others false way of gains, according to Mr. Childs third head in that of
Trade, and Interest; that the Advantage the Dutch have of us in all their
Native Commodities is their exactness, by which means their creat is so, that
it is taken by its contents, (and ours not) which is very advantageous, which
is done by the qualifications of those persons that have the oversight, and are
entrusted in that affair, which is not done in England, but generally the
contrary.

In general all States and Commonwealths are supported by two providential
works (viz.) Reward and Punishment; for as no Law can compel men to be
corporally laborious, or studious in knowledge and literature, unless rewards
be annexed to all such compulsion; so no providence can attend the preservation
of profitable designs, either in Learning or Trade, unless such punishments be
enjoined: This opinion that profound Senator Cicero alleges from Solon, one
of the seven wise Graecians, and the only man of them which gave Laws; and
this is the weak and frail Estate of men and Nations, that unless they be as
well encouraged in their endeavors, as punished in their misdemeanors, they
will speedily become Libertines, and ruin all as is too too much feared in this
case in England at this day; and as before about the Wool, so the working for
the greatest part has been confined to England this three hundred years, and
until these late years has been so preserved, by the diligence of such
Officers as have been ordained and empowered, carefully to see the Manufactures
kept under those rules which the Laws have provided for their perfection; and
seeing this Nation is by God peculiarised in these two blessings (viz.) Wools
and Manufactures, and through the vigilance of its Monarchs safe guarded by
Laws, that the native Manufactures might not be undermined by the practices of
Foreiners; their ancient providence exacts from the present age the same
preservation (as before in the Wool) that the Dutch do not undermine us out of
all. Again, we may be taught by their diligence, who though they have few or no
native Commodities, yet are rich and thriving; (and we who have all, are poor
and decaying at least the Country) who spare no attendance in overseeing and
searching the true making of their Manufactures as above, for their exactness,
giving therefore power and Commissions to persons of more than ordinary worth
amongst them (whom they call cure or care Masters) to see every thing according
to the Law; and wherever they find a defect, they make a default upon the
Cloth, which first is recompensed by a fine to the State for abusing the Laws,
and afterward remains to admonish the buyer, who thereby may guard his purse;
and in case the Cloathier be abused by any of his Work folks, he checks his
damage upon the true offender in his wages. Now in England there is so much
the contrary, that many persons take liberty for want of a regular or legal
course followed, either for time or form in working; there is not any of the
Relations to Clothing which does observe such an exact rule of Apprentiship
(which is not the least cause that the Manufactures of Wool are so abusively
and deceptiously made in England) notwithstanding it is enjoined in very strict
and penal manner by the Statute Laws; the chief inconveniences of which, is,
that the Trade so general in use, and maintenance of even numberless Families,
does by its own vast exorbancy convert into Corruptions, and so those great
multitudes of people become discredited, beggered, and finally ruined, to the
destruction of themselves and the Nation which gave them so great a Blessing.

Another prejudice and not the least, is, that the Nation which has given them
being, and invested them with such materials for Clothing, is dishonered by
false and abusive works: And it is not a little scandal to that Nation which
God has perticularly endowed with those blessings which others want, when its
people shall divert those good things which God has bestowed upon it to evil
and deceptious practices; In this consideration it is observable (by some) how
little comparitively is the Drunkenness of those Countries which produce Wines,
and wherein lies their personal riches, and their Nations Honor, though their
other sins may sufficiently swell, their ultimate account; yet doubtless it
strengthens their last Apology, in that they abuse not that endowment which God
has made the original of their Being and Subsistence.

Another consideration is, the Cheat it puts upon all the world, for though
every Country has not the benefit of the Manufacture in themselves, yet are
there few of them condemned to such ignorance as not to discern the Couzenage
which false Clothing puts upon them, in which case to the aforesaid dishoner
they add a curse, and it was a chief care in Jacobs practice for a Blessing,
that he turned it not into a Curse; how much more is this of consideration,
when the blessing comes by gift, and not by design or procurement.

And further, great may be the thought of heart, when the sins of false Lucre
and Covetuousness (which is Idolatry) are in full pursuance of such as have the
full plenty to make weight and measure, yet make it the Art of their practices
as well as the practice of their Art, to Cozen both the wise and weak: It can
be no great wonder, nor without abundance of presidents, if God for sins of
such wilfulness remove his blessings, (with which this Nation is peculiarly
enriched and dignified,) and give them to a people which will render him a
better, more just, and more profitable account of his Talent; and its no news,
that though England be by the Almighty, chiefly ordained to produce the
Materials, yet the Manufactures be given to a people, which will render him a
better Account; all this and much more is expected, if the Native people
continue to abuse the Native Commodity, as of necessity they must, when they
know not how to use it. The wisdom of our Ancestors has been liberally
manifested in this particular. First, That the Manufactors be constantly made
Apprentices for seven years at least, the contrary is one great reason, that
by ignorance so many abuses are, that are unremidable: Another reason, why
Apprentices are generally confined to seven years servitude, is to the end,
that professors (in each Art) multiply not beyond the support of their Trade,
which were not to increase good Subjects, but Vagabonds, which doubtless was
not the intention of King Edward the 3d. (ever to be remembered by an English
man, when in his design in bringing Clothing to England, a chief part was to
multiply his people, as by his Native and Alleageant Subjects (such as by and
by you will understand) he might securely possess the Conquests wherewith God
had blessed him, which were beyond any Christian Prince's in his time. It is
utterly against reason that a Nation can be poor, whose people are numerous, if
their Industry be compelled and encouraged, and their Idleness be punished and
reformed. It is the opinion of some, that it is not the barrenness of a Country
which can forbid this Maxim. The Scots are an abounding and numerous people,
and they have a soil which to a Traveller eye, seems to produce nothing
toward a so vast maintenance of the body of that people; yet are they in all
parts of the world a warlike and honored Nation, helpful to all Princes in
their Wars, and ready upon occasion to return to the Assistance of their
Brethren, be their case good or bad. The Dutch are a numerous Nation, daily
multiplying in a Country which has in comparison nothing of its own growth to
support them, either in Food or Clothing, yet they want nothing neither in
necessaries or wealth, because they are industrious. What Crick of the Seas do
they leave unvisited? and in shipping are so stored as most parts of the world
do love or fear them. Now a great increase (at least) of good people (as above
hinted in King Edward) rests upon the regulation of Trade; for its not the
number of workmen, but number of good workmen which increases Families, and
it is Families which increases and spreads good people; the other for want of
knowledge and skill, being fixed no where, because their labors will not
maintain themselves, muchless Families: For who will use a workman, who has
neither skill nor credit, when he can employ one that has both?

Of principle importance therefore is the Regulation of Apprentiships, both to
the best increase of people, and to the honest, creditable, and wealthy
Manufactures of Wool, and especially of Clothing, (being the Antient'st
Manufacture) for want of which not only the former denoted faults are daily
found in their works, but good workmen are undersold and ruined (as formerly
hinted) by bad, and the whole Nation involved in great dishonor, as after you
will hear.

Now Justice, which all men cry up, and few practice, is a virtue both divine
and humane; Divine Justice is either from God to man, wherein his Providence is
his Justice, by which he governs the world, or it is from man toward God,
and then its piety, whereby he returns to God praise and glory for his
numberless blessings in Republics, Cities and Towns, its Equity, the fruit
whereof is Peace and Plenty; in domestic relations between Man and Wife, it is
Unity and Concord; from Servants to Masters, good Will and Diligence; from
Masters to Servants, its Humanity and Gentleness; and from a man to his own
body, health and happiness. There is none of all these Relations but is
necessary and important to the Reformations in the abuses, defaults,
deceptions, and grievances committed upon Clothing, which in this discourse
have in some measure been discovered, and by which both God and man are justly
provoked.

The Justice we are to use to relieve the complaints before exhibited, is
either distributive, or Commutative; Justice distributive, is to give each man
his deserts, whether it be honor or punishment: And Commutative Justice, is in
bargaining, bartering, exchanging, or in any transactions between man and man,
to use all means to keep Promises, Covenants and Contracts; and for a man to be
have himself as he would have others do to him, to receive the Innocent into
protection, to repress and punish offenders, without which, common intercourse
and humane society must necessarily be dissolved; and for preservation whereof,
I have read, that in Ancient times, the Fathers have not spared their own Sons.

The Egyptian Kings, to whom Antiquity gives the privilege of making Laws,
the Graecians, and Romans deified Justice, and would not violate it toward
their Enemies; so just also were the Lacedaemonians, and so free from
distrusting each other, as even for the public safety, they used neither Locks
nor Bars, insomuch that one asking Archidamus, who those Governors were,
which so justly, happily, and gloriously governed the Commonwealth of
Lacedemon: he answered, that they were first the Laws, and afterward the
Magistrates executing those Laws: for Law is the rule of Justice, and Justice
the end of the Law, which indeed is the Life of all.

The ready way to rectify abuses about Clothing, were to compare them with
the rules of the Law provided for them, for which there is Law, (and new Laws
where they are wanting) nevertheless holds not in all points. For instance, the
Law empowers the Merchants and Drapers to be their own Searchers, and to punish
the Cloathiers Purse, as they find his works to be faulty; and so they do, to
the no small grief of the Cloathier: but the Retayling-Buyer is not hereby at
all relieved; the Draper selling to him these faults, for which he was before
paid by the Cloathier; the Merchants do the same, by causing their Cloathiers
to bring their Manufactures into the Merchants private Warehouses, where their
own Servants are Judges, who upon searching the Cloth, do make, and mark
faults enough, for which they have reparable abatements; but themselves again
do practice all fraudulent ways they can to barter and exchange those faults
away, without giving any allowance for them. I speak not of all but some; and
though sometimes they be detected, yet find they means to save their purses,
whilst their Nation suffers in honor, and the Laws are vilified to Foreiners,
who stain the Justice of the Nation with weakness and fraud. True it is, that
in the Netherlands, where their cunning is as piercing, as their practice is
common, they (even every buyer) do search with diligence, and make themselves
reparations, first to the Merchants great loss, and so in course to the
Cloathiers no small damage: But in all this, the State remains much
dishonored by the scandal, and robbed of those Fines which the Laws in
punnishment, do give to the public Revenue, which if they were rightly and
legally attended, would render a vast gain to the Commonwealth by a general
Reformation.

Now in finding out the causes why Manufacture in Clothing becomes so abused,
there may be good use of the Drapers and Merchants knowledge and skill; yet the
application of the remedy is a work of State and Policy, in making and
executing the Laws proportionable to the grievance, in which instance it does
not hold; for though the Merchants and Drapers be able Searchers of the abuses,
yet they are not competent reformers of the grievances, because they are
interested in participating of those gains which the faults occasion and
intend. Therefore it is requisite* that both Cloathiers, Merchants, and
Drapers, may be joined by the Magistrates approbation,

Nor is this all the abuse; for in such parts of the world as the Buyers are
not in ability of knowledge, like the Dutch, who make Clothes themselves, and
especially in those parts where the difference in Religion is so great, as it
is between Christians and Turks, there the corrupt Merchant causes the Name of
God to be Blasphemed: for when those people; (whose eye and judgment gives them
not so good information as does their proof and wearing) do find themselves
cheated in their Garments, they presently conclude that there is no fear of God
in that place, nor obedience to their Rulers, for Conscience, which must
assuredly procure much scandal to Christian Religion.

It has been noted that the original of money, was from sheep, affirming that
the Ancient Signature upon money, was a Sheep; and its further observed, that
Mercandizes were the cause of money; and there being no greater Merchandise
than are from the Sheep, it is evident, that there is nothing more requisite
toward the enriching this Nation (whose peculiar blessing rests in Sheep) than
strictly to hold the Manufactures to the letter and rule provided for their
just making; and that the Laws be unpartially executed; and it being apparent
that this Nation cannot be rich without a constant utterance of Clothing, nor
can that be done without a perfect reformation in the particulars of the works.

It does undeniably follow, that Clothing must be purged from its Corruption,
or England must be poor. It is therefore the Manufactors which abuse the Wool,
and thereby improvidently give advantage to the Dutch: whereas a perfection in
the making of Clothes in England, will capacitate the English to undersel the
Dutch.

Now for a true Reformation and Regulation of those damages that have befallen
England, by the false and deceptions Manufacturing of Wools, and to bring the
Trade to its primitive worth; we must rightly understand the cause of those
defects, or else we can never prescribe suitable remedies as before, but the
contrary; the supposed remedy will be worse that the disease. The principle or
grand cause of all our misery, in all these things formerly spoken to both in
Transportation of Wool, and the bad Manufacturing thereof, is by that division
in Trade, both in Merchant and Cloathier, by which means it falls out that by
the consequence of one man's single Act, a thousand persons may be undone; this
I have observed in several persons in this Kingdom, and I know no way so
profitable to prevent (at least some of that mischief) as by incorporating the
Manufactures, and faithfulness therein; as witness Norwich, and Colechester;
the misery is the liberty, taken in that which is of necessity a Union, as
before by a Law, and more liberty by a Law for some in matters of Conscience,
for compulsion can never make that unity as the Law of that Relation does
require, in this as in all others things, to do to others, as we would have
others do unto us, which is the Royal Law of Heaven) The great and main
inducement to these two things, as good reason (if we will have Trade) to
observe the Dutch in both these things, as not the least cause of their riches,
(having nothing of their own growth comparatively with England,) yet are a Rich
people, and much by our Commodities, whilst we are disputing whether it be good
for us: And I cannot pass by what I have heard of the Follies of the Indians,
that will part with a rich Treasure for a Trifle; so we are to the Dutch and
French by their policies and circumventing practices, which draw from us, and
still covet to exhaust the Wealth and Coin of this Kingdom, and so with one
Commodity (as formerly the Wool) to weaken us, and finally beat us out of our
Trades in other Countries, and thus they do (especially the Dutch) more fully
obtain their purposes by their convenient privileges, and settled
constitutions, by which they draw multitudes of Merchants to Trade with them,
and many other Nations to inhabit amongst them, which makes them populous and
there they make Storehouses of all Foreign Commodities, wherewith upon every
occasion of Scarcity and Dearth, they are able to furnish Foreiners with plenty
of those Commodities, which before in time of plenty they Engrossed and brought
home from the same places; which does greatly augment Power and Treasure to
their Stocks, besides the Common Good in setting the Poor on work, as in
several particulars mentioned by Mr. Child.

1. By having in their greatest Councils of State and War, Tradeing Merchants
that have lived abroad in most parts of the world, who have not only the
Theoretical knowledge, but the Practical Experience of Trade; sby whom Laws and
Orders are contrived, and Peace with Foreign Princes projected, to the great
advantage of their Trade.

2. Their Law of Gavel-kind, whereby all their Children possess an equal share
of their Fathers Estates after their Decease, and so are not left to wrestle
with the World in their Youth, with inconsiderable assistance of Fortune, as
most of our youngest Sons of Gentlemen in England are, who are bound
Apprentices to Merchants.

3. Their exact making of all their Native Commodities.

4. Their giving great encouragement and immunities to the inventors of new
Manufactures, and the discoverers of any new Mysteries in Trade, and to those
that shall bring the Commodities of other Nations first in use and practice
amongst them, for which the Author never goes without his due reward allowed
him at the public charge.

5. Their contriving and building of great Ships to sail with small charge,
not above one third of what we are at for Ships of the same burden in England.
And compelling their said Ships (being of small force) to sail always in
Fleets, to which in all time of danger they allow a Convoy.

6. Their parcimonious and thrifty living, which is so extraordinary, that a
Merchant of one hundred thousand pound Estate with them, will scarce spend so
much per annum, as one of fifteen hundred pounds Estate in London.

7. The Education of their Children, as well Daughters as Sons, all which, be
they of never so great quality or Estate, they always take care to bring up to
write perfect good hands, and to have the full knowledge and use of Arithmetic
and Merchants Accounts.

8. The lowness of their Customs, and the height of their Excise: which is
certainly the most equal and indifferent Tax in the world, and least
prejudicial to any people, as might be made appear, were it the subject of this
discourse.

9. The careful providing for, and employment of their poor: which it is easy
to demonstrate, can never be done in England comparitively to what it is with
them, while it is left to the care of every Parish to look after their own only.

10. Their use of Banks, which are of so immense advantage to them, that some,
(not without good grounds,) have estimated the profit of them to the public,
to amount to, at least one Million of pounds Sterling, per annum.

11. Their toleration of different opinions in matters of Religion, by reason
whereof, many industrious people of other Countries, that dissent from the
established Government of their own Churches, resort to them with their
Families and Estates, and after a few years co-habitation with them, become of
the same Common Interest.

12. Their Law-Merchants, by which all controversies between Merchants and
Tradesmen are decided in three or four days time, and that not at the fortieth
part (I might say in many cases not the hundredth part) of the Charge they are
with us.

13. The Law that is in use among them for Transference of Bills for debt from
one man to another.

14. Their keeping up public Registers of all Land, and Houses Sold or
Mortgaged; whereby many chargeable Lawsuits are prevented, and the securities
of Lands and Houses rendered indeed, such as we commonly call them Real
Securities.

15. The lowness of Interest of money with them, which in peaceable times
exceeds not three per cent. per annum.

To Conclude with a short Survey of those things in General, seeing my time
will not permit to enlarge upon it particularly (according to my purpose) nor
so to Correct the former Papers for want of time, being exposed to much Travel,
I must humbly beg the Reapers pardon for some Errors passing the Press in my
absence.

The first thing observed in the Dutch, is to have experienced persons in all
Councels skilled, as Well Practical, as Theoretical knowledge, which is without
all peradventure of such advantage, that nothing but experience of it can put
the value.

The second I shall not touch.

The third I have at large to eated (viz.) of the advantage in exactness in all
Commodities, of which we have sufficient experience at home as well as abroad,
that one and the same Commodity for goodness, yet if one have the reputation
more than the other, it shall not only have a quick Market, but shall yield 10
or 15 per cent, more than the other. I speak this of what is matter of Fact in
the woollen Manufacture in my own knowledge

The fourth is the Encouragement to those that are any way beneficial to the
Public, which is contrary in England to its shame, as well as to its apparent
Loss* hence it is that those persons that are employed in public affairs,
that have not principles of honesty, are liable to those temptations of Bribery
and (...), being beyond my spear.

Time permits me not to make any further recapitulation. But for my Language in
the whole, the Ingenuous peruser will, I trust, rather value my serious
Intentions (while I write to matter of Controversy, but what may redound to the
Honor and Advantage of his Majesty and Kingdoms) than criticize upon my defect
of Scholastic phrase, or Logical method; who being never enriched with
opportunities of education thereto, yet have so much of a Christian and true
Englishman, as to wish every Reader Happiness both here and hereafter.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2, l, 15, for Land r, ^a^d, p, 5, l, 27, for is r, by; p, 10, l, 16,
insert Advantage of a; p, 1^, r, 18, for you r, them; p, 19, l. 15 for Reg^l r,
real; l, 28, s^a^ himself himself* p, 21, l, 8, for then r, there; l, 15,
fo^^^^d he gi^^n that (...) be sol^ to For^i^^^, r, Bank; l, 2^; for, Bond r,
Bank; p, 24, l, 7, for D^apers r, Draperles; p, 25, l, 15, ^o^ Manufactures r,
Manufactors.


