ENGLAND's Appeal, to her High Court of Parliament; Against Irish and Scottish
Evidence.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
IT is your Country, your Native Country that Appeals to You; It is you only
that represent your Country, and are the Pillars of it, who can Redress its
worst of Grievances; and worst of Sins. Wilful Perjury, and secure to its
Subjects their Lives, which next to their Religion must be certainly most Dear,
Let them Live if only to Enjoy the benefit of that Religion, and Liberty, you
have so dearly Purchased and Established for them; and leave not Men of Honor,
Estates, and Fortunes like your Selves, (and who we see by Young's Association
to be also liable) to he Sworn out of their Lives, their Fortunes and Estates,
by the Perfidious Breath of Managed and Confederate Miscreants, who are ^^ly a
sort of more Monstrous Cannibals, that not only make a Meal upon the Man; but
devour at once his Family and Inheritance, Wretches in this only to be pitied,
though not pardoned, that they are half famished before into the Villainies they
commit, and stolen from the ^^als and Gibbets, to bring the better sort to
those Halters and Dungeons from whence they are unluckily escapt, or designedly
manumitted.

Among Foreigners that once envied us, (...) was called the Ringing Island,
and mainly indeed did we Troule it away in Peace and Plen^^ and destroyed the
pleasantry of that Appellation; till that fatal Period in 78. That (...)* Era,
of Irish Oath and Affidavit; since which, we were turned into the Hanging (...)
have Rung indeed, Changes, and the Round, but in the Blood of one another.
(...) ^ells seemed to stop while we only made use of the Ropes; and as if there
had been no (...) ^^rs in England: but that of London or Tyburn; and so we have
continued ever since (...) ^^^^byterian, Church of England, all (...) the same
way; and God know^ when this (...) of Blood, of Innocent Blood will be ^op ^
unless the Wisdom of this Parliament will ^^ ^nly limit constructive Treason,
but take some c^^^se to prevent instructed Evidence, and to suspend the Ax a
while with the Halter. What comfort can Englishmen take in all those Blessings
and Benefits You procure them, in the Laws which You make, in the Liberties
which You contend for, in the Religion that is dearer to You than Your Lives;
when your Lives are in Jeopardy every hour, and when with St. Paul also, after
the manner of Men, we are put to fight with Beasts, Irish Welves, (or that is
the more devouring Animal) Irish Evidence: The Romans n^er exposed their
^^serable Spectacles so naked in their Amphitheatres as we Christians do o^^
another to worse Monsters: They allowed them Dagger, Sword and Target; when a
baited Prisoner at a ^at a^ack'd by a Couple of Confederate Ruffians of the
Mouth. shall be bl^^ (...) the very Eyes of these Basilisks, and swallowed up
whole by the (...) ^^chre of their Throat; who like David's Euemies, stand
staring and gaping up (...) the Enemy of us all, the Devil, go about seeking
whom they may devour^ (...) ^^ing ^^soner in this manner beset, as if not only
the Goal, but Hell it self were ^et (...) ^on him, shall (...) denied a piece
of single Paper or Parchment, the bare (...) Indiction (...) for a ^^ield or
Buckler; and to hear it by Lawyers urged in a Cour^^ of J^^^e, that (...)
P^actice of the ^^te Reigns made it Law, looks like a Libel, and an (...) of
(...) s^^t Power, that is set up; and set up purely to redress the Grievances
of the (...) which pretended not to re^eem us from Law but Oppression.

The Kings of England have advantage enough (on these occasions) besides, by
the Learning of their Judges; The Eloquence of their Council (many times mortal
and killing enough) and above all (as the Case stands at present) (or the
Practi^^ for which there is no Law) (by the Prisoner's Evidence being not sworn
against the King. An unjust; and partial process, and unworthy of a Court of
Judicature, and in no Country used or practiced but in our own; for an honest
Jury we find, when imposed upon by a Couple of Perjured Villains commonly lay
more weight upon what is Sworn upon Oath than testified without it, tho by much
more honest Men than the King's Evidence have happened to be; and this we are
afraid some poor innocents have sadly experienced. We know our Judges sometimes
in seeming favor to the Prisoners, recommend to the Jurors the weight of their
Evidence unsworn; but that, (where the King is concerned, more especially in
High Treason) is commonly so coldly done, that it seldom has its due weight, as
wanting the Corroboration of that Oath by which the King's is Countenanced and
Confirmed; and therefore it is time to give Prisoners favor and fair play, and
as much time as the Court can possible, which my Lord Coke, again and again
says in Case of Life can never be too long: and especially since false Swearing
them out of their Lives is grown a Crime no less common, than notorious, as
customary, as if it were a Custom-house Oath, or Entry; and a Bill of
Indictment for High Treason is no more regarded by these sort of Jurors than
there a Bill of Loading or Store; and indeed confidering the Lives and Estates
that lie at stake; these Affidavit Teagues, or Irish Adventurers that truck for
them, have this common with other Merchants and Incorporated Companies, that
accordingly their Actions rise and fall proportionably to the Wealth and Cargo
they bring to the Bar.

This then Gentlemen, being the Case, (as certainly so it is) This Case is no
common one that comes before You, no Case of Tradesmen; Mechanism or
Manufacture, no Case of the Chyrurgeons or Physicians, though a bleeding Case of
the Nation; and what You, only You can stanch, stop, and Cure; It respects no
more particular Parties than Persons, for such has been poor England's
misfortune; that some of all Parties and persuasions have been sacrificed by
these Blood-suckers, these Bogg-Leeches, since they crawled into English
Ground; and tho Popery here is as hateful as an Irishman, I am afraid some
Innocent among the Papist led the Van in this Akeldama, this Field of Blood;
and that by some of their Irish Countrymen and Religion, as well as by some of
ours that were of no Religion at all; next to these marched (to make the Body)
those that were called Fanatics; who followed the same way to Golgotha, to
Tyburn, that place of Skuls; and now some of the strict Church of England Men
(as the Jacobites and Non-Jurors think themselves) have been favored so far by
these Monsters as to bring up the Rear; and by a Courte^ie like that of
Polyphemus, are come to be devoured at the last; and this is the way indeed to
make an Army of Martyrs; but neither from the Justice of their Cause, or the
Favor of God Almighty to so many injured Persons. The Malice of these
Diabolical Men, their Accusers has been openly detected, and as ^ignally
defeated, in about the space of one Year, in two or three of the most
flagitions Conspiracies to take away their Lives, as ever was offered among a
Christian people; and what an Infidel would not only blush at, that believes
there is no God, but hang himself for the Guilt of so much Injustice and
Inhumanity; and those that have the greatest Aversion to their persons and
principles must admit this for a Truth and matter of Fact, too notorious for
any of us to give them the Lie.

That these are no Invidious Reflections we shall confirm in each Individual
party, by so many Matters of Fact, and then only endeavor to enforce the
reasonableness of redre^^ing these miserable Grievances, from the practice of
most human Laws; from the practice of Old England's Laws, and the plain
direction of God's Law, the most Divine. And first, to begin with the Popish
Plot, for we have had such varieties of them in England, that we are grown a
Jest by it to all Foreign Nations, for it is well known abroad, that when any
Wits are disposed to be Jocose, and ridicule any unaccountable and ridiculous
Discovery, they can find no pleasanter Appellation for it than, Une Plotte
d'Angle Terre; and this tho in French is the Language of most other Countries.

That there were endeavors by Mr. Coleman, and some of their Popish Priest to
subvert the Established Religion, and introduce their own (which could not be
done without overturning our Constitution, which in them was Treason (whatever
Mr. Coleman Coleman's Trial. p. 17, 18, 20.
thought to the contrary) no modest Man can doubt even of a Papist that has
read his Letters, and for that he deserved Death; and the Wisdom of that Court
to which we now appeal, did upon the perusal of his Papers, Vote it a Formed
Conspiracy, more than upon any Testimony of Mr. T. O. but whether T. O. had a
Patent to open Letters, in which Coleman called the King Tyrant and Traitor;
and were privy to the Guinea that p. 2. 4.
Coleman gave to Expedite the Ruffians to kill the King? Or whether he that had
Coined so many Letters for him, could not remember his Face by p. 30.
Candle Light; or could well in Council declare upon his Oath he did not p.
ibid. and 38*
know him, he was to hang; This may make the Testimony somewhat suspected while
the Conspiracy is out of doubt; and that Bedloe, which also swears he had
carried several Letters also from him, and discoursed him in p. 43, 44.
Somerset House, should be so forgot by him, as to make him take it to his
Death, he had never seen him in all his life; this may detract somewhat from
the Cr^dit of the Evidence without injuring the Justice of the Nation by which
he did, much less lessening the belief of their Design to introduce their
Religion: And the several Jesuits that succeeded him in their Trials and
Executions, and were probably embarked in the same Design, which as well as
Coleman they did confess they had endeavored to promote, (tho they were
pleased to think it no Treason to propagate their Religion) yet all with their
last Breath and Imprecations denied the measures by which it was Sworn they had
endeavored to compass it. Their Dying Protestations must startle many a good
Protestant when he looks upon them. But as a Christian, and that in spite of
all the severe Coments and Expositions of our Eminent Divines, our T's, and our
Sh's, Bt's, and Pat's, upon the Loyalty of the Papist, and the equivocations of
the Jesuits, which they did not then think they should have occasion to
practice: Their Plot upon our Religion, we say, was very probably true; but
whether the Circumstantial Evidence were all so, we think yet remains a doubt,
and indeed Jesuit's Trial. p. 23, 24.
the Forty thousand Black Bills; the Commissions from Paulus de Oliva, the Monk
of Coleman's Trial. p. 23.
the Pilgrims from Spain; The killing the King with Silver Bullets, poisoned by
Chewing; The thirty strokes on Pickering's Bum for failing in it, seem such a
mystical Roll of ridiculous Absurdities, as if they had been testified for the
Diversion of the Court, rather than as Evidence for the King, yet all these we
find liberally sworn; as for our parts, we are really discontented at any honor
or kindness done such an Evidence; In God's Name let Oats and Keeling, both
enjoy their Annual Pensions together; no man, I believe, will envy either of
them their Salaries no further than it may encourage worse Men to aspire to it
at the Price of Blood; which if Mr. O. be guilty of, let him know that by all
the Laws of God and Man, it is what all his meritorions Sufferings have not yet
expiated.

But the Case that comes nearer to the Case in hand, and upon this head; is
Plunket's, A person that seemed from the Character he had from Eminent
Protestants in Ireland, of no such Intemperate Zeal, and to have but little
other Crime; but his being a Priest of the Church of Rome; upon which Act they
had better Indicted him.

The Trying of him here in a foreign Country tho by an Act of our own
subjected to our Jurisdiction; and that after he had been legally acquitted in
his, where tho in their own Ireland his Evidence were ashamed to show their
Faces in a Court of Judicature; The exposing him here naked, and as he told
them with his Hands tied; The denying him ten days time after his Evidence were
upon the Road; and tho our Lawyers were not pleased to answer him to that Point
of Poyning's Act; yet that (by their leave) which they gave to that Objection
of his being twice Arraigned for the same Fact seems very insufficient and
weak; for I think Arraigment for High Treason puts a Man in danger of his Life
with a witness, especially the time and circumstances the Prisoner was in, and
such Witnesses to worry him; for if a Man shall not be in danger of his Life,
till he is convicted, then he is never so at all, for after Conviction, he is
worse than in danger, and as good as gone; For tho the King may pardon, what is
an extrajudicial thing; an Act of Grace, and foreign to the Trial; and to see
what Creatures they were that appeared upon it to testify against him, or Take
the Swear (as they phra^'d it) would induce a man to believe a little better of
T. O's Fellows, that seemed to be raked out of their own Irish Boggs, and whom
even their own Dispensing, Latitudinarian Religion had spewed out of their
Church; fitter to be carried out with our Night Weddings, than wooed as they
were (about that time) first to come over, of which Lousy Cattle we would have
afterward been gladly rid, but the Nation was overstockt; and so the Plague
and Murrain has continued with us ever since; and have produced a Race that are
like those filthy Creatures that crawl out of Mud with all the Toad-pole train
that are Generated out of Slime and putrefaction; and what work was made with
those Macwyers, Macmoyers, Frogs, and F^yars, with their Duffy's and Mouffy's;
let any sober Protestant but consider; the latter of which begins in a right
Irish Dialogue Why look ye Plunket's Trial. p. 80, 81.
Masters, I am first Discoverer, I*sh have ten Witness to the Doctor in
Ireland, these Witness (I*sh am sorry) don't know him, and so testifying
forward and backward, and at last nothing at all, but that I'sh am indifferent
whether I'sh be Papist or Protestant: If any one doubt this, let him take the
pains to turn to it, insomuch, that the Court, as grave as it was, could hardly
contain it self, and tho it was urged by them against the Prisoner, that this
their Witness they brought for the King had been tampered with (which Plunket
might as well and have better objected) yet it showed what Cattle they had
gotten together to gore Men, who could testify forward and backward; and take
the Swear, as a Spaniel takes a Stick, according as he is taught and tutored.
Lewd Irish, Popish Priest whom this Titular Prelate for their Immoralities had
censured as himself said, and Excommunicated, and it must be great Crimes we
know that Church will not Absolve: Here we found the Maclegh's and Phyloneals,
etc. Landing the French for him at Corlingford, one of the most unlikeliest
Ports of Ireland; up the Bristol Channel, and dangerous Irish Sea, quite out of
their way, 70000 Men to be secretly Raised and maintained by the Poor Titular
Prela^e, with a little bare Sustsistance-Money squeezed from a Parcel of Lowsy,
Beggarly, Popish, Irish Priests and Curates; a Feat not so easily to be
Effected now by the best Lieutenant we could send thither with the largest
Commission; and Landing all the French Auxiliaries in a shallow Water where a
Man might as well set an Army a shore in an Eggshell, This (to use the
Prisoner's own words at his Death, would no more have been believed by any
Protestant Jury Ex vicineto, (and as by Law and Confession to his Case it ought
to have been (i. e.) upon the place) though himself had confessed it, than if he
had sworn he had flew through the Air from Dublin ^o Holy-head; and if a Man does
seriously consider it, to give only a matter of a Months or five Weeks time to
send to Ireland, cross the Sea to search the Record of five or six Counties as
high as Ulster, to be denied them till order from England, to return cross the
Seas against Wind and Weather, and under the Difficulties that Popish Recusants
then especially were in traveling abroad, and then the refusing but ten days
Respite when the Witnesses were on the Road; Certainly these were no such
wonderful Acts of Favor or Justice to a Person upon his Life, and when all
this, after he had been acquitted by a Protestant Jury of his own Country, the
best Judges of the Veracity of the Deponents, the Circumstances of Truth, and
Human probability, 'twas hard to be Tried and found Guilty by Foreigners, who
from their strangeness and distance, must needs be exposed to the delusions of
a probable Lie. And had the angry Sir Robert Arkins, with his un^asy Mr. Hawles
in their learned Essays been but as impartial in their Writing as they were
Writers for a Party, certainly this Trial also, could never have honestly
escapt their Animadversion. but now the one being a Judge, and the other (as we
hear) King's Council, it is to be hoped we may never have occasion to find fault
with any future Trials.

When these Irish Rakehells had almost run themselves out of Breath in running
the Popish Party into Newgate, and out to Tyburn; after a little rest in their
Kennels, these Hellhounds are out upon the Hunt again, and start another sort
of Irish Game, and with full Scent and full Mouths drive about what they called
the Fanatic Party, that before had drove them on upon Papists: And so College
was first singl'd out among them for a Prey, who had been a busy Man among
them at the same Sport; and now like another Action without the help of a
Metamorphosis, came to be devoured by his own Hounds. A person Hot and
Choleric, bold and Turbulent, and being of Natural Parts above his Calling,
aspired to Intreagues of State, and concerted Matters of Government with these
Carrions your Witnessmongers, and Narrative-men, that made him pay dear at last
for his Correspondence. Upon the whole an ill Man, tho* made a Martyr, and from
his Principles might probably have justified the Decollation of King Charles
tho First with the Parliamentary Proceedings that occasioned; as Mr. Masters
swore upon him. A Doctrine that in those Days the Court could not digest so
well; General Ludlow had not then appeared in Print; and little was it thought
that College, that Stephen would have come to be a Martyr at White Hall
instead of King Charles; However the proceedings against him might have been
less violent, and if the Proof against him were not so credible; to have
pardoned him after Conviction might have been more plausible; But that he was
to Charge the Guards, Seize the King, kill him with his own Hands, with all the
Canting Extravagancies of your B^lrons and Mowbrays, Smiths or Barrys; Haynes
and Fitz-Geralds. His Popish Irish Beagles that devoured him. This indeed does
not seem at first sight so plain and conceivable; as plain as it was sworn.

And from this flight of Evidence against this Party; let us look a little upon
another piece of Witnessing, as lame as the other was mad; in this self-same
Presbyterian-plot. The Two Honorable Houses have seemed so much dissatisfied
with some of the Evidence that was given against the persons that suffered for
it, as to Repeal some of their Attainders, which may be conceived to be a Tacit
Conviction of some of the Evidence being plainly perjured; and indeed we must
acknowledge, that among some of these Cases of suspected Swearing, Mr.
Cornish's would bear a little c^nvassing,

For He, though several times Attacked for having been present at the Consult,
and taken into Custody so often, insomuch that Mr. Atterb^ry and the Alderman
were grown very intimate, so far as to be very Jocular and pleasant with one
another upon the repealed occasions of his coming into Custody, and the Accused
thought himself so safe or Innocent as to keep the Exchange, from whence he was
at last co^n'd for good and all; upon Goodenough's being brought in from the
Western Insurrection in an ill-time for Him, a Person that might be presumed to
owe him an Ill-turn, where yet what he swears does not seem so Trensonable or
True to have justified so precipitous a Trial: And R^msey's having sworn at the
Lord Russel's Trial, That he came in himself after the Declaration was read, is
indeed a Contradiction to his being present at the reading it to Cornish, and
his declaring at the same Trial, that he knew of no other Person besides what
he had accused, and accusing the Prisoner so long after (under favor) will not
be excused from wilful Perjury from a desire he had of favoring the Prisoner;
for If he had perjured himself to save Him, as he very fairly tells the Court;
the Judges sure ought to have judged him a less credible Evidence to hang him:
And though the Print might have past had they been pleased, yet the Record of the
Trial which he ought to had time to produce must have been manifest proof of
the Perjury: and Mr. Shepherd's denying absolutely his being of the Consult;
denying utterly that he held the Candle, which yet the Evidence
circumstantially swore was as much as could be offered to the making him
forsworn; or be brought an Evidence that is not upon his Oath; unless we could
imagine that Rumsey was more sensible of the holding the Candle, than Shepherd
that he swore did hold it; and from this unhappy Man's Case perhaps it might
well become the Wisdom of a Parliament, to add to those wise Laws we have
already (especially as we shall show there is no Law against it) That
advantageous one to the Lives of the Subject; to have his Evidence sworn as
well as the King's, that it may have its due weight with a Jury, and not be
born down, by the downright swearing of another.

My Lords and Gentlemen:
We would do Justice to all People and Parties, as it is from You the Nation in
this Weighty Point (no less than Life and Death) does expect it.

Come we now to that other Party of the Church of England Men; among whom the
Jac^bites and Nonjurors, who (we don't know upon what secret Considerations)
look upon themselves the purer Part of it, and almost all the poor Remnant God
has left of the Church of England; We promised you to show how Hanging and
Swearing has gone fairly the Round; and now you are come to see How every Dog
has his Day, tho it be to die in a Halter; and one would think it should be
time now to compound and agree upon the Matter among our selves who have one
after another gone all the same way, if we must again take another Turn, and go
the Round, and some of this or that sort be singl'd out to die; Decim^tion,
Martial Discipline, will do better than such Mockerys of Judicial process,
attended with a Force of such flagitious Evidence: The Dice and the Drum will
better befit the Cause on such a Stage of Justice, than a formal Tribunal, and
then the Prisoner will be sure to have a Cast for his Life, or if such bloody
Villains are worthy of their Salaries, Butchers will have a better Right to put
in for their Pensions, and then Service need not be so secret: We have seen
Gentlemen what Irish Evidence have done; we had no need certainly of more
Cunning, and false ones to come from the Scotch to try what finer Feats your
Lunts and Loons could do; and how the Mac^'s and Teagues could be outdone.

But yet let us see what a new Set of Harpys would have done, had not the
Almighty been the only Hercules to subdue these Monsters; and certainly no
Animal has a greater Agreeableness to these Creatures than those Birds of Prey,
who not only come to defile those Tables that feed them, but devour those that
give them Bread.

Pardon Gentlemen this Intemperate Zeal since designed for Your own Safeties,
and the Service of the Public; it is time to look to this Impending Mischief,
High time for your Selves to do it, if you value not only Your Liberties of
Debate but Your Lives, by which all our Liberties are asserted; For such
Hellish Plots can as infallibly blow up an House of Lords or Commons, as ever
could Guide Fauxe, or the Gunpowder; and let these forewarn You, as much as the
Letter to the Lord Monteague; for it is but such Varlets conspiring against so
many Members, and the most Eminent Patriots are at the merry of these
Cannibals: It Is well known how the Parliament in the late Reigns was Alarmed
with the mysteries of the Meal-Tub, and the unintelligible Plot of that Irish
Harpy, Fitz Harris: And pardon us again, if we put you in mind that the same
sort of Vultures have taken a flight not long since at the same Quarry; and if
those Members on whom Young made his villainous Attempt, do not move vigorously
for the Detecting the Depth of his villainy, and for Enacting such Laws as may
terrify such V^^lains* they are unworthy of that Mercy by which they are
preserved, and Contemners of that Providence they ought to Adore: The B. of
Rochester, Earl of Marlebourough, Lord Cornbury, Sir Basil Firebrass, are all
Members, as we think, that make a part of each House in Parliament; Let them
Remember the Flowre-Plot, that ought to s^ink in the Nostrils of the Nation;
and as little as it looks, is deeper than the Meal-Tub, Let these Gentlemen be
glad they are alive, Give God the Glory, And keep each Man his Anniversary; and
if they do not now look to preserve others; they do not deserve his Favor by
whom they now live, move and have their Being, but to take them in their Order.

The Plot of that Infamous and Flagitious Fellow, Fuller (pardon us if we give
him his Title, from a Vote of the House) is no stranger to your Walls; and how
many of Quality and Virtue he would have singl'd out, and that perhaps among
Your selves, is yet unknown; Give but once half the Encouragement for the
finding out these Rogueries that they have for carrying them on, and You Will
find this Confederate Evidence as ready to hang their Benefactors; and it is a
Blot upon the Honor of the Nation not to do it; And to the Honor of both
Houses be it spoken, after this infamous Wretch had filled the Parliament and
the Nation with the Noise of a Plot, which then was Forming its self in the
Clouds, the black Forgery of it was by Your sifting Sagacity, and prudential
Enquiries soon discovered, and the perfidious Fellow by Your Justice Ordered to
be prosecuted, but unless the Fosterers of these Vipers are found out, and some
other Punishment than the Pillory (which is only putting such a Snake to peep
through a Hedge) We warm that in our Bosom that will certainly sting us to Death.

As this was a Plot in Embrio we miscarried of, come we next, Gentlemen, to
another of the kind, but more Enormous Villainy; midwif'd into the World at its
full Time; but as God would have it, Dead-born. The Bromley Association, Had my
late Lord of Shaftsbury been another such, it is to be hoped we might have had
better Laws before now against such Treacherous Conspiracies. Consider,
Gentlemen, if not our Cases, yet your Own, and by some severe Sanctions
preserve Your selves against this so Sacrilegious a Sin as Wilful Perjury, that
robs God of his Honor, and Men of their Lives; Consider in this Case before
You Three Temporal Lords, and Two Spiritual in all, Five Lords, and Two
Commoners; (and the same Hand, had it not been spied, might have Associated so
many more Hands) brought in the greatest peril of their Lives, and what they
had actually lost, had not providence visibly interposed) by the Machination of
a couple of Varlets and Diabolical Conspirators; that since Judas his days
never had their Equals, and which Pror^tyne and Ps^udo (...) (bating but the
preciousness of that Life against which he Conspired) These Villains have
transcended, for that Primitive Apostolic Witness had some Remorse with him,
confessed he had sinned in betraying Inncent Blood; brought again the pieces of
Silver, and went and hanged himself, to show to Posterity (that tho the
Sanhedrim said, they had nothing to do with That, or what is that to us) yet
before God the Price of Blood, the selling of Innocent Blood, is DEATH; who for
want of better Justice on Earth made the Wretch his own Executioner; So that
God in this very Instance has made it capital by the Evangelical Law as well as
the Mosaical;) But our Young Judas here so far from Repentance, that after the
clearest proof of the blackest Contrivance, the obstinate Rogue perseveres in
his Villainy; and after he was lost in his Blockhead, suborns an Holland and a
Law to defend a detected Imposture.

The Villainy of this hom'd Contrivance, and the infamy of the Person, that
coined it on, is sufficiently set forth by the Book of the Bishops; and it is no
such pleasant employment for us to take Hell again and the Kennel, and had that
forged Association been lodged in any other Flowre-Plot but where it was, the
Messengers being directed, must certainly have found and met with it. And the
miserable Gentlemen been as infallibly lost, and the interposition of
Providence very observable to turn their very Exposing it in so public a place
as an open Hall to the very means of concealing it from the Searcher's Hands.
But after all that fervent Appeal of the Innocent Prelate in behalf of himself
and Fellow Sufferers; for Justice and Prosecution, for Enacting adequate
punishments (if it were possible) to such impropor^ionable Crimes, are not both
these Vipers suffered to escape, Young only like an harmless Robin or Red
Breast, with a Paper Ruff about his Neck, or wooden one, and Blackhead without
the least Punishment at all; we have that veneration for our Court and
Ministry, as not to think them concerned in such unconscionable Proceedings;
yet it will make some severer Animadverters apt to reflect upon Robert Young's
being known to be such a very Rogue for six months, for an half Year before,
and yet his flagitious Forgery to be so easily entertained, so long after; and
it might (on this most horrid Roguery; been expected from our Government that
pretend to unravel the Mysteries of the Last and rectify its irregularities;
that such a Perjury and Forgery should have been as severely prosecuted as any
of those Crimes were in the Reign of King James; We mean nothing less than
Oats's Discipline upon his Recorded Conviction, let each one judge of that
according as he ^ancies his Sufferings either the Resentment of the Court, or
the Justice of the Cause; We wish we could but have seen that Justice done on
these Goal* Birds that was shown in that so blemished Reign of King James, on a
less Enormous Malefactor, both Houses of Parliament, to whom we appeal were all
Wetnesses too of Sh^xton,s confuted Evidence on the Trial of the late Lord
Dellamere, and all the Town can Witness he was scourged for it beyond T. O. tho
short of Tyburn, and of which if he was not, we are sure he was reported Dead.

The security indeed of the Discipline shows that the design was not so deeply
laid among the Great, or else this Little fellow durst not have been so
sever^ly handled; what may be gathered from the gentle treatment of these more
wicked varlets, we leave to the wisdom of the Highest Court to determine:

And one would have thought that after Hell having broke loose, and so many
Innocent Souls preserved by the mere providence of Heaven, some course should
have been taken to shut those Gates of Hell; that they might never again have
been able to prevail; or these Devils; to have been so far muzzel'd that they
might not thus gone about seeking whom they might devour, but alas to our
shame, and the Reproach of the Nation and Christianity; (which should it be
told in Gath, and published in the Streets of Askalon, would make the
Philistians rejoice, and the uncircumcised Trimph; Turks Tartars and Mahometans
take us to have been bred on the Coasts of Barbary) The Animadversion on these
Villains has been so much Negleg^ted. That another, the very Cub of the same
Dam has been Midwif'd into the World in LANCASHIRE; That if all the Witches
that County is said to have produced, had met in Consult for the destroying of
Innocent persons; they could never have thought upon a more malicious or
murderous Invention, As first an Essay to the swearing so many substantial
persons out of their Estates for the false Alienations of their Lands, and when
that mystery of Iniquity was laid open, to attempt their Lives and Estates
together.

It Is hard that those that are Sequestered to the Government, should not be
suffered so much as to Live; We are loath to say, had their Lives been lost
where the blood must have layn; and their Death had been unavoidable, had not
the poor Gentlemen been able to describe the Hue and Shape of these Monsters,
and we hope it may Come to Light who lick't them into Evidence, Vid. Albert
Gent. S^ Universitas negligit Emendare illaqueat ipsase: Grot* de J^r^ Belli.
Z^uch de Jure feci^le Part. 2 d.
Qui non prohibent Jubent, and Tenentur, is a Maxim in the Civil-Law, In our
own Law, and in the Law of God;

There was notice enough given of this profligate Evidence in Print, that our
Ministers needed not have disparaged the Good Government so much by bringing
them on the Stage, but fince so many Innocent Subjects are brought in Jeopardy
of their Lives, It is but fit such a Villainous affair be brought before a
Parliament, *It Is the D^rnier Resort, the last Refuge Englishmen have when their
Lives and Estates are both so barbarously Invaded; and how out True Punys and
Empericks in the Politics come to be so f^r infatuated; after so signal a
Defeat at Bromley, to set up their Stage again at Manc^esie^, is as amazing as
the Horrid Perjury of their Knights of the Post, who have nothing to match
Theirs; but the Confidence of those Mountebanks, who; after they have
Notoriously killed in one place, yet Impudently set up in Another.

We cannot but look upon this pestilent pack of setters (for whom we ought to
set Ginns and Traps, as they do for Vermin and Polecats) to be but a sort of
BARRETERS for the Public, to set the Government and its Subjects in perpetual
Animosities, while they Run away with the Moneys of Both; And defame the
Government more than a Common one does the Country Corporation in which he
resides; and since the Vid Coke 1. and 3d Inst. c Bar. 78.
Law where it only related to Litigiousness is so severe, what ought it to be
where Life and Estates are thus Barrated away to the shame of the Commonwealth,
and Common Christianity.

If our Ministers are touched with Remorse for what is done, or what by
Flagitious persons has been imposed upon them; let the Innocence of the
Arraigned make as great a Noise as their Plot, and their deliverance be
published as lo^d in their Gazetts as would have been their Conviction. And it is
to be hoped that their Judges who some of them have had the Reputation of
Learning and Loyalty will secure some of these Ruffians; for his Majesty's
Service, and the Reputation of our Laws and Constitution, as the best means to
make amends for the Disservice that is done him in his Absence.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
THE Manner of this second or third Essay to Judicial murder must all come
before you, of which you are to take Notice as you will answer it to those
Powers upon which the Prisoners Put themselves to be tried, That is, God and
the Country; and where they proved such a Villainous Conspiracy for taking away
their Lives, even to the Astonishment of Judges and Jury, and satisfaction of
all good men present, who to their Immortal Honor partook in their so signal a
deliverance; That nothing less than a public Act of Terror and Infamy can be
past upon the Conspirators, unless we have a mind to defame the Constitution.

Consider but the Creatures that Crawled into Court to commit Murder in the
very face of it; and the Rest of the Cabal that would have appeared, but being
Uncharacterized, or more cunning, kept behind the Curtain.

In the first place your Dandys must appear, one that has given the Papists an
occasion to value him for his Apostasy (that honored their Church by
relinquishing it, to Disgrace ours by his Conversion; and after this piece of
service, it would be well if we could return Him; and just so were we credited
by our Converts before in the former Plots: and should they serve their Setters
as their predecessors did College, and some others, who can help it?

In the next place, [that Priest of all Religions,] (which God forbid) would be
the same; Comes in one Kingston a stancht Church of England Divine, whom in
kindness (since Dandy comes over to us) we ought to send to them; In a word,
the very Counterparl of Robert Young; Forging sacrilegiously his own sacred
Orders, proved from the Registry at Bristol's one of Robert's Brethren in
Poligamy, and if Sir S. A. be to be believed, The Bankers in Lombardstreet will
as soon trust Robert with their Cash, as the Banker of the King's Bench will
Kingston with his Coin. And after these Defeats, should this blessed Pair meet
in Consult or Partnership, their Joint Stock is enough to break the Nation.

In the next place we come to our Lunts the lag Poligamist, Cousingerman to the
two Spiritual ones, a lowsy discarded Coachman; with your Ombrals or Whombrals,
a Rascally Carrier; both Carrier and Coachman all driving to the Devil, whom
yet the Devil drove: Let but one of these Scotch Evidence (as some of thom are
said to be) but feel a little of their own Bo^t or Thumkin, The Deel^ will they
or their Irish Associates take the Swear again in England, and what will be an
infallible way to squeeze out of their Knuckles and Fingers ends the bottom of
all the Villainy, and the Top of all their Accomplices; such a Scottish Boot
will very well become the Evidence that carried off one of the Gentlemen's Gold
in the Leathers of his own. And the ^humkin a proper Instrument for the Fingers
of a Priest that ^orges Orders; and I hope it is time to make Wretches know
themselves, that swear against those they do not know; and so let these be the
l^st of such execrable Villains that are not hanged.

Let it be but considered what a Tool such a Fellow as Lunt was to go to work
withal for the taking away Lives; Lives of Value, by his most contemptible
Breath; And it is to be hoped his Confederates have burnt their Fingers, now
they have found their principal Evidence burnt in the Hand; branded upon the
Record of the Court for stealing of Bullocks, proved ex confesso to have Robbed
on the Highway, Indicted for having two Wives, and what never yet was heard or
seen in a Court of Judicature; Evidence that came to swear High Treason against
a Person he had never seen in his Life, nor so much as knew from all the rest
that was in Court, I think the Villain Lunt has outdone what no person of
probity ever thought on this side Hell could have been so much as matched
Blackhead and Young, who never pretended to swear before they were acquainted
not only with the Phys and Faces of the persons, but also their Hands and
Writings; whereas this audacious Varlet swearing he delivered Commissions
severally to these Gentlemen at the Bar, they severally Read them; that they
severally gave him Five pounds apiece; yet being ordered with one of the white
Rods in Court to point at Sir R^wland Stanley, very fairly singles out Sir
Will Clift^^, and this a Blunder at Noonday; and not like Oats to be excused
by Candlelight: It Is pity but such a Rogue should meet with his Rowland for his
Oliver, for we dare be bold to affirm, that since that Usurper's Days there
were never such horrid Conspiracies formed for the taking away Lives; and
Wilson proved to have received the ready Rano Money for encouragement;
certainly if piety and Justice are not Abdicated too, The Wages of this Sin
ought to be Death.

The Threatenings of Brereton to have the Lives of some of the Prisoners proved
in open Court; a most fervical way of Revenge; A Stilleto of Poneyard might
have done as well; but the Devil owed the Evidence a Spite, and so tempted him
to add Porjury to his Murder.

After all to clinch close the Nails in this murderous Machine improved beyond
all what the War has yet produced, was provided a Gentleman called Taff, who
was as ready to have sworn himself the Count of that Name, but that Vienna was
little too far off from M^nchest^r; but here True Teague appeared; for with his
working and witnessing after his Irish way, all the Mystery of Iniquity came
out, and the most horrid Conspiracy to Sacrifice so many Innocent Souls to the
Amazement as well as Resentment of the whole Court and Country, Insomuch, that
even Aaron Smith, that e^perienc'd Muster-Master of Plot and Affidavit, that
understands, we are sure, what it is to swear and be sworn against, and all
that relates to Popish, Irish Evidence and Conspiracy, was astonished at his
flight, and sublime. So transcending all the former Villainies he had seen; (or
to his honor been concerned in, and (to supercede even the shamming the
Discovery.) All this deep Design laid so open as those Graves they had dug
for the Prisoners, and so black as that Hell which gapes for the Evidence.

My Lords and Gentlemen:
WE have laid before You a great deal of horrid Fact, but yet no more than
what is Matter of Record, and what every Member of You will find verified
beyond Contradiction, and all the Aggravations we can use, can never represent
these Villainies more odious than they are to God, and should be so to all Men;
and therefore it is time to show here how by the Laws of God and Man they are to
be punished.

First for the Warrant from the Law of God, we need not go so far from the Text
as to Appeal to the Dialogue, and God's Express Command in the case of Murder;
That he that sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; and (again
in another place) He shall surely be put to Death; Though indeed this way of
killing is not so wide from downright Murder; and only more propense and
malicious, which our own Laws have the greatest regard to punish, but God
expressly commanded the Deuteronomy. 19. 18. 19. etc.
Jews in these words: That their Judges should make diligent Inquisition, and
if the Witness be a false Witness against his Brother, then shall thou do unto
him, as he had thought to have done unto his Brother, thy eye shall not pity
him, Life shall go for Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth for tooth, etc. and in another
place Prove. 19. 9.
False Witness shall not be unpunished, and he that swears Lies shall perish:
But to go further yet with God's Judgment more severely denounced against such
Reprobates Equivalent to the Romans Julian Law in punishing of Regicides by
rooting out the whole House and Family, and who till the Lex Poma a long time
had no Law for that so unnatural a Crime of Para^ides, because they thought
could not enter into Man's Heart to commit it, and I could wish that had
perjury been the Reason, and no State Policy, that we have wanted a new Act so
long for Perjury; but as the Romans ordained in Regicide, so has God also
denounced in this Fratricide, and even in less heinous Perjury, if it has any
Gradations; for by the Curse of the Zach. v. 4.
flying Roll he has pronounced the Destruction of the whole House and Family*
and declared, that it shall enter into the House of him that swears falsely*
and shall consume with the Timber and very Stones thereof; and that this
Capital Punishment was inflicted on these perjurious Offenders as well as
denounced, we need go no further than that well known Story of Susanah, and her
two Perjured Elders, There was what our Law calls a Villainous Conspiracy, and
deserves, as my Lord Coke 3 Instit. 66.
Coke explains it, a villainous Judgment, and we think that ought to be to
forfeit their Lives; and the best Reports are to be read in holy Writ: and it is
here in this Case you find that as soon as they were Convicted, the Text tells
us, according to the Law of God and Moses, they put them to death; and it is
plain God has interposed in our late Discoveries, as once he did by his Servant
Daniel from the Holy Writ; let us but have recourse to profane History, for
Parallel to God's Curse upon the House and Family for this crying Sin, the
Story of Glaucus the Lacedemenian; recorded by Her^d. lib. 6.
H^rodotus, to show what regard was to be had even among Heathens to what they
swore, and what dismal Punishment attended their Perjury) for he having only a
design to forswear a sum of Money that was deposited in his hands, yet had so
much Conscience as to Consult the Oracle before he committed the sin, and was
told by it what he was to expect, To be Consumed, him and his Posterity; and
though he departed the Judgment as having only intentionally Committed the Crime,
however the Vengeance of God fell upon him, and He and his Posterity Perish^t.

And now let us but look into the Law of other Nations, and next cast back our
Eye upon what was our own.

By the Le^ Remnia Among the Romans a Common Calumniator or false Accuser in
ordinary Cases, had first the To* K in the Greek Capital burnt in his forehead,
a little more severe than our Paper Kite that is put upon our Prances or our
Youngs in Westminster Hall or the Pillory; and besides the Identity of
punishment, that the party must have suffered by his Perjury, was also
inflicted and this appears from their Imperial So Vid. Prove. 19. 9. Zach. v. iv*
Law, and will be all good men's wishes to see it among our Acts of Parliament,
And by their Lex Cornelia made by that famous Dictator Cornelius Sylla, Their
Judicium Falsi, D. 48. 161. c. 9. 46. 6.
For forged Attestations, or forged Associations (though they did not tend to the
taking away lives) was very fearful, for by that the offender convicted of any
such Instrument of forgery; was to suffer Deportation, and their Publication of
all their Goods; and if perpetrated by a Servant or Slave, to be condemned to
their ultimum supplicium, that is to lose his life; and sometimes made Capital
in those that were Free; and with the Instit lib. 1. Tit. 18. D. 4 8. 10. 4. C.
de. falsis. l. ubi. b. 4. 8. 10. 1.
same punishment did they prosecute your Willsons as well as Youngs, that had
received any bribe for their evidence, and money for their Testimony, and what
aggravates the defects of our Laws as vainly as they are ulcerated, these
severities or just Retaliation, were inflicted in Civil matters; and in
Criminal ones the Perjury always punished with the same Death and Torment the
I^nocent was to have suffered, and then we are sure their Punishment of Laesae
Majestatis was equally terrible to that of our High Treason, and extended
formerly even to the C. 9. 8. 5.
Children, and Servants of the Conspirators, tho never so innocent: And these
Judgments were also confirmed by their lex Tali^nes, in which the Law of God
seemed to be Copied out of Deter^nomy, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth.

These Gentlemen, were the Laws made by a wise and flourishing Republic, and
Collected in a Body, by a Renowned Emperor esteemed the Justest Legislator; by
which those Laws of Solon himself might seem to be out done, and Rome in
Justice as well as Glory to have transcended Athens and Lacedemon, and it was
these Laws that made them Victorious abroad, safe and easy at home; and These
esteemed so Just and equitable that even since most part, (we may add all the
Christian World beside our selves are governed by them; nay our own Kingdom
was; and Scotland that is under the Dominion of our own Prince, as we shall
show, is still governed and guided in this point by the same Ancient and
Equitable Laws; and if any of these Conspirators be Scottish Cattle of the
Irish kind, let them in Gods name swear up Plots and forswear them in their own
Country where they may be deservedly hanged after they are damnably perjured,
and not bring true Englishmen to be tried for their Lives by a parcel of false
Loons that have abandoned God, as well as God their Country; The only Good they
have left in it being these good Laws by which such forsworn Varlets are to be
punished: and that not only by those Civil Institutions of the Roman and
Imperial Law we have cited (which with them take place where their own
Municiple ones are defective,) but also by their very Parliamentary Acts and
Constitutions, and particularly by one of Vid. Jac. 6. p. 1. c. 49.
King James the 6 th. where he that Calum^ates any one of High Treason, and the
party acquitted, incurs the same Vid. lib. cui. Tit. Reg. major.
Punishment the presumed Gullty must have undergone, had he made good his proof.

And now in the next and last place, let us come to our own Legislative; and
it is well known, especially to this High Court of Parliament composed of so
much Law and Learning, that anciently, and before the Conquest, by our own Laws
Perjury (tho it were not in the Capital Cases) was punished with Death or
Exile, the Romans Ultimum supplicum; or Deportation, and the least penalty that
followed after that was the Cutting out the Tongue of the Perjured, we are no
more I hope a Conquered People now, than we were before the Conquest, (whatever
some Scottish Doctors, or Scotch Evidence may tell us.) And if we be the same
Free Subjects the same True English men, In Gods Name let us have the same
agreeable Leg. Edward. c. 3. Leg. Aethel. c. 10. Mirror c. 4.
Laws, we had before we were a Conquered people, the same that in this Case
agree so much with the Laws of God and Man; and we would willingly know since
the second offense in forging a DEED or public Instrument is made by the fifth
of Eliz. Felony, where but a little Land or Lease is liable to be lost; why not
the Forging of Commissions and Associations to the taking away Lives, and then
I am sure such Priests as Young and Kingston that forge their order too ought
not to have the benefit of their Clergy. So that to Revive these so Ancient and
Excellent Statutes for Perjury we see is not (as the Parliament once bravely
opposed,) to change the Old Laws of England but to Restore them.

As our Case stands now, we have not so much as the Hazard the Chance of our
fore Fathers, the Fire Ordeal to acquit us of the Accusation of a Couple of
Conbin'd Conspirators, nor that other favor long since Legally to be granted,
or to be demanded by the falsely Accused to defend his Innocence. Vid. 2d. and
3d. Inst. cap. 14. and cap. 72.
The Co^bate. *but are immediately swallowed up Quick by these false Crocodiles
as soon as they gape with their upper Jaw; for our our Ancestors commonly in
Cases of false Accusations of Felony or High Treason, as well as in a Writ of
Right had the privilege of fighting it out with their Calumniators; and so was
to be decided that Famous Case Reign of Rich. III.
between Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Henry Duke of Hereford, where the one
accused the other as false and Traiterous to the King; and were this in
practice at present, Capt* Brewerton, that Hervick Calumniator might have had a
more honorable way of having the Life and Blood of Sir Rowland and the
Gentlemen he so falsely accused, but since all protection is now taken from the
Innocent, that they cannot defend themselves against the force of Villainous
Affidavit neither by Law nor Arms, what is there left to fence against these
devouring Animals, but fearful and severe Sanctions, that like the Fire we make
in Woods against Wolves and wild Bears, may make them turn away and leave their
Prey.

In the Conspiracies indeed of Juries we have a terrible Judgment ( Coke 3
Inst. Chapter Conspi. 66.
as the Lord Chief Justice thinks it) whereby they are put out of Protection of
the Laws, to loose their Lands and Goods to have their Houses raised and Trees
rooted up; and if these are thought so great Villains, as to merit such a
Villainous Judgment, only in Civil Actions, what must such Irish or Scotch
Evidence merit in Criminal Cases? Creatures that have no more Goods than what
they carry on their backs, no other Houses but their last Goal, and not a Tree
to hang themselves on, or a Dog, and so far from being aggrieved by being put
out of the protection of the Laws, that they are commonly (as we see in these
Bromley and Manchester Evidence, outlawed to our hands for being Felons or
Highway-men; what then can suffice for such transcendent Transgressors, that
are incapable of any other Punishment, but Death.

My Lords and Gentlemen:
LET us only on this occasion crave leave to remind You of what was not long
since the Result of your own Learned Debates upon the like Emergency, That so
solemn 22, 23 Car, II.
Act, on the Villainous Attempt on Sir John Coventry; where no such Punishment
was provided for by any Law before* Certainly this Case concerns You nearer
now; where Your Honors, Your Estates, Your Lives lie at stake; and must needs
make a deeper Impression on Your Minds, than an Assault, or Mutilation; and
since these Ruffians, these Assassins in Affidavit have adventured to attact no
less than four or five Members at once. That Puny Attempt (in respect of these
more Bulky and Buteherly Assassination, and the more barbarous in being also
more secret) was looked upon too big for that little Punishment the Law did
inflict; so that, that which was only Trespass, Assault or Battery before, was
made Felony; and sure Gentlemen, the cutting off a Man's Life, will deserve as
considerable a Punishment as the Slitting of a Nose; or the Cutting out his
Tongue or Eyes, which was long before made 5 H. IV. 5. 3 I^st. 62.
Capital.

We are not so severe in our Just desires, as to insist that this so necessary
an Act should have any Injurious or revengeful Retrospect, as to regard even
Robert Young, a Taff, or a Lunt; a Blackhead, or a Wombrell; though one would
think they should deserve no favor no more favor than a Dandys, or O brian; a
Parry, or a Reeves, Men of better Birth and less Barbarity; at least we might
expect, that if with those lesser Criminals, they are not to be hanged, that
for the public Interest of the Nation, and the Safety of every Individual in
it, they may at least be Exiled with them out of that Land in which they do not
deserve to live, Coke's Comm. 3d Inst. Chap. 13.
as this will be; as my Lord Coke calls it upon the like occasion, Salutaris
severitas and beata securitas; *A severity only for the Safe^y of us All, and a
most blessed Security indeed for the Public, the People and the Parliament.

My Lords and Gentlemen:
LET our Zeal for the Public Good, with You (who are Overseers of it, Ne quid
detrimenti capiat Respub lica) Supercede the Presumption of these weak
Overtures, for the Honor of the Nation, the Reputation of your Two Houses, and
the regaining a Repute to our once celebrated Law; which why they should be
defective in matters of such main Concern as Life and Estate, is unaccountable.

Let us have the long looked for Bill for limiting Constructive Treason made at
last an Act; and let not the Twelve Men in Scarlet, which were painted so
terrible and bloody in the last Reigns be a Terror to the Subjects in This; All
the Twelve may not have the Judgment and Moderation, the Learning and the Law
of an Hales or an Holt; and when our Lands and our Lives are at stake, Malice
and Ignorance may make most wretched Constructions on the 25 of Edward; if we
are delivered to eat Manna and Quails, why must we still be fed on Leeks and
Onions; and if we must never see our Canaan, it is as good to perish in the
Wilderness; and it is tempting God to see those Men that cried in their Bondage,
to please themselves now with their Shackles; and those that not long since
were so afraid of hanging on that Statute of King Edw. to play now with the
Halter, as if it were no more than the Garter which he Instituted.

Let the Evidence for the Prisoner by a special Act have his Oath administered
him, as well as the Swearer for the King. We have found Villains and Perjury
sufficient on the one side to bring Men to the Gallows, and never yet seen so
much on the other to save a Man from it: The Crown will have this advantage
upon the Reciprocal Oath, That His Evidence if false, must perjure himself to
save the Indicted; and if he swears True, it is all the reason in the world he
should be saved: To refuse this for the ridiculous Reason that it is against
the King, as is commonly done; and particularly was in Vid. Trial Fitz Har*
page 37.
Fitz Harris's Case when demanded, is the highest Reflection on the Crown; the
very blemish to our Constitution; derogatory to a Court of Justice, unworthy of
Lawyers, and indeed as shall be shown, against Law; it looks as if the Prince
had it as a part of his Prerogative to have an advantage over the Subject's
Lives, expressly against Cap. 29. Coke 2 Inst.
Magna Charta; which we dare affirm takes all the Care imaginable for the
preservation both of Life and Estate even in opposition to the King and Crown;
and the Original Contract upon which we now stand has not I hope overturned
that; and besides this advantage of Swearing, as (we have shown before) the
King is advantageously enough posted upon this Point in a Court of Judicature,
in the Learning of his Judges, in the Zeal of his Attorney; the Eloquence of
his Council, and it being the King's Court, and too much as it is commonly
made, the Subject that comes to contend with him on his own Ground ought to
have all the fair play imaginable, and upon Justice and Honor the advantage of
the ground given him; for it is always judged unfair, To Cut, and Choose too. We
are confident some of the King's own Council have been once of this Mind; and
we dare engage to show it under some of their own Hands who by this time may
have forgot what fell from their Fingers five Year agone; and whatever were the
hardships of Trials before this Revolution, it is notorious, there was never
such barefaced Forgery and Villainy that offered to set up for King's Evidence,
though some may be, did endeavor to come near it; and if it be true what is
reported, that one of the Reprieved Printers, has owned himself Author of that
Book for which Anderton died, 'twill help to remind some Authors of the Story
of those that were hanged for the Murder of a Person absent; and of my Lord
Coke's Heiress that hung her Uncle by running away; and at last both returned
alive: All that can be said in the Case is, it is easier to make Remarks on
Trials than to regulate and reform them,

But besides all this. the Benefit of an Oath against the King is allowed in
all Civil Actions, and as much the Subjects Right as his Benefit Ticket, though
the King with ten times the Money should draw all Blanks, and both these by Act
of Parliament, and is a Man's Life then of less value to him than a Lot on the
Million Adventure, or in a Civil Action have we a better Right to contest it
with? The King's Auditor, then in a Criminal one with his Executioner; yet on
this slippery ground we stand, notwithstanding our excellent Laws and
Constitution, so that the Prisoner seems to be tied up before Council or
Sentence, at the first false step, to be hanged for the King.

My Lord Coke that Learned Lawyer, and once Gentleman, in your Station, an
Honorable Member of Parliament, is expressly for the Administration of this
Oath, to the Evidence for the Prisoner; and says there is neither Author, Act,
Book* Statute, Record, not so much as Vid. Coke 3d. Inst. Cap. 22.
S^intitla Jaris, against it. And the Statutes of Eliz. III. and Jacob. IV. are
expressly for it, where also in Criminal Cases the Oath is tendered; and in
God's Name, let the Protestant Reign, and the Peaceful Reign be Presidents for
our Reigns, though at present in a State of War; and moreover partinent to this
Purpose does that Eminent Lawyer add that memorable Expression of that
Celebrated Queen, who when Burleigh told Her of him as he was coming into Her
Presence; V^d. Coke 3d. Inst. ibid.
Here comes Your Majesty's Attorney General that prosecutes pro Domina Regina:
She very readily replied, rather let it be pro Domira veritate; and was so
intent upon it, that she really would have had it altered, and run thus in the
Record; A charge fit to be given by every Prince to this Minister of his
Prosecution.* instead of Instructions to Sharp Speeches and bitter Words; as if
when they are coming perhaps to Crucify an Innocent, They must also give him
Vinegar and Gall to drink.

Gentlemen, We have had Great Boasts that we are come to Queen Bess her Days;
and therefore it is but fit we should have Queen Bess Government too.

And Lustly; Let this so necessary a Bill for the very Being of the Subject be
past into a Law; Great Things are expected from this Sessi^n, and these Laws
indeed would mako the Session Great.

Let PERJVRY in Capi^al Cases be as Capitally punished: Since it is God's Law,
All Christians Law, and was once our Law; and this no Airy flight or Assertion,
but what we have made out from the Law of God, The Law of Nations, and our own
Law Books; it is a Jest to talk of our Excellent Laws, when we want one to
secure our Lives, and our Constitution goes upon Crutches as stout as we think
it, while the People that are to Establish it are thus cramp^ and crippl'd;
What Compensation for God sake can it be to a Peer or Commoner after he has
made his Cavalcade to Tower Hill or Tyburn to have a Young or a Lunt, to look
with an Iron Cap through a Wooden Cage, and gloriously defended by a Guard from a
Rotten Egg, or Turnep; or what kind of Consolation to the Posterity of a
Marlebor^ugh, or a Molineun, after the Chopping of their Heads, to have had a
Snip of Robert's Ear, that would have blemished the Pillory, or a little of
Lunt's Leather, that if Nailed to the Gibbet must have made it blush: It was
pretty oddly observed by a Bishop well enough affected to the Government, That
the Non-Jurors had preserved the Nation from Atheism; but by the increase of
these sort of Jurors there is no hopes of keeping out the most Atheistical
Infidelity; For never in any Age were such sad Examples of Fallen Reprobates,
that had sunk down to such a degree of Diabolical Atheism; (for the Devils,
though the false Accusers of the Brethren yet fear and tremble) as has been found
out in the Forgers of these two last most Hellish Plots, of which perhaps
Fuller, their Foreman would have furnished us with a finer Original. What will
the next Generation think of this in the Revolving our Annals and History, when
they shall see so many Perjuries upon Record, and most of them unpunished? When
they shall find such a Catalogue of uncouth Names, and more unheard of Monsters
and Animals than any in Aldr^vandus? when they shall meet with so many
Mac-Moyers, Mac-Oneals, Mac-Namarac's, Blackheads, and Whombralls, all
Tantivying it away upon the Sacrament; as if they were so many Spiritual
Saints, when all the while nothing less than so many Devils, Incarnate Sons of
Belial; for so the very word of God has called them that by false Witness
dispossess a Naboth or a Neighbor of his Life and Vineyard; Hell Hounds! that
in the dark Night pursue their Prey, that like Pestilence Walk in Darkness;
till fletch't and sharpn'd like the Arrow, they come to destroy us at Noonday:
That Plot how to seize the Heir, and Quarter his Body; only to divide h^s
Inheritance. These things Gentlemen, have not been done in a corner, and Ye
that are Rulers in our Israel; Ye our Legislators, cannot be said to have heard
or known none of these things; The Bishop has laid all open in one Book, and
there will matter enough come before you to make up another.

If any Members should be so hard, as not to be easily moved with so tender a
Case, let them but consider the said circumstances of such a dying Innocent
amidst his Horror and Distraction, to find himself hurrying away to an infamous
and painful Death, through all the Gazing Crowd, and ghastly Pageantry that
attends it; and all the while perhaps so Just and Innocent, that he is only
conscious of the Injustice and Injury that is done him, and has in Equity, a
Right to that Life and Freedom that every Spectator enjoys, that comes to see
him die, and more than many, and (his Accusers especially) that don't deserve
to live, it must needs discompose and distract the Sedatest Soul to be thus
tor'n from the Body, and to leave that too to be butchered abroad; We must
confess we look upon this to have been much of Mr. Cornish's Case, whose dying
Agony many that were no Enemies to that Reign and Government could not so
easily digest; The conflicts and convulsions both of Soul and Body, that
Innocent Person must be under in such sad circumstances is unconceivable,
whilst a Tacit Guilt; or opinionatre of the Goodness of the Cause in which he
suffered so long as matters of Fact are truly sworn, makes the Dying and
Condemned more patiently to expire, either from the Approbation of the Fact for
which he suffers, or considering it as the Effect of his own Crime or
Indirection; and it is observable in that Man's Case we mentioned, we find that
neither Judges nor Jury could defend themselves from the killing force of a
false Oath, which from the Lips of a King's Evidence like the Ball from the
mouth of a Cannon carries all before it where it is levelled*

And thus we hope we have shown that this is a National Concern, and not the
particular Case of a few incensed and uneasy Jacobites, as many that are
unwilling to lose the least power of Oppressing may be apt to imagine, but such
will then only be best Taught when they come perhaps to find it their own, and
have bought more Wit so late, and so dearly. Neither will we imagine, as some
perhaps may more maliciously among that Party conclude, that these Machinations
against them have been carried on by any of our Eminent Ministers of State; we
see how Robert Young's Roguery and Information was rejected, long before it was
discovered and found out; and his Bundle of Papers and Intelligence Branded and
stigmatized in the Forehead for that of a Very ROGUE; but these Villainous
Evidences in all probability have been Instigated only by some Punies in the
Politics; some half-witted Underlings, The Fi^z Harris's of the Times, that
would officiate themselves into favor, by scandalizing those they would
pretend to serve* and whom our Ministers (if detected) ought to make Examples
for their Impudent Presumption, and the disservice that is done the Government;
for we may look upon these Creatures and Conjurors more Diabolical than the
Evidence; they thus raise us up from the the Devil* for if we could have any
Charity for them, we might think that they only designed to live by the Tr^do,
and to damn themselves for a little Bread; whereas these more malicious
Conspirator's Plot to destroy the Innocent at their own Cost, and pay for the
pains of their Perjury, with the Price of Blood, and no little Expense for
their Preferment may meet perhaps with the mistaken Reward of false Edric's
Treachery, who was preferred for the Villainy he had committed for the sake of
King Canutus, above any of the Peers, by putting his Head upon a Pole; and
besides all wise Statesmen will know that it is no Policy to exasperate even
what they think a contemptible Part of the Nation; For notwithstanding all King
James's Army, Monmouth might have made mad work of it, had he took them
Napping; so that if we are well wishers to our present Government, we ought to
study how to make it easy to all alike, lest we should be mistaken (as our
Predecessors have been) in the consequences of any violent Prosecutions. The
Gentry and Nobility of the Nation are upon another account obliged to take
notice of this New way of Swearing; with relation to the true Rules of Honor
and Chivalry, or else to restore again the ancient practice of turning
Champion; and defending ones self, when accused by Combat, and to challenge
the Evidence instead of the Jury; for though some of these Brood of Witnessess
like a body of beggarly Bandity set up to Rob and to kill, but according to
Law, and to level at Men of Estates alike as they come in their way; so it
seems there are others among them that are irritated into this Villainy by way
of Animosity and Revenge, and like the Band among the Jews, bind themselves in
a Curse neither to eat nor drink till they have slain Paul; and of this humor
we find were some of the Mac'^ and Irish in Colledge's Case, the Duffy's in
Plu^ket's Case, and our renowned Capt. Brewert^n, in Sir Rowland Stanley's
Case; so that Perjury at last is like to arrive to a sublime pitch of Hervick
Valor; and instead of deciding Quarrels by a Duel it may be thought a piece of
Gallantry to get the Blood of a Man, by swearing him out of his Life, what
consequences this may have upon the Nobility and Gentry we leave to the
Determination of both Houses of Parliament that are composed of both.

And now after all that has been said for this so necessary a Law against
Wilful Perjury, none ever yet could bring the least objection against it, save
only this single one.

That Capital Punishments in Cases of Perjury, would deter all Persons from
detecting of capital Crimes, and especially Conspiracies against the King and
the Crown.

As to what concerns the Crown and King's Case somewhat has been said already
upon another head, Though it may be observed here that it was the Practice of our
Royal Ancestors to Triumph more in the detecting the Innocence and Quietness of
their Subjects, than of an hundred horrid Plots and Conspiracies; for those
whether true or forged, only help to make the Monarchs more uneasy to
themselves and People; and besides it is the saying of the wise and good
Emperor Trajan, to Severus, and a Maxim in the Laws both Divine and Human,
That it is better Satius est, impunitum relinqui facinus necentis. quam in
nocent^m damnari sic iniquite Vlj^ian Trajanus Severo rescripsit.
Ten Guilty Persons escape, than one Innocent Man perish: Now we would feign
know which way there is for an Innocent Man to be safe, when for the weak
Pretense of Regal Prerogative there shall no greater Terror and Restraint be
put upon such Villainous Forgeries: The most Innocent Men are commonly the worst
Enemies to such Diabolical Varlets, and therefore from them they may expect the
most of Mischief, and this has been made out to a miracle in some of the
forementioned Conspiracies.

Besides, as Parasitical as the Argument is to the Crown, it is perfidious and
Traiterous to our very Constitution; for if the King's Prerogative must stand
in opposition to the Lives and Safety of Subjects; We have at once over-turn'd
all that Original Contract upon which we settled the very Foundation of the
present Government; and we can compare the Unjust Notion to nothing else, but
the Justice some English Gentlemen (we have heard of) met withal in France, who
in their passage through it, by a Perjurious Wretch that had never seen them
before being sworn to be all Hagonots, and upon that were imprisoned and ill*
used; and contra^y to the Law of Nations, upon Appealing to the Governor of
the next Garrison, and showing their Authentic Passport, and demanding
Reparation for Damages sustained, had only this cold Compliment to make them
amends, That they must excuse their ill Treatment from the strict Regard was
had to the King's Ed^ct; and since the Fellow had only perjured himself in Zeal
for his Majesty*s Service, he did not see how he could well punish him;
Gentlemen! where Life is concerned too, we hope French Arguments will have no
weight with Englishmen. But further, for this only Objection, There is no more
Sense or Reason in it than of public Spirit or Honesty; for what Reason has an
honest upright English Evidence, with no Irish Hue, or Scotch Complexion, to
decline giving a fair Testimony to what he knows of a Prisoner, since
whatsoever Evidence the Prisoner brings to disprove his (being likewise upon
Oath, which as my Lord Coke says no Law is against) must run the same Risque of
a capital Punishment, if by Forgery or Falsehood he goes to invalidate the
King's Evidence; so that the Accuser here has the same Security for his Life
that the Person has whom he Accuses, and since swearing False is grown so
Fashionable, it is fit he should have no more; and it is certain from the purity
of the Punishment the security to both is the same; besides there is this to be
considered to encourage any true Witness from being dismayed, That Truth from
probability and circumstances will defend it self, whilst those that falsely
come to invade it (as the Success in these Affairs were Evidenced) are sooner
discovered in their most secret Conspiracies; So that no Man of Sense or Reason
can see the least Reason why notwitstanding this Reciprocal punishment annexed
to Perjury, he cannot as boldly proceed in confidence of the Truth of what he
Deposes; as if there were no such Retaliation or Identity of punishment
annexed; and that which may be ^ack'd to this Objection; that this might
multiply Swearing and Perjury, Vying and Revying on one another by way of
Revenge, is so preposterous an Argument that it contradicts the other, and is
as false in Fact, for if by this Lex Talionis, Evidence can be terrified (as
it is objected) from giving True Testimony; How can it disencourage an Impostor
to disprove it by Forging a Falsehood, since the Terror and Punishment must
equally extend to both; and for such Varlets as by way of Revenge would swear
Perjury against another for Evidence given in a Capital Case only to take away
his Life, has no advantage at all by this Act; for we find by all these sad
Examples, that such Villains can as easily swear you into a Plot and High
Treason: And for which perhaps many a Man's Breath has been stopped, only because
the perjured Ac^user had nothing to choke him but his own Lies and Forgeries,
and many an Innocent brought to a shameful Death* because the Informer was
never in any danger of his Life.

Gentlemen.
WE are none of those your Town-Whiffers (the best in the world at throwing of
dirt) commonly called Jacobites; new distinctions that may cost us as much as
the old ones of Whigg and Tory; for a Jacobite indeed in the common Acceptance
is worse than Tory; and I hope we shall give no occasion to make a Williamite
worse than a Whigg; It Is a known Reproachful Reflection to make a Jacobite, one
that though an Englishman would enslave his Country to a Foreign Yoke, and what
is worse a French one, but if such Blood-suckers, such Reprobate Svearers are
to make their Cavalcade through* the Kingdom; attended with Dutch (...) ^o destroy
peaceable and True Englishmen, Come French or Turk, our Condition cannot (...)
worse; and these Irish and Scottish Evidence will certainly bring us to their
Scottish or (...) Government, That Absolute Power without Reserve; and though
some Scotch Priests may (...) such Enemies to the Doctrine of the Bow-string,
such Forging, and Swearing will differ (...) from some peremptory Orders to
bring in our Heads,

My Lords and Gentlemen:
WE are plainly our selves, plain, honest, Country Gentlemen, True and Trusty,
Freeborn Englishmen, that only plead Magna Charta; The Petition of Right the
P. of O^ Declaration for our Lives and Estates, neither directly nor indirectly
known or concerned with any against whom this Flagitious Evidence have
conspired; but only engaged in a Common Concern for the Honor of the Nation,
The Interest of their Country, which none but Apostate Scotc^men, or perjured
Irishmen will offer to betray; therefore since this sort of Cattle have
imported themselves of late, and Creatures crawled into the Nation with Tongues
worse than a two edged Sword, while the Poison of Asps is under their Lips,
what is to be done in so profligate an Age where Atheism is drawing up the
Sluices to deluge us in such horrid Impieties, and the Air so Tainted with the
Breath of ^hese Animals, that we may expect even a Cloud of Irish Witnesses;
what is left to preserve the Land from those Locusts, but the making their
Swearing away other Men's Lives to be a Forfeiture of their own; For if Salary
shall be the secret Price of Blood, 'twill be only the Fool then that does not
Commence a Villain: And for this End (with all Submission) to this Great and
Wise Body in this great and weigty Case. This Old Englishmen's Address humbly
presented; may it have the Effect to Postpon all by ends to the Public; To
make us look like other Nations that understand Civil Law and Equity like other
Christians that understand God's Laws, and the Decalogue like True Englishmen
that understand their Old Law and own Interest; and then there will be no fear
of Irish Interlopers, or Scotch Brokers, for the Bartering or Barreting away of
Englishmen'^ Lives; For the Honor of God, for the Credit of the Nation; for
the Safety of our Selves, and the saving some of these Atheistical Fellow's
Souls, since Perjury is growing as Epidemical as the Plague, and as Mortal too,
Let some frightful Mark upon the Door of every Tribunal; and let not the
Innocent, but those that would destroy them die.

FINIS.

