England's Deliverance from Popery and Slavery: And the Piety and Justice of
King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY of Ever Blessed Memory, in Ascending the Throne of
these Dominions, Asserted.
King William III of England depiction of the royal scepter Queen Mary II of
England
I. BEcause James, Duke of York was by three Parliaments of the Commons of
England, rightly adjudged to have rendered himself incapable to Execute the
Sovereign Power of these Realms, having Apostatized to Popery; whereby he
incapacitated himself, 1. To Maintain the Dignities and Preeminencies of this
Imperial Crown, as they were asserted in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
in both which all Papal Power is rejected and barred. 2. To take and keep the
Coronation Oath, in the first Clause whereof he promises, To keep the Church
of God, the Clergy and People entirely in Peace and Concord in God.

II. Having been admitted as King, he degenerated into a Tyrant, openly
endeavoring to overturn the Established Laws, Liberties, and Religion, and to
introduce Arbitrary Power and the Popish Superstition; as appears, 1. By
raising Money contrary to Law; that is without any Act of Parliament, as in the
Levying of Customs, Excise, etc. 2. By maintaining a standing Army in time of
Peace. 3. Quartering that Army contrary to Law and the Petition of Right. 4.
Officering that Army with Papists, Subjects in part to a Foreign Power, in
Opposition to the Laws of the Land, and Addresses of his Parliament, to whom he
made this Answer, November. 9. 1685. Though the said Officers were not qualified
according to the late Tests for their Employments, yet he would neither expose
them to Disgrace, nor himself to the want of them. 5. By his assuming a
Legislative Power, by Dispensing with all Statutes for the Protestant Religion
established by Law, whereby he at one blow took away above Forty Acts of
Parliament. 6. Erecting a High-Commission-Court for Ecclesiastical Affairs, to
proceed with a Non obstante; that is, without and against Law; whereby the
Bishop of London was Suspended, the President and Fellows of Magdalen College,
Oxon. were outed of their Free-holds without Legal Process, and because they
would not contrary to their Oath choose an unqualified President; though it is
expressly provided in Magna Charta, That no Man shall lose Life, Limb, or Goods,
but by the Law of the Land. Also the same College, as well as others in both
Universities, were provided with Popish Priests, who by the Law of the Land
ought to be hanged. 7. Imprisoning seven Bishops, only because they Petitioned
him to regard the Oath he had taken to maintain the Laws of the Kingdom. 8.
Setting up Popish Mass-Houses, Schools, Monasteries, sending out four Popish
Provincial Bishops to Visit England; admitting Petre a Jesuit, and other
Papists into his Privy Council; sending an Ambassador to Rome, and receiving a
Nuncio from the Pope, putting Papists into Commission of the Peace all the
Kingdom over, and Commissioning a Popish Judge to sit on the Bench. 9. And
after all this, signifying in his Second Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
dated April 7. 1688. That none ought to be employed under him, but such as
would contribute to choose such Members of Parliament, as might do their part to
finish what he had begun. 10. In Scotland he declared himself clothed with
Absolute Power, and that his Subjects ought to Obey him without Reserve.

III. To entail Popery and Tyranny upon the Kingdom, he endeavored to alter
the Succession, by imposing a false Heir upon these Kingdoms, in Dis-inherision
of the Princess of Orange his Daughter, the true Apparent Heir of the Crown,
whose undoubted Right to the Succession could not be overthrown, unless the new
Claimer's Right be fully proved by a competent Number of Witnesses, duly
qualified to give Evidence upon so high a Concern. For which 'twas necessary,
1. That they who assisted, or attended at the Queen's pretended Delivery,
should be Persons of known Honor and Honesty; not Foreigners, Papists, or such
complying Protestants, who had assisted the King in his unlawful Designs. 2.
The Time and Place of the pretended Birth should have been fore-known, and so
ordered as not to have given great Suspicion of Indirectness. 3. 'Twas
necessary that the Princesses of the Blood should have had notice thereof, that
in their Persons, or by their Proxies they might have been present. 4. And also
tht they or their Proxies, or at least some other Women of High Quality and
Great Credit, should have been made acquainted with such Symptoms of a true
Conception, which any Breeding Woman may with Ease and Modesty discover, as
Milk in the Breast, and motion of the Child. And that which made all these
Precautions necessary, was the Universal Suspicion, that the Queen's great
Belly was fictitious. And there were some Great-bellied Women, a little before
the time of the Queen's pretended Delivery, treated with, to part with their
Child as soon as born, provided it were a Son. But on the contrary, the Women
who assisted, were most Papists and Foreigners; the Men who attended (at a
distance too) were the Instruments of the King's Misrule, as the Lord Chanc.
and others; the Princesses of the Blood not present, so much as by Proxies:
Time and place of the Birth concealed; a private Door within the Ruel of the
Bed, the Curtains whereof were then drawn; the Child not shown in the Room
where the pretended Delivery was, and but one Protestant Gentlewoman at last,
who asserted the reality of the Queen's being with Child. Now, if Zeal for the
Popish Cause, could prevail on the King to break through his Oaths and frequent
Promises, to maintain the Church and Laws of England, it is no strange thing
that he should consent to the Dis-inherision of his Protestant Children.

IV. That for the foresaid Reason the King was justly laid aside, and abrogated
for Misgovernment, will appear, if we consider with St. Paul the Nature of
Government in the general; as it is God's Ministry to us for good, Romans 13.4.
Or else in any particular Form, with St. Peter, who in that respect calls it
the Ordinance of Man, 1 Pet. 2.13. Without doubt Men as well as God ordained it
for their Good. So that a Sovereign Prince can claim no Authority either from
God or Man to Oppress his People. But if he does, they may justly lay aside
their Oppressor; and being obliged by God's Law of Nature to preserve
themselves and Families, they ought so to do. And since the sole reason of our
Allegiance to a King is the Common Good, when his Government becomes an
intolerable public Evil, our Allegiance is at an end.

Agreeable hereunto is our Old English Constitution, as appears by the Solemn
Deposing of King Edward II. and his Grandson King Richard II. to whom the Lords
and Commons declared, That they had it by Ancient Statute, and by a late
doleful Instance, that in case a King shall alienate himself from his People by
bad Advice, and in a headstrong way will exercise his own Self-will: From
thence it shall be Lawful for them to Depose the King from the Regal Throne,
and to promote some Kinsman of his, of the Royal Family, to the Throne of the
Kingdom in his stead. Knighton.

V. The settled Resolution of King James to Rule by an Arbitrary Power, will
appear from his twice withdrawing himself from the execution of his Royal
Trust, and leaving the Kingdom rather than he would refer the Matter of
Succession, which was then in Dispute betwixt him and the Prince of Orange, and
also other Matters of Difference betwixt him and his People, to a free
Parliament; he would in a headstrong way go to France, that by the Assistance
of French Counsels and Arms, he might return a Conqueror, and Rule (as for
some time he did in Ireland) by those Counsels, and his own Will.

VI. There is a Right Honorable Peer (who was very intimate with the late King
Charles) who has writ a Character of him; and when he comes to speak of his
Death, he says, I am assured the most knowing of his Physicians did not only
believe him poisoned, but thought himself so too, not long after, for having
declared his Opinion too boldly. [He means Dr. Short, who dyed about eight days
after that King.] Now, though we may not say, the Duke of York was privy to this
Villainy, yet it may honestly be thought to have been done for his sake: And
though he could not but know there was a suspicion of it, yet he never made any
Inquisition into it.

These Reasons do fully justify the Act of Parliament, which Investeth the
Prince and Princess of Orange with the Imperial Crown of this Realm: Wherein it
is declared, That King James II. did endeavor to subvert and extirpate the
Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom; and also that
he had Abdicated, i. e. Forfeited the Government, whereby the Throne became
vacant.

And Secondly, If the Throne was vacant, and there has appeared no Legal Proof
of the pretended Prince of Wales's Right thereunto, but strong Presumptions on
the contrary, it was both Lawfully and Rightfully filled by his present Majesty
King William III. and his late Royal Consort of Ever Blessed Memory, our most
Gracious QUEEN MARY.

LONDON: Printed for Eleanor Smith, and are to be Sold by John Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall. 1695.


