THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled at the House of LORDS,
WESTMINSTER, December 25. 1688.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assem^led in this Conjuncture, Do Desire
Your Highness to take upon You the Administration of public Affairs, both
Civil and Military, and the disposal of the public Revenue, for the
preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties and Properties, and of
the Peace of the Nation; And that Your Highness will take into Your particular
Care, the present Condition of Ireland, and endeavor, by the most speedy and
effectual means, to prevent the Dangers threatening that Kingdom: All which we
make our Requests to Your Highness to undertake, and exercise, till the Meeting
of the intended Convention, the Two and twentieth of January next; in which we
doubt not such proper methods will be taken, as will conduce to the
Establishment of these things upon such sure and legal Foundations, that they
may not be in Danger of being again Subverted. Dated at the House of Lords,
Westminster, December the Five and twentieth, 1688.

WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster in this
Extraordinary Conjuncture, Do humbly Desire Your Highness to cause Letters to
be written, subscribed by Your Self, to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being
Protestants, and to the several Counties, Universities, Cities, Boroughs, and
Cinque Ports of England* Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Twede; the Letters for
the Counties to be directed to the Co^ers of the respective Counties, or any of
them, and in Default of the Coroners to the Clerk of the Peace of the
respective Counties; and the Letters for the Universities to be directed to the
respective Vice-Chancellors; and the Letters to the several Cities, Boroughs,
and Cinque Ports, to be directed to the chief Magistrates of each respective
City, Borough and Cinque-Port, containing directions for the choosing in all
such Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, within Ten
Days after the receipt of the said respective Letters, such a number of Persons
to represent them as are of right to be sent to Parliament; of which Elections,
and the times and places thereof, the respective Officers shall give notice
within the space of Five days at the (...). Notice of the intended Elections
for the Counties to be published in the Churches immediately after the time of
Divine Service, and in all Market Towns within the respective Counties; and
notice of the intended Elections for the Cities, Universities, Boroughs, and
Cinque Ports, to be published ^ithin the said respective places. The said
Letters, and the Execution thereof, to be returned by ^uch Officer and
Officers, who shall execute the same, to the Clerk of the Crown in the Court of
Chancery, so as the persons so to be chosen may meet and sit at Westminster on
the Two and ^wentieth day of January next.

Dated at the House of Lords, Westminster, December the Twenty ^^fth, 1688.
Both which were Signed by all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then Assembled,
and Presented to His Highness the Prince of ORANGE the same day at St. James's.

Published by their Lordships Order.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and William Churchill, near Amen-Corner, M DC LXXX
VIII.


