ENGLANDS CONCERN IN THE CASE OF His R. H.

LONDON, Printed for H. R. in the Year 1680.

ENGLANDS CONCERN IN THE Case of His R. H.
HAving seen and read all the Pamphlets for, and against the Power of
Parliaments in the Right of Succession, I cannot but conclude both Sides
mistaken in the Main, and to have, wilfully or ignorantly, past-over, or wrong
stated, the Chief part of the Question; which was, not what the Parliament,
meaning King, Lords, and Commons, could do, by virtue of their Might or Power;
but, What in Justice, or Prudence, they ought to do in the Case of His R. H?

In the first Notion, no man in his wits can dispute, that the stronger joining
against the weaker, have not power to do what they please: But this being a
Right of Nature, to which both Parties are equally entitled, and both, upon
entering into Society, have renounced or changed for an Artificial Right or
Power, that of the Magistrate, or Community, cannot fall within the limits of
the Question; because it can never be made use of, without running into a State
of War, putting an end to all Society, and, with Ismael, having ones hand
against every man, and every man's hand against him. And therefore in the second
Notion this Controversy is to be taken, viz. What in Justice, by the Laws in
being; or, since the Instance is extraordinary, What in Prudence, in Reason,
the Parliament may do? For, this being the Supreme Judicature, must not want a
sufficient Authority in any Case that can possibly happen.

We must then inquire, Whether some Actions of the D. have been obnoxious and
censurable? and, if found so, What is their proper or condign Punishment? In
order to which, it is to be premised, That nothing in its own nature is or can
be Penal, or censurable in foro humano, but a Transgression of some positive
Institution of the Commonwealth, or a Deviation from the Dictates of Right
Reason. Now the Crime objected, but never yet proved, nor consessed, is the D's
going over from the Protestant to the Romish Church. This is the Trojan Horse,
that ruins our City; for in its Belly is hid a mysterious Consequence, viz.
That his doing so, gave encouragement, and was the occasion of the late
discovered Popish Plot. The first part of this Accusation is a breach of the
Laws of England; the latter, of those of Reason, and all Nations; and therefore
punishable after the most severe manner. But before Sentence, or Execution,
it is to be observed. That not only our own, but the Laws of all Countries,
require not only the Criminal's Conviction, but that his Sufferings be
commensurate to his Offense. This last must be known by the stated Measures,
the Rules of the Society and Country; the former is built upon the same
Foundation, and necessarily supposes a Legal Process, and sufficient Evidence.
Both are wanting in this of the D. he having never been summoned to appear, nor
Witness produced to prove him guilty: For, who can say he has changed his
Religion, or that, if he be now a Papist, he has not been so ever since he came
to the use of Reason, since he was forced to fly, to avoid the Effects of the
late Rebellion? If that be so, who are most in the fault, those who occasioned
this Evil, or he that suffered himself, before his years enabled him to
understand better, and to choose, to be persuaded that was not the truest
Religion, that authorized such Impieties as Christianity forbids? If this be
his Case, he is not liable to the Pains of Treason, pronounced against the
Perverters and Perverted to the Romish Communion. But, to wave Disputes,
allowing it were otherwise, yet the Statute of General Pardon enacted in the
year 1673 has so acquitted him from all guilt, that on this Foot he now stands
rectus in curia, innocent before any Earthly Tribunal.

But as to the Consequence, That his being reconciled to Rome has given
occasion and Encouragement to the Plot, I can only say, That he cannot in
reason be blamed on that account, if it be not proved he intended and designed
that horrid Contrivance. It Is the End and Intention that justifies, or condemns
any Action; and neither Father nor Mother are to be censured, that a Monster
happens to be the Issue of a Marriage Bed. This being accidental (for so it
must be granted, till the contrary be made out) can no more be imputed to his
R. H. without madness or folly, than it can to God, without Blasphemy or
Irreligion, That by his making Man he is the Author and Cause of Sin, and all
the Evils under Heaven.

I am unwilling to mention what I have seen in Print, to wit, That the D. of
York's being a Papist has given birth and life to the Plor; because this is so,
inartificial and illogical an Inference or Conclusion, that I am persuaded the
Authors will be ashamed of the Ignorance or Malice it betrays: An Assertion
that has neither Sense, nor Wit, nor more force than the Old Wives Story, The
Cat washed her Face a Sunday, therefore it rained a Monday; or any other such
impertinent or senseless Saying. Indeed, if this could be made appear, I think
it a Crime of so foul a nature, that nothing less than Death, not Disinherison,
could satisfy the Justice of the Nation. But from this the D. is acquitted by
Mr. Oats; and Mr. Bedloe, even in his last words, clears him from having any
knowledge of the Design against the King's Life; in which, and in the bringing
in Religion by the Sword, (of which his R. H. is not accused) the Treason or
Conspiracy does consist. And being freed by these two, by whom else has he been
accused? By Mr. Dangerfield. As to this, tell me what you think, when you
reflect, that he gave in his Depositions to the late Lord Mayor, and to the
King and Council, the first and seventh of November, 1679. and upon Oath
declared, so often, he had nothing of further Discovery or Additions. What
credit will you then give his late new Accusation before the House of Commons,
of the D. Lord Privy Seal, Earl of Peterborough, and Lady Powis? Whatever the
Infamy of his Person, and the former Actions of his Life would signify, this
alone, in my opinion, would invalidate his Testimony, in all matters, with Men
of Honor or of Conscience. So that upon the whole matter, from what does
hitherto appear, the printed Narratives and Letters to and from Popes and
Cardinals, etc. I am not afraid to avow, That excluding the D. his Right of
Succession, is contrary to the Laws of God, and of this Kingdom (expressed in
Magna Charta, and agreeable to those that give every man his due, Liberty of
Person, and Descent of Inheritance, and all the Advantages of Birthright;
Blessings every Freeman has in common with the Prince: and if the greater be
thus outed; how shall the less be secured?) and to the Rules of Reason, which
forbid the doing any Action that in its consequence will be a greater Evil,
than that from which we intended to be freed. The two first parts of this
Assertion are very plain, because Religion or Christianity alters not the
Political Constitutions of any Society, and because Popery in England hinders
no man from being Heir to Real or Personal Estates; the third therefore is to
be made evident, to wit, That Prudence and Reason tell us the D. ought not to
be barred of Succession. I say then. This Act is not only unjustifiabie at
present, but in future and consequence, as what will bring upon the whole
Nation irreparable Mischiefs. Where there are more hazards of an ill, than a
good Event, the Action is in prudence to be avoided. In great and momentous
Instances new Experiments are not to be tried; nor indeed in any Case, or
Distemper, where the Remedy is like to prove more fatal than the Disease. Now
to give or allow so boundless, arbitrary, and despotick a Power, as that of
putting by the next Heir, or punishing ex post facto, either in the King alone,
(who is obliged under the Obligations of Oaths and Interest to govern by the
stated Measures of Law) or in him, when advising with both Houses, (whose Power
is so far from being coordinate or independent, that it is only communicated,
or derivative from the Prince, as Streams from the Fountain, and therefore can
add or give him nothing new) is to subject and enslave our selves and our
Posterities. For, if every one be a Papist, whom Faction or Malice, Presumption
or slight Circumstances, and no positive Proofs, have made so; and if the right
Heir on this account, or for being really a Papist, may be despoiled of his
Right by Parliament, since there can be greater Crimes or Evils than Popery,
which we all acknowledge consistent with Salvation, what can secure all future
Princes, even the King at any time in being, from being laid aside and
dethroned. To endeavor so absolute a Subversion of our Government, if it be
not Treason, is to design, if it be pursued, that which cannot but happen,
Anarchy and Confusion, and all the Calamities of an unnatural Civil War.

Against this, there is but one Objection, That in the notion of a Parliament a
King is implied, and nothing can be supposed to consent to his own Ruin. This,
I confess, is true in nature, in Thest, but not in the fact in Hypothesi: for,
what has been once done, may be again: Tumults and Factions, Cunning and
Address, may make a Prince quit his Crown to save his Life; and yet none ever
lost the first, but soon after did the second: nay, every Flower or Jewel he
parts with, is a step or advance to his Grave: And the Considerer of the
Weighty Considerations leaves in this Objection no Force, by mentioning the
Seconds of the Edwards and Richards deposed by Parliamentary Authority; he
might have added to his Catalogue the late Royal martyred CHARLES. While this
Book, in many Passages treasonable, is publicly sold before the Doors of
Parliament, who can lay aside fatal Apprehensions; especially when Two Houses
of Commons have successively prepared a Bill disposing of the Crown contrary to
the King's express Commands; and former Presidents? And because I will not run
to far back, and that Queen Elizabeth is renowned for one of the best of our
Princes, I will instance what in some great Points happened in her Reign,
concerning the Commons intermedling in the Ecclesiastical and the Crown
Affairs, their Right and her Prerogative.

In the Twenty third year of her Reign, when the House of Commons first ordered
to have a Time of Prayer and Humiliation appointed, in the Temple, on
Sunday-fort'night after, the Queen hindered it, and sent a Message to the House
by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, declaring, That her Highness had great admiration of
the rashness of this House, in committing such an apparent Contempt of her
express Command, as to put in execution such an Innovation, without her
privity, and pleasure first known. And thereupon Mr. Vice-Chamberlain moved the
House to make humble Submission to her Majesty, acknowledging the said Offense
and Contempt, craving a Remission of the same, with a full purpose to forbear
the committing of the like hereafter. And by the consent of the whole House,
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain carried their Submission to her Majesty.

Likewise in the Twenty eighth year of her Reign, the Queen said, She was sorry
the Commons meddled with Choosing and Returning Knights of the Shire for Norfolk,
a thing impertinent for the House to deal withal, and only belonging to the
Office and Charge of the Lord Chancellor, from whom the Writs issue, and are
returned.

In the Thirty ninth year of her Reign, the Commons, by their Speaker,
complaining of Monopolies; the Queen made answer, by the the Lord Keeper, That
she hoped her dutiful and loving Subjects would not take away her Prerogative,
which is the chiefest Flower in her Garland, and the principal and head Pearl
in her Crown and Diadem; but that they will rather leave that to her
disposition.

In the Thirty fifth year of her Reign, Mr. Peter Wentworth and Sir Henry
Bromley delivered a Petition to the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords of the
Upper House to be Suppliants with them of the Lower House, unto her Majesty,
for Entailing the Succession of the Crown, whereof they had a Bill ready drawn.
Her Majesty was highly displeased herewith, as contrary to her former strait
Command, and charged the Council to draw the Parties before them. Sir Thomas
Henage sent for them, and commanded them to forbear the Parliament, and not to
go out of their several Lodgings: After, they were called before the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas Henage; Mr. Wentworth was
committed by them to the Tower; Sir Henry Bromley, and other Members of the
House of Commons, to whom he imparted the Matter, were sent to the Fleet.

And in the same Parliament, when Mr. Morriee, Attorney of the Court of Wards,
moved against the hard Courses of the Bishops, Ordinarles, and other
Ecclesiastical Judges, in their Courts, and spoke against Subscriptions and
Oaths, offering a Bill to be read against Imprisonment for refusal of Oaths;
the same afternoon Sir Edward Coke, then Speaker, was sent for to Court, where
the Queen her self gave him a Message to the House, declaring, It being wholly
in her power to call, to determine, to assent or dissent to any thing done in
Parliament; That the calling of this was only that the Majesty of God might be
more Religiously observed, by compelling, by some sharp Laws, such as neglect
that Service; and that the Safety of her Majesty's Person, and the Realm, might
be provided for: It was not meant they should meddle with Matters of State, or
Causes Ecclesiastical; and she wondered that any could be of so high
commandment, to attempt a thing so expressly contrary to that which she had
commanded; wherefore with this she was highly offended: And because the Words
spoken by my Lord Keeper are not now perhaps well remembered, or some be now
here that were not then present; her Majesty's present Charge, and express
Command, is, That no Bill touching the said Matter of State, or Reformation in
Causes Ecclesiastical, be exhibited: And upon my Allegiance (says the Speaker)
I am charged, if any such Bill be exhibited, not to read it. I have been
credibly informed, That the Queen sent a Messenger, or Sergeant at Arms, into
the House of Commons, and took out Mr. Morris, and committed him to Prison.
Within few days after, I find Mr. Wroth moved in the House, That they might be
humble Suitors to her Majesty, that she would be pleased to set at liberty
those Members of the House that were restrained; which was accordingly done:
And answer was sent them by her Privy Council, That her Majesty had committed
them for Causes best known to her self; and to press her Highness with this
Suit, would but hinder them whose good they sought: That the House must not
call the Queen to an account for what she does of her Royal Authority: That the
Causes for which they are restrained, may be high and dangerous: That her
Majesty likes no such Questions, neither does it become the House to search
into Matters of that nature.

In 39 Eliz. the Commons were told, Their Privilege was Yea and No: And that
her Majesty's pleasure was, That if the Speaker perceived any idle Heads, which
would not stick to hazard their own Estates, but meddle with reforming the
Church, and transforming the Commonweal, by exhibiting Bills to that purpose,
the Speaker should not receive them, till they were viewed and considered by
those, who are fitter to consider of such things, and can better judge of them.
And at the end of this Parliament the Queen rejected Forty eight Bills, which
had passed both Houses. All these Passages are expressly to be found in the
Records and Registries of the Council Table, and are quoted by Sir Robert
Filmer, in his Free holders Grand Inquest, p. 77, etc. and by Mr. Howel,
sometimes Clerk of the Council, in his Philanglus, p. 57, etc. and several
others.

By which it appears, That this grand Privilege of Parliament, Liberty of
Speech, which at present makes so great a Noise in the World, was not, in this
good Queens Reign, half so considerable as People now would fain persuade us.
It was of no great antiquity in her days, but a Favor first begged in King
Henry the Eighth's Reign, by Sir Thomas Moore, then Speaker of the House of
Commons, who prayed the King, in the behalf of the House, That if in
Communication and Reasoning any man should speak more largely than of duty he
ought to do, that all such Offenses should be pardoned, and this to be entered
upon Record: which was accordingly granted by the King. And the same Favor was
allowed by Queen Elizabeth, in the beginning of her Reign, to Thomas Gargrave,
then Speaker: since whose time this Privilege was always humbly desired by the
Speakers, for themselves, and the whole House of Commons, and favorably
granted by their Sovereign. Yet this Privilege extended only to rash,
unadvised, ignorant, or negligent Escapes, and Slips in Speech, which People
are subject to let fall in the heat of their Debates; not to wilful
Reflections, much less to treasonable Speeches, against the King and
Government: as sufficiently appears, not only by the aforesaid Proceedings in
Queen Elizabeth's time, but also by the Transactions of her Father's Reign,
where we find, that Richard Strood and his Accomplices were not thought
sufficiently protected by this Privilege for their free Speech in the House,
unless their Pardon were expressly confirmed by the King in Parliament: to which
purpose there is a printed Statute enacted in King Henry the Eighth's time. And
in Queen Mary's days, Plowden was Fined in the King's Bench, for Words spoken
by him in Parliament against the Queen's Dignity. See Filmer ubi supra. and Mr.
Fowlis Hist. of the Plots and Conspiracies of the Pretended Saints, in it.

This was well known to our British Solomon King James, who finding the House
of Commons encroaching too far upon the Prerogative, sent the ensuing Letter
from Newmarket, to Sir Thomas Richardson their Speaker. Mr. Speaker, We have
heard, to our grief, That our distance from the Parliament, caused by our
indisposition of Health, has emboldned some fiery and popular Spirits of the
Lower House to debate Matters above their Capacity, to our Dishonor, and
breach of Prerogative Royal. These are therefore to command you to make known
to them, That none hereafter shall presume to meddle with any thing concerning
our Government, or Matters of State; with our Sons Match with the Daughter of
Spain, nor to touch the Honor of that King, or any other our Friends or
Confederates, nor with any Man's Particulars, which have their due Motion in our
ordinary Courts of Justice. And whereas they have sent a Message to Sir Edwin
Sandis, to know the Reasons of his late Restraint; you shall resolve them, It
was not for any Misdemeanour of his in Parliament: But to put them out of doubt
of any Question hereafter of that nature, We think our self very free and able
to punish any Man's Misdemeanors in Parliament, as well sitting there, as
after; which we mean not to spare hereafter, upon any Occasion of any Man's. And
if they have touched any Point, which We have here forbidden, in any Petition
of theirs, which is to be sent to Us, tell them, (except they reform it) We
will not daign the Hearing or Answering. Newmarket, December. 3. 1621.
Sanderson's History of King James, page 510.

And likewise, in the same Parliament, when the House of Commons much insisted
upon their Privileges, calling them their ancient and undoubted Inheritance,
this wise Prince, in a second Letter to the Speaker, plainly and truly told
them, That most Privileges of Parliament grew from Precedents. which shows
rather a Toleration, than an Inheritance; therefore he could not allow of the
Style, calling it their ancient and undoubted Right and Inheritance; but could
rather have wished that they had said, their Privileges were derived from the
Grace and Permission of his Ancestors and him. And thereupon he concludes, He
cannot with patience endure his Subjects to use such Antimonarchical Words
concerning their Liberties, except they had subjoyned, That they were granted
unto them by the Grace and Favor of his Predecessors: Yet he promises to be
careful of whatsoever Privileges they enjoyed by long Custom, and uncontrolled
and lawful Precedents, Sanderson's Hist. p. 519. and 520.

Now, add to this, That if the King should be drawn to consent to the Bill of
Exclusion, after his several Declarations to the contrary, he cannot but be
concluded under a Constraint, which alone makes the Act void in it self; it
being absolutely necessary, that the Commons, Lords, and the Kings Consent
should be free from all Restraint and Terror: and we know, that Acts of
Parliament in 15 Edw. 3. and 10 Ric 2. were repealed, merely because the King's
Consent was forced. -- Moreover, if we seriously did consider the mighty
Advantages of an Hereditary Monarchy beyond an Elective, we should find it
reasonable, that though the Laws had not, yet the King should, endeavor to
make ours such; much less ought he to alter that most happy Constitution, by
excluding his Brother. For, let Men say what they please, the same Power that
can put by One, may All; and so change the Best of Government for the Worst, or
None at all.

Besides, His Majesty cannot but find it his own Interest to stick to the D.
when he reflects, that there is in all things, especially in State Affairs, a
Balance necessary, by an equal Libration to keep things in a right Order, and
prevent Confusion and Ruin. Where Men are, there will be Ambition; this
creates Parties and Factions; these must be kept divided, and asunder; by their
Jars and Disagreement, and by so poising them, that the less, like the smaller
Fry of Fishes, be not swallowed by the greater, the safety of the Prince and
State is preserved. If the Prince be once prevailed upon to join with the One,
to the suppression of the Other, he has resigned his Power, and exposed himself
to the Mercy of the Conqueror. This he likewise does, if he gives way to
several little Factions to embody into one of greater strength than the rest,
though assisted with that of his own Particular: For here we must suppose three
strong Parties, one of the Prince, and two of the People. To keep this Balance
in the best posture, and to secure the Peace of the Commonwealth, by the Kings
reigning void of Fear or Jealousy on the score of Factions, or his Successor,
it is necessary in polity to find or make the next Heir the Object of the
Peoples hatred, and keep the Factions from combining; because, however they may
chance to be weary of the King, either through the inconstancy of their
Humors, studious of Change and Variety, though for the worse, or through the
ill Conduct of Ministers, or the Misfortunes of Public Affairs; when they find
a Person whom they hate like to succeed, they will be for continuance of the
old; or else, being jealous of one another, will not attempt his removal. This
then being so great an advantage, prudent Kings cannot be supposed to neglect
it, by suffering the immediate Heir to be run down, and thereby giving way to
the People to dethrone the present Possessor, and set up the next in course
after. To this Wisdom in Henry the Third, gained by his own and Fathers
Misfortunes, we owe our present Constitution of Parliament. This King
perceiving the Lords Power (in whom, with himself, the Supreme Legislative
Right then consisted) grown formidable, the Commons being their Livery-men and
Dependents, erected these into a Lower House, to counterpoise the weight of the
other, that he joining with either, as Occasion of State required, might
balance the other, and so keep things in an equal and steady Libration. And if
his Successors had been as sollicitous to maintain, as he was to institute,
this good Order and Polity, the Eternity of this Commonwealth would not at
this day have been a Question. And as this was our Home-Interest, and that of
holding the Scales even between France and Spain our Foreign; so it plainly
appears, that not to exclude the Duke, is not only his Majesty's particular
Interest, but also that of the Three Kingdoms. Not to insist, that the
Parliament is not completely the Peoples Representative, but granting it is,
they cannot be supposed to enjoy a greater Power than those they represent;
who, because such, are the greater, and therefore must be concluded, explicitly
or implicitly, to limit the Commissions of these their Trustees; and that
Consinement, Reason will tell us, must be within the Bounds of our ancient
Rights and Privileges; consequently, these are not to be invaded, without the
consent of every individual Person, or at least of the major part, truly poll'd
and computed. The present Electors, not making a sixth part of the Nation,
cannot in reason bind the rest, contrary to their Interest; much less can the
Majority of those, chosen by them, oblige the others to conform to whatever
they enact, when they find the Statutes more prejudicial than advantageous; the
End of Government being the Good of the Community, i. e. of the major part, not
of any artificial or fictitious Majority of a Quorum, as in the House of
Commons, of 512 to reckon 40 the greater Number.

Now if such an Act should be obtained, the Consequence, if the D. survive the
King, (whose Life God long continue) must needs be War and Misery, Folly and
Repentance. Our Histories are full of Tragical Events upon such Occasions: One
of them wrought so great a Depopulation, that in sixty miles riding, between
York and Durham, for nine years together, there was neither Ground tilled, nor
House left standing. Harold justling young Edgar Atheling out of the Throne,
produced a Civil War, and the Norman Conquest. I wish excluding the D. may not
enslave us to the French Dominion, which may be of greater evil, than the
cutting of as many of our own Peoples Throats as died in the Yorkist and
Lancastrian Quarrel, upwards of 200000 of the Commons, besides several Kings
and Princes, and Nobles without number. The Duke cannot be supposed to want
Sticklers both at home, and from abroad; few will believe the Act lawful in its
own nature, nor the King's Consent free, or themselves not bound by Oath to his
Assistance: Scotland and Ireland will rejoice at another Civil War in England,
in hopes to free themselves from the Inconveniences of being Provinces. Those
who have least to lose, are the usual Gainers by Rebellion. There are sown
between these Nations Seeds of Discontent, and there will not be wanting those
who will improve them. I have heard from knowing Persons, there are no less
than Fifty thousand Irish Soldiers now living, that have been trained up in the
French, and other Foreign Service; and I believe there cannot be fewer of the
Scottish People. These all, with many of our own Countrymen, will quickly
credit the Lawyers, that tell us, No Act, no Crime, no Attainder of Treason,
can bar the next of Blood from being King in the instant of time his
Predccessor does not so much die, as transmit his Life, his Breath, or his
Soul, by a State-Metempsychosis, into the Nostrils, the Body of his Successor.
Edward the Fourth, Henry the Seventh, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King
James, enjoyed the Crown, though all excluded by Acts of Parliament, if they
ought to have the name, that were the Effects of Force, Strong hand, and an
usurping Tyrannick Power. These Statutes were by all Judges of England
accounted void in themselves, and therefore never had the honor of Repeals,
nor were they brought into Plea by Sir Walter Rawleigh, one of the greatest
Wits of that Age, though he urged a very trivial one, The King's not being
Crowned; a Ceremony of Pomp and State, not of Use or Necessity, as appears not
only in that it could be of no use to him, but that several Kings have
exercised a full Regal Authority, enacted Laws, etc. before their Coronations.
And since this Inauguration is but a Formality, let it be well weighed, That
unless the Monarchy be made purely Elective, and that part of the Common Law,
and the several Statutes that have declared it Hereditary, be repealed in
express Words, and the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy changed, and the
Successor mentioned by Name, the Act against the Duke falls to the ground of it
self, in the moment in which he happens to outlive the King; for thereby
becoming our lawful Sovereign, none can fight against, or oppose his Right to
the Crown, without Perjury and Rebellion; we having sworn to defend, against
all Pretenders whatsoever, Foreign or Domestic, the King's Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, and all Rights, Privileges, and Preheminences to them
belonging, and ann^xed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And is not the
Descent of the Crown upon the next of Blood one of these Rights, etc.
acknowledged by the Common Law, and in the Statutes 1 M. Eliz. and Jac. The
Maxim in our Laws, The King never dies, confirming as much. And was not the
Duke then, at the taking of these Oaths, the next Heir? And what Power on Earth
can absolve from the Obligation of Promissory Oaths, without the Parties own
Consent to whom the Promise is made? Let us not rail against the Pope, for
deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, and yet allow
the Parliament the same Authority.

The Bill against the Duke is not only of an extraordinary, but of two
natures; one expresses a present Punishment, Exile, which, as a Subject, did
the Crime deserve it, none will deny may be inflicted; the other refers to the
future, and is at present no Punishment, nor can be hereafter; for if he
outlive his Brother, his being King in that moment puts upon him a new Person,
a Politic Capacity, over which, not before in being, no former Authority could
have power, nor any after, because himself is become Supreme, and, as such, by
our own, and the Laws of God, subject to no Earthly Tribunal. Bracton, and all
our old honest Lawyers, tell us with one consent, The King can do no wrong, i.
e. can be accountable to his Subjects for none of his Actions. Nemo quidem de
factis ejus praesumat disputare, multo minus contra factum ejus ire -- Locus
erit supplicationi, quod factum suum corrigat and emendet; quod quidem si non
fecerit, sufficit ei ad poenam, quod dominum Deum expectet ultorem.

Now he that says, The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy reach no further than
to the King in being, says not amiss, if he takes the King in his Public
Capacity; for, in that he never dies. But if he means no more than the Person
of the now reigning Monarch, he cancels with his Death the Obligation of those
Oaths, and makes Rebellion against the Successor no Crime against Conscience,
though it may be otherwise against Prudence. This is to elude the Oath, and rob
it of the energy designed. For, it is plain by the Words Heirs and Successors,
that the Takers Obligation continues during their own Lives, let the Persons of
never so many Princes be altered; and as certain, that in an Hereditary
Monarchy the Duty is owing to the next of Blood: And, that a Parliament, or any
Power, may dispense or absolve from the Obligations especially of Promissory
Oaths, between Party and Party, without mutual consent, is a Doctrine
inconsistent with the nature of Promises (where the Promiser gives the other a
Right, and makes himself his Debtor), with the Rules of Christianity, of Humane
Society, and all Governments. It Is no less dangerous to assert, That Promissory
Oaths, or Oaths de futuro, are not Obligatory. Such a Principle cancels all the
Duties and Bonds of Obedience between Prince and Subject; of which therefore
not only the Divines, and my Lords the Bishops, but the State, is to be very
tender and careful. Upon this Foundation, it is evident, that if the Duke
outlives his Brother, and the Monarchy of England, as it is, be Hereditary, and
Coronation but Formality, we become upon the death of the one, the Subjects of
the other: And though there may be some that will not think of this Truth, or
notwithstanding will not mind it; yet I am assured, all that are truly
Christians, and all that are of the Church of England, and wise, will lay it to
heart; for Christianity, teaches, be the Prince of any, or no Religion, we must
be obedient, and submit our selves, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. In the late Times of Usurpation they were so sensible of this,
that they made the People Covenant against the King, and renounce their former
by after Oaths; yet they durst not depend on that Artifice, without the
assistance of an Army. Thus then we see the Duke cannot want a Party in
England, whose Strength must overpower any other, when to it is united that of
Scotland and Ireland. And here let none be mistaken, as if Scotland were
governed or influenced by Presbyterian Domine's; the Nobility there do wholly
sway, and hate refined Presbytery, and a Plebeian Commonwealth. Neither will
the Scots be more forward to assist the Duke, than the Irish; in hopes they may
thereby find an opportunity to extirpate the English, and regain their ancient
Possessions, free themselves from any Dependence, or at least change their
present from that of England to France, which on many scores seems to be the
true Interest of that Kingdom, politickly considered, either as Popish or
Protestant, without respect to Religion. It Is a ready Inlet to France, who
will not be wanting to assist the Duke in this Quarrel; the only way he can
hope, by gaining England on his side, to win the Universal Dominion. Now to
resist the Duke, an Army must be maintained; the General of that Army may turn
Papist, or Tyrant, or both; and either way we may be enslaved: by the Duke, if
he gains the Victory; or, if he loses it, by our own General. Thus we may, by
shunning one Rock, split upon another. The Romans designing to free themselves
from the seeming Tyranny of Julius Caesar, (who studied by Clemency and
Obligations upon every body to secure himself, as must needs be his R. H's
Interest, as it is his Temper and Inclination) made way for the real and
perpetual one, in the Persons of Augustus, Tiberius, and their Successors. And
the Graecians repining against their lawful Emperors, and deeming their just
and wholesome Commands tyrannical and oppressive, were so refractory, and so
obstinate, that, through spite to their Sovereign, they would contribute
nothing toward the necessary Defense of the Empire, when invaded by the Turk,
until at last, through the just Judgment of the Almighty, (a fitting Punishment
for their Folly) they became a Prey to that Tyrant, and to this day continue
the veriest Slaves in Nature.

And, I pray, why must we run all this hazard to secure Religion? If that be
the thing, it may certainly be done by binding up the hands of a Popish
Successor by such Laws as will make it Felony or Treason for a Papist to appear
at Court, or bear any Office, and put it out of the Princes power to pardon
such Offenses or Offenders. For my own part, I see no cause to apprehend a
Popish Successor, especially the Duke, would or could alter our Laws or
Religion. To attempt it, would be, for a Crown of Flowers, to forfeit one of
Gold and Jewels. Has he ever offered to persuade any of his Children, or his
Servants, to change their Opinions? And why should we think a Man who has never
broken his Word or Promise, and ever professed nothing more than a Liberty of
Conscience, so restrained as might be consistent with Public Peace, should,
with his Fortune, alter his Judgment, contrary to Prudence, and contrary to his
Interest? Kings are not now adays Priest-ridden; and the King of England cannot
be supposed to destroy his Subjects at their desires, more than the Monarchs of
France and Germany, and other Princes of that Religion, where Non-Papists, or
Protestants, live under the Protection of Laws, and enjoy their Liberties, and
their Fortunes. Besides, to offer by force to reduce all to the Church of Rome,
would be Folly and Madness. Neither the Constitution of England, nor
Christianity, will admit of propagating Religion by the Sword. The next King,
not to mention that his Subjects in the Three Kingdoms will be above Two
hundred Protestants for One Papist, will not have the Fourth part of the
present King's Revenue; which being insufficient for the necessary Expenses of
the Crown, will necessitate him to have recourse to, and compliance with his
People in Parliament.

But now consider the Issue: If it please God, after this Bill passed, in some
short time to take the King to himself, the Princess of Orange, perhaps in
complement to her Father, and to prevent a War, may refuse; and her Husband
cannot come to the Throne, if she decline it, others being before him. What
then? the next after cannot come in; must the Duke then? No, that is against
Law. Here will then be no King; consequently, Anarchy and Confusion. But if the
Princess do assume the Crown, and after that the Duke have a Son, and he bred
up in the Protestant Religion, what will then follow? Still a War. The Princess
will be unwilling to resign, and yet the other is most certainly King. But if
this young Prince should, during his Fathers Life, or his Sisters, be kept out;
he, or his Issue after, contending with that of the Princess, will entail a War
upon the Nations. So that upon the whole, if the Duke outlive the King, I see
nothing but Misery and Desolation like to ensue upon his Disinherison. And
therefore I say, it is fitter to wave the Act wholly, or endeavor, by proving
him guilty of the Plot by sufficient Testimonies, to take away his Life. For,
if we cannot be safe if he succeed, I am sure we cannot, if he outlive our
present Sovereign: a Bill of Attainder will be of no force; the best Lawyers
will tell you, the Descent of the Crown washes that Stain away. A Project of
Divorce whispered between the King and Queen, will not be sufficient Security:
for, if that should take, which is not probable, because Christianity forbids
it; yet it is possible the King may have no Issue by a new Consort; or, if he
have, that the most will look on them but as Illegitimate: and so, as a
questionable Divorce once brought us from the Church of Rome, in Henry the
Eighth's days, another may return us thither, during, or soon after the Reign
of CHARLES the Second.

And here I would have it remembered, That the Nature of Parliaments requires
their intermedling only with what the King shall propound or approve: He calls
them to advise and deliberate as Counselors, not to impose upon him in any
Particular. Let therefore the Spirit of Moderation govern and direct their
Counsels, put an end to the Plot, by trying the Accused. It has lost England in
its Trade already Six Millions, as has been lately computed by knowing Persons;
increased our Jealousies and Fears at home, made us a Scorn and Reproach
abroad, and exposed us to be a Prey to the Designs of Foreigners. Let not the
Ambition, Malice, or Revenge of any of our Fellow Subjects prevail to the
enslaving our selves and our Posterities. If the Power of the Commons grow
exorbitant, the Lords are with the King to counterpoise it, to prevent the
otherwise not avoidable Ruin of the Commonwealth. To the Lords then this
Address is humbly submitted, praying they would betimes consider all the fatal
Consequences of the Bill of Exclusion. The love of Truth and Justice, Courage,
and the practice of those Virtues in this great Affair, are the only
Preservatives of Englands present Peace and future Happiness. Faelix quem
faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Remember what is past, and then I shall not need
to add more than this, --. Verbum sapienti. As for others, guided or misled by
Ignorance, Malice, or Interest, I can only say, with the Poet,

Quid cum illis agas, qui neque jus, neque bonum atque aequum sciunt? Melius,
pejus, prosit, obsit; nihil vident, nisi quod lubet.

And therefore I leave them to Time for a better Temper, to the Conduct of
their own Reason, and God's Providence, for the Cure of their Folly, and for a
better Understanding.

Since I finished this Discourse, the following Letter came to my hands; and
believing it as advantageous to the Public, as it is Ingenious, I have
resolved to add it, that those who might repent the Charge of the former, may
be recompensed by the latter.

SIR.
I am grieved at my very Soul, and infinitely ashamed, to find by your last,
that any make the Supposition of the D's being a Papist, and consequently unfit
to Govern, the pretense of running so high against the Monarchy; and, that so
many are drawn into this violent Course and Faction, upon the surmise of his
being, if once offended, irreconcilable.

I shall, in few words, return you my Opinion on these two Points. I cannot
indeed but look on both as mere Artifices of ambitious Men, who, missing a
share in the present Constitution, contrive another Government, I wish I had
not too much cause to say, It will at last end in a Commonwealth: For, if
nothing were in their Heads, but securing the Established Religion, they would
not oppose Popery alone, but Presbytery, equally with the other destructive of
That, for which they do not only open a gap, but for the Opinions of all other
Sectaries. And we cannot here but observe, with astonishment, and with
Resolutions, which have put us upon Preparations, of sticking by our Sovereign,
against all manner of insolent and rebellious Practices whatsoever, That the
Commons have not brought any one Man into trouble, besides Papists, but Men of
known Loyalty, and of the Church of England; Addressing, by repeated Instances,
in favor of H. who ought, in our opinion, to have been executed for Treason,
if guilty of no other Crime than his saying he could be backed with Sixty
thousand Men, to stand by him for printing that Seditious Libel, The Appeal.

How is Popery more dangerous than Presbytery, either in Principles or
Practice? Suppose the first is for the King killing and Deposing Doctrine, of
which all her Professors are ashamed, and therefore disown it as a general
Tenet, allowing it only a probable Opinion of some private Divines: And where
have Princes felt the Effects of it, as they have in Germany, from the
Anabaptists; in France, from the Hugonots; in the Netherlands, from the Geuses;
in Geneva, Scotland, and England, from the Presbyterians? For shame let us give
the Devil his due, and not make him blacker than he is.

'Twas the Presbyterians of Scotland that made War against, and banished their
lawful Queen M. and began the Rebellion in 37. against King Charles the First.
'Twas these in England, and not the Papists, who fought in his defense, that
cut off this Princes Head.

But what if the Papists say, An Heretic King may be excommunicate and
deposed, and that every one is so, that is not of the Church of Rome? Does not
the Presbyterian say the same in other words? And is not the dogmatical
Classis, or Synod, the sole Arbitrator, and as Imperious and Infallible as St.
Peter's Chair, That Dominion is founded in Grace? and, That an Idolatrous King
may be cut off? and, That a King is but the Peoples Officer or Trustee; and if
he fails in his Duty, of which they alone are to be Judges, they may resume
their Grant, and spurn him beside the Throne? Put one anent the other, the
Hares Head against the Goose Giblets, and Dee'l a Barrel better Herring will
you find among all. The Case is so plain, I need not instance Authors,
especially in a private Epistle: But let me see whether Knox or Buchanan's
Disciples, or any of your English Presbyter Followers, can purge themselves,
and their Writings, from these pernicious Principles. Did not all the Popish
Plotters lately executed, not only aver their own Innocence, but deny the
King-killing Doctrine? Was not the contrary plain here with us, in the several
Risings of the Whigs? And did not the Murderers of the Archbishop of St.
Andrews, as well as those just now bypast, maintain the lawfulness of their
Proceedings, and choose to die, asserting the King was justly excommunicate, and
that it was doing God service to kill him, rather than take their Pardon, and
disown those damnable Tenets, and Doctrines of Devils? What a stir, all over
your Nation, has the Murder of a single Justice of Peace, Sir E. B. G. made?
and even that, by the Papists, is not so very clear, but that some doubt
whether they were really the Authors: But granting they were, those that
suffered for the Crime denied it, with horrid Execrations, and Asseverations of
their Innocence; and yet allowing them guilty, that is much, very much, less
than the barbarous Assassination of a Protestant, the Metropolitan of Scotland;
the wicked Instruments of which, the Presbyterians, were so far from disowing
it, that they impudently gloried in that inhumane Act, as a meritorious piece
of Zeal and Devotion. And is it not a smaller Guilt or Evil, with the Papists,
to design the killing of a King, than, with the Presbyterians, to have actually
murdered one of the best that ever swayed a Scepter; and, with those
Antichristian Zealots of this Kingdom, of the same Herd, to avow they would
likewise gladly sacrifice our present Sovereign? And yet what Prints or Pulpits
have since inveighed against such Hellish Proceedings? Was not this, together
with a formed Rebellion of many thousands in the Field, hushed and passed over
in very few days, without noise, wonder, or abhorrence? the Memory and Reproach
of the other being still in the Mouths of all, and freshest in theirs, who were
Partisans, or of the same Principles with those of our Villainy. Away, away,
Man, for shame; let it not be said, that the Presbyterians are not even as
black as the Papists: Suppress both, or neither: It Is best policy to set them
anent each other, for a Balance. If I did not hear, from all hands, the
Insolence of the Presbyterians; and with trouble read many of the Printed
Votes, and the Ballads on the Bishops, for voting against the D's Exclusion, I
should believe, that your present Fears and Disorders in England did proceed
from apprehensions of Popery; but by many Arguments I am convinced, That the
D's private Opinion is but made the Stale to wreak their Malice against the
Kingly Government; and that Passion, more than Reason, does influence your
Countrymen.

For, I pray consider; Is not Faith the Gift of God? Can any Man believe what
he pleases? And who knows whether the D. was ever of the Church of England? Did
not the late Rebellion force him to fly into a Popish Country, in his Youth?
And is it not next to impossible to remove Prepossessions, especially
considering the Unity, Antiquity, and Universality of that Church, wherein all
the English Orthodox Divines allow Salvation? Can any Man change his
Complexion, alter the figure of his Face, the stature of his Body, the color
of his Hair, or of his Skin? Is not the Jaundice a Disease in the Eye, that
needs the help of Physic? And is not Error, or Weakness in the Understanding,
a Distemper also that requires the Assistance of a Physician? And what Remedy
can be proper, but gentle Arguments, and the persuasive Arts of Discourse, and
sober Reasonings? Persecution makes some Men, those of great Souls, obstinate;
and others, of little, Hypocrites. But what Law enacts, That an Opinion, in the
disputable Parts of Religion, ought to deprive a Man of his Right to Inherit?
Would any of your Phanaticks (I am sure none of our Whigs would) hold, their
tongues, if treated so severely* Equality of Justice is that alone which
upholds a State, and makes a Kingdom happy.

And why must there be all this stir about the D. when it is more than probable
he may not survive his Brother, for whose long Life, I am persuaded he, as well
as all honest Subjects, does heartily pray: But if he should, pray, why, if a
Papist, must he, more than the French King, or other Popish Princes, destroy
his Subjects? To do so, would be against his Interest, if a Turk, or an Atheist.

The Case would not then be, what it was in Queen Mary's days: Those Laws, by
which Men suffered, (and yet in her Six years there were not Three hundred, and
few of them too purely for Religion) are abrogated; the Body of the People were
then more Papists, than now Protestants; and no new Laws can be made, without a
Parliament, out of which, as well as out of all Offices, R. C. are excluded, by
Oaths and Penalties, not in the Princes Power to remit or forgive: So that,
upon the whole, there is, indeed, on this account, no real danger of any
Innovation in Religion; and therefore we may well look on this, but as a
Pretense to undermine Monarchy it self.

But lest this single String should fail, they have cunningly found out another
for their Bow, The Inexorableness of the D's temper, if once offended: A
groundless and malicious Scandal; an Opinion that being generally spread
abroad, has already begot many great Evils, and, if continued, will, in all
probability, run us into infinite Calamities and Disorders, not to be equaled,
but by the Malice of the Contrivers: For, his being thus misrepresented, must
needs add to the Peoples obstinacy in opposing, and his violence in asserting,
his Right to the Crown: and therefore I wonder why you suffer your selves to be
imposed upon, and your Understandings subjected to that Slavery which is
certainly designed against your Persons, by the Ambitious, without prying into
the Grounds, and considering the Consequences of that Calumny. I am sure, did
his Enemies allow but half the time for Consideration, as they do for Passion,
they would find his R. H. is much less fway'd with an inordinate desire of
Revenge, than they are with a false and misguided Zeal; or, which is more, that
he is as void of that spiteful Humor, as they that charge him with it, are of
Candor and Integrity. The knowledge of this Truth I owe to my observation of
his Temper, Principles, and Practice, in the many Varieties of his Fortune: But
I am now more bold to affirm it, since his coming into Scotland; because, three
days after I had showed him your Letters, he publicly declared in Council,
That though the Malice of his Adversaries might possibly deprive him of a Crown,
together with the Affections of the People; yet it would never of the Royal
Virtue of Clemency: which whether he derives more from the Blood of his Father,
or the Example of his Brother, is an undecided Question; as it likewise is,
whether the one merited more by laying down his Life for his Peoples Liberty,
than the other by pardoning so many thousands, who had forfeited theirs to his
Justice: That he was not ignorant, how Machiavil's Advice, of Eortiter
calumniare and aliquid adhaerebit, was daily put in practice by his
Adversaries; nothing being so usual with them, as to traduce his most blameless
Actions, calling Justice, Cruelty; Bounty, Prodigality; Resolution, Obstinacy;
Valor, Rashness; and, in fine, any thing that is Great or Glorious, Base and
D^^generous: Yet he hoped Truth would at last prevail against his and its own
Enemies, and make it as impossible for them to spread their Calumnies to his
disadvantage, as for him to leave any to severity, or punishment, that had
first left their Crimes: That he always looked upon Revenge as the Result of a
cankered and impotent Mind, inhumantly rejoicing in the Calamities of the
Oppressed, and as insatiable in Cruelty, as the memory of received Injuries is
commonly indelible; than which, nothing was more contrary to his Nature,
having, besides the Commands of Christianity been taught from his Infancy, That
so poor and mean a Passion ought never to influence a Prince, who is obliged by
Honor to end his Wrath, as soon as his Enemies do their Malice; and, having no
Rivals to contend with, is then to be accounted most victorious, when he
triumphs over himself, by conquering his Passions: That he challenged any that
knew him, to give one Instance, wherein he had swerved from this Maxim, or
exercised any Rigor against any Offender, that had truly and sincerely
repented: That it was true, he could not forget the French Proverb, Qui se fait
un brebis, le Loup le mange, i. e. The Wolf devours him that makes himself a
Sheep; and therefore would not, by an over-easiness of Nature, yield tamely to
his own Ruin, and suffer himself to be made a Prey to the Ambition and
Insolence of others; but was resolved to temper the Methods of gaining and
enjoying his just Rights, with a mixture of Severity and Mildness,
proportionable to the opposition he should meet with: And lastly, That he could
distinguish, very well between those whom Ignorance, or Imprudence, carried
insensibly beyond the bounds of Duty, and those who knowingly, and advisedly,
ran not only into Extremes themselves, but likewise, by Lies, and false
Suggestions, hindered many to return from, and drove others to, wicked and
malicious Practices; and, consequently, he hoped, none would wonder if These
should feel the smart of his Justice, as the Other might be sure, upon
disclaiming their Errors, to be received into Mercy; being persuaded, that
punishing such Men could no more be termed Revenge, than executing the Laws
against Traitors, and Disturbers of the Public Quiet, could reasonably be
accounted Cruelty: But lest, upon this score, he should be thought to reserve a
Latitude to himself of wreaking his Anger against any, at pleasure, he was
willing to give all the Assurances they themselves could expect, and would move
his Brother to agree to an Act of Parliament for that purpose; that he would
freely forgive, and bury in eternal Oblivion, whatever is past, that so either
all may be thoroughly reconciled, or such as are guilty of that Implacability
which they attribute to him, differenced from the rest, and left without
excuse, to the terror of their own evil Consciences, and his just Resentments.

I cannot imagine what further can reasonably be expected from an injured
Prince, and am confident, whoever after continues dissatisfied, is as great an
Enemy to Reason, as he is to his R. H. and in stead of taking away, seeks to
perpetuate your Differences. Nor do I see why any, before him, should be
credited in an Affair of this Importance; since all acknowledge him to be of a
frank and generous Nature, free from all Dissimulation, and the little Politic
Fetches and Evasions which serve other Men's turn to break their Promises:
Whereas the Ringleaders of his Adversaries are versed in all the Arts and Wiles
of forming Parties and Factions, and consequently, cannot be thought to stick
at forging any Lie, or Aspersion, beneficial to the End they propose. But,
allowing an equal probability of truth in his Denial, and their Charge; yet to
err of his side, is not less safe, and I am sure much more honest and
honorable.

It Is indeed the usual Cheat of aspiring Men, by specious Pretenses first to
engage the unwary in their Conspiracies, and, when either Fear or Honesty opens
their Eyes, then to make them believe, they are so far advanced, that they
cannot with safety retire; and that the State or Person they provoked, will
admit of no other Atonement than that of their Lives and Fortunes. This Device
(to omit ancienter Times) in Philip the Second's Reign, filled the Belgic
Plains with the Blood of his Spanish and Flemish Subjects; brought France,
successively, under several Kings, almost to a total destruction; deprived our
late Sovereign of his Life, and Crown, which I am confident was not by the
major part first intended, in 1640; and had like to have kept his present
Majesty in perpetual Exile, had not Providence wrought Miracles in his favor,
and, in spite of all the Artifices of his Rebellious Subjects, restored him to
his Throne, without Blood or Violence: among which, I cannot but remember that
devilish Pamphler, entitled, A Letter from Bruxelles, etc. mentioned in
Baker's Chronicle, published after his Majesty's Declaration from Breda,
insinuating; That notwithstanding his Promises, if they suffered his Return, he
would with all imaginable Cruelty revenge the Death of his Father, and not
forget it to the third Generation of those concerned in that horrid Murder.
This put the People into a great Consternation; yet his unparalleled Clemency,
and his so often pressing his Parliament to pass the Act of Oblivion,
sufficiently proved the Malice of that Invention. But I hope this Cheat is now
so well known, that it will gain no Credit with considering Persons: I only
wish some care were taken to undeceive the weak and unthinking, that Peace and
Unity, which seem to have parted from you with his R. H. might with him be once
more restored, and the happy Union of both Kingdoms be made perpetual, by
suffering no rent or gap in the Royal Line; which all of our Nation, (and we
hear those of Ireland will not be less forward) are not only obliged, but have
vowed to maintain, with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes: a Necessity we
hope you will never put upon us, as well for your own sakes, as for the Peace
and Quiet of this Kingdom, wherein he has not the least Concern, who is, and
always will be,

Your most humble and most obedient Servant, etc.
POST SCRIPT.
JUst now I hear of a new Project set on foot, to give the King 600000 l. of
which he may dispose one at pleasure, on condition he will consent to the Bill
of Exclusion; and that, in return, he shall have Power, by Act of Parliament,
in case he have no Issue by his Queen, to settle, by Will, the Crown upon any
of his Natural Children. To manage this Design, a new Set of Ministers is
contrived: A great Lord, whose Son most, if not wholly, influences the House of
Commons, is to be made a Duke; another Earl, to be Treasurer; Sir W. J. is to
be L. C. J. Col. T. to be a Secretary of State, etc. I am very sorry to
perceive the Differences between the King and his Subjects, are fomented by
Persons of the same Humor with those in 1640. who, meeting at Sir Robert
Long's, undertook, if his then Majesty would do so and so, he should govern the
Parliament to all Intents and Purposes: The King consenting to every, excepting
one, their desired Preferments, was refused, crying out, One and all, having
before bound themselves accordingly. One of the then leading Men has in this
Parliament a Son, whose Power and Ambition falls very little short, if at all,
of his Fathers; and if you have a mind to discover Hercules his Proportion by
that of his Foot, compare the Remonstrance, and the late Address, and, without
naming, you will find the near Relation of the Authors. For shame, let not such
Proceedings be nicknam'd, doing your Country Service. I remember to have heard,
that in the short Parliament, before that of (40.) when some more zealous, than
wise, Members spoke too extravagantly, a sober Gentleman, and no Courtier,
stood up, and said, he was for more moderate Counsels, lest their present heat
and exorbitance should put that King, and his Successors, for ever out of
conceit with Parliaments, who depended upon his Pleasure. I wish the whole
Kingdom, as well as their Prince, may have no reason to grow weary of, and
dislike the settled Constitution of Commons in Parliament, choosing rather to
have, as formerly, the whole Power in the King, and his Great Council of Lords
and Barons. Extremes are near one another; and many, by grasping at too much,
have lost the little they enjoyed: This is as foolish, as with the Dog, in the
Apologue, to lose the Substance for the Shadow: And since Prudence tells us, A
long provoked and incensed Clemency turns into the greatest Cruelty, you ought
to bridle your Passions and Ambition, lest you too late repent your Madness and
your Folly. This Consideration has carried me beyond the usual length of a Post
script, wherein I designed to have said little more, than that I understand,
the D. writes this night to the King his Brother, That if he can be secure his
Parliament will agree with him upon quitting his Interest, that he should not
longer struggle for him, who would not only hazard his uncertain hopes of a
Crown, but would with joy expose his Life, to do his Majesty service; whose
long Reign, and Happiness, notwithstanding all the Forgeries of his Enemies, he
as heartily wishes, as any other the most Loyal Subject in his Dominions.

Consider the Greatness of this Generosity, and let not Malice for ever
prevail, to the defamation of Innocence, and the disturbance, if not the ruin,
of these Nations.




FINIS.

