A Letter directed to Master Bridgeman, the fourth of January, and a Letter
enclosed in it, to one Master Anderton, were this day read and ordered to be
entered.
To the Worshipful, and my much honored friend Orlando Bridgeman Esquire, and
a Burgess of the Parliament, at his Chamber, at the Inner Temple, These
present. SIR,
WE are your friends, These are to advice you to look to your self, and to
advise others of my Lord of Straffords friends to take heed, least they be
involved in the common Calamity, our advise is, to be gone, to pretend
business till the great Hubbub be passed, Withdraw, least you suffer among the
Puritans. We entreat you to send away this enclosed letter to M. Anderton,
enclosed to some trusty friend, that it may be carried safely without
suspicion, for it concerns the Common safety; So desire your friends in
Coven-Garden, January 4.

To the Worshipful, and my much honored friend Master Anderton, These present.
SIR,
ALthough many designs have been defeated, yet that of Ireland holds well. And
now our last plot works as hopefully as that of Ireland, we must bear with
something in the Man, his will is strong enough, as long as he is fed with
hopes, the Woman is true to us, and real, Her Council about her is very good:
I doubt not but to send you by the next very joyful news, for the present,
our rich Enemies, Pym, Hampden, Stroude, Hollis, and Haslerigg, are blemished,
challenged for no less then Treason: before I write next we doubt not but to
have them in the Tower, or their heads from their shoulders.

The Solicitor, and Fynes, and Earl we must serve with the same sauce: And in
the House of the Lords, Mandevill is touched, but Essex, Warwick, Say, Brook,
and Paget must follow, or else we shall not be quiet. Faulkland and Culpepper,
are friends to our side, at least wise they will do us no hurt. The
Protestants and Puritans are so divided, that we need not fear them; the
Protestants in a greater part will join with us, or stand Neuters, while the
Puritan is suppressed. If we can bring them under; the Protestant will either
fall in with us generally, or else, if they do not, they are so indifferent,
that either by fair, or foul means, we shall be able to command them.

The mischievous Londoners, and Apprentices, may do us some hurt for present,
but we need not much fear them; they do nothing orderly, but tumultuously:
Therefore we doubt not but to have them under command after one brunt, for our
Party is strong in the City, especially Holborne, the new Buildings, and
Westminster: We are afraid of nothing, but the Scots appearing again: But we
have made a Party there, at the Kings last being there, which will hold their
hands behind them, while we act our parts at home; Let us acquit our selves
like men, for our Religion and Country, now or never. The Kings heart is
Protestant, but our friends can persuade Him, and make Him believe any thing.
He hates the Puritan party, and is made irreconcilable to that side; so that
the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, are for us. There are no less then twenty
thousand Ministers in England, the greater half will in their places, be our
friends, to avenge the Bishops dishonor. Let our friends be encouraged, the
work is more then half done.

Your servant, R. E*


