The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal TO HIS MAJESTY, In
Relation to the PETITION of Charles Desborow, Late Captain of His MAJESTY's
Ship Mary Gally, Employed in the Expedition to Newfoundland, in the Year 1697,
under the Command of Captain John Norris.

AND His Majesty's most Gracious ANSWER thereto.

Printed for Charles Desborow, 1699.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled.
The humble Petition of Charles Desborow:
SHOWS,
THAT Your Petitioner was Commander of His Majesty's Ship Mary Gally, in the
Expedition to Newfoundland, Anno 1697. together with Ten Men of War more, Two
Fireships and Two Bomb-Ketches. The 21st of June, Mr. Ponti appeared off the
Port of St. John's, which gave the fairest Opportunity imaginable to those that
were employed on that Expedition to have taken them, had they then believed the
Intelligence that from time to time was given them by your Petitioner, and
others; but instead of giving Encouragement to your Petitioner for his
readiness to do service to the Nation, and to cover their own fault, your
Petitioner was unjustly charged with Breach of Orders, and Neglect of Duty, and
dismissed from his Command; which your Petitioner is ready with Witnesses to
prove, either at the Bar of Your Lordships House, or as in Your Lordships Great
Wisdoms shall think meet.

Wherefore Your Petitioner most humbly Prays, That Your Lordships will enquire
into Matter of Fact, that Justice may be done both in relation to His MAJESTY,
the Kingdom of England, and your Petitioner, who has been a great Sufferer on
this Occasion; And, as in Duty bound, he shall ever Pray. Cha. Desborow.

Die Lunae 17 April. 1699.
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, The Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled, Humbly acquaint Your Majesty, That We have
received a Petition from Charles Desborow, late Captain of Your Majesty's Ship
the Mary Gally, empoly'd in the Expedition to Newfoundland in the Year 1697.
under the Command of Captain Norris: Which Petition sets forth, That on the
21st of July, 1697. Monsieur Ponti appeared off the Port of St. John's, which
gave the fairest Opportunity imaginable to those that were then employed on
that Expedition, to have taken the French, if the Intelligence that from time
to time was given by the said Charles Desborow and others, had been believed:
And that instead of receiving any Encouragement for his Readiness to do Service
to the Nation, he was unjustly charged with Breach of Orders, and Neglect of
Duty, and dismissed from his Command.

Which We conceived to be a Matter of so Ill Consequence to Your Majesty's
Service, if there were Truth in it, that We thought fit to enter into a
particular Examination upon Oath, of the Allegations of the said Petition:
Wherein the said Desborow does acquaint the Committee of this House, That on
the 21st of July Five French Ships appeared off St. John's, which were reported
by Prisoners taken, to be part of Monsieur Nesmond's Squadron appointed to
Attack St. John's.

That on the 23d of July, Four Englishmen who had been taken Prisoners by
Ponti, made their Escape, and informed him the said Desborow, That the Five
Ships beforementioned belonged to Ponti: That most of his Men were sick, and
that their Provisions were short. These Four Men informed Commadore Norris the
same thing, and also that they came from the West Indies; but he would not
believe them.

That Alexander Cumberbatch (who was a Prisoner with Ponti, but being sent
under a Guard to the Shore to get him Provisions, and liberty to Water) gave us
Notice hereof by Letter; and told us, That if we would serve our Country, this
was the time.

That Edwards and Shuttleworth brought this Letter from Cumberbatch, and
affirmed the same thing, but we would not believe them.

That on the 26th of July the said Desborow was sent out to discover them; and
Captain Littleton was sent out the same day, or the next, to Carbonier, where
pursuing a French Boat sent out from Ponti, the Frenchmen were forced on Shore,
and surrendered themselves to the Merchantmen that kept Guard on the Island of
Carbonier, who brought Five and twenty of them to Captain Norris, to whom they
owned it was Ponti's Fleet, and not Nesmond's; but he would not believe them,
but threatened to Whip them.

While this was duing, the said Desborow came in, and assured them, There were
Five French Men of War, and no other Ships near them; but neither the French
Prisoners, Shuttleworth, the said Desborow, nor the four English that had been
Prisoners, could be believed; so it was resolved, Not to go out to sight them.

William Essex and Charles H^shfield being Examined before the said Committee,
said much to the same Effect; and particularly, That they heard the four
English Prisoners say, That those French Vessels were Five Men of War under
Ponti, come from Carthagena, who they said were weakly Manned, and had but
little Wood and Water Aboard.

And Cumberbatch informed the said Committee, That when he came out of France,
the Commissioners of the Admiralty gave him 500 l. and a Medal and Chain of 150
l. value; and gave his Mate 50 l. and a Medal of 30 l. for the Intelligence he
the said Cumberbatch had given to Commadore Norris at St. John's.

John Bailey deposed, That the Ship Monk, where Captain Norris was Commander,
had several Bails of Linen and Woollen, Brandy, and Wine, Haberdashery Ware,
and Druggets on Board; and that the Bails lay between the Guns, and before the
Cabbin-door, from the 21st to the 28th of July; and that the said Ship was so
pestred with Goods, that she was not fit to go to Sea all the while Ponti lay
there; and they took the Fishes, Top-Masts, and Chains, to make a Boom across
the Harbor, to keep Ponti out.

George Wittered also deposed, That the said Monk was so pestred with Goods on
the 21st of July, when Ponti appeared at the Mouth of the Harbor, that she was
not fit to go out; and that they took the Fishes, Top-Masts, and Chains, to
make a Boom to keep Ponti out.

We have likewise looked into the Resolution of the Council of War, of the 24th
of July, 1697. which was called upon the receiving an Express from the Masters
of the Merchants Ships at Carboneir, of Five French Men of War being seen off
that Port, which the Officers of the said Council of War judged to be a Part of
Monsieur Nesmond's Squadron; where it was considered, Whether the Squadron
should go to Sea or not; to which Council of War the Land-Officers were joined;
and the Question being put, the Votes were as follow; every man signing his
Opinion to his own Name.

Seamen.
Francis Dove, Yea. Robert Stapilton, Yea. James Littleton, No. Charles
Desborow, Yea. Cooper Wade, Yea. Roffey, No. James Mighells, Yea. Tho. Day,
Yea. John Cranby, Yea. John Drake, No. Nicholas Trevannon, No. John Norris,
Yea. Tho. Smith, No.
Landmen.
John Gibson, No. Tho Door, No. Tho. Handusyd, No. Cliff. Brexton, No. Griff.
May, No. Hugh Boyd, No. M. Smith, No. Jos. Hargrave, No. Rob. Dalyell, No. H.
Petit, No. George Watkins, No.
These Votes were signed the 24th of July, at Three of the Clock in the
Afternoon; by which it was carried, That the Squadron should not go to Sea.

After this We Examined all the Captains that are now in England, that had been
employed on that Expedition; who owned the Intelligence above mentioned, but
distrusted the Truth thereof, thinking still it must be Nesmond, and not Ponti:
And yet by an unaccountable Negligence took no care to send out others to be
further satisfied of the Truth of the aforesaid Intelligence.

As concerning the said Desborow's being broke by a Court Martial on the 11th
of August following for Neglect of Duty, and Breach of Orders; We have likewise
Examined as many of the Captains of that Court Martial, as are now in England,
who do not charge the said Desborow with any particular Breach of Orders, or
Neglect of Duty; but res^rred themselves to the Depositions taken at the
Court Martial for the Ground of their Reasons for breaking the said Desborow:
Whereupon we had Resort to the Original Depositions then taken upon Oath; and
First of John Stoneman, the Master of Your Majesty's said Ship, Mary Galley;
which says, That having Sailed out of St. John's Harbor on Monday the Six and
twentieth Day of July, they Steered to the Northward, and on the Seven and
twentieth of the same, they gave Chase to Three small Sail, one whereof proved
to be the Lisbon Merchant. Captain Sookes Commander, who came that Morning from
Carbonier, and acquainted them, That the Night before there was taken a French
Man of War's Boat, with several Prisoners; and that Captain Littleton was gone
thence with them to St. John's: Also that there were Five Sail of French Men of
War then at Anchor in Conception Bay: He further deposes, That on the Eight
and twentieth they saw them at about Four Miles distance from them; that the
biggest of them had a White Flag at Main-top Mast-Head, which he judged to be a
Ship of about 80 Guns under Sail; That thereupon they made the best of their
way to St. John's Harbor, to acquaint the Commander in Chief with it; That
they plied off and on, off St. John's till the 29th; when they Sailed again to
the Northward, the Wind at South West and by West, and the Weather very Foggy;
That at 11 that Night they fell in with the aforesaid Five Sail near Cape St.
Francis; That the Sternmost of them Fired a Gun, and made false Fires. Upon
which all their Lights were put out immediately, and they lost sight of them,
it being hazy Weather; That they stood upon a Wind till it cleared, which was
about 2 in the Morning, when the Wind coming out at N. N. E. and seeing no
Sail, they stood in for Carbonier to gain Intelligence if those Ships had done
any Injury there; That their Captain went ashore, and returned at 9 at Night,
and brought a French Prisoner with him; which had been taken in the
forementioned Boat. He further adds, That that Night about 12 a Clock the
Current set them so near to the Shore, that ^hey were obliged to come to an
Anchor till 3 in the Morning, when they weighed and made Sail for St. John's;
but the Wind being contrary, they got not off that Harbor till the 31st, when
their Captain went into the Harbor in his Boat, to acquaint the Commander in
Chief with what Intelligence he had learnt.

Mr. John Crow, Lieutenant of Your Majesty's said Ship Mary Galley, John Car,
and Nicholas Bundocks Mates of Your Majesty's said Ship, in their several
Depositions say near to the same Effect.

Mr. Arthur Bass, Lieutenant of Your Majesty's Ship Monk, does depose upon
Oath, That being sent by Captain John Norris, Commander in Chief of Your
Majesty's Ships in Newfoundland, to get Intelligence from the Northern Parts of
the Coasts, on the 28th of July, under Bell-Isle, he saw Five Ships which he
was informed by the Inhabitants of that place were French Ships, Men of War;
and that he did at the same time see in the Bay Your Majesty's Ship the Mary
Galley, and to the best of his Judgment she was from 6 to 8 a Clock no nearer
to the French Ships than two or three Leagues.

Which being the only Deposition that charges Desborow with being at that
distance from the French Ships, We must observe, That the said Bass was not on
Board the same Ship with Desborow, which the other Four Deponents were; and
besides, the said Cumberbatch, who was then Aboard Ponty's Ships, does depose,
That on the 28th of July (as he believes it was) he saw a Frigat-built Ship of
36 Guns which he took for English; which Ship in truth proved to be the said
Mary Galley; so that it does not appear to us, That any Breach of Orders, or
Neglect of Duty, could justly be charged upon the Petitioner Charles Desborow:
Whereupon this House proceeded to Pass the Three following Votes. (viz.)

I. It is Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That it is the Opinion of this House, That Captain Charles Desborow was
unjustly broken; and also that an Humble Address be Presented to His Majesty
from this House, That he may be restored to His Majesty's Favor, and his own
just Rights.

II. It is Resolved, That the Squadron Commanded by Captain Norris, at St. John
's in Newfoundland, not going out to sight Ponti upon the several Intelligences
given, was a very high miscarriage, to the great Disservice of the King and
Kingdom.

III. It is Resolved, That the joining the Land-Officers with the Sea Officers
in the Council of War of the 24th of July, 1697. was one occasion of the
Miscarriage in not fighting Ponti.



All which, according to our Duty, we lay before Your Majesty, to the end Your
Majesty may be plainly and impartially informed of the great Miscarriage in
that Expedition, and the true Cause and Ground of it; not doubting, but that
Your-Majesty upon a serious Reflection of this our Humble Representation, will
give effectual Orders for the Redressing and Recompencing this poor Man's
Grievances and Sufferings in particular, and for Vindicating the Reputation of
Your own Service both at Home and Abroad, which we are sensible has extremely
suffered on this Occasion, and for preventing the like discredit, damage, and
mismanagement for the future.

And whereas several Matters of very great Consequence, have been throughout
the course of these Examinations Sworn against Captain Norris, which we forbear
to enter into a more particular Enquiry of, because the said Captain Norris was
not here to answer for himself: We humbly desire, That Your Majesty would give
effectual Orders that the said Captain Norris be forthwith Remanded, and
ordered to Attend this House the next Session of Parliament, to Answer such
Matters as have been now objected against him: And that in the mean time the
said Captain Norris may be suspended from his Employment in Your Majesty's
Service.

Die Veneris 21 April. 1699.
The Earl of Bradford Reported His Majesty's Answer to the Address Relating to
Captain Desborow as follows: THAT His Majesty will Consider of the Address, and
give the necessary Directions in order to what the House desires.

FINIS.

