Englands Appeal TO THE PARLIAMENT AT OXFORD,
March 21st. 1680/1. Most Worthy Senators,
OUR Distempers are many and Grievous, our pressures heavy and Burthensom, our
Application we make to you, through the Blessing of God you are the means of
our help, and as Parliaments are constituted by Law, called by the King, Chosen
by the People, and all this for these ends? Either Humbly to Counsel the King,
to provide for the safety of the Subject, to prevent the Conspiracies of our
Enemies; of which we have many; principally the Papists, who for these hundred
years have Persecuted and Demolished the Protestant Interest in England,
Scotland, Ireland, and likewise in all parts of Europe; their implacable rage
has transcended all the Malice and Mischief of former Ages Cruelty, whether of
the Assyrians and Philistines of old to the Israelites, or the last ten
Persecuting Heathen Emperors to the Primitive Christians.

But those (most Worthy Senators) which are the Supplanters of our Protestant
Interest, which indeed is our best Interest, are certainly a pernicious woven
Knot of malignant active Spirits Combining and Confederating to supplant the
fundamental Laws and Principles of Government, on which the Religion and
Government of the Kingdom are firmly established, and of this sort must there
be these four. viz.

1. The first sort are Jesuited Papists, whose Teeth have long watered for, and
their ravenous Appetites hungered to devour our Religion.

2. The second sort are Persidious Papists in Protestant Masks, of these too
many have we lurking in England; these are Enemies very dangerous, because most
indiscernable, their Enmity is hid under a Vizard of Friendship, and if in high
places and great Employments, do harm; for under a pretense of plucking down
Popery they set the Structure the firmer; if possible, though secretly, they
Act as much or more than the professed Papists.

3. The third sort are Treacherous Courtiers who may in a Pensionary way for
beggarly selfish ends engage themselves to Foreign Princes, to the prejudice of
their natural King and State at home; (I don't say there are such in England,
but I wish there be none,) these may harm us exceedingly, being politic men,
and not unable through deficiency of parts to set on work their evil designs,
having also the advantage of place added to the former; and generally it tends
these four ways.

Either first to work and win the King to stand stiffly to his Royal
Prerogative, and the People for the maintenance of their Liberties and
Privileges, thus seeming to side with the King against the Subject, would seem
his faithful Servants and truest Friends, when for the World he would not, but
the People also should stand up for their Liberties, and so he fish in troubled
waters to engross the more to himself.

Or Secondly, To Suppress Religion in its Purity, lest that having a free
course should be an irresistible stop to their designs; and tend to pull down
that Religion which he imagines most likely to set up his Interest.

Or Thirdly, in Countenancing all of their own Stamp, to Disgrace, Vilify and
Dishearten all their opposite Party, rendering none the loyal party but
themselves and their adherers.

Or Fourthly, By Scandals to work in the King to disaffect Parliaments, by
misconstructions, etc. which is much to our loss; I pray God England may have
none such evil Counselors.

4. But the fourth sort of our Enemies are base Pamphleteers, who would gladly
set us together by the Ears; which very much want suppressing.

Now these four Enemies of ours call us to take heed.

But (most Worthy Senators) to you do we appeal, and as we have chosen you our
representatives, to you do we refer it, whether or no these be not our Enemies,
and if they be, that you would act as the case requires.

Besides other mischiefs we suffer; As first, but that especially in the
Country, our faithful Ministers are thrust into corners by suspensions and
deprivations.

And secondly, with many the name of a Papist is exalted above that of a
Presbyterian, a very horrid Shame, yea a Judgment, that Diffenting Protestants
should be reckoned worse than real Papists: But we humbly conceive none do this
but Papists in Protestant Masks at the best.

And thirdly, The Plot to Assassinate his Majesty, to Subvert the Government,
so plainly proved, is with many not acknowledged, but rather turned into
ridicule, and the Evidences ungratefully disparaged.

And fourthly, These times of uncertainty are a great let to Englands
Prosperity, very few Sun-shining days have we enjoyed since this thick Cloud
of Popish Plots have hung over our heads.

Fifthly, England has been greatly Oppressed by reason of the Suppression of
Religion, it has Suffered in Fines, Stigmatizings, etc.

Sixthly, Evil Counselors, which Craftily Confederate that which tends to our
harm; but let them remember, Malum Consilium consultori possimum, which may
prove so in the long run.

Seventhly, Generally in the interval of the Parliaments Sitting (most Worthy
Senators) how usual is it for you to be Vilified and greatly contemned, your
procedings to be aspersed and besmeared.

Eighthly, Our Enemies that have begun are restless till they finish; as
impossible believe it (most Worthy Senators) to be for a stone cast up in the
Air when descending toward the Earth to rest before it attains it center;
their center is Mischief, their Motion thereunto is restless: were it otherwise
most, certainly they must be treacherous to themselves, because unanimously
joined to destroy us.

Having also attempted great things against us, and being unvailed, such an
Odium stains their Name, that doubtlesly nothing less than our blood will serve
turn for them to wash it off.

They also (we conceive) are grown to such a height of Insolency, that no less
than a universal propagating of their wicked Cause over the European Parts,
will satisfy their Ambitious and Covetous projects, faced with the pretense of
a zeal to a superstitious Religion.

All their Tricks, Evasions and Shamming Designs be laid as open as themselves,
and hereby their Odium much aggravated must needs enrage their desperateness.

Which is a means of not abating our Jealousies, which incite us to Vigilance;
for we expect no Mercy from them when upon us; but England has been made an Ass
of to bear the heaviest Burdens, but now it is more skittish, and it is danger
the more man's it with Valor.

And (most Worthy Senators) to your Consideration refer we these two principal
Props of our Prosperity. First, Obstructing a Popish Successor from Inheriting
the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And Secondly, In Uniting his Majesty's
Subjects, which are to us of high Concern: For we appeal to you; what Mercy,
Favor or Compassion would a Popish Prince exercise over Protestant Subjects?
whether or no he would be false to his own Profession, were he true to us, our
Religion, Liberties and Property? Our union also is a great Branch of our
Felicity, in that it disheartens all our Foes.

Therefore (Most Worthy Senators) as our Grievances are heavy, our Enemies
many, our Jealousies numerous and fearful, as all with us is at hazard, as
Religion, Liberty, Property, and that you would be pleased to consider your own
and the Nations Good; which that you may do, Prays the English Nation.

LONDON, Printed for R. Janeway. 1681.


