A LETTER FROM THE LORDS AT OXFORD and other LORDS whose names are SUBSCRIBED,
TO THE LORDS OF THE PRIVY-COVNCELL and the Conservators of the Peace of the
Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

OXFORD March 1. Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University 1643.

Our very good Lords,
IF for no other Reason, yet that Posterity may know We have done our duties,
and not sat still while our brethren of Scotland were transported with a
dangerous and fatal misunderstanding, that the Resolution now taken amongst
them for an expedition into England, is agreeable to their obligation by the
late Treaty, and to the Wishes and Desires of this Kingdom, expressed by the
two Houses of Parliament; We have thought it necessary to let your Lordships
know, That if We had dissented from that Act, it could never have been made a
Law; And when you have examined and considered t^^ names of us who subscribe
this Letter (who, We (...) are too well known to your Lordships, and to both
Kingdoms, to be suspected to want Affectione to Religion, (...) to the Laws
and Liberties o^ (...) C^^^^^ or the Defense and maintenance of which we shall
always hold our Lives a cheap sacrifice;) And when you are informed, That the
Earls of Arundell and Thanet, and the Lords, Stafford, Stanhope, Coventry,
Goring, and Craven, are in the parts beyond the Seas, and the Earl of
Chesterfield, Westmerland, and the Lord Mountague of Boughton, under restraint
at London, for their Loyalty and Duty to His Majesty and the Kingdom; your
Lordships will easily conclude, how very few now make up the Peers at
Westminster, there being in Truth, not above five and Twenty Lords present or
privy to those Counsels, or being absent, consenting or concurring with them:
Whereas the House of Peers consists of above one hundred, besides Minors and
Recusant Lords, neither of which keep us company in this Address to your
Lordships. How We and the Major part of the House of Commons come to be absent
from thence, is so notorious to all the World, that we believe your Lordships,
cannot be strangers to it; How several times during our sitting there,
Multitudes of the meanest sort of People, with weapons not agreeing with their
Condition or custom, in a manner very contrary and destructive to the
Privilege of Parliament, filled up the way between both Houses, offering
injuries both by words and Actions too, and laying violent hands upon several
Members, and crying out many hou^^^ together against the established Laws, in
a most tumultuous and menacing way; How no remedy would be submitted to for
preventing those Tumults; After (...), and other unlawful, and Vnparliamentary
^^tions, many many things rejected and settled upon solemn debate in the House
of Peers, were again after many Threats, and Menaces resumed, altered and
determined contrary to the Custom, and Laws of Parliaments, and so, many of
us withdrew our selves from thence, where We could not Sit, Speak and Vote,
with Honor, freedom and safety, and are now kept from thence for our duty and
Loyalty to our Sovereign. And we must therefore protest against any
Invitation, which has been made to our Brethren of Scotland, to enter this
Kingdom with an Army, the same being as much against the desires, as against
the duty of the Lords and Commons of England. And we do conjure your
Lordships by our common Allegiance, and Subjection on under one gracious
Sovereign, by the Amity and Affection between the two Nations, by the Treaty
of Pacification, which by any such Act is absolutely dissolved, and by all
Obligations both Divine and Humane which can preserve Peace upon earth, to use
your utmost endeavors to prevent the effusion of so much Christian blood, and
the confusion and Desolation which must follow the unjust Invasion of this
Kingdom, Which we, and, we are confident, all true English men must interpret
as a Design of Conquest, and to impose new Laws upon us. And therefore your
Lordships may be assured we shall not so far forget our own interests, and
the Honor of our Nation, as not to expose our Lives and Fortunes in the just
and necess^ry ^ence of the Kingdom: But if your Lordships in t^ have any
doubts or apprehensions, that there now is, or hereafter may be, a purpose to
infringe your Laws or Liberties from any Attempt of this Kingdom; We do
engage our Honors to your Lordships, to be our selves most religious observers
of the Act of Pacification, and if the Breach and violation do not first
begin within that Kingdom, We are most confident you shall never have cause
to complain of this. And having thus far expressed our selves to your
Lordships, we hope to receive such an Answer from you, as may be a means to
preserve a Right understanding between the two Nations, and lay an Obligation
upon us to continue,

Your LORDSHIPS, most affectionate humble servants, Ed. Littleton C. S. L.
Cottington. D. Richmond. M. Hertford. M. Newcastle. E. Huntington. E. Bathon.
E. Southampton. E. Dorset. E. Northampton. E. Devonshire. E. Bristoll. E.
Berkshire. E. Cleveland. E. Marlburgh. E. Rivers. E. Lindsey. E. Dover. E.
Peterburgh. E. Kingston. E. Newport. E. Portland. E. Carbery. V. Conway. V.
Fauconbridge. V. Wilmot. V. Savile. L. Mowbray and Maltravers. L. Darcy and
Coniers. L. Wentworth. L. Cromwell. L. Rich, L. Paget. L. Digby. L. Howard of
Charleton. L. Deincourt. L. Lovelace. L. Poulet. L. Mohun. L. Dunsmore. L.
Seymour. L. Herbert. L. Cobham. L. Capell. L. Percy. L. Leigh. L. Hatton. L.
Hopton. L. Iermyn. L. Loughborough. L. Byron. L. Withrington.



