(...) Passages of the House of LORDS In the Winter Des^^^^ of Parliament in
the year 92.
November.
1st. THe Earls of Hontingdon and Marlebrough complained of their being denied
by the Kings Bench to come out of Prison, although they had offered Bail
accorcording to the Act of Habeas Corpus; the Business was referred to a
Commit, who were empowered to send for Papers, Persons and Records: And the
Lord Lucas was ordered to produce the Warrants for Commitment of both the said
Earls, also the Clerk of the Kings Bench was ordered to bring to the Commit,
the Affidavit of Aaron Smith upon which the Lords had been Remanded back to
Prison.

10th. After a very long Debate, and the Judges heard in their own defense as
well as Aaron Smith upon Oath, which he refused to swear till the House was
just going to send him to Prison; A Commit was ordered to draw up a
Resolution in pursuance of the Debate, and to present it to the House to ^orrow
morning, and Aaron Smith also to attend, and no other business whatsoever to
intervene.

11th. Upon the Report from the Commit, there was another long Debate, which
was at last Adjournest again till to morrow, and all the Judges Ordered to
attend.

12th. Upon the Earl of Scarsdalt's Complaint that his House had been
searched, the Messenger being sick who (...) was ordered to send the Origin I
Warrant by virtue of which ^e (...) one it, and the (...) ^^siness of the three
Lords was referred to a Commit of the w^^^ House, the Judges (...) attend,
and nothing else to intervene.

14th. Resolved in the Commit of the whole House, That whereas by the Statute
31 Chapter 2d. commonly called the Habeas Corpus Act, A^ Judges and Justices, etc.
it is now resolved and declared by this House, that it is the duty of all the
Judges and Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and general Goale-Delivery in
pursuance of the said Act, to set at Liberty the Prisoner on Bail, ^f Committed
for High Th^^s^^, unless it be made appear upon Oath that there are two
Witnesses against the said Person who cannot be produced in that Term,
Sessions, or General Jail-delivery: And it is hereby further resolved, that in
case there shall be more then one Prisoner to be Bailed or Remanded, it is the
intention of the said Statute, that there must be Oath made that there are two
Witnesses against each of such Prisoners, in order to remand them to Prison
respectively.

And this Resolution was Ordered to be Recorded in the Books of this House, as
a Direction to a^^ ^udges for the future, and to prevent all excuse for any
such Illegal Proceedings for the future.

(...) Upon a long Debate about the manner of freeing the several Lords from
their Bail before (...) House would go upon any other Business whatsoever, to
prevent it a notice was intimated from the King that he would cause their Bail
to be immediately discharged at which the House (...) for two days that he
might hay time to do so before they sat again they being (...) upon no other
Business till that was not only promised but executed.

(...) House was ^^^or^ed by the Lords concerned that their Bail was discharged
and as (...) ever they had a^^^inted the House they fell to other Business.

18th. The House ^ppointed a Commit to draw a Return of Thanks for the Kings
Speech, which had n^^er yet been so much as taken notice of because of this
Business of the Lords, and it (...) only that a handle might be taken for
giving Advice to the King, to which something in h^^ Speech seemed to invite
the Lords, and the Address was Penned soon purpose to thank him for the
invitation so that the Lords found themselves engaged in the Advice before some
of them were well (...)

(...) after having sat many days ^^der great Controversies about giving
advice, it was Resolved, first that the King should be advised to give the
chief Command of the English For c^^^o no man who is not a Subject born in his
Majesty's Dominions.

And that Mr. Blaithwait should bring a List of all the General Officers and
Troops upon the ^

And that the Chief Officers of the Ordnance shall send a List of all Officers
belonging to the same, as also an Account of the Stores, and what has been
delivered out these two last years.

And that the Keeper of the Paper-Office in Whitehall send the Capitulation
made between the English and Dutch in 1674.

29th. Ordered, that the Commissioners of the Admiralty shall send all such
Orders and Letters, and Instructions as were sent to the Admiral last Summer,
and Particularly those which relate to the Descent, and the Answers thereunto,
and also Coppies of such Letters or Orders as have been sent by the Commanders
in Chief to Inferior Officers, in Relation to the intended Descent, or to the
pursuit after the Fight at Sea. That the Commissioners for the Transport Ships
send an Account of all they have done concerning these Matters. That the King
be desired to direct, that all the Orders and Papers sent by the Privy Council,
or by the Secretary of State, relating to the last Summers Expedition at Sea,
and the full account of all the Transactions be laid before this House, and
Particularly all such Orders and Papers as relate to the intended Descent.

30th. The King sent Word that he had directed it accordingly: The
Commissioners of Accounts Established by Parliament were ordered to send them
in, Signed by five of them at the least, and they were sent in accordingly.

December. 1st. The Officers of the Ordnance were ordered to bring an Abstract of
the Stores two Years ago, and what has been delivered out Since, and to put
under the Name of every Spe^^^ the Sum total, as well of the Issues, as of
what remains* And (...) send a List of all the ^^reigners upon their
Establishment, or employed by them, and in what Places.

6th. The Earl of Nottingham brought in those Papers from the King, which
being Read,

7th. There arose along Debate about a Motion for having a Commit of both
Houses sit together, in order to the better Examination of the last Years
Miscarriages, the Question being carried by a very few Votes in the Negative:
The other Lords Assigned the following Protestation, and entered it under their
own Hands in the Books of the House.

A Protestation against the Vote that refused to agree that a Commit of both
Houses should sit, together.

First, Because his Majesty having particularly, and expressly desired the
Advice of his Parliament at this time when he so much seems to need it; no
other Methods was, nor in our Opinions could be proposed, by which the two
Houses might so well and so speedily be brought to that concurrance which is
necessary to render their Advice Effectual.

2dly. Because it appears by some Papers already imparted to this House, that
severa^^^ ^^mbers of the House of Commons are concerned in the Matters before
us, as having been so lately employed in his Majesty's Service, and we conceive
it the easiest, properest, and fairest way of Communication between the two
Houses, to have so great and important Business transacted, and prepared in a
Commit so chosen.

3dly. Because it cannot be expected that so many Members of the House (...)
from whom we shall need Information, can in any other manner be here present so
often (...) with the leave of their House) as will be necessary for a
sufficient Enquiry into the sever^^ ^^^^s now under Consideration.

4thly. Because, if the House of Commons intend also to give Advice to his
Majesty it is very probable that both Houses of Parliament may receive such
Information severally as will be thought fit to be communicated as soon as
possible, and we conceive no way of doing that can be^^ proper, or speedy, as
in a Commit of both Houses.

5thly. Because in a time of such iminent Danger to the ^ation by reason so
many Miscarriages as are supposed generally to have been committed; the closest
and strictest Union of (...) Houses is absolutely necessary to redeem us from
all that Ruin which we have too m^^^ cause to fear is coming upon us.

December. 8th. The Earl of Nottingham brought his own Book of Entries, with Mr.
Russels Le^ers, and Copies of his own to Mr. Russel, of all which a List was
taken, and all of them re^erred to a Commit.

9th. Another Commit appointed to examine what way might be found for the
House to ^peak with a Member of the House of Commons, or to have him before a
Commit.

10th. Sir John Ashby was examined at the Bar, then it was reported from the
Commit, that they had found an Expedient, which was Debated, and at last
resolved on.

And another Commit ordered to prepare something to be delivered at a
Conference, together with all the Letters, etc.

19th. The Lord President ordered to deliver the Papers, etc. And to say as
follows, We, by Command of the House of Commons are often mentioned in the
said Papers, from whom possibly you may be more particularly informed of the
Matters contained in them.

21st. The House of Commons at another Conference told the House of Lords, that
they had Read and well considered those Papers which they had sent them, and
finding Mr. Russel a Member of their House often mentioned in them, the Commons
unanimously came to this Resolution: That Admiral Russel in his Command of the
Fleet during the last Summers Expediton, has behaved himself with Fidelity and
Conduct.

22. A Commit to inspect the Books in relation to a true Conference, and
particularly whether there have been any free Conferences desired with the
Commons, when the Houses di^ not disagree.

^^th. Reported from that Commit that they had found some Presidents for it
as follows.

Aug. 9th. 1660. The Commons desired a Conference about a Business of great
Importance, without any Disagreement. Aug. 13. 1660. The Lords desired a
Conference about the same Business without any Disagreement.

Sept. 1. 1660 A Free Conference was desired by the Commons upon the same
Subject still, without any Disagreement.

July 29 1660. A free Conference was desired by the Lords about the same Bill,
without Disagreement' and another Conference was desired by the Commons the
same day.

After a long Debate, another Commit was appointed to inspect Presidents,
whether the Resolution of the House of Commons delivered at the last
Conference, be according to the usual Proceedings of Parliament, and to
consider of Heads to be delivered at a free Conference on than subject.

31. The Question was put, whether the Bill for impartial Proceeding in
Parliament should (...) ^^^mitted, and it was carried in the Affirmative by 15
Votes: Then it was put whether they should now proceed upon it, and it was
carried in the Negative.

July. 1st. A Free Conference desired by the Lords, who told the Commons that
their Hose ^^^^unicating to the House of Lords at a Conferance, a Vote of
theirs upon Matter of Fact only, without giving any Reasons for it, is not
according to the usual Proceedings in Parlia^^^^; (...) ^^^sure it seems they
took putiently, and without making the least reply.

(...) of those Lords who Signed the several Protestations with Reasons in this
Sessions of (...), which Names under their own Hands, together with the Reasons
in the Public (...) of that House.

Mulgrave. Rivers. Warrington. Denbeigh. Thanet Alisbury, etc. to the number of
40.
An Account relating to some of the Affairs in Ireland, given by Mr. Sloane To
the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled.
IN ^bedience to your Lordships Commands, I humbly give this Account of some
things I have seen and Observed, or credibly heard of the Affairs of that
Uunfortunate Kingdom: out of which, by your Lordships direction, I shall omit
many other things which I have only by Informations. Though I believe the same
may be well proved, concerning the State and Affairs of that Kingdom. And if
this shall be of any public service either to this, or that Kingdom, I shall
reckon it more then a reward sufficient to repair any Injury can be done me on
this account.

It was in August last I went into Ireland, partly on own private Business, and
partly to settle some Affairs relating to my Lord Lisburn, who had left me one
of his Executors and Trustee^ of his Estate, and being there, was chosen a
Member of the House of Commons, which was the chief occasion of my seeing or
observing what I did on this unfortunate Subject.

1. One of the great Grievances, and that which is most immediately felt by the
subjects there I take to be that the Army there have not been better paid, and
that by reason thereof since the War ended they have been contrary to known
Laws (as they said for want of Pay and subsistence) in many places of that
Kingdom necessitated often to take free Quarter, not only for Meat and Drink
and Lodging, but to supply themselves with Clothes and other necessarys, have
Taxed, exacted, and received from the Country, great Sums of Money, and where
the same was not paid, in many places cistrained for the same. Of which I heard
man^ Complaints, and that few or none could ever get any Redress. And on that
account I believe there is due to the Country above 200000 l. which has tended
to the ruin of many Persons and Families there. And if this were an end of it,
that which is past might be the easter forgot. But as I am credibi, informed by
the late Accounts from thence, Free Quarters, and taxing the Subject is in
diverse places continued to this time, or some few Weeks since: And if not
prevented for the future by the better Pay and Order of the Army, may tend to
the great impoverishment and destruction of that Kingdom. Yet I am not
surprised it should be so, for it was publicly told us in the House of
Commons, as I remember by Mr. P^ultney and Mr. David's, concerned in or about
the Government there, that u^^^ess we would poss the Money Bills as brought
from the Council Board, the Army woule take Fice Quarter, or to that effect.
(...) as appears to me there is the less Necessity for it now (were the public
Money rightly applied) for that as Mr. Polutney brought the Papers from the
Lord Laeutenant to the House of Commons, considering the List of the Civil and
Military Establishment of Ireland, which was so far from being under-rated,
that it was observed that the Abatement might reasonably be ma^^ therein, in
such a time of Distress as this is there: And considering likewise the
Calculations of the Revenue, which, by what I have heard from those well
skilled therein, I do believe was at a great undervalue; yet to supply the
defects thereof, and to support the Expense of the Government, there, the Sum
demanded was no more than 70000 l. to discharge all to^^ (...) the Supply,
whereof a Bill has passed for an Additional Excise on Beer, Ale and other
Liquors, which at a very moderate, and one of the lowest computations, I heard
was reckoned at 30000 l. and others computed it at far more, and the rest was
intended to be supplied by a P^ll (...) the Parliament had not been Prorogued
before the had time to do it.

I have heard many Complaints of the Misapplications and Emhezilments (...)
Real and Personal Forfeited Estates, wherewith the People found themselves the
more sensibly (...) ^eved, for that when the Money was wanting to support the
Expense of the Government (...) Parliament were called upon to make it good,
and therefore this was Voted to be a great ^^^^vance. Pursuant to that Vote the
Commit of Grievances began to enter upon particular ^^^quiries of the Revenue
and Forfeited Estates: And the first Man I remember fell in their way was Mr.
Culliford, who being acquinted that he stood charged with the taking into his
^^^^^dy several forfeited Goods, and the Disposing thereof to his own Use, when
he was one of the Commissioners of the Revenue, he told the Commit that he
was a Member of the Parliament of England, and though he was willing to wave his
own Privilege, yet the privilege of the ^^^sse of Commons in England might be
concerned therein, which re offered to their Consideration^ of to that effect.
And the Debate thereof was afterwads Adjourned by the House, and never
determined for or against his Privilege, but to prevent the loss of the
Testimony, Witnesses were Examined there, and by what had passed before here at
the Treasury against him, and what was there, I think it plainly appeared, and
of the same Opinion seemed generally the rest of all who heard it examined,
that he was guilty of very great Breaches of Trust when he was one of the
Commissioners of the Revenue, by seizing and converting to his own use,
Forfeited Goods of considerable value, and by letting or procuring Leases in
trust for himself, of the Milns and Weers of Kilmainham, Mr. Kereifs Estate,
the Cranage and Wharfage of Cork, which as of late exacted, was affirmed in
proof by persons of Credit there, to be a new Exaction, and upon the Merchants
first set up by his own Means. And Mr. Warren of Carduffs Estate of
considerable yearly value, at very inconsiderable Rents: To which he added the
Estate of one Mr. Sweetman adjacent to him, who had been under some prosecution
or accusation for the Murder of some Soldiers near Dublin, and became Mr.
Callefords Tenant for his own Estate, and was never after prosecuted as I heard
of.

The Commit of the Commons were likewise upon inquiries of other Leases let
at great under-values, and about 13000 l. or more said to be returned by the
Commissioners of the Forfeit Personal Estates to the Commissioners of the
revenue, of which it was believed a small Account had been made to their
Majesty's, and had several Papers and Books brought before the Commit, which
were as seemed to me so general by confused and imperfect, that they could not
make a full Discovery thereby. And were likewise upon another Inquiry after
other Imbezilments of the Revenue and Forfeitures, but were Prorogued before
they could arrive at the lame. Diverse other ways there are of lessening the
Forfeitures, as by reversing of Outlawries, and thereby the former Proprietors
restored, and some of them, as credibly said, not within any Articles, but what
they made for themselves, since the War ended, and also by Grants, or promises
of Grants to the Lord Sidney, Lord Athlone, Lord Coningsby and others to that
Degree, that by a late credible Account I have from Ireland, there remains
little or nothing of the clear forfeitures but what is pitched upon, or in a
way of Grant to some Great Person.

It was much complained of, the suffering so many Papists to keep Arms, and
many of them to be in the now standing Army, of which the Members of the House
from their several Countries gave many Accounts: and the House of Commons had
that apprehension thereof, and that the same might greatly endanger the
Government, that they sent to the Lord Lieutenant for remedy thereof or to that
Effect, which his Excellency said he would take care to do, as his answer was
reported to the House, or to that effect.

And there was likewise a general Complaint, and Account thereof given to the
House or Commit of the House, of hindering the Protestants from their due
course of Law against the Papists, and illegal Protections granted to the
Papists, of which there were instances given, and when the Reason was asked why
so many, or such persons should be Protected, it was publicly answered by the
said Mr. Davies, who as was said had a hand in making the same out, that it
might be A cana Imperii, and not fit to be told, or to that effect.

But that which I apprehend to the greatest discouragement of all to the
Protestants, and Encouragement to the Papists, is the manner of Proroguing the
Parliament, and what has happened since that time.

I think I may without flattering of them say, that there never was a House of
Commons of that Kingdom of better Value than they generally were, either for
their Estates, or the sincerity of their Principles, to the English Protestant
Interest, and who on occasions expressed the grateful sense they had of the
great kindness of this Kingdom many ways expressed toward them for their
relief in their distress. We received the Lord Lieutenants first Speech with
great joy, for thereby he told us, that he had their Majesty's Commands to call
us, as the greatest demonstrations they could give of their Affections to us,
who had suffered so many great Oppressions almost to an utter desolation of the
Country. And could not be so well settled as by a Parliament, which he said was
a blessing that for so many Years we had been deprived of, whereby the Interest
had been in danger of loosing not only their Religion, but all that property
with which so great expense of Blood and Treasure they had purchased. And
therefore he doubted not but we would make use of it to pass such Laws as might
tend to the firm settlement of the Country upon a Protestant Interest; And that
He was ordered by their Majesty's to assure us, that nothing should be wanting
on their Parts that might contribute to our lasting or perfect Happiness, as
among other things does in his Speech appear, or to that effect.

This was thought all very good, and very true; For my Lord Cook in his 4th.
Institutes, mentions the Law of Edw. 2. de Parliamentis tenendis singulis annis
in Hibernia, and de legibus and consuetudinibus ibidem emendandis, which was so
far observed, that from the 7th. of H. 6. which was about 200 and odd Years
before the last Parliament in 1665. there were in all above 50. Sessions of
Parliament, and most of them were new Parliaments. But from the time of the
last Parliament till now, they had contrary to the said Law as I conceive, an
Interval of about 27 Years, in which time I fear may too easily be made appear
there had grown over the Kingdom several Arbitrary Powers, and Jurisdictions,
Oppressions and Grievances, besides that we wanted many good Laws which had
been made in this Kingdom, and were as I thought as much wanted, though not of
force there, and now we hoped to redress all.

But though the Matter of money came toward the last in the Speech, it came among
the first of the Business, and was readily embraced by the Commons, and when my
Lord Lieutenant sent the Civil and Military Lists, together with their own
Computation of what the Revenue might yield, Mr. Poultney proposed only the Sum
of 70000 l. as what would be wanting to support the Government, and though it be
almost incredible to any body who has not been there, to believe the great
wastes and Poverty which generally reigns throughout the Kingdom, save in some
parts of the North, and in and about Dublin, and a few other Towns which are
better then the rest; yet the Commons were resolved to bear any thing they
could rather than be further burdensome to this Kingdom; And therefore Voted a
Sum not exceeding 70000 l. and spent some time in finding the ways and means
how to do it with the greatest ease to the Country. But thereafter were brought
to us (by Mr. Poultney as I think) two Bills which had been prepared by the
Council Board, the one for the said Additional Excise, which was pretty well
liked for its substance, and the other as was said for a Charge of 15 d. per
Acre on all Corn in the Kingdom, which was thought very unequal in it self,
there being very great differences of Corn, and of the several sorts, and the
Grasiers and Traders greatly escaping the Tax of so many People starving for
want of Bread. It was thought strange by some, why these Bills should have been
kept from us so long, to let us spend so much time as aforesaid; after they
were tendered it was greatly disli^ed that the Privy Council should prepare
Money Bills, before the Heads of them were first found and prepared by the
Commons. And here I would undeceive any of your Lordships who have been told
that we intended by that or any other proceeding to avoid Poynings Law, being
the 10th. of H. 7. And thereby make our selves Independent as they call on this
Kingdom. For what we did was to assert the Commons having the sole Right of
first finding or proposing the Heads of Bills for raising Money; and that when
the Cummons had proposed them to the Council Board, the Council Board should
draw them into Bills, and transmit them into England, to be transmitted back
according to the Method of Poynings Law; which Vote was made on the 27th. of
October. and 7 days after that we were prorogued, and the Cause assigned by his
Excellencies last Speech of the 3d of Novem. for his displeasure against us was
Printed, is that he is troubled that we who had so many Obligations to be Loyal
and Dutifully Affected to their Majesty's, should so far mistake our selves as
to entrench upon their Majesty's Prerogative and Rights of the Crown of
England, as we had done by our said Vote of the 27th of October, and of the
subsequent Vote of rejecting a Bill Entitled, An Act for granting to their
Majesty's certain for one year, which was the Corn Bill, because it had its
rise first from the Commons, and therefore he requires his Protest against
those Votes to be entered in the Lords Books, or to that effect, and so
Prorogued we were to the 6th. of April.

It was thought by many Members there present, that his Excellency had said we
had behaved our selves undutifully, and ingratefully in invading their
Majesty's Prerogative and to that effect; and if they were in a mistake, I
confess I was in the same; but I find little difference in my apprehensions
between those Words, and the meaning of the said Expressions in the Printed
Speech; However this was very unkindly taken, and thought strange that this
should be the cause of our parting in that manner, considering first, for that
the Reasons appeared, as was generally thought, for the right of the Vote to be
with us. In that I think no body can reasonably deny but that Poynings Act was
not intended to divest the Commons of that Original Right, but that it was
designed chiefly to prevent the danger of an Irish Interest, being too
prevalent with a Chief Governor there, to the prejudice of the English. And the
same reason which was before the Act for the Commons to begin Money Bills still
remains that they are presumed to know better than the Council what Money the
Country is able to bear, and how it may best be raised, with ease to the
Subject. But that was not much insisted on in the Case, For that we proposed
only to pursue Poynings Act as aforesaid, and having also the Act of the 3d.
and 4th. Ph. and Mar. Explicatory thereof, and finding the Reasons as to most
of us seemed, with us, we inspected the Journals of the House, and though perhaps
some time upon an Emergency, and for an Expedition this Right might be
Overlookt for a time yet.

Hereupon it seemed after the Debate to be the general Opinion of the House
that Right was for us, but it was much pressed that for supply of the present
Necessity of the Government, we should pass these two Bills with a salvo to our
Right, which was not at first well liked by some, Namely Mr. Hamilton of
Taltimore, my self, and others, who thought it no good Expedient to yield the
Right, and have only a salvo for it, the rather for that we were ready to have
come if we had been called sooner, and were now desirous to stay till we might
raise the Money in our own way: And so we might have some of our other Laws go
hand in hand with the Money Bills, whereas the other way the Money would be
given, and the Laws might be left behind; However an Expedient and the present
giving some Money was so earnestly pressed, that the House for ought appeared,
became all unanimous in what was done, that is, in passing the Excise Bill,
which was to raise the ready Money, with a Declaration that it was only for
this time, and should be never drawn again into President, and by asserting the
Right by the said vote, and by rejecting the Corn Bill for the same reason of
not having its first rise from the Commons, which was all done, and was by many
reckoned a great compliance, and not doubted but it would be pleasing to his
Excellency. For this last Expedient was particularly proposed and prosecuted,
as I was credibly informed by Brodrick by some of the Privy Council, as Col.
Cook who had frequent Access to his Excellency, and seemed to understand his
mind and think it appears by the votes that they passed Nemine contra dicente
on this Matter.

It was yet the stranger to many of us, because Sir Cyril Wyche on Wednesday
2d. of November, reported from his Excellency to the House, that he had heard a
good Character of Dr. Warkington the Chaplain of the House, but being
recommended by the House to his Excelency, he would on that account take more
care of him. And so on other Occasions ^hi Excellency was pleased to return
very good Answers to the Addresses of the House. And farther the same day,
Wednesday the 2d. Novem. He reported from his Excellency, that he had appointed
Friday next for the Commit to attend him in Council, with the Heads of the
new Laws we had prepared, which made many of us think that his Excellency had
not then resolved to Prorogue us on Thursday, which was the only intervenient
day, however it was done on Thursday the 3d. and was reckoned a greater loss to
us, for that the Heads of the Laws we had prepared to tender him, were of very
great consequence to the Nation, viz. The Heads of Habeas Corpus Act, of the
Act for restraining the Jurisdiction of the Council Board, of the Act against
buying and selling of Offices, of the Act against Frauds and Perjuries, with
several other good Laws of Force here but not there. But being Prorogued the
day before, we had not the Opportunity so much as to tender them. It was only
told us on the Prorogation by the Lord Chancellor, that his Excellency being
informed of what Heads we intended to tender him, He would take them into
Consideration, and against the next meeting of Parliament such of them as
should be found requisite, should be in a readiness to be brought into
Parliament. And I am now credibly informed that some of them are prepared, but
the Habeas Corpus Bill which I value more then all the rest, I am told is to be
left behind, and so is not thought requisite as I believe.

It was yet the stranger, that in these 7 days we had been very busy by a Poll
Bill to raise the rest of the Money, and intended to do it sooner that way then
the Corn Bill would have done, which could not be till next Harvest. And also
for that we were then coming upon the more close pursuit of our Grievances, and
the imbezilments of the Revenue, in which we thought we were at our Duties.

And after all this heat about (as we said) our intrenching on the Prerogative,
it was considered that it was of great use to the Subject, that the Commons
should have that right, if they are willing to give the Money. It seemed to
many but reasonable to let them find the easiest ways of raising it. But on
the other side, such a Prerogative as that the Council Board may first find the
Ways of raising Money, I could not see of what use it could be, unless it were
to occasion more heats; For the Commons without doubt has a Negative Vote, and
can throw it out; besides that I could not see how this Claim comes by the name
of Prerogative, which I take to be an ancient inherent Right of the Crown. But
whatever can be said of this must be drawn from Poynings Act and the the 3d.
and 4th. of Ph. and Mary, or something since Poynings Law.

Now for what happened since the Prorogation, many of the Members thought it
very necessary to have Agents to attend their Majesty's here on the behalf of
the Protestants, to render them and their proceedings right in their Majesty's
Opinion, as also to solicit such Matters as might happen relating to them.
Which way of sending Agents hither had been heretofore used, but was done as
some affirm, by consent of the Government there. Wherefore to pursue the former
method, a Petition was presented to his Excellency by Sir Robert King, and Sir
Arthur Rawden, Sir Arthur Langford and Mr. Annesly, and Signed by them on the
behalf of themselves and others, which was no more in substance than to pray
leave to appoint Agents to attend their Majesty's, to which his Excellency (as
they declared) delivered this Answer, that they could not have a better Agent
than the King himself, who had been Agent for the Protestants for these twenty
years, but if they would have leave for any to go over and beg the King pardon
for their Rio^ous and Seditiou^ Meetings, they might have it, or to that
effect. This sounded very hard in the Ears both of the Gentlemen to whom it was
said and others, who believed them to be men of Great Value and integrity. But
this was not the end, for there was, as I believe may be proved, a dir^ction to
prosecute them upon an Information in the Kings Bench, which they were resolved
to defend, but it seems it was better considered, and they were let alone.

This of having Agents here, was thought the more necessary, for that the
Papists, as many affirmed, have Agents to Solicit their Affairs here, and make
Collections for them in Ireland, and if the Prot^stant^ had Agents here, it is
not like that such Bills would have ^een sent them without amendment, as some
were now Transmitted to the Parliament, with very fair Titles, but rejected for
the Bodies of them, As a Bill to confirm the Act of Settlement, which is much
wished for, but there were such things therein, that instead of confirming, it
would have set things much looser than they were, as many seemed to think, for
which it was rejected. And the same fate found a Bill for reversing the
proceedings of Attainder, passed when the late King was there, which had been
very welcome to many ^imerous People there, yet was rejected by reason of a
Clause in the body thereof. It faired no better with a Bill for punishing
Mutineers and Deserters, which probably had passed if it had been as the Act
for that purpose here is, but it was to continue for 3 Years, and from thence
to the next Session of Parliament, which was so uncertain, and the Clauses
relating to the regulating Quarters left out, that chiefly as appeared to me
for these reasons it was rejected, and also for that it would have had some
days retrospect, before it could have passed, and the Heads of another were
ordered to be brought to supply it. And another was a Bill to Erect and
Establish the Militia, which the House as appeared to me were very desirous to
do for the public safety, but this as drawn would have brought a burden on
the Subject, as was offered, more then we thought them well able to bear,
besides the great penalties and Arbitrary ways of Taxing and raising the Money,
and an Obligation thereby to find more Men to serve in some Counties then there
were Protestants in such C^unties, as some of the Members said. For which among
other faults, and for that being a charge on the Subject, and not having the
Heads first proposed by the House of Commons, that Bill was also rejected, and
the Heads of another ordered to be prepared.

Mr. Osborne, and Mr, Brodrick their Majesty's two Sergeants at Law were
presently after the Prorogation suspended or discharged, and since that have
been turned out even of the Commission of the Peace, as I have been credibly
informed.

The said Si^ Ar^hur Rawdon was superseded or discharged of being Governor of
the County of Down, and that Command or Government was first offered to the
Earl of Dun^igal, and then to the Earl of Mount-Alexander as I have been
credibly informed, who both ^efused it, and I do not hear that to this day any
body has accepted thereof.

The Consequence of the said Matter^ (as I have been credily told) have
happened very evil to the Public, for the Plante^s are discouraged, and
persons who came hither with their Stocks and Money from Scotland, and
elsewhere, are removed again, and so are others of the Ancient Inhabitants, and
so much the Country is like still to lie longer waste and depopulated, while
these dissatisfactions continue.

I fear I have been too tedious, which I hope will be excused by your Lordships
by the greatness and variety of the Subject, and for what uncorrect Expressions
may have escaped me (as I believe there are many) I hope the straitness of
^ime, scarce being able to review or peruse it, will procure my Pardon from
your Lordships; but I have endeavou^ed as ne^r as I can, pursuant to your
Lordships Directions, to set forth the Truth, and nothing else to the best of
my knowledge, remembrance and belief, and that I hope will always justify it
self.

2d. March. 1692. JAMES SLONE.

May it please your Lordships,
I Humbly pray your Lordships pleasure, whether in the Account your Lordships
are pleased to Command from me of the Estate of Ireland I may use Names,
without which the Account I shall make will not be perfect.

That then I humbly lay at your Lordships feet will chiefly arise from my
Observatio^ in the Parliament of Ireland, in which I had the honor to be a
Member, and one of the Commit of Grievances and Accounts.

Before the Commit of Grievances there was brought so many Complaints of the
unequal disposition of Lands, and chiefly against Mr. Calliford, that the
Commit fearing they should not have time to proceed on greater Grievances of
the Nation, made one general Vote, that it was a Grievance and great breach of
Trust, for the Commissioners of the Revenue to set forfeited Lands to
themselves or any in trust for them, or any employed under them; too many
instances of which came before the Commit. I dare not presume on your
Lordships time to relate the main grievous Complaints of dispoyled Protestants,
turned out of the Farms they were formerly in, and some that had their Lands
taken away from them after they had Plowed and Sowed it, and then set to Irish
for a fifth of what they paid.

Others their Lands seized contrary to Law, their Goods and Cattle taken out of
the Country and brought to Dublin, that so they might be under an Attachment
for Debt i^ England, being asked why they complained not to the Government,
gave such reasons a^ I am loath to repeat.

With your Lordships leave, I now come to the Disposition of forfeited Lands;
and though the Methods pretended for Setting them was very fair, yet the practice
was differin^ from it. Articles was used, that few had liberty of bidding for
the Lands they Lived o^ but by all I could find in the Books and Rent-Role the
Greatest part of the Lands were S^ for private Advantage to Favorites or some
concerned in the Revenue, or in trust f^^ others, as the Lord Chief Baron
Heyley, Judge Lindon, several of the best Farms near Dubli^ taken in the name
of a Hackney-Coachman, by the best information I could get and mak^ out of the
Books and Rent-Role, the Lands were generally set for one fourth of the pr^sent
Value.

I found by the Books and Rent-Role, that the forfeited Lands were set the
first y^a^ for 32000 l. and this was when only two of the Provinces were
entirely under his Majesty's Obedience.

The second Year when the other two Provinces were under his Majesty's
Governmen^ and entire Peace, then all the forfeited Lands were set for about
10000 l. per Annum, an^ the reason of this being asked, I was answered by some
in the Revenue, that it was the Articles of Limerick made so great a fall in
the forfeitures, but that could not be the Caus^ for there was much more added
to the forfeitures by the surrender of Galloway and Lim^rick, which brought in
two Provinces, than there was restored, though it was said by the Lords Justices
Interpretations of the Articles of Galloway, There were some put in possesion
of Lands they had no Right to; this Disposition of the forfeited Lands was so
not^rious that it put the Commit of Accounts off from any further inquiry,
and intended report of the Lands as they must of the forfeited Goods, that they
were generally imbeled, in my humble Opinion to the Value of some Hundred
thousands of Pounds.

The next thing the Commit of Accounts looked into was the Accounts of
forfeit Goods which was so framed that it would have taken up Months to have
brought it into Methods that might be understood. The Account seemed nothing
but a trick, neither Cheeque nor Vochers, Method nor Form who to Charge, but so
loose that every Officer employed in them must be examined before a Charge
could be made on any one of them, but upon the whole I found there was not
brought to the Kings Account above 1800 l. and about 5000 charged for Goods as
I remember on the Army that they had taken, but I saw not such care taken to
charge others that had greater Shares of the Goods, so that 135000 l. worth of
Goods delivered into the Commissioners Charge, and near as much said to be
privately disposed of in the Country by the Commissioners of the Revenue by
private Orders from Mr. Calliford. Of all there appears not 10000 l. brought to
their Majesty's Account.

Yet I must acquaint your Lordships, that there seemed great diligence in the
Government to enlarge the Forfeitures, as will appear in an instance I beg your
Lordships leave to Mention.

There was one Ivy, now Knight of the Shire for the County of Waterford, This
Gentleman upon his flight for England from the Irish Government, had his Estate
and Goods Seized, and upon his return sound a Quantity of his Wool in King
James's Stores in Waterford, upon which he made application to the Government
to have his Wool restored, but could obtain nothing but Referrences from one
set of Commissioners to another, but at last had his final answer, that he must
go to the Exchequer, and they told him that he must proceed by due Methods of
Law, which he did, the Kings Council demurred, and he obliged by the Court to
join or answer. I beg your Lordships pardon if I express it not according to
the Rules of Law, but so it was upon some nicety in the Law, Judgment was
given against him, and he lost his Wool. This was set forth in a Petition to
the Parliament, and put into my hands to move, but there was in our Sessions no
Room for Private Grievances, our Public were so many. And therefore the
Gentleman was only pitied among the Number of afflicted Protestants.

The Irish that came in upon the Kings first Proclamation were better used,
having the right ways to get their Goods, which few of the English could do.

The next Inquiry, May it please your Lordships, that the Commit of Accounts
made, was relating to the Stores, and in the Manage of them, found Mr. Robinson
to be principally concerned. The Stores that were left by K. James were said to
be great both of Provisions and Clothes, but of all there did appear nothing:
the noise indeed was great that Mr. Robinson had managed the Stores to the
Advantage of some body, to the Value of 80000 l. but so ingeniously it is
managed that I presume nothing Material can be proved whilst the Manage of that
Kingdom in these things are of a piece. Mr. Robinson is besides his other
Employments, one of the Deputies to the Lord Coningsby in the Treasury, and who
ere has power in that influences most men of Employment in that Kingdom. One
Artifice I was told of by a Commissioner of the forfeited Goods, that was used
in Cork, which seemed designed to serve for a pretense in general for the
imbezilments of the Stores, and that was keeping Corn, Oats I think it was 5 or
6 foot thick till it rotted, when at the same time both Soldiers and
inhabitants were in extremity, this rotting of Corn is thought will be a
general Article through the Kingdom, it was said there was quantities of Beef,
Butter, and other Provisions put for France, and that a Ship of Wool taken out
of the Stores of Waterford by Mr. Robinson under pretense of being used at the
Siege of Cork was disposed by Mr. Robinson, and sometime after, a Ship was
taken by o^ Capt. Peder, Commander of one of their Maj^sties Ships coming from
B^est to Ireland Laden with French Goods, the Captain brought her into
Waterford, and there received Orders from the Government to deliver her up to
the Officers of the Custom House, for tha^ she belonged to Dublin, the Captain
refusing, threatening Letters came to him, and the^ he said they had best be
quiet, for that he had taken such Letters of their settling a Correspondance in
France as would do their Business.

The relation of the Ship I had from a Colonel that is at the Door ready to
give you^ Lordships a more full Account as he had it from the Captains own
Mouth.

I shall now with your Lordships leave give the Remarks I made on the Manage of
the Treasury, which was never before in the hands of the Chief Governor. The
former methods were that all Receipts and Payments were transacted by Exchequer
Acquittances and they were entered in several Offices, the last of which was the
Pells, where all was entered, and every Monday morning the Book brought before
the Chief Governor, by which he knew what was in the Treasury, this cannot now
be practicable, where most of the Receipts and Payments are by Paper
assignments, by which means there is no Ch^cque o^ the Treasury, nor indeed on
the respective Collectors and Receivers, the consequence of which is to be
feared has and does affect the ill payment of the Army, and that ruins the
Country, which is the reason of my laying it before your Lordships. There was
some motion made in the Parliament of Ireland of the hardships the Country lay
under by Free-Quarters, but it was unanimously agreed by the House, that there
was a necessity for the Army so to do, and that the Country freely gave them
the bread out of their Mouths, and the Clothes from their Backs to support the
Army when they had no Pay. But that which grieved the Subject was the irregular
and unlimited way of taking their Corn and Cattle from them, by which more was
destroyed then eaten, and that brought a Famine in the Country, and the loss of
thousands of people. This was complained of to the Lords Justices, and Offers
made by the Country, either to pay the Army, or give them such quantities of
Provisions as they should need, and so keep the Country in a possibility of
supplying both the Army and themselves. But this was rejected, which together
with the belief of that there was enough if rightly applied of Forfeitures and
Stores to have maintained the Army without any burden to the Country, caused
hard reflections on the L. Coningsby, I speak this not to reflect on his
Lordship, for that I never had any concern with his Lordship, but as my Estate
lay under the common Calamity of his Government. There was another Grievance
much complained of, and that was the giving Protections to Irish against just
Debts owing to the English, to such as were not under the Articles of Limerick,
when poor destroyed Protestants were left to the Irish Suits.

I must now beg leave to lay at your Lordships feet, the present condition of
that ever Loyal and obedient City, the City of Dublin, of which I have the
Honor to be a Member, this City has never till now been denied their right of
Choosing Magistrates, which under the Cover of a Clause in the new Rules of
Proving, is become an imposition, excluding any choice until the Man put on
them to be chosen, this is the case of the present Mayor now in the second year
of his Majoralty. The City at first, according to their ancient Custom chose
another, but were rejected; I hope your Lordships will not take me to reflect
on the Man, when I say as he was the last of many in turn to be chose, so he
was the least in his fortune, There being many of considerable Estates, and
known integrity and Loyalty to their Majesty's over whose heads he came.

(...) must further pray your Lordships leave to mind your Lordships that this
Gentleman by ^nterest of some it is thought that still promotes him, was
recommended by his Majesty when ^reland to be Treasurer of the City, but his
Majesty on the first application graciously recal^^ his first recommendation,
saying he would abrige none of the Privileges of the City but in (...) Election
of this Major, they were not so used by the Lords Justices, and as this
Imposition ^s new unto them, so it was unexpected, having so lately received
with their Deliverance* Majesty's gracious promise that they should enjoy all
their Privileges, and so they did by Majesty's Command, until this Command of
the Lords Justices. These new Rules were in ^^ce in the best days Ireland ever
saw under the happy Government of the Duke of Ormond; (...) his Grace never
made use of them for more than they were intended a power in the hands ^he
Government, to lay aside such as were questionable in their Loyalty, which that
City has ^er yet been tainted in.

(...) dare not stay your Lordships longer to ennumerate all the oppressions
that poor Kingdom (...) under; but what I have said I humbly affirm will be
asserted by thousands in Ireland. All ^^ch I humbly pray your Lordships to
receive as in truth I intend it, for their Majesty's ser^^e, and the relief of
their oppressed Subjects in Ireland among whom I am one.

F. Brewster.

(...) Obedience to an Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, assembled in
Parliament, the 28 Feb. (...) 1692. I Sir Will. Gore of Donnegale in the County
of Donnegal and Kingdom of Ireland Ba^^ronet do hereby humbly certify.
That a part of their Majesty's Forces had free Quarters in the County of
Donnegal, and other Counties in the Kingdom of Ireland, during the late War,
and sometime after, upon ^^^r Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and took much of
their Goods, for which they did not make ^^^isfaction, and that when I demanded
Satisfaction of some of the Officers of Colonel Tyffins ^^giment and others
who Quartered longest there, they did assure me their pay was stopped ^atisfie
the said Quarters, and what was taken from the Inhabitants by their Men.

That about 1500 Irish Officers and Soldiers, most of them Armed, under the
Command of ^^^gadier O Donnel (as they styled him) were quartered for the most
part on the Protestant In^^^itant; of the County of Donnegal, with a great
rabble of Wives, Children and other depen^^ts, for a considerable part of the
Winter Anno 1691. during which time their Officers took (...) Cattle by force
from the Country people, and particularly from James Hammond, and Hugh
^^derson, who live near the Town of Donnegal, by which they and many others
were extream^^ improverished, that the said Quarters were not satisfied, or
Cattle paid for when I left that ^^^gdom, which was about 4 Months ago, nor can
I hear that they have been paid for since. That the said Officers and Soldiers
were extreme insolent during their being quartered as ^^^esaid, demanding of me
the Abbey of Donnegal to say Mass in, and causing their Priest to say (...)
publicly in the Town and next house to the Castle of Donnegal, who being
rebuked for it (...) he was King Williams Chaplain, as being Chaplain to one of
Brigadier O Donnels Regiments ^^^t was in the Kings pay, as I was informed by
those that spoke to him on this occasion, They ^^^re extremely importunate for
liberty to Quarter their Women.

That the method of disarming them was thus, They were warned to appear and
bring in their ^^^s on a certain day to the Governor of the County, that they
knew they were to be disar^^^, some of their Officers having told me so, by
which means they brought in a most incon^^^rable number of unfixed Arms, and
kept the best which I believe they have still, that I pres^^^ the Governor of
the County to clap up one of the Officers that I knew had a great number (...)
Muskets, and did not deliver them, but he excused himself for want of Orders.

That I have been lately informed by Letters, that the Kings Rent which is a
Chiefrent pay^^^ out of most Estates into the Exchequer of Ireland, are
demanded from the most Estates in ^^^ght and elsewhere, which may keep waste,
none daring to Plant them for fear of being dis^^^ed; That I have received but
four Pound since the year 1688. Out of an Estate that pays ^^^t 66 l. Yearly
into the Exchequer, that by the present Collecting the said Rents many Estates
may be ruined, and run more and more in Arrear, except their Majesty's will be
pleased to for (...) till the wisdom of a Parliament there, may take such
course in it as may be to their satisfact^^^

All which I most humbly certify as truth having been a Spectator of most of
the things h^^^ in mentioned, as witness my hand this 1st. of March 1692.

Will. (...)

Die Jovis 2. Martij 1692.
IN Obedience to your Lordships Commands, to give my Reasons why I did not
mention (...) which was given to me for Reasons why those persons that were
aggrieved by the Gove^ment in Ireland did not complain to the Lords Justices,
was this, That they observed and (...) believe nothing was done by the
Commissioners of the Revenue but what was agreeable to t^^ Majesty's pleasure.

In obedience to your Lordships further Commands, to explain who I mean by
saying it (...) thought Mr. Robinson had disposed of the Stores, to the Value
of 8000 l. for the use of s^^ Body, I mean my Lord Coningsby and himself.

Your Lordships are further pleased to command me to name who told me that it
was t^^^ purpose to complain to the Government of any Grievance, and that they
should be treated (...) Enemies if they did, was Mr. Joy in the case of his
Wool, Mr. Henry Davies in that of the (...) Panns set to Judge Lindon, and by
Mr. Cocker in that of the Imbezlement of the Forfe^^^ Goods and Stores, He
further adding that he had a small Employment which he believe^ (...) should
have lost if he had appeared in any such thing.

Mr. Edward Haines a Sheriffs Peer, and one of the Common Council of the City
of Dub^^^ told me, that tho he and several others had a desire to complain of
the Grievance in deny^^ the City their Right of Electing their Lord Major, they
durst not do it, for that the Lords ^^stices looked upon any that complained as
Enemies, and that he was Indicted by the Lord ^^jors order at their own Quarter
Sessions, for appearing in the right of the City, tho the p^^tence was for
Words he spoke, and the Lord Major being not able to prevail with the Gr^^^
Jury to find the Bill, he was Indicted at the Kings Bench, and that he had
heard they wo^^ Ruin him. There was Mr. Flood and several others that made
Complaints of the like Nat^^^

Fran. Brewster

One of the Earl of Mulgraves Speeches in Parliament about the Bill Entitled
An Act for the f^^^dom of Elections and more impartial Proceedings in
Parliament, passed in the House of C^^mons and sent up to the Lords, in the
Winter Sessions of Parliament, Anno 1692. as it was t^^^ in short hand.
My Lords,
THis Debate is of so very great consequence, that I resolved to be silent, and
rather t^^ advised by the ability of others, then to show my own want of it.
Besides it is of so^^ a Nature, that I who speak always unpremeditately,
apprehend extremely, saying any th^^ which may be thought the lest reflecting,
tho even that ought not to restrain a man here fr^^ doing ones duty to the
public in a Business where it seems to be so highly concerned.

I have always heard, I have always read that Foreign Nations and all this part
of the w^^^ have admired and envied the Constitution of this Government. For
not to speak of the K^^^ Power, here is a House of Lords to advise him on all
important Occasions about Peace or W^^^ about all things that may concern the
Nation, the care of which is very much entrusted to (...) Lordships. But yet
because your Lordships cannot be so conversant with the generality o^ (...)
People, nor so constantly in the Country as is necessary for that purpose, here
is a House (...) Commons also chosen by the very people themselves, newly come
from among them, or sh^^^ be so, to represent all their Grievances, to express
the true mind of the Nation, and to dis^^^ of their Money, at least so far as
to begin all Bills of that nature; and if I am not mistaken the (...) writ for
Election sent down to the Sheriffs does empower them to choose, what? their
Representa^^^

Now my Lords, I beseech you to consider the meaning of that word
Representative. Is i^ (...) do any thing contrary to their mind? it would be
absurd to suppose it; and yet how can (...) ^^herwise, if they, after being
chosen, change their dependency, engage themselves in Employments plainly
inconsistent with that great trust reposed in them: and that I will take the
liberty ^o demonstrate to your Lordships they now do, at least according to my
humble opinion.

I will instance first, in the least and lowest incapacity they must be under
who so takes employments.

Your Lordships all know but too well what a general carelessness there appears
every day, more and more in the public Business; if so how is it likely that
men should be as diligent in their Duty in Parliament as that Business
requires, where employments, and a great deal of other business shall take up
both their minds and their time.

But then in some cases it is worse, as in Commands of the Army and other
Employments of that kind, when they must have a divided Duty: for it does
admirably become an Officer to ^it Voting away Money in a House of Commons,
while his Soldiers are perhaps taking it away at their Quarters for want of his
presence to restrain them, and of better Discipline among them. Nay perhaps his
Troop or Regiment may be in some Action abroad, and he must either have the
shame of being absent from them at such a time, or from that House where he is
entrusted with our Liberties.

To this I have heard but one Objection by a noble Lord, that if this Act
should pass, the King ^s not allowed to make a Captain a Colonel, without
disabling him to sit in Parliament.

Truly if a Captain has only deserved to be advanced for exposing himself in
Parliament, (...) think the Nation would have no great loss in the Kings
letting alone such a Preferment.

But my Lords, there is another sort of incapacity yet worse then this, I mean
that of Parliament Men's having such Places in the Exchequer, as the very profit
of them depends on the Money given to the King in P rliament.

Would any of your Lordships send and entrust a Man to make a Bargain for you,
whose very interest shall be to ma^e you give as much as he can possibly?

It puts me in mind of a Farce, where an Actor holds a Dialogue with himself
speaking first in one Tone, and then answering himself in another.

Really my Lords this is no Farce, for it is no laughing matter to undo a
Nation: but it is altogether as unnatural for a Member of Parliament to ask first
in the Kings name for such a sort of supply, give an Account from him of how
much is needful toward the paying such an Army or such a Fleet, and then
immediately give, by his ready Vote, what he had before asked by his Masters
order.

Besides my Lords, there is such a necessity now for long sitting of
Parliaments, and the very Privileges belonging to Members are of so great
extent, that it would be a little hard and unequal to other Gentlemen, they
should have all the places also.

All the Objections that have been made may be reduced to these:

First, it is told us, that it is a disrespect to the King, that his Servants or
Officers should be excluded

To this I desire it may be considered, that it is in this case, as when a Tenant
sends up any body to treat for him: would any of your Lordships think it a
disrespect, nay would the King himself think it any, if the Tenant would not
wholly refer himself to one of your own Servants, (...) to the Kings
Commissioners in the case of the Crown? And if he chooses rather some plain
(...) ^est Friend of his own to supply his absence here, will any man blame
such a Proceeding, or ^^^^k it unmannerly?

Besides your Lordships know this Act admits them to be chosen, notwithstanding
their employments, provided the Electors know it first, and are not deceived in
their choice.

All we would prevent is that a good rich Corporation should not choose to
Entrust with all their Libertys a plain honest Country Neighbor, and find him
within six Months, changed into (...) preferred cunning Courtier, who shall tyd
them to their Cho^ce, tho he is no more the same man, than if he were turned
Papist, which by the Law as it stands already, puts an incapacity upon him.

Another Objection is, that this Act, may by its Consequence, prolong this
Parliament which they allow would be a very great Grievance, and yet suppose
the King capable of putting it upon us, which I have too much Respect for him
to admit of; tho I am glad howeve^ that it is objected by Privy Counselors in
favor, who consequently I hope will never advise (...) thing which they now
exclaim against as so great a Grievance.

But pray my Lords what should tempt the King to so ill a policy? Can he fear a
freedom of Choice in a people, to whose good will he owes all his Power, which
these Lords suppose he may use to their Prejudice?

And therefore give me leave to say, as I must not suspect him of so ill a
Design as the Perpetuating this Parliament, so he cannot, he ought not to
suspect a Nation so entirely, I was going t^ say, so fondly Devoted to him.

My Lords, O Man is readier then my self to allow that we owe the Crown all
submission as to the time of calling Parliaments according to Law, and
appointing also where they shall sit, but with reverence be it spoken, the King
owes the Nation an intre freedom in Choosing their Representatives, and it is no
less his Duty to God then his true interest, that such a fa^^ and just
proceeding should be used toward us.

Consider my Lords of what mighty consequence it may he, that so many Votes
should be free, when upon one single one may depend the whole security or loss
of this Nation. By one single Vote such things may happen, that I almost
tremble to think on. By one single Vote a GENERAL EXCISE may be granted and
then we are all lost. By one single Vote the Crown may be empowered to name all
the Commissioners for raising the Taxes, and then surely we should be in a fair
way toward it.

Nay whatever has happened may again be apprehended; and I hope those reverend
Prelates will reflect, that if they gro^ once obnoxious to a prevalent Party,
one single Voice may be as dangerous to that Bench, as a general
dissatisfaction amo^^ the People proved to be once in a late Experience: which
I am far from saying by way of threatening, but only by way of cautio^

My Lords. WE may think because this concerns not the house of Lords, that we
need not be so over careful of the Matter, but there are Noblemen in France, at
least such as were so before they were enslaved, who that they might dom^ near
over others, and serve a present turn perhaps, let all things alone so long
till the people were quite Mastered, and the Nobility themselves too, to bear
them company.

So that I never met a French man, even of the greatest rank (and some had
10000 Pistols a year in employments) that di^ not envy us here for our freedom
from that which they groan under: and this I have observed universally, except
just Monsieu^ de Louvoy, Mon. Colbert, or such People, because they were the
Ministers themselves who occasioned these Complaints, an^ thrived by the
Oppressions of others.

My Lords, This Country of ours is very apt to be provoked, we have had a late
experience of it, and tho no wise man, bu^ would bear a great deal rather then
make a bustle; yet really the people are otherwise, and will at any time change
a present uneasiness, for any other condition, tho a worse; we have known it so
too often, and sometimes repented it too late.

Let them not have this new Provocation in being debarred from any Security in
their Representatives, for malicious People will not fail to infuse into their
minds that all those vast sums, which have been and still must be raised
toward this War, are no^ disposed away in so fair a manner as ought to be; and
I am afraid they will say their money is not given but taken.

However whatere success this Bill may may have with your Lordships, there must
needs come some good Effect of it: for if it passes it will give us security;
if it be obstructed it will give us warning. I humbly move your Lordships that
the Bill may be committed.

After which it being put to the question whether the bill should be rejected
or committed, it was carried for the bill by 15. Votes, there being only 32
against it, and 47 for it, amongst which latter were 5 Bishops; but it was so
late, that many of the last refused to stay, and so it was deferred to a
further day, by which time so many Proxies were obtained, as threw out the Bill
as nine a Clock at night by 2 Votes.

Note, The occasion of all this was their having been several other Prisoners
as well as these Lords brought to the Kings Bench, here was an Affidavit of
Aaron Smith drawn privately at somebodys Chamber so equivocally that instead of
the word Witnesses, according to the Statute, he only swore there was Evidence
against each Prisoner, and at the end of it, instead of Witnesses against each
Prisoner, the Affidavit only mentioned Witnesses against the Prisoners, by all
which he saved himself from being forsworn, so preventing any punishment, from
being prosecuted by the the Prisoners and his Affidavit served for (...) though
but an ill one for the Judges to remand the Prisoners back, they supposing
there were two Witness against each of the Prisoners. Note also, While this
was under examination, the Judges showed plainly they had not doubted of the
Equivocation, but hoped it was sufficient to warrant, or at least to excus^
their Proceedings, which perhaps had never thus luckily come to light, if Peers
had not been concerned to bring it into their House by the order of which
entered in their Books the subjects of all Ranks are better secured ever after.
These Notes should have been inserted after the 17 day of Sep. 1692.

Note, That Precedence is not observed in the House of Lords, where they Sign
Protestations. He that draws them up Signs first, and then others as they come
to the Books.


