England's Alarm: OR, A most Humble DECLARATION, ADDRESS, and fervent PETITION,
To his Most Excellent MAJESTY Charles the Second, King of Great BRITAIN and
Ireland; AND To his most Honorable and Grand Council The PARLIAMENT of
ENGLAND; AS ALSO To the CITY of LONDON, AND The whole NATION in general.
CONCERNING The great Overtures, Catastrophe's, and grand Occurrences about to
inundate and pour in upon us, as the Judgments of Almighty God upon Antichrist
and his Adherents, and the Pride, Nauseancy, and Error of Professors, in the
years 1680 and 1681.

Written by a true Lover of the true Protestant Religion, and of his Tottering
poor Native Country of England. Johannes Philanglus.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Pasham in Fleet-lane. 1679.

England's Alarm.
TO THE KING.
Most Excellent and Dread Sovereign,
THE meanest Creatures have access and admittance to the Throne of the King of
kings, by the Blood of Jesus; may I, the meanest of your Subjects, have
admittance to your Temporal Throne, by the Dreads and horrible Fears of the
secret Effusion of your own and our Blood, by the unprevented Conspiracy of
Bloodthirsty Papists. The meanest Star, as it has dependence on, and
influence from the Sun, has liberty to dart forth its Nocturnal Beams, when
great Phoebus, the Titan of the World, submerses his refulgent Rays on the
Neptune-waves; and now your glorious and Princely Rays are feared daily to set
continually, in the Horizon and Neptunian-Sea of Popish and Jesuitical
Subtilty, and bloody Cruelty. Shall faithful Subjects be afraid of a Frown,
when Church, State, and Crown are, by Papal Violence, Tumbling down? -- Inter
majora sydera minora lucerent. The poorest Subject in the Primitive Raigns of
the glorious Kings of Israel, have been permitted to cry, in times of
extremity, Help, O King! 2 Samuel 14.4. And though your magnificent Majesty be
ambiently attended with so many Stars of the first magnitude, yet a poor
Micaiah may prophecy to the King, and have a clearer prospect of the Celestial
Councels upon the heavenly Throne, than the Zedekiah's with their iron horns,
1. Kings 22.11.24. though he be fed with Bread and Water till these Euroclydons
be blown over. So, most excellent and glorious Prince, I beg Pardon as
prostrate at your most Sovereign feet, for this act of seeming-presumption,
while I acknowledge my self nothing; yet in the hand of God, things that are
not, may instruct things that are. Beside, the present Necessity, the horrid
and trembling sounds of the Plot and Plotters Alarming my Ears, my obsequious
duty to my King, and love to my Native Country, is the Womb that has conceived
and brought forth this Trembling Babe: Which, although in its Infancy, may, to
the future admiration of the securest Lethargists in this Nation, be credited
as a Child of Truth, by that time bright Phoebus has twice mounted the twelve
Herculean Pillars.

I remember, it was asserted by that Reverend Bishop James Usher, Bishop of
Armagh, sometimes in Ireland, That those Predictions that fell from him (most
of which are fulfilled already) were imprinted and engraven on his Spirit: even
so are these things that now I write to my Sovereign Lord the King and Country.
And moreover, if it be true, or like to be true, that is reported to us by the
Speech of the Dead, in Nocturnal Visions, as is famously reported by ancient
Philosophers, as Artemidorus, and the famous Remembrances of Julius Caesar his
Warning before his Death and fatal Stab in the Roman Senate, cum multis aliis;
then have I reason to fear the Impression of these things on my Spirit, and
these scaring Visions of the Night, which for some years past I have sustained,
concerning the Person and Crown of your Sacred Majesty; and also of him and
them who have raised the Thunder and Tempest in this our Horizon. As also the
just fears we may have of the sudden Fall of your Life and Crown, by the hand
or hands of Papists. And that except your Majesty be miraculously defended by
supreme Providence, and the timely Remissions by his mighty hand; and also your
Royal Adherence, and just and methodical Conjunction to your great Council the
Parliament, and so jointly removing the Nations Grievances, and those things
offending the King of Kings, and timely and speedily executing Justice upon the
notorous Offenders of your Majesty's Crown and State, and of the Church of
Christ; it cannot be, but that before either your Majesty or we are well aware,
they you now by your boundless Clemency indulge beyond Necessity, will give the
fatal stroke to your sacred Life, and in yours, to all your Subjects, who have
the Breast Plate of Christ's Righteousness upon them, and the marks of the Whore
of Babylon cashiered from you to the Conformists and Nonconformists; and that I
trembling fear in the 1680th year. O! would your Majesty please speedily to
extirpate out of your Royal Territories, and this City of London, all those
Amalekites that trouble Israel, (I mean the French) that devour and eat the
bread out of your Subjects mouths; and may you ever remember, that King Saul
for neglecting the Word of the Lord, and not totally destroying Amalek, had his
life dishonourably taken from him by a Chip of that block, 1 Samuel 15. compared
with 2 Samuel 1.13. Antiquity tells us, our English nation was never more blessed
with Peace and Prosperity, than when the French Nation were conquered by us; as
by Henry the fifth of famous memory, and Henry the sixth, who was crowned in
Paris, and planted the Flower-de-luce in Englands garden: But now it is to be
feared that the French King will be crowned not in the French, but our English
Paris (London) except the providence of the King of kings divert present
occurrences, and the prudence of your most Excellent Majesty, in happy
Conjunction with your prudent Parliament, prevent it; which that you may, the
God of Heaven grant.

It Is a Curse in Gods Word, to be governed or counseled by the Spirit of
Jezabel, or by a wicked woman, Isai. 3.12.15, 16. Hence has arose monstrous
Pride, and intolerable Oppression, the very bane of Church and State. Who knows
but by the hands of such, your Majesty may sustain a Stab or fatal Stroke! And
nothing would more draw the hearts of your Subjects up to the height of true
joy, than if it may please your Majesty to abandon such morning-clouds from the
Mountain of your Throne: O how glorious would the day shine! It is expressly
said by God, the King of kings, Deuteronomy. 17.17. The King shall not multiply wives
to himself, that his heart turn not away. And though Solomon's Throne was
established by God himself, yet it was strange women made his Crown to totter,
and his Kingdom to rend asunder. It Is the greatest interest to Kings and
Princes, to treat the Lords people kindly, who are still by the Papists and
Popish affected, called, in scorn and derision, Heretics: for he reproved
Kings for their sakes, Psalm. 105.14, 15. 'Twas the Prodromus to the destruction
of Ireland formerly (as says Dr. Usher) to adhere to the Principles and
Patterns of Papists; nothing being true they hold, as said the Martyr, but the
Doctrine of the Trinity: for Free will, and general Redemption, now embraced by
too many, is the Foundation of the Popish Kingdom, first brought into Rome in
the fifth Century by Pelagius. 'Twas the hastening the destruction of Ahaz King
of Israel, 2 Kings 16. in that he joined himself to the King of Assyria, verse.
7. Nothing can more suddenly ruin King and Kingdom, than joining Affinity with
Popish Princes, because God has determined to cast that Mountain as a
Millstone into the depths of the Sea, Rev. 18. Jer. 50, and 51. and they that
will not come out of her when her hour comes, shall perish with her without all
peradventure. Besides this, Ahaz goes to Damascus, verse. 10. and takes a
fashion of the Altar and the Worship, and sends to Vrijah the Priest for to
take a pattern thereof; which, Isai. 8. caused the Lord to hasten his
Judgments, under the figure of Maher-shalal-hash-baz, make haste to spoil, and
to the prey make speed. So verily will God make haste to ruin that Kingdom
that shall patternize their Worship, from the grand Idolatry of so impudent an
Harlot, Rev. 17. as the Church of Rome is. Alas, our Sun is darkened with
Popish Principles, our Moon turned into Blood, our Stars fallen and falling
from Heaven, the true Protestant Profession and Principles; both Universities
and Pulpits filled with the Roman Trash that the Martyrs and Fathers of our
Protestant Religion truly abhorred, and Gods word is silent in: while those
few Stars that remain in their Primitive Luster, are scoffingly called
Calvinists and Solifidians, as if Christ and his Apostles were not the Patrons
of the same Doctrine.

May your Majesty be directed by the good Angels of God, to do what may
preserve your Life, prevent our Fears, establish your Throne, comfort the
Protestant Churches of Christ, and glad the hearts of all your Subjects. Your
Majesty knows that the design of Monarchy is to preserve your Country in it
self, not to betray it. For though those things that God will not set up, be
attempted in the breast of Majesty it self, yet it may not prosper, but will
tumble down as Babel. In medio Consistit Virtus. The way to make your Kingdom
everlasting, and your Crown immovable, is to consult Gods Word and Will, and
execute his Commands, cherish his Church, his Doctrine and Truths; banish and
subdue his Enemies; and make it the policy of the State, to aim at Gods Glory,
the Nations Prosperity, and the Churches Comfort: by permitting the various
Interests and Privileges of King and People to glide sweetly in their proper
Channels, as Law, Reason, and Equity has provided, from the Constitutions of
Antiquity.

Vivat Rex, and Vertitas.
To the PARLIAMENT, the great Council of England.
Noble Senators,
WHen you that are our great Representatives, and the Pillars, Nerves, and
Sinews of our Body-politick, have not a Being, it may be said, that the People
and Nation of England (during that Casma and Gulf of Dissolution) have also no
Being. And how monstrous would it be in the eye of Reason, and incommodious to
our Interests and grand Concerns, at this juncture of Affairs especially, to
have a glorious Head without a Body to substitute it? But though yet you are
not born into our Angelical Commonwealth, yet I hope you are conceived in the
womb of the hearts of the best People, whose great Interest it will be to
hasten the Birth with all possibility, and by a careful Midwifry to deliver
safely that hopeful Child may cherish its aged Mother, and defend her from that
Murderous Train of Popish Plotters, and Devils in grain: That you may have the
Heart of Piety it self, and the Tongues of Angels, to promote Justice and
Verity; bovem in lingua nondum ut habeatis: That Bribes may be as remote from
you, as the East from the West, as Popish Cruelty is distant from England's
Felicity: And as it was once said of the Belgic People, of their prudent
management of great Affairs, so may it be practiced by you; Dum nesciunt
fingere possunt, quid autem agant statim Statuunt. Noble Sirs, as it was said
in another Case, may be now said to you in this present Case, Quid facitis,
faxite Citius; if you be not nimble, the mangled walls of our old Carthage will
be tumbled down, and the Babylonish Whore rush in at both ends of the Town. And
if bad Council, or thwarting Providence, or Romish Policy, should either
prorogue your time, or dissolve your being once more, it is past peradventure
feared, we nor you shall live any longer, and your Ruins will make way for our
Miseries. O consult God, begin at the Oracle not of Delphos, but Christ:
Resolve with Hannibal, when he was going over the Alps into Italy, Aut
inveniam, aut viam faciam. Truly, Sirs, you must hew your ways through the
Rocks, and meet your Enemies under ground, or they will quickly both you and us
Confound. And, as Luther said to Malancthon, If we shall not boldly and
resolvedly do the Lords Work, he will remove us, and raise up others; so say I
to you, If through fear, cowardice, or sloth, you should outsleep three
quarters of a year more, our Petitions will end, and your Work be finished: Yet
will God raise up others yet invisible to deliver his redeemed, and work
wonders for us in our field of Zoan: for the Earthquake, Rev. 11.11, 12, 13. is
at hand, 1680 will go near to manifest it, and the time of the three days and
half, the time of the Churches Sackcloath and mourning state, is near
expiration; and God will call you up in a Cloud of protection, Isai. 26. ult.
while he shakes the Earth and Earthly Professions and Professors, and makes the
Earth to disclose her Blood, and bring to naught things that are, by things
that are not, 1 Cor. 1. and the Romish Philanax shall be cast in the Sea like a
Millstone, never more to rise; and her Brats and Followers, and the Blood of
Christ, but their own dung and dross, shall perish with her: because when they
were called out, they refused the Wine, Milk, and Waters of Life, the marrow
and fatness of the Gospel, for Trash, Popish Ceremonies, and Jesuitical
Doctrines. And this let Sion expect 1681 or 1682, to 1685. Deliverance will
come another way.

To the CITY of LONDON.
O, London, London!
MY Soul mourns for thee, like Tire and Sidon, Ezekiel 28. thou have been like the
Garden of god, every precious stone was thy Covering; thy Tabrets and Pipes was
prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created. Thou that wast the anointed
Chorubin, thou wast upon the holy Mountain of God. Thou have wallted up and
down in the midst of the stones of fire; thou have had the voice of the Turtle
in thee, when the dark places of thy Land was desolate; but Iniquity is found
in thee. In thee is found fullness of Bread, Pride and Wantonness, Extortion,
Whoredoms, Drunkenness, Error, and Heresies. None have partaken more of
Christ, and none have more slighted and abused Christ, and the means of Grace:
and because thy heart is lifted up, and thou saidest I am as God, Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold, I am against thee, O London, I will cause (Ezekiel.
26.3.) many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causes his waves and
tides to come up to thee. And they shall destroy they walls, and break down thy
towers: God will scrape thy dust from thee, and make thee like the top of the
rock. And because thy Children are settled up the Lees, Zeph. 1. God shall
search thee with Candles, and purge thee with Nitre and Soap, and cast thee
into the Furnace, that his Sons among thee may be tried. Neither will thy Gold
or thy Silver preserve thee in the day of wrath, Zeph. 1.18. because thou have
been wanton, and decked thy self in thy Attires, while thy poor Brethren have
wanted Bread, and Arraiment to cover their Nakedness. And thou have professed a
Faith that had nor love nor bowels in it; but have cried out, Isai. 66. with
the Proud, Stand far off, for I am more holy, more rich, more honorable than
thou; and have respected the persons of the rich and great, while thou have
contemned the brother of low degree: Therefore, Isai. 3. shall thy Jewels and
Ear-ring, thy Head-attires and Paintings, thy French fashions, and uncivil and
unseemly Dressings, prostrating thy self to Strangers, and discovering thy
Nakedness by thy French unseemly Robes and Dressings, God will send thee (yea
by that Nation) whose folly thou have impudently followed, Baldness for hair,
Stink for perfumes, and Sackcloth for clothing; War for peace, and Blood for
water; till thou return and acknowledge thy iniquities, and break off thy
whoredoms and impieties, and be found in the way of repentance. But for the
hidden ones in thee, the Children of the Covenant, who have the Faith of Jesus,
and the Commandments of God, who have not exacted the labors, but freely
followed the Lord the Lamb; and have clothed the naked, and fed the hungry,
and scorned the fashions, and despised the glories, and have been transformed
in the renewing of their minds; who have disdained the Babylonish Garment and
the wedge of Gold, the Lord will hide them in the hollow of his hand, and say
to them, Come, my people, Isai. 26. into your several Chambers, until the
indignation be over. But you that drink Wine in bowls, and sport your selves on
Beds of Ivory, while the afflictions of Joseph are not minded, suddenly will
come your Calamity, as the pains of a woman in Travel, and as the Storm and
Thunder in a clear day. A day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of
wastness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, and a day of clouds
and thick darkness. And you, Canaphims and Kenites, that for your Atheistical
Self-interest, that God of the world, so you may keep but your Pride, your
Honors and Gold, care not though you set to your slavish hands and help to
pull down the Church and State, and swallow Bribes as Children) Plumb-stones;
be it known to you, if God be true, a double portion of divine Vengeance shall
be your lot in the day at hand. And note, that Unanimity, not Uniformity, is
most remote from Papistry, etc.

To the NATION in general.
Ah, England!
THou have had thy Name from thy Angelical State and Beauty, but thou art
fallen like Lucifer. Thou wast an inexhaustible pit of Treasure, and his
Devilish Holiness in quondam times has licked his Neapolitan fingers of thy
Sweetness: and now he remembers thy Delicacies, and would attempt to ravish thy
Wardrobes, and drain thee dry with his insatiable Bucket; if for thy Iniquities
thy God gives him leave. For the Pope, like the Devil his Father, cannot come
one link of his chain, unless thy God suffer him, for thy unrepented Sins; and
while thou art crying out against the Jesuits and other the Incendiaries, thou
forgettest to cry to him, whom by sin and dishonor thou have provoked to send
the Wolf and the wild Boar of the Italian forest, into thy Vineyard. Remember,
England, if thou art not mad drunk with the Whores Charms, how that thy
Preaching-Ministers are turned into dumb Dogs and ravening Wolves. And they
bear rule by thy means, and thou love to have it so, Jer. 5.31. And you that
are of the Ecclesiastic Function, that not long since, if you do remember, did
cast out the Laborers of the Lords work in the Lords Vineyard, and got the
Fleece, and turned the Flock to the Devil, and set up your drunken, mad,
Arminian, Pelagian, and Pope-poisoned Sons to ensnare the Flock. You hate the
Pope, but have received Popery: Arminianism, Free Will, General Redemption,
Falling from Grace, denying a free, personal, eternal Election, are all hatched
in Hell, and are the Popes foundation, that which the Martyrs abhorred, etc.
and in those days Papists only asserted; and in your bringing in of this
Serpent, of this Army of Vipers in the belly of the Trojan Horse, painted over
to the Peoples view with a show of Zeal, Religion and Purity, yet the ground of
Popery in England, and of our Desolation and Destruction: and this brand will
lie on you, Gentlemen, when England is wallowing in her blood. And have raised
up Persecutions and Acts of Parliament against the Lord's Lambs, for serving
their God, and preaching Christ to the People, whom you have famished with your
Assyrian and Roman dishes, and driven them from post to pillar, while you
suffered the Romish Leopard to lie in your houses, in your Territories, and in
your Pulpits. And now you are come up in remembrance before God, and she (I
mean the whore) whom you have adored and jussled so nigh to, will jussle you
out of your States, Dignities, and Honors: for though you turn, she will no more
trust you, you shall burn. Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, Jer.
50.31. and 51.44. and you shall spew out again all the Dainties you have
swallowed down by iniquity. Your Wall shall fall. Break off your Iniquities by
Repentance, if happily the Lord may accept you, and turn to the Blood of Jesus,
and acknowledge your Errors, your Covetousness, your Persecutions of Christ's
Lambs, your feeding your bellies, and famishing the Flock with Popish Trash and
dry Ceremonies; and cast from thou that Babylonish Garment you have bespotted
your selves with, and let not the dust of an Idol lie in your Gowns, in your
Families, in your Churches, and in your Pulpits. My Soul mourns for you,
because you have the name of Protestants. O that you had the Spirit, and
Doctrine, and Gifts of Protestants. Gather your selves together, yea, gather
together, O Nation not desirous, before the decree bring forth, before the day
pass as the Chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you. Seek the
Lord all ye meek of the Land, that have Christ's imputed Righteousness for your
Wedding Garment, and his Blood alone for your Laver; It may be ye shall be bid
in the day of the Lords fierce anger, Zeph. 2. Repent of your fullness of
Gospel-bread, your forsaking the pure Doctrine of Christ and his Messengers,
and giving heed to lies and sables: ever learning and running up and down, but
never attaining to the faith of Gods Elect, and to the Love that covers a
multitude of sins; who justify your selves, and cloak over your enmity,
malice, and implacable spirits, with fair words and soft speeches, and
voluntary humility, while within you are Pride, Covetousness, Revenge, Lust,
and all manner of wanton filthiness. The Lord has made bare his holy arm, and
will take away your Cloak that you have deceived with, and you shall seek from
sea to sea for the pure Word you have contemned, with its dispensers, while you
have laid out your money for that that is no bread, that is, not Christ And you
shall know that the Lord has spoken to you, but you have refused the still
Waters, and chosen the swift streams. There is no Peace to the wicked in their
own righteousness, out of Christ imputed Righteousness; but it shall be well
with the Righteous, even in the day of the greatest distress. Then lift up your
heads and rejoice, for the day of your Redemption draws nigh. For in twenty
four years to come, there shall be neither Pope, nor Popedomes, but the Lord
shall reign in Mount Zion before his Ancients gloriously, Dan. 7.

FINIS.

