Englands Triumph And JOY for the MEETING OF THE King and Parliament.
LET us renew our Acclamations and Shouts, Let us dry up our Tears, and cease
our Lamentations: Our Halcyon Days begin again to appear; and it is now, that
we have reason to hope, that all our Fears and Jealousies will vanish, our
Distractions and Divisions be remedied, and an Union and good Understanding be
so well established between the King and his People, as may heal all our
Differences, put an end to all our Troubles, make us a Comfort, and a Help to
our Friends and Allies, and a Dread and Terror to their and our Enemies.

Perhaps, never any Nation lay and groaned under such Numbers, and Variety of
Sufferings, as our has done, in the later part of this Age: Our late Civil
Wars, the Plague, and Dreadful Fire, during that, we had with Foreigners and,
to complete our Misfortunes, this last horrid and damnable Conspiracy of the
Papists, which, to satisfy the Humors and Interests of some few particular
Men, designed no less than the Death of His Majesty, and of all, at least, the
greatest part of his Protestant Subjects, the Subversion of the State and
Government, and the utter Extirpation of the Reformed Religion. These are all
such Examples, as certainly no Tradition, Record, nor History can parallel; and
which have brought us now at length, into that Condition, that we are now
become almost as contemptible to Foreigners, as we formerly were Dreadful. But
it is to be hoped, that the Storm is now over, and our Sky will be clear ag^in;
the Plot is at length brought to the last gasp, by his Majesty's Infinite
Prudence, and indefatigable Care; and there seems no more wanting, than his
meeting with his Parliament, to put an end to it, and all our Fears.

If we may ground our Hopes upon Appearances, we have certainly reason to raise
our Expectations very high of the Performances of this Parliament: All its
Members are well known to persons of great Prudence and Integrity, of undaunted
Courages, of indefatigable Zeal and Care, in prosecuting all such as are
suspected of Designing against the Peace of the State, of tried Fidelity and
Loyalty to their Prince, real Protestants, and good Patriots; so that there is
no manner of Advantage, but what we may propose to our selves, from the
Endeavors and Zeal of such Representatives, under the Influence of so good, so
great, and so glorious a King. We may now reasonably promise our selves, that
an end will be put to all Factions, all Dissentions removed, all Differences
reconciled, our Prince enabled, and put in a posture of protecting us, our
Friends and Allies; and that thus this Parliament may gain the Name of the
Healing Parliament; and we have cause to praise and bless God, and honor it,
for retrieving us from Destruction, when we were just upon the Brink of Rui^e,
for bringing us safe into the Port, out of a Furious Tempest, and making us
relish and enjoy all the pleasures and satisfaction of Peace, notwithstanding
all the Efforts of our Enemies to the contrary.

This indeed is a great Undertaking and Work, and considering the ill
Circumstances we lie at present under, it will doubtless meet with a great
Opposition, and many Obstacles; But what is not such an Assembly of Men capable
of effecting? Men of such Fortune, Experience and Ability in Affairs, so
unanimously elected by their Country, as being looked upon as the best Pilates
to Steer and Weather us out of the present Storm; There is no question, but
that this Assembly will overcome all Difficulties, and procure and settle the
Peace and Tranquillity of the State, bring to Condign punishment such of the
Disturbers of its Repose, as are in its Bowels, and humble such others, as rise
up from abroad; and that they will dissappoint and bring to naught the
Contrivances and Machinations, both of the one and the other.

Can any King be more glorious, than ours is at the Head of such a Parliament?
And can any People be more happy than we are in such a King? Have we not reason
to expect all manner of Satisfaction, Profit, and Advantage from this Meeting,
May we not hope, that now, all our Fears and Jealousies will vanish, that His
Majesty will be secured from all the Attempts and Designs of the Papists and
other Malignants, and the Church and Government freed from all Change and
Innovation, that the Promoters and Abettors of Schism, Sedition and Tumults,
will be punished according to their Merits; and in general, that our Land will
be cleared and purged of all the Disturbers of its Peace and Repose. All these
Advantages we do, with Justice, promise our selves, from the Prudence, Wisdom
and Integrity of this Parliament. Methinks I see every man's Face full of Joy,
all their Fears and Apprehensions are now fled, all their Consternation and
Agonies are now retired, Satisfaction and Joy have got the upper-hand; and by
the means of this Parliament, we are likely to become a People as Glorious and
Dreadful, as our late Troubles rendered us despised and contemptible. Trade
will now again flourish, All our Neighbors, will now as much court our
Alliance and Friendship, as they have lately avoided and refused it: Our
Prince, we hope, will now be enabled to encourage and succor his Friends and
daunt, and strike a dread into his and their Enemies; the Government be secured
from being Libelled by every Nonsensical Fellow; and such Expedients found out,
as may unite us amongst ourselves, both in Opinion and Interest, so that all
that we do, may turn to the Glory of God, the Honor of the King, and the
Benefit and Welfare of the whole Nation in General.

Peace and Tranquillity will now get into the Throne, and the English Name
become as grateful and formidable, as it has been lately neglected and
despised; and we hope, that such Courses will be taken, that private Interest
may not bias the public Good; but that all their Consultations and
Resolutions, may tend to the Benefit of the whole Kingdom in General, and its
Advantage, Peace and Quiet, be the Rule and Standard for all our Actions, that
the Security and Advancement of the True Protestant Religion may be endeavored
and effected both at home and abroad; that Law may have its free Course, and
full Career, and that the Privileges of the Subject may be kept and secured
entire, and yet no Attempts nor Breaches made in the Prince's Prerogative: But
that every one may act in his own Province, and that such as shall transgress
their Bounds, either out of Ambition, Interest, or Vanity, thinking themselves
more capable and sufficient than they really are, and aspiring to have their
Parts at the Helm before they are called to it, and to that end, sow
Dissentions, spread abroad Apprehensions and Fears, and by these means, bring
the People into most dreadful Distrusts and Agonies; it is sit and necessary,
that such People be curbed, and bridled by such Laws and Punishments as may
daunt and discourage them from the like Courses any more, and make them at
rest, and satisfied with the Condition and State God has put them in. To effect
all this, I must confess, is one of the highest points of Policy. But what is
not such a King at the Head of his Great Council, capable of performing and
bringing to pass, since the Prince, and most of the Members of his Parliament,
are known to all the World, to be of a consummate Wisdom, of vast Experience in
all Affairs, and of so true and ardent a Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and
the Church of God, that doubtless they cannot fail of his Blessing upon all
their Councils and Undertakings? May we not now hope, that all the Practices
and Devices of our Enemies will be brought to naught, that all their Designs
and Machinations will be disappointed and come to nothing, and that Popery and
Rebellion will be rooted out of the Land, or at least, their Wings so clipped,
that they shall not be capable any longer or disturbing our Repose, nor
endanger the Safety and Tranquillity of the State? The whole Nation is full of
Expectation of such Performances as these from this August Assembly, that its
Interest and Welfare may be promoted and procured, that every Man's Honor and
Fortune may be secured from the Aspersions and Attempts of Seditious and ill
affected Persons, that all the corrupted and infectious Members of the
Commonwealth be cut off, or at least, such Remedy is to be applied, as may heal
the Disease, and prevent its ill Humors from spreading any farther into the
Body of the Nation; that such Expedients be found out, as may satisfy the
Demands and Desires both of King and People, reconcile all our Differences,
make up all our Breaches, and so reunite us amongst our selves, that we may be
no longer in Fears and Apprehensions of Attempts from Abroad or at Home; no
longer in danger of Civil and Domestic Broils, nor in a State of dreading the
Arms of Foreigners; that our Properties may be secured, and our Wives and
Children safe from being perverted to any manner of Idolatry, whether of
Papists or others; and that thus we may act our Parts out here in Peace and
Tranquillity, and that all our Desires and Actions n ay have no other Aim than
the Glory of God, the Honor of the King, the Good of the Nation, and the
advancement and Establishment of the Protestant Religion.

London, Printed for H. R. in Fleet Street, 1681.


