depiction of King Charles II kneeling beside a book before an altar, with a
female figure resting on a cloud in the top right corner; a parody of the
frontispiece to 'Eikon Basilike'

EIKO'N ASILIK' DEY'TEPA. THE POURTRAICTURE OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY King Charles
II. With his Reasons for turning Roman Catholic; published by K. James. Found
in the Strong Box.

Printed in the Year MDCXCIV.

The CONTENTS.
I. ON his Majesty's being converted into the Catholic Church. Page 1. II. On
his Majesty's accepting of the Scots Proposals, and taking the Solemn League
and Covenant in Scotland. p. 6. III. On his Majesty's Coronation in Scotland;
upon taking the Covenant, and other Oaths, to govern according to the Laws of
that Kingdom. p. 15. IV. On the Divisions amongst the Scots Presbyterians, upon
his Majesty's bringing his Father's old Friends into Places of Power and Trust
about him. p. 18. V. On his Majesty's Defeat at Dumbar. p. 20. VI. On the
Defeat of his Majesty's Forces at Innerkeithing, etc. and his raising another
Army to march into England. p. 22. VII. On his Majesty's Defeat at Worcester.
p. 24. VIII. On his Majesty's Escape to Whiteladies; from thence to
Spring-Coppice; and then to Boscobel house, where he was concealed some time by
the Penderels, after he left the Royal Oak. p. 28. IX. On his Majesty's being
in the Royal Oak. p. 31. X. On his Majesty's being concealed at Boscobel-
house; Entertainment there by the Penderels; and Journey thence to Mr.
Huddleston' s. p. 34. XI. On the Proclamation against entertaining his Majesty,
and offering 1000 l. to any that would discover him. p. 38. XII. On his
Majesty's leaving Mr. Huddleston' s, and riding before Mrs. Jane Lane to
Bristol, etc. in order to his embarquing for France. p. 40. XIII. On his
Majesty's Journey to Trent, and parting with Mrs. Lane there, in order to his
embarquing at Charmouth, a small Village near Lime, and his Disappointment by
the Skipper's Wife, who locked her Husband up, that he should not carry him. p.
45. XIV. On his Majesty's Return to Trent, and lodging at an Inn in
Broad-Windsor, in his way amongst Rebel-Souldiers, where one of their Women
were brought to bed; and his Concealment in a Place at Trent, where Recusants
used to retire. p. 47. XV. On his Majesty's employing my Lord Wilmot to procure
Money for his Transportation; his hiring a Ship, being known by one Smith an
Innkeeper, and his Arrival near Havre de Grace in France. p. 49. XVI. On his
Majesty's being conducted to Paris, met by his Brother the Duke of York, and
entertained at the French Court. p. 51. XVII. On his Majesty's offering his
Mediation betwixt the Prince of Conde' s Faction, and that of Cardinal Mazarin,
supported by the French King, and the Odium which he thereby brought upon
himself from both Parties. p. 53. XVIII. On Mrs. Lane' s Arrival in France: His
Majesty's being disappointed of Mademoiselled' Orleans; and treating with the
Duke of Lorrain for the recovering of Ireland. p. 55. XIX. On his Majesty's
falling in love with one of his own Subjects in France; his marrying her, and
having a young Prince by her, who was afterward created Duke of Monmouth. p.
59. XX. On the French King's concluding a Treaty with Oliver, by which his
Majesty and the Royal Family were to be excluded France, and his going
thereupon into the Low Countries. p. 62. XXI. On his Majesty's traveling into
Germany and the Low Countries: The Duke of Glocester' s being importuned and
threatened by his Mother to turn Roman Catholic; and the Duke of York's being
charged to depart France. p. 64. XXII. On his Majesty's being invited into the
Spanish Netherlands by Don John of Austria, in name of his Catholic Majesty,
upon the Rupture betwixt Spain and France. p. 68. XXIII. On the Defeat of the
Spanish Army, and the Surrender of Dunkirk to the English. p. 70. XXIV. On
Oliver' s Death; Richard' s being declared Protector, outed by Lambert and the
Army, etc. p. 72. XXV. On his Majesty's being invited to a Treaty on the
Frontiers of Spain, betwixt the French and Spanish Ministers, about a Peace
betwixt those Crowns: Sir George Booth' s Defeat: The Confusions which the
Nations were cast into by Lambert, and General Monk' s carrying on the Designs
of restoring his Majesty. p. 74. XXVI. On General Monk's having brought the
Design of his Majesty's Restoration to Perfection: His Majesty's Declaration
from Breda, and Entertainment of the Presbyterian Ministers there, who were
sent over to him, p. 76. XXVII. On his Majesty's being proclaimed by the
Parliament: His magnificent Entrance into London, and enjoying the Countess of
Castlemain the first Night. p. 80. XXVIII. On the Parliament's condemning the
Regicides, and appointing an Anniversary Humiliation on the Day of King Charles
IN s Murder. p. 83. XXIX. On his Majesty's dissolving the Parliament which
called him in, and summoning another. p. 85. XXX. On the Presbyterian Plots set
on foot November. 1661. Sir J. P' s forging treasonable Letters to that effect.
His Majesty's appointing a Conference at the Savoy betwixt the Conformists and
Nonconformists; and influencing the House of Commons to offer Reasons against
any Toleration. p. 89. XXXI. On his Majesty's selling of Dunkirk to the French
King for 500000 l. p. 92. XXXII. On the Parliament's beginning to grow sensible
of the Encouragement given to the Catholic Religion by his Majesty's
Declaration, December. 1662. Their Petition on that head: and his Majesty's
publishing a Proclamation against Papists thereupon. p. 94. XXXIII. On the News
of some more Plots by the Phanaticks against his Majesty both in England,
Scotland and Ireland. The Execution of the Earl of Argyle, Lord Wariston, etc.
in Scotland; and some of those concerned in the Plots in England and Ireland.
p. 96. XXXIV. On his Majesty's making War upon the Dutch, Anno 1664. p. 99.
XXXV. On the Parliament's voting to stand by his Majesty till he had a Redress
for the Injuries done to his Subjects by the Dutch. The King's great Care to
have his Fleet ready before theirs, putting them off by fair Promises, seizing
their Bourdeaux Fleet without declaring War, etc. p. 101. XXXVI. On the French
King's making Peace with the States. Several Skirmishes, with various Success.
The Victory at Sea by the Duke of York; and the Plague which broke out in
London in 1665. p. 103. XXXVII. On the meeting of the Parliament at Oxford,
because of the Plague at London. The King's Speech to them about the Dutch War,
and Supplies. The Chancellor's Enlargement on it. The Act for banishing
Nonconformists five Miles from Corporations. p. 107. XXXVIII. On the Dutch's
recalling their Ambassador from England. The King's Letter by him to the
States: and the French King and his Majesty's Declarations of War against each
other. p. 111. XXXIX. Upon the Sea Fights with the Dutch, May and July, 1666.
both sides pretending to the Victory: And the French's lying by, though they
came as if they designed to assist the Dutch. p. 113. XL. On the firing of
London. p. 114. XLI. On the Parliament's meeting at Westminster after the Fire.
His Majesty's Demand of more Money. Their Address against Papists. His
Majesty's Proclamation on that Head. The Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters.
Declaration of War against Denmark. The Insurrection in Scotland in 1666. The
burning of his Majesty's Ships at Chattam by the Dutch, etc. p. 119. XLII. On
the murmuring of the People at the Consumption of the Treasure. His Majesty's
granting leave to the Parliament's Commissioners to take the Public Accounts.
His raising an Army of 30000 Men, and disbanding them. On the Parliament's
being displeased with it. The Sessions of Parliament in July, October, and
February, 1667. His Majesty's Speeches to them: Proclamation against Papists:
Displacing of Chancellor Hide, and League with the Dutch, etc. p. 124. XLIII.
On the Proclamation against Dissenters in 1669. Inviting the Dutch and Swedes
into a League with us; proposing a nearer Alliance with the Dutch, and forcing
the Treaty of Aix La Chappelle upon the Spaniards and the French. p. 128. XLIV.
On the Interview betwixt his Majesty and his Sister, the Duchess of Orleans,
at Dover; and her Advice to him to break the Triple League, and concur with the
French King to destroy the Dutch and the Protestant Religion, and render
himself absolute in England. Her leaving one of her Maids of Honor, created
afterward Duchess of Portsmouth, behind her; and her own Death speedily after
her Return into France. p. 131. XLV. On Colonel Blood' s Attempt to steal the
Crown. A Proclamation against Papists to please the Parliament. The second War
with the Dutch. The shutting up of the Exchequer. The falling upon the Dutch
Smyrna Fleet before War was declared; and the Declaration of War thereupon. p.
141. XLVI. On the Dutch's surprising our Fleet in Southwold-bay, the Duke of
York being Admiral. His Majesty's Declaration to the Dutch. The Progress of the
French in the United Provinces. His Majesty's and the French King's Proposals
to the Dutch, and their rejecting them, and making the Prince of Orange
Stadtholder. p. 148. XLVII. On his Majesty's suffering the Parliament to meet
November. 1673. His Speech to them concerning the Indulgence and the Dispensing
Power, and the Necessity of raising more Forces for carrying on the Dutch War.
Several unsuccessful Fights with the Hollanders. The Letter from the Dutch to
influence the Parliament, who addressed against the Match betwixt the Duke of
York and Duchess of Modena. The Prorogation which ensued thereupon. A
Proclamation against Papists, and the Consummation of the Marriage. p. 154.
XLVIII. On his Majesty's Speech to the House of Lords, upon the Address of the
Commons against his Declaration of Indulgence. The Answer of the Lords
thereunto. The Vote of the Commons for Ease to Protestant Dissenters, and that
part of their Address which desired that all in Places of Power and Trust
should take the Sacrament according to the Church of England. p. 163. XLIX.
Upon the Complaints of the Commons, that Ireland was like to be overrun with
Popery, because of his Majesty's Proclamation, allowing Papists to live in
Corporations, and giving them equal Liberties to the English. Their Address
concerning the Danger of the Protestant Interest there; and that Mr. Richard
Talbot should be removed from all Public Employment, and denied Access to
Court: And their Address concerning English Grievances; with Reflections on the
Miscarriages of his Majesty's former Designs of being empowered to raise Money
without Parliament, on extraordinary Occasions; and having an Universal Excise
settled on the Crown. p. 166. L. On his Majesty's making Application to the
Parliament of Scotland, upon his failing of Money from the Parliament of
England; the Scots insisting first upon the Redress of their Grievances, and
sending Duke Hamilton and others to London for that end. p. 172. LI. On the
Spanish Ambassador's Proposals for an Union betwixt England and Holland, and
declaring that they must break with England if the same were not accepted. The
Manifesto of the Dutch to the Parliament of England, wherein they appeal to
them for the Righteousness of their Cause. The Parliament's Endeavors
thereupon for a Peace; and his Majesty's agreeing to it without including the
French King. p. 178. LII. On his Majesty's proroguing the Parliament, because
of their impeaching his Ministers, forming Bills against Popery, and for the
marrying of those of the Royal Family with Protestants, and educating their
Children in that Religion. Clamours raised in the Nation, that we were running
back to 41. The Court's mediating a Peace betwixt France and Holland, and
sending 10000 of their own Subjects into the French King's Service. p. 185.
LIII. On the meeting of the Parliament again, April 1675. Their falling upon
Bills for the Benefit of the Nation, and being diverted by the sudden bringing
in of a Test into the House of Lords, to be imposed upon all in Places of Power
or Trust, Civil, Military or Ecclesiastical; obliging them to declare their
Abhorrence of taking up Arms against the King, or any commissionated by him;
and to swear that they would not at any time endeavor the Alteration of the
Government either in Church or State. p. 190. LIVE. On the Debate betwixt the
Lords and Commons about the Lords hearing of Appeals from any Court of Equity,
with the Behavior of the Bishops in that Affair, and the Opposition which they
met with from the Earl of Shaftsbury, etc. p. 199. LV. On the meeting of the
Parliament after the Prorogation. His Majesty's Demand of Money to build Ships.
The Commons insisting upon the Bill for a Habeas Corpus: Against sending Men
Prisoners beyond Sea: Raising Money without Consent of Parliament: Against
Papists sitting in either House: For the speedier convicting of Papists, and
recalling his Majesty's Subjects from the French Service; and the Duke of
Buckingham' s Speech for Indulgence to Dissenters. p. 202. LVI. On the Motion
for an Address by the House of Lords for dissolving the Parliament. The
Address's being cast out by the Majority, and the Protestation of the Country
Lords thereupon. p. 205. LVII. On the filling of the Benches with durante
beneplacito Judges. The publishing of some Books in favor of the Papists and
Prerogative. The French King's letting loose his Privateers amongst the English
Merchants: And the sending of Ammunition from his Majesty's Stores to the
French King. p. 211. LVIII. On the meeting of the Parliament after the long
Prorogation, Febr. 1676. His Majesty's Demand of Money, recommending a good
Correspondence to the two Houses. The Question whether the Parliament was not
dissolved by that unprecedented Prorogation: Sending some Lords to the Tower
for insisting on it. The granting of Money by the Commons. p. 218. LIX. On the
Commons throwing out the Bill, entitled, An Act for securing the Protestant
Religion: and another for the more effectual Convicting and Prosecution of
Popish Recusants. p. 224. LX. On the Address of the Commons concerning the
Danger from the Power of France, and their Progress in the Netherlands: His
Majesty's Answer. Its not being thought satisfactory by the Commons, who
presented a second, to which his Majesty delayed giving Answer; and the Cause
why. His demanding of Money when he did answer. Their giving 200000 l. and
Adjournment, with the Cause of it. p. 227. LXI. Upon the Duke of Crequis' s
arriving from France with a great Train, and meeting his Majesty at New Market.
The Affairs treated of there. The meeting of the Parliament again. Their
insisting upon a League with Holland; and his Majesty's Answer. p. 231. LXII.
Upon the Prince of Orange' s Arrival at Whitehall, and Marriage with the Lady
Mary, eldest Daughter to the Duke of York. The Address of the Commons
thereupon; and their insisting upon the Alliance with the Dutch, and War
against France. p. 238. LXIII. On the raising an Army, on pretense of a War
with France: The modelling of them. The sending of Duke Lauderdale to Scotland,
to bring down an Highland-Army upon those Parts of the Low-lands which were
most Presbyterian. The private Treaty with France. The Discovery of it by the
Commons. Their Address to his Majesty to dismiss the French Ambassador. Their
Vote in May, 1678. That the King be desired to enter into Alliance with the
Emperor, King of Spain, and Princes of Germany. His Majesty's Answer. Their
second Address against Duke Lauderdale and other Ministers; and Vote to give no
Money till they were secured from Popery and Arbitrary Government. The Treaty
of Nimeguen, and the Behavior of his Majesty's Plenipotentiaries there. p.
241. LXIV. On his Majesty's acquainting the Parliament that there was a Peace
in agitation. His Desire to keep up his Army and Navy till it were concluded.
The Resolve of the Commons for supporting the King in the War against France,
or provide for disbanding the Army. His Majesty's Answer thereupon; and the
Commons continuing their Resolution to disband the Army, though the King
desired the contrary. p. 249. LXV. On the relieving of Mons by the Prince of
Orange, with the Assistance of the Duke of Monmouth and the English Forces. The
Defeat given to the French at that time; and their King's Complaint, that it
was contrary to his Majesty's private Articles. The concluding of the Peace:
Recalling our Forces: Quartering them in the Country. His Majesty's being in a
Consult with the Duke of York, Lord Clifford, etc. which was overheard; and
the Person who listened kicked down Stairs by the said Lord. p. 252. LXVI. On
the Discovery of the Popish Plot in August, 1678. by Dr. Oats and others. The
Design of the Jesuits against his Majesty's Life. Sir Edmundbury Godfrey' s
taking Dr. Oats his Depositions. The seizing of Coleman, Secretary to the
Duchess of York, and his Papers; and the murdering of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
thereupon. p. 258. LXVII. On his Majesty's Apology to the Parliament, October
21, 1678. for keeping up his Army. His demanding of Money; and acquainting them
with the Plot, and Danger from Popery. The Vote of the Commons upon the Plot,
and Orders to apprehend the Earl of Powis, and four other Popish Lords. Their
passing of the Bill for raising the Militia; and his Majesty's refusing it. The
Execution of Coleman, and some other Plotters of less note. p. 263. LXVIII. On
the Bill for excluding Papists from both Houses of Parliament; with a Clause,
excepting the Duke of York. The Dissolution of the Parliament, as prosecuting
the Popish Plot. The calling of another, and ordering the Duke of York to
withdraw out of the Kingdom before they met. His Majesty's Speech to them, and
Declaration, confessing his Error in governing by Cabals. His dissolving of his
Privy Council, and choosing another; whence the popular Members did quickly
desire to be discharged. p. 268. LXX. On the French King's seizing several
Places in Flanders, etc. as depending on those which were confirmed to him by
the Peace of Nimeguen. His and the Spaniards Unkindness to the Duke of York, at
that time, in the Netherlands. The Address of the Commons to stand by his
Majesty and the Protestant Religion. Their disbanding of the Army. The
Discovery of Endeavors to make the Witnesses of the Popish Plot retract their
Evidence: And the proroguing of the Parliament upon their growing warm about
the Trial of the Popish Lords in the Tower. p. 273. LXXI. On the Insurrection
at Bothwel-bridg in Scotland. The sending the Duke of Monmouth thither to
suppress it, which he effected. The Execution of several Presbyterian Ministers
upon it: and the Execution of several Jesuits for the Popish Plot; and
Endeavors to stifle the same by the Meal-tub-Plot, which proved abortive. p.
277. LXXII. On the dissolving of the Parliament, July 12. 1679. and calling
another against October 7. The Return of the Duke of York in the mean time; and
his being sent to Scotland. The proroguing of the Parliament after their being
chosen. The acquitting of Sir George Wakeman, and others of the Plotters, by
the then Lord Chief Justice. The burning of the Pope, etc. in effigy. The
presenting of a Petition by the Citizens for the sitting of the Parliament: and
Abhorrence of Petitions presented by others. p. 281. LXXIII. On the Court's
being disappointed of receiving Money from Rome and France. The meeting of the
Parliament October 22, 1680. The Proceedings of the Commons against such
Justices as obstructed Petitions for the sitting of the Parliament. The passing
of the Bill of Exclusion against the Duke of York, in the House of Commons,
nemine contradicente. The rejecting of it by the Lords. The Trial and Execution
of the Lord Stafford. The impeaching of the Judges. Their Denial of a Supply to
the King. His Majesty's Message to them, and dissolving them, because of their
Obstinacy. p. 285. LXXIV. On the calling of another Parliament to meet at
Oxford, Febr. 1680. The seizing of Fitz-Harris with seditious Libels, designed
to have been lodged with Protestant Peers and Commons. The seditious manner of
the London- Members going to Oxford. His Majesty's Speech to the Parliament
when they met there. Their Impeachment of Fitz-Harris, and Dissolution. p. 289.
LXXV. On his Majesty's Declaration that the Duke of Monmouth was not lawfully
begotten. p. 295. LXXVI. On the Protestant Plot. The Trial and Execution of
Stephen College. The Commitment of the Lord Howard of Escrick, and the Earl of
Shaftsbury, with his Trial and Acquitment. The Quo Warranto against the Charter
of London, and other Corporations. The imposing of Sheriffs upon the City of
London. The Commitment of Sir Thomas Pilkington and Mr. Shute, then Sheriffs,
for opposing it. The calling of a Parliament in Scotland, where the Duke of
York represented his Majesty, as Commissioner. The Test enacted there; and the
Act for settling the Succession upon the Duke. The Trial and Condemnation of
the Earl of Argyle, for explaining the Test; and his Escape. p. 298. LXXVII. On
the finding of my Lord Gray, Alderman Cornish, and other Citizens, guilty of a
Riot, for countenancing the Election of the City-Magistrates. The Discovery of
the Conspiracy to assassinate his Majesty and the Duke of York at Ry-house; and
the Council of six to manage the Plot: Whereupon my Lord Russel, Algernon
Sidney, etc. were out off. The Earl of Essex' s being murdered in the Tower.
The Trial and Sentence of Mr. Speak and Mr. Braddon, for endeavoring a
Discovery thereof. The Continuance of the Surrender of Charters, etc. p. 303.
Copies of two Papers written by the late King Charles II. Published in 1686. by
King James' s Authority, who attested that he found them in his Brother's
Strong Box, written in his own Hand. p. 309. A brief Account of Particulars
occurring at the happy Death of our late Sovereign Lord King Charles II. in
regard to Religion; faithfully related by his then Assistant, Mr. Jo.
Hudleston. p. 316.
EIKO'N ASILIK' DEY'TEPA.
CHAP. I. On his Majesty's being converted into the Catholic Church.
THIS I know will be offensive to my Subjects if it should take air, and
therefore in Policy am obliged to conceal it; but that I am secure enough as to
God and my own Conscience, I have no reason to doubt: It Is the Catholic Church
whereof I am now a Member, and it is that Church which in the Bibles of the
Heretics themselves is called the Pillar and Ground of Truth; then why should
I scruple to submit my self to her Direction?

Did not my Grandfather K. James, though he mauled Bellarmine, give the Pope
the Title of Most Holy Father, and declare his Readiness to meet the Church of
Rome half way? Did not my Father, whom the very Heretics acknowledge a Martyr,
in like manner, give the Pope those Titles which they call Names of Blasphemy?
If he had thought the Catholic Religion damnable, or believed that the Church
of Rome teaches the Doctrine of Devils, would he ever have taken a Catholic
Princess into his Bosom? or granted such Concessions in favor of her Religion,
and suffered it to spread so much in his Dominions? Would he have employed the
Irish in his Armies after they had cut the Protestants Throats? or would he
ever have made Archbishop Laud his Favorite, who brought such Innovations
into the Church of England, and declared his good liking to a Cardinal's Cap,
if the Church of Rome were but a little reformed? So that I am safe enough as
to what concerns my Soul, having not only the Sentiments of the Bishop of Rome
positively for me, but also those of the alterius orbis Episcopus, not at all
against me. Then surely I may venture my Salvation on the same bottom with my
Mother, and embarque in a Church which uncontrovertibly appears not to have
been altogether disrelishing to my Father.

Let it go which way it will, I am of the surest side: the Catholics say, that
out of the Church of Rome there is no Salvation; and Protestants acknowledge,
that in the Church of Rome there is Salvation: and though it should be true
what I have learned from my Tutor Hobbs, (and am indeed inclined to believe)
that all Religion is but a Trick of State to keep the People in obedience; yet
a Profession of Religion is necessary for a Prince as well as others, according
to Machiavel's Maxim, Plebem dum vis fallere, finge Deum: and certainly that
Religion of which it is a Fundamental Principle, that Ignorance is the Mother
of Devotion, is most agreeable to a Prince who would maintain or advance his
Prerogative: for where it is allowed, as amongst all Protestants, to examine
the Dictates of their Ghostly Fathers, in relation to the Church, it must
unavoidably follow, that the People will also claim the like Privilege to
canvass the Orders of their Civil Fathers, in relation to the State. Then let
the Heretics talk as they please of the Kings of the Earth giving their Power
to the Beast: I see that it is undoubtedly the best Expedient for any Monarch
who designs to be absolute, to be an obedient Son to the Church of Rome, who
can insure him not only his Subjects Persons, but also their Consciences and
Purses, seeing they must do and believe as the Church will have them.

True! it is my Misfortune that a Protestant Bishop, and several Protestant
Lords, who have followed me hither, are privy to my Conversion, which might
indeed prove fatal to my Affairs, if it were not their Interest as well as mine
to conceal it: but seeing their Restitution depends on mine, I have no reason
to fear that they will divulge it. And for the Satisfaction of the Church of
Rome, though I have no Cause to profess to be of the Religion of Protestants
who murdered my Father, and give the Ignominious Character of an Idolatress to
my Mother; yet seeing the Principles of the Catholic Church allow Mental
Reservation, and that Christ himself did not reject Nicodemus, tho a
Night-Disciple, the Roman Catholics cannot be angry that I still profess my
self a Protestant, especially seeing thereby I shall be the more capable of
doing them Service: and thus I find my self obliged to give an early Assent to
my Grandfather K. James's Maxim, which he had from Lewis XI. of France, who
never learned any other Latin Words, viz. Nescit regnare qui nescit
dissimulare. Nor do I know why it should be any greater Stain to my Honor, to
feign my self a Protestant for the Crown of Great Britain, than it was to my
Grandfather Henry the IV. to feign himself a Catholic for the Crown of France;
and may my Endeavors have the same Success, but a happier Exit. And seeing the
World will have it that there is a God, I can lose no more but a little Breath
to make some Addresses if there be none; but seeing it is safer to venture with
the bulk of Mankind, than to rely on the Efforts of some Men of Wit, I am
resolved to lift up the following Prayer.

O thou Almighty Being! who createdst the Heavens and the Earth, by whom Kings
reign and Princes decree Justice, to thee I refer my Cause. for a final
Decision. Thou art King of Kings, who put down one and set up another,
and therefore the fittest for me to make Application unto. I have been taught
by those who call themselves thy Ambassadors, and would have me to believe it
to be thy Law, that Kings are accountable to none but thy self, as being thy
Vicegerents, and Gods on Earth. Vindicate therefore the Justice of my Cause
against those Men who have not only usurped my Throne, but thine, for I am
accountable to none but thee: Give Success to my Arms and Endeavors against
them: And seeing thou have said, that Vengeance is thine, and thou will repay
it, let not the hoary Heads of those who shed my Father's and thy Vice-gerent's
Blood go down in Peace to the Grave. And give me Strength, O thou most High, to
execute Vengeance upon a bloody Nation. Thou who did grant Samson' s Desire
to be revenged on the Philistines for his two Eyes, listen to my Petition. I
request thee that I may be avenged for my Father's Blood, and the unjust
Usurpation of my own Throne.

CHAP. II. On his Majesty's accepting of the Scots Proposals, and taking the
Solemn League and Covenant in Scotland.
THE Order of Nature is strangely inverted when the Head is become the Tail: I,
who ought to give Laws to my Subjects, must now receive Laws from them; and it
adds to the Misery of my Fate, that I must obey. My Father by his Stiffness did
lose both his Crown and his Life; and to preserve the one, and obtain the
other, I must comply. My Mother, who had no small Influence on his Refusal,
does now press me to accept the Terms: so that at once I must abjure my
Religion and Prerogative, that I may the better advance them both. It Is true
that this will reflect upon my Honor, but of two Evils I must choose the least:
If I do not comply, my Prerogative is lost, for I shall never be admitted to
possess my Crown; if I don't abjure the Church of Rome, I can never promote her
Interest, nor be rendered capable of doing her Enemies Hurt. My Mother, who is
known to be a Princess of Sense, lays an Obligation of Duty upon me, to submit.
Her Zeal for the Catholic Religion is known, and as a Daughter of France she
is better instructed in the Pretensions of the Crown, than to advise to any
thing that may really lessen the Prerogative in the Conclusion; and therefore I
am resolved to take the Advice which she gave me in her Letter, not doubting
but that according to her Suggestion there, I shall after my Restitution find
an Opportunity to free my self from my Bonds. Nor can it reflect upon my Parts
to be governed by my Mother, whose Counsels were Oracles to so great a Monarch
as my Father.

For the Roman Catholic Princes they know my Mind; I sent the Marquess of
Montross to the King of Spain, and other Ministers to the Courts of Austria and
Poland, to solicit their Assistance for my Restitution, on which the
Advancement of the Church of Rome does so much depend. I have likewise the
Advice of the Council of France, to comply with the Scots, so that I am safe
enough as to any Reflections from those of the Roman Communion, though I
profess my self to be of another. I have also tried what may be expected from
the Assistance of the Irish, before I would accept of the Proposals of the
Scots; but seeing they cannot defend themselves, I am sure they are unable to
restore me, and therefore I must depend upon the latter, though much against my
Mind: But Heaven, it seems, thinks fit to humble me so far, that I must rely on
the Fidelity and Assistance of those whose Stubbornness and Rebellion laid the
Foundations of my Father's Ruin. But why should I despond? is it not possible
that the Fates may have put this Opportunity in my hand, to revenge his Blood
upon them and the Neighboring Kingdom, according to the solemn Vow which my
Brother James and I have made, to sacrifice thousands to the Memory of our
Father, and ten thousands to the Resentments of our dear Mother? And as the
Scots by their Rebellion were first in the Transgression, may they atone for it
by being first in the Punishment.

True, they are a cunning People, and if they smell the Design, it ruins my
Affairs, but I must manage them with Prudence: The Presbyterians are now on the
Top of the Wheel, and testified an Aversion to my Father's Blood, which affords
me a specious Pretext of caressing them; but if they find me too easy, it will
render me cheap, and therefore I must stand aloof for a time. Some of their
Commissioners I have already bought off, and those will certainly espouse my
Cause; I must allarm them with their Danger from the English Sectaries, and the
Designs of that new-raised Commonwealth. This will be a Pretense for bringing
in the Cavaliers to defend their Country against the Common Enemy, which will
divide the Presbyterians amongst themselves; and if I once get but part of them
on my side, it will cover my Designs against the whole: I must pretend to be
zealous for their Covenant, and bewail the Sins of my Father's House: I must
admit some of their Ringleaders for my Chaplains, and that will attract the
Applause of the Mob. I must indulge the Nobility of my Court in their
Practices, and that will defend me against the Rigor of their Church: I must
profess a great Passion for the Liberties of the Subject, and that will procure
me the Concurrence of their States. And by these Methods I hope to accomplish
my Designs; for when they are engaged against one another, in the first Place,
and Cromwell and his Republicans in the next, let the Loss fall on which side
it will, it is my Gain, I shall be rid of so many dangerous Enemies, and their
Fall will be the Rise of my Throne: for if the Presbyterians prevail, they are
for Monarchy, though limited; and when their old Friends, but present Enemies,
the Independants, are subdued, it will be easy for me to scrue it a Pin higher,
and render it absolute. If the Sectaries carry the Prize, (and who knows but it
may be so, for Fortune favors mad Men) their Anarchy will quickly make the
Nations weary, and pave the Way for my Restoration: for the Presbyterians, who
are for a National Church, will never be quiet under a Congregational Frame;
and being also, as I have said, for a King in their Principles, which are two
main Heads of Agreement betwixt them and the Church-of- England-men, they will
quickly prove too strong for the divided Sectaries, who disagree in their
Models both for Church and State.

My Design, it is true, may seem Inglorious, but there are Precedents which I am
not ashamed to follow: My Grandfather, King James, was sworn to maintain the
Church and State of Scotland as he found them, but yet made considerable
Alterations in both. My Father was obliged by his Coronation Oath, to govern
according to the Laws, and yet did advance his Prerogative above them. My
Grandfather, Henry the IVth of France, dissembled both with his Protestant and
Catholic Subjects, and yet his Reign is famous to Posterity. But what need any
farther Argument; Did not the Council of Constance determine that Faith is not
to be kept with Heretics? Then why should I stand upon such a
Cobweb-Objection, as the Violation of an Oath to Protestants, especially seeing
I have now such an Opportunity as, if lost, can never be regained? The English
are already fallen off to a Commonwealth, and the Scots, if I do not accept of
their Terms, will quickly send me such a Message as they sent my Father, That
if he did not think it worth his while to come to Scotland and receive their
Crown, they might perhaps be inclined to make choice of another Sovereign. The
Roman Catholics, and Church of England-men, I am sure of; and the
Presbyterians I may be sure of, if I comply with their Measures; so that it is
best striking the Iron while it is hot, and taking them by the Hand while I
may, lest my Friends be dispirited by their long-waiting, and my Enemies be
strengthened by their uninterrupted Career.

But alas! how am I disappointed; the Scots are not so easily to be cheated,
they demand my Solemn and Public Declaration, that I accept of the Crown on
the Terms which they propose without Equivocation or Mental Reserve; so that I
must be obliged to renounce my best Friends, the Catholics and Church-of-
England-men; and not only so, but also to root out what they think incumbent
both upon themselves and me to maintain. Ah miserable Strait! but yet I have
found a way to escape. The Roman Catholic Princes are acquainted with my
Heart; and for others, I am not obliged to perform what I swear to them. The
Opinion of a Council I have for me already, and it will be no great Difficulty
to obtain a Dispensation from the Pope: And if I should afterward break to the
Presbyterians, I am certain of Absolution from the Bishops, some of them having
already signified to me, that an Oath forced upon me, is not to be kept,
especially when it obliges me to extirpate their Order, which is Jure Divino
established in the Church. And if the Presbyterians should know that I were
under a Vow to maintain the Church of Rome, or the Church of England, they
would tell me I were absolved by the Unlawfulness of the Matter: So that seeing
every one of them will allow me to break to their Adversaries, I may allow my
self to break with them all. And whereas each Party would secure their own
Interest with me, why should not all their Interests truckle to mine. The Kings
of the Jews commanded their Priests, and why should a Christian Prince be their
Subject? Let me once be but firmly established on the Throne, and then
Kingcraft and Priestcraft shall have a Trial of Skill; and if they cannot agree
about the Methods of saving their Souls, they may leave it to me how to govern
their Bodies. Let the Doctors dispute their probable Opinions, and I will
follow my Sense and Interest. There Is no more of Religion that is needful to a
Prince, than what serves to give Credit to his Affairs. The Catholics entitle
me, Defender of the Faith; and the Bishops do swear that I am Head of their
Church: If the former offend me, they lose my Protection; and if I be Head of
the latter, the Tail must follow; and then I shall punish the Roundheads with
its Sting.

It Is true, I am obliged to declare my unfeigned and voluntary Assent to the
Covenant, but that is also the Effect of Force, and who is it that would not do
so much for a Crown? If ever there were a Case wherein it was lawful to
prevaricate, it is that of an Injured Prince to recover his Right. If David did
lie to save his Life, why may not I do it to recover my Throne? And if Peter,
who abjured his Savior, was pardoned, there can be no Cause for me to despair?
But what need is there of all this Debate? if my Works cannot merit, yet my
Revenues may purchase Heaven, if Soul-Masses and Pious Legacies have any effect.

Do thou, O Blessed Virgin, Mother of God, favor my Designs, which do all
center in the reobtaining of my own Right, and establishing that Church which
commands its Members to worship thee: Grant Success to those Piae Frauds which
have no other Tendency than the advancing of my own Throne, and the restoring
so great a Tract of Land to the Roman Church; then shall I perform the Vows
which I have made, and sing,

Omni die dic Mariae
Mea lauds anima,
Ejus festa ejus gesta
Cole devotissima;
Contemplare and mirare
Ejus Celsitudinem;
Dic felicem Genitricem,
Dic Beatam Virginem
Sine fine, dic Reginae
Mundi, laudum Cantica
Eja bona semper sona,
Semper illa praedica.
Omnes mei sensus ei
Personate Gloriam
Frequentatae tam beatae
Virginis Memoriam.
Ave Maria.
CHAP. III. On his Majesty's Coronation in Scotland; upon taking the Covenant,
and other Oaths, to govern according to the Laws of that Kingdom.
I Have now weathered the Point so far as to obtain the Crown in spite of the
declared War of one Part, and the Jealousies of another Part of my Subjects;
and, like a good Pilot, have kept a steady Course betwixt the Gulphs of Scylla
and Charibdis; but, Heavens bless me! with what a great deal of Danger! Having
now compassed my End, it remains that I contrive how I may handsomely break
those Fetters which the Scots have laid upon me. I have Topics enough from
whence to argue: I am now in Possession of my Native Right, which in Justice
they could not have kept me from. It Is but reasonable therefore I make them
sensible, by Degrees, that I can lawfully shake off their Usurpation. They have
no Right to impose Terms upon the Crown, which is mine by Birth. Nor am I more
obliged to keep Contract with them than with Robbers that should assault me on
the Highway, and force me to such and such Oaths to save my Life. I do not
hold my Crown by the Tenor of their Covenant, but as being descended from
Fergus's Loins. And if they reproach me with having used unjust Methods to
obtain it, it is no more than what they did to keep me from it; but now when I
have it, I am free from all Attainders, and responsible only to God alone. This
was the Doctrine of my Father's Chaplains, and this will be justified by the
Old Cavaliers, whom I must now bring into Play as I can: It Is true I have some
Pangs of Conscience for having appealed so solemnly to God Almighty, that I was
sincere in my Intentions, and meant as I spoke, and so much the more, that on
being invested with the several Parts of the Regalia, I was obliged to renew my
Oath in the Sight and Hearing of the People. Nor was it without some Horror
that I heard my Chaplain Mr. Douglas insist upon the Guilt of my Family, the
Duty of a King, and my Obligation by the present Oath; when I considered my
previous Engagements to the Church of Rome, the old Cavaliers, and exiled
Bishops, to take Care of their Interest at my Restoration. But those Qualms I
conceive to be the Result of Opinion, which is fixed in our Minds by the common
Representations of the Wickedness of such a Procedure, which I am the rather
confirmed in, because the Frequency of the Act takes off that Apprehension of
the Guilt which at first Commission does stare one in the Face.

Thou who did bless the Hebrew Midwives for telling a Lie to the Egyptian
Inquisitors that sought after the Life of the young Hebrew Infants, if thou will not bless, yet at least pardon me for the Lies which I have sworn this
Day, that I may advance thy Catholic Church. O! all ye Saints, hide me under
your Protection from the Plots and Contrivances of my Enemies, who are also
yours, and do profane the Days which the Church has consecrated to your
Memory. And blessed be thou, O Holy Virgin! who have hitherto favored my
Designs with such Success.

Opto nimis ut imprimis
Des mihi memoriam,
Ut decenter and frequenter
Tuam cantem gloriam.
Ave Maria.
CHAP. IV. On the Divisions amongst the Scots Presbyterians, upon his Majesty's
bringing his Father's old Friends into Places of Power and Trust about him.
AS I conceived, so has it happened; the Scots Presbyterians are all in
pieces; those that are rigid did at first suspect me, and now they have begun
to declare against me, and insinuate already my Breach of Covenant. They are
very sharp-sighted, but I must outwit them. Their Clergy are not all of a
piece; those who are strictest I must declare against, and fall in with that
Party which is most complaisant: If I can but once prevail with them to yield
in a little, they will comply with me more and more by Degrees. The Usurper Oliver
being now in their Country, I must improve the Opportunity. The Nobility are
easy to be persuaded that a Commonwealth will totally ruin their Honor: The
Clergy are mortal Haters of Independency; and the People have an old Grudge
against the English; so that it will be easier to unite them, in opposition to
the Enemy, than to bring them to a good Opinion of my Government. But as when a
Ship is in Hazard, all Hands are employed to save her, I have found it easy to
persuade the moderate Presbyterians to admit my Friends to Places of Power and
Trust, to assist against the Common Enemy: And then if there be no Probability
for me to conquer, I shall be in a better Capacity to destroy. And when the
Presbyterians are totally subdued, I shall be the better able to deal with the
Independents: And those of the Scots Clergy, who comply with my Designs in
reference to the State, will also at length come to be of my Sentiments, as
touching the Church; for I can already perceive that the Favors of the Court,
and Hopes of Preferment, do dazzle their Eyes. And as for the Puritanical Sect
called Remonstrators, I will blacken their Fame by the Imputation of Rebellion,
and make them odious to the Country, as Complyers with the English; for which
end I will suborn some of my Friends who shall put the Notion in their Heads,
to begin a Correspondence, and then accuse them.

O! all ye Holy Apostles, and thou St. Peter, who art their Prince, pray for a
Blessing on my Endeavors: Your Successors teach me, that there is no Means
unlawful which can be made use of for the Benefit of the Roman Catholic and
Apostolic Church: And therefore I make my Application to you, that I may be
enabled to triumph over the now prevailing Party of my Subjects, who are
Despisers of your Holy Order, and pretend to a Parity among Ministers, expressly
contrary to the Divine Charter of the Roman See: Tues Petrus; Sancta Maria,
exaudi nos.

CHAP. V. On his Majesty's Defeat at Dumbar.
I Have lost the Day, but they are my Enemies who fell, which does not a little
allay my Grief. The Presbyterians say they are punished for my Breach of
Covenant, and I look upon it as the Merits of their old Disloyalty; such an
easy Matter is it to turn those Occurrences as the Protestants do their
Scriptures, like a Nose of Wax. Nor does this Disaster so much affect my
Throne, as it does disgrace their own solemn League. Nor does it so much
dishearten my Friends, as it will certainly divide theirs: and while Presbytery
and Independency strive for the Mastery, the Crown and the Mitre may play their
Game. If the Defeat be ascribed to the ill Conduct of the Presbyterians, as I
shall be industrious to have it believed, it will open a wider Door for the
Advancement of my Friends, as fitter for Conduct and Command. And if once an
Army be modelled to my Mind, I doubt not of succeeding in my Designs: And by
the Opposition which I know I shall meet with from the Roundheads, I shall be
further justified in my Breach of Contract with them, as a Party who are
Enemies to all Government.

St. Peter, favor my Designs which are for the Advancement of thy Holy Chair,
and bring my three Kingdoms again into the Bosom of the Church, from which,
like wandering Sheep, they have gone astray; they have left thee, the only Rock
on which the Church can be firmly founded: And seeing thou and thy Successors
were entrusted with a Power to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to
Heretical Sovereigns, you can also absolve a Catholic Sovereign from all Ties
laid upon him by Heretical Subjects. Kyrie Eleyson, Christ Eleyson, Ave Maria
Gratia plena.

CHAP. VI. On the Defeat of his Majesty's Forces at Innerkeithing, etc. and his
raising another Army to march into England.
THE Scots have showed their Affection to me, but Heaven thinks fit to blast
their Endeavors. Nor is it possible for a Kingdom divided against it self to
stand. The hotheaded Zealots ascribe it to my own Perjury, with my Father's
Tyranny, and my Mother's Idolatry: But I rather think that the Curse due to
Rebels has seized on them, and that the Blood of my Father is required at
their Hands, who were the first that durst oppose him. How remarkable is that
Justice which brings those very Men against them, whom formerly they themselves
did assist against him? and that the Covenant on which they founded their
Security should now be made the chief Ground of the Quarrel? and that those
very Men to whom they sold their Sovereign, should now sell their People, by
hundreds, for Slaves? But those Reflections I must keep to my self; and so long
as I have need of them, must flatter the Scots, who are now resolved to invade
England, and to model me an Army more agreeable to my Mind: and then shall I
see if my Church-of- England-Friends will own me in Adversity, as they did my
Father in his Prosperity, and so long as he was able to advance and protect
them: And if they do not, as I suspect that they will not, because most of them
comply with the Current of the Time, it will also justify my Breach to them, if
ever the Fates restore me to my Throne.

I have now again a considerable Army, and pretty well purged from Puritanical
Humors; but still I must pretend a Zeal for the Covenant, to please the Temper
of the Scottish Nation, and blunt the Darts which are thrown at me by the
Presbyterian Remenstrators; but when we are in England, I know what to do, and
how to distinguish my Friends from my Foes: The Catholics and Churchmen shall
have the fairest Quarter, though I must still pretend Friendship to the
Presbyterians there, if it were for no other end but to make Oliver jealous of
them, and because some of them are very popular Men, and testified their
Dissatisfaction at my Father's Murder.

Prosper my Designs, O thou Almighty! for the Advancement of the Catholic
Church, the Restitution of the pious Order of Episcopacy, and the Holy Liturgy.
Thy true Worshippers, those of the Roman Communion, having found Healing under
the Wings of the former, and no small Security in times of Difficulty, by being
able to comply with the latter, my Predecessor Edward VI. having owned that it
was the Mass Book translated into English: And my Father, of blessed Memory,
having gained it the Approbation of the Spanish Clergy when he ordered it to be
translated into Spanish. Blessed Virgin, who sit as Queen in Heaven, favor
my Design; command thy Son to assist me in it: And, O all ye Saints be
propitious to my Endeavors! interceed for me at the Throne of Heaven, that I
may recover those Thrones from which I am unjustly withheld; and I make a Vow
when I am restored, that I shall re-establish Bishops and the Liturgy, in order
to the Introduction of the Catholic Religion.

CHAP. VII. On his Majesty's Defeat at Worcester.
HOW changeable are all humane Affairs, and how little is Grandeur and Strength
to be relied on? I, who not long ago was crowned with extraordinary Pomp, am
now in a worse Condition than the meanest Peasant: The other Day I was at the
Head of a gallant Army, and now there is not a Man dare be seen to follow me: I
was lately guarded by a Forest of Spears, and now I am glad to sculk in a
Forest of Trees. O! how does this Disaster wound my Soul? that I who was lately
a King over Men, am now exposed to wander among Beasts, and in so much a worse
Condition than they, that I cannot so well provide for my self? How do my
Enemies now triumph? and what a dreadful Slaughter have they made of my
Friends? I was proud of having an Army modelled to my mind, and to be at the
Head of so many Cavaliers. How will the Scots Remonstrators, to whose ill
Conduct I ascribed my former Defeats, reproach me now with the Conduct of my
own, so many of whom are killed in the and others will be butchered like Beasts
in the Shambles? Alas! this Defeat is more fatal to me than those at Dumbar and
Innerkeithing: The Presbyterians, whose Loss I did not regard, will now say,
that Justice has found me out, by cutting off those who were the Pillars of my
Hope. How often shall I be upbraided with it, that I am disappointed by those
whom I preferred to them? Alas! what can I answer? That I had scarce so many
hundreds of my Subjects of England, as I had thousands of those from Scotland:
That they should have marched so far into this Kingdom, and be joined by such
an inconsiderable Handful: That so many thousands of Covenanters should follow
me into this Nation, where the Churchmen are strongest, and yet so few of the
Churchmen did join me; so that I came to my own, and they received me not. In
truth, this Presbyterian Reflection has something in it, that the Churchmen do
follow their Kings for the Loaves, and always worship the Rising Sun. Poor
Souls! how many of the Covenanters have their Garments rolled in Blood, for
espousing my Cause, though their whole Party suspects me? And how few of my
English Episcopal Friends have either assisted me with Men or Money? How do the
Sectaries revile the Presbyterians, as Friends to me, because Haters of their
Anarchy? And yet how little do I hear of the Zeal of the Churchmen, who
formerly pretended to adore the Monarchy? How true have I found it, that their
Loyalty to the Crown was measured by its Ability to protect the Mitre? No
wonder that they followed and stood by my Father, who undertook the War in
Defense of them; but now that I must not declare for their Hierarchy, I
perceive a Declension in their Zeal for the Monarchy; but if ever I happen to
recover my Crown, then I shall be sure to have their Friendship. And of the ten
thousand Ecclesiastics that are said to be in England, the far greater part
will still keep their Churches, as well as the Majority do now comply.

Deliver me, O thou Almighty! from my imminent Dangers. Thou who art King of
Kings, defend me from those Blood-thirsty Men who have murdered one King, and
hunt after the Life of another. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, then why
should they call me to an account? Deliver me from their Hands, and vindicate
thy own Prerogative from those who have usurped thine as well as mine. When my
pretended Friends forsake me, yet do thou espouse my Cause. And as thou have
covered my Head in the Day of Battle, deliver me from those who thirst for my
Blood. Kyrie Eleyson, Christ Eleyson. Ave Maria Gratia plena.

CHAP. VIII. On his Majesty's Escape to Whiteladies; from thence to Spring
Coppice; and then to Boscobel-house, where he was concealed some time by the
Penderels, after he left the Royal Oak.
HEavens be blessed, that I have hitherto escaped from the Cruelty of those who
seek after my Life, that my first Sanctuary should have been a quondam Nunnery,
foretold what Party were to be the Instruments of my Preservation: But alas! at
Whiteladies I parted with the choicest of my Friends, and God knows whether
ever we shall meet again: The Noble Earl of Derby I hear is taken, and will
quickly be sacrificed to the Fury of the Rebels; but there is no Remedy against
such Disasters, he dies for his Loyalty, which is his unquestionable Duty: And
though I be not now able to protect him, yet Heaven is able to reward him.

How changeable is the Scene of humane Affairs, since Crowns are also liable to
the Cross? The Court which did formerly set forth my Glory, I was lately
obliged to abandon with Terror, lest they, who at another time would have
guarded my Person, should now have been the Cause of a fatal Discovery.

I who was lately in Royal Apparel, am glad to exchange it with the Garb of a
Peasant: my Countenance, which did lately enlighten the Court, is now eclipsed
with a Vail of Soot; and my Hands, the Dispensers of Royal Bounty, are instead
of Jewels, embellished with the Smoke of the Chimney. In room of a Palace I am
glad of a Coppice, and my Lodging is common with the Beasts of the Field; so
that like Nebuchadnezzar, I am driven from amongst Men, and for ought I can
see, shall be forced to eat Grass like him, till such time as I am made to
know, that the most High rules over the Kingdoms of the Earth, and gives them
to whomsoever he will. God will be known by the Judgments which he executes,
let my Tutor Hobbs pretend what he pleases. Did not I, the other day, say to my
self, Is not this the Army which I have raised for the Defense of my Crown, and
the Glory of my Power? And lo, how they are all consumed like Wax, without
either gaining Victory or Honor? and this Day the Kingdoms are taken from me,
and now I am worse than the meanest of my Subjects.

On his being in Spring-Coppice.
My Royal Attendance has now failed me, and I have Hunger instead of Dainties;
yet kind Heaven prevents my starving, and has sent me a little Country Cheer.

But, good Lord! what a Change? I who used to be served in State, have no other
Attendants but a Clown and his Sister; and instead of a Royal Concert of
Music, there is the Sound of the Wind on the Trees of the Wood. I who used to
sit on Cushions of Velvet, am now exposed to the Moisture of the Ground; and in
lieu of being covered with gilded Roofs, have scarce any thing to defend me
from the Showers of Rain. Nor can I be secure in this comfortless Condition,
but am in perpetual fear of my miserable Life, being now exposed to the Mercy
of those poor People, who, if they please, might easily betray me; and yet I
must of necessity rely on their Faith.

On his going from Spring-Coppice to Madley in Shropshire, Richard Penderel
being his Guide.
I who had lately the Conduct of an Army, am forced to be conducted by one poor
Peasant; and insted of the Battoon of Command, must now be content with a poor
Wood-bill; and expose my self to the Darkness and Dangers of the Night.

Alas! what a fatal Catastrophe? Instead of my Trumpets and Kettle-drums,
here is nothing but the rustling of my Guide's Leather Breeches: I have now no
Flambeaus nor Torches but the Stars, and must foot it after my Leader, over
Ditches and Rivers, whithersoever it shall please the Fates to draw me.

My Subjects, who ought to defend me with their Lives and Fortunes, are now
afraid to receive me into their Houses; so that my best Apartments must be the
Corner of a Barn; my Royal Bedchamber some part of a Hay-mow; and my choicest
Washes must be the Juice of Walnut-tree-leaves, the better to disfigure my Face
and Hands.

CHAP. IX. On his Majesty's being in the Royal Oak.
IN lieu of a Palace I am glad of an Oak, whose Leaves must serve instead of my
Tapestry; and the Sky is now my Canopy of State: The Stars must content me for
Imbroidery: the Dew of Heaven must be my Perfume; and one single Rustic my
Court and Guard.

On Colonel Carlis's coming to him, and their being helped up into the Oak by
the Penderels.
I see that Heaven has not left me quite destitute, but has now sent me some
more suitable Company to be a Companion in my Adversity; and being known in the
Country, he may do me good Service.

I must now mount the Oak instead of my Throne, and its Branches must serve for
my Chair of State: The Land nor the Sea have neither been propitious, and now I
must make trial of the Bounty of the Air.

What others do in sport, I am obliged to do per Force; and if I cannot have a
Hole with the Foxes in the Earth, I must seek a Retreat with the Birds upon the
Trees.

But alas! the Air is not Man's proper Element, and my weary Limbs have need of
a more commodious Resting Place. This looks like Absalom's Punishment, though I
was never guilty of his Crime, to be posited thus betwixt the Heaven and the
Earth: but God avert the rest of his Fate, lest my Enemies should thereupon be
exalted above measure.

O Almighty Being! why do thou thus punish me? What Evil have I done in thy
sight? Is it a Crime to endeavor the Recovery of my Throne, from which I am
driven by a Rebellion worse than the Sin of Witchcraft? Surely thou do not
punish me for my Breach of Covenant with the Scots, for I am taught, that I
ought not to keep Faith with Heretics. Nor can these Judgments pursue my
Incontinency, which the Priests do persuade me is a Venial Sin, when it is the
fault of our Natural Constitution? But Events are alike to the Good and the
Bad; then why should I thus disquiet my Soul? My Father, though a very Pattern
of Virtue, had a harder Fate than mine has been hitherto. O! all ye Saints
intercede for me: Blessed Virgin, pray for me, that I may be delivered out of
my Straits, and firmly established on my Father's Throne; then shall I
encompass thine Altars with Incense, and promote the Catholic Religion to the
utmost of my Power. Ave Maria.

CHAP. X. On his Majesty's being concealed at Boscobelhouse; Entertainment
there by the Penderels; and Journey thence to Mr. Huddleston's.
I Have now exchanged my Forest for a House, and one that belongs to a Loyal
Catholic, as if Heaven would still inculcate that I must be obliged to them
for my Preservation; and that I must now be punished for the Persecution of my
Predecessors, and hide in those very retiring Places where the Priests were
forced to abscond from the Severity of the Laws; but if ever I be restored to
my Throne in Peace, I Will take care to secure them from such Annoyances.

On his Majesty's being shaved there, by William Penderel.
I dissembled a Likeness to my Enemies in their Principles, and now am forced
to do the same in my Habit: I am become a Roundhead against my Will, that so I
may the better avoid their Snares.

On his dining on a Sheep killed by Colonel Carlis in Mr. Staunton's Field.
It is hard that I who am Sovereign of the Nations, and ought to have their
Lives and Fortunes at Command, should be put to such Straits for needful
Provisions; and to take those Methods which are seemingly base; but the common
Proverb I find to be true, that Hunger will eat through Stone Walls. My
Subjects have unjustly robbed me of my Crown, and it is but just that I should
take what I can from them: I did formerly seize their Ships by Sea, but must
now be content with a Sheep by Land; and not only so, but to be my own Cook,
and glad that I can have Victuals for the dressing.

I who used to maintain so many thousands, am now put to it to provide for my
self: but do thou provide for me, O King of Kings; for I find that not only
Subjects, but Kings themselves have need to put up that Petition, Give us this
Day our daily Bread.

On his Majesty's going from Boscobel to Mr. John Huddleston's, on a
Mill-Horse, attended by the Penderels, and his Entertainment by the said Mr.
John Huddleston.
The old Proverb is, He that goes softly goes surely, but I am certain it does
not reach my present Case, for Expedition is necessary to my Safety, though at
present I cannot be expedite if I would. Good Lord! what a Change? From a Coach
with six Horses, and many thousands more at my Command, I am now reduced to a
single Mill-horse; a Meal-sack is the best of my Royal Trappings, some Country
Louts my Guard du Corpse, and Wood-bills the chief of my Arms and Artillery.
Thus thou castest down one, and set up another: He who was but lately a
Subject of mean Quality, is now attended with Royal State; and I, who am a King
by Birth and Inheritance, am thus reduced to the greatest of Straits. Thus the
Omnipotent leads away Princes spoiled, and overthrows the Mighty; and thus
he pours Contempt upon Princes, and weakneth their Strength; so that this Day
may the Vanity of the World be discovered, when Servants are seen upon Horses,
and Princes walking on the Earth as Servants.

Now I am arrived at a Place of Security, where several of my Friends have
found a safe Retreat.

Surely the Saints have interceded for me, and preserved me from all the
Dangers of my Way. This ghostly Father is very kind, for he knows that I am
still the hope of their Party, and Heaven seems to declare that I must espouse
them as my own. They do indeed requite my Father and Mother's Kindness, and are
as tender of me as they were of them. Thus may Princes learn to extend their
Compassion toward the meanest of their Subjects, when it is in their Power to
crush them; for a Mouse may requite a Lion's Kindness.

I have now the Satisfaction of some suitable Company, whereas before I was
immured amongst Clowns: Now here is a Clergyman, a Gentleman, and a Peer, a
small Representative of all the three States with whom I may safely advise how
to retire; so that in the midst of my Affliction God has assuaged my Grief.
Here I find a more convenient Subsistence, and can take some Repose for my
wearied Limbs, till my galled Feet, which are not used to travel, may grow
whole again, and fit for another Journey.

But alas! how variable is the Wheel of Fortune? and how quickly is all my Joy
over-clouded; I thought I had found a secure Place to hide in, but the Malice
of my Enemies pursues me throughout. Yet blessed be God, I have escaped the
Snare which they laid for me; he has broken the Net, and I am escaped in as
miraculous a manner as David did from Saul when they were both together in the
same Cave; so that as Saul sought David every Day, but God delivered him not
into his Hands, he has been graciously pleased to protect me from the Fury of
the Rebels, who have hitherto sought me, but in vain; for God is my
Hiding Place, and has sent his Angels, who smote the Sodomites with Blindness,
to do the same to those who sought after me, but have not hitherto been able to
find me, though they came into the very place where I was.

CHAP. XI. On the Proclamation against entertaining his Majesty, and offering
1000 l. to any that would discover him.
HOW is the World turned up-side down, when they who are guilty of the vilest
Treason dare proclaim their Sovereign a Traitor, and they who have no Right to
their Estates but through his Clemency, deny him any Residence in his own
Dominions? Where the Word of a King is, there is also Power; but now both my
Name and Authority are despised, and by an unparalled Audacity they have
taken upon them to abolish the Regal Dignity; and though they be great
Pretenders to Religion, yet they do not consider the Divine Prohibition, not to
touch his Anointed, nor to do his Prophets any harm, but rather wrest and
misapply the Scriptures, and look upon themselves to be the People who must
bind the Princes of the Earth with Fetters, and load their Nobles with Chains:
But do thou deliver me, O Lord, from the violent and blood-thirsty Man, who
hunts after my Life, that the King may joy in thy Strength, and greatly joy in
thy Salvation.

But what do I say, or why should I be discouraged? for all these things will
justify my Procedure, when I shall be re-advanced to the Throne of my Fathers,
for shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

CHAP. XII. On his Majesty's leaving Mr. Huddleston's, and riding before Mrs.
Jane Lane to Bristol, etc. in order to his embarquing for France.
NOW I must leave my Catholic Landlord, but it is in order to go to a Catholic
Country, where, instead of being concealed by a poor Priest, I shall have the
Protection of a mighty King: I have hitherto acted the Part of a Master, but
now I must learn to act that of a Servant; and instead of being conducted by
Men, must submit to the Conduct of a Woman: and though all Passes ought to be
given by my Authority, yet now I must make use of another's, and that also
procured from the Rebel-Usurpers: So that what I ought to decline in point of
Honor, I am forced to comply with in regard of my Safety.

How mutable are all sublunary Comforts, when he who has sat as a Monarch on
his Throne is now obliged to change both Habit and Name, and he who was born
Sovereign over some Millions of Men, must now act the Servant to an ordinary
Gentlewoman? he to whom Princes themselves did uncover, must now attend his
Mistress with Hat in hand? But Heaven seems to favor my Inclinations, and not
to be angry at my hidden Designs; for the Catholics, whose Religion I have
embraced, are hitherto the Instruments of my Preservation; and now I must be
obliged to the fair Sex, to whom I have a more than an ordinary Propensity.

On his Majesty's passing through a Troop of Rebels, before Mrs. Lane,
undiscovered.
How hard is my Fate, that I who ought to protect others cannot now protect my
self? and that I should be in continual Danger from my Subjects, who are
obliged to spend their Lives and Fortunes in my Defense? But the Angels who
blinded the Eyes of my Enemies that they could not find me when seeking for me
in the House where I was, can as easily smite them with Blindness now when they
do not suspect me, and carry me safely through them. O all ye Angels and
Saints! as ye tender the Advancement of the Holy Catholic Church, watch over
me for Good: Ye who smote the Host of the Syrians with Blindness, that brought
them to Samaria instead of Dothan, do the like to these Men who hunt after my
Life, that they may not perceive me.

Blessed be ye, O ye Saints and Angels! who have heard my Request, and brought
me safe through this imminent Danger, and vouchsafed unto me such a signal
Deliverance; may I incur your Displeasure, and forfeit your Protection, if when
I am restored again to my Throne, I don't remember my Vows, to promote every
thing that may tend to the Advancement of the Church of Rome, which allows so
much Honor to Saints and Angels, of whose Protection and Guardianship I have
had such a visible Demonstration, Hallelujah.

Ave Virgo singularis,
Matter nostri Salutaris,
Coeli decor, stella Maris,
Arca mundi mystica:
Nos in hujus vitae Mari
Ne permittas naufragari,
Sed favoris vela Cari
Clemens in nos explica.
Amen.
On his Majesty's being chid by the Cook-maid at Long-marston, for not winding
up the Jack aright; and calling himself a poor Farmer's Son.
How vain a thing is worldly Grandeur? and how little to be relied on? It was a
wise Saying of him who gave his Adversary this Caution, Let not him that
puts on his Armor boast as he that puts it off. When a few Weeks ago I
was at the Head of a gallant Army, I did not at all doubt of the Victory; and
now instead of so many thousands to wait upon me, and put my Commands in
execution, I am forced to obey an ordinary Kitchin-wench, submit to her
Reproof, and deny my Quality, as St. Peter did his Master, for fear of what may
be the Consequent of her Anger; as David counterfeited Madness to escape the
Fury of a Philistine Prince, I must be forced to tell a Lie to excuse my self,
for not knowing how to wind up a Jack: How miserable is this Change? that I
whose Word and Will ought to pass for an uncontrolable Law to my Subjects, am
afraid of a mean and ordinary Servant! Lord, how great a Change is this? that I
who am the Head and Fountain of Power, should now be obnoxious to the meanest
of my Subjects, who might easily procure my Ruin if they knew me.

On his Majesty's counterfeiting an Ague at Leigh near Bristol, and his being
known by John Pope, Mr. Norton's Butler, there.
Well may he dissemble an Ague on his Body, who has not only a trembling, but
an aching Heart. To preserve my Health I must feign my self sick; and to retain
my Sovereignty I must call my self a Servant, and yet I am not safe in so mean
a Disguise. Now I hold my Life from the Courtesy of a Butler, as I have several
times lately from that of a Peasant, but with how much Anxiety of Soul God
knows: for what Reason have I to trust any of my Subjects, when the far greater
Part are avowedly false; and instead of disowning, do glory in their Treason?

But as Pope bears the Name of my greatest Friend, I have also found him to be
none of my Enemy: But how dangerous is my Condition, when the meanest of Habits
and Conversation is not a sufficient Disguise? But blessed be God and the
Saints, my Protectors, that hitherto I have escaped. Ave Maria, Gratia plena.

Lampas Soli, splendour Poli,
Quae fulgore praeis Soli,
Nos commenda tuae Proli,
Moestos fac laetificet.
O Maria, pro tuorum
Dignitate meritorum,
Supra Choros Angelorum
Sublimaris unice;
Sede fulgens jam superna,
Sort gaudes sempiterna,
Pietate sed materna,
Nos in imo respice.
Nobis sis per mundi fluctus,
Via, lux, dux and conductus
Salvus ad Coelestia.
Tene Clavum rege Navem,
Tempestatem seda gravem,
Nos in Portum induc suavem
Tua pro Clementia.
Amen.
CHAP. XIII. On his Majesty's Journey to Trent, and parting with Mrs. Lane
there, in order to his embarquing at Charmouth, a small Village near Lime, and
his Disappointment by the Skipper's Wife, who locked her Husband up, that he
should not carry him.
HOW changeable are the Capricio's of that Teasty Goddess called Fortune? I who
entered the Kingdom not long ago with a formidable Army, am now in a strait how
to get out of it with one or two in my Company: But though the Goddess of
Wisdom be none of my Friend, yet the Goddess of Love continues propitious. It Is
true, I am obliged to part with one Female Protectress, to whom I hitherto owe
my Life, but kind Heaven has sent me another; so that I find the fair Sex to
be more inclinable to my Government than the Males.

How great is the Difference betwixt Prosperity and Adversity? My Predecessors
could have Fleets to attend them at Command, and I cannot have a single Bark to
transport me for hire. My Commands which ought to be obeyed by thousands of
Men, are now controlled by a single Woman; nor dare I so much as dispute her
Authority. Here Is a small Emblem of my own Condition, for she who ought to obey
does now command, and has her Husband not only upon but under the Lock. The
whole Nation is infected with the Rebellion, for a Man is not now the Master of
his Family, but must be forced to submit to the Command of his Wife, so
dangerous is the Example of a People's usurping it over their Sovereign; and
thus is the Nation plagued for its Rebellion.

CHAP. XIV. On his Majesty's Return to Trent, and lodging at an Inn in
Broad-Windsor, in his way amongst Rebel-Souldiers, where one of their Women
were brought to bed; and his Concealment in a Place at Trent, where Recusants
used to retire.
THAT I might the better avoid the Fury of my Subjects, I designed to have
committed my self to the Mercy of the Waves, as thinking it safer to be in a
Storm at Sea, than in the middle of a raging Rebellion by Land; but the Fates
think it fit to suspend my Designs. I am environed by those who seek after my
Life, and forced to lodge with them under the same Roof, but Heaven has paved
the Way for my Escape, and by their Impurity provided for my Safety; so that
instead of their having time to enquire after me, the Parish is come to enquire
after them, that they may not be at the Charge of their spurious Brats. When
such things happened in my Army, they accused my Discipline, but cannot
perceive the Faults of their own.

But, Thanks to the Saints, I am again escaped, and free at present from the
fear of my Foes, and have another Asylum and Place of Refuge, where the Holy
Fathers did use to retire from the Fury of Protestant Persecution; so that my
first and last Retreat must be to the Catholics.

Blessed be thou, O Being of Beings, that when the Tribulations of my Heart
were enlarged, did hear my Prayer, and deliver me from my Distresses;
continue thy Mercies, that I may have Opportunity to advance thy Cause, and
seek the Welfare of the Catholic Church! O ye Angels, who protected me in the
midst of my Enemies, watch over me in the remaining part of my Life. Blessed
Virgin, Mother of God, intercede with thy Son for me, and deliver me from those
who seek after my Soul. Ave Maria.

CHAP. XV. On his Majesty's employing my Lord Wilmot to procure Money for his
Transportation; his hiring a Ship, being known by one Smith an Innkeeper, and
his Arrival near Havre de Grace in France.
HOW great is the Change from a King who ought to command, to become a
Supplicant that must beg. My Father demanded Loan-money by Authority, and I am
glad to desire it with the greatest Humility; He, that he might govern them
with an Army; and I, that I may be enabled to fly the Country. My Predecessors
had Navies to invade France at pleasure, and I have not so much as a
Fisher-boat to carry me thither from Danger, but must both pay, and be obliged
to those that will be hired.

They that are eminent in Dignity, ought to be so in Merit, else they can
hardly escape being undiscovered in their Adversity. It Is almost as hard for a
Prince to be concealed in a Disguise, as for the Sun to be hid with a
transparent Cloud: I was not long ago at the Mercy of a Butler, and must now be
obliged to the Fidelity of an Innkeeper; and how dangerous is it to trust to
those who must live by Gain, when then they might have 1000 l. to discover my
Person.

The tumbling of the Waves resembles the Instability of the Mob, who cry
Hosanna to day, and crucify to morrow. When the Sky is serene, the Surface is
smooth; but when Storms arise, they threaten both Heaven and Hell. What
Mountains of Water seem ready to invade the Skies? and how do the bottomless
Gulphs seem ready to disgorge upon Hell? yet had I rather be here than amongst
my rebellious Subjects, who are swollen by the Winds of Error and Sedition. But
Thanks to my Guardian Angel I am within sight of Land, and almost out of the
Limits of my cursed Dominions.

Now am I arrived in a most Christian Country, and under the Protection of the
most Christian King. This Place, though it had not been called so before, does
now deserve the Name of Havre du Grace, as having indeed afforded a safe Haven
to a Monarch who has been tossed by a Tempest of Rebellion.

Ave Regina Coelorum,
Ave Domina Angelorum,
Salve radix, salve porta
Ex qua mundo lux est orta:
Gaude Virgo gloriosa
Super omnes speciosa,
Vale, O valde decora,
Et pro nobis Christum exora.
CHAP. XVI. On his Majesty's being conducted to Paris, met by his Brother the
Duke of York, and entertained at the French Court.
It Is true I am now safe from the Fury of my rebellious Subjects; but alas I am
a King without a People, and like a new married Husband deprived of his beloved
Bride. I had scarcely tasted the Sweets of the Throne when I was deprived of my
Sovereignty per Force; and instead of giving Laws to my own Subjects, am now
constrained to wander amongst Strangers. I had not near obtained a plenary
Possession when the Sword of an Usurper did serve me with an Ejection; and
instead of going to Paris in Triumph, as did some of my Predecessors, I am glad
to go thither as a Supplicant and Fugitive: And whereas my Ancestors did wear
the Crown of France, I must now be obliged to that Monarch to preserve me for
the Crown of England, and court his Endeavors for my Restitution. Where my
Forefathers used to command I must obey, and am glad to be entertained as a
Subject where I ought to be a Sovereign. The Kings of France have been
Prisoners in England, and now the Monarch of Great Britain is a Fugitive in
France: So great is the Difference betwixt a King of England beloved of his
Subjects, and one who is at Variance and War with his People; for they who
would have enabled me to come hither as a Conqueror, have now constrained me to
become a Petitioner.

But more than enough of this melancholy Theme: I must strive to make the best
of my present Condition, in order to establish my future Repose. Here I am safe
from the Rage of Rebellion, and enjoy the Society of my Royal Relations. Here I
have a Palace instead of a Wood, and the Society of Princes in lieu of Clowns:
I hold not my Life from the Courtesy of Peasants, nor am I in hazard of
Discovery by tatling Females. Here I can despise the Proclamation of the
Rebels, and am neither in hazard by their Flattery nor Force. It behooves me now
to reassume my Spirits, and represent my Case to other crowned Heads, and
solicit them vigorously to espouse my Cause, lest the bad Example should reach
themselves. I must declaim warmly against all Commonwealths, as mortal Enemies
to the Name of Kings. I must also alarm the Church of Rome, and make the Pope
understand the Danger of his Tiara; and that my Republican Subjects have not
only sworn the Destruction of all Crowns, but will involve the Mitres in the
same Fate.

CHAP. XVII. On his Majesty's offering his Mediation betwixt the Prince of
Conde's Faction, and that of Cardinal Mazarin, supported by the French King,
and the Odium which he thereby brought upon himself from both Parties.
MY Friends, if divided, cannot give me that Assistance which I am sure they
might do if they were united, and therefore it is my Interest to have that
effected. Circumstances do specify Actions, of which this is a remarkable
Instance: If I were upon my Throne, and in full Prosperity, it would be my
Advantage to pour Oil into the Flames, that by their mutual Divisions I might
triumph over both, and make good my Title to the Crown of France; but now that
their Help is my only Refuge, I must endeavor an Accommodation. But of this I
am resolved to take special Care, that as much as I can I will side with the
Crown, which is the common Interest of all Monarchs.

On his Majesty's being suspected by both Parties.
The Office of Mediator I find very ungrateful, and he that parts Quarrellers
must have Blows for his Pains. Of all Men alive I am the least obliged to my
Stars, for their malign Influence blasts all my Designs, so that I can neither
be in Peace at home nor abroad: My direful Fate pursues me every where, and not
only involves my self, but all my Relations in Ruin. I thought that Monarchy
had been sacred in France, and the Persons of Princes not to be approached
without Fear: I thought that their Monarchs had been successful in making
themselves to be looked upon as Gods on Earth, by keeping the greatest part of
their Subjects in Ignorance, that there was a God in Heaven: but now I find
that the Contagion of Rebellion has spread every where; and that my Mother,
though a Princess of the Blood, is not secure in France; and that that
Deference is not paid to the Royal Family in her own Country, which she would
have extorted from the Subjects in mine.

O ye Saints! if ye have Ears to hear, or Hearts to consider, have Compassion
on a forlorn distressed Prince, who can neither be safe at home nor abroad:
restore me to my Crown, that I may restore your Worship; or if I cannot restore
it, that I may at least connive at it. If the Catholic Church have any of your
Merits in her Treasure, let them be made use of to my Advantage. Ave Maria.

CHAP. XVIII. On Mrs. Lane's Arrival in France: His Majesty's being
disappointed of Mademoiselle d' Orleans; and treating with the Duke of Lorrain
for the recovering of Ireland.
HOW inveterate is the Malice of my natural Subjects, that not only pursue my
self, but those who entertained me, and vent their Rage against a poor
Gentlewoman who befriended me. I am not in a Capacity of giving her a Royal
Reward, but shall entertain her with Royal Honor; and as she provided for my
Safety, I will take care of hers, and repay her with Public Respect for her
Private Service.

My Predecessors of England have matched with the Imperial Family, and must the
King of Great Britain and Ireland be thought too low for a Duchess. My Father
thought it a Condescension to take a Daughter of France, but I am not thought
worthy of a remoter Princess. What vain things are Titles and Honor, without
the Substance of Riches and Power! But if I be unsuccessful in Royal Amors, I
have not been so in those which are meaner, and can satisfy Nature, though not
my Grandeur.

My Loyal Subjects being unable to defend me; and the French King, though my
Kinsman, unwilling to sustain me, I must now have recourse to inferior
Princes, whom, if I had my Right, I should be able to command, but now must be
obliged to court their Assistance, and quit part of my own Title for a Reward.
How hard is my Condition? that I should be reduced to call other Princes the
Protector of my Subjects, and with the Addition of Royal, which would denote
their Independance. But why may not they protect them as well as me, and enjoy
the Name as well as perform the Thing? It Is true, my rebellious Subjects will
say, that my making Application to Catholic Princes, and not to Protestants,
is a shrewd Cause to suspect my Religion; but I must consult my own Interest,
and not their Humors. Those of them who are the firmest Protestants are
already either jealous of me, or have avowedly declared against me; and for the
Pillars of those who call themselves by the Name of the Church of England, they
are already privy to my Reconciliation to the Church of Rome, which they don't
much disapprove, because I feed them with Hopes of bringing the Church of Rome
to an Accommodation with them; and she will certainly do it, that she may the
better animate them against the Puritans, who being the most obstinate of all
the Heretics, if they were once out of the way, the rest will the more easily
be brought to comply: for I perceive my Episcopal Friends do still believe the
Church of Rome to be a true Church, and the other Party to be none; and
therefore a Reconciliation will be more easy with the former than the latter,
especially considering how near they approach in Discipline and Ceremonies to
the Church of Rome. The Advances which Bishop Laud's Party made toward their
Mother Church also in Doctrine, will be a great step toward the desired Union;
but that which will chiefly contribute thereunto is the implacable Hatred which
my Grandfather and Father did always take care to nourish in those of the
Church of England against the Puritans, which is now increased by the late
overturning of their Hierarchy: so that if ever I be restored, the one will
infallibly assist me to destroy the other; and when the Destruction of the
Roundheads is effected, and my Father's Blood at the same time sufficiently
revenged, I shall next take the other Party to task; and seeing it is not
Principle but Interest which keeps them from complying with the Church of Rome,
I Will use my Endeavors to have it accomplished, or by -- the Church, or at least
the hottest of them, shall smart for it: and thus I shall revenge my self on
them too, for playing the Poltroon, and sotting in Taverns, while my Father was
led to Execution, and declining to join my self when I entered England.

But as to my Treaty with the Duke of Lorrain, I shall reap these Advantages
from it: If he once be possessed of Ireland, he will be assisted by the
Spaniards, to whom the Irish have a natural Inclination; and with his Help from
thence I shall keep my rebellious Subjects in the other two Nations in
perpetual Vexation, both with Incursions on that side, and from Flanders: Or if
this don't take effect, the very Apprehensions of it will alarm the French, and
move them rather to assist me themselves, than venture to give the Spaniards
such an Advantage; for they may not only join the Duke of Lorrain's own
Subjects from the Netherlands, but when the Duke has footing in Ireland, he may
easily join the Spaniards in their own Dominions, and invade France.

CHAP. XIX. On his Majesty's falling in love with one of his own Subjects in
France; his marrying her, and having a young Prince by her, who was afterward
created Duke of Monmouth.
HOW hard is my Fate, that I am still designed to be a Conquest, and that also
to my own Subjects, first by the Arms of their Men, and then by the Amors of
their Women. One might have reasonably thought that I had received so many
Affronts from my own People, that I should never have been enamored on any of
them; but, to my sad Experience, I find it otherwise, and that Cupid tyrannizes
over Kings as well as others, and commands us as imperiously as we command
them, with a sic volo sic jubeo. Alas! that Love is Proof against all Cures,
and that I cannot oblige it to withdraw at my Commands, which I find it
entertains with as much Disdain as the Waves of the Sea did those of my
Predecessor, who smote them with his Scepter, and forbad them to approach his
Chair. Thus I who might be courted by the greatest of Foreigners, must languish
in love for one of my Subjects, as if the Fates had decreed both Sexes of them
an absolute Conquest over me.

If I marry her, I am sure to lose my Interest; and if I do it not, I must
sacrifice my Content, for her Virtue I find altogether insuperable: I must
therefore comply with my Brother James's Advice, and marry her privately before
him and a Priest; and thus I may consult my present Repose, and take my
measures in time to come by future Contingents.

Nor am I like to be less unfortunate in the Quality of my own Match, than also
in my Allies, by that of my Brother, who is caught in the like Snare; but who
can resist the Charms of Love? We must needs deplore the Hardness of our
Destiny, to have Mars and Venus triumph over us at once, and each of them force
us to an unequal Surrender. Our Father was reputed a Man of Chastity, but it is
strange that Incontinence should be our Inheritance: I wish that it may not be
hereditary from our Mother, of whose Honor I ought not to be suspicious; but
the Current of Fame, and our own Constitution, may justify at least this
passing Reflection, which, if it should be true, makes me but Neighbour-like;
for my Cousin, the French King, lies under a more public Scandal, and that not
without ground, that he is the Spawn of a Priest: For whatever is the Cause,
this I find by Experience, that Cardinal Mazarin has more Influence upon him
than all the Peers and Grandees of his Kingdom: and though the Laws of Nations,
which forbid the Violation of Hospitality, especially to a neighboring and
injured Prince, might afford me a safe Retreat in this Kingdom; yet I find that
I cannot be safe from Insults, because I advised that the Cardinal should be
removed.

On the Consummation of the Marriage, and the young Prince's Birth.
Hymen I have found exorable, but Mars continues obstinate: I have been
successful in my Love, though not by my Sword. My next great Care must be to
keep the thing secret, else it will rejoice my Enemies, and disgust my Friends;
the former, that I have so much degraded my self, and rid them from the Fear of
my Foreign Allies; and the latter, that I have thus put my self out of a
Condition of relieving them from the Yoke of a tyrannous Usurper; so that the
Sweets which I enjoy are mixed with sour; and my Stars have still a malign
Influence. The same Precautions must be used as to my Brother, and we must
weather this Point as well as we can.

As my Comforts increase, so do my Cares; I have a Queen and a Prince, but
cannot provide for them as I ought. However there is Vengeance entailed upon my
Enemies, for here is one more of the Line to revenge his Grandfather's Blood.

CHAP. XX. On the French King's concluding a Treaty with Oliver, by which his
Majesty and the Royal Family were to be excluded France, and his going
thereupon into the Low Countries.
SInce the Kingdoms to which I have a natural and hereditary Right, would not
entertain me, it is no wonder that this, to which I have only a Title, should
refuse it; so that my unlucky Fate has now stripped me of all my Possessions,
both Real and Titular: I have no reason to complain of France's dealing thus
with Princes of the Blood, when Britain and Ireland have done so by their
natural Sovereign.

Bless me! how strange a thing is it that the Arms of a traitorous Subject
should be able not only to expel me from my own Dominions, but disturb my
Repose in those of others? and how dishonorable and unnatural is it for one
Monarch to countenance Rebellion against another? But why should I say thus? it
is just with Princes as it is with the Pope, he would impose his Infallibility
upon others, when he does not believe one word of it himself: So we would have
our own Subjects to obey us without Reserve, as being obliged by God so to do;
and yet we countenance the Rebellions of one another's Subjects. Thus did my
Father make a show at least of countenancing the French Hugonots against their
natural Sovereign. My Grandfather, King James, though a great Admirer of
Kingcraft, did, in some sort, espouse the Elector Palatine's Quarrel against
his Sovereign the Emperor: And my Predecessor Queen Elizabeth supported the
Netherlands in their Rebellion against the King of Spain: So that in short, my
Church-of- England-Subjects may boast of their Loyalty what they please, but I
think they have very small Reason; for they that make no Scruple to countenance
the Rebellion of others, will make no Conscience of rebelling themselves, if
ever they have occasion. And thus, if there be any thing like Divine Justice, I
am punished for the Sin of my Forefathers; and as they countenanced the
Rebellions of other Princes Subjects against them, now others countenance the
Rebellion of mine against me; so that amongst us we shall expose the Dignity of
Monarchy, and make all our Pretensions be looked upon as a Cheat.

But it is in vain to dispute, the Fates have decreed it, and I must obey; so
that rather than be sent from this Kingdom with Disgrace, or any public
Remark, I Will abandon it willingly of my own Accord, and save my Honor as much
as I can.

CHAP. XXI. On his Majesty's traveling into Germany and the Low Countries: The
Duke of Glocester's being importuned and threatened by his Mother to turn Roman
Catholic: and the Duke of York's being charged to depart France.
INstead of being a Monarch of three potent Kingdoms, I am now become a Citizen
of the World, and must be content to reside where I can find Reception. It Is
hard that Lewis XIV. should have dealt thus with me; and that the Advice of a
Priest should take place to the Disadvantage of a Prince of the Blood Royal of
France; that he who covets the Title of the most Christian King, should not be
more hospitable to a Prince who suffers for the most Christian Cause; that
France should make a League with the Murderers of my Father, and yet erect a
Monument to render the Jesuits eternally infamous for stabbing of Henry IV, my
Grandfather; that the French King, who pretends to be Absolute himself, should
so far approve of my Subjects Rebellion against me, appears with a very bad
Aspect: He Is not so much afraid of the Influence of the bad Example, as willing
to keep the King of Great Britain humble, for fear I should pursue my Title to
France; and knowing that Republics are unfit for Conquest, he is rather
inclinable to favor the New Commonwealth, and prefer his Interest to his
Reputation.

Nor is it the French King alone who opposes my Designs, but my Mother, I
perceive, has a hand in the pie, though I suppose she is misled by an
Overcharge of Zeal. It Is not my Interest that any of my Brethren should openly
profess the Romish Religion, for that were a way to obstruct our Return; and
yet she not only sollicites but threatens my youngest Brother if he do not
openly profess himself of that Church; an Evidence that she had but little
regard to my Father while alive, when she tramples so avowedly upon his
Commands now that he is dead; if the Eikon asilike was truly his, wherein he not
only advises me against any Change of my Religion, but all the rest of his
Children: and though it is true that I have changed mine in Obedience to a
higher Command, viz. that of Christ's Successor upon Earth, and for the
advancing of my own Interest; yet it is not publicly known, and by Consequence
is not scandalous; but for my Mother thus openly to scandalize the World by
influencing my Brother to an avowed Breach of my Father's Commands, is no
suitable Return for that last Message which he sent her, that his Thoughts had
never strayed from her: So that either she must not believe that Book to be
his, or is very impolitick to take such Measures. However I will make the best
Improvement of it I can, and send for him away from under her Conduct, which
will be a good Argument for my Friends in England to prove that I am firm in my
Religion; and I will endeavor to persuade her that I do it out of Policy,
because I would not come to a Rupture with her.

My Brother James's being commanded out of France does justify the Policy of my
former Conduct, in not staying till I was sent away; which, though disgraceful
enough to him, would have been much more so to me: Having had such slender
Entertainment amongst Papists, it will make our Friends in England believe that
we are still good Protestants, especially now that I make Application for
Assistance from Protestant States; so that I must turn every thing to my
Advantage as near as I can, though I am not like to do much with the Republican
States of Holland, who being jealous already of the Family of Orange, will be
afraid lest I support their Interest: Yet it will strengthen my Cause, if I get
but a favorable Answer, because it will be an Argument in the Mouths of my
Friends, to prove that the Proceedings against me are disliked by Foreign
Protestants.

CHAP. XXII. On his Majesty's being invited into the Spanish Netherlands by Don
John of Austria, in name of his Catholic Majesty, upon the Rupture betwixt
Spain and France.
INstead of being able to serve my self, every one would serve their turn of
me: the Spaniards, who refused my Father a Wife, do now proffer me their
Assistance to regain my Crown, that they may the better preserve their own
Dominions: My Presence they judge may be serviceable in Flanders, to withdraw my
Subjects who have joined the French: and now that I may be useful, they
condescend to court me, and my Circumstances oblige me to try my Fate; perhaps
my being present in Person may draw over some of my Subjects from the Enemy;
and my being so near England may animate my Friends there to some brave
Attempt; and seeing Fortune favors the Bold, I Am resolved to adventure,
perhaps she may be sated with my past Miseries, and instead of her usual Frowns
vouchsafe me some Smiles. The malign Influences of my Stars are, it may be,
exhausted, and the Aspect of the Heavens become more propitious. The Tyrant's
Oppression does fret my Subjects at home; and if Victory should crown my Head
with Laurels abroad, I may soon return with Triumph to my Throne. The Usurper
having disobliged the Nobility by the height of Contempt, abolishing the House
of Lords, and squeezing the Commons, may perhaps incline them to witness their
Resentments, when they hear that I Am at the Head of a numerous Army. If the
Church-of- England-men act their Part as the Presbyterians have done theirs,
though I confess they are infinitely less obliged, they might quickly give the
Usurper such a Diversion as would oblige him to recall his Troops for his own
Defense. But, alas! the Miscarriage of all my Designs in England, and the
renewed Attempts of my Friends in Scotland, give me reason to fear that the
same ill Fate attends me abroad; and therefore I think it best not to be with
the Army in Person, but send my two Brothers, and what Men I have, lest my
former ill Fortune should give the Spaniards occasion to say, that it had also
an Influence on their Affairs, in case their Army should be defeated.

CHAP. XXIII. On the Defeat of the Spanish Army, and the Surrender of Dunkirk
to the English.
HOW are all my Hopes vanished in a Moment, and my towering Designs brought
down to the Dust: My ill Fate not only pursues my self, but involves my Allies
in the same Destiny. Those who flatter this fortunate Usurper will doubtless
say now, O nimium dilecte Deo, for nothing can stand before him. The Loss of
this Battle does mightily affect me; so many of my best Friends having done
their utmost to retrieve our lost Cause in it, but in vain; and my two Brethren
commanding in Person, have also been made sensible of the Frowns of Fortune; so
that the whole Family will be henceforth esteemed unsuccessful: and what
dangerous Consequences attend such an Opinion of Generals, Experience has
taught in all Ages. There happened nothing favorable in this Rencounter, but
that my Brother James being taken, had the good Fortune to escape: Whence I
have some ground to hope that we are preserved for better Times: and though
Fortune at present favors Oliver, so that neither Scots, Dutch nor Spaniards
can stand before him, the Case will not always continue thus, but the Wheel may
turn upon him or his. My Subjects begin already to be weary of the Anarchy in
the State; and the Presbyterians themselves of the Confusion in the Church: The
Nobility and Gentry are angry to be trod under-foot by his Officers, who are
Fellows of inferior Quality: And by their desiring him to take upon him the
Title of King, it shows that they have no Dislike to the Office; and being
sensible of his Breach of his Oath, by taking the Government upon himself,
though a single Person, modelling their Parliaments as he pleases, though he
was sworn to maintain their Privileges, and governing them by an Army, though
he would not allow my Father the Militia; they will quickly come to draw such
Inferences, that seeing we must be tyrannized over, it were as good to be so by
those who have a long time been in possession of the Throne, and will take care
to leave something worth the Enjoyment of their Posterity, seeing they believe
the Divine Right of a Lineal Succession: whereas they who have no such
Principle nor Pretense, do only take care for themselves, and make Hay while
the Sun shines.

The giving up of Dunkirk to the English, is a very strange and impolitick Act
of France, if they have not some more than ordinary Assurance of Oliver. Had my
Predecessor Queen Mary been possessed of such a Post on the Continent, the Loss
of Calais would never have broke her Heart: And if ever it happen that a
warlike King enjoy the British Diadem and Dunkirk at the same time, the Kingdom
of France may have Cause to repent of this Folly; but, as I said before, they
are not so afraid of a Republic.

CHAP. XXIV. On Oliver's Death; Richard's being declared Protector, outed by
Lambert and the Army, etc.
DEath has effected what my Arms could not, and rid me of my greatest Enemy.
If there be any such thing as a Supreme Being, the Saints and He have certainly
heard my Prayers; and on that very Day of the Month when Oliver triumphed over
me at Dumbar and Worcester, Fate has triumphed over him; so that now I may
begin to pluck up my Spirits, and hope that Fortune will favor me at length.
This Man being dead, whom my Enemies did idolize, they have not such another to
fill up his room: and by his nominating his Son Richard to succeed him, he has
at once discovered his Folly and Hypocrisy; his Folly in naming such an one who
is unfit for the Charge, and his Hypocrisy in claiming a Lineal Succession,
which he did all along so strenuously impugn.

Richard is deposed by the same Power that set up his Father, which is a very
remarkable piece of Justice; the Divine Nemesis has made them destroy their
own Creature, and they will at last destroy themselves. Oliver raised himself
by concurring with Enthusiasts, and advancing the Power of the Army over the
Parliament, and by the same Method the Frame of his own Government is pulled in
pieces.

CHAP. XXV. On his Majesty's being invited to a Treaty on the Frontiers of
Spain, betwixt the French and Spanish Ministers, about a Peace betwixt those
Crowns: Sir George Booth's Defeat: The Confusions which the Nations were cast
into by Lambert, and General Monk's carrying on the Designs of restoring his
Majesty.
FOrtune begins now to look upon me with a more favorable Aspect, when the
Great Potentates of Europe court me to be present at a Treaty of Peace; which,
if concluded, may tend to my Restoration, without being obliged to my own
Subjects; and then I may introduce the Catholic Religion in an open manner, as
the Condition of the Assistance which is granted to me by Catholic Princes.

But, alas! the malign Influences of my Stars are not yet exhausted, for the
Treaty is turned only to a Cessation of Arms; the French are very cold in their
Caresses, and the Spaniards have only granted me some Complimental Honors.

Nor have I been more successful in my Subjects Endeavors, Sir George Booth
and his Party are defeated; so that I find the Presbyterians were more
successful against my Father than ever they have been since for him or me. And
the Church-of- England-men, though they will expect to reap the greatest
Benefit from my Restoration, are very slack in their Endeavors toward it.

The only thing which looks with a favorable Aspect, as to my Affairs, is,
that the Nations are madded with so many Changes of Government, and always
subjected to the Tyranny of the Army: Their Parliaments, the Conservation of
whose Privileges had a great share in beginning the War, are also trampled
under foot, which I know must exceedingly disgust the People.

The main Anchor of my Hopes is General Monk, whom I must caress with great
Promises to carry on my Designs, under a pretense of being zealous against me,
till such time as he may safely declare himself for me.

The Scots, I know, are weary of the English Usurpation, and many of the
Presbyterians there do still think that I am their Friend; so that it will be
easy for him to secure my Interest in that Nation; and while he summons their
Gentry to abjure me by the Tender, he may form the Plot for my Restoration.

CHAP. XXVI. On General Monk's having brought the Design of his Majesty's
Restoration to Perfection: His Majesty's Declaration from Breda, and
Entertainment of the Presbyterian Ministers there, who were sent over to him.
NOW Fortune is surely sated with my Miseries, and instead of her Frowns
vouchsafes me her Smiles: My Designs at length have proved successful, and now
I am mounting to the Top of the Wheel; but that Lady is so fickle and
unconstant, that I must be careful of the Measures which I take, and give my
Subjects kind Words now, if I would have them to be my Servants for ever. The
English Loyalty is purer than that of the Scots, who demanded much harder Terms
from me; and seeing I swore the greater, I may very well promise the lesser,
being resolved to keep them both alike. And seeing the Puritans complained of
being persecuted in my Father's Reign, I must promise an Indulgence to tender
Consciences: and, in short, take all possible Methods to sweeten my Subjects,
till such time as I be settled upon the Throne, and then I shall punish the
stubborn Schismatics with a Vengeance for their old Rebellion. But I must be
very cautious, and counterfeit a deal of Piety before the Puritanical Parsons
who are sent over to me: I must prepare some Prayers in their own canting
Dialect, and order them to be brought where they may hear me at them in my
Closet; and for once I Will imitate Oliver, who used always to pray with an
audible Voice, by which he drew his Followers into a great Opinion of his
Piety. He Is a cursed Pattern indeed, but according to the Proverb, Fas est and
ab host doceri: And if I can but impose upon those Leading Priests, the Cant
will take universally amongst the Party, and I shall carry on my Designs with
the more Facility. It Is true, that according to the common Notion of the World
this may seem Atheistical; but seeing the Catholic Church will avouch that
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, it cannot be unlawful for me to
dissemble with them; and if there be a God, he is not certainly such as we have
him represented, else he had never paved my Way to the Throne, seeing he must
know that I never designed to keep one Word of my Promises: so that I have no
reason to suffer any Disquiet in my Thoughts upon that account; for when those
who call themselves Divines, and make it their Trade, cannot agree whether
there be only one God and no Persons, or one God and three Persons; nor yet as
to the Rule which he has left to direct us, nor the Meaning of that which some
of them pretend to be the Rule; let meaner Persons trouble themselves about
these Speculations, I Will concern my self how to live like a King. And seeing in
their own Dialect they call me a God upon Earth, they shall obey my Will as the
Vicegerent of Heaven. And since it is uncertain whether there be either a God
or a Heaven, I Will ease my self of the Trouble of my Prayers for time to come,
as I have already done for some time past; and yet I perceive that my Affairs
go on and prosper, while theirs, who do not only pray, but also howl and whine,
are on the Declension; and certainly their God must be a very unkind Sovereign,
to suffer the best of his Subjects, for so they must be if the Bible be his
Word, to lie under the greatest Affliction. Surely I would not do so to the
best of my Subjects if I could help it; but if they be such Fools as to think
that Afflictions make them the fitter for Heaven, qui decipi vult decipiatur,
for my part, if I can, I Will take my pleasure here, and venture upon what is to
come hereafter.

There is still one dangerous Rock more on which I must beware of splitting,
and that is, lest the People be jealous of my Designs on their Civil Liberties;
for let them clamor and talk of Religion as much as they will, I find that to
be pinched in the other is their principal Grievance; so that Stiffness in
Religion is a thing peculiar to the Scots Presbyterians and their bigoted
Followers: However I must be high in my Protestations, that there is nothing
which I do so much lay to heart, as the Advancement of the Protestant Religion,
and the Conservation of the Privileges of Parliament; that all the Unkindnesses
which I and mine have met with from Protestants, have not been able to alter my
Opinion, as to the former; nor have all the Invasions which they have made upon
my Prerogative, been able to put me out of Conceit with the latter; but that I
shall always look upon their Counsel as the best, and be ready to comply with
such Measures as they propose for the Advancement of Religion and Liberty.

CHAP. XXVII. On his Majesty's being proclaimed by the Parliament: His
magnificent Entrance into London, and enjoying the Countess of Castlemain the
first Night.
MY Designs have taken, and my Subjects are thereupon returned to their Duty;
so that now I am recalled by the Consent of the Nation, who were wearied by the
Oppressions of the late Anarchy. I may now with Safety put off my Vizard in
some measure, and say with Pope Sixtus V. that it is needless to stoop any
longer now that I have found the Keys. The People, I perceive, are come to a
high Flight of Loyalty; so that my small Escapes will not be taken notice of:
And seeing all this Solemnity is for me, why should not I chiefly reap the
Sweets of it? If the Subjects indulge themselves as to Wine and Women, upon
this occasion, why should the same be denied to their Sovereign? The best way
to carry on my Designs is to begin my Reign with Jollity, which will be
grateful to those who have been so long restrained from Liberty. By this means
I shall be sure to have the strongest Party; for all Men's natural Inclinations,
which the Precisians call Lusts and Corruptions, will be certainly for me; and
if once they get a Vent, will break out like an Inundation now that they have
so long been under a Restraint. The youthful Nobility and Gentry will certainly
adore my Reign on this account, as August and Splendid; and the Churchmen will
be glad to be from under the Checks and Grimaces of the Puritans: so that the
Whole being immersed in Jollity and Pleasure, they will quickly leave off the Cant
of Religion and Property; and they who do otherwise, will be made the Subject
of public Ignominy.

Why may not I have the Countess of Castlemain, as well as David had Bathsheba?
The Solemnity of this Day is a much more excusable Tentation than his viewing
of a beautiful Woman from the top of his House. If I be privately reproached,
as having invaded another Man's Property, I can tell them publicly, that
Princes are not to be limited as private Men, they have a Right to the Persons
and Goods of their Subjects; and who ought to say to a King, What do thou? If
I keep them from incroaching upon one another, they may very well allow me my
Liberty: I am accountable to none but God, and him I will venture to take in my
own Hand; the Advancement of the Catholic Church will atone for all other
Miscarriages; so that as to this I have no reason to be sollicitous; a good End
will hallow the worst of Means: and seeing those who are called the debauchedst
of Men have sometimes Pangs and Gripes of Conscience, a Licentiousness of
Practice is the best Method of the World to reduce such to the Church of Rome,
because Pardons may be had for the highest of Crimes; so that a Man may enjoy
the Pleasures of Sin, and not only be freed from the Punishment due to it, but
also assured of Heaven at last. And herein the Pope does as much as Mahomet,
though under a Vail of greater Modesty, and secures to his Followers the
Pleasures both of this World and that which is to come: so that I shall take
care by this Method to pave the way for the Return of Popery, and make it
appear that Debauchery is looked upon by me as the best Test of Loyalty, as
indeed it will be; for sure I am that Debauchees, as foolish Men call those who
indulge the innocent Appetites of Nature, will never be Enemies to a Reign
which allows them in it; but on the contrary, will be my surest Defense against
all the Attempts of the Puritanical Precisians.

CHAP. XXVIII. On the Parliament's condemning the Regicides, and appointing an
Anniversary Humiliation on the Day of King Charles I's Murder.
NOW when the Kingdom is in a Ferment of Loyalty, I must take care to revenge
my Father's Death, wherein I shall be sure of the Concurrence of the
Parliament, because that same Hand which cut off his Head cut off their
Privileges; but I must push it further than I Am afraid they will be willing,
and by my Friends and Pensioners procure an Act for an Anniversary
Commemoration of my Father's Murder, by which I shall blazon his Virtues to all
Posterity, and load his Enemies with the Height of Reproach, which will
mightily tend to the Establishment of my Prerogative; for by crying out against
his Murder, all manner of Opposition against Sovereigns will be condemned. I am
sure of having the Church of England's Assistance, because those that destroyed
him did also destroy them; so that they will certainly defend his Cause as
their own; and the more that they extol my Father, the more they depress their
own Enemies: so that I need not doubt but the Churchmen will express
themselves with all the Hyperboles imaginable, to display the Horridness of the
Murder, and the Piety and singular Virtues of their Martyr; which will be of
special Use to support my Pretensions to an absolute Monarchy: for when the
Generality of the Pulpits ring with Declamations for Passive Obedience, it will
create an Universal Abhorrence of all such as are for any manner of Resistance;
which the Churchmen will find themselves obliged to promote, that they may
throw Dirt upon the Presbyterians, who are Enemies to their Hierarchy. And thus
by keeping the Protestants at Enmity amongst themselves, and the stiffest and
most obstinate amongst them under the Hatches, I shall be the better enabled to
destroy the whole, and bring in Popery by Degrees, if not by Head and Shoulders.

But as to the Regicides, to have them condemned has been no hard matter,
because the Parliament did never approve of their Proceedings; and from their
Condemnation I shall reap this Advantage, that the Means must fall under the
same Censure with the Instruments; and all things which contributed to my
Father's Death as a pretended Zeal for Religion, and the Privileges of the
People, will be looked upon as certain Marks of Disloyalty.

CHAP. XXIX. On his Majesty's dissolving the Parliament which called him in,
and summoning another.
THis Parliament has done all that I am to expect from them, and therefore
it is expedient that I should dissolve them, it not being safe to trust too much
to a Parliament that has such an Alloy: I must summon another, which will be
fitter for my purpose, and bring in as many of my Companions in Exile as I can:
Their Spirits are embittered by their former Sufferings, and their Purses are
still sensible of their Sequestrations, which will make them the more eager for
a Revenge; and to help it on, I will still keep them low, and feed them with
Promises to carry on my Designs. I must now begin to think of my Engagements to
the Catholics; and toward the better accomplishing of them, must restore the
Bishops, which I can easily do now that the House is filled with my Friends,
who will be glad of such a Revenge upon the Presbyterians. I have weathered the
Point in other things of as great Consequence, so that I need not despair of
succeeding in this. Let the Scots Phanaticks upbraid me with the Breach of
Covenant, and the English Roundheads with my Declaration from Breda, I am not
concerned to regard such Trifles. The former was tyrannically imposed both upon
me and my Subjects; and the latter was only an Essay of Policy. When I was
under Restraint I might abate of my Prerogative; but now that I am at Liberty I
may as lawfully regain it, for I can never be divested of my native Right. They
both say that I am God's Vicegerent, and therefore if I part with my own
Prerogative I part with his; but if I must follow my own Inclination, I had
rather say with the noble Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? And
if the Puritans call themselves Israelites, I Am resolved to keep them in
Bondage; and though I don't allow them Straw, will exact the Tale of the Brick:
I shall expect as much Loyalty and Obedience from them, as from those who have
my Favor; and if I find them come short, they shall be sure to smart for it:
They are a Company of idle Enthusiasts, and therefore say, Let us go serve the
Lord; but they shall serve him in my way, or not at all. I have already
overturned their Babel in Scotland, or have rather indeed kept it under, as I
found it, for Oliver had pretty well humbled them to my hand; and instead of an
Indulgence there shall be a strict Uniformity in England, which will set the
Episcopal Party and the Presbyterians together by the Ears; and then the
Catholics may take their Advantages to promote their Religion; and I shall
improve the Opportunity to advance my Prerogative. When the Pulpits are once
emptied of the Presbyterian Parsons, who preach up such rigid Morals, I Will take
care that the Bishops shall not employ Precisians, but Men of a more courtly
and complaisant Temper, who will allow a greater Latitude both in Doctrine and
Example, that the Church may have no reason to upbraid the Looseness of the
Court. Nor shall I value the moross Reflections of Fanatics upon my Principles
and Practice, but contemn them as unworthy of a Monarch's Regard.

I am happy in the Model of this present Parliament, for they have given me as
much as I can at present desire: they have made me an Offering of the Peoples
Purses, Privileges and Lives; have enacted such Laws as will make one
Protestant devour another, and do every thing according to my own Mind. How
great is the Change betwixt mine and my Father's Days, when the Parliament
thought they could never restrain him enough, and my Parliament think every
thing too little for me. Thus the Triennial Act, which secured the Peoples
Properties, and was with so much Struggling obtained from my Father, is now
made a Sacrifice to my Prerogative, so that their chiefest Fortress is
surrendered at once. They have not only provided for my living in Slpendor, but
also taken care of my Reputation: And lest some sharp-sighted Fellows should
perceive my Design of introducing Popery, they have forbid it to be spoken of
on pain of Praemunire, though at the same time I be in actual Correspondence
with the Pope; so that I find my Pensions are well laid out; and though at
present they be expensive, yet they are but like the putting of a small
Quantity of Water into a Pump, to draw out an hundred times more.

CHAP. XXX. On the Presbyterian Plots set on foot November. 1661. Sir J. P's
forging treasonable Letters to that effect. His Majesty's appointing a
Conference at the Savoy betwixt the Conformists and Nonconformists; and
influencing the House of Commons to offer Reasons against any Toleration.
DIvide and Command was Machiavel's Maxim, and I find it very necessary for me
to put in practice, that my Subjects may not unite against me as formerly
against my Father. That I may the better revenge my Father's Death, and my own
Injury upon the Puritans, I must find a way to make them be thought guilty of
Plots against the Government, which will be readily believed, because they
joined with the Parliament against my Father, and look upon themselves as
oppressed and betrayed by me; and I need not doubt of its being believed by
those of the Church of England, who are their irreconcilable Enemies; for when
the one is up, the other must go down: and then I shall reap this Advantage
from it, that the Pulpits will thunder Invectives against them, and bring the
general Odium of the Nation upon them, by which some of them will be obliged to
comply, which will create Divisions amongst their own Party. And some of the
moderate Churchmen will be displeased at the Severities used against the
Presbyterians; and by this Means I shall break all the Protestants to pieces
amongst themselves. To give my Accusation the Face, at least, of Probability, I
must take care to have treasonable Letters lodged with their chief Patrons, for
which Sir J. P. is a very fit Instrument. It will also be a very proper Method
to suborn Fellows to talk of treasonable Designs amongst such of them as are
unwary; and if they cannot be indicted for High Treason, they may very well be
pursued for Misprision of Treason; and if they themselves be brought to confess
that they heard of such Designs, others will believe that they had actually a
hand in contriving them; and when once some of them are convicted by Public
Justice, and executed accordingly, it will confirm the Belief of a Plot, and
strike a Terror into the rest.

But that the State may not bear all the blame, I must bring in the Church for
a share; and though I appoint them by Commission to confer with the
Nonconformists about Methods for a Comprehension, yet they shall have private
Instructions, not to comply: And that they may not at first perceive my Design,
I shall take care to insinuate that their conceding in one thing will occasion
all the rest to be called in question; and then by the Influence of the Bishops
in the House of Lords, and of the Members of the Clergy's Choice in the House
of Commons, I shall bring it to pass that the Phanaticks shall fall into a
general Disgrace, and be reputed not only such in Name, but in Deed, and not at
all worthy of a Toleration; which I reckon the best Politics that I can put in
practice, to ruin the most zealous Professors of the Protestant Religion
first, and then the rest will quickly be brought to comply with my Designs, and
abandon that Religion of which they have little or nothing but the Name, or at
least render it odious and of small Esteem, by walking unanswerably to its
Principles. And if any cunning Fellow shall smell out my Design, I have
provided against his daring to speak of it by the Act against those who shall
declare me a Papist, or that I have a Design to introduce Popery: And though
those who are sharp-sighted may laugh at such a Provision, as rather giving
than taking away Cause of Suspicion, yet when it dare not be openly talked of
amongst the Vulgar, it will not obtain a common Belief: And the Church of
England, whom I support against the Phanaticks, will certainly support me
against their Censures. And thus when I have made one Party of Protestants to
bait the other sufficiently, if the Church of England prove refractory
afterward to my Designs, then I shall endeavor, by remitting the Rigor of
the Law, to engage the Dissenters on my side, to favor an universal
Toleration, by which my Friends the Papists may have ease, if the Episcopal
Party begin to grudg at my Favors toward them, or to fear that at last they
may dispossess themselves.

CHAP. XXXI. On his Majesty's selling of Dunkirk to the French King for 500000
l.
THis I know will be censured as an impolitick Action, and the shutting my self
out of the Continent, whereunto this Town opened a Door, by which I might have
invaded France and the Netherlands when I pleased. It Is true that it was a
Monument of England's Glory, but such an one as being erected under the Conduct
of an Usurper, is not for the Credit of me nor my Family; and therefore lest it
should be an Allurement to re-intice my People to a Commonwealth, I will make
it a Sacrifice to my Cousin the French King: Not that I owe so much to his
Kindness, but that he may supply my present Necessities with his Money. And to
testify my farther Resentments of that impious Rebellion, the Citadels which
Oliver built shall be razed throughout my Dominions, and the Towns which held
out against my Father dismantled; and if it were not that the Consequence would
be fatal to my self, every one of them should be sowed with Salt, their
Inhabitants made to pass under Saws of Iron, and have their Flesh torn with the
Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness: But I must pretend other Causes to the
People, lest they should be enraged, as that I will not keep up Garrisons amongst
them, when there is no need to disturb their Commerce, nor leave it in the
Power of other Kings to do it, when the Places which are capable of being
garrisoned are dismantled: though in reality it is to prevent the Rebels from
nestling there, or having recourse to them to favor their Rebellion, the best
way to be rid of the Harpies being to destroy their Nests: And that I may free
my self at once, as much as is possible from that viperous Brood, as I have
already disbanded the Army, under pretense that I would not keep up one in time
of Peace, but in reality because I would not have such a Body of
well-disciplin'd Troops of their Principles together, lest at any time they
should make head against me as against their former Masters, the Parliament,
Richard, etc. So now I Will forbid their old Officers to stay within 20 Miles of
London, and the Remainders of the Troops I Will send to fight against the
Spaniards in my Wife's Quarrel; and if they never return, as I hope few of them
will, I can very well bear the Loss.

CHAP. XXXII. On the Parliament's beginning to grow sensible of the
Encouragement given to the Catholic Religion by his Majesty's Declaration,
December. 1662. Their Petition on that head: and his Majesty's publishing a
Proclamation against Papists thereupon.
It Is a mischievous thing for a Sovereign to be limited, and to be obliged to
act the King only by halves. How happy is my Brother of France who is not
troubled with such Fetters, but his Will does pass for an uncontrollable Law. I
abhor those Parliaments, for they are nothing else but Spies upon Kings, and
dive into their most reserved and hidden Intrigues: I find they begin to
suspect my Religion, and grudg at the Favors which I show to the Papists, and
therefore I must proceed slowly and surely. Their Zeal to my Prerogative is
regulated by their own Interest, which makes them oppose my Dispensing Power:
So that I find I am only absolute against Phanaticks and Republicans; but when
I come to meddle with the Church of England, my Power is limited, and the
Parliament must then be Sharers of the Sovereignty. Their Petitions against my
Administration may issue in Remonstrances against my Government, as it happened
in my Father's time, and therefore it is my Interest to flatter them a little;
and by a Proclamation against the Papists to create an Opinion of my Firmness
to the Protestant Religion in the Public, draw Money from the Purses of the
Commons; and so to recoil, to give the stronger and heavier Blow.

CHAP. XXXIII. On the News of some more Plots by the Phanaticks against his
Majesty both in England, Scotland and Ireland. The Execution of the Earl of
Argyle, Lord Wariston, etc. in Scotland; and some of those concerned in the
Plots in England and Ireland.
I Find that I shall bring my Designs about by Degrees, and under the Notion of
Plotters execute Vengeance upon mine Enemies, without incurring the Censure of
being bloody or cruel. It Is true that it may seem hard that I should take the
Earl of Argyle's Head, who was the Person that set the Crown upon my own: But
during this Extacy of Loyalty, in which the Nations are at present, the Method
of such Proceedings will be the less taken notice of; and it is absolutely
necessary for my purpose that the Earl of Argyle should be taken out of the
way; the Greatness of his Power, and his Zeal for his Religion, may otherwise
prove great Impediments to my Designs: I have Pretenses enough against him,
because of his Activity in the Parliament's Rebellion; and his Death will be
acceptable to the Church of England, because he was Head of the Presbyterians;
and the Friends of the late Marquess of Montrosse, and all the Cavaliers, will
concur with my Design against him; and though there is no doubt but that he
will profess his Innocence on the Scaffold, yet the Authority of a public
Sentence will be of greater Weight, or at least restrain the People from open
Murmurings. By his Death I shall have also this farther Advantage, that the
Power of his Clan will be thereby reduced, and neither be formidable to my self
nor Successors, it being the Interest of all Crowns to guard against too potent
Subjects. As to Sir Archibald Johnston of Wariston, though he be not so great
in Power, yet he is nothing inferior to the other in Policy, but indeed far
above him: and as the Trojans owed their Destruction more to Vlysses's Counsels
than Achilles's Arms, it is my Interest to rid my self of a Politician, who is
my Enemy, as soon as of one who is greater in Power and Quality. And though it
be reckoned no great Policy for a Monarch, newly reestablished, to cement his
Throne with Blood, yet it is not only good Policy, but absolutely needful, in
my case, to sacrifice the Ringleaders of the Presbyterians while they are at
present under a Consternation, before they have time to recollect their
Spirits, and make head against me; and therefore I am resolved on a Victim of
each sort, viz. of their Nobility, Gentry and Clergy; and so Mr. James Guthry,
who has appeared so stout for the Privileges of their Church, as being supreme
Judge themselves in Ecclesiastical Affairs, shall smart for his Opinion. And
thus I will pave my way to the Enjoyment of my Prerogative, both in Affairs of
Church and State, over the Bellies of my Enemies. Nor must it be in Scotland
alone where the Effects of my Resentments shall be felt, but in both my other
Kingdoms, for I must take care to have the Apprehensions of a discontented
Party continued in all the three Nations; of which I shall make these
Advantages, that they will serve for a Balance against the Church of England
if she grow stubborn, and always serve for a Pretense of a Necessity of keeping
up Forces; and the sacrificing of them to the Fury of the Episcopal Party, will
be at all times an effectual Means of draining their Pockets, and making them
concur to the raising of Money in Parliament: and when at any time I am minded
to amuse the People with the Noise of a Plot, it will be the more easily
believed, seeing there is a Party, who being exasperated with Oppression, it
may be reasonably thought that they will endeavor to procure their own Liberty.

CHAP. XXXIV. On his Majesty's making War upon the Dutch, Anno 1664.
LEST the Nation should grow luxuriant with too long Peace, it is sit that I
should engage them in War abroad, to prevent their having leisure to tumultuate
at home. Had my Father done so, he might have prevented his Disaster. I have
Pretenses enough of quarrelling with the Dutch, but if they be not thought
weighty, I must endeavor to make them appear so. My Pensioners, which I have
in the House of Commons, will easily be influenced to find justifying Causes:
And seeing the Nation are jealous of their Trade, as their principal Support,
to give out that the Dutch have incroach'd upon that, will be most plausible
and taking; and the natural Hatred which the Episcopal Party have against the
Dutch Presbytery, and Form of Government, will render them easy to believe the
Crimes charged upon them, and make them concur with Zeal enough in their
Destruction. And for the other Party, who will certainly murmur and guess at
that which is the real Cause of the War, it will afford me an Opportunity to
treat them the more severely, and justify the Rigor which shall be used
toward them. And in the mean time I shall carry on the common Design of
restoring the Church of Rome under such Colors as will not be easily
discerned, it being indeed fit to raze out the Memory of that People from under
Heaven, and not to leave such a Monument of successful Rebellion against
Monarchy and the Catholic Church in Being. It Is true that my Design may be
taxed with Ingratitude, considering the kind Entertainment that I found amongst
them during my Exile: but as I have been happy in palliating my Treatment of
the Spaniards, and the Scots Presbyterians, both of whom were very kind to me;
I doubt not also to find Excuses for this, which will in some measure satisfy
the Public.

CHAP. XXXV. On the Parliament's voting to stand by his Majesty till he had a
Redress for the Injuries done to his Subjects by the Dutch. The King's great
Care to have his Fleet ready before theirs, putting them off by fair Promises,
seizing their Bourdeaux Fleet without declaring War, etc.
MY Parliament I do find are made to my purpose, partly by Pension, and partly
by Principle; and having them on my side, I am safe enough. If any of the
Phanaticks shall be so bold as to mutter, that Popery is at the bottom of this
War; or if the Dutch should give it out so to possess the Minds of Foreign
Protestant Princes with prejudice against me, the Parliament's being on my side
will knock all their Suggestions on the head; for who will believe that the
Protestant Representatives of a Protestant Nation will concur in a Design to
destroy their own Religion? But at the same time I Will take care to have it
truly represented to the Pope and the House of Austria; and they, together with
the French King, who is in the Design with me, will be too strong for all
Opposers; and what by their Strength and my own Policy, we shall be able to
carry the Design on to perfection. But considering the ill Fate which attended
the Spaniards in their Designs against that cautelous People, I must proceed
very warily, and hide my Intentions as much as I can, till I find sufficient
Advantage against them; and accordingly my Envoy shall have Instructions to
assure them of my good Intentions, until such time as I can entrap their
Bourdeaux and Smyrna Fleets, which will enable me to manage the War against
them at their own Charge: And tho such Practices might be esteemed dishonest
amongst private Men, yet it will pass for justifiable Policy with Princes; and
in the mean time I will order it so as to have my Fleet ready before theirs,
and begin Hostilities without declaring War. My Brother the Duke of York shall
be my Admiral, of whose Zeal against that Heretical Republic I have no reason
to doubt; and this will besides render him popular to the Nation, if he happen
to be successful, and pave his way to the Crown if he outlive me, and that I
have no Issue, and by consequence secure the Interest of the Church of Rome in
these Nations.

I must magnify the Zeal of my Parliament, and thank them for espousing my
Quarrel so kindly, which will keep them still in a good Humor, and make them
justify my whole Conduct in the Affair, and whet their Zeal to enact severe
Laws against the Nonconformists, who are Men of the same Principles with the
Dutch. So that during this Ferment against the Puritans I shall provide for the
Security of my Friends the Papists, which will be the more easily overlooked. I
have also received Assurance of the French King's Concurrence, who will demand
Reparation from the Dutch for his two East-India-Ships which they have taken,
and together we shall destroy that Bulwark of Heresy.

CHAP. XXXVI. On the French King's making Peace with the States. Several
Skirmishes, with various Success. The Victory at Sea by the Duke of York; and
the Plague which broke out in London in 1665.
MY Brother of France has failed of his Promise; so that I find that I h^^^
the same Measure dealt to me which I de^^^ to others; and he endeavors to take
the Advantage of the Dutch and me both: However I Will let him know that I can go
on without him: And though I have hitherto gained nothing by this Rupture with
Holland, but that Fortune has favored them as well as me in small
Rencounters, yet I am resolved to push it on as far as I can, and let that
proud Monarch know that he is not the sole Inheritor of Henry the IV's Glory
and Grandeur.

On the Victory.
The Poets are in the right when they represent Justice blindfold, for in good
earnest it seems that she determines Causes by chance, and that the good things
of this World are made for those who can catch them: and if there be any such
thing as a Deity, it sees not as Men see; nor does it act according to those
Rules which are in vogue amongst us Mortals. The Dutch pretend to have that
which they call Religion and Justice on their side; and in truth if that which
is esteemed the Rule of both, be true, their Pretensions are not ill founded,
and yet the Victory has fallen to me. Then seeing we are not certain what be
the Rules and Decrees of the higher Powers, it is rational for Men to follow
their own Inclinations, and gratify their natural Appetites as much as they
can. The contrary Principle seems very unreasonable, that we who look upon our
selves as a happy Race of Creatures should yet labor under a severer
Restraint; and that we should be denied the pleasing of what is visible for the
pretended Safety of some, I do not know what, invisible Substance. But from
this Victory I shall be sure of these following Fruits; In the first place that
it will give Credit to my Arms, which have not hitherto been reckoned
successful; and in the next it will magnify my Brother's Conduct, which will
still contribute to render me the more formidable. It will also create
Disorders in Holland, which may be improved to my great Advantage, and it will
secure me from the Murmurs of the Rabble at home, who always measure the
Justice of a Cause by its Success; and it will be a prevailing Argument with
the Parliament to go cheerfully on with their promised Supplies.

But my Joys are neither long-lived nor unmixed; for though I be Conqueror by
the Sword, I Am consumed by the Plague, which rages in the Bowels of my Capital
City. No doubt the Phanaticks will say that it is for the Sins of me and my
Family; as Israel was plagued for David's numbering of the People: but as my
Subjects are not so well deserving as his, I am not obliged to be so much
concerned as he was; nor am I indeed any further, than that it weakens and
renders me less able to carry on the War, and will be esteemed by my Enemies as
the Hand of God against me. But for the Reflection of the Phanaticks, I can
easily turn it upon themselves, that it is a just Punishment upon the Nation for
their unnatural Rebellion, and the horrid Murder of their King and my Father:
and if this be once given out at Court, I am sure it will be echoed again from
the Pulpit: and as that will justify the utmost of my Severity in Scotland by
free Quarter, etc. on the Presbyterians there, it will also defend my
Proceedings against their Brethren in England, to keep them in Prisons at
London, etc. till they die of the Contagion here: And as for my self and my
Court, we can remove to a Place of better Air. And though the Bills of
Mortality do increase to a prodigy, it is a just Vengeance on the rebellious
City: and if it come to the worst, that I should want Men to carry on the War,
I can quickly make up a Peace abroad; and when my Subjects are diminished, I am
the less in hazard by a Rebellion at home.

CHAP. XXXVII. On the meeting of the Parliament at Oxford, because of the
Plague at London. The King's Speech to them about the Dutch War, and Supplies.
The Chancellor's Enlargement on it. The Act for banishing Nonconformists five
Miles from Corporations.
AS this City afforded a safe Retreat to my Father from his rebellious Subjects
at London, it furnishes me with the like during the Pestilence which has
seized upon that City for their Rebellion: And as the Londoners had Influence
upon the then Parliament to increase their Obstinacy, I doubt not but the
University will have Influence upon this to heighten their Loyalty. My Business
is now to applaud the Parliament for their advising me to a War with Holland,
which has hitherto been so successful: And as it will convince them that I am
willing to make them Sharers of my Glory, it will render them the more willing
to make me a Sharer of their Purses: But lest those amongst them who are firm
Protestants should perceive my Design, and blame my Conduct for leaguing with
Popish Princes to procure the Destruction of the Dutch, I must hide my Designs
under a pretense of repaying them in their own Coin; and that my stirring up
the Bishop of Munster against them, is only because they have given an ill
Character of me to Foreign Protestant Princes: And considering that it was
necessary for the Nation's Glory that those stubborn Republicans, who had broke
the Power of Spain, should be humbled by England, the Parliament have no reason
to be angry at my supplying the Bishop of Munster with Money. And at the same
time I will pretend that I am willing to come to a Peace upon reasonable
Propositions; and give my Lord Chancellor Order to insist and enlarge upon
those Heads, and to declare the Affronts which the Dutch put upon the Royal
Family before my Restoration; which as it will incense the Cavaliers in the
House, it will silence those who are fanatically inclined. And the better to
color my Demands of Money, I must take care to have the ill Condition that my
Magazines for Arms and Naval Stores were in, represented to the full, and the
Pains and Charges which I have been at magnified to the life.

The Parliament I find have answered my Expectations, and not only ordered me
sufficient store of Money to carry on the War, but have given a Gratuity to my
Brother the Duke, notwithstanding of its having been represented by some, that
his Cowardice, under pretense of want of Repose, gave the Dutch an Opportunity
to escape better than they would have done otherwise. And that nothing may be
left unattempted which may tend to the Ruin of the Protestant Interest, he and
I have not only delivered up Monsieur Rohan, who came to acquaint me with the
French King's Designs to ruin his Protestant Subjects, and to propose Measures
which might have prevented it, and advanced my own Glory, as he imagined, but
by my Solicitation I have also got the strictest of my own Protestant Subjects
declared incapable of Trust, except they comply with that which is contrary to
their Consciences, and their Preachers to be banished five Miles from
Corporations, which is a thing of mighty Consequence to the carrying on of my
Design; for by this Means I shall not now be pestered with Returns of
Precisians and Republicans for Members of Parliament, nor can they have any
share in the managing of the Government: And as for the other Party, they are
so much taken up with the Discipline and Rituals of their Church, that they are
not very sollicitous what Innovations be made in her Doctrine: And I have
always found that their Harmony with the Church of Rome, in the outward part,
has engendered in them a better Opinion of the Papists than Presbyterians. And
thus at once I strike at the Protestant Interest at home and abroad. It Is true
that the delivering up of that French Gentleman, and our placing the French
Ambassador behind the Curtain, to hear his Complaints and Proposals for
Redress, may seem inglorious, and a thing below a Crowned Head: But as it will
confirm my Friends the Papists, in their good Opinion of me, it must needs be
an Engagement upon the French King, though I am but little obliged to his Care
of my Reputation, that suffered the Criminal to be examined as to his Converse
with me, while they were breaking him upon the Wheel; but I perceive he thinks
it his Interest to keep me low in the good Opinion of my Subjects, lest I
should put a stop to the Career of his Ambition, which is his Predominant, as
Sensuality is mine: but he is mistaken in his Measures, I am as zealous for
promoting of the Catholic Religion as he can be, nor do I care how or by what
Methods it is effected, so it be but accomplished. But I shall not trouble my
self neither to enlarge my own, nor stop the Course of his Conquests; for I am
as much concerned to gratify my predominant Passion, which requires Ease, as he
is to gratify his, which is constantly attended with Hurry and Trouble.

CHAP. XXXVIII. On the Dutch's recalling their Ambassador from England. The
King's Letter by him to the States: and the French King and his Majesty's
Declarations of War against each other.
THE Dutch having recalled their Ambassador, imports that they have no Hopes of
obtaining a Peace; however, to dazzle the Eyes of the World a little further,
I Will send a Letter by him, with an Offer of Proposals to the States, wherein I
will charge them as the Beginners of the War, and testify my own Inclination to
bring it to an end; which, though it is plain will never obtain Belief, yet
will serve for a Pretense, that the Continuance of the War is not my choice,
and consequently free me a little from the Odium of the Havoc which the Bishop
of Munster, with his Popish Forces, makes in a Protestant Country, and furnish
Arguments to my Friends of the Church of England, against those who suggest
that my Design at bottom is to promote a Popish Interest.

The mutual Declarations of War by my self and the French King against each
other, will very much contribute to a Concealment of our Designs, and give us
an opportunity of destroying the Dutch more advantagiously; for I am very well
assured that the French Troops, which march to the Assistance of the
Hollanders, will annoy them as much as those of their Enemies, and make them
quickly repent the calling in of such Auxiliaries: but however there is this
which will be gained by it, that it cannot well be thought that my Design is
against the Protestant Religion, when a Monarch, who is a professed Papist, and
the eldest Son of the Church of Rome, does seemingly oppose me, though by the
Message which he lately sent to my Mother, he has sufficiently informed me as
to his secret Intensions; so that betwixt us I doubt not but we shall ruin
that Knot of Heretics: And as I have brought their Friends here in England
under the Lash of the Law, I will take care to undo their Brethren in Scotland,
where by the Concurrence of their new Bishops, and the Zeal of my Privy
Council, I can do what I please, seeing all the Presbyterians are excluded the
Government: And thus while I set one Party of Protestants against another at
home, and dash the Protestants of England against those of Holland abroad, I
shall advance the Church of Rome, and my own Prerogative, apace.

CHAP. XXXIX. Upon the Sea Fights with the Dutch, May and July, 1666. both
sides pretending to the Victory: And the French's lying by, though they came as
if they designed to assist the Dutch.
I Cannot always chain Success to the Wheels of my Chariot, nor promise my self
Happiness in every Undertaking. I obtained one Victory over the Dutch, and
therefore may the better bear with my present Loss; though, at the same time, I
must conceal it, to prevent the Grumblings of the People, and order all the
public Tokens of Joy for a Victory. How true were the French to their Promise
of deceiving the Dutch, and making them rely on their Assistance, yet afforded
them none; so that though I have not obtained a Victory by this Procedure of
theirs, yet it has considerably diminished my Loss; for if the Dutch had not
been deceived by relying on the French, they would have been better provided of
themselves, and in a Capacity to pursue the Blow further home: And in truth I
must needs applaud the French King's Conduct, in letting the English and Dutch
Heretics fight it out, and save his Catholic Subjects for a better Time and
Service. From their lying by I shall also reap this Advantage, that though the
Dutch proclaim their Victory, it will be the less credible; and my Pretensions
to the same will be the better believed: but the Mischief on it is, that their
appearing so speedily at Sea, after the Noise of my pretended Victories, gives
the People occasion to suspect my Veracity.

CHAP. XL. On the Firing of London.
THE Sword, Pestilence and Fire, are three of the heaviest Plagues that can
befall a People; and of late I and mine have had our Shares of them. This
dreadful Conflagration would be as pleasant to me as that of Rome was to Nero,
when he took his Harp in hand and triumphed over its Flames, if it were not
that I am liable to the Suspicion of favoring it, because my Brother and my
Guards are so foolish and imprudent as to rescue those who are taken in the
Fact; and that some Catholics, who are not fit to be entrusted with Secrets,
have talked too openly of the Design a great while before it was put in
Execution. However, this is a good Expedient to clear both the City and the Air
about it, from all manner of contagious Infection: for that I could not set any
Bounds unto, but this I can limit; That was the Hand of God, This the Hand of
Man; That did promiscuously cut off my Friends and Foes, but This I can order
so as to make it fall upon the latter: and after all, if I cannot, as Nero did
with the Christians, fasten the Plot of firing the City upon the Dissenters,
which the Jesuits have strenuously endeavored, by tricking some silly
Fifth-Monarchy-men into a Plot; yet if I give it only a little finer turn, and
alledg, that it is the Vengeance of Heaven upon this City, for their being so
instrumental in the late Ruin both of Church and State, and not preventing my
Father's Murder, the Pretext will be plausible and taking with the Church; for
their great Patrons, such as Heylin and others, have oftentimes declared their
Dislike of the Bulk and Populousness of the City, and hate it because
inclinable to the Puritanical Side: so that these things being prudently
insisted upon, and the Clergy's Dislike of the City encouraged, its Desolation
and Ruins will be the less regarded, and the Odium wear off from the Papists
by degrees, though at the same time they have wisely destroyed that which was
looked upon as the great Bulwark of the Protestant Religion. And I have also
reason to be very well satisfied that hereby they have exhausted the great
Treasure of Rebellion. But the main Danger is, lest the Committee of
Parliament, appointed to dive into the Causes of the Fire, should trace it as
far as St. James's and Whitehall, and then it will lie upon me and my Brother:
but if this should be the case, I know of a Remedy, viz. to call it a Forgery
of the Dissenters, to bring a Calumny upon the Royal Family, and the Church of
England, who are their Adherents; then to be sure, though the Matter be as
clear as Sunshine, the Bishops and their Clergy, who know they must stand and
fall with me, will maintain my Credit for their own Interest, lest they should
be utterly overthrown, as in my Father's time. And the better to cover my
Design, I must renew all my former Protestations of Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and advise the Citizens, in the first place, to rebuild their
Churches, where they may worship God, and mourn for their Sins, which have
brought on such desolating Judgments; and this, together with contributing
something toward the Re-edification of the City, and bewailing their Losses on
all public Occasions, will conciliate their Respect, and beget a good Opinion
of me, which will be sufficient to obviate all the Misrepresentations which the
greatest of my Enemies can make of me: and thus shall the Protestant Interest
languish, as by a Consumption in the Vitals, while I smite it secretly under
the fifth Rib. I know that the censorious Phanaticks will say that this Fire
was carried on by the same Hand that manages the War against the Dutch; and
that the City is justly punished thereby for not opposing, but rather
concurring with me; and that I have repaid them as I have done all my other
Friends, the Dutch, the Spaniards, and the English and Scots Presbyterians: so
that for their assisting me with their Treasure to carry on the War against the
Dutch, I and my Party have consumed their Substance. But having taken care to
have that Faction looked upon as my Enemies, whatever they say against me will
be reckoned Spite; and therefore though it be true, it will not be much credited.
And for any Improvement which the Dutch may make of it, as that I am punished
by Fire in my own Capital City, for endeavoring to bring Fire and Sword upon
them; I can easily hear them, and laugh at their Folly, for ascribing that to
Providence which is my own Action, and looking upon that as my Punishment which
I esteem my Advantage; and so far from being their Gain, that it is their
irreparable Loss, for the Puritanical Citizens were their true Friends. It Is
indeed no small Cause of Triumph to the Roman Catholics, that instead of the
Fall of Babylon, as the Heretics call Rome, which they expected in 1666. the
greatest City of the Reformation should lie in Ashes, with 89 of their Churches
which were polluted with Heresy; 13200 of their Houses; 150000 l's Worth of
their Books; and in the whole to the Value of betwixt nine and ten Millions of
their Goods: so that for once the Catholics have put the Writ, de Haeretico
comburendo, very effectually in execution upon their Houses, the Fire or Plague
of God having not long before consumed above a Million of their Persons. And if
there be any such thing as a Deity, the Catholics might very well say now, as
in their Letter to my Lord Mounteagle, which discovered the Powder Plot in my
Grandfather's time, that God and Man had agreed to punish this Heretical
Generation.

CHAP. XLI. On the Parliament's meeting at Westminster after the Fire. His
Majesty's Demand of more Money. Their Address against Papists. His Majesty's
Proclamation on that Head. The Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters.
Declaration of War against Denmark. The Insurrection in Scotland in 1666. The
burning of his Majesty's Ships at Chattam by the Dutch, etc.
THough the Catholics have not been able to blow up the Houses of Parliament,
with all the Lords and Commons, yet they have consumed the City, which was both
the Fountain of the Heretics Treasure and Strength. And to disable the Party
further, I have conveen'd the Parliament, who, I doubt not, will dive to the
bottom of their Purses, and supply me with Money to ruin their Brethren the
Heretical Dutch.

Though the Parliament has been liberal enough in parting with their Money,
yet I find they are alarmed at the Increase and Growth of Popery; and
accordingly have importuned me with an Address. It is not time for me yet to
pull off my Vizard, and therefore I must grant a Proclamation to please them;
but the Priests and Jesuits shall still have Protection, as Attendants
belonging to my Consort the Queen.

Their Brethren the Dissenters shall pay for this Animosity of theirs against
the Papists; and I will take care that the Laws shall be put in execution
against them. Let them remind me of my Declaration from Breda, promising Ease
to tender Consciences, as much as they please, I am at liberty to change my
Measures according to my Interest. The Presbyterians of Scotland have been
condignly punished by Fines, Free Quarter, and Military Execution, which has
happily procured an Insurrection according to my Desire. So that now the
greatest of my Rigor will be justified; and when they pretend to be Sufferes
for Religion, I can accuse them of Rebellion. This furnishes me with a
justifiable Pretense to cut off some of their Ringleaders at present, and
endeavor the Extirpation of the rest by degrees. And this I am sure to have
approved by the Church of England, because the Presbyterians obliged themselves
to the Extirpation of Prelacy by their Covenant. This will also serve to
heighten the Resentments of the Episcopal Party against the Dutch, when I
represent how the Phanaticks act in concert with them, and do manifestly favor
their Designs, by beginning an intestine War when I am engaged with them
abroad. Whence they will easily be persuaded of the necessity of complying with
my Measures against both, especially when I insinuate the Danger that there is
to the Church and the Crown, if the Dissenters should not be rendered incapable
of disturbing either. When I once inspire them with these Sentiments, they will
the better concur with my Declaration against Denmark, for siding with the
Rebellious and Heretical Dutch; and by this Means my Brother of France and I
shall reach a fatal Blow indeed to the Northern Heresy, by the Concurrence of
the Heretics themselves: for as my Church-of- England-Subjects will certainly
assist me on the Considerations abovementioned, so the French Hugonots concur
with their Monarch to destroy those of their own Religion, they being also
scrued up to a high pitch of Loyalty, by the Cunning of the Court, and the
Management of their Clergy. And thus when we have deprived our Heretical
Subjects of all Support from abroad, it will be the easier for us to destroy
them at home.

How unhappily are all my fine Projects blasted, and my Designs against the
Dutch not only miscarried, but they have put theirs in execution against me,
burnt my Royal Navy in my own Haroours, and ride without Control upon my
Coasts. This is indeed an intolerable Disgrace, but I must study how to repair
it. The Want of Money were a plausible Excuse, but considering the Tax which I
lately had, it will not be practicable, and therefore I must endeavor to
excuse it, by charging it on the Treachery of the Dutch during the time of a
Treaty; which, though it is not likely to obtain Belief amongst knowing Men,
yet it will do much to put a stop to the Murmurs of the Vulgar: and in the mean
time I must study how to work a Revenge, and not suffer them long to triumph in
their Success. I perceive the French King takes advantage of my Circumstances,
and has deluded me on purpose to carry on his own Designs, by giving out that
the Dutch would have no Fleet at Sea this Summer. Let him hug and bless himself
for his good Success, I may find an Opportunity to make him repent it: May he
flatter himself as a great Politician, and framed by Nature for the Empire of
the World, I can sooner accomplish my Designs than he can do his, and satisfy
my Desires with those things which I look upon as my Summum Bonum: Whereas he
can never satisfy his Ambition; and as he makes me to subserve his Designs, his
Money shall also subserve mine; and while he pleases himself with the Thoughts
of conquering Europe, I will indulge my self in such Conquests as are more
agreeable to my Nature, though at the same time I am resolved to give a check
to his growing Greatness, by clapping up a Peace with the Dutch and Danes: and
thus I shall revenge my self on him for dealing so dishonourably with me, as to
suffer it to be printed at Paris, that my Design against Holland was for
advancing Popery

CHAP. XLII. On the murmuring of the People at the Consumption of the Treasure.
His Majesty's granting leave to the Parliament's Commissioners to take the
Public Accounts. His raising an Army of 30000 Men, and disbanding them. On the
Parliament's being displeased with it. The Sessions of Parliament in July,
October, and February, 1667. His Majesty's Speeches to them: Proclamation
against Papists: Displacing of Chancellor Hide, and League with the Dutch, etc.
It Is not without reason that the King of England is by Foreigners called, Rex
Diabolorum; for my Subjects are truly headstrong, and ill to govern. What
mutinous Murmurs do sound in my Ears daily, and grievous Complaints of
exhausting their Treasure, when in the mean time the Nation is neither well
governed at home, nor secure against the disgraceful Insults of our Enemies
abroad? The Seeds of the old Rebellion begin to spring again, so hard a Matter
it is to cure this Nation of the Distemper: However in Policy I am obliged to
humor them a little; and to please them will offer to give the Parliament an
Account which way the Money that they gave me has been spent. I know that
their Commissioners will scarcely be Proof against Gold; so that I can easily
take them off if they become too inquisitive. This yielding a little will give
me an Opportunity to renew my Blow with the greater Force. And from their
Complaints of the Nation's not being secured against Foreign Insults, I shall
take the Opportunity to raise an Army in the Interval of Parliament, but model
them so as to render them fit for my Design, if possible, both of raising Money
without Parliaments, and advancing the Interest of the Church of Rome. If I
cannot have all the Officers avowed Papists, I shall at least order it so that
they be not Haters of the Church of Rome; for none shall be promoted without
Father Patrick's Approbation. To encamp them near the City will be most
commodious, that so they may overawe both it and the Parliament.

But, alas! I find that my Design is perceived; and the Commons being met, are
resolved to defeat it. My Aim was glorious indeed, but my Success unanswerable;
so that Nature seems to have designed me for the Conquest of Women, but not of
Men. A Prince who has not the Command of his Subjects Purses, can never say
that he has the Command of their Persons; for I must comply with the
Parliament, because I want Money, or otherwise I am sure they will give me none.
The Army that I raised must again be disbanded; else they will never be satisfied,
nor have their Jealousies removed; so that I find I must take another Method.
If the Catholics grumble at the Slowness of my Progress, they may remember
that the Work in hand is Church-work. I am resolved never to sacrifice my own
Quiet to any Party or Profession of Religion; but now that I have reobtain'd my
Throne, will labor to keep it, having already experienced the Misery of being
reduced to Travel. They may be also convinced from my Failure in this Attempt,
that I want not Will but Power to serve them; and that to hurry on the Design
by Force is the way to ruin both them and me. It Is true, that is a very great
Mortification to a Sovereign, to receive a Check from those who ought to obey
him; but whatever it has had upon others, it shall have no great Influence
upon me, who am resolved to pursue Ease and Pleasure as my chief Good.

But the Parliament having taken the Alarm, I must sweeten them by soft
Speeches; which with the Assistance of my Friends in the House, will take off
their Edg. I will tell them that they shall follow their own Methods in
bringing those who have received the Public Money to an account; and that
their Grievances shall be redressed. I know that the disbanding of the Forces
on their Desire, the displacing of my Lord Chancellor Hide, and dismissing of
Papists from my Guards, will be acceptable to them. And to please them yet
further, I will publish a Proclamation against Papists; and that none shall
frequent the Popish Chapels of Somerset House, St. James's, or Foreign
Ambassadors, but those who belong to my Mother, the Queen Consort, and the
Ambassador's own Families, though at the same time I shall take care that they
suffer no Damage for contraveening it. And to pluck up their Jealousies by the
very Roots, that I may give them the more surprising Blow, I will make a
defensive Alliance with the Dutch and Swedes, which will remove all their
Fears, as to the head of Religion: And another for an effectual Mediation of
Peace betwixt France and Spain, which will look with a favorable Aspect
toward their Civil Rights: but in the mean time I shall connive at the
Progress of the French Arms in the Spanish Netherlands, the better to make way
for our Designs upon Holland.

The Parliament being thus sweetened, I will move for Money to rig out another
Fleet, which as soon as I obtain, they shall be adjourned and prorogued, so as
they may not trouble me with their Importunities to assist the Netherlands; for
I know they will be unwilling of the French King's Neighborhood, though the
same will be convenient for me to accomplish my Designs: for in that case they
will be prevailed upon by their Fear to allow me a standing Army, that I may
always be provided against such a potent Enemy; and then in a little time I
shall rule by the Sword, and command their Money to spend upon my Pleasures.

CHAP. XLIII. On the Proclamation against Dissenters in 1669. Inviting the
Dutch and Swedes into a League with us; proposing a nearer Alliance with the
Dutch, and forcing the Treaty of Aix La Chappelle upon the Spaniards and the
French.
IF I cannot ruin the Interest of the Heretics in General, yet I can keep
those under who are obnoxious to the Laws which were happily procured during
the Height of the Church of England's Zeal and Loyalty. And seeing all my other
Measures fail me, I am resolved to drive the Nail that will go. That Phanatical
Crew are my greatest Enemies, and therefore I have reason to deal with them as
such: Their Rigidity of Principles, and Austerity of Practice, render them
odious to all Men who love their Pleasures; and they are no less hateful to me,
because of their Politics, as having an inveterate Prejudice against the
Prerogative, and being great Patrons of the Privileges of Parliament; so that
from those of their Kidney I meet with the greatest Obstructions, for which I
have sworn and will take a Revenge: It being moreover my Interest to nourish
mutual Animosities amongst my Protestant Subjects, and make the two Factions
irreconcilable, that so I may keep them from uniting against me in defense of
their Common Religion and Liberties. By this Method I have humbled the Kingdom
of Scotland, and I doubt not but it will have the same effect in England.

It Is necessary however for the concealing of my Design, to invite the Dutch
and Swedes to a League, who both of them being Protestant States, it will
possess the common People, that I have still a Zeal for that Religion; but in
reality I shall hereby ensnare the Dutch, and render them more liable to the
Fury of France. My being divided from them by the Sea will furnish me with
Excuses for delaying to give them Assistance; or if I send them any Forces, I
can prevent their being serviceable; make use of them, as I find Opportunity,
to seize some of their Towns, or find occasion of Quarrel, and join the French.
However, this Triple League will please my Parliament: and to impose further
upon them, I will propound a nearer Alliance with the Dutch, and bring the
French and the Spaniards to a Treaty of Peace, which my Subjects will look upon
as the securing of themselves; but at the same time I will take care to
maintain the French Interest, and secure them some considerable Posts upon the
Frontiers, that so the Door may be open for a new Invasion, whenever he sees
his time. However, I must not be wanting to have my Conduct in this Point
applauded to the height; as also my Care for the Honor, Safety and Commerce of
my Subjects in this Affair magnified, the better to obtain a Subsidy from the
Parliament. The Spaniards I know are dissatisfied at this Treaty, because it
obliges them to a Surrender of a great part of their Country; and the French
are not well pleased to be stopped in their Career; but I must prefer my own
Interest to both: It Is for my Reputation to be successful in so weighty an
Affair; and it will make me the more valued at home, when they see that I have
so much Influence abroad.

CHAP. XLIV. On the Interview betwixt his Majesty and his Sister, the Duchess
of Orleans, at Dover; and her Advice to him to break the Triple League, and
concur with the French King to destroy the Dutch and the Protestant Religion,
and render himself absolute in England. Her leaving one of her Maids of Honor,
created afterward Duchess of Portsmouth, behind her; and her own Death
speedily after her Return into France.
THE Messenger is enough to procure Acceptance to the Message; for who can deny
the Request of such a beautiful Princess, though she were not my Sister? The
Message of it self is very acceptable, though infinitely full of hazardous
Intrigue. It will reflect upon my Honor to break that League of which I was in
a manner the Author, and invited all the Princes of Europe to join in it. It Is
true, I am pretty well accustomed to breaking of Compacts; so that this will
not be my first Essay: and though others may not only hate but contemn me for
it, yet this Satisfaction I shall certainly reap from it, that thereby I outwit
so many Sovereign Princes, whereas hitherto I have only deceived my own
Subjects. Though this League be made with more honorable Persons, yet it was
far from being so solemn as the Scots League and Covenant: so that as to what
concerns Conscience, I may as well do the less as the greater; and in this I
have an Advantage which I wanted in that, as having Lewis the XIVth for a
Partner in the Crime, if it be one: and it is pretty manifest to all that know
us, that we never intended to be Slaves to our Word.

To destroy the Dutch and the Protestant Religion, and render my self absolute
in England, are all Glorious Designs, but not so easy to be practiced as
proposed. For my Concurrence in the first I can form plausible Pretexts enough;
and if that were once accomplished, the other will be the more easily effected.
Great Designs ought to be deeply weighed, and therefore I must give a cautious
Answer, but not engage in a positive Promise; yet something I must say to
please the Messenger, in order to obtain my Desires of her, which I must
confess Nature seems to abhor; but my heightened Passion will neither admit any
Limits nor Denial. How happy are they in those Parts of the World where they
know no such Restraints as we who are called Christians do labor under? there
their Loves are promiscuous, without Offense, and they have no Restraint on the
Appetites of Nature, but satisfy all its Desires to the full: Then why should I
be scrupulous, or filled with Horror, upon such a Motion of the Flesh as this?
It Is only the Custom and Tenets which we imbibe, that make such Impressions as
these upon us. If the Nations where promiscuous Amors are allowed without
restraint, thought it contrary to the Laws of Nature, or had any Qualms of
Conscience for the Practice, they would never have allowed it; and therefore my
Scruples must altogether be owing to my Education. The Mahumetans have no
Checks of Conscience for their Polygamy, because their Customs and Principles
allow it. And it was the like with those who were called the Saints of the Old
Testament. Nay, Lot enjoyed his own Daughters; and Abraham had his Father's
Daughter to Wife. The first, it is true, was not the Effect of Choice, but I am
certain the latter was; and if all be true that I have heard, as in truth from
my own Temper I have no reason to doubt of it, there is Cause enough to question
whether she be not only the Daughter of my Mother, and not of my Father, and in
that case I am but even with Abraham: And as for my violating both my own and
the Duke of Orleance's Contracts of Marriage, I may be allowed to come so far
short of the Father of the Faithful. Let Puritans and Precisians do what they
please, for my own part I will worship no Deity, except Priapus be one; nor do
I desire any other Heaven than Mahomet's Paradise. If this should take air, my
Phanatical Subjects would improve it against me, and say, that such unhallowed
Causes must needs have cursed Effects; and that Popery and Slavery can never be
ushered in by any other Means than such as violate both the Laws of Nature and
Religion, and open the Sluice to the Height of Impiety. They would quickly tell
me that a Custom of Sinning hardens the Conscience; and that such promiscous
Amors had no little Influence on the destroying Judgments which have from time
to time laid so many of the Heathen Nations desolate, and particularly brought
the Sword of the cruel Spaniard upon the Americans: That the Failings of the
Old-Testament-Saints are not to be Patterns for those who live under the New:
That Abraham's Wife was not his Father's Daughter, but Granddaughter by Law:
And that the New Testament has excluded all Whoremongers and Adulterers from
the Kingdom of Heaven; with abundance more of such Cant, which influences me to
deny that Faction any peaceable Residence in my Kingdom upon Earth, as being
morose, the Leaven of all humane Conversation, and an ungrateful Check upon
Jollity and Mirth, attributing that to the Effects of Religion and Divine Zeal,
which is merely occasioned by Phlegm and Melancholy.

The bad Influence which so near a Neighbor as the flourishing Republic of
Holland may have to animate my Subjects to re-attempt such a Form of
Government, will justify my Policy in seeking its Destruction. And the Roman
Maxim of Carthago est delenda, and destroying of those who study to rival us in
our Trade and Naval Strength, will be taking with the English Nation: and my
Concern in destroying their Religion will be covered, by having the French King
for my Ally, who is a Roman Catholic by Profession; so that that Affair will
be wholly ascribed to him. As to the Proposal of ruining the Protestant
Religion in England, and rendering my self absolute, the Reasons of the Attempt
are much easier than the Means; some of which are also not ill concerted, as
flattering the Church of England, and engaging them in a severe Persecution of
the Dissenters, who are indeed the firmest Protestants. Then as for the
rendering of my self absolute, the Doctrine of Passive Obedience has already
paved my way toward it, amongst those of the Church of England: And on the
other hand I can trick the Dissenters into a Concurrence with it, by dispensing
with the Penal Laws, under which they smart so severely; so that they will
contribute to heighten this part of my Prerogative for their own ease: and if
once I can secure my self in the quiet possession of this Practice of
dispensing with Laws, the rest of my Work will be the more easy, especially if
once the Dutch were ruined, and their Countries and best Towns shared betwixt
the French and me; for in that case my Heretical Subjects can neither have
Assistance from thence, nor Recourse thither. And as for Scotland, the
Episcopal Party there having no other Interest but mine; and being wholly
destitute of the Peoples Favor, I am in no danger of any Disturbance from that
Kingdom, now that I have brought the Presbyterians in that Country so low: And
that which will be no little serviceable to my Affairs, is, that the Parliament
of Scotland have made an Act to raise me 22000 Horse and Foot to serve in any
part of my Dominions, such cordial Friends are their Episcopal Party to the
Interest of the Crown.

My Sister has not only granted me her last Favors, but left me a very
agreeable Present to nourish my Flames. My Brother of France has hit the Mark,
and if he continues both to fill my Purse, and satisfy my Love, as my Occasions
require, he shall find me a very useful Friend.

But, alas! my Pleasures are always mixed with an Alloy of Mortification: My
Sister's Kindness to me has been her Death. It might have been thought that
the Height of our Rank should have set us above the reach of Spies; and that
the Nearness of our Relation should have taken away all Cause of Suspicion,
that the Danger of divulging the Secret should have locked it up in eternal
Silence; or if it had been otherwise, that it should not so readily have
obtained Belief: but I am now convinced of the contrary by the dismal Effects;
and yet I must be content, and lay aside all Thoughts of Revenge, lest the
thing should be laid open to the View of the World. I must henceforth take care
to observe the Maxim of living caute, seeing I cannot live cast: and though my
open Practice has declared that I am not to be bounded by the Customs and Laws
of the Country, as to my Love-Intrigues; yet I must be cautious how I entrench
on the Laws of Nature, because of the general Abhorrence thereof which is
impressed upon all Men. I must also take care that I be not thought to debase
my self by the Meanness of my Courtships, and therefore will at least dignify
my new French Paramour with the Title of a Duchess.

It Is a great while since I absolved my self from the Trouble of making any
Prayer to that Bugbear which Princes and Clergymen would impose upon the World,
under the Notion of a Deity, merely to render the People Slaves to themselves:
And the principal Reason for easing my self of this Trouble was, because I
perceived that all things happened alike to those who are called Good, and
those who are called Bad. But if there are any Beings superior to Men, I think
that the Notion of the ancient Heathens, who were for a Plurality of Gods, has
very much Reason in it; and the Roman Catholic Church seems to own the same
thing, though under a different Name, when they have so many Saints and Angels
to whom they address themselves, according to the Diversity of their Occasions,
which does necessarily imply, that they believe a Plurality of Omnipotent and
Omniscient Beings. Then seeing the Case is thus, it cannot be amiss for me,
that, in imitation of their Example, I betake my self to Patrons suitable to my
present Necessities: And it being Priapus and Venus whose Assistance I do most
stand in need of, it is reasonable that I should make Application to them both
conjunctly, but chiefly to the first. Nor can I see why it should be culpable
in me to make Requests to them in my Prosperity, seeing my Father is said to
have made use of a Prayer taken from an amorous Romance, in the Height of his
Adversity, though it had been consecrated beforehand to an Heathen Deity. And
whereas he whom Christians look upon as the Omnipotent, has commanded us in
his Word to increase and multiply, without any manner of Restriction, it ought
not to be offensive to them if I obey him in this Particular.

But thou, O Priapus! seeing the Female Deity Venus has cast a favorable
Aspect toward me, as Monarch of the Britains, who are the lineal Descendants
of her beloved Trojans, insomuch that the fair Sex have hitherto received my
Addresses very kindly, as becomes those who would be obsequious to that
beautiful Goddess; be not thou less propitious to me than she, but assist me to
the utmost of thy Power, that I may be capable of a grateful Retribution to the
fair Nymphs who bless me with their Favors. I have a stubborn and rebellious
People, who are more addicted to War than Love; but do thou inspire them with
amorous Inclinations, and wound them with the Darts of Cupid, that they may
grow out of Conceit with those of Mars. They are fond of Parliaments, because
created by themselves; but if thou will be pleased to vouchsafe me thy Favor,
I may govern them in time by a Parliament begotten by my self. My Sons shall
quickly overbalance the Lords, and their Interests and mine will have no
little Influence upon the Commons, amongst whom I can also bestow some of my
Daughters. Then shall I erect Altars to the God of Love, and make his Conquests
as large as my Dominions. Let those who call themselves Christians admire their
own Chastity, and boast of their Temperance as loud as they can, I don't find
but their Patron was very favorable to the Adultress; and Nicholas, one of the
first of their Sect, maintained a Community of Wives. Do thou assist me, and I
doubt not but to make thy Religion triumph over theirs; for I am sure that the
Number of those who are led by the Flesh, is greater than the Number of them
that are led by the Spirit. Nor is it from me alone that thou art to expect
Returns of Thanks, but from Venus her self, and her beautiful Train, and
particularly those Ladies who have now devoted themselves to my Service.

To Hymen I have twice performed solemn Adoration, but to thee I vow perpetual
Worship, and will extend my Amors as far as my Prerogative. Do not thou, O
Goddess of Beauty! withdraw thy Kindness; but as thou have favored my
Conquests hitherto, be pleased to enlarge them, that I may become Father of my
Country in Deed as well as in Name. I have sometimes been apt to blame the
Phanaticks for their long Prayers, but if they be as intent on the obtaining of
their Desires, as I am for the obtaining of mine, I find there is no great
Reason for it. I am sure that this is the longest Prayer that ever I made in my
Life; and accordingly as I find your Answers I shall proportion my Praises, and
repay my Thank-offerings on the Altars of Bacchus; you being the only Trinity
whom I adore, and the Eleusina Sacra, my beloved Worship.

CHAP. XLV. On Colonel Blood's Attempt to steal the Crown. A Proclamation
against Papists to please the Parliament. The second War with the Dutch. The
shutting up of the Exchequer. The falling upon the Dutch Smyrna Fleet before
War was declared; and the Declaration of War thereupon.
THis is a very bold and daring Attempt, and such as may excite Wonder sooner
than Belief. If there be many such daring Spirits among the Phanaticks, it is
not Policy to provoke them too much, lest some attempt my Life, as others have
done the Crown. However, seeing the Design has miscarried, it is fit that I
should improve it, which may be done several ways: It will serve as an Argument
to heighten my Resentments against the Dissenters, and justify my dealing
severely with them. It will also serve for a Subject of Clamor against them to
those of the Church of England, and animate them to prosecute the Puritans to
the utmost; and at the same time countenance my Pretenses of a necessity to
dispense with the Laws against them, while I am engaged with a foreign Enemy,
lest they should be provoked to attempt something more dangerous, though
nothing can be more disgraceful than this would have been, had it succeeded.

The better to cover the Treaty at Dover, and to prevent the Suspicion of my
Sister's having engaged me to do any thing in favor of the Catholics, I must
emit a Proclamation against them as usual; and though I never intend to put it
in execution, the Neglect will be easily fastened upon the inferior
Magistrates. I cannot but wonder at this repeated Zeal of the Parliament
against the Growth of Popery, when at the same time they are so zealous for a
Popish Form of Church Government and Ceremonies, and concur to make such severe
Laws against their Brethren the Dissenters. This must proceed from some
Political but not Religious Considerations. They are without doubt unwilling to
part with their Church Lands, to have the old Tax of Peter Pence renewed, and
be obliged to submit their Necks to the Pope's Usurpation. These, I don't
question, are the Grievances of the Laity; and the Loss of their Benefices and
Wives have no less Influence upon the Clergy. Nor indeed is this particular
Aversion to Popery to be very much wondered at in the Church of England, seeing
Popery in all its Pretensions is not admitted by the Church of France, which
has no good liking to the Pope's Supremacy, nor did ever admit the Council of
Trent.

As to the War with the Dutch, I must urge all the Arguments to have it
effectuated; which my own Invention, and those of the Cabal, are able to
furnish. Their Encroachments on Trade being that which will be most plausible
with the Populace, the several Companies must be influenced to make Complaints
on that Head against them; or if they will not, yet I can assert it boldly in my
Declaration. It Is true that the Phanatical Part of my Subjects perceive my
Design, and mutter it where they dare do it with Safety; but a Royal
Declaration will be sufficient to weigh down the Clamours of such: And though
they complain of the Injuries done to my Subjects in the Foreign Plantations by
the French, yet all these must be buried in Oblivion; so that I shall order
such Complaints to be received, but the Grievances shall never be redressed. I
must also represent the Dishonor done to the Nation, by the Dutch's refusing
to strike to the English Flag; and the Affronts put upon my self by scandalous
Medals and Pictures, which my Pensioners and Friends in the House of Commons
will take care to aggravate to the Height. It will be a meritorious piece of
Service at this time to find occasion of Quarrel with the Dutch, now when they
are out in pursuance of the Triple League, to prevent the Progress of the
French in the Netherlands. It is not to be supposed that they will be guilty of
such a manifest Breach, as to refuse to strike to my Fleet, or any of my Men of
War in my own Seas, and therefore I will order a small Yatch to sail through
their Navy on their own Coast; and upon their not striking, as in such a case
they will scarcely think themselves obliged to do, I shall have Ground enough
to found a Quarrel.

My next Care must be to prevent the Dutch's coming to a Treaty, or offering
Satisfaction, and to declare War when they come near a Conclusion, that so the
French may have Opportunity of overrunning their Country; and they and I shall
divide the Spoil. But this being a Design of great Importance, I must take care
to keep it secret; and therefore it is fit that I should put out of the Council
all those that are disaffected to the Intrigue, on the pretense of its being
contrary to the Interest of England and the Protestant Religion.

A War with the Dutch being resolved on, my next Care must be to provide Money,
which are its Sinews: The pursuit of my Pleasures, which are the chiefest Good
that my Soul desires, have drained my Treasury, so that I must think of some
Method to fill it again. My Subjects are averse to this War against their
Fellow-Protestants, and will not easily be brought to contribute for carrying
it on; but having decoyed abundance of the wealthiest of them to bring their
Money into the Exchequer, upon hopes of great Gain, I am resolved to shut it
up, and apply the Money found there to the Use of the War. This will be an
effectual Means to drain the Purses of my Heretical Subjects; and if they
murmur, I shall make use of their own Money to chastise them: but I am in no
hazard of a Rebellion upon this account, for although the Loss will affect the
whole Nation, yet immediately it reaches only to few: None put in Money into
the Exchequer but those who have enough left behind; and for such, they will be
loath to hazard the Loss of the rest by any Tumult or Sedition, especially when
Passive Obedience is preached to them daily from the Pulpits, that their Lives
and Fortunes ought all to be at the Service of their Prince, who has Power to
make use of them as he thinks fit, according to the several Exigencies of
State. This being one certain Method of procuring Money to carry on the War at
the Charge of my Heretical Subjects, I have another in view, to make the Dutch
contribute toward it themselves, and that is by seizing their Smyrna Fleet
before War be declared. This, it is true, will look ill, but the Catholic
Maxim, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, absolves me from all Guilt:
and if I be successful in the War, as I have very great Reason to hope, then I
can justify the Action by the Event, as I did formerly when I fell upon their
Fleet before Cadiz; and yet I have weathered out all the Storms of Reproach
which were impending over me upon that Account.

To blind my Subjects still further, I must pretend that nothing but
unavoidable Necessity could have prevailed with me to have shut up the
Exchequer; but that the Welfare and Advantage of particular Persons must always
give way to that of the Public; that it is better to seize the Money of a few,
to make use of it in Defense of the whole, than suffer Foreigners to invade us,
and hazard our All; that seeing all my Neighbors are preparing for War, it is
not fit that I should lay my self open to Surprise; and my Treasure being
spent, and my Revenues anticipated, it is but reasonable that I should take the
first Money that comes to hand, for defense of the Public. Then as to my
attacking the Dutch, I must justify it by charging them with Ingratitude to
this Nation, notwithstanding of the many Favors conferred upon them by my self
and Predecessors: and I am sure of having the Clergy on my side, because of the
Hatred which they have against the Dutch, both upon the account of their
Government in Church and State; and they, together with the Court-Party, will
raise a Clamor sufficient to drown the Murmurs of the Phanaticks, whom I have
also endeavored to take off by dispensing with the Laws which are in being
against them.

CHAP. XLVI. On the Dutch's surprising our Fleet in Southwold-bay, the Duke of
York being Admiral. His Majesty's Declaration to the Dutch. The Progress of the
French in the United Provinces. His Majesty's and the French King's Proposals
to the Dutch, and their rejecting them, and making the Prince of Orange
Stadtholder.
THE Dutch by their Diligence have balanced my Dissimulation, and surprised me
instead of my surprising of them. This is a remarkable Disgrace to my Brother
and me, and will strengthen the former Reflections that have been made on our
Conduct, confirm the World in the belief of the Unsuccessfulness of our Arms,
and make my Subjects curse our Amors, as the fatal Causes of all their Ruin.
It Is true that his Carriage in this Affair is highly to be blamed, that he
should be so intent on the satisfying of his Passion for a Woman, when his
chief Passion ought to have been the acquiring of immortal Honor for me and
himself, by executing Vengeance on the Heretical Dutch: But why should I
upbraid him with it, seeing this Temper is hereditary to him and me both? I
must excuse it to the People as the Fortune of War; and in the mean time
comfort my self with the Success of my Allies the French, who have well nigh
overrun them by Land, though they have had the better of me by Sea; and that
Element does now triumph over their Country, upon which they so lately
triumphed over me, they being under a necessity of drowning their Territories,
as having no other way to save them from their Enemies.

That I may the better accomplish my Designs upon them, I must take care, if
possible, to divide them, and for that end will publish a Declaration, inviting
such of them as are either well affected to me, or weary of the Oppression
which they groan under at home, to come hither, with their Effects and Ships,
to England, where they shall enjoy the Privileges of my natural Subjects: And
as this will create a Jealousy amongst themselves, and occasion a general and
mutual Distrust, so it will in some measure take off the bad Opinion which my
Subjects may have conceived of me for engaging in this War against their
Protestant Neighbors. And to prevent the Fanatical Murmurs which have a
tendency that way, I will issue a Proclamation, forbidding all public
Discourse amongst the People on that Subject. And to consummate their Ruin,
I Will send over new Plenipotentiaries to the States, under a pretense of
concerting Measures to stop the Progress of the French Conquests, but really to
assure them in what they have got, and to prevent their depriving me of my due
share, lest Lewis XIV treat me as Aesop's Lion treated his Fellow-Hunters, who
would be satisfied with no less Dividend than the whole. By this Means I shall
still bring some of the weaker sort to have a good Opinion of me; and in the
mean time shall have the Opportunity to attempt the bringing off of the Prince
of Orange from the States, by putting him in hopes of enjoying the Sovereignty,
while my Plenipotentiaries shall have Instructions to take care that my
Interest be assured with the French King; and then when both of us insist upon
high Terms, the Dutch must either submit or be undone.

Though Plots be well laid, they don't always hold, for the Dutch continue
refractory, let us do what we can. I thought that my Interest and Authority
might have prevailed with my young Nephew the Prince of Orange, especially when
tempted with the Proffer of Sovereignty; but I find he is Proof against all
such Allurements: the Blood of the Family of Nassau has got the Ascendant in
him; so that I am afraid there is not a sufficient Alloy of mine: I doubt that
the Consequence will prove, that my Mother's Present of her eldest Daughter,
instead of being serviceable to her Design, will utterly ruin it; for that
Family seems to be destined for the Bane of unlimited Prerogative, and they
have for a long time been the invincible Champions of the Northern Heresy. I do
also foresee an impending Storm from the House of Austria, upon me and France,
as if the Fates had resolved to turn the World upside down, and make that
Family which did propagate the Catholic Religion with so much Zeal a Bulwark
now for the Defense of Heresy. It Is strange that the Emperor, after he had
intimation that the Design of this War was to root out Heresy from the Western
World, should yet oppose me and my Brother of France: but let the greatest of
the Bigots pretend what they will, I find that their Interest is their chief
Religion, and that confirms me in the Opinion that the whole of Religion is a
Cheat.

However, I resolve to go on with my Proposals, and back my Brother the French
King in his Demands of a full Liberty to the Roman Catholics, not only to
profess their Religion openly, but also to enjoy the Public Churches. And that
this may be the better effected, I must stand by him till he have the best of
the Towns which he has taken from the Dutch ascertained to him, and a yearly
Gratuity, the Payment of which may reduce them to Poverty. For my own part, I
resolve to insist upon having the Flag, and that they shall strike to me on
their own Coasts, that so I may assure my self of the Dominion of the Seas; and
some of their best Towns I will demand for Security, that they shall faithfully
perform their Contracts with me, to pay me a Million for bypast Damages, and
10000 l. per annum for their fishing on my Coasts. By this Means I doubt not
but a fatal Blow may be given to those Heretical Republicans, and the Family of
Orange quite destroyed, to the great Satisfaction of all good Catholics, to
whom they have been irreconcilable Enemies: and I can easily wipe off the
Odium, by charging the Prince with Ingratitude for the Royal Favors bestowed
on him by my Family.

But I find that the stubborn Dutch are neither to be frightened nor flattered,
now that they have declared the Prince of Orange their Stadtholder. Nor could
they give a greater Instance of their bidding Defiance to France, than by
massacring the De Wits, who were thought to be its Pensioners. There Is no
doubt but that they will look upon themselves as betrayed by me, when I sent
over Plenipotentiaries on pretense to favor them; and that yet I should enter
into a new Alliance with France against them: and they will exclaim against my
Unkindness to my Kinsman the Prince of Orange; but they may remember that the
French Massacre was carried on under pretense of an Alliance with the head of
the Protestants; and that it can be no Crime for so near Descendants of the
Royal Family of France, as I and my Mother, to follow so great an Example of
our Predecessors. The matching of my Sister with the Family of Orange, was
designed as a Kindness to our selves, and not to them: So that if they do not
answer our Design on their part, it is but reasonable that there should be a
Breach on ours: And seeing the Dutch by their Example and Encouragement bid
defiance to my Arms in so contemptuous a manner, it is but reasonable that I
should chastise them for their Insolence, and not sit down patiently under such
a Diminution of my Glory; and I doubt not but my Brother of France and I shall
find Means to stir up the Bishops of Cologne and Munster, who are Neighbors to
the Dutch, and consequently the greatest Haters of them, both because of their
Form of Government and Heresy, to take part with us against the House of
Austria. And to prevent the Protestants Belief that the chief Design is against
their Religion, we shall influence the Duke of Hanover, by our Gold, to join
with us; and he being a Protestant, it will make our Design the less
perceptible.

CHAP. XLVII. On his Majesty's suffering the Parliament to meet November. 1673.
His Speech to them concerning the Indulgence and the Dispensing Power, and the
Necessity of raising more Forces for carrying on the Dutch War. Several
unsuccessful Fights with the Hollanders. The Letter from the Dutch to influence
the Parliament, who addressed against the Match betwixt the Duke of York and
Duchess of Modena. The Prorogation which ensued thereupon. A Proclamation
against Papists, and the Consummation of the Marriage.
HOW uncomfortable is it for a Monarch to be limited, and not to have the
Purles of his Subjects at command? for him to be obliged to use Entreaties to
his People, who ought to receive his Dictates without Control? But Necessity
has no Law, the Constitution of this Government being such, that English Kings
are but a sort of Royal Beggars. I must try if my Parliament will let me have
Money now that I am disappointed as to my Hopes of seizing the Dutch Smyrna and
Spanish Plate Fleets; and that my Supplies from France come but slowly in. I
know that they are jealous of their Privileges, have an envious Eye at my
Prerogative, and are particularly startled at the Dispensing Power, therefore I
must sweeten them by my Speech, and endeavor to possess them with an Opinion
that my Design therein was only to secure my self from Tumults and
Insurrections at home, while I was engaged in a War abroad, which cannot be
thought an unreasonable Fear by any thinking Man, considering the Troubles
which the Puritanical Party gave to my Father. And as to their Objection, that
more Favor has been shown to Papists than Dissenters, I can easily answer it,
that the latter are abundantly more Loyal than the former, and have been fast
Friends both to my Father and my self; and yet they were only allowed their
Worship in private, whereas the other Party had theirs in public: but as for
dispensing with the Executive Part of the Law, I am resolved to hold it as long
as I can. Their Fears that I shall make use of the Forces which I raise to
subvert their Liberty and Property, I must endeavor to dispel by fair
Promises, and the Interest of my Clergy and Pensioners; and at the same time
possess them with a Necessity of my raising more Forces for the Honor and
Defense of the Nation, that we may not be insulted over by the ungrateful
Dutch, whom my Predecessor Queen Elizabeth did raise from the Dust. I have
culled out the Earl of Shaftsbury for Lord Chancellor, who may do me very great
Service, because a Popular Man; so that I shall make use of his Influence and
Eloquence both to palliate my having shut up the Exchequer, and to demonstrate
the Necessity of a War with the Dutch, and at the same time of granting an
Indulgence to the Papists.

I perceive that the bad Influences of my Stars are not yet exhausted; for
though I lay my Designs with all imaginable Policy, they do often miscarry. Who
would have thought that so many fair Promises, backed with the Earl of
Shaftsbury's Eloquence, and the Interest and Influence of my Pensioners, should
have miscarried in Parliament? and yet, to my great Regret, I do find that it
has; so that nothing will serve but a renouncing of my Dispensing Power, and
fresh Assurances, that never any thing of that Nature shall be attempted again;
which, rather than want Money, I am resolved to comply with: for if I could but
once get a Standing Army on foot, I should soon be able to retrieve it. And in
the mean time I shall take care to have all this Clamor against the Dispensing
Power and Standing Army imputed to the Jealousies and envious Surmises of the
Phanaticks and Republicans. And from this Obligation laid upon me to recall my
Act of Indulgence, I shall at least reap this Advantage, that it will heighten
the Animosities betwixt the Dissenters and Churchmen; for I can easily bring
it about to have the Refusal of it wholly imputed to the latter: And though I
have no reason to be well satisfied at the Check which is hereby put upon my
Prerogative, yet it has thus much of a Cordial in it, that I perceive the
Episcopal Party wholly irreconcilable to the Presbyterians, which at some time
or other will very much forward my grand Design: and at present it has had so
much Influence as to procure me a considerable Sum; though, to avoid the
Reproaches of the Phanatical Party, the Parliament will not own that it is for
carrying on the War against the Dutch, but to supply my extraordinary Occasions.

If it were not that I question the Being of a Deity, I should be apt to
conclude that God fights for the Hollanders, who have obtained some fresh
Advantages against me at Sea: and though they labor under the greatest of
Pressures that can be, they do also make good their Cause against the Power of
France by Land. And those pernicious Heretics being sensible of the
Apprehensions which my Parliament have, that the Consequences of this War may
be fatal to the Protestant Interest, they have taken the most effectual Method
that can be to possess that Heretical Divan, that the French King and my self
aim at nothing less than the Subversion of their Religion, and the Liberties of
their State, with that of the Spanish Netherlands. Nor have I any other way to
save my self from the Influences of this Accusation, than by insisting on the
necessity of destroying those States to preserve our own Trade, and to prevent
the Encouragement which they give to those who are Enemies to the established
Discipline of our Church.

There is but too much Truth in the common Proverb, That after one Mischief
comes another, for so I find it by sad Experience. Though the Dutch and the
Phanatical Party be both of them hated by the Church of England, yet they have
Influence enough to foment Jealousies in the Parliament, that their Religion
and Liberty are both in danger: And hence comes the Address of the Commons
against my Brother's Match with the Duchess of Modena, because a Catholic
Princess, and proposed by the French King. It Is true that this may indeed seem
inconsistent with my reiterated Protestations of taking all imaginable Care to
secure the Protestant Religion and the Peoples Liberties: but amongst so many
Concessions I may certainly venture on one Dram of Prerogative, and tell them,
that the Marriage is concluded by my Authority, that in Honor I cannot be
worse than my Word; and if this will not satisfy them, I Will cool them by a
Prorogation.

What ill Fate is this that attends all my Measures! I did reasonably hope that
this Prorogation would have diverted the Commons from insisting on their
Address against my Brother's Match; but it seems that the Jealousy which they
have conceived has taken deeper Root than to be pulled up so soon, and
therefore I find my self under a necessity to prorogue them again, seeing they
press me so hard to dissolve the Match, because hitherto only concluded by
Proxy. They are become very sagacious, and discern that this Marriage will
engage me in new Alliances, which may be dangerous to the Protestant Religion:
and that the Princess having so many Relations in the Court of Rome, the
Secrets of my Court must needs be open to them, and therefore they are about to
render Catholics incapable of sitting in either House of Parliament: but this
is too much for me to concede; and if granted, would ruin my Design entirely;
and therefore I must find out some Method to divert the Current, which I cannot
attempt with hopes of so much Success any other way, as that of laying the
whole Burden upon the Fanatics, and the Suggestions of the Dutch, it being
both their Interests to create Differences betwixt the Parliament and me; and
that therefore I thought fit to prorogue them, that they may have time for
second and more moderate Thoughts, because the Enemy would reap more Advantage
from our Divisions than they could flatter themselves with the hopes of from
their own Arms; and that therefore it is more their Interest to secure me and
themselves from our only Competitors and Rivals at Sea abroad, and the
Fanatics, who are the Brands of intestine Discord at home, the present Evils
under which we labor, than to trouble themselves about such remote
Consequences as the Fears of the Growth of Popery, because of my Brother's
marrying with a Catholic Princess: And in the mean time, that my Friends
amongst the Clergy and others, who will certainly espouse the Defense of my
Practice, may have Groundwork for plausible Arguments, I will publish a
Proclamation for putting the Laws in execution against Papists, forbid them my
own Court, and that of my Brother; which, though it may seem very hard and
severe upon our good Friends the Roman Catholics, yet none of them, who are
Men of Thoughts, will be much offended at it, when they consider that he and I
both have chosen Wives of that Religion; and especially that I take care to
have my Brother's Marriage solemnized the very next day after the Proclamation.
And to cut off all Pretense of Excuse from the Church of England, whom I design
to engage in the Cause with my self, the Marriage shall be consummated by one
of their own Bishops at Dover, that Place being already famous for the Alliance
which broke the Triple League, on the Influence of my Sister the Duchess of
Orleans. And thus I shall retrieve my late Losses, and strengthen my Alliances
with France, by matching my Brother with an adopted Daughter of that Crown,
there being no more reason for the Parliament's opposing of the Match with this
Popish Princess, than that which was talked of with the Arch-dutchess of
Inspruck: Whence I perceive, that though the Clamor to enrage the Populace be
the Danger of Religion, yet there is nothing but Policy and Interest at bottom:
and that they thought an Alliance with the House of Austria not so dangerous to
their own Liberties, as one with the House of Bourbon: and their Argument from
Conscience has received a mortal Wound, when the Bill that English Princes
should marry none but Protestants was thrown out of the House of Lords by the
unanimous Vote of the Bishops Bench, though their Lordships, at the same time,
did as unanimously vote for a Test to make their own Form of Church Government
unalterable: And certainly if they who call themselves the Fathers of the
Protestant Church have so little Zeal for the Main of their Religion, I may be
allowed a greater Latitude on that Head, and even to oppose it when those
ghostly Fathers have given Instructions to their Clergy, to represent the
Dissenter as a more dangerous Enemy than the Papist.

CHAP. XLVIII. On his Majesty's Speech to the House of Lords, upon the Address
of the Commons against his Declaration of Indulgence. The Answer of the Lords
thereunto. The Vote of the Commons for Ease to Protestant Distenters, and that
part of their Address which desired that all in Places of Power and Trust
should take the Sacrament according to the Church of England.
THE Commons having showed so much Warmth against my Declaration of Indulgence,
I thought that my Speech would have proven a very good Expedient to have set
the Lords at Variance with them, especially when I professed so much Zeal for
the Upper House: but I find, that though they differ in respect of their own
particular Privileges, yet they are agreed in the common Heads of Religion and
Liberty, and consequently in the defense of them against my Designs, as appears
by their conjunct Address, wherein they complain of Papists being admitted into
Places of Power and Trust, and especially into Military Commands; and instead
of standing by me against the Commons, they have only resolved that my Answer
to them in referring the Points in controversy to a Parliamentary Decision is
good and gracious.

By the Vote of the Commons for Ease to Protestant Dissenters, I perceive that
they are now jealous that those Penal Laws were at first framed for the
destruction of the Protestant Interest: but seeing they have denied me the
Privilege of dispensing with those Laws, I shall take care to have them kept on
foot; and this will be sufficient to render all their Efforts against me faint
and of no effect, which would be formidable enough if the Strength of the
Protestants were united: And whereas they think that they have done mighty
things in excluding Papists from Places of Power and Trust by their Sacramental
Test, it demonstrates sufficiently how little they are acquainted with the
Principles or Practices of the Catholics, who can have a Dispensation to do
what they please for the advancement of their Interest. And that, moreover,
there are abundance of Church-Papists, who make no Scruple of Conformity;
whereas the Dissenting Protestants, who are the greatest Enemies to my
Measures, cannot comply with the said Test: so that instead of excluding their
Enemies, they shut out their Fellow-Protestants; or at least will be sure to
manage it so as to make it have that Effect; and I doubt not to reap very good
Advantage from this Method, and to make it appear to the common Observer, that
this manner of Procedure is wholly (as it is indeed in a great part) owing to
the Rancour of the Episcopal Party, and not to the Designs of the Court: for I
make no question but that the Church-of- England-Clergy will speedily take the
Alarm of the Hazard that threatens their Constitution, if once Dissenters have
Ease, and be admitted into the Church; so that my Enemies are not aware of my
Advantage against them, by having the Pulpits of the Nation on my side. By the
Influence of the Bishops, who depend so much upon me, I can make the Pulpits
speak in the Court-Dialect, and libel the Proceedings of the Commons as the
Result of Fanatical and Republican Consults; which being pronounced ex
Cathedra, and having the Shadow of Divine Authority, and that of the Civil
Magistrate, to back it, will have a more universal Effect than their private
Murmurings in Clubs and Conventicles. And though this Test may in some measure
incommode the bigoted Catholics in my Service at home; yet I will order it so
as it shall not reach those who are in my Service abroad; and there I can have
a Nursery of Swordmen fit for my purpose, and provide for my Catholic
Officers, till such time as the Design for introducing of Popery and Absolute
Monarchy be ripe.

CHAP. XLIX. Upon the Complaints of the Commons, that Ireland was like to be
overrun with Popery, because of his Majesty's Proclamation, allowing Papists
to live in Corporations, and giving them equal Liberties to the English. Their
Address concerning the Danger of the Protestant Interest there; and that Mr.
Richard Talbot should be removed from all Public Employment, and denied Access
to Court: And their Address concerning English Grievances; with Reflections on
the Miscarriages of his Majesty's former Designs of being empowered to raise
Money without Parliament, on extraordinary Occasions; and having an Universal
Excise settled on the Crown.
WHat mighty Clamours do continually sound in my Ears, as to the Dangers which
threaten the Protestant Religion? and now that I have given them the most
solemn Promises that can be for my Care and Endeavors to preserve the same in
England, they exhibit an Address of their Fears as to Ireland, where they
strike at once both against my Designs in Church and State, and fall foul upon
my Proclamation, granting the Irish Papists the same Liberty with the English
Protestants; so that they are resolved to quarrel with my Prerogative in every
Particular, and will allow me to be Absolute in nothing but in quelling
Dissenters, so little Sense have they of that Religion which they profess, by
the Laws of which they are enjoined to love their Neighbors as themselves: but
I perceive that they are firmly resolved that none shall have the Privilege to
buy nor sell, but such as conform to the Church of England.

The imprudent Zeal of Mr. Richard Talbot, who glories in being Agent to the
Roman Catholics in Ireland, has animated them not only to address against
him, but against employing any Catholics in Ireland, either as Officers or
Soldiers. Nor do they stop there, but desire that I should recall my Commission
of Inquiry into Irish Affairs, as tending to the Overthrow of the Act of
Settlement; and the like as to my Letter, forbidding the Prosecution of the
Irish for any Injuries they committed in the late Rebellion; and urge me to
banish their Titular Bishops and Archbishops, and to suppress their Seminaries
and public Schools, and yet at the same time pretend to be the Patrons and
Disciples of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, while they prescribe Laws to
their Monarchs. I thought it the best Policy to begin to exert my Prerogative
in Ireland, by extending Favor to the Catholics there, who did so cordially
espouse my Father's Quarrel against the Puritanical Rebels both in England and
Scotland, concluding, as I thought with Reason, that the Church-of- England-men
would have been willing that the Irish Catholics, who were their
Fellow Sufferers in Affliction, should also be Fellow-Sharers with them in
their Prosperity after my Restoration; and that those who had no Scruple of
Conscience to join with them in Arms against their common Enemies the
Presbyterians, even after they were accounted barbarous for massacring the
Protestants, should have had no Disquiet at seeing them Copartners with
themselves in my Royal Bounty: but I find that I am mistaken, and that the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience is only calculated to the Church of England's
Interest, but has no place when that is not the Monarch's chief Aim; for they
not only take upon them to quarrel with my Proclamations and Letters about the
Affairs of Ireland, but pretend to order who shall have Access to my Court, and
who not, as if the King of Great Britain was to be confined to as narrow Limits
as the Doge of Venice, so ill founded are those Peoples Complaints against the
Scots Presbyterians, for imposing Conditions upon me before my Coronation; that
they themselves who admitted me almost without any, are now for intrenching
upon my Prerogative when I am in plenary Possession: And yet because of this
pretended Constraint upon me, the Episcopal Party justify my Breach of Covenant
with the Scots; so that according to their own Doctrine I may as well break
with themselves when I find an Opportunity, because they now take the Advantage
of my Circumstances and want of Money to bring me to their own Terms, which is
still more palpable from their other Address concerning their own Grievances,
viz. my imposing of 12 d. per Chaldron upon Coals, for providing of Convoys;
the exempting of my Soldiers from ordinary Justice; the quartering of them on
private Houses; the pressing of Men for Land-Service, etc. So that
notwithstanding of the Divine Right of Succession, my not being accountable to
any but God, and the Height to which their Divines have preached up my
Prerogative, they would still reduce me to a King of Clouts. These things being
so inconsistent with the Church of England's pretended Principles, I must take
care to possess the Clergy of the Danger they are in if such Encroachments upon
the Crown be suffered to pass without Animadversion: for as they value
themselves upon the Maxim of No Bishop, no King; as if where Episcopacy is not
the Government of the Church, Monarchy can never be that of the State; I am
sure that the converted Proposition, No King no Bishop, will hold much truer:
And if once there be an Incroachment made upon the Crown, the Privileges of the
Mitre will never be lasting; and therefore it is their Interest to disown the
Maintainers of such Principles for true Sons of the Church, as I can never own
them for good Subjects to the State; and so we shall brand them with a Note of
Ignominy: But in the mean time I must put the Commons off with a smooth Answer,
both my Father and I having sufficiently smarted by provoking Parliaments,
though at the same time I shall be sure to prorogue them, that so all their
Designs of Ease to Dissenters, and to oppose my Brother's Match, may fall to
the ground; and this I esteem a much safer way of dealing, than to withdraw
from them, and set up my Standard, as my Father did, who seems to have entailed
his Misfortune in War on all his Posterity; for I find that the Minds of those
who depend entirely upon me are mutable, and therefore I have less Reason to
put Confidence in the Body of the Nation, who brag of their Privileges as a
free People. The Churchmen, notwithstanding of their former Flights of Zeal
for the Prerogative, do many of them join with those who are for encroaching
upon it; and my very Pensioners, who lived by my Bounty, withstood my Designs
of having a Power to levy Money upon extraordinary Occasions, and getting an
universal Excise settled upon the Crown, because they found that if these
things were but once obtained, there would be no need of Pensioners, and
consequently an End put to their Salaries and Subsistence. Nor are even the
highest of the Clergy, who bind Passive Obedience upon the Consciences of their
Hearers, on pain of Damnation, willing to have an Arbitrary Power put in
exercise over themselves: and the most obsequious of their Hearers, though they
applaud the French King and his Government, are very unwilling to have it
introduced here, and therefore concur with the Phanatical Members to oppose the
keeping up of a Standing Army; and as they have excluded their Brethren the
Dissenters, they are also unwilling that the Roman Catholics should be Sharers
with them in Places of Power and Trust: so that my Episcopal Subjects are
indeed very Loyal, but it is on this Condition, that they alone may enjoy the
Bag; and if either I, or any of my Successors shall put out our hands and touch
them in their Property, I make no doubt of it but they will curse us to our
Face; and therefore I must take care to drive on cunningly but not furiously,
so that when I have a mind to be revenged on any of my Enemies, I must
represent them as Fanatics and Commonwealths-Men; then shall I be sure to have
them baited from the Pulpits, nor shall they find any more favorable Treatment
when they come before the Benches.

CHAP. L. On his Majesty's making Application to the Parliament of Scotland,
upon his failing of Money from the Parliament of England, the Scots insisting
first upon the Redress of their Grievances, and sending Duke Hamilton and
others to London for that End.
MY Case is very desperate when I must have recourse to the Poorest of my
Subjects for Money, and that the Richest refuse it. My Father and Grandfather
took such Measures as tended to the keeping of Scotland low; so that it is no
wonder that that Nation should have failed them in their Distress. They were
obliged by their Coronation-Oaths to live some part of their time there, lest
the Substance of the Kingdom should be spent in England by the Nobilities being
obliged to frequent the Court: but Reasons of State induced them to do
otherwise; for the Scots being a People tenacious of their Privileges, and
zealous for their Religion, did oppose their Measures for advancing the
Prerogative; whence it became necessary to humble them, lest their Example
should have had bad Influence on the two other Kingdoms. My Father, it is true,
would have proceeded further, and designed to have chastis'd their Contumacy
with the Sword; but how unsuccessful it proved in the Event, is too late and
recent to be forgotten: their Kindness to me was truly remarkable in declaring
me their King immediately upon his Murder; but I am afraid that my treatment of
them since has effaced those good Impressions which they had of me then,
seeing I have not only overturned the Presbyterians, who were at that time my
greatest Friends, but cut off the Chief of their Patrons, and brought the whole
Party under the lash. Cursed be the Necessity which occasions my application to
them, and may those Disciples of Passive Obedience, the Churchof- England-Men,
be dealt with in the same manner as they have dealt with me. They pretended to
receive me without any previous Terms, and to own the Divine Right of my
Succession to the Throne; but now when I have settled the Discipline of their
Church, and brought the Dissenters under their feet, they are also for
disputing my Commands, and confining my Prerogative within narrower Limits. I
must now try whether their Brethren, the Episcopal Party in Scotland, will be
any thing more ingenuous, and if they can really perform what they have so
solemnly promised, they have undertaken to assist me with 22000 Horse and Foot
wherever I shall have occasion; then surely they may let me have the Money and
save their Men, which would do my business in an effectual Manner: and that no
means may be left unattempted, I will send the Earl of Lauderdale, their great
Patron, to persuade them to it.

But my cursed Fate continues inauspicious, and I find that the Party in
Scotland are very insignificant, being not so much as able to grant me one
Subsidy; but instead of that, I am presented with an Address of their
Grievances, and a smart Remonstrance against Lauderdale's Ministry, backed by
the greatest of the Peers of Scotland, whose Noise and Complaints have reached
me in England; and until those be redressed, they will not so much as hear of any
Overtures for Money. I was made to believe that an unbounded Loyalty had been
so universally diffused through that Kingdom, that the Episcopal Party adored,
and the Presbyterians feared me; but Experience teaches the contrary, else what
means this bleating of the Sheep and lowing of the Oxen? the Episcopal Party
though they alone are capable of being admitted to Parliament, either cannot or
will not give me Money, and their Libel of Grievances are but an old
Presbyterian Remonstrance newly vamp'd, being an Impeachment of my
Administration both in Church and State, and including Desires in favor of the
Dissenters. They complain of the Monopoly of Salt, which has increased the
price of it so much, that what was formerly had for 4, cannot now be bought for
20s. though the Inconvenience of this Monopoly was represented to me. They do
also murmur against the Impositions on Brandy and Tobacco; and that the Lords
of the Articles who were originally no more than a Committee of the
Parliament's appointment, are now advanced above Parliaments themselves: That
the Mint and Coinage are corrupted: Persons ignorant and insufficient created
Judges: That the Bishop of Edinburgh and others of the Clergy are countenanced
in preaching reflectingly upon the Parliament: That Magistrates are illegally
imposed upon the City of Edinburgh: That eminent Offices are accumulated upon
single Persons; and conclude this Point with the Maladministration of my
Revenue, and the Earl of Lauderdale's excessive Greatness. In the next place
they complain of the Severity of the Laws against the Presbyterians, and that
my own Power is too great in Church Affairs: so that the Nations seem resolved
to join Complaints against my Government; and how fatal the Issue of that may
be, I can easily conjecture from bypast times; therefore I must dismiss Duke
Hamilton with a favorable Answer, and promise a Redress of Grievances in
Parliament, that so I may allay their present Heat. It Is happy for me that I
have two other Kingdoms by which I can overawe them, or else their Address had
been backed by the Sword, and they would probably have brought me on my Knees
before their Parliament, as they have done several of my Predecessors, or have
cut off my Head; but I shall henceforth endeavor to put them out of a Capacity
to deal so by me or any of my Successors. And whereas the Presbyterians do
tenaciously adhere to the pretended Liberties of their Forefathers, instead of
Rods, by which they were chastis'd by my Father, I shall henceforth order it so
that they shall be punished with Scorpions, that they may be rendered altogether
unable to raise any Rebellion at home, or assist the Parliament of England, and
the Protestants of Ireland abroad. I will take such effectual Course to render
them contemptible, that they shall not henceforth have the Vanity, as in my
Father's time, to think that the Representation of their Pressures can find any
Acceptance with their ancient Allies of France, to whom they recommended
themselves formerly by their Military Services; so that at once I shall revenge
upon them the Blood of all my Predecessors whom they have murdered, and turn
the best of their Country into a Hunting Field. And herein I doubt not of the
Concurrence, or at least Connivance of the English Nation, because of the
ancient Enmity betwixt the two Kingdoms; and if once the Scots be subjected, I
shall with the more Ease bring England under the Yoke.

CHAP. LI. On the Spanish Ambassador's Proposals for an Union betwixt England
and Holland, and declaring that they must break with England if the same were
not accepted. The Manifesto of the Dutch to the Parliament of England, wherein
they appeal to them for the Righteousness of their Cause. The Parliament's
Endeavors thereupon for a Peace; and his Majesty's agreeing to it without
including the French King.
MY Stars seem to threaten me with a Series of bad Influences; I can neither
have Money from my Subjects of Scotland nor England, nor yet the wonted
Supplies from France: and now the Spaniards are not only become Mediators, but
threaten me if I continue the War with the Dutch. What a mighty Change is this,
that they who did formerly seek their Destruction, should now interpose for
their Preservation, and treat their formerly Rebel-Subjects with that Respect
which is due to the best of their Allies: And that his Catholic Majesty, whose
Predecessors were the greatest Champions for Popery and Absolute Monarchy,
should now become the Patron of Heretics and Republicans. I may hence observe,
that Princes pursue different Measures, according to their different Interests,
and support those at one time, whom at another they seek to destroy. The
Spaniard, though esteemed the most bigoted Papist, yet prefers his Interest to
his Religion, and thinks it better to save the Heretical Dutch, than to perish
with them; and to preserve their Commonwealth, rather than to lose a Limb of
his own Monarchy. And seeing all the Neighboring Monarchs pursue what they
think their different Interests, and summum bonum, by such Methods as they
themselves think best, I may certainly be allowed to pursue my Pleasures, which
I reckon my chief Happiness, by such Methods as I my self think convenient.

The Dutch take advantage from the Discontents of my Subjects, and labor to
foment Jealousies betwixt them and me; and according to their Republican
Humor, would make the Parliament judge of my Actions, whereby they would
insinuate themselves into my Peoples Favor, and blacken my Designs as much as
they can.

Accordingly I do find that they have their Aim, and the Commons have declared
their Sentiments for a Peace; so unhappy a thing it is when the Head and the
Members don't agree, and that Sovereign and Subjects drive different Designs. I
must try what Influence a Speech will have upon the Commons, when larded with
Promises of securing their Religion and Property; and tell them, that our
Enemies place their greatest Hopes in our Divisions; and seeing they prepare
for a War, it will be very dishonorable for the English Nation to be threatened
into a Peace, especially seeing the best way to procure an honorable Peace is
to treat with the Sword in hand, and to have a good Fleet ready to oppose them,
which cannot be effected without a large Supply. I have also taken care to
inform the House as to my Treaties with France, of which they have had hitherto
very frightful Representations, but cannot prevail with them to believe what I
say, so far have their Jealousies got the Ascendant over them, that Popery and
Arbitrary Government are ready to break in upon them; wherein the Earl of
Shaftsbury proves a very ill Instrument, and foments their Jealousies by
discovering my Intrigues, so mischievous a thing is it when great Courtiers
fall off from their Duty; so that now the Commons will listen to nothing
without a firm Security for their Religion and Property: and the better to
insinuate to the People the greatness of their Danger, they have made
application to me to appoint a Fast, desire that the Trainbands of London may
be raised to suppress the tumultuous Meetings of the Papists, and accuse my
chief Ministers of Designs against the Nation, for which they would have them
banished my Presence for ever. These are woeful Circumstances to which I am
reduced, and afford me but a melancholy Subject of Meditation, when I consider
what Pains and Expense I have been at to deliver the Nations from the Bigotry
of Religion, by testifying how little I value it in my own Practice, and how
careful I have been to discourage it in others; that now when my Parliament
has concurred with me for so many Years, to ruin their dissenting Brethren at
home, and Protestant Neighbors abroad, they should at last become refractory
and obstinate, and from an overheated Zeal for Religion pursue the same
Measures themselves which they have condemned in others. I reckoned that the
indulging of a Licentiousness in Practice, would at last have extinguished all
Sense of that which they call Religion; but the Event shows that I am mistaken.
The Phanaticks, whom I have prosecuted, will say, that the Judgment of God has
pursued me, and created a Difference betwixt me and my Parliament, who did so
unanimously concur to promote their Ruin; and this Cant they will buz and
spread about the Nation, and value themselves upon their Foresight, as having
so long ago foretold what is now come to pass; and by this Means work upon the
present Fears and Ferment of the Nation: but I shall fall upon a Method to be
even with them afterward, and infallibly turn the Tables upon them. In the
mean time I must make the best Improvement of my present Circumstances that I
can; and seeing there is no avoiding of a Peace with the Dutch, I must seek for
a Pretense to come off with Honor, for which the Marquess de Fresno's
Proposals, in name of his Catholic Majesty, come very opportunely: for seeing
they are new Proposals, I can easily give out that they are more advantageous
than the former; and by seeming to advise with the Commons, whether it be meet
for me to accept of them or not, I shall both please them, and salve my own
Reputation, for my Allies the French will by this Means see that my concluding
of Peace is the Effect of Constraint, and not of Choice, seeing I can neither
have Money nor the Parliament's Consent to carry on the War: and if the French
King should complain that I act dishonourably in concluding a Peace without
him, it will be a plausible Answer, that I am not Absolute as he is: So that
having neither Men nor Money at Command, without my Parliament's Concurrence, I
am under a Necessity of discontinuing a War, which they are against: And seeing
he has failed me in his promised Supplies, he cannot be angry that I seek for
them elsewhere, it being every whit as reasonable that I should satisfy my own
Pleasures, as it is for him to gratify his Ambition. And seeing my Parliament
have very bad Impressions of the Treaties betwixt him and me, as containing
mysterious and dangerous Articles, it is but reasonable that I should draw a
Vail over their Eyes, by seeming now to come to an absolute Rupture, that we
may afterward carry on our Designs with less Suspicion: but if none of those
Reasons will satisfy him, I am not solicitous, for I know that he can as little
be without me as I can be without him; and that a mutual Friendship is
indispensably necessary for the carrying on of either our Designs; and if he
will be disgusted at this Treatment, he may remember how he forbad me his
Dominions at the Instance of a Rebel and Usurper, and how little Care he has
had of my Reputation ever since, but has continually exposed me both as to the
Affair of betraying Monsieur Rohan, the suffering of it to be printed at Paris,
that he and I engaged in this War against the Dutch, on purpose to destroy the
Protestant Religion, ordering his Squadron to abandon my Fleet in the Day of
Battle, and grasping all the Country to himself when he overrun the Hollanders
by Land, without the least Design of making me a Sharer, according to our
Agreement. But let him be well or ill pleased, I cannot help it: My Parliament
have not only testified their Dislike of his Alliance, and this present War,
but have begun to attaque me in the Persons of my Ministers, who have hitherto
been so necessary both for the promoting of my Prerogative and Pleasures; and
therefore in prudence I am obliged to clap up a Peace, not being able to deal
both with the Parliament at home, and the Dutch abroad; though I must confess
that it is not without a sensible Regret that I must perceive both him and my
self robbed of our Prey when it was just betwixt our Teeth.

CHAP. LII. On his Majesty's proroguing the Parliament, because of their
impeaching his Ministers, forming Bills against Popery, and for the marrying of
those of the Royal Family with Protestants, and educating their Children in
that Religion. Clamours raised in the Nation, that we were running back to 41.
The Court's mediating a Peace betwixt France and Holland, and sending 10000 of
their own Subjects into the French King's Service.
IT may be thought strange that a Parliament of such stanch Churchmen should
be so uneasy with their Sovereign, and contrary to their professed Principles
wound me so furiously through the sides of my Ministers; they condemn the
Puritans for insisting so much against Strafford and Laud, whereas they
themselves are as violent against the Duke of Buckingam, Earl of Lauderdale,
and Earl of Arlington. Whence I find, that let them pretend what they will,
their Loyalty is measured by their supposed Interest.

My being obliged to concede to them in one thing has emboldned them to press
upon me to yield in another: So that having obliged me to put an End to the
War, they are resolved to deprive me of the Sweets of Peace, and to rob me of
those Ministers in whom I delight, because of their Agreement with me in
Practice and Design. If I suffer them to be brought to trial, it will not only
discourage others from serving me afterward, but endanger both my Reputation
and Safety, and bring me to Repentance when it is too late, as my Father did
after he abandoned Strafford. I must not therefore run such a risk, for if I
leave them to the Vengeance of the Commons, they will secure themselves by
accusing me, and consequently break all my Measures, therefore it is necessary
for me to prorogue the Parliament; and if I can be otherwise supplied with
Money, shall never call them more, but rid my self of that pernicious Divan,
who are an ungrateful Check upon all Monarchs. My Father found, by sad
Experience, the mischievous Inconvenience of making use of them; and what King
is there who will not be easily convinced of the danger of having such an
Assembly to control them in their Designs, dive into their Secrets, and chain
up their Hands, that I must neither favor what Religion I think fit, marry
what Wife I please, nor make such Alliances as I think advantageous, and for my
Interest, without their Consent, and Limits, or rather Fetters of their
imposing? And thus my ill-natured Subjects do continually stun my Ears with
their Clamours against Popery; not that they have any true Regard to the
contrary Religion which they profess, as may be seen by their Practice, but
because of their temporal Interest. Then they break in upon the Peace of my own
Family; so that I must neither gratify a Wife, to suffer her to educate a Child
in her own Religion, though perhaps the same may be also most agreeable to my
own Opinion: Nor must any of my Children, or near Relations, be suffered to
marry with Roman Catholics, for fear of the dangerous Consequence to their
beloved Heresy. And thus though they pretend to believe that Monarchy is the
only Government of Divine Right, and that I hold my Crown from God alone by
lineal Succession, they load me with such Fetters that they convert my Diadem
to a Crown of Thorns; and how desirable soever a Throne may seem to be, yet by
those Restraints they would make it sweeter to the Fancy than the Enjoyment.

This dangerous Temper must be obstructed in time, and a Method found out to
divert their Zeal, and give it some other Current. The Phanaticks were the last
who had them under their Feet, and have still a great Interest in the Nation;
whereas the Catholics have now been dispossed for an Age, and have no other
Prospect but the Favor of the Court to recover their Footing. Then the Course
which does naturally offer it self to my View, is to alarm the Nation with the
Danger of relapsing into the Disorders of 1641. which issued in the Destruction
of the Church and Monarchy. The Puritans ushered in their Rebellion by Clamours
against the Invasions of their Civil Rights by an unlimited Prerogative, and of
their Religion by Innovations in Doctrine and Discipline; and that therefore it
is a Shame for them who pretend to so much Loyalty, and to despise others upon
the account of contrary Principles, to be found tracing their Footsteps. The
Clergy, I am sure, will be sensible of the Danger, and will, no doubt, be ready
to take the Alarm; and when the Pulpits are on my side, I can diffuse what
Opinions and Notions I please through the Nation: and if once the Clergy be
possessed with an apprehension of the Danger they are in of losing their
Benefices by the Fanatics; and that the Gentry, who did formerly smart by
Sequestrations, be effectually put in mind of their former Sufferings, and the
Probability of running headlong into the same Inconveniences, by pursuing the
Methods which they are now upon; I doubt not but the Current will turn as
strongly upon the Phanaticks and Republicans, as it does now against the
Catholics and Courtiers, especially when backed by my Authority, and made the
Pathway to Preferment in Church and State; for I shall henceforth take care
that none be advanced in either, but such as are willing to concur with my
Designs. For the carrying on of which it is necessary that some acute Pens be
set at work to defend my Proceedings, and draw such Vails over them as cannot
be seen through by ordinary Observers.

It is also necessary for that end, that I employ some fit Persons to negotiate
a Peace betwixt France and Holland, which as it will be a plausible Argument of
my Aversion to have that Protestant State destroyed, it will give the French
King an Opportunity to concert his Measures at leisure, render his Protestants
less useful to him at home, and the easier to be destroyed, and enable him to
assist me in advancing my Prerogative: for which end he shall have 10000 of my
Subjects in his Service, who after they have acquired Experience and Reputation
in his Wars, will be useful to me for training up others, and be ready at hand
to quell my rebellious Subjects, in case of intestine Troubles.

The old Cavaliers may be now very useful to me; and whereas they have hitherto
complained of being neglected, I will incite them by hopes of having their old
Services rewarded, to publish their former Sufferings afresh, and declare that
the Parliament is taking the same Methods which did formerly ruin the Church
and the State, by which Means I shall bring their Procedure to be hated, and
animate the Royalists and zealous Churchmen against them.

CHAP. LIII. On the Meeting of the Parliament again, April, 1675. Their falling
upon Bills for the Benefit of the Nation, and being diverted by the sudden
bringing in of a Test into the House of Lords, to be imposed upon all in Places
of Power or Trust, Civil, Military or Ecclesiastical; obliging them to declare
their Abhorrence of taking up Arms against the King, or any commissionated by
him; and to swear that they would not at any time endeavor the Alteration of
the Government either in Church or State.
THE Want of Money obliges me to let the Parliament sit after so long a
Prorogation; but, to my great Grief, I perceive that the Vitals and noble Parts
of the Nation are in danger by this Contagion of rebellious Principles, which
has raged so long amongst them. Insomuch that whereas it might have been
justly expected that this long Prorogation should have cooled them, they fall
upon the old Theme of Bills for the Advantage of the Nation; but I am resolved
to give them a Diversion by the Cavalier and High Churchman, whom I have
inspired with a Desire of Revenge for old Injuries, and put them in hopes of
better Success than formerly, if they should have occasion of fighting the old
Quarrel over again, seeing now they are possessed of the Arms, Forts and
Ammunition of the Nation, and are sure of one to head them, who will never be
guilty of such a precipitant Action as to leave their Enemies in possession of
London, divest himself of the Power of the Militia, or lodge his Power in the
Hands of the Parliament. So that the Church and I shall mutually gratify one
another, and maintain both Monarchy and Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, and
not to be bounded by humane Laws. We have made considerable Steps toward this
already; the Act for regulating Corporations has excluded all Men of different
Principles from the Magistracy; the Act of Uniformity has shut them out from
the Ministry; and the Act of the Militia has left them no Place in the Army:
So that it only remains for laying on the Top-stone of the whole Fabric, that
we get this Test to be universally imposed, and then we take away all
Opportunity from the Parliament to alter any thing in Church or State, and
confine them to their proper Work of raising Money. The Bishops, who have their
Dependence upon me, must be taught to instruct their inferior Clergy to make
use of their Learning to justify and not to examine what their Superiors
command: And seeing this Oath secures their beloved Government and Discipline
to Perpetuity, they can neither in Gratitude nor Interest decline their
Concurrence to promote the same in favor of the Crown; which, with so much
Zeal, they desire for the Mitre. If this can be obtained, the Act of Oblivion
will be made void, and then we can take a sweet Revenge on the Phanaticks and
Republicans. The better to make it pass, we must endeavor to possess the
Parliament, that it is a necessary and moderate Security for the Church and
Crown, and will be the most effectual Preservative that can be thought on
against such Rebellions as that of 41. The Necessity of it may easily be
instructed from the Swarms of Phanaticks, and Men of dangerous Principles,
which abound in the Nation: And all who refuse to give this moderate Security,
shall be looked on as tainted with this rebellious Leaven.

But I find that I must still lay my Account to meet with Opposition; for those
Lords who value themselves, as being Patriots to their Country, but in reality
a factious Cabal, oppose this Bill with Vigor, as incroaching on the
Birthright of the Peers, striking at the Root of the Government, taking away
Freedom of Debate from the Houses of Parliament, which have part of the
Legislative Power, obliging them to abjure all Endeavors to alter the
Government of the Church, whatever the Necessities of the State, or Christian
Compassion to Dissenters may require; and therefore they have protested against
it; but however I have this Satisfaction, that it is carried against them, and
committed. And my Lords the Bishops have behaved themselves bravely in it, by
endeavoring not only to have those Protesting Lords personally punished, but
the Liberty of exhibiting Reasons with their Protestations abolished, because
of their pretending a Christian Compassion to Dissenters: Nor did they show
themselves less my Friends in rejecting the Proviso's offered by the Protesting
Lords, to secure the Freedom of Debate to Members of Parliament, and prevent
Dangers from Popish Recusants. And though they could not answer, yet they could
outvote the Arguments brought against Assertory Oaths in point of Doctrine, and
Promissory Oaths, though held unlawful by Grotius; and generally ineffectual,
to keep ill Men out of the Government, though they may exclude some
conscientious Persons: And as the Bishops cannot justify this their Procedure,
without an assurance of Infallibility, which they do not pretend to, it shows
that they do not believe the Religion which they profess and teach. And seeing
I perceive this to be common among Priests of all Religions, it cannot but
justify me, though I should openly profess my self to be of none. I perceive
the Country Lords have found out my Design to swear them not to oppose an
Arbitrary Government, by binding them up not to resist my self or any having my
Commission, though I should command them to do things contrary to the standing
Laws; as levying of Money without Consent of Parliament, etc. Or though I
should either deliver my self up to the French King, or by Fortune of War fall
into his Hands, and either willingly or by constraint command my Subjects to do
such things as are contrary to my Royal Dignity: Or in case that a Popish
Successor should by Force of Arms endeavor to establish the Catholic
Religion: So that I find the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, though inculcated
from the Pulpit, as a necessary Article of Faith, on pain of Hell and
Damnation, has not obtained universal Belief amongst the Church-of-
England-Laity, whatever it has done amongst their Clergy, and consequently
that the latter are not fit for me to rely upon, as not being able enough to
defend me against that Party who proved too strong for them and my Father both;
for I am now fully satisfied that such of the Church of England as agree with
the Dissenters in Politics, would also quickly unite with them in
Ecclesiastics, if they would but allow them a sufficient Latitude of Practice:
So that hence I have ground enough to persuade the Clergy to declare against
all such as Presbyterians in Masquerade, and secret Enemies to their
Church Government, which they do not believe to be jure divino, else they would
never boggle at swearing not to alter it.

I have also this to comfort me, that I am not suspected alone by those Peers,
but the Bishops do now come in for a share, it being plainly perceived by the
contrary Party, that though they took care for their Discipline, they took none
for their Doctrine, that they might be as good as their Promise to the Popish
Lords, that the Oath should be so formed as not to bear hard on them, which is
still an Encouragement to me to think better of the Catholic Religion than the
Reformed; for the Catholic Clergy I find much truer to their Interest than
those of the Church of England: If the English Bishops did believe the Truth of
their own Religion, they would certainly be more concerned for its Doctrine
than Discipline, and not more sollicitous to secure the latter against
Dissenters, than the former against Catholics; or if they were Men who made
conscience of Oaths themselves, they would never be for imposing such Oaths
upon others as are contrary to their own Practice: for if they thought it
unlawful to endeavor any Alteration in their Church, they would never make
choice of such Men for Preferments as Preach and Write against her Doctrine of
Predestination. Those Prelates do exactly resemble the Pharisees, who bound
heavy Burdens upon the Shoulders of their Disciples, while they would not touch
them themselves with one of their Fingers; and so, though there have been
several Alterations made in the Prayers and Rites of the Church since the
Reformation by them and their Predecessors, yet they would oblige others by
Oath never to endeavor the like, but to maintain their Church as now
established by Law; which swears them to maintain the old Popish Canons revived
by the First of Elizabeth, which is indeed of a piece with the last Act of
Uniformity, that makes Popish Priests capable of Benefices without
Reordination if they turn Protestants; and yet unchurches all their Reformed
Brethren abroad, and declares their Ordination invalid. It Is true that all this
is for my Interest, and contributes exceedingly to the advancement of my
Designs; but at the same time, though I love the Treason I hate the Traitor,
and can put no Confidence in those Men, who being false to that which they call
their own Interest, can never be true to mine: and hence I perceive, that
though they profess otherwise, their Religion is the same with my own; for as I
pursue my Pleasures, they pursue their Profits as their summum bonum; and if
they may but acquire it, they care not by what Methods. Who then can blame me
for disbelieving that Religion which they who are the Fathers of the Church do
manifestly disbelieve themselves? or how can I be blamed for favoring Popery
as best suited to my Designs, when Protestant Bishops approve of their
Ordination, Canons, Ceremonies and Government, and by the choice which they
make of Ecclesiastics for Preferments, and the Tenderness which they have
showed to the Catholics in the management of this Test, it is evident enough
that they have no dislike to their Doctrines. However, I am in a great measure
obliged to them for standing by me in this Point, though I perceive their
principal Motive was to have their own Government rendered as Absolute as my
own; and that it should be equally, if not more dangerous for any Man to mutter
against the Church, as it is to speak Treason against the State. However if
this Oath could be passed, I should be happy in my Government, and rendered
abundantly more Absolute, than now I can pretend to be; the present Oath of
Allegiance and the Laws not being comprehensive enough, but loaded with
ungrateful Restrictions. And as for the Bishops, I know how to deal with them
if ever they should happen to grow uneasy; the Wounds of my Sword will be
sooner felt than those of their Pastoral Staff; and having rendered themselves
unacceptable to the Nation by concurring so much with the Court, and being so
violent against Dissenters, they cannot well recover their Interest there, and
so must be forced to comply with me; by which means I can easily protect the
Crown against the Efforts of the Mitre.

CHAP. LIVE. On the Debate betwixt the Lords and Commons about the Lords hearing
of Appeals from any Court of Equity, with the Behavior of the Bishops in that
Affair, and the Opposition which they met with from the Earl of Shaftsbury, etc.
THE Lords having made so much opposition to my Designs, it is my Interest now
to gain the Commons, and own their Pretensions against the Privileges of the
Peers: for if by this means I could render the Upper House useless, I should be
the better able to deal with the Lower; or if both of them fall by their mutual
Heats, I shall be a certain Gainer by their Destruction; or if the Commons once
find that I am for them, it may further their passing the Test with more ease.
The Bishops I am sure of in the House of Lords, and of my Pensioners and high
Churchmen in the House of Commons; who I Am sure will vote according to the
Direction of the Court. The Cavalier's Conscience is governed by the Bishop,
and the indigent Courtier must live by the Crown; so that both their Votes I
may depend upon. The Phanatick I can take off by hopes of Liberty; so that I
shall only have the staunch Countryman to oppose me, and it is hard if I be not
able to weather the Point against him.

But my Designs are still very apt to miscarry; and the Earl of Shaftsbury,
with others of the Country Lords, have got so much Influence on the Humors of
the Nation, that my Project, I fear, will certainly fail: Their Arguments for
preserving the Rights of the Lords as an essential Part of the Government, and
a necessary Check on aspiring Monarchs, are so popular and taking, that they
charm the Vulgar, who are made to believe that the Upper House is their chief
Security for the peaceable Enjoyment of their Rights and Properties, which may
be otherwise destroyed by partial Judges, who depend on the Court for their
Honors and Preferments, and are consequently influenced by them in their
Sentences. However, I am obliged to the good Will of the Bishops, who do herein
behave themselves like true and loyal Subjects, and advise the Lords to quit
their Pretensions, though thereby they lay themselves open to Lashes, as
concurring to destroy that Government; the Preservation of which for ever,
without any endeavor of Alteration, they did so much press to have the People
sworn to: but herein they act conformable to their great Principle, that
Monarchy and the Lineal Succession is of Divine Right, and not being the
Creature of Man's Constitution, ought not to be subject to humane Limitation,
but to God alone, from whom it has its Being. The Lords, however, are deaf to
all Insinuations, either from the Danger of a Rupture with the Commons or me at
this Juncture, which puts me under a Necessity of proroguing the Parliament,
and rather to hazard the Loss of the Test, than the Quiet of my Government: for
I find that Kings have always been Losers, whenever they came to a War with
their Barons and People; and I am not without Reason to think that this Debate
betwixt the two Houses is rather fomented to obstruct the Test, than out of any
Kindness to my Prerogative, which is sufficiently evident from the
inconsiderable Subsidy which the Commons have voted me.

CHAP. LV. On the Meeting of the Parliament after the Prorogation. His
Majesty's Demand of Money to build Ships. The Commons insisting upon the Bill
for a Habeas Corpus: Against sending Men Prisoners beyond Sea: Raising Money
without Consent of Parliament: Against Papists sitting in either House: For the
speedier convicting of Papists, and recalling his Majesty's Subjects from the
French Service; and the Duke of Buckingham's Speech for Indulgence to
Dissenters.
HAving, during this Interval of Parliament, taken sufficient Care to insinuate
the Danger of open Rebellion, such as that in 1641. if the Parliament persist
in their late Methods, and to make all those who refuse such Sums as I think
best to desire, odious to the Church as Presbyterians, I thought fit to let
them meet again, to try whether this Method had had any Influence on them, or
if the last Prorogation had any way cooled them. But though the Money which I
desired was to strengthen my Fleet for the Honor of the Nation, which I
concluded that they would the more easily grant, because in the former Session
they complained that the French were grown stronger than us at Sea; yet still I
meet with a Repulse; and instead of Money am answered with Complaints and
Libels against my Administration. By withholding of Money they make me unable
to give Rewards; and now they are about depriving me of the Power of inflicting
Punishments: By their Bill of Habeas Corpus they would deliver Criminals from
the Irksomness of long Imprisonments at home, and yet will not agree that they
should be sent Prisoners abroad. They are, moreover, so stubborn, as to deny me
Money for support of the Monarchy, and yet will not suffer me to raise any
without their Consent. Now their Fears of Popery and Slavery come upon them
afresh, which with redoubled Clamours they send abroad into the Country, to
inspire the Mob with their own Sentiments, and fill the Nation with endless
Jealousies. Hence come their Bills for disabling Papists from sitting in either
House, by which they would rob me of the Assistance of my best Friends. Nor are
they content to stay there, but they are also for having them speedily
convicted and punished, according to their sanguinary Laws, which in my time
shall never be granted. Nor do their Designs rest here; but as they will not
allow me an Army at home, they are now for my calling back such as I have
abroad, being afraid that they should learn too much of the French Methods of
an undisputed Submission to the Dictates of their Prince. All those disloyal
Practices are fomented by Dissenters and others, who are of Antimonarchical
Principles, for which in time I hope for a Revenge; and at present am resolved
to give them a Diversion, by reviving the Quarrel betwixt them and the Lords;
and while they are hot in the Contest about their own Principles, they will
remit their Violence against the Papists, and forget the Kindness which they
intended to Dissenters; for I have always observed this in their Temper, that
when they were kind to the one, they were severe to the other; and when any Man
is disgusted with that which they call Tyranny in the State, and Concurrence
with it in the Church, they strait have an Inclination to favor the Phanaticks
and Republicans. How could it have happened else that the Duke of Buckingham,
whose Father was a Sacrifice to the Resentments of the Faction, should now make
Harangues for an Indulgence to Dissenters? So that I plainly perceive that all
the Enemies to the Glory of my Crown, do nestle themselves amongst that
rebellious Herd. Yet herein at least I shall reap an Advantage, that the Church
will more cordially espouse my Quarrel, and oppose such Causes as are favored
by their Enemies, whose Bodies in due time I shall bequeath to the Gallows,
whilst the Clergy pretend to send their Souls to Hell.

CHAP. LVI. On the Motion for an Address by the House of Lords for dissolving
the Parliament. The Address's being cast out by the Majority, and the
Protestation of the Country Lords thereupon.
HOW unhappy is it for a Monarch to be tied up to the Humors of his People?
and thus it must be so long as Parliaments have any share in the Government,
and till the Prince be made Absolute by the Power of the Sword. I thought to
have rendered my Parliaments insignificant, and altogether useless to the Ends
for which they are chose; and by continuing this Parliament so long, had well
nigh effected my Design, having bribed most of them to change their Interest,
and taken such Methods as to make not a few of them change their Religion; so
that instead of acting according to their Original Commission from the Country,
they were wholly led by the Dictates of the Court: but now an evil Spirit of
Contention having seized upon the Lords, they begin to control me, as
Consiliarii nati; and those whose Interest it is to keep the Government steady,
and therefore move to have this Parliament dissolved, because they can no more
be called the Representatives of the Country, seeing they have their Dependence
wholly upon the Court, and don't vote according to the Mind of those that chose
them: So that they are in the same Design with my self to swallow up the
Peoples Liberties, provided they may have some Court-Preferments. The Lords do
also insist upon the frequent Calling of new Parliaments, which they alledg
from the Records to have been their ancient Privilege, and plead the
Prescriptions of many hundreds of Years. What pity! that all those Monuments of
Rebellion should not have perished in the great Conflagration, that they might
never have risen up in Judgment against me; but seeing they are extant, and so
violently urged, I Will do the best I can to divert their Force. I can insinuate
to the Commons, that these Proceedings of the Lords are not the Effect of any
Zeal for the People, but merely a Desire of Revenge upon the Lower House, for
their late controverting of their Privileges; and an Aversion that any
Commoner, by his Service to the Crown, should merit an Advancement to a Dignity
equal with their own: By these and such other Arguments as I can suggest, I
doubt not to have the present House of Commons on my side. And suppose it true,
that they are not the real Representatives of the Nation, as having forfeited
that Title, by going contrary to the Peoples Interest and Instructions; yet the
very Name of their Concurrence adds Credit to my Conduct: and I doubt not but
abundance of the Members who have found the Sweets of the Privilege of the
House, which protects them from their Creditors, and many times confirms their
Titles to Estates by Prescription, because while they are Parliament Men they
are secured in the Possession; I say I have no reason to doubt but such Men
will be against a Dissolution. It was a wise and commendable Practice in my
Predecessor Henry the VIIIth, to make Parliaments long-lived, for by that means
he had the Opportunity of making them for his purpose, and left a happy
Precedent for his Successors. Let the Murmurers grumble as much as they please,
and object the Custom of holding Parliaments thrice a Year before the Conquest,
and the Act of Edward III. that Parliaments should be holden once a Year, or
oftener, I am not tied to those antiquated Rules: If those Kings did not know
the Extent of their own Prerogative, I am not therefore obliged to allow any
Intrenchments on mine. But since Henry the VIIIth could protract the Duration
of a Parliament beyond its former Length, and the Customs of his Predecessors,
I may certainly be allowed to exceed the Examples of my Predecessors since his
time, especially having the Clergy on my side, who have preached up the
Prerogative higher than ever it was in former times, and will defend my
Practice by the Authority of their Gods. But I am not to be so easily drawn
from what is my Interest by the Allegations or Addresses of some factious Lords;
for it is my Wisdom to foment the Misunderstanding betwixt them and the Commons
as much as I can: and if I could but once bring them to have a mutual Distrust
of one another, and possess the Commons with an ill Opinion of the Arrogance of
the Lords, and their incroaching too much upon the Privilege of the Members,
who knows but it might procure such a Surrender to me as that which was lately
made to the King of Denmark by his People, who could not bear with the Contempt
showed to them by their Nobles, and therefore did all of a sudden devolve the
whole Power upon the King, and render him Absolute? Or if no such thing should
happen, yet by making the House for my purpose I can with the more Ease attain
my Desires; and if once the Commons were brought to comply, the Popish Lords,
Court-Lords and Bishops, will easily cast the Vote in the Upper House. But let
things go as they will, I am sure of this one infallible Method; I can possess
the Clergy, by means of the Bishops, that if this Parliament be dissolved, the
Mitre and Crown are both in danger; and then all those who are Enemies to my
Designs shall be threatened with Hell and Damnation, as opposing themselves to
God's Ordinance, to which they ought to be subject for Conscience Sake. And on
the other hand, I am very sure that those Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
who have spent some hundreds and thousands of Pounds for the Advantages which
they had a Prospect of enjoying by being Parliament Men, will never submit
willingly to a Dissolution, nor be content to put themselves to the hazard of a
new Choice: And I am sure of my Pensioners, for their Usefulness to themselves
and me both ceases with their not being Parliament Men; for as in that case
they cannot do me any Service, so neither can they tell where to have
Subsistence.

I have had the good Fortune to put a Check upon those factious Lords, and to
throw out their Address by the Majority of Votes, in which the Bishops were all
on my side, so happily are the Interests of the Church and Crown united. Hence
I find the Advantage of dissembling a Zeal for Religion, though in my Heart I
believe the whole to be a Cheat; for my professing my self to be the grand
Patron of the Church of England, sets all the Clergy at work for me; and they
having the Conduct of the Peoples Consciences, are useful Tools for any
Sovereign.

The Country Lords have protested against the Votes for rejecting the Address,
and inserted their Reasons in the Journals of the House, but it signifies
nothing, seeing they have lost their Cause; however it shall remain as an
Indictment against them: and now that I have their Names as my Enemies on
record, I shall take care on occasion to treat them as such, and make them
odious to the Country, by charging all the Miscarriages and Heats in
Parliament, and consequently the Obstruction of whatever might have been
advantageous to the Public, upon them.

CHAP. LVII. On the filling of the Benches with durante beneplacito Judges. The
publishing of some Books in favor of the Papists and Prerogative. The French
King's letting loose his Privateers amongst the English Merchants: And the
sending of Ammunition from his Majesty's Stores to the French King.
HAving been hitherto unsuccessful in my Attempts of following French Counsels,
raising a Standing Army, bribing Parliament Men, and contriving Oaths to swear
the People into Arbitrary Government, I must try some new Methods, and
endeavor to carry on my Designs by Shadow of Law: for which end it is
necessary that I make a Reform amongst my Judges, and instead of granting their
Commission ad vitam aut ad culpam, will make them hold them by a new Tenure of
durante beneplacito, by which they will be bound to their good Behavior, and
not dare to disoblige me, but give out my Will as the Oracles of the Law, and
then I can effect that by a Shadow of Justice which is not so safe to attempt
by Force: and when all Causes come to be decided by Favor in Court, I shall
despoil my Enemies, and enrich my Friends, which is the surest way to increase
them; for I have sufficient Experience of the Inconvenience of Judges who keep
strictly to the Rules of the Law, and therefore shall take care now that Judge
Hales is dead, that none of Puritanical Education and Principles shall
henceforth fill his Chair: And thus when I can by Forms of Law dispose of my
Subjects Lives and Estates, I may perhaps find my Judges as useful as a
Standing Army, and worm my self by degrees into Arbitrary Government, by
Methods less odious, and not so perceptible.

I do also find it necessary in order to the taking off of that general Disgust
which the People of this Kingdom have imbibed against Popery, that some Authors
be encouraged to write smoothly on that Subject, and insinuate a Difference
betwixt the Court and Church of Rome, that the latter is not chargeable with
the Miscarriages of the former; and that an Union amongst Christians is highly
desirable. And in the same manner I must take care to reconcile the Minds of
my Subjects to the Prerogative, and brand those who oppose it as Men of ill
Designs and Principles.

But seeing the Noncompliance of my Subjects with the Measures which I take,
may probably issue in a Rebellion, it will be my Wisdom to secure a Place of
Retreat, to take care beforehand, that I may be made welcome, and order it so
as the French King may have Effects of my own wherewith to maintain me if the
worst should happen, and be in a Condition to restore me, in case I should be
expelled; for I am resolved to take Warning by my Father's Fate, and either to
stoop to invincible Necessity, or provide against the severest Lot which may
befall me, and not to quarrel with my Subjects without good assurance of Foreign
Alliance, and while they are rich, and have Arms and Ammunition: Therefore I
shall order it so that the French King may interrupt their Commerce by his
Privateers, and seize their Ships, Men and Goods, which will humble them: And
in the mean time when they address to me for Relief, I can excuse my being
unable to defend them, seeing they are so backward in giving me Money to rig
out my Fleet: and that I must not upon the Miscarriage of Privateers break the
Friendship betwixt the two Nations, considering the great abundance of
Malcontents which are at home, and the Improbability of my receiving any
Assistance from abroad, now that the Parliament by their frequent Clamours of
the Designs of the Court to introduce Popery and Slavery, had rendered me
suspicious to Foreign Protestants. However, that they may not suspect my
Concurrence with the French in this Affair, they shall now and then have Orders
for my Resident at the French Court to demand Satisfaction; but if they have
it, it shall cost them so dear, as to make them quickly grow weary of that
Method. This indeed may seem unnatural for a Sovereign to concur with a Foreign
Prince to rob his own Subjects, but in my Heart I think they deserve no better;
their Priests have from the Mouth of their Divine Oracles preached up the
Prerogative, and Greatness of my Power, that my People were created for me, and
not I for them; that their Lives and Fortunes are at my Command, and yet they
allow me no Power in either; so that it is but reasonable they should smart for
their damned Hypocrisy; and it is just, seeing they will not allow me to take it
with my own Hand, that I take it from them by the Hand of another. Their Riches
and Fullness of Bread gives them occasion to be idle, and leisure to concert
their Measures of Rebellion; to prevent which Poverty is the surest Method: And
in the mean time the French King allows me to go Sharers with him in the
Profit, which my Enemies call by the ignominious Name of a Pension. But seeing
my Subjects and their Fortunes are my Property, what reason have I to give an
Account to any how I treat them. And seeing I am not to own that I have any
legitimate Heirs of my own Body to succeed me, why should I not make my Life as
pleasant as I can; which being impossible without Money, it is but reason that I
should use my own Methods to come by it, seeing my Subjects are backward to
grant me what I need.

But I have yet a stronger Reason for this kind of Procedure, the Catholics
having taught me that it is lawful to kill, by necessary Consequence it must be
much more lawful to impoverish my Heretical Subjects, and put them out of a
Condition to withstand the Reintroduction of that Religion which they pretend
will merit a Crown in Heaven: And if there be any such Place or Reward, I know
no other way how I can deserve it; for rather than take such Methods to obtain
it, as Protestants think needful, I had better want it. Let those who have a
mind to pull out their right Eyes, and cut off their right Hands, do so if they
please, I Will keep mine as long as I can. And seeing, according to the
Catholics, the Opus operatum is sufficient to carry me to Heaven, I need not
be so scrupulous nor nice about the way; it being reasonable that Kings should
be allowed a broader Path than others: And that seeing we are God's
Vicegerents on Earth, he should afford us a more commodious Passage than
ordinary to Heaven. And that I may the better deserve it according to their
Doctrine, I shall not only take care to furnish Lewis XIV. the great Champion
of the Catholic Church, with an Opportunity to enrich himself with the
Treasures of my Heretical Subjects, but also supply him with Arms and
Ammunition from my own Magazines, as I have already taught him the way of
building Men of War, and improving his Naval Strength, that if I be not able to
effectuate the great Design my self, he or his Successors may do it when I am
dead; for I find that it will never be practicable by any English King without
very powerful Assistance from abroad. I know that my Measures are condemned, my
Designs suspected, and Lists of the Ammunition and Arms which I have sent to
France, under pretense of sending them to Jersey, handed about: But I have this
Advantage, that my Enemies are not united; and they who are most zealous to
oppose me, rendered sufficiently odious to the Church and their Party, who being
countenanced by my Authority, are much the strongest, or at least able enough
to keep the rest under Hatches: And while they contend against each other, I
obtain the Victory over both. I have, however, not only secured my self a Place
of Retreat and Royal Maintenance, in case of my being overcome by my Subjects,
should there happen a Rupture, but I have also weakened the Magazines of the
Nation, and provided sufficient Arms and Ammunition for my self to equip my
French Auxiliaries, and assert my Right, or at least have furnished the French
Catholics with Weapons against my Heretical Subjects at their own Expense. And
if the Church-of- England-men should murmur against this Procedure, it is but a
small Degree above what was done by my Father, whom they have canonized for a
Saint and a Martyr; it being well enough known that he assisted the French King
with his Men of War against his Hugonot-Subjects of Rochel; which, considering
the Claim that the Kings of England have to the Crown of France, is much the
same with what I have now done: So that they cannot condemn me without
condemning him; nor condemn him without condemning themselves.

CHAP. LVIII. On the Meeting of the Parliament after the long Prorogation,
Febr. 1676. His Majesty's Demand of Money, recommending a good Correspondence
to the two Houses. The Question whether the Parliament was not dissolved by
that unprecedented Prorogation: Sending some Lords to the Tower for insisting
on it. The granting of Money by the Commons.
THE Greatness of my Expense requiring proportionable Supplies, and my Returns
from France not being sufficient, I must once more adventure on a Session of
Parliament, not doubting but my Pensioners will for their own Interest gratify
my Desires. I know that this long Prorogation is beyond all Precedent; but I
think that I have the best Authority to make one of any Body, and I am
furnished already with a very plausible Pretense, that such a long Recess was
absolutely needful to allay so great a Heat as happened betwixt the Houses last
Sessions. But however, that the Honor of the Nation lying at stake, I found it
necessary to call them together for a Supply to enable me to rig out my Navy,
on which so much of our Strength and Reputation depends. The March of my
Brother the French King, with his Army into Flanders, I know will alarm and
make them apprehensive of their own Danger, which will probably induce them to
part with Money for their own Defense.

But I perceive that my Difficulties are not quite over, for now both Houses
begin to question my last Prorogation, and think that it was really a
Dissolution; yet the Commons I find the most tractable of the two, because
there my Pensioners are most numerous; so that they have passed it over, and
fall to their Business: but the factious Lords I find still more obstinate and
daring; insomuch that they offer to maintain, that the last Prorogation was
illegal, and contrary to all the Laws of Parliament, even before the Judges;
and are so confident, that they demand to have their Opinion in it: but though
I can rely upon their Determination, yet I don't think fit to gratify the
opposite Faction so far, especially seeing I am sure of the Majority in any
Question, by the Influence of the Court-Lords and Bishops; and therefore their
Impertinence in falling foul upon my Prorogation, as a thing without Precedent,
shall be punished by an Imprisonment in the Tower, of the same Nature, which I
shall order so, that it shall appear to be the Act of their Fellow-Peers, and
not mine. And thus the Ringleaders of the Faction, the Duke of Buckingham,
Earls of Salisbury, Shaftsbury, and Lord Wharton, shall have time to consider
of the Question in their Confinement; and by this Means others will be deterred
from the like Boldness; and the Freedom of Debate, which has been hitherto
claimed and allowed in Parliament, be visibly infringed, of which there is an
absolute and very great Necessity; and now more than ever, when some of the
Members have had the Impudence to upbraid the House to their Face, that a great
part of them are Outlaws, abundance Papists, and no small number Pensioners:
And though I cannot but commend the Prudence of my Friends in the House, in not
sending the Authors of such scandalous Reflections to the Tower, because they
know them to be true; yet such things must be prevented if possible, otherwise
I and my Government shall fall into Contempt. However, my Pensioners were
rather willing to bear this Affront, than to do any thing that might make their
Dissolution or Prorogation necessary; and that they may show themselves worthy
of my Allowance, have granted me Money, and that very frankly, without an
Appropriating Clause: So that I am at liberty to spend it how I please. And as
they have been generous in their Grant, they have been no less as to the Terms,
having quitted all their other Pretensions for an Habeas Corpus Act. And thus I
find the Advantage of having those who depend upon me chosen for
Parliament Men, though I be at the Expense of their Election my self: For what
Privy-Counsellor is there that will not justify the most Arbitrary Proceedings
of the Council Table in the House, rather than lose his Place in Council? and
represent all the Proceedings of State to the Advantage of the Crown, rather
than lose his Prince's Favor? What Lawyer is there that will not put a
favorable Construction upon the Sentence of the Judges, rather than be
subjected to the Frowns of the Bench, or excluded all Hopes of mounting it
himself? What Captain of the Fleet or Navy but will be for the maintenance of a
Standing Force, as knowing that he cannot otherwise have a standing Pay? Or
will he not rather defend the Procedure of his superior Officers, than hazard
the losing of his Commission? And will he not be ready to declare his
Abhorrence of that traitorous Position of taking up Arms against the King, or
any commissionated by him? What Commissioner of the Customs or Excise is there
that will not rather give the Court a Vote than lose his Commission? Or which
of my Domestics will be so bold as to vote against me in Parliament? And
therefore I am resolved never to part with my Privilege of having those who
depend upon me chosen for Parliament Men, that being the most effectual and
least obnoxious Method that can be taken to render my self Absolute; for they
are at the same time the Representatives of the Country, and my Pensioners and
Servants: and so long as they have vendible Souls, and have most from me, I
need not doubt of their being on my side: and when others who are hungry
perceive their Fellows to be not only treated with Money, but also at good
Tables on the Charge of the Court, it will make them willing to take the same
Measures, that they may enjoy the same Advantages. And in the next place I
shall take care to have the Sheriffs modeled to my purpose, and then they will
determine the double Elections as I would have them: And if the injured
Fanatic or Republican complain of the Sheriff, yet the Majority of the Judges
can easily vacate his Fine. By this Means those of my Party will always know
their own Strength in the House; so that the Intrenchments made upon the People
will be judged the Affection of the Parliament Men to the Crown, and not be
charged on my aspiring Humor or Ambition. And I know that a Parliament of such
a Constitution will rather do any thing than hazard my Displeasure; and not
dare to impeach any Man, because they know their own Guilt: and so those who
are my Tools for promoting the Catholic Religion and Arbitrary Government,
shall pass unpunished. But that the Nation may not perceive my Intrigue, and
thereupon grow tumultuous, the Commons shall have leave now and then to talk of
Grievances, and also to name those who are the Instruments of them; but if they
exceed their Bounds, they shall be kicked from one Adjournment to another,
chastised by Prorogations, and Abatements of their Pensions, and kept in
obedience by Threatenings of Dissolution. I have already some Experience of the
good Effects of these Methods, for now they have voted me double that Sum for
building of Ships that they thought sufficient last Sessions, and continued the
double Excise upon Beer and Ale; and have taken care to make the Nation have a
good Opinion of their being still a legal Parliament, when so great a Number of
the Gentry of the Nation are appointed Collectors of the Money which they have
given.

CHAP. LIX. On the Commons throwing out the Bill, entitled, An Act for
securing the Protestant Religion: and another for the more effectual Convicting
and Prosecution of Popish Recusants.
BY committing the factious Lords to the Tower, my Designs run on more smoothly
in the Upper House, insomuch that those Bills passed them without any
Opposition; but they have not had the same Acceptance amongst the Commons, who
have thrown out the first after once reading, and the second in the same
manner, with a Note of Disgrace, as being contradictory to its own Title. I
perceive that the Commons, though they don't love their Religion for Religion
sake, yet they have no mind to part with it because of their Interest; for if
Popery were introduced, Arbitrary Government would find its way more easy, and
then they could neither be assured of their Places nor Pensions, so that I must
contrive some new Method. But were I as happy in the Church-of- England-Laity
as I am in their Clergy, there would be no need of such Precaution; which makes
me smile at the Apology of the Commons, who are so very careful about the
Credit of their Bishops, tho they don't look upon their Concurrence with those
Bills to be any way hurtful to their Reputation. By this Method they diminish
the Authority of their Church, and exalt their own Wisdom above that of their
spiritual Fathers, whom they believe to be appointed by Divine Right to oversee
and take care of the Affairs of the Church. Nor can the Weakness of their
Apology pass without a Remark, that they should think it worth while to excuse
them, as not being the Contrivers and Promoters; and yet own that they did not
oppose those Bills; nay, they plainly confess that some of the Bishops were of
the Cabal that hatched them. Certainly it can never be safe to entrust one's
self in that Church which owns that her Guides are blind, or to commit one's
Conscience to the Direction of such as don't know how to direct their own. But
if the Commons had hit upon the true Reason of the Concurrence of their
Bishops, they would find it to have been because the Mitres and Ceremonies,
which is all that they mean by their Church, would be sufficiently secured;
though Popery were established; and they being in present Possession, might
merit a Continuance by promoting the Catholic Interest underhand. Nor can I
believe that the Commons don't perceive this, seeing the Bishops advance such
Clergymen daily who incline mightily to the Church of Rome in the Doctrine of
Justification, which Luther their great Patron owned to be Articulus stantis
and cadentis Ecclesiae; and yet they will not admit of one Man to enjoy a
Benefice, who does not accept of Episcopal Ordination, and conforms to the
Ceremonies, whence it is manifest and apparent that by these they understand the
Church. And the Commons themselves, though they seem now to differ a little
from the Bishops, yet make use of this Distinction to keep all but those of
their own Communion out of any Public Employments: And I am apt to think, that
could they but secure their own Interest in a Change, as well as the Bishops
can do theirs, they would never make so much to do in opposing Popery, which I
am convinced by my own Experience is a Religion best suited of any to such as
would live in those Enjoyments which Precisians call carnal Delights; and that
the greatest part of the Members are such, I have reason to know, for I am sure
it has and does daily cost me Money. And hence I conclude that it does not
proceed from any Religious Principle that the present House of Commons do seem
more opposite to have a Popish King than the Bishops.

CHAP. LX. On the Address of the Commons concerning the Danger from the Power
of France, and their Progress in the Netherlands: His Majesty's Answer. Its not
being thought satisfactory by the Commons, who presented a second, to which his
Majesty delayed giving Answer; and the Cause why. His demanding of Money when
he did answer. Their giving 200000 l. and Adjournment, with the Cause of it.
MY Subjects are now upon another Scent; and from the Affairs of their Religion
and Property at home, are come to consider of the State of Affairs abroad. I
could be very glad that they should have forborne any such Motion, but shall
take proper Methods to render it ineffectual. The Phanaticks and
Commonwealth's-men do still foment Jealousies; and having put Checks upon my
Designs at home, they are now for curbing my Allies beyond Sea, and putting a
stop to the French Conquests. The Netherlands being looked upon as the natural
Barrier of England, I must not positively refuse to assist them, but shall form
such plausible Pretexts as will excuse my Delay. And in the mean time, though I
cannot go on with my part of the Design, the French King may go on with his.
However, I have promised them to use all Means in my Power for the Safety of my
Kingdoms; but that does not satisfy, and therefore they presented me with
another Address, wherein they not only petition as becomes Subjects, but boldly
direct, as if they were Masters; by which they do manifestly entrench upon my
Power of making Peace and War. By proffering to assist me to the uttermost
against France, no doubt they think they have acquitted themselves bravely,
though it is no more than what in Duty they are bound to do, let me be engaged
in what War I please. But seeing they press so much for my making of Alliances
with the Dutch, etc. and to make an actual War with France, I must give my
Friends Instructions to argue against it in the House, from the Inconveniences
which may attend it; as the seizing of our Ships and Effects by the French,
which will afford them a Million to carry on the War; that they will ruin our
Plantations abroad, disturb our Trade by their Capers; that they are better
provided both of Ships and Ammunition than we; that if we should engage in a
War with the Dutch, they would slip the Collar by a separate Peace; and that
it is not possible to make any firm Alliance with those of such different
Principles and Interest as the Emperor and Princes of Germany. But I find that
the other Party are not so easy to be put off: They pretend not to press me to
make War, but to make Leagues to prevent War; that now is the critical Season
to prevent the growing Greatness of France; that the same Inconveniences will
happen as to our Trade, if the War be not begun till three or four Years hence;
that we may as well defend our Plantations and Sea-Trade as the Dutch can do
theirs; that it is the Effect of the Maladministration of this Reign, that the
French are stronger by Sea than we; that the Dutch and German Princes will be
as firm in their League with us, as they are in that with one another; and that
the Dutch would assist us in such things for our Fleet as we were defective in;
that the want of a Trade with France would rather be an Advantage than
otherwise to the Nation, because their imported Goods, which we could live
without, do exceed what we export to their Country a Million per annum; and
that my selling of Dunkirk, and making War on the Dutch in 1665. has
contributed to their overgrown Greatness; and abundance of such seditious
Reflections. However, I testify my Contempt of them by a profound Silence,
until I find a convenient time; and mean while, by the Interest of my
Pensioners and Servants in the House, I have got some Money to further my
Designs, according to my Demand.

My Fate is chequered with Variety of Fortune: The Success of the French
against the Netherlands, where they have taken some Towns, and defeated the
Prince of Orange, will embolden me to carry it with the more Authority against
my refractory Subjects, and give a plausible Pretense for demanding more Money,
else I cannot be in a condition to defend them against such a powerful Enemy.
And whereas they may alledg that the 200000 l. which they have lately given, is
enough to supply my present Occasions until such time as they meet again, I can
answer, that that Sum is otherwise applied: so that the Country shall not be
able to see into the true Reason of their Adjournment at this Juncture, but
will probably be induced to believe that it is because of their having denied
me Money; and during their Recess I shall have leisure to entertain the spendid
Embassy which is coming hither from my Brother of France, and concert such
Measures as may either render all such factious Divans, as Parliaments, wholly
useless, or at least order it so as I shall not be so much subject to their
capricious Humors: but by this seeming Difference betwixt them and me, the
Nation will be brought to have a good Opinion of this present House of Commons,
who will thereby have the better Opportunity to gratify me, and deserve their
Pensions; and therefore I made a Demand of 600000 l. which I knew they could
not grant, that they might have an occasion of refusing it, and at the same
time afford me one of adjourning them with a plausible Pretext.

CHAP. LXI. Upon the Duke of Crequis's arriving from France with a great Train,
and meeting his Majesty at New Market. The Affairs treated of there. The
meeting of the Parliament again. Their insisting upon a League with Holland;
and his Majesty's Answer.
HAving adjourned the Parliament, I must now make ready to meet the French
Embassy; and London being a Place where there are too many Spies upon my
Actions, I design to choose New Market as the fitter Place; there we may confer
with more Freedom and Security, and adjust Matters better to our Mind. I know
that my mutinous Subjects will load this Conference with many aggravating
Reflections; but if I can carry my Point, I shall not value that. My Brother of
France I know will plead for the Continuance of my Subjects in his Service,
because they have not a little contributed to the Glory of his Arms: and he
will also insist on the Abolition of all Claims on the account of the Prizes
which his Subjects have made of mine, and other things of that Nature, which
shall be granted according as I find him liberal in his Supplies of Money.
Those Demands, especially the latter, are fit to be made, that the private
Agreement betwixt him and my self may be concealed: and for the other, it must
also be regulated by my own Interest, and that of the Design which we carry on
in conjunction; for by a firm Union betwixt us, we shall add Strength to our
common Endeavors, and may in time bring things to a happy Conclusion: But
seeing I have no Reason to despair of effecting my part by a Form of Law,
considering what Party I have in both Houses, I will prepare to entertain the
next Session of Parliament, and contrive Arguments to make them liberal of
their Fellow Subjects Purses, which will be the most effectual Method that I
can think of to accelerate my Designs.

The Parliament being now met, I have renewed my Demands of Money, because they
alledg that it was not according to the Methods and Rules of Parliament for
them to grant me any more at the Close of the last Sessions, when the House was
so thin: but that Objection being vacated by their meeting now in a full Body,
it might have been thought that they should have fallen upon the Money of
Course; but instead of that they insist again upon an Alliance with Holland, as
the only mean of withstanding the French: By which I perceive that the
Phanatical Jealousies gain ground; they are not satisfied to have me declare
War my self, but they would yoke me with the Dutch, who will be sure to inspect
my Conduct severely, and then I must act against France in good earnest. I find
that all the Objections that I can make, as that such a League would alarm the
French, if imparted before made; and that such things are of great Consequence,
and require time to be concerted, are easily seen through; and the Commons
having taken Umbrage from the extraordinary French Embassy, alledg that my
Brother of France and I understand one another's Minds: Wherefore I find it
necessary to send for the House, and in a public Speech assure them, on my
Royal Word, that my calling them together was not only a Design to get Money,
as some do insinuate; and tell them positively, that I will neither hazard my
own Safety nor theirs, by declaring against France, or leaguing with the Dutch,
till they supply me with Money to act and speak as I should; and that therefore
it will be their Fault and not mine, if their Security be not provided for. By
this means I shall amuse the Public, and prevent the general Disgust of the
Nation. And if I can but preserve my Honor with the People, I shall despise
the Reflections of particular Men; for herein I think Saul acted truly like a
Monarch, that though Samuel had denounced the Anger of God against him for
disobeying his Commands, he was not in the least solicitous about that, but
prayed that the Prophet would honor him before the People: he took care of his
Concerns for this Life, let it fare with him as it would for what was to come.
But to what I say my self, my Friends shall have Instructions to add, the Right
of making Peace and War is in me alone; that if they withold Money, I will
neither declare War, nor make Leagues; that I have already exhausted my own
Treasury in rigging out 44 Ships of War to preserve their Trade, and convoy the
Merchants, and yet the City of London is so ungrateful as to refuse me Credit
for 200000 l. and therefore if my People perish, it is their own Fault. Those
Suggestions will be readily imbibed, and diligently improved by the Courtiers
and Clergy, and then let my Enemies insist as much as they please upon the
Necessity of shutting the Door toward France, else our Treasure and Trade will
creep out, and their Religion and Tyranny creep in: I am sure to have the
Advantage of them when my Dictates shall be delivered from the Pulpits once per
Week, as the Oracles of Heaven. And thus I shall make void all their Efforts
for lessening the Power of France, which I perceive they dread, as carrying
with it the Bane of their Heresy and Republican Principles; and therefore it is
as necessary for my Design, that the Power of the French King be kept up, as it
is necessary for theirs that it should be brought low.

I am unhappy, that notwithstanding of all my Pensions an Address for an
Alliance with the States, etc. should be carried in the House, and have but two
Negatives against it, especially considering that they alledg it to be
unprecedented to grant any Money till the Wars and Alliances for which they are
demanded be signified in Parliament; which plainly implies their Distrust of
me, that though I should have the Money, yet I would not answer their Address;
which is so mischievously composed, and so strongly backed with popular
Reasons, that it seems to be calculated for possessing the Subjects that I
would never suffer the French King to increase his Strength so much, to the
manifest Hazard of my Kingdoms, if I were not engaged in the same Design with
him. I do also perceive that the Allegations of my Friends in the House, of
their intrenching upon my Prerogative, by directing me with whom to make
Alliances, is nothing regarded, but their Practice defended by former
Precedents of Parliaments, who have not only advised to Alliances, but also
confirmed them, as in the Reigns of Edward III. Richard II. and Henry V. etc.
And though my Pensioners were more serviceable in voting against the Manner and
Words of the Address, than formerly that there should be one, yet they are
worsted by a considerable Majority; so unhappy is it for a King to depend upon
the Humor of his Subjects, which is as unconstant as the Waves of the Sea, and
liable to the Tossings of every Wind; for however complaisant they have
formerly been, yet now they are all on a fire again about Popery and France: So
that I find my self under a Necessity of cooling them by an Adjournment, and
checking them by a severe Speech for intrenching on my Prerogative of making
Peace and War, in such an unprecedented manner, while King and Parliament were
not at mutual Enmity. By which they would seem to claim a Privilege not only of
directing me what Alliances to make, but also to insinuate, that it were not in
my Power to make any without their leave; so that I shall be looked on by
Foreigners as a King merely in Title. I shall also take care that their
Proceedings shall not dare to appear in print. Whereas my Speech shall
publicly proclaim their Disloyalty; and the Speaker being made to my purpose,
I shall hinder the Commons from debating the Adjournment, or diving into the
Intrigues of the Court; for if ever they begin to meddle in it, he shall have
Orders to quit the Chair; by which the House must break up of Course: and then
the French shall have liberty to pursue their Conquests without Interruption by
the Clamours of my Heretical Parliament; who, as also those that they
represent, shall be duly chastis'd in time convenient.

CHAP. LXII. Upon the Prince of Orange's Arrival at Whitehall, and Marriage
with the Lady Mary, eldest Daughter to the Duke of York. The Address of the
Commons thereupon; and their insisting upon the Alliance with the Dutch, and
War against France.
THe safest and most secure way of ridding ones self of an Enemy, is to smite
them under the fifth Rib, while they embrace them on pretense of Kindness. And
as Charles the IXth of France, and Queen Katherine, contrived the Destruction
of the Protestants under the Covert of a Marriage with their Chief the King of
Navar, I may carry on the like Design by matching my Niece with the Prince of
Orange. Saul gave his Daughter Michal to David to be a Snare to him: Nor is it
out of any Kindness to my Nephew the Prince of Orange, that I do now marry him
upon my Niece. He has not hitherto behaved himself so like a dutiful Nephew,
as to deserve such a Favor, having not only been the chief Support of the War
against the French, but encouraged the Dutch boldly in their Wars against my
self. But it may be this Match may take him off, or at least will afford me an
Opportunity of attempting it with more Vigor and Frequency than hitherto.
However, let the Success as to that be what it will, this Advantage I am sure
of reaping from it, that my Protestant Subjects will be thereby pleased; and
their Jealousies, as to my Design of introducing Popery and Arbitrary
Government, abated: so that being the less suspected, I shall go on with the
more Success, and forward my Purpose. My Parliament, I perceive, are pleased
with this Alliance, and have therefore ordered me an Address of Thanks; yet
their Fears and Jealousies are not so much quieted, as to leave me at freedom
from their Solicitations, but still they insist on my not admitting any Treaty
of Peace, by which the French may be left in possession of any thing that they
have taken since the Pyrenaean Treaty; and confine their Promises of Support to
my making a War with France. How happy are unlimited Monarchs, whose Will is
their Law, and whom their Subjects dare not control? but my Stars have not yet
blessed me with any such Influences. I cannot imagine how this phanatical
discontented Humor has got so much the Ascendant of this, which was once a
Loyal Parliament; or that my Pensioners and Friends should come so far short of
their wonted Devoirs: Perhaps the late Checks which they have met with by my
Speech and Adjournments, have given them some Umbrage to suspect that they are
not long-lived; and therefore they would now endeavor to recover their Credit
with the Country: They discovered before, by the Motions which some of my
Friends made of impowering me to raise what Money I pleased upon extraordinary
Occasions, that I was grown weary of Parliaments themselves, and that my Bounty
to them would cease with their Usefulness to me, and therefore are taking care
to make their Fortunes another way; and so run out violently for a War with
France. I must humor them a little to further my own Ends, and pretend to be
for such a War, that I may once get their Money, and then I can lay it out
which way I please. I shall also make an Advantage of it another way, by
obliging the French King to open his Coffers, on pretense that I must otherwise
comply with my Parliament. And by this Means I shall be sure to have Money one
way or other. If the Commons must be gratified with a War on France, it is but
reasonable that it should be carried on at their Expense, and therefore I will
demand no less than a Million. I know that my Pretenses of Alliances with the
Dutch, and Agreement to the Prohibition of a Trade with France, will be
irresistible Arguments to carry my Demand; and those I am resolved to improve
to the utmost.

CHAP. LXIII. On the raising of an Army, on pretense of a War with France: The
modelling of them. The sending of Duke Lauderdale to Scotland, to bring down an
Highland-Army upon those Parts of the Low-lands which were most Presbyterian.
The private Treaty with France. The Discovery of it by the Commons. Their
Address to his Majesty to dismiss the French Ambassador. Their Vote in May,
1678. That the King be desired to enter into Alliance with the Emperor, King of
Spain, and Princes of Germany. His Majesty's Answer. Their second Address
against Duke Lauderdale and other Ministers; and Vote to give no Money till
they were secured from Popery and Arbitrary Government. The Treaty of Nimeguen,
and the Behavior of his Majesty's Plenipotentiaries there.
THE Parliament having given Money; it remains for me to improve it: and that
they may be induced to believe that it shall be applied to the Ends for which
it was given, an Army shall be raised, but such as I hope will put me in a
Condition, that I shall stand in no more need of Parliamentary Supplies. The
principal Posts in Church and State are already so well filled with Persons
suited to my Designs, that I can scarcely have better. And now I must take care
to model the Army; to have most of the Soldiers, if possible, composed of such
Men as are either Catholics, or but Protestants in Name; and the Officers, in
like manner, either altogether Catholics, or such who by taking the Test to
qualify them for their Office, may nevertheless advance the Catholic Cause:
for which Reason I am happy in the Constitution of the Church of England, it
being so framed, that moderate Catholics may easily comply with it. The Army
being formed, my next Care must be how to get them paid, for the Money granted
by the Parliament will quickly be consumed upon them and my necessary
Pleasures: and therefore seeing the French King and Catholics press me to the
furtherance of their respective Designs, it is highly reasonable that the same
should be carried on with their own Money. I having done my part in being at
the Expense of raising an Army, they are obliged to maintain them: and if to
the 300000 l. per annum, which the French King is obliged to pay toward it,
the Conclave of Rome, and the Catholics in England, will contribute their
Shares, the Work will be done, and I shall no more stand in need of such
tumultuous Divans as Parliaments, who instead of granting me Money, which is
their only Province, do dive into my Counsels, and obstruct my Measures. It
will render me obnoxious to Discovery and Censure, to keep a Correspondence
with France and Rome in my own Person, and therefore I think it advisable to
do it by my Brother, who can better keep the Pope and Cardinal Howard to their
Promise than I can do: and if the Business should happen to be perceived, he
being a Subject can easily make his Escape, and retire a while till I weather
out the Storm.

That I may prevent as much as in me lies all Impediments of what Nature
soever, I have also taken care to put Scotland out of a Condition to oppose me,
as remembering very well that the Presbyterians of that Nation were the first
who made head against my Father; and therefore I have consumed the Substance of
the richest and most phanatical part of the Kingdom, by bringing down an Army
of Popish Highlanders to take Free Quarter upon them; for which the frequent
and numerous Meetings of the Presbyterians has furnished me with a Pretense, I
having taken such Methods, that either they should have no Meetings at all for
hearing Sermons by their own Ministers, or be obliged to meet in the Fields,
and not in Safety there neither, except they put themselves in a Posture of
Defense; and if they do that, I carry my Point, and have a fair Opportunity of
charging them with Rebellion, and taking my Measures against them accordingly.
I am also secure as to the meeting with any Obstruction from Ireland, having
indulged the Papists in that Kingdom so far as they have got the Ascendant, and
put such Men in all Places of Power and Trust as are sincere and cordial for my
Designs: so that I had no Reason to despair of bringing things to a good Issue,
if the Influences of my Stars, which are always malignant, had not discovered
my private Treaty with France, and raised a new Ferment of Jealousy amongst the
Commons, who upbraid the Court for want of Sincerity; that at the very time
when they talk of an actual War, they should enter into secret Treaties with
their Enemies. And hence I am importuned by another seditious Address, that I
should immediately proclaim and declare War against the French King, recall my
Ambassador from his Court, and dismiss his from mine. So that notwithstanding
of the severe Check which I gave them by my Speech the last time that they
presumed to give me such Directions, they persist still in the same Method. And
to expose me to my Subjects, in revenge of my having exposed them formerly in
the Gazette for their Disobedience, they have publicly declared that they have
a Bill ready to assist me with Money if once I declare War, which they solicit
me to undertake, that the French King may be so reduced as to be no longer
terrible to my Subjects. And lest the People should not take notice of this
Address, they have voted another, wherein they press, that I may be desired to
enter into an Alliance with the Emperor, King of Spain, and Princes of Germany,
and the Dutch. Heu quantum mutatus ab illo! What Difference is there betwixt a
King newly enthroned or restored, and one who has reigned till his People are
weary of him? Who would have thought that a Parliament which has enabled me to
trample upon their Brethren the Protestant Dissenters, and punish them for
their rebellious Practices and Principles, should fall into the same Crimes
themselves for which they condemn others? What Difference is there betwixt the
Scots Presbyterian Remonstrances, and the Addresses of this Church-of-
England-House-of-Commons? Could any Fanatic libel my Administration with
greater Severity than they have done? and yet upon the account of their
opposing the same things in my Father which they themselves do now oppose in
me. How have they endeavored to load them with Reproaches, and render them
odious to all Posterity, as Enemies to Monarchy? But seeing the Case is thus, I
will pursue my own Measures; and instead of declaring open War against France,
assist them with Provision and Ammunition underhand, on pretense of supplying
the Isle of Wight, etc. And by my Interest with the Pope's Nuncio, and the
Catholic Princes concerned in the Treaty of Nimeguen, will labor to have them
accept of the French King's Proposals of Peace, and that will put an end to the
Importunity of my Parliament for declaring a War against France. But for an
Answer to their Address, they shall know that I don't value neither them nor it
so much as to answer any thing of that Nature, without the concurrent Advice of
the other House, which may perhaps throw a Bone of Contention betwixt them.

The Storm increases instead of abating; and now they address a second time to
alarm the Nation, as if they lay under imminent Dangers from the Clandestine
Practices of ill Men; and urge to have the Duke of Lauderdale removed from my
Presence; which they back with a Vote that they will give no Money till they be
secured from Popery and Arbitrary Government: a terrible Alarm from the
Representatives of a Nation, who are looked upon as the Preservers of their
Civil Liberties. I know no other way to remedy this Disaster, than by
proroguing the Parliament to allay their Heat; and in the mean time take care
to have my Proceedings justified from the Pulpits. Nor am I any happier in the
French King's Friendship, he is far from being punctual or true to his Word,
and by consequence has failed of giving me the 300000 l. per annum, which he
promised. And I have another Evidence of the Mischief that attends a King's
being obliged to his Subjects for Money; that the French King does in an
inglorious manner threaten to discover our private Treaties to the Parliament,
and to create a Rupture betwixt me and my People, if I press him too hard. Had
I the Purses and Persons of my Subjects at command, as he has his, I should as
little value his Kindness as he does mine: Or could I but have subdued those
irregular Passions which have enslaved my Soul with the Baits of sensual
Pleasure, I needed not have been obliged to him for Money. However, seeing Fate
has brought me into those Circumstances, I must do my best to get out of them
as well as I can; and order my Ambassadors at Nimeguen to retard the Peace,
that by the prospect of a War I may draw Money from the Parliament. And the
better to stop the Peace, my Plenipotentiary at Nimeguen shall have Orders to
demand the free Exercise of the Catholic Religion throughout the Dominions of
the States, which I know they will not grant; but by this Means I shall
recommend my self to the Pope's Nuncio: and the zealous Catholics, who seeing
my own Forwardness, will solicit the Pope and Conclave of Rome to give me
Assistance; and then perhaps I shall be able to carry on the Design my self,
without the French King's Concurrence, and reap all the Glory alone.

CHAP. LXIV. On his Majesty's acquainting the Parliament that there was a Peace
in agitation. His Desire to keep up his Army and Navy till it were concluded.
The Resolve of the Commons for supporting the King in the War against France,
or provide for disbanding the Army. His Majesty's Answer thereupon; and the
Commons continuing their Resolution to disband the Army, though the King
desired the contrary.
THE Treaty of Peace being no longer to be concealed, I must now acquaint my
Parliament with it; and because I know they will be for disbanding my Army upon
it, I will urge for Reasons to the contrary, the common Maxim, that it is best
treating with Sword in hand, and therefore inconvenient for me to disband my
Army, or lay up my Fleet till the Peace be fully concluded. And seeing this
cannot be done without Supplies, I must press for renewing of the additional
Excise, and making up the Defect of the Poll-Bill; for the more I have of their
Money, the less they will be able to rebel: and to render them as little
suspicious as may be of my Designs, I will offer it to their choice, either to
provide for their Subsistence till a Peace be concluded, or to furnish Money to
disband them, with an assurance that whatever ill Men may suggest, my Designs
were always levelled at the Public Good. But let me take what Measures I can,
the Jealousies of my Parliament will never be quieted; and, to my Grief, I
perceive that they smell my Designs, which are only to possess my self of their
Money, and keep up an Army to render my self absolute: They dread that the
Soldiers will rather make themselves Work than be idle; and therefore have
resolved that the Army is burdensome to the Nation; that they will support me in
maintaining a War against France, or otherwise provide for disbanding them.
Seeing they are so very hot, it is my Interest to cool them, which cannot be
better effected than by a mild Answer; and to offer them as a Reason, that
seeing hitherto the French King has only granted a Cessation, and not a Peace,
it is fit that I should continue my Fleet and Army till the latter be agreed on,
and in the mean time to press for Money for their Subsistence.

What a mischievous thing is this horrid Suspicion, which causes Men to pry
into one another's Secrets, and obliges Princes to be on their Guard against
their own Subjects! And yet though I carry it with all imaginable Secresy, it is
impossible for me to avoid being suspected, and in a great measure traced: they
whisper about, that I never raised this Army with a Design to disband them; and
being afraid that I should have Money from France to maintain them, are
resolved to furnish me wherewith to discharge them, though I have earnestly
pressed for their Continuance. And thus it is to be a Sovereign by halves.
However, it not being safe to controvert the Matter too far, I am resolved to
pass the disbanding Act, but will observe it no further than suits my Measures.
I am pretty well accustomed to Violation of Oaths, which have a degree of
Solemnity beyond mere Acts of Parliament. The Money which they give to disband
them, will serve for some time to maintain them; and then I may be otherwise
provided, or make them at least provide for themselves, and earn their Bread
before they eat it. It Is strange that I may not adventure upon that which
Oliver the Usurper did before me: He was so far from being checked by his
Parliaments, that he gave Laws to them by his Army; and why may not I attempt
the like? And though I be sworn to the contrary, yet may defend it as he did,
by Reasons of State, until such time as I arrive at that height of Power, as to
make my Will pass for a Law: But this is more easily hoped for than effected.
However, if I can handsomely weather out this Storm, it is not impossible to be
brought to pass.

CHAP. LXV. On the relieving of Mons by the Prince of Orange, with the
Assistance of the Duke of Monmouth and the English Forces. The Defeat given to
the French at that time; and their King's Complaint, that it was contrary to
his Majesty's private Articles. The concluding of the Peace: Recalling our
Forces: Quartering them in the Country. His Majesty's being in a Consult with
the Duke of York, Lord Clifford, etc. which was overheard; and the Person who
listened kicked down Stairs by the said Lord.
It Is some Comfort to have Fellows, though it be but in Affliction. The French
King, who has for a long time been on the top of the Wheel, is also liable to
be turned downward, having lately received a considerable Check by the Defeat
at Mons. This is a sensible Diminution of his Glory: But though at another time
it would have been a joyful Hearing to the Kings of England, it is not so to me
now, because it is a considerable Balk to our common Design. There is also this
mortifying Circumstance in it, that the Laurels which are pulled off from his
Head, are planted on that of the Prince of Orange; who, though my Nephew both
by Birth and Marriage, yet I cannot cordially love him, because he pursues
Measures so contrary to mine. And though I cannot but in some measure be
satisfied to hear of what may tend to the Honor of my own Child, whom I cannot
but love by the Instinct of Nature; yet I could have wished he had been
otherwise employed, and that his Valor had been signalized at this time, as
well as at others, on the contrary side. Two such promising Princes embarquing
in the Protestant Cause, may prove fatal to the Interest of Popery and Absolute
Monarchy, if they be blessed with a few more such Victories as this: and that I
must, in compliance with my own Inclinations, endeavor to hinder, lest my
stubborn Subjects should make choice of the Son to chastise the Father, as it
happened to my Predecessor King James III. of Scotland, whose rebellious States
made his Son Generalissimo against him. I am also pressed with another
Difficulty, which is how to excuse this to the French King, who upbraids me
with it as a Breach of the private Treaty, that my Son and Subjects should
fight against him: I can truly say, that neither the Duke nor they did engage
in that Action with my Consent; and that the thing is wholly owing to the
Prince of Orange, whose Conduct and Courage, I have reason to dread, will mar
all the Designs which Lewis XIV. and I have so long concerted. This Disaster
makes it necessary to conclude a Peace, and then we may contrive at leisure how
to retrieve it.

The Peace being concluded, I must recall my Forces, which now I perceive become
grievous to the Spaniards; and I hope to employ them to better purpose at home
than ever they were abroad. Let the Phanaticks murmur and belch out their
seditious Reflections upon my violating the Act for disbanding the Forces, I am
Proof against such Tongue-shot as theirs: I can find out a Pretense for keeping
them still on foot, as being necessary to overawe the French, who being now at
Peace with every body else, may reasonably be thought to have Designs against
me, as having first obliged them to the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, and now by
my Forces have contributed to bring them to a Peace. These Regiments being
brought over from Flanders, will restrain the Tumnlts which I have reason to
fear from the mutinous Humor in which my Subjects are at present; and in a
little time I can augment my Army, if I had but Money. It Is true, that in the
late Consult diverse Expedients were proposed for obtaining it, either from the
French King, the City of London, or the Parliament: But to have it from the
former can never be relied on; and if he supply me once, I am not sure that he
will do it a second time, his own ambitious Designs having carved him out Ways
enough for his Money: Neither is it safe for me to be so much obliged to him,
lest he should at some time or other improve it against me, as he did lately
threaten to discover our secret Intrigues to the Parliament, when we charged
him with being worse than his Word, and failing in the Money which he had
promised for the common Design. I know the Ambition of his Heart inclines him
to aspire to the Universal Monarchy; and therefore I must be on my Guard
against him. The Proposal of borrowing Money from the City of London I know
impracticable, they have already denied me Credit; and it is nothing but to
render my self too mean to desire Money of them again. The Project of bringing
them to it by Force were no more than what they merit, but the Consequences may
prove fatal to my Designs. The City of London being the Head of the Nation, has
a natural Influence on the whole Body Politic; and if the City be once
enraged, I must not expect to have the Kingdom long in quiet: And I have the
more reason to be cautious on this Head, because the Loss of the City was the
Loss of my Father's Life. It Is true that my Lord Clifford's Advice of declaring
my self barefaced, and out-braving all Difficulties, were a thing very
beseeming a Monarch: but my Experience is greater than his; Dulce Bellum
inexpertum, War is sweet till it be tried. Had he three Crowns to lose, as I
have, his Courage would not be so great: for he that never enjoyed the Sweets
of Life, does not know how to value them; but I have had Experience both what
it is to want and possess them. I know that this Nation, though very well
prepared by that which Phanaticks and Men of their Kidney call Profanity, is
not yet ripe enough to embrace downright Popery. The Miscarriage of the Father
may very well serve as a Warning to the Son: He fell in an Attempt less
obnoxious; and I have no great reason to hope for better Success in one which
is more displeasing. The People are very well satisfied with as much of Popery
as Queen Elizabeth left; and whoever designs to introduce more, must do it
insensibly, by promoting such Clergymen as are Well-wishers to it; bringing in
Favorers of the Roman Catholics into the University by side-Winds, and
filling all Places of Power and Trust with those who are for the Design: But it
is not safe for me to trust my self to the Conduct of such furious Men as
Clifford, who has not Prudence enough to govern himself. It can not be defended
by any sort of Politics to treat a Person who is capable of divulging an
important Secret in that manner, as he did the Gentleman who overheard us at
the door, that being the very Method to have it made public: and therefore
though for the Convenience which I should thereby reap in the Administration of
my Government, I could wish as well as he or any other, that Popery were
established; yet seeing I believe that all Religion is the Contrivance of
Politicians, I shall never hazard my own Quiet for any one sort of it. As for
the last Proposal of getting Money from the Parliament, I am resolved to try
it, and must be preparing my Arguments beforehand to move them to grant it.

CHAP. LXVI. On the Discovery of the Popish Plot in August, 1678. by Dr. Oats
and others. The Design of the Jesuits against his Majesty's Life. Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey's taking Dr. Oats his Depositions. The seizing of Coleman,
Secretary to the Duchess of York, and his Papers; and the murdering of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey thereupon.
NEver was there any Prince so much exposed to the Capricio's of Fortune as my
self: So that of all Men alive I am the least obliged to offer Incense at her
Altars. In my Youth I was expelled my Dominions by Phanaticks and Enthusiasts;
since my Restoration I have been continually perplexed by the perverse and
stubborn Humors of the Church-of- England-men, though I restored their
Discipline: and now my Life is sought after by the Roman Catholics, whom I
have so much obliged in the whole Course of my Reign, even to the hazard of my
Crown and Government. I perceive that my seeming Neutrality enrages the Bigots
of all Parties against me: And hence the Jesuits do now seek to dispatch me,
because I am not willing to follow my Lord Clifford's Advice, and go their
pace. They promise themselves undoubted Success in their Designs, considering
the French King's Power, my Brother's Zeal for their Church, and the
Constitution of my present Army: and because I am not willing to push on
further than I conceive is for my Interest, they are therefore willing to rid
themselves of me. O ungrateful and mischievous Generation! I am now convinced
that it is not without Reason that the Society of the Jesuits is hateful even to
some Catholic Countries; and that their Motto, Cavete vobis Principes, is
proper enough for them: yet such are my Circumstances, that I dare not testify
my Hatred to their Order, because of their revengeful and vindictive temper.
They who did not spare two Henry's of France, though professed Catholics, will
never spare me who am esteemed a Protestant: and therefore though I do not love
them, I dare not avow that I hate them; for they are not only to be dreaded for
their Courage but for their Conduct, which is very observable in this
Particular. They know that I have all along kept down the Phanaticks; and
therefore if they had succeeded in their Murder, would have fathered it upon
them; and for this end have, by their Interest amongst my Courtiers, got Mr.
Cleypool, Son-in-law to the late Usurper, committed to the Tower, as having had
a Design against my Person. This they did reasonably conclude would have
obtained Belief amongst the Vulgar, because of the Disgrace I put on his
Father-inlaw's Corpse, and my Severity against the whole Herd of Dissenters; and
by this means the Church of England should have been so inflamed against the
Phanaticks, that they would have done the Jesuits Work to their hand, by
ruining their Brethren, and so weakening themselves. Yet thanks to my Stars I
have escaped the Snare; and now being warned, can provide for my own Safety,
though it will be a very hard Matter to escape their Fury: Nor do I know any
better Method than by my Brother's Interest to assure them of being favorably
dealt with, and make as if I did not believe the Accusation. By this means I
shall prevent those Efforts of their Revenge which their own Preservation may
put them upon, if they think that I do really believe them guilty; for I doubt
not but my Brother and they both will be ready to capitulate with me on these
Terms, that they may enjoy my Protection against the Resentments of the Nation,
who are terribly incensed by Dr. Oates's Discovery, and the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, for taking his Depositions. Nor am I indeed any further
pleased with this Detection of the Conspiracy than as to what concerns my own
personal Danger; for my Measures were well laid to have effected what they do
so violently desire, but their Precipitance and too much Haste has spoiled all.

By Dr. Oates's Treachery to the Catholics, with whom he was engaged, it is
easy to observe that Conspiracies are dangerous, and that all Men are not to be
entrusted with Secrets of State; for let Ecclesiastics of all Persuasions
inculcate the binding Force of Oaths as much as ever they please, yet when it
comes to their own turn, they break or observe them according as their Interest
directs. The Danger of Conspiracies may be further observed from Coleman's
Conduct; Princes had need to be well assured of the Fidelity of those whom they
entrust with their Secrets. Could any Man have imagined that one in his Station
should have been so blab-tongu'd, or that he would not have been more careful
to have concealed his Papers? It Is for my Brother's Interest and mine both,
that he should suffer Death, though it is our Policy to feed him with Hopes of a
Reprieve at the Gallows, left out of Revenge for our dropping him he should
discover what he knows. And tho the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey be
barbarous, yet it is justifiable enough by Reasons of State, it is better that he
should fall, than that the Crown should be made to totter, as it must certainly
have done, if what Coleman had told him should have been publicly known: for I
could neither in Honor nor Safety have abandoned my Brother, which would both
have endangered my Throne and Reputation, it being impossible for him to have
been brought to a public Trial, without a Discovery how far I am concerned in
the Plot. However, to prevent popular Tumults, which would certainly happen if
none of those who are accused be brought to Punishment, I must seem to
countenance the Prosecution of the Plot to prevent the Peoples having any
Pretense for executing Justice themselves; which, by the great Multitude of
Swordmen that attended Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Corpse to the Grave, I may
reasonably conjecture they have Inclination enough to do. And seeing these
hotheaded Fellows who were entrusted with the Commission to kill him, had so
little Prudence as to commit the Fact within the Verge of my Consort's Palace,
it behooves me to give way to Justice against them, lest the world should think
it had been contrived at Whitehall. And the time of the Parliament's Meeting
drawing near, I must be very cautious how I take my Measures, and contrive in
what manner it is fit to accost them.

CHAP. LXVII. On his Majesty's Apology to the Parliament, October 21, 1678. for
keeping up his Army. His demanding of Money; and acquainting them with the
Plot, and Danger from Popery. The Vote of the Commons upon the Plot, and Orders
to apprehend the Earl of Powis, and four other Popish Lords. Their passing of
the Bill for raising the Militia; and his Majesty's refusing it. The Execution
of Coleman, and some other Plotters of less note.
THE Parliament being to meet, I must bethink my self of an Apology for not
disbanding my Army according to the Act. And seeing they insisted so much upon
the Preservation of Flanders, as the Barrier of this Nation, I must urge the
Necessity there was of keeping them on foot for that end, and so turn their own
Arguments against them; which will, by the Assistance of my Friends, draw a
Vail before the Peoples Eyes; and at the same time this affords me a specious
Reason for demanding Money, as having spent what they gave me last to maintain
the Army. And if this should raise Heats amongst them, as I have Reason to
think it may, I shall thence have a justifiable Pretense for proroguing them
again, as designing a manifest Invasion of the Rights of the Crown. And by this
means I shall acquit my self of my Promises to the Catholics, in preventing a
through Scrutiny into their late Plot; and give those hotheaded Bigots, who
intended my Death, a convincing Evidence, how necessary it is for them in their
present Circumstances to preserve my Life: for if I should happen to miscarry
at this Juncture, when the Kingdom is in a Ferment, on account of their
Conspiracy, it will certainly issue in the Ruin of their Affairs, and the
perpetual Exclusion of my Brother from the Throne, his Enjoyment of which is
the thing that they expect with so much Impatience.

But that I may the better screen my self from the Jealousies of the
Parliament, it is necessary that I should inform them of the Popish Plot, and
the Danger of my Person, and the Protestant Religion, if they don't fall upon
effectual means to prevent it. This cannot in Justice give any reasonable
Ground of Offense to my Friends the Catholics, seeing I only dissemble to do
them the more Service. Nor have they any greater reason to be angry at my
suffering some of the inferior sort to be cut off, and some of the chief ones
committed, it being always good Policy rather to lose a Part than hazard the
whole. This I shall take care to impart to the great ones: and so long as I
secure my Interest with them, I need not value the other.

The Commons, I perceive, are not to be diverted by a false Scent, as I did
hope they would by my Apology for continuing the Army, and new Demand of Money,
but are now very eager in pursuit of the Plot, and have voted it a damnable
Design to root out their Religion and Government, have procured Warrants to
apprehend the Earl of Powis, with the Lords Stafford, Arundel, Peter's and
Bellasis; so that I must of necessity comply with committing them to the Tower,
where I shall take care to keep them in salva, though not in arcta custodia,
and by that means save them from popular Fury. By my compliance in this I shall
the better stave off the Odium of refusing the Bill for raising the Militia,
though the Commons have voted it as necessary for their Safety. And I can
easily palliate my so doing under the Notion of a Tenderness for my
Prerogative, which being an old Plea, can never be suspected of being framed on
purpose to favor the Plot, though at the same time I have no more Cause to
repose my self on the Fidelity of the Country, than they have to entrust me
with a Standing Army. I have met with no such Encouragement of late from their
Civil Representatives in Parliament, as to make me confide in their Military
Representatives in an Army: The Militia of the Nation were never Friends to my
Father; nor do I know what reason they have for a greater Respect to the Son.
If I should gratify the Commons in this, I have reason to dread the Issue; for
having been so bold as to libel my Administration when they had no Forces to
back them, I have no reason to doubt but that they would advance a Step higher,
if they should have an Army which they could depend upon. Let them exclaim
against my Conduct, for denying to raise the Militia, though at the same time
they are encompassed with an illegal Army, as loud as they can, I am to prefer
my own Interest to their Humor, and will always value my own Prerogative and
Pleasure above the Will of my Subjects, who were born for me, and not I for
them, according to the Doctrine of their own beloved Church, which can never
stand if Popery fall: and I doubt not but their Clergy will quickly have their
Eyes open to see it; for whenever the Tide runs strong against Popery, their
Bishops decline, and Dissenters are favored: and whenever the Stream is turned
against the Phanaticks, the Mitres triumph, and Papists are encouraged: of
which my Father's Reign and mine have afforded many incontrovertible Instances;
and I doubt not but the Event will verify my having been a true Prophet.

Foul Water quenches Fire as well as that which is clean: and so the Death of
some of the meanest Plotters will satisfy the present Resentments of the
People. And thus the greatest of Cities will condemn their own Suburbs to
Destruction in case of a Siege, so they can but save the Body of the Place. The
Heathen Romans thought it their Honor to devote themselves to the Infernal
Gods to regain a Battle in hazard to be lost; and why should not the Christian
Romans follow their Example? Those ordinary Fellows who have suffered on
account of the Plot, will have more than a sufficient Compensation by a Place
in the Roman Calendar of Saints; so that they have no reason to upbraid me for
suffering the Law to take place against them; since, according to their own
Doctrine, their Martyrdom does not only merit a Release from Purgatory, but the
Enjoyment of Heaven it self: And by the sacrificing of Coleman I shall gain
this Point, that the Vulgar will think I prosecute the Plot in good earnest;
whereas at the same time I punish him for his too great Freedom of Speech, and
prevent his using the like for time to come. Nor can the Papists themselves
blame me for it, when they consider how much I am exposed in his Letters, which
discover my Intrigues with France and Rome; and that he was so much a Fool as
to have Copies of them by him.

CHAP. LXVIII. On the Bill for excluding Papists from both Houses of
Parliament; with a Clause, excepting the Duke of York. The Dissolution of the
Parliament, as prosecuting the Popish Plot. The calling of another, and
ordering the Duke of York to withdraw out of the Kingdom before they met. His
Majesty's Speech to them, and Declaration, confessing his Error in governing by
Cabals. His dissolving of his Privy Council, and choosing another; whence the
popular Members did quickly desire to be discharged.
MY Pensions and Favors have been ill bestowed, since they are useless to me
now in my greatest Strait. The Current of the House runs so strong upon the
Plot, that I must find out some Method to stem the Tide. They are now so bold
as to strike at my Brother, which is as much as if they should bid me to look
to my self. I have gained one Point by the Assistance of the Bishops and
Court-Lords, that though the Bill to prevent Catholics from sitting in
Parliament, was principally levelled against him, yet I have got a Clause added
to except him: and though it is true that this is a declaring him a Papist to
the World, yet the Reasons for my doing so outweigh the Inconveniences: for
now the Catholics will be the less pressing upon me to declare my self of
their Party; when, besides the Stratagem which I formerly used to make my
Brother declare himself, by threatening that I would sue for a Divorce, and
marry another Wise, by whom I might have Children, I have now got his Religion
declared in Parliament. But because this will rather alarm than appease the
Nation, I don't find it convenient to continue this Parliament any longer, lest
they should at last become headstrong and ungovernable: And rather than be
controlled by them, to whom I have given so much Money to so little purpose, I
had rather have my Designs checked by another, for I have but small Hopes of
having a better. But this Advantage I shall reap from the Dissolution, that it
will stop the farther Enquiry into the Popish Plot for a time, and give my
Friends the Catholics a Breathing, by which they may recover from their
Consternation, and take such Measures as are best for their Interest. At the
same time I shall have some liberty to enjoy my Pleasures, for that is the way
whither the Biass of my Soul inclines; and without dissolving this factious
Divan, I could neither have so well provided for my Brother's Safety, nor the
Desires of those charming Beauties, in whose Caresses I place my chief
Happiness; for I had rather repose my Head in Venus's Lap, than be strutting in
the Field with Mars's Helmet.

The Dissolution of the Parliament at such a Juncture, I know will render me
liable to abundance of Censures; and, amongst others, that I have done it to
stifle the Discovery of the Plot: I must therefore take such Measures as will
serve me for a Shield against this Accusation; which, together with the calling
of a new Parliament, may be an Argument for me in the Mouth of my Friends. Nor
can I think of a better Expedient than by ordering my Brother to leave the
Kingdom for a time, but with all Assurances imaginable of my inviolable
Friendship: And this, with the suffering of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murderers
to be brought to Trial, will at least blind the Eyes of the unthinking sort,
and make my Pretenses of having dissolved the Parliament on the account of
their frequent Entrenchments upon my Prerogative, the more credible.

The new Parliament being met, I laid before them my Designs to unite the Minds
of my Subjects; that in order thereunto I had excluded the Popish Lords from
the Parliament, executed several of the Plotters, and Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's
Murderers; that I had moreover disbanded as much of the Army as I had Money to
do it with, and will disband the rest when they enable me; that, to take away
all Subject of Cavil, I had discharged my Brother from my Dominions; and that I
was ready to join with them in any good Laws against Popery: and, to drive the
nail home, did plainly confess my having been formerly misled by Cabals, and
declare my Resolution of governing henceforth by the Advice of my Parliaments
and Privy Council: and, to please them further, did choose such Persons for
Members of the latter, as were known to be Zealots both for their Liberties and
Religion. By this Method I quieted the Ferment in which the Generality of
People were, and saved my self from a sudden and tumultuary Revolution; and at
the same time my Friends the Catholics had leisure to provide for themselves,
and my Brother withdrew from the impending Storm with Safety. But this I
perceive was not durable, for the popular Privy-Counsellors finding that I only
made use of them for the Credit of my Affairs, did quickly grow weary, and
desire to be dismissed: and now my new House of Commons insisting on the same
Courses which the former had taken, go on to impeach the Popish Lords in the
Tower, and have voted a Bill to disable my Brother from inheriting the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; and to make this go down the more smoothly with the
People, they assign, as the Cause of their Vote, that the Hopes of his
Succession has been the chief Cause of this Conspiracy for the Destruction of
my self, and altering the Government. By this Means they would possess the
Kingdom with Fears of unavoidable Ruin to their Liberties and Religion, if the
Duke be not excluded from succeeding to the Crown; and endeavor also to
insinuate their Loyalty in taking care for my Preservation: but I have no great
mind to trust to their Friendship; their Predecessors in 1641. were as ample in
their Protestations of Loyalty as they, and yet took up Arms by my Father's
Authority against his Person, and never made any stay till they cut off his
Head. I know my self to be much more criminal in their Sense than ever he was;
and that my Concurrence in the Popish Plot can be demonstrated with much more
Ease than ever could his Commission to the Irish Rebels: And I have no reason
to doubt but they will think that a Concurrence with the Papists, to cut off
the English Protestants, is a Crime of as heinous a Nature as that of
destroying the Irish Protestants, and will certainly decree it as severe a
Punishment; and therefore I cannot be blamed if, for my own Preservation, I
study how to give them a Diversion.

CHAP. LXX. On the French King's seizing several Places in Flanders, etc. as
depending on those which were confirmed to him by the Peace of Nimeguen. His
and the Spaniards Unkindness to the Duke of York, at that time, in the
Netherlands. The Address of the Commons to stand by his Majesty and the
Protestant Religion. Their disbanding of the Army. The Discovery of Endeavors
to make the Witnesses of the Popish Plot retract their Evidence: And the
proroguing of the Parliament upon their growing warm about the Trial of the
Popish Lords in the Tower.
THough I be unsuccessful and encumbered at home, yet my Allie the French King
is fortunate abroad; and, like a true Politician, does order his Affairs so as
to make himself a Gainer both by Peace and War: Whether he gives Obedience to
Mazarine's Dictates, as an obedient Son or tractable Scholar, I shall not
determine; but sure I am he puts his Commands in practice, and values Treaties
no more than as they conduce to his Interest. However, it is more politic for
him to seize those Towns, as granted to him by Agreement under the Notion of
Dependancies, than under any other Pretense whatsoever. And this I rejoice in,
not only as it contributes to promote the common Design, but also because I
have the Practice of so great a Monarch, as an Argument for my own Conduct; and
the Authority of so great an Ecclesiastic as Cardinal Mazarine, to justify me
in point of Principle. But however well pleased I am with this Matter, I cannot
be satisfied with his Treatment of my Brother, who is a kind of Exile for
following his Dictates, and therefore deserved kinder Entertainment at his
hand: but I smell his Design, he is unwilling that his civil Reception abroad
should extinguish his Desire of returning home, because he knows that his
Presence is necessary here to confirm the drooping Catholics, and keep Life in
his Party; for I know that he is jealous lest I should concur with my
Parliament, rather than admit of an Interruption of my Pleasures. As for the
Unkindness of the Spaniard, it is no Surprise; for whatever Goodwill they have
to the Advancement of the Catholic Interest, yet they are angry at us for
promoting that of France in opposition to theirs. And seeing the Case is so, I
am resolved that my Brother shall return home.

But I must first rid my self of this Session of Parliament; the Commons being
so much overacted with Zeal, that they have presented me with an Address,
wherein they promise to defend my Person and the Protestant Religion, and to
revenge any Violence that may be offered to me. They exclaimed formerly against
the Scots Covenant for measuring their Endeavors, to defend my Father,
according as he stood up in defense of their Religion, and now they themselves
run into the same Error, though the great Doctors of their Church pretended to
teach and believe that Loyalty was an essential Point of their Religion: for
now they join the Defense of my Person and that of the Protestant Religion
together; which is as much as to say, that if I don't concur with them in the
defense of the one, they will take no Care for the defense of the other. Then
as for the revenging of any Violence that may be offered to my Person, I know
what they aim at, but can provide for the defense of my self better than they,
or at least in a way more agreeable to my Design. The Catholics are not such
Fools as to cut me off now, for that were the way to ruin their Affairs,
seeing my Brother's Interest is not yet established; so that I have no Fears on
that Head yet. Neither have I any reason to trust their fair Promises now that
they have deprived me of the Defense of an Army which was modelled to my Mind:
Besides, it is below a Monarch to own that he needs the Defense of any one part
of his Subjects against another, when he himself is born to defend the whole.
However, I must submit to the Humor of the Multitude; and seeing I can neither
have Money from France nor them to maintain my Army, I can the more easily
dispense with having them disbanded: And by conceding this Point I shall put
some stop to the Jealousies of the Nation; and my proroguing the Parliament to
save the Popish Lords, whose Trial the Commons do so earnestly demand, will be
of so much the easier Digestion. And by this Favor to the Catholics I shall
engage them more firmly on my side; for the Interest of those Lords, whose
Preservation depends on mine, will prevent Assassinations from the Bigots of
their Party; and during the Recess of Parliament we shall have leisure to
recover our lost Ground, and find out Expedients for taking off the Evidence of
the Popish Plot that may not be so obnoxious to a Discovery as those which have
been made use of hitherto, which have rather confirmed than discredited the
Belief of the Plot.

CHAP. LXXI. On the Insurrection at Bothwell-bridg in Scotland. The sending the
Duke of Monmouth thither to suppress it, which he effected. The Execution of
several Presbyterian Ministers upon it: and the Execution of several Jesuits
for the Popish Plot; and Endeavors to stifle the same by the Meal-tub-Plot,
which proved abortive.
HAD my Subjects of the Episcopal Communion in England been as true to my
Interest as their Brethren in Scotland, my Affairs would have appeared e're now
in a better Posture. The former are nothing so steady to the Interest of
Monarchy and Episcopacy as the latter, which may easily be evinced from the
Endeavors which the English Parliaments have used both to establish Liberty to
Dissenters by a Law, and to limit the Succession and Administration of their
Kings. My Episcopal Subjects in Scotland do on the contrary, make no scruple to
put my Commands in execution, though against the Letter of the Law; and by a
just Severity upon their Brethren the Presbyterians, beyond what the Laws in
their strictest Interpretation will allow, they have procured this
Insurrection, which happened very opportunely for my Affairs. By this means I
have not only humbled the Presbyterians there, and suppressed their rebellious
Field-Conventicles, but have a plausible Pretense for making the Laws still
more severe against them; forfeiting their Estates to gratify my hungry
Courtiers; cutting off such of their Preachers as I have in my hands; and
ridding the Country of so many rebellious Fellows as I have taken Prisoners; so
that I shall be sufficiently revenged on the pestilent Heretics for the Lives
of so many of my Friends the Catholics as they have cut off on account of the
Plot, which I was obliged to give way to to prevent being suspected thereof my
self.

I shall also gain this by the Scots Insurrection, that the Duke of Monmouth,
whom I employed as General to suppress it, will be thereby rendered the less
popular amongst the Presbyterians in that Nation, and their Friends the
Dissenters and Republicans here: So that if ever he attempt to ascend the
Throne, he will find it the more difficult, or at least be made less capable of
obstructing the Design of introducing Popery, for his Zeal against which the
Faction applaud him.

I shall also make this Improvement of that Phanatical Insurrection, that it
will serve to alarm the Church of England, and convince them of the restless
Endeavors of the Dissenters to overturn their Discipline and Government, and
by consequence make them the more apt to believe the Plots which shall
henceforth be charged upon Phanaticks here to destroy the Government both in
Church and State; which will be the best Expedient that we can think on to turn
the Plot, which has been prosecuted with so much Vigor against the Papists,
upon their own Heretical Brethren the Dissenters, from whom it is much easier to
possess them with Apprehensions of Danger, than from the Catholics, because
their Interest is greater in the Nation; and that they have smarted by them
more lately than by the other: And if I can do my Catholic Friends this piece
of Service, as I have not the least reason to doubt but I shall, they may very
well dispense with my having sacrificed some of their Priests and Jesuits, that
I might with the less Suspicion advance their Cause.

I thought that my Design of burying the Popish Plot in Oblivion, by fathering
another upon the Presbyterians, could scarcely have missed taking effect,
especially when so dexterously managed by one of Dangerfield's Parts; but the
Fates are not yet propitious to my Endeavors, nor is the measure of my Crosses
entirely filled up. This Plot was sufficiently well laid; and had those Papers
which were scattered in the Phanaticks Lodgings been but happily seized,
without suspicion of any Tricks, the Presbyterian Plot would have passed for
current, for I should have been certain of having it trumpeted by the Clergy
from their Pulpits: But seeing it has proved abortive, I must take more care
for time to come; and have no reason to despair of succeeding in some Attempt
of the like nature, for I am sure of having the Clergy on my side.

CHAP. LXXII. On the dissolving of the Parliament, July 12. 1679. and calling
another against October 7. The Return of the Duke of York in the mean time; and
his being sent to Scotland. The proroguing of the Parliament after their being
chosen. The acquitting of Sir George Wakeman, and others of the Plotters, by
the then Lord Chief Justice. The burning of the Pope, etc. in effigy. The
presenting of a Petition by the Citizens for the sitting of the Parliament: and
Abhorrence of Petitions presented by others.
THIS Parliament proving refractory as well as the other, I find my self under
a necessity of dissolving them, for I am sensible that they will never be fit
for my purpose. Perhaps the dissolving of two such Parliaments successively may
prevent the choosing of another of the same stamp, and therefore I am resolved
to try the Experiment. In the mean time I can, with the more Safety, recall my
Brother; for if the Parliament be dissolved, there is none else that dare to ask
the Reason why. And if any of the Council shall dare to mutter against it,
according to the Earl of Shaftsbury's Example, they shall be certainly
discharged as well as he.

The new Parliament is of the same Complexion with the old. Whence I perceive
that the Contagion has spread so broad and wide in the Nation, that all Ranks
and Degrees of Persons are infected: But seeing my Subjects are resolved to be
cross, and choose such Men to represent them in Parliament as thwart my
Designs, I am resolved to be as cross to them, and prorogue the Parliament from
time to time: so that if they are not like to answer my Design, they shall not
have an opportunity of answering theirs, till I have taken such previous
Measures as I think fit for my purpose, and see whether I can have Money by any
other Method. For which end I will try both France and Rome; and if neither of
them answer my Ends, I shall have opportunity to attempt the buying off of some
of the leading Members: And if that should also miscarry, I will send my
Brother to Scotland, that he may be out of their way, for I am sure of his
being well entertained there by my Episcopal Council, who will order it so as
to make him seem acceptable to the whole Nation: and that will strengthen his
Party here; and at the same time such of his Friends as find themselves pressed
by the Stubbornness of the English House of Commons, may find Sanctuary there
under his Protection. I doubt nothing of the Zeal of the Scots Episcopal Party
for his Interest, because the Constitution of their Church makes them depend
wholly on the Crown; and in that my Politics proved very successful, to have a
Law for leaving the Government of their Church wholly at my Disposal. Nor do I
doubt but the particular Inclination which that Kingdom has always evidenced
to a Monarchical Government, and the singular Respect which they have hitherto
showed to Fergus's Race, will have a considerable Influence on them, to
preserve the Succession in the right Line. And during these Prorogations I
shall also have the Opportunity of making the English Clergy to my purpose; and
order it so, that my durante beneplacito Judges shall acquit such of the
Plotters as come to trial here; which will give a mighty stop to the Credit of
the Conspiracy, and be an Argument for the Nullity of the Plot from the
Pulpits, when it is evident beforehand that it is disbelieved by the Bench, for
the Color of Justice adds very much Strength to any Cause.

The extraordinary Heat of the Rabble against Popery, and such Protestants as
concur with the Measures of the Court, makes it absolutely needful for me to
keep off the Parliament as long as I can: for seeing the Mob are so insolent at
present, as not only to burn the Pope in effigy, but such also of their
Fellow-Hereticks as are addicted to my Interest, it is more than probable, that
if they were countenanced by the Authority of such Parliaments as those which I
have had of late, that their Insolence would not stop there; of which the
Petition of the Citizens for the sitting of the Parliament is no obscure
Indication: but that the Odium of hindering the Parliament to meet should not
lie wholly upon me and the Court, I have ordered it so, that a part of the
Subjects have declared their Abhorrence of such Petitions; which affords me a
plausible Argument for what I have done, seeing the Sense of the Nation, as I
shall take care to have that of my own Party esteemed to be, is against it as
well as mine: And by these Abhorrences I have ground to conceive Hopes that my
Design for engaging the Churchmen on my side has actually taken.

CHAP. LXXIII. On the Court's being disappointed of receiving Money from Rome
and France. The Meeting of the Parliament October 22, 1680. The Proceedings of
the Commons against such Justices as obstructed Petitions for the sitting of
the Parliament. The passing of the Bill of Exclusion against the Duke of York,
in the House of Commons, nemine contradicente. The rejecting of it by the
Lords. The Trial and Execution of the Lord Stafford. The impeaching of the
Judges. Their Denial of a Supply to the King. His Majesty's Message to them,
and dissolving them, because of their Obstinacy.
NO wonder that those who are avowed Enemies to my Designs should refuse me
Money, when those who are zealous for the same, and promised Assistance both by
Men and Money, do now fail me: that the Court of Rome, who compass Sea and Land
to make Proselytes, should deny Money when it is only required to propagate
their Faith, may justly seem strange; but as for the French King's doing so,
it is easy to conceive that he has been thereunto influenced by Reasons of
State. It was his Interest to create Jealousies and Discontents betwixt me and
my Subjects, not only to prevent our uniting against him, but that both of us
might fall as an easier Conquest, though it is horribly inglorious for him to
take such Methods. But why should I say thus, seeing all the great Princes that
ever aspired to the Universal Monarchy did make use of Fraud as well as Force?
However, during my Life I shall prevent his Design to cheat me of my Crown; and
if I can carry on my Work without him, as it is the more hazardous, it will be
also more glorious: and by the Divisions which have from time to time been
carefully nourished amongst my Protestant Subjects, I doubt not but in time I
may obtain my Desires without his Assistance.

The Parliament being met, they are as bad to the full as I suspected, and
tread in the same Steps with their Predecessors, and discharge their Fury upon
such of my Justices as obstructed Petitions for their sitting, and accuse them
as Betrayers of the Rights and Liberties of the People, because they witnessed
their Zeal for the Prerogatives of my Crown. Nor does their seditious Procedure
stop here, but they have unanimously voted a Bill for excluding my Brother from
the Crown, cut off the Earl of Stafford for his Accession to the Plot, and
impeach my Judges. The Fall of that Lord I must needs lament; but it is as
venial for me to let him fall a Sacrifice to popular Vengeance, as it was for
my Father to give up the Earl of Strafford to his rebellious Parliament, though
he was much more necessary to him than ever this Lord was to me. But as for the
excluding of my Brother, and impeaching of my Judges, I must never give way to
it, for that would infallibly issue in the Destruction of my self. My stubborn
Subjects have deprived me of my Army, so that I cannot establish my Authority
by the Sword; and if I suffer my self to be likewise bereft of my Judges, then
I shall be utterly disabled from carrying on my Design, either by Military
Power, or the Shadow of Law. As to the Exclusion of my Brother from succeeding
to the Crown, it can in no manner be admitted. And here I have a very good Plea
against them: The Clergy have preached up the Divine Right of a Lineal
Succession; and if that be so, I can maintain my Argument by the Laws of God;
and I doubt not but my Judges will give it out as the Laws of the Land. If I
should give way to his Exclusion, it would weaken my self, for then my Enemies
might reasonably act with the greater Boldness against me, when they should be
in no fear from my Successor to punish such a Practice.

The Lords having thrown out the Bill by the Influence of the Bishops Bench, is
enough to justify me in the Eyes of the World; for why should I consent to the
disabling of my own Brother from succeeding to me upon the account of his being
a Roman Catholic, when the Protestant Bishops, who are the ghostly Fathers of
their Church, make no Scruple to own his Right of Succession, and testify their
Hatred against the Bill? In this they have done me remarkable Service, and I
doubt not but their Example will have Influence on the Clergy. But to prevent
all Suspicion, as much as is possible, that I have any Design to re-establish
Popery, I will send them a Message, that I am ready to agree to any other
Expedients for securing them against it. And thus when I have made such
Proffers, and have the Bishops and their Clergy on my side, it will look very
presumptuous in any Party whatever, so much as to whisper a suspicious Word of
my Intentions. And if the Commons adhere tenaciously to their Bill, and refuse
to drop it, there is none who will dare to blame me if I dissolve them.

CHAP. LXXIV. On the calling of another Parliament to meet at Oxford, Febr.
1680. The seizing of Fitz-Harris with seditious Libels, designed to have been
lodged with Protestant Peers and Commons. The seditious manner of the
London-Members going to Oxford. His Majesty's Speech to the Parliament when
they met there. Their Impeachment of Fitz-Harris, and Dissolution.
THE City of London being a perfect Nest of Rebellion, it is reasonable to give
them a Mortification, by summoning the Parliament to meet elsewhere: and as
Oxford has been always signal for Loyalty, both to my Father and my self, I
will gratify that Place with the meeting of this Parliament, which will engage
the Clergy more firmly on my side, especially the young Nursery which is now a
breeding up there. And as by this Method I shall oblige my real Friends, it is
probable that it may cool the Courage of my Enemies, especially when they find
themselves at a distance from their factious Accomplices at London, and
surrounded with my Soldiers and Guards at Oxford.

It is not without some appearance of Reason that my stubborn Subjects do boast
of the Divine Care and Providence which seems to watch over their Persons,
Religion and Liberties; for not only the Plots of Catholics against them have
been discovered and baffled, but all my Designs of fastening Plots against them
upon the Government have miscarried. The Disappointment of this, which was
managed by Fitz-Harris, may be of very ill Consequence, if there be not care
taken to prevent, or at least baffle his Discovery, which he has been such a
Fool as to make now that he is taken. How unhappy have I and my Courtiers been
in the Tools that we chose to carry on our Designs: for every one of them have
not only discovered whatever they were employed in, but also who set them at
work; which incenses the Nation against the Court. But without attempting we
can never be sure of any thing; and it is some Satisfaction when we do
miscarry, to be able to say with Phaeton, Magnus tamen excidit ausis. This
Design was considerable, though not successful; for had the Plot but taken, and
those seditious Libels been found upon the Persons to whom they were intended
by the Penny-post, it would have afforded a plausible Pretext for charging them
with a Plot; and then I could have rid my self of so many dangerous Enemies by
color of Law. The Commons are sensible enough of the Importance of the Design,
and therefore have impeached Fitz-Harris, in order to have a full Discovery who
set him at work, which to be sure they would take care to publish through the
Kingdom: but by my Interest in the House of Lords I have got that Impeachment
rejected; and the Heat of the Commons in this, together with the Posture which
the London-Members came in to the Parliament at Oxford, will furnish Pretense
enough for dissolving them, it being altogether intolerable that Subjects
should put such mutinous Affronts upon their Prince, as to distinguish
themselves by Badges in their Hats, with printed Motto's upon them, to
insinuate as if I had a Design to introduce Popery and Slavery. So that I doubt
not but to make a good Improvement of this extraordinary Heat discovered by the
Citizens, and can easily make it a sufficient Groundwork to build a Plot on,
that shall not be so apt to tumble down about the Ears of the Workmen, as those
which have hitherto been attempted; for here is Overt Act plain enough. It Is not
to be supposed that the Citizens and their Members did come in this posture,
without previous Consultation: nor can it be thought that those Lords and
Commons who have so frequently complained of my Administration publicly, and
are so much incensed now at my opposing their Design of excluding my Brother,
should never have talked about those Affairs in private Cabals, and propose
Expedients to deliver themselves from that which they call Popery and Slavery,
the two things of which they are so much afraid. And if I can but prove any
such Consults or Conferences, as I need not despair of effecting it by some
false Brethren of their own, let them extenuate the matter as much as they
please, by alleging that it was no more than what was talked in Parliament,
and agreeable to the Association proposed by the Commons, according to the
Pattern of that signed in Queen Elizabeth's time, upon the account of
Jealousies of the same Nature. I say, let them make those and a hundred more
such Apologies, if I can fasten it upon them, I shall prove it a Plot, and
punish them accordingly for it. And if I succeed in this, as I have no great
reason to doubt but I shall, seeing the Judges are made to my purpose, it will
not only justify all the Measures which I have taken hitherto, but also such
Severities as I may have occasion to put in practice in time to come; for if
once I get a Protestant Plot to be believed and fixed upon those Lords and
Commons who have always been most averse to my Designs, and made the greatest
Clamor against the Court, then all that they have from time to time alleged
of my Purposes to introduce Popery and Slavery, will be looked upon as the
effect of Envy, and a mere Contrivance for the better carrying on of their
Designs to overturn the Government in Church and State. And if once I get but
some of them convicted by color of Justice, then I may charge the Design upon
the whole Party with Confidence; and I am sure to be seconded by the Pulpit and
the Bench, whose Arguments against the Phanatical Plotters will have so much
the more Weight, that the Parliament by their Influence would proceed to thwart
me in the matter of the Succession, which is unalterable by Divine Right,
notwithstanding of the fair Proffers which I made to them in my Speech, of
concurring with the Trial of the Lords in the Tower, and harkening to any
Expedients by which the Protestant Religion might be preserved, and the
Monarchy not destroyed. And seeing the Fathers of their own Church do own their
Loyalty to be an essential Part of their Religion, and Monarchy to be of Divine
Right; and that rather than break the Chain of Succession, they are content to
have a Popish King, which the other Party think so dangerous to their Religion,
I may very well be excused to value the Monarchy and Succession at least as
much as they; and I am sure that I cannot well value it higher, seeing it is
apparent that they prefer it to their Religion, as probably thinking that to be
the more disputable Point of the two. And if it be so, as I have very great
Reason to believe it is, I am the more confirmed in my Skepticism as to all
Religion; for that Monarchy is not thought to be the only Form of Government by
Divine Institution, is apparent enough, because there are so many Republics,
both Protestant and Popish, which are all of them defended as lawful
Governments, by the greatest Doctors of both Churches. But seeing the Popish
Clergy value their Religion above all sorts of Government or Governors, as
appears by their exauctorating Kings, and defending their Murder or
Dethronement when they fall off to Heresy, I have reason to conclude that they
are the more serious of the two; and with the other Arguments which they urge
as the Antiquity, Universality, and Infallibility of their Church, this is to
me a strong Presumption that their Religion is the truest of the two, seeing it
has evidently more Influence upon its Followers, of which it has also the
greatest Number, and amongst those a great many Men of undeniable Learning and
Parts.

CHAP. LXXV. On his Majesty's Declaration that the Duke of Monmouth was not
lawfully begotten.
HEre I find a mighty Struggle of Nature against declaring my Son illegitimate;
but seeing I have got over those things which foolish Bigots reckon Divine, why
should I stand upon that which is merely humane? It Is known to the World that I
have violated those Oaths which I made to God, then why should I scruple to
deny that I was ever under a Matrimonial Vow to any Woman but Queen Catharine?
I had rather be esteemed wicked than weak, and have it said, that I was
unchaste than foolish, as every one will conclude me to have been in doing as
much as in me lay to sacrifice the Interest of my Crown to an impotent Passion,
for a handsome Woman; and that for the Satisfaction of my present Desires I
should have hazarded a Deprivation of all my future Dignities, by contracting
such a mean Alliance as would not have excited the Compassion, but exposed me
to the Contempt of other Sovereign Princes. It Is true, my Brother James may,
for one reason, justly condemn me in his Heart, because I would not let him
disown his Match upon the Foresight of my Restoration, though in strictness he
has no Reason, seeing our Circumstances do so much differ. His Father-in-law
would have resented such an Injury to the utter Disappointment of my Return, if
I should have contenanc'd him in that Design; but there is no such hazard in my
Case now. And if he should have any hard Thoughts of me upon that account, he is
very ungrateful, seeing it is chiefly for his sake that I do it, though at the
same time I have also a Prospect to the Merit, which according to the Roman
Doctrine attends such Actions as are done for the Advancement of the Catholic
Church, that in case there be any such thing as a future Reward for such good
Deeds, I may by this Means insure it; and at the same time I revenge my self on
this undutiful Son, for associating himself with those who are my Enemies, and
have all along opposed my Designs. Private Men do many times disinherit their
Children upon Disgusts, and why should not a Monarch have the same Liberty? My
great Grandmother, Mary Queen of Scots, declared her Son, my Grandfather, a
Bastard, to prevent his succeeding her, because he was educated in the
Protestant Religion; and she being enregistred as a Saint in the Roman
Calendar, it can be no Crime to follow her Example.

This Procedure may be also justified from Reasons of State; seeing he is
become so popular amongst those who are Enemies to my Government, they may
perhaps take upon them to make him Head of a Rebellion against me, and think to
justify themselves by his Right of Succession, and the Interest which he has to
preserve the Nation upon its true Basis: So that the most effectual way to give
a Check to any such Designs, which I have Reason from his Circular Journies
into the Country to suspect may be in embrio, is to declare him illegitimate,
which will lessen his Reputation, seeing it will easily obtain Belief, that I
would not declare him illigitimate, if it were not so, merely for the Credit of
my younger Days, when I professed so much Piety, that I may not be thought to
have acted the Hypocrite from my Cradle.

CHAP. LXXVI. On the Protestant Plot. The Trial and Execution of Stephen
College. The Commitment of the Lord Howard of Escrick, and the Earl of
Shaftsbury, with his Trial and Acquitment. The Quo Warranto against the Charter
of London, and other Corporations. The imposing of Sheriffs upon the City of
London. The Commitment of Sir Thomas Pilkington and Mr. Shute, then Sheriffs,
for opposing it. The calling of a Parliament in Scotland, where the Duke of
York represented his Majesty, as Commissioner. The Test enacted there; and the
Act for settling the Succession upon the Duke. The Trial and Condemnation of
the Earl of Argile, for explaining the Test; and his Escape.
THE Parliament being now dissolved, and I by Consequence at liberty from such
an impertinent Check, it is convenient for me to carry on my Designs with all
imaginable Vigor; and having found an opportunity against one of the Faction,
who was a talkative meddling Fellow, I am resolved to have him tried for
High Treason at Oxford, seeing the London-Jury have acquitted him. Let the
Faction complain of its being contrary to Law, and what else they please, it is
for my Interest that he should be cut off, to be a Terror to others, and gain
Belief to the Plot: Oxford being a Place of noted Loyalty, I doubt not of
having him found guilty there, seeing I have Evidences enough ready, who will
swear treasonable Words against him; and he being once convicted, it will not
only reflect upon all the rest who attended the London-Members to Oxford, but
upon the Members themselves, and the whole Party of Lords and Commons that
countenanced the Bill of Exclusion. And I am certain of this Advantage against
all of them, that the Church of England will be their Enemies, because of the
Favor and Inclination which they have evidenced to Dissenters. And when
College shall be condemned by due Forms of Law, it will reflect upon the
Sheriffs of London for having picked such a Jury as acquitted him.

Having begun with Stephen College, and been successful in my Endeavors, I am
now resolved on higher Game, and therefore have caused the Earl of Shaftsbury,
and the Lord Howard, to be seized as Ringleaders of the Faction. It Is true
that I could not promise my self such Success in London as I had in Oxford; but
however in attempting it I have gained thus much, that of the Crimes wherewith
the Earl of Shaftsbury was charged, some will be believed; and his being
acquitted in London will furnish me with farther ground of Quarrel against the
City, and countenance my Quo Warranto against their Charter, as to which I am
sure of the Sentence of the Judges: And if I could once but humble that Source
of Rebellion, it would render the rest of my Work easy throughout the Nation:
And if the Charters of Corporations were once in my possession, I shall be able
to choose what Men I please to represent them in Parliaments, which will be no
small Advantage to my Designs. It is indeed a very bold and daring Attempt; but
finding that hitherto my Proceedings have met with no Opposition by way of
Arms, I have the more Encouragement to go on, especially seeing I have got the
Church on my side, who are happily alarmed with the Insinuations of their own
Danger from the opposite Party: so that I doubt not of bringing this Affair to
a happy Conclusion, by letting the hungry Church-of- England-Justices loose
upon the Dissenters Estates, and giving those of Doctors-Commons a full Power
over their Consciences and Purses; by which means the Party will easily be
prevailed on to believe that my seizing of the Charters is only designed to
exclude Dissenters from bearing any share in the Magistracy of the Nation, or
assisting in the choice of Parliament Men: so that if once I get a House of
Commons modelled to my mind, I can easily make my party good in the House of
Lords; and then I or my Successors may effectuate, by the Peoples seeming
Consent, what hitherto we have not been able to accomplish. The City of London
having behaved it self so rebelliously, I am resolved to be further revenged
upon them, and to deprive them of their liberty of choosing Sheriffs, for
opposing me, in which some of the most Factious are already committed: And
because the Herd of Phanaticks did unanimously concur with them, I shall take
care to have them duly prosecuted and punished according as their Merits
require.

My Episcopal Subjects in Scotland have acted their part, and evidenced a
Loyalty without any Reserve, having dispensed with my Brother's not taking of
the Oath which was incumbent on him, as Commissioner, and settled the
Succession without any Scruple: They have, however, enacted a Test for the
Security of their Religion, which I can easily assent to, for pleasing of the
Rabble, and furnishing the Episcopal Party an Answer to the Reproaches of their
Brethren the Phanaticks, who alledg that they have no Zeal for the Religion
which they profess. But though I am very well satisfied with my Friends
Loyalty, yet in truth I cannot commend their Policy, that they should not have
taken more care to avoid such plain Contradictions in their Test, as furnish
Objections against it, not only to the Phanaticks, but also to many of their
own Party. It Is true, they are the more excusable, that herein they were
outwitted by some of the opposite Faction; who, though they had a hand in the
framing it, refuse it themselves: but I took care to have had the Earl of
Argile beheaded for his Behavior in that Affair; whereby I should not only
have punished him for his own and his Father's former Rebellions, but have also
deprived the opposite Faction of a Head, but the cross Fates have decreed his
Escape: Yet I am so much a Gainer by the Affair, that his forfeited Estate will
reward some of my zealous Friends, and his Sentence will terrify the rest of my
Enemies, as it has pleased my Church-of- England Zealots, because of his
Inclination to the Scottish Kirk. This Behavior of the Parliament and Church of
Scotland will mightily strengthen my Friends of the Church of England in their
espousing mine and my Brother's Cause, which will not a little contribute to
the running down of the Dissenters, our irreconcilable Enemies in both Nations.

CHAP. LXXVII. On the finding of my Lord Gray, Alderman Cornish, and other
Citizens, guilty of a Riot, for countenancing the Election of the
City-Magistrates. The Discovery of the Conspiracy to assassinate his Majesty
and the Duke of York at Ry-house; and the Council of six to manage the Plot:
Whereupon my Lord Russel, Algernon Sidney, etc. were cut off. The Earl of
Essex's being murdered in the Tower. The Trial and Sentence of Mr. Speak and
Mr. Braddon, for endeavoring a Discovery thereof. The Continuance of the
Surrender of Charters, etc.
THE Citizens, I perceive, continue still tumultuous, and are mighty tenacious
in asserting the Right of choosing their Magistrates, though there is a Quo
Warranto against their Charter. It is therefore my Interest to punish those who
encourage them, that for time to come they may be deterred from such Practices;
and therefore I shall order it so that my Lord Gray, Alderman Cornish, and such
other noted Citizens as countenance their Proceedings, shall be indicted as
Rioters; and I doubt not of having them found guilty accordingly: which will
both reflect upon their Credit, and affect their Estates.

But all this while I play at nothing but small game; and this way of proving
Plots by Consequence and Inferences is not so satisfactory to the Public: for
the Faction evades them, by alleging that all those things with which they are
charged amount to no more than a zealous Appearance for their Liberties, to
which they have a Right by Law; so that I must find out a Method to charge
their Ringleaders with something of a more heinous Nature, that may appear
odious in the Eyes of the World; and not only render the Persons, but the Cause
also hateful: By which means I shall be justified in cutting off the Chief of
the Faction, as the Lord Russel, Algernon Sidney, etc. and afford a plausible
Pretext for committing the Earl of Essex and others. But seeing it will be
looked upon as improbable that such Persons as the Duke of Monmouth, Earl of
Essex, Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, Mr. Hambden, etc. should be concerned in
any mean or base Design against my Life, or my Brother's, by way of
Assassination, I have taken order that the Plot shall consist of two Parts,
viz. one of levying War against me to overturn the Government in Church and
State, whereof those great Men abovenamed shall be given out as the Managers;
which as it will justify the Reasonableness of my having declared the Duke of
Monmouth illegitimate, so it will be the more readily believed that he is
engaged in such a Design to revenge that Affront. The other part of the Plot,
which shall be given out as a Design to have assassinated my self and the Duke
of York, I have, by the Advice of some of my Confidents, laid it so as to have
it charged upon meaner Persons, as Walcott, Rumbold, etc. And being provided
with the Lord Howard of Escrick, and other Evidences fit for my purpose, the
Matter shall be sworn boldly home. And thus shall I revenge my self on those
Men who have appeared with so much Zeal against me and my Brother, and rid our
selves of such dangerous Enemies. And at the same time, to make the Belief of
the Plot obtain amongst the People, I will order a Day of Thanksgiving for the
Discovery, which will give the Clergy an occasion to run down the Phanaticks,
and assert the Truth of their Design to overturn the Church and State, under
the specious Pretext of consulting how to preserve and maintain their Religion
and Liberties. By this means I may go on to cut off their Ringleaders securely,
and the Lord Russel and Algernon Sidney particularly; the former for having
dared to carry up the Bill of Exclusion to the House of Lords, and because he
is popular, and the apparent Heir to a great Estate of Church Lands, which will
make him vigorous in his Opposition to Popery; and the latter, because of his
being an old Rebel against my Father, a Person of Antimonarchical Principles,
and one whom the Faction admires for his Counsel and Conduct. I know what will
be urged in their Defense, as that their innocent Discourses and Meetings are
aggravated; that the Evidence against them is infamous and defective; and that
my Attorney and others are moved with Bribes, and the Prospect of Preferments
from the Court, to harangue them out of their Lives: but those
Cobweb-Objections I can easily break, now that the Tide runs with as much
Violence against them as they carried it formerly against the Catholics; for
which I am obliged to my Bishops and Clergy, who have espoused the Business
with so much Zeal, because I have turned the Chase upon the Phanaticks. And to
engage them yet further, I have ordered some of the Scots Presbyterian Gentry,
etc. who lurked about Town, to be sent to Scotland, that so the Plot given out
to be carried on in both Nations by the Phanaticks and Republicans, may acquire
the more universal Credit.

The Death of my Lord Russel I perceive is a great Mortification to the Party,
who are now as much dejected as they were formerly elevated in the time of the
Popish Plot and seditious Parliaments. But that which pleases me most is, the
bringing of the Protestant Interest in my Kingdoms so low, and splitting them
to pieces by a Wedg of their own, tho I have been deserted, in a great measure,
both by my Friends of France and Rome. But my Brother, I perceive, carries the
thing too far; and I find it generally suspected, that all was not fair in
relation to the Earl of Essex: yet the News of his having cut his own Throat
was of singular Use to advance the Credit of the Plot, and contributed much to
my Lord Russel's Condemnation. And though I have no reason to bewail his Loss,
because he might have proved a dangerous Enemy, yet the Merit of the Father
makes me regret the Fate of the Son, which I could wish had been more
favorable.

I perceive that it is dangerous to go on in this Method too fast; and I must
not give my Brother too much way, lest I should indeed dig a Grave for my self:
and therefore having gratified the Catholics enough at once, I may very well
be allowed to pause a while, and consider whether I may not be ship-wrack'd in
the Tempest that I have raised, before it be too late; and therefore I think it
necessary to recall the Duke of Monmouth, whose natural Affection will make him
tender of my Preservation. And by this means I shall have a Check upon my
Brother, though at the same time I must not allow the Plot to be decried, but
find it convenient still to sacrifice Colonel Sidney, and suffer Speak and
Braddon to be prosecuted, for offering to call in question the Earl of Essex's
having been felo de se. And in the mean time I will take surer, though slower
Measures to bring about my Designs: For the Heads of the Faction being now cut
off, and the whole Party brought under Hatches, I judge it better Policy to
divest the Corporations of their Charters gradually, while the Churchmen are
in the surrendering Humor, than to pursue these severer Methods with heat, lest
the People should come at last to be enraged, and rise in an universal
Rebellion; for if my Brother be suffered to follow his own Conduct, he will
quickly run himself and me both off the Stage.

FINIS.
Here follow the Copies of two Papers written by the late King Charles II.
Published in 1686. by King James's Authority, who attested that he found them
in his Brother's Strong Box, written in his own Hand.
The First Paper.
THE Discourse we had the other Day, I hope satisfied you in the main, that
Christ can have but one Church here upon Earth; and I believe that it is as
visible as that the Scriputre is in print, That none can be that Church, but
that, which is called the Roman Catholic Church. I think you need not trouble
your self with entering into that Ocean of particular Disputes, when the main,
and, in truth, the only Question is, Where that Church is, which we profess to
believe in the two Creeds? We declare there to believe one Catholic and
Apostolic Church, and it is not left to every fantastical Man's Head to
believe as he pleases, but to the Church to whom Christ left the Power upon
Earth to govern us in Matters of Faith, who made these Creeds for our
Directions. It were a very irrational thing to make Laws for a Country, and
leave it to the Inhabitants to be the Interpreters and Judges of those Laws;
for then every Man will be his own Judge, and by consequence no such thing as
either Right or Wrong. Can we therefore suppose that God Almighty would leave
us at those Uncertainties, as to give us a Rule to go by, and to leave every
Man to be his own Judge? I do ask any ingenuous Man, whither it be not the same
thing to follow our own Fancy, or to interpret the Scripture by it? I would
have any Man show me, where the Power of deciding Matters of Faith is given to
every particular Man. Christ left his Power to his Church even to forgive Sins
in Heaven, and left his Spirit with them, which they exercised after his
Resurrection: First by his Apostles in these Creeds, and many Years after by
the Council at Nice, where that Creed was made that is called by that Name; and
by the Power which they had rereceived from Christ, they were the Judges even
of the Scripture it self many Years after the Apostles, which Books were
Canonical and which were not. And if they had this Power then, I desire to know
how they came to lose it, and by what Authority Men separate themselves from
that Church? The only Pretense I ever heard of, was, because the Church has
failed in wresting and interpreting the Scripture contrary to the true Sense
and Meaning of it, and that they have imposed Articles of Faith upon us, which
are not to be warranted by God's Word. I do desire to know who is to be Judge of
that, whether the whole Church, the Succession whereof has continued to this
day without Interruption, or particular Men who have raised Schisms for their
own Advantage?

The Second Paper.
IT is a sad thing to consider what a world of Heresies are crept into this
Nation: Every Man thinks himself as competent a Judge of the Scriptures as the
very Apostles themselves; and it is no wonder that it should be so, since that
part of the Nation which looks most like a Church, dares not bring the true
Arguments against the other Sects, for fear they should be turned against
themselves, and confuted by their own Arguments. The Church of England (as it is
called) would fain have it thought, that they are the Judges in Matters
Spiritual, and yet dare not say positively that there is no Appeal from them;
for either they must say, that they are Infallible, (which they cannot pretend
to) or confess that what they decide in Matters of Conscience, is no further to
be followed, than it agrees with every Man's private Judgment. If Christ did
leave a Church here upon Earth, and we were all once of that Church, how, and
by what Authority, did we separate from that Church? If the Power of
interpreting of Scripture be in every Man's Brain, what need have we of a
Church or Churchmen? To what purpose then did our Savior, after he had given
his Apostles Power to Bind and Loose in Heaven and Earth, add to it, that he
would be with them even to the end of the World? These Words were not spoken
Parabolically, or by way of Figure. Christ was then ascending into his Glory,
and left his Power with his Church, even to the End of the World. We have had
these hundred Years past, the sad Effects of denying to the Church that Power
in Matters Spiritual, without an Appeal. What Country can subsist in Peace or
Quiet, where there is not a Supreme Judge from whence there can be no Appeal?
Can there be any Justice done where the Offenders are their own Judges, and
equal Interpreters of the Law, with those that are appointed to administer
Justice? This is our Case here in England in Matters Spiritual; for the
Protestants are not of the Church of England, as it is the true Church from
whence there can be no Appeal; but because the Discipline of that Church is
conformable at the present to their Fancies; which as soon as it shall
contradict or vary from, they are ready to embrace or join with the next
Congregation of People, whose Discipline and Worship agrees with their Opinion
at that time: so that according to this Doctrine, there is no other Church, nor
Interpreter of Scripture, but that which lies in every Man's giddy Brain. I
desire to know therefore of every serious Considerer of these things, whether
the great Work of our Salvation ought to depend upon such a Sandy Foundation as
this? Did Christ ever say to the Civil Magistrate (much less to the People)
that he would be with them to the End of the World? Or, did he give them the
Power to forgive Sins? St. Paul tells the Corinthians, Ye are God's Husbandry,
ye are God's Building; we are Laborers with God. This shows who are the
Laborers, and who are the Husbandry and Building: And in this whole Chapter,
and in the preceding one, St. Paul takes great pains to set forth that they,
the Clergy, have the Spirit of God, without which no Man searches the deep
things of God; and he concludes the Chapter with this Verse, For who has
known the Mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the Mind of
Christ. Now if we do but consider in humane Probability and Reason, the Powers
Christ leaves to his Church in the Gospel, and St. Paul explains so distinctly
afterward, we cannot think that our Savior said all these things to no
purpose: And pray consider on the other side, that those who resist the Truth,
and will not submit to his Church, draw their Arguments from Implications, and
far-fetched Interpretations, at the same time that they deny plain and positive
Words; which is so great a Disingenuity, that it is not almost to be thought
that they can believe themselves. Is there any other Foundation of the
Protestant Church, but that if the Civil Magistrate please, he may call such of
the Clergy as he thinks fit for his turn at that time; and turn the Church
either to Presbytery, Independency, or indeed what he pleases? This was the way
of our pretended Reformation here in England; and by the same Rule and
Authority it may be altered into as many more Shapes and Forms as there are
Fancies in Men's Heads.

A Brief Account of Particulars occurring at the happy Death of our late
Sovereign Lord King Charles II. in regard to Religion; faithfully related by
his then Assistant, Mr. Jo, Hudleston.
UPON Thursday the Fifth of February, 1685. between seven and eight a Clock in
the Evening, I was sent for in haste to the Queen's Back-stairs at Whitehall,
and desired to bring with me all things necessary for a dying Person.
Accordingly I came, and was ordered not to stir from thence till farther
notice; being thus obliged to wait, and not having had time to bring along with
me the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar, I was in some Anxiety how to procure
it: In this conjuncture (the Divine Providence so disposing) Father Bento de
Lemos a Portugez came thither, and understanding the Circumstance I was in,
readily proffered himself to go to St. James's, and bring the most Holy
Sacrament along with him.

Soon after his Departure I was called into the King's Bedchamber, where
approaching to the Bedside, and kneeling down, I in brief presented his
Majesty with what Service I could perform for God's Honor, and the Happiness
of his Soul at this last Moment, on which Eternity depends. The King then
declared himself, That he desired to die in the Faith and Communion of the Holy
Roman Catholic Church; That he was most heartily sorry for all the Sins of his
Life past, and particularly for that he had deferred his Reconciliation so
long; That through the Merits of Christ's Passion he hoped for Salvation; That
he was in Charity with all the World; That with all his Heart he pardoned his
Enemies, and desired Pardon of all those whom he had any wise offended; and
that if it pleased God to spare him longer Life, he would amend it, detesting
all Sin.

I then advertised his Majesty of the Benefit and Necessity of the Sacrament of
Penance; which Advertisement the King most willingly embracing, made an exact
Confession of his whole Life, with exceeding Compunction and Tenderness of
Heart: which ended, I desired him, in farther sign of Repentance and true
Sorrow for his Sins, to say with me this little short Act of Contrition.

O my Lord God! with my whole Heart and Soul I detest all the Sins of my Life
past for the Love of Thee, whom I love above all things; and I firmly purpose
by thy Holy Grace never to offend Thee more, Amen, Sweet Jesus, Amen. Into thy
Hands, Sweet Jesus, I commend my Soul; Mercy, Sweet Jesus, Mercy. This he
pronounced with a clear and audible Voice; which done, and his Sacramental
Penance admitted, I gave him Absolution.

After some time thus spent, I asked his Majesty, if he did not also desire to
have the other Sacraments of the Holy Church administered unto him? He replied,
By all means, I desire to be Partaker of all the Helps and Succors necessary
and expedient for a Catholic Christian in my Condition. I added, And does not
your Majesty also desire to receive the precious Body and Blood of our dear
Savior Jesus Christ in the most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist? His Answer
was this, If I am worthy, pray fail not to let me have it. I then told him, it
would be brought to him very speedily, and desired his Majesty, that in the
Interim he would give me leave to proceed to the Sacrament of Extreme Unction;
he replied, With all my Heart: I then anointed him, which as soon as performed
I was called to the Door, whither the Blessed Sacrament was now brought and
delivered to me.

Then returning to the King, I entreated his Majesty that he would prepare and
dispose himself to receive. At which the King raising up himself, said, Let me
meet my Heavenly Lord in a better Posture than in my Bed. But I humbly begged
his Majesty to repose himself: God Almighty, who saw his Heart, would accept of
his good Intention. The King then having again recited the forementioned Act of
Contrition with me, he received the most Holy Sacrament for his Viaticum, with
all the Symptoms of Devotion imaginable. The Communion being ended, I read the
usual Prayers, termed the Recommendation of the Soul, appointed by the Church
for Catholics in his Condition. After which the King desired the Act of
Contrition, O my Lord God, etc. to be repeated. This done, for his last
spiritual Encouragement, I said,

Your Majesty has now received the Comfort and Benefit of all the Sacraments,
that a good Christian (ready to depart out of this World) can have or desire.
Now it rests only, that you think upon the Death and Passion of our dear
Savior Jesus Christ, of which I present unto you this Figure (showing him a
Crucifix;) lift up therefore the Eyes of your Soul, and represent to your self
your sweet Savior here crucified, bowing down his Head to kiss you, his Arms
stretched out to embrace you, his Body and Members all bloody and pale with
Death to redeem you; and as you see him dead and fixed upon the Cross for your
Redemption, so have his Remembrance fixed and fresh in your Heart. Beseech him,
with all Humility, that his most precious Blood may not be shed in vain for
you; and that it will please him by the Merits of his bitter Death and Passion
to pardon and forgive you all your Offenses: And finally, to receive your Soul
into his blessed Hands: and when it shall please him to take it out of this
transitory World, to grant you a joyful Resurrection, and an Eternal Crown of
Glory in the next. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; Amen.

So recommending his Majesty on my Knees, with all the Transport of Devotion I
was able, to the Divine Mercy and Protection, I withdrew out of the Chamber.

In Testimony of all which I have hereunto subscribed my Name.

JO. HVDLESTON.

ERRATA.
PAge 105. line 2. read happier. Ibid. l. 3. after Restraint supply than the
Brutes.


