THE English Jeroboam: OR, THE PROTESTANT Reforming Magistrate, And What the
Church of England May Expect from such a One. Precisely Characterized by a
Transformed Churchwarden, at a Vestry-Consultation, held upon the Putting in
Execution the Laws against Seditious Conventicles. Being London's Caveat, in
Electing Magistrates.

Diruit aedificat mutat quadrata Rotundis. LONDON, Printed for Walter Davies,
in Amen-Corner, near Pate-Noster-Row, 1683.

TO ALL English Protestants, By what Names or Titles soever Dignified and
Distinguished.
Qui Consulta Patrum, qui Leges Juraque Servantes.
Worthy (if Loyal) Sirs,
IT is Recorded by Knowls, in his History of the Turkish Empire, That
Uladislaus, King of Hungary, having made a Truce with Amurath the Second.
(Sixth King of the Turks) Sealed and Sworn to him in the Name of Christ, in a
little Time violated his said League, waged War against him, gave him Battle
at Varna, and was like to rout him: Upon which Occasion, and extreme Danger,
Amurath beholding the Picture of the Crucifix in the displayed Ensigns of the
Christians, plucked the Writing out of his Bosom, wherein the late League was
comprised; and holding it in his Hands, with his Eyes lifted up to Heaven,
said; Behold thou Crucified Christ, this is the League, thy Christians, in thy
Name, made with me, which they have without any Cause violated. Now, if thou be
a God, which they say thou art, and as we dream, Revenge the Wrong now done
unto thy Name and Me, and show thy Power upon thy Perjurious People, who in
their Deeds deny Thee their God. Upon the uttering of which Words, the Battle
presently turned, and those Perjured Persons (the Authors of the Breach of
Oath) were slain, and the Army totally routed. An Example hugely applicable to
our present Swearers, and Test-takers; and was it generally weighed, would
awaken a great many of our pretended Protestant Christians out of that
Jesuitical Lethargy, in which they miserably indulge themselves.

There is no kind of Men (say one of their Late Saint ships) can be such
complete and neat Knaves, as a Jesuit, a Pharisee, and an Old (well-studied)
Professor of Religion: when once Men's Consciences are defiled, and they begin
to trade in the World with a Pretense, that it is for God, they are so cunning
that no Bonds of Honesty and Faith can possibly hold them.

Oaths (the main Pillars of Humane Societies, the greatest Determiners of
Controversies) are in these times so strangely violated, and most impudently
profaned, as if they were but Bugbears to fright Children into Obedience. Nay,
to show what great Children our Magistrates are, or to expose them as such, an
Ecclaircissement, or clearing of those Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to be
taken by them at their entering into their Offices, is Stated, and laid down,
according to Conscience and Religion, how far they might take them Salva
Conscientia. But was Indignum patella Operculum, a Case not fitly made, and
soon was Vn-Cased. And certainly, that Religion must needs be degenerated and
apostatized, which God in his Wrath has appointed (as an Engine) to break down
these great Bulwarks of the World, Oaths.

Solemn Oaths are able to hold most Men's Consciences; but Men heightened by
Religion into the Forms of the Spirit, doing things by immediate Direction from
God, carrying a Glorious presence of God before them, affirming that they are
called by God to do some special Signal Work in the World; these can easily
mount above the highest sorts of Oaths, and trample them under Foot presently.
Such is the Case of our Reforming Jeroboam; The Religion Established in
Jerusalem was too great an Obligation to them, to revere that Authority by
whose Laws it was first Established: It taught them too much the Sacred
Ordinances of Loyalty to their Sovereign Prince; 'Twould be a snare to them to
go to Jerusalem to Worship, lest it should invite them to entertain Loyal
Thoughts of re-acknowledging their first Lord. A couple of Calves nearer home,
would serve for the Vulgar to Worship, and he no sooner thought on it; but they
were such Calves as to accept the Offer, and Idolatrous Bethel and Dan, are as
zealously followed, as Jerusalem, the true place of Worship: and this Jeroboam
did, notwithstanding a Trible Obligation to the contrary, by Three several
Oaths: 1. When he Swore Allegiance to his Prince, as a private Person. 2. At
his entrance into his Inferior Office, as Ruler over a particular Part of the
Royal Estate, the House of Joseph. 3. At his Coronation, as Supreme Magistrate
afterward. And this became a Sin ever after to Israel.

It Is the same with our modern Reformers: They cant as Religiously as
Protestants take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and as cunningly as
Jesuits evade their Observance. They can Swear not to alter or endeavor
Directly or Indirectly the Alteration of the Government in Church and State;
yet are ready to erect a Conventicle, before a Church, or pull a Temple down,
to build a Bethel up. They can Swear to Discover, and to their Power dissipate
any Meeting or Conventicle, which shall be convened contrary to the Laws, and
the Practice of the Church, and yet so treacherous are their Memories, that
they forget it; and alas! through inadvertency, (or I know not what) were
strangely overtaken, and found Members of such Meetings.

Themistocles, (as Plutarch reports in his Life) used to say, That Athens ruled
all Greece, He ruled all Athen's His Wife ruled him, and his young Child at
home ruled her: So may it be tartly (and truly) said at this time; This City
Rules all England, Magistrates Rules the City, the Wives Rule the Magistrates,
and the Lecturers Rule them.

No sooner does Aaron bid the Women to bring their Jewels and Earrings of
their Sons and Daughters, unto him ('it is no matter to say further; hold, Aaron,
do not tell them, it is to make a Calf) but the Widows press to cast in their
Mites, the Married Wives their Wedding-Rings, the Zealous Virgins their whole
Stock, to their Silver-Bodkins. Such Influence have these Architects of
Sedition, to procure their Materials toward their Babel-building.

The Historian tells us of a Speech; which Pontius Telesinius used to a Roman
General; who, when he saw him busied in delivering Italy from Thieves and
Robbers, told him, that he did well to scour the Country; but Italy would never
want Wolves, so long as there was such a Spacious Forest, as the Great City of
Rome, to retire unto. The Application of which is so obvious, as need nothing
to be added therein. Purge the Fountain, and the Streams will run clear.

Such, in short, is the Composition of the Times, wherein our Reformer has the
Fortune to appear on his Stage. A Time, that God Rains Snares upon the whole
Land, suffering Men to act little else but Obliquities, Illegalities,
Absurdities, and self Disappointments; a Time, wherein Satan has set the Land
on Fire, and like Nero, sits on his Turret, making Music with his Instruments;
his Religiously profane Lying Pamphletters, that every Man may dance Antique
over his Brothers Head. It is a Proverb not to be neglected, That he that
danceth when the Devil Pipes, shall certainly break his Shins, if he has not
the luck to save them whole, by breaking his Neck. Wise Men will not Travel in
a Night, when the Air is full of Ignes Fatui, nor a Sober Mariner hoyse up all
his Sails, when the Winds blow in all Quarters.

Gentlemen, Through all these Disadvantages our Protestant Reformer ventures to
appear, hoping he shall find acceptance with some, though not with all, whose
Interest it may be to reject him. But this he promises; That if his proposed
Church-Reformation be at all encouraged, he will venture next at the State.
However, lest you should question his Person and Parts, I have sent you by him,
a friendly Character of him.

HE is One, he knows not what Himself, if you ask him; but is, indeed, One of
God's Judgments. He is the Epitome or Abridgement of the Age; in him the Age
is seen; and without him, the Times are not. Observe him in his taking his
Degrees; from his Shop to the Chair of Church-Guardian. Here he tells you lies
by rote, and not minding, as the Phrase to sell in, and the Language he spent
most of his Years to learn. He is an arrogant Commender of his own Wares; for
what soever he shows you, is the Best in the Town, tho the Worst in his Shop.
He never speaks so much Truth, as when he tells you, he would use you as his
Brother; because he would abuse his Brother. His Religion is much in the nature
of his Customers, and indeed the Pander to it; and, by a misinterpreted Sense
of Scripture, makes a Gain of Godliness. Thus his Honesty having gotten him a
Name, the Parish thinks him able to carry a Constables Staff, and become a
King's Officer. Under this Title he swells, and looks big; and environed with a
Guard of Halberts, sitting in his Chair of State, a shop-stall, peremptorily
examines Night-walkers. He is a Scarecrow to all Alehouses, where he is a
great Stickler in a Tumult of Quart-pots, and ventures his Head by his Place,
which is broke many times, to keep the King's Peace. He is strangely startled
at the appearing of an Informer, whom he is ready to secure, upon their
presenting a Conventicle-Warrant; but he is as ready to let it alone in God's
Name, as he is to apprehend a Drunkard for not standing in the King's Name: And
Men esteem him for this a Zealous Affectionate; but then do mistake him, for he
does it but to be esteemed so. Thus he becomes a Man of Business; and, if you
would find him now, it must be at some Coffee-House, which is his Ears
Brothel, which satisfies his Itch. His Company here, all Men without Exception;
but the Principal are Old Captains out of Service, discontented Officers, Men
of long Rapiers; which, after all, turn Merchants, and traffic here for News.
Some make it a Preface to their Dinner. Others make it their Ordinary, and
board here very cheap. In fine, It Is the Rendezvous of Spitting, where men
dialogue with their Noses, and their Communication is Smoke. Here it is, you
may find our Viceroy or Constable; where he gravely discourses of the
Government. He converses with you, as if he was in Spain; for if you are
inquisitive, he fears you as the Inquisition, and Suspects your Questions for
Examinations. He delivers you Common Matters with great Conjuration of Silence,
and whispers you in the Ear, Acts of Parliament. He is one that lies kindly to
you, and for good Fashion-sake, and it is discourtesie in you to belive him. His
Words finely set together, equally serve all men, and equally to no purpose. He
kisses your Hands, as he did the last he met, and is your Servant to be
commanded; but you shall entreat of him Nothing. His Proffers are universal
and general, with Exceptions against all Particulars: He will do any thing for
you; but if you urge him to This, he cannot; or to That, he is engaged; but he
will do any thing. Promises he accounts but a king of mannerly Words; and in
the expectation of your Manners, not to exact them; if you do, he wonders at
your ill Breeding, that cannot distinguish between what is spoken, and what is
meant. Public Invitations he will not wrong with his Absence, and is the best
Witness of the Sheriffs Hospitality; where he talks Rebellion in a Bravery, and
speaks big from the Spirit of Sack. Religion being now much in Vogue, he
becomes enamoured with the Church: His Devotion there, is much in the turning
up his Eye, and turns down the leaf in his Bible, when he hears named Chapter
and verse: When he comes home, he commends the Sermon for the Scripture, and
two Hours. He is so taken up with Faith that he has no room for Charity; and
understands no Good Works, but what he has in his Shop. He Overflows so with
the Bible, that he spills it one every occasion; and will not cudgel his Boys,
without Scripture. He is One, that thinks he performs all his Duty to God in
Hearing, and shows the fruits of it in Talking. He is a main Derider to his
Capacity, of those that are not his Preachers; and censures all Sermons, but
bad Ones. He accounts nothing Vices but Superstition, and an Oath. He expounds
the Priests of Baall, Reading Ministers; and thinks the Salvation of the
Parish, as desperate as the Turks. But now by the Grace of God, and his
supposed Sufficiency, the Parish thought him a fit Person to manage that great
Office of Church Warden; wherein he employes his Zeal, for the Reformation of
it, according to the right Old Frame; Where I leave him; the Church into a
Conventicle, Conformity into Nonconformity, and Uniformity into Deformity.

THE English Jeroboam, etc.
THE Vestry being fully Convened, and Liberty of Speech being the Undoubted
Privilege of all Assemblies, our Churchwarden or Reformer, with a serious
composed Gravity, lays open the Present State of the Church, and the necessary
Resolution he had taken for Reforming it, in the following Emphatical Oration.

IT was a Blessed Easter (Brethren,) that raised me up again to this Ponderous
Service; and if any Feast be Worthy of Annual Solemnity, my Vote is, That the
Feast of Easter (though Moveable) shall stand fast for ever. Antiquity tells
me, That the Office Gardiani Ecclesiae, is an Office instituted and dignified
by the Fundamental, Known, Common, and Statute Laws of this Kingdom; (as for
the Civil and Canon Laws, I have held them execrable, ever since the
High Commission departed with a Duck in the Mouth on it, and the Imposition of
the Sacred Solemn League and Covenant) and this Honor is not to be conferred
upon any, but such as are Judicious and Fidele, and able to employ (
Courageously, Sincerely and Conscientiously) the Common Stock of Treasure, and
Discretion belonging to the Parish.

It is not, I conceive, yet out of Your Memory, how accurately I heretofore
steered the Affairs of Parochial Government; nor out of Mine, with what
Alacrity you submitted to it. My Deportment then (correspondent to Those Times)
was a fair Character of Square Dealing; and was, I presume, a prime Motive to
your Thundering Acclamations, in re-electing me the Principal Reformado of this
Ecclesiastical Policy. In the exact Execution whereof, I intend with the
Assistance of my younger Brother, (whom I shall well Educate for the Next Year)
to use such Precise Diligence, as may cashiere many Fears and Jealousies, and
settle many things (hitherto incomposed) in such a graceful Posture, that the
Trust of you, that confide in me, shall not in the least Scruple be abused. But
you must remember the Old Word, Distingue Tempora; and then (regarding the
Turning round of the Times), you will conceive, that the Wind sits in another
Corner; and I must move by other Rules, than formerly: for I am now more
Spiritually Illuminated, and possessed with Sounder Principles. The Civil-Law is
disregarded, and its Authority and Power stoutly disputed, by our Goliath from
Colchester, so that we shall see the Canons ( Old and New) recoil on the
Canoniers; the numerous Army of Articles routed; the Oath ex Officio put out of
Office; and the bottomless etc Oath is swallowed up. The Case thus standing,
and that you may have a right Understanding of your Moderator, take an Epitome
of my Resolution; but withal, take this fourfold Advertisement along with you.

First, That I will follow the present Fashion so far in my Discourse, as to
keep No Order. Secondly, That my Interspersion of Latin, shall no way
Authorize the use of that Beastial Language in the Pulpit. Thirdly, That if my
Phrase transcend your plumbeous Capacity, esteem it the Fruit of my Liberal
Education, before I ever handled the Sheers, or fingered the Thimble. Fourthly,
That you, who ( for solid Edification) fall so nimbly to your Brachigraphy,
shall not let this Oration pass Grub-street, without my Approbation, nor (if it
may be) until a Sweet Panegyric of my Sister Hannah's Composing, may be annexed
unto it.
I begin with the Weathercock; which is an imminent, gilded, hollow, craking,
combed, and variable Creature; and does so wonderfully Sympathize with me in
All, and with the present Turning Times, in Some special respects, that I do
Order it to Continue Statu quo prius; and the Four Fanes adorned with the
initial Letters of my unspotted Name, shall be sedulous Attendants upon it in
my Livery, to go which way soever it goes.

From the Weathercock, I should immediately have fallen upon the Leads, but an
Iron Cross hinders me in my way; which (with all other Crosses moveable) shall
be abolished, that nothing may go Cross in our Designs.

The Leads I find Profaned with the Images of corrupt Hands, irregular Feet,
and with unsanctified Names; they shall therefore be Removed, Purified with
Fire, and Converted into Bullets, to button the Bosoms of the Common
Adversary, and to seal up the Brazen Foreheads, of the Formidable Tories.

This being Dispatched, I have made a fair Thorow-fair to the Bells, which
indeed had been out of Frame long since, were it not that sometimes they Ring
the Changes ( sweetly consenting therein with me,) and sometimes Audaciously
proclaim an unknown Victory to the Over-credulous, or the Unwelcome Coming of
the Tories Alumna, and the like; which inflames all their Zeal and Faggots in
an instant. There is an Impeachment, as strong as a threefold Cord, against
four of the Bells.

First, They were Baptized before the Years of Discretion. Secondly, Three
times a Day they Pollute the Tune of the Fourth Psalm. Thirdly, They have
Idolatrous Inscriptions upon them; as (with a little of the Sexton's help) I
have curiously discovered; For upon the First Bell there is Peccatoris; on the
Second, Mei; on the Third, Miserere; Domine, on the Fourth.
Now, judge you, Brethren (who would seem, peradventure, to be as wise as your
Officer in chief) is not Domine Miserere mei peccatoris, notorious and gross
Idolatry? Are those words fit to be uttered by a Professor, unless it be with
an Holy Detestation of such Puddle? Ah! I see by the Devout shaking of your
Heads, that your Brains are troubled about it, that your Hearts abhor, and ache
to think upon such rotten Trash. Well, it is high time, that these four be no
longer Hanged, but Drawn and Quartered; that they, with the abominable Brass
upon the Monument of our Idolatrous Ancestors (I pass not tho an Old Aunt of
mine lies mouldring under one of them) may concur for the making of Ordinance,
to batter down the Posterity of their Donors. The Wheels (being but
Hemicircular) shall hang there like Meteors between Heaven and Earth; but the
Ropes may serve the next Sessions, at the Wooden Tripode, a Mile out of the
Town, for the use of those that will not Stretch their Endeavors for Whiggism,
or the Good Old Cause. The Liberties of the Dawes, (our Beloved Allies) will by
this means, be enlarged; and we will further Confirm their Incorporation, that
from time to time they may make such Ordinances, as are Consistent with the
Privileges of their House, and conducible to the Been esse of their Common
Wealth; keeping their Courts ad Libitum, in the upper Region of the Tower, as
we do Here in the Vestry.

The Clock and Dial, because they go Round, shall take their usual Course; only
by a Pious Fraud, they shall go somewhat Earlier in the Morning, and Later at
Night, than Truth would admit of; Only to Revenge my self on Three crook-Legg'd
Youths of mine, who had rather encounter with a whole Briggade of Whiggs, than
move a yards Length against a Tory: Rogues, as they are, were out all Night,
making Bonefires, and Drinking Hazza's to the Duke; but I Will warrant --

I have dwelt somewhat long in the Steeple; Now we will come to Church; where
in the First Place, I see the Font taking up so much room, that would be
capable of two double Taffata Gowns; which, I confess, I should not so strictly
have observed, had not the Discontented Yoke-Fellows of my Dyer and
Hot-Presser, which are Crowded up behind the Door, drawn me to it. Away with
it; this Font is abominable, a Basin will be more apt for the Service. And
those Lofty Pews, which are higher by the Head and Shoulders, than their
Inferiors, shall be Circumcized, that our Grave Matrons, and Sweet Heavenly
minded Sisters, (whose Posture, turning their Faces Westward, is most Amiable)
may have a more cheerful Influence upon Us their Governors.

The Pulpit (in respect of the Form of it, being almost Round) is Tolerable;
although my Neighbor Zachary the Cooper (a precious Vessel) could fashion out
One more seemly, and to better purpose; but the Situation of it shall suffer a
Reformation, and at the Parish Charge it shall be secured with a Substantial
Padlock, lest they, whom the mere Natural Man calls Profound, Pious, Loyal, and
Orthodox Divines, should sawcily any longer intrude it. I can partly tell you
the Poor Condition of those silly Priests: As soon as they ascend the Pulpit,
they fall on their Knees for Divine Assistance, as if they could not be
Cock-sure of it at all times: Then they have a Premeditated Prayer, not much
exceeding a quarter of an Hour, wherein they Petition for Peace and Unity, and
Pray for Kings, Queens, and Princes, and such like kind of People, (though they
know them Popish, (as our so-much feared Successor is;) and then supplicate Our
Savior Christ for Choice Blessings upon Archbishops and Bishops, whom we have
found (by the Spirit that we lead about us) to be strongest Lambs of
Antichrist. After this Mess, comes the Sermon; which is the greatest part of a
Weeks Study (Written perhaps over and over) yet may be delivered in an Hour.
Their Conclusions, which we are neither able, nor willing to understand, are
confirmed by Scripture, Fathers, and Reason: They consult with the Original
Tongues, and such Authors as are called Authentic and Classical, fetching
their Water from the Primitive Spring, because they (empty Casks) think they
cannot have as pure nearer Home. So, by their great skill in Divinity,
gracefully attended (forsooth) with Variety of Humane Learning, they will
exhort us to Study to be Quiet, to Try the Spirits, to be Charitable, Moderate,
Obedient to the Higher Powers, and to do things According to Order; with a
great deal of such hungry thin Stuff. I have utterly done with Them and Theirs;
and am heartily over-joyed, that I have ever thought of this Happy Padlock. But
of this, more at large by and by in its due Place.

The Pulpit-Cloath was the Legacy of a Blind Zealot, as appears by that
Jesuitical Badge (J. H. S.) upon it; for, as some of Our Learned Professors do
conceive, J. Signifies Idolatry, H. Heresy, and S. Superstition. Oh, here is
good Work! What but flat Popery can be expected from a Pulpit apparel do with
such a Livery? These Letters of Gold shall be delivered to the Finer, to make
Silver withal; and the Velvet (because it deserves a better Wardrobe, and the
costly Infirmities of the Testator should be hidden by our Christian Charity)
shall be Converted into Window-Cushions, for my new Reformed Parlor; where I
intend frequently to entertain those Immaculate Assemblies, which the
Unregenerate call Conventicles.

The Hourglass shall be turned out of Doors; for our Extemporary Teachers, may
not keep time with Clock or Glass; and so, when they are out, (which is not
very seldom) they can take leisure to come in again: whereas, they that
measure their Meditations by the Hour, are often gravelled, by complying with
the Sand.

The Communion Table has since 1660, regained its Ancient Name and Sire; and
(had I my mind) our nimble joynted Mass-Priests shall never be suffered to
Offer or Cringe there any Longer. But I will be bold with the Round Pillars,
that inviron it, (when the Leaprous Superstition is scrapt off) to make an
Impregnable Fence for my Hospitable Buttery. The Plate that is there so
Decently placed, I know to what Furnace it might be conveyed, to what Use and
Form converted, and by what Means Multiplied, and faithfully Secured: But there
is such a Noli me Tangere upon it, that I dare not finger the Twentieth Part of
it. But as for the Velvet-Cloath, adorned with the Jesuits Badge, and the
Silver and Gold Embroidered Glory about it, I shall put to a more Sanctified
Use, with the Pulpit-Cloath.

The Organs are of Levitical or Popish Institution, and like the breath of a
Basilisk; they deter hence the Two prime Grandees of the Parish, (the most
Celestial Almanack-Maker, and the Best Tempered Potter, that ever lived by
Heaven and Earth. They drown the Virgin-Melody of the Galleries, and Middle
Alley, and against our Wills bring our Confused Notes into Order; Therefore
though I adventure my Neck (as that Desperado did in Worcester Cathedral, and
his Predecessor at Cheap-side-Cross) I will set them such a flat, that shall
lay them Breathless on the Pavement. This Romish Merchandise will yield good
English Coin at Paul's, or the next Cathedral that is not Bankrupt.

The Table of Degrees, Prohibited in Marriage, is obsolete, and so is marriage
it self, as here it has been used; for I see no ground to the contrary: but
when all things are Common (as they ought to be) a Man may Marry, whom, when,
and how often, as he will. This is a very short, but a sweet and comfortable
Doctrine to you, (my Dear and Attentive Auditory) and so the sudden pricking up
of your Ears does assure me.

Let us now take a little survey of our Church-Books: The Bible (which always
comes first to my sight and handling) has a dangerous Apocryphal Obstruction
in the very Bowels of it, which is of a very Malignant Influence upon the whole
Body. This is Composed of such Histories as bind not our Credence, and Morality
which shall not be the Rule of our Practice; it must needs be presently
Expurged. Yea, the Canon it self, in respect of Translation, is not free from
Infirmity (and indeed, it is no Marvail, since so many Mitred Heads had their
Heads in the doing of it.) The Geneva Version is far beyond it. But Old Hugh
Broughton, if he might have been suffered, had exceeded them both. A Learned
Synod (and what do you think of another Assembly of Divines, without either Root
or Branch of Episcopacy?) must be the only Aesculapius, that must cure this
Evil.

The Errata of the Book of Common Prayer (as some call it) or rather the
Lethargy of the Church of England, were they expressed at Large, would over-bulk
the Bible: Yet the Ravenous Esaus of the World, had rather lose all their
Liberties and Properties (which are their Birthright) than one Mess of this
Red and Black Pottage. I will not contaminate my Lips, nor abuse your chaste
Ears with so much as naming any Errors that are in it; but refer you to Rabbi
Lewis Hughes (the Glory of the last British Druides) and diverse others, who
have already smitten this Belphegor under the Fifth Rib. It further behooves us,
that the Singing-Psalmes be rescued from the Back of such a Monster, and from
those other Humane Inventions, Te Deum, Da Pacem Domine, and Quicunque vult:
But whosoever will that any (but the 150. Psalms) be continued, may do well, in
my Understanding, to defend Robert Wisedome's, Preserve us Lord.

There is an Error in John Jewell's Works, but it is an Error with a Witness;
and although it be Palliated over Jure Divino, yet it is instar omnium errorum
and has in it the Spawn of all Abominations: It is beyond pity, that such a
Gemme should be defiled with so base a Cognizance; He was a Bishop: The very
word Bishop, (I fear, I offend in naming it so often) imparts all the
Mischiefs, that are destructive to a Common Church or State. Your Holy
Indignation (Brethren) is well expressed by the present Groanings of your
Spirits; but be comforted; for these stall-fed Lordly Prelates must come to
their Fatal Banquet. Erasmus his Paraphrase has found the more Favor hitherto
at my Hands, because he sometime wrote a Tract in the praise of Foolishness.
But when I remember some Popish Passages in his Colloquies, which I read when I
was at Merchant-Taylors-School, I cannot well resent his Best Labors. The Book
of Deus et Rex, is a Pamphlet quite out of my Books, merely for the Oaths-sake
that is in it. These Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance are binding Things; the
Latter was imposed upon me, when I was a Novice; and it has so hampered me
these Three Years last past, that I would fain (if possible) cast off these
Manacles; for it is almost Hell it self, to us Whiggs, to be so pinioned.

The Book of Thirty Nine Articles is in many things diametrically Opposite to
our Fundamental Principles; it must necessarily be withdrawn, or farewell our
Diana for ever. All the aforenamed Corrupt Volumes shall be Translated out of
the Church, and all the Isles thereof into Little Britain, or else into
Smithfield.

We have but one Manuscript, (I mean, the Register) and that must be Corrected;
for the Names of all those that are Crossed in their Baptism, Ring'd in their
Marriage, or Prayed over at their Burial, shall be cancelled. No Names
henceforth shall be engrost, unless they were first Registered in Holy Writ: Nor
will we keep a Record of the Names of Strange Preachers any more; for they may
deliver Good Doctrine in the City, who never had Orders, or good Name in the
Country.

The Parish Cash yet, is ready to my hand; and I will presume to seize upon a
fleece of it, to maintain at the Church Door a guard of Long-taild
Vociferadoes; lest the Conjuring Littany should rush in upon the Fourth and
Sixth day of the Week (heathenishly called Wednesday and Friday) that Prayers
be not read against Pride, Vain Glory and Hypocrisy, etc. And lest the
Babilonian Garment (the Surplice) be shouldered in amongst us; for to
Professors of our Profession, no Smock is more Odious, than that of the Whore
of Rome; nor any Petitions more terrible, than those that would oblitterate our
Principal Character.

Some of our dim-ey'd Ancestors could see unhappily, to make their Simplicity
Legible upon the Church-Walls, by setting up the Lord's Prayer, (as they termed
it) which is too narrow a Directory, or Summary of our Petitions: The Ten
Commandments, which are not (I conceive) absolutely Obligatory now under the
Gospel; and the Creed, which is not (I believe) Apostolical, nor am I bound to
stand to it. These shall, in Good Manners, give the Wall to Choicer Scriptures;
and I will be the Master of the Sentences, to Select them.

The taking down of Popish Pictures out of the Windows, and bringing them (by a
Legal Trial), to a Second Martyrdom, was a Laudable and Transparent Work of One
of my Brother-Church-Wardens. I wonder some of our Zealous Predecessors, of
the Late Times (I mean, Fifty) had not done it, and saved him that Labor: But,
Nil simul inventum and perfectum, Rome was not Built in one Day; nor could they
be demolisht all in one Year, nor Two Years, There are some pretty Scandalous
Babies still left in East-Windows of some Churches, with trim Coats on, and an
Orient Luster about their Heads. I remember now, I asked our Sextons Grandam
one Day, what they were; and especially, One I took great notice of? She told
me, it was our Blessed Lady; but truly, if she were my Mother, and as high as
Heaven, I will (as Duty binds me) make her kiss her Mother Earth again. And the
Angels on the Roof of the Church (though they cost Five Shillings a piece the
Gilding) shall have their Wings clipped, and fall down to salute her.

Queen Elizabeth's Monument was put up when the Royal Government had fairer
credit amongst us, than now; and her Epitaph was one of my Brother J's best
Poems, before he abjured the University, or had a thought of New England. I
have had no small struggling within me, about the Tolleration or Abolition of
this Statue; and, at last, have resolved it shall continue; but with a Curtain
to Vail it, that we may regard or disregard it at our pleasure. For methinks,
in Forty Four Years Reign, she might (if she pleased) have baited the Beast of
Rome, to better purpose, and wrought a more through Reformation; yet,
(notwithstanding Her Majesty's Omissions, of sorrowful Memory) if her
Successor King James had not been too Wise and Learned, as well as too
Peaceable, for our Generation, and his Divines too Sinewy for ours to graple
with at Hampton Court, we had finished that Work long ago. We shall never meet
with such an Opportunity to do, since Forty One, as Now. Plots and Conspiracies
can now be glibly swallowed under the Mask of Religion and Liberties, which we
may justify to be Popish, and to come from Rome, instead of Geneva; and while
we pretend to thrust out Popery, we may bring in Whiggisme, alias, the True
Protestant Presbyterian.

The Escutcheons that are quartered over our Heads in the Body of the Church,
are Emblemes of those Honors, which some of our Noble Progenitors purchased
with the Hazard of their Blood, in Defense of Religion, known Laws, and Liberty
of the Subject. I will give them leave to be Hanged. But when I take notice of
the Royal Arms, and their Motto (Beati pacifici) I cannot, for the present,
but entertain some Mutinous, Disloyal, Rebellious Thoughts, and a Furious Zeal
would soon drive them into Action, were it not that Conscience, Allegiance, and
Honi Soit upon the Blue Garter, did countermand it.

Some Alterations would be of Postures and Names, as well as Things. For truly,
I cannot with an Upright Conscience, condescend to Kneeling at the Sacrament:
We are not required to be so Flexible in a Superstitious Adoration: My Advice
is, That we sit Familiarly, (as we did in the Late Free Time of Liberty) or
stand to it courageously: Nor ought our Gesture to be the same now, at the
Gospel, Creed, or Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the Beginning.
These, and other like Gesticulations, came first into this Country, from the
City which stands on Seven Hills; and thither (with all such Baggage) let them
trudge again.

As for Names, I see no Warrant, but under the Man of Sin's own Seal, that this
Church should be called St. Clement's; nor indeed (as I have learned since I
was enlightened) that it should be called a Church. We only can discern, who are
Saints, who Reprobates; and it is not hard to find, who, and what this Clement
was, and yet deal gently with him.

But in this particular (my dear Brethren) we must have a Reformation, and
Order the Parish Clerks to pass it in their Weekly Bills, and those Roman
Harlots who cry St. Thomas Onions (knowing such Egyptian Roots cannot be
Sanctified) shall be punished; and this to be as Zealously done, as he that
lash't a Carr-man, for whistling the Tune of a Psalm to his Horse. The Law
shall be the same concerning St. John's Wort, and Carduus Benedictus. As for
this Building, which (now lately again) we have ignorantly called a Church; it
is, indeed, but an Old Pile of Stones; it was built at the Charge of those, who
vainly thought a Decent Barn or Stable too homely for a Christian Synagogue,
and was Consecrated (saving your Presence) by some Old Prelate, as
superstitious as the Founders. The Verity of it is, We are the Church, and this
Fabric (till we are otherwise provided) is but a Meeting Place; where (to our
Grief) there is too often a Miserable Mixture of the Profane with the Godly.
For Redress whereof, there is no other way, than (in a Tumultuous Fashion) to
repeat the Presenting of Petitions for Liberty of Conscience, and the speedy
Session of a Godly, true Protestant Parliament.

I promised you even now somewhat of my Opinion (my Dearly Beloved) concerning
the Reformation of the Church in its Ministers, or Clergy: Now, give me leave
(by your Patience) to deliver it unto you; which I will do with as good and
pious an Emphasis, as I can; who desire to spend my self, and be spent in the
Service of God, my King and Kingdom.

That the present Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical
Officers, depending upon the Hierarchy, is evil and justly offensive, and
burdensome to the Kingdom, a great Impediment, (observe this, I say -- mark
--) a great Impediment to our Reformation, and the further Growth of our
Religion, (if I may so say) and therefore to be taken away: For (I say For --
here is the Reason) they have been, and are entrusted with the Care and
Provision of the Souls of King and People, to heed, feed, and watch over them;
and, as Ambassadors, to attend their great Embassy from God to Man, for
Reconciliation; and Preach, or cause to be Preached, by Able and Faithful Men,
the Word of God in Season, and out of Season: They have done just contrary, run
counter to all This; and this by Two manner of ways: First, They have neglected
their Personal Execution of their Trust: And, Secondly, Have committed
(generally and mostly) the weighty Matter to Men illiterate and insufficient,
Dumb Dogs, as the Scripture calls them; that cannot bark, but against our poor
Shepherds, that would Feed (not Eat) up the Flock. Men quorum esse and vivere,
est esse and bibere. Whose Tables are full of Wine and Strong Drink. Their
Precept's iter Longam, their Example's iter Breve. Satanae Satellites, non
Christi Sectatores, sed Antichristi Successores. They are Branches of the
Hierarchy of Rome; Plants not planted by God our Heavenly Father. What Immense
and Transcendent Goodness would it be of the Almighty, could but these Priests
of Bacchus, Sons of Belial, be Sequestered, Silenced, and Turned out: and our
true Ministers, true Shepherds, [that would not kill them that they Feed, eat
the Fat, and Cloth themselves with the Wool] placed in their Rooms. It Is true,
there are some of these Church Governors, that are Good Men and Learned; but
then we find them too Unsanctified. Like Curio, they are ad Republicae
perniciem facundi: Learned and Eloquent, but to the Destroying of our
Commonwealth. For my part, I shall endeavor to pray for a
Through-perfect-Reformation in the Ministers, as well as in these Particulars I
have before declared unto you. The Church is the Garden of God, and till these
Weeds be plucked up, God will not delight to walk therein. And therefore we
must, without Fear of the Hand of Violence, of Pride, or Informer's Malice, set
Hand, heart, and Shoulder and All, for the perfect Cleansing the House of the
Lord. In short, (my Dearly Beloved) I shall give you a brief Epitome of what
Measures we took in our Late (blessed be God, and the King) Times, and finished
our Work in this Matter, and how We must work.

1. None shall Preach or Declare in his Sermon, That the Puritans, now called
Whiggs, should be Ejected out all Parishes, nay Societies, as being ever the
only Cause of all the Troubles and Disturbances in this Kingdom.

2. No one shall Preach, That our late (nay, any other) Petitions to the King
for a Parliament, were like Jeroboam's Petitions to Rehoboam; Commands, and not
Petitions.

3. No one shall Preach, That the late and present Reformers of the Church
were, and are but Hypocrites: That an Evil Spirit did Then, and does Now breath
these Things into their Minds; a Devout Devil, pretending Care of God's
Service: That all Their and Our goodly Pretenses, are but Hypocritical, and the
Mask of Vile Iniquity, and Holy Theft. And shall hold, That it is a thing
senseless, for Laymen to have any Tithes, and that Tithes are Jure Divino; and
that to Alienate the Lands of Cathedral Churches, to set up and maintain
Preaching Ministers, is to pervert the Will of the Dead that gave them.

4. None shall declare his Wishes and Desires in his Sermons, That Evil may
befall those that go about to take away Government by Bishops, which has its
Platform from Heaven: And holds, That the Government by Bishops, Priests and
Deacons under the Gospel, is from God; as under the Law, the Government of
Highpriests, Priests and Levites. And that say, That he knows not from whence
the Presbyterian-Government comes, but from Corah, Dathan and Abiram.

5. No one shall call those Irreverent Puppies, that use not Superstitious
Bowing at the Altar, and the Name of JESUS; and if they will not how Here, will
bow in Hell hereafter; and those that teach us not to bow as needless, are
Blind Guides.

6. None shall Preach, That they that go about to Change the Laws and
Government of the Church and Ceremonies, would at last change the Religion too.

7. None shall Preach, That it is as Lawful for a Woman, if she dislike her
Husband, to leave him, and take another; as for one to go out of his Parish, to
hear another Minister: And that to go to another Church, is as the sin of
Witchcraft and Idolatry. And threfore,

8. None shall Declare against A Preaching Ministry, by affirming, That to
Preach nothing but Scripture without Authority of the Fathers, was like the
Devils Sheering of Hoggs; a great Cry, but a little Wool. Or use that vile
Comparing of painful Ministers to Pedlars and Ballad Singers, that have most
Company; when rich Merchants have but few.

9. None shall dare to gainsay or contradict Extempore Praying; and compare
those that use it, and enlarge themselves therein with (im) pertinent
Expressions, to Baals Priests, who Thought to be heard for their much bawling.

These, and such like Tenants and Speeeches in Sermons, held and preached by
our late Ministers, were severely taken notice of, and severely reprehended by
silencing such destructive Persons, and Sequestring and Plundering Them and
Theirs: Nay, if we could not find them erring in their Words, we waylaid them
in their Actions, and were soon ready to pick holes in their Coats. 'Twas easy
enough to say, they were Popishly Affected, Drunkard, Superstitious Adorers at
the Alter, or Name of JESUS, Swearers, Whore-mongers, Adulterers, Alehouse
haunters, Malignants, Enemies to the Cause, and the like; and we did their
Work. Out we turned them Head and Shoulders, Bag and Baggage, to shift for
themselves. And then all care was taken that fit Persons of our own Select
Fraternity enjoyed the Benefice or Cure.

My Brethren, that is the way we must go, not dally with them, but handle them
without Mittins. We must thwack their Cassocks; and rattle their Jackets. We
must stamp upon the Panch of their Villainy, and squeeze out the Garbish of
their Iniquity. And dare they resent our Proceedings with unnecessary
Interrogatories and unwelcome Reasonings, they shall have Rehoboams Answer, Our
Fathers (the Bishops) chastized you with Whipps, but we will Chastize you with
Scorpions, etc. For the same Power, which was lately resident in an
Archbishop, is inherent and of Divine Right in a Presbyter. Ay, if they repine
and call our Proceedings unreasonable, we must put our Vincent Skale-skie,
Humphrey Bang-Priest, and Curtiss Claw-Clergy upon their Backs. That Speculum
Crape-Gownorum was an excellent means to vilify their Doctrine and Parts; and
then a Fig for their Persons. Oh! 'Twas pity, pity -- Heretofore, Brethren,
we proceeded by a better way, by a two fold Authority, we had 1. a Commission
from Sir Simon Synod at Westminster; and 2. Resolves of the then Commons
Dissembled in Parliament, concerning all such Ministers, who should directly or
indirectly Preach or Pray against our Power or Proceedings: We took Cognizance
of them, and deemed and adjudged them Delinquents, and within the respective
Orders, Ordinances and Acts touching Sequestration, as to their Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Stipends: So that in a matter of Seven Years time, a General Bill
of Mortality being drawn up of those Ministers who were defunct by reason of
our Contagious Breath, the total amounted to One Hundred and Fifteen, who were
Sequestered, whereof above Forty Doctors in Divinity; their Goods we Plundered,
and turned out their Families. Reformation (Beloved) could not have been
wrought, but by these means, they were rooted in, and ere we could plant good
Seed, these Weeds must be plucked up. And then we wisely Ordered the Directory
for Worship; Classical Presbyteries, and Congregational Elderships; Then had we
our faithful painful Ministers, and such as Preached in Season, and out of
Season.

Having propounded this excellent Method for Reformation of Church-Ministers, I
proceed.

The Ingens Opus, and true Masterpiece of all, now calls aloud for your
quickened Attention, inflamed Zeal, and well-setled Endeavors; I mean, the
Discreet Election of an Able and sincere Pastor, whose Model I have conceived
briefly thus.

He must not proceed from Wales, or either of the Universities; for then we
shall never understand him: Nor yet from Jericho, lest the Gravity of his Beard
give us cause to suspect the Truth of his Enthusiasms and Inspirations: But he
shall be a smooth, sweet young Man, well descended (not from Levi, but) from
the Tribe of Gad, or Man-asses, and trained up in Amsterdam, Geneva, the Isle
of Silly, or (if you please) in our own Neighborhood, where we have good
Choice of such, whose Mechanic Professions have left them to make the Pulpit
(as others do their Swords) their quum nemini. -- Here are Felt-Makers, that
can roundly deal with the Blockheads, and Newtral Demi-casters of the World.
Cobblers, who can give good Rules for upright Walking, and handle Scripture to a
Bristle: Coachmen, who know how to lash the Beastly Enormities, and curb the
Headstrong Insolences of this Brutish Age; stoutly exhorting us to stand up
for the Truth, lest the Wheel of Destruction roundly overrun us. We have
Weavers, that can sweetly ly inform us of the Shittle-swiftness of the Time,
and practically tread out the Vicissitude of all Sublunary Things, till the Web
of our Life be cut off. And here are Merchants of my Profession, who can
separate the pieces of Damnation from those of Salvation, measure out every
Man's Portion, and cut it out by a Thread; Substantially pressing their Points,
till they have fashionably finished up their Work, with a well-bottom'd
Conclusion.

Out of this Gross Heap (wherewith we are so comfortably surrounded) we may
pick such a One, that with a Stentorian Voice (making more use of his Lungs and
Nose, than Nature requires) shall reprove our Sins in that kind and measure, as
we would have him; Shall courageously sound an Alarm to Battle; shall tell us
the Events of our Actions before they are begun, by expounding Old Visions and
Prophecies, better than he that was in Pathmos: He shall not need to Travel for
Orders to the Prelatical Hierarchy, He shall receive Orders from Us. I have
drawn up some of them already for him, and by these you may judge of the Whole;
Ex pede Herculem, ex ungue Leonem, as we use to say.

His Habit shall be a High-crown'd Hat, or (to follow the present Mode, to
avoid an Indecent Pointing at) a Low-crowned, narrow-brim Hat, a black Leather
Callot-Cap, a sad Medley-Cloak, and Jerkin of the same, Violet Hose, and Russet
stockings.

His Landress shall evidence his Hatred of White-Linnen, by his little
Coller'd-Band; and his Barber shall so roundly indent his Head, that our Eyes
may as well see his Ears, as our Ears hear his Doctrine.

In his Fathomless Prayers, he shall dispense with the Third Commandment; and
take the Lord's Name in vain ex tempore, cutting out more Work for God in an
Hour and an half, than a sober Man can expect ever to be performed by Him that
is Most Wise: And if at any time (forgetting him-self) he Pray for the King's
Majesty, it shall be with such Distractions and Dilemma's, that we can hardly
distinguish it from Treason.

His Text must never be divided, (We shall make sufficient Divisions amongst
our selves) but he shall wander from it, as if it were not a Tangible Body;
only in Case of pure Necessity, he may (for a Moment) make it a Place of
Retreat, and then frisk abroad again.

His Understanding shall be free from all Liberal Arts and Sciences, his
Conversation from all Humanity, and his Discourse from all Figures, except
Hysteron and Proteron, Hyperbole, Tautalogia, and other Flowers of the like
Scent and Color.

He shall use no Language, but his Mother Tongue, and the Hebrew, (if he has
attained to it) making choice of his Authors accordingly; such as Aben Ezra,
Rabbi David Kimchi, and the rest.

He must abominate the Greek Fathers, Chrysostom, Basil, and all the Bundle of
such Unwholesome Herbs: Also the Latins, whom the Pope-bellied Gray-beards of
the Town call St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, etc. The intricate Schoolmen, as
Aquinas, and our Devilish Learned Countryman, Alexander Halensis, shall not
come within the Sphere' of his Torrid Brain, lest his Pia Matter be confounded
with their subtle Distinctions; but, by special Dispensation, he may (for
Names-sake) cast an Eye sometimes upon Scotus; and (when he has Married a
Sisster) upon Cornelius a Lapide.

His English Authors should be curiously culled also: He must not so much as
name Whitgift, Boys, Hooker, Stillingfleet; nor any of the Rabble of
Anti-Presbyters or Conformists: But his Chief Guides shall be Knox, Brown,
Barrow, Buchanan, Robinson, Baxter, and (whom I had even forgot) that never
sufficiently honored and admired Howes, (not the Chronologer, but) one of our
late and best Translators. He was a Man, that feared not to come close to the
Heels of Truth: He was a Laborious Applyer of strong Points to the Last, and
had always a Lift or two for the Back-slider: If any stood stubbornly on his
Pantofles, he would work him as pliable as Wax: If there were a Schism in his
Charge, both his Hands and Awl should make up the Breach in a Zealous
Contraction. He well observed the Footsteps of his Auditory, and grafted much
Goodness into those, that had gone aside; driving his Holy Instigations so
home, that wheresoever they went, they were sensible of them: In a word, He was
the Hammer of all Humane Learning, a most Industrious Converter of Soales; and,
in a short Space, did set forth more Works in Oxes-Hides, than old Tostatus did
in all his Life. Oh! -- I can never mention his Name, nor visit his Monument in
Finsbury, but these Spiritual Pangs surprise me -- Oh! -- He is gone! He is
gone! But there is still Heavenly Comfort provided for Us, and our Posterity,
by the daily Preaching of his Learned Successors; and their Judicious and Pious
Works, the great Artichects of the Partition Wall: True Herod's in their
Conscientious Observance of the Sacred Covenant, though 'twere to the utter
Destruction of Themselves and Others. And now heartily thanking you (Holy
Brethren) for your present Patience, I will proceed where I left.

When our Souls are blessed with a Doctor of these, and the like rare
Qualifications, the next considerable will be his Stipend, (for this Ox will
not be muzzled) which I conceive (under Favor) should be the Ampler, in regard
there will be little or no Use of him for Weddings, Churchings and Burials;
which, in these our Purblind Times, yields the Incumbent (as the Lawyers call
him) a Comfortable Revenue. I think well (with Submission to your Judgments)
that we advance him to Forty Marks per Annum; but with this Proviso, that our
Benevolent Sisters shall not be inhibited their Voluntary Contribution of Money
(their good Husbands knowing nothing of it) and Plate, (if their Cupboards
afford it) Linen, and other Necessaries; which, I am confident, will amount to
twice as much. This was the mere Motion of my Reverend Mother, and Dear Sister:
And truly, I judge too very well motion'd; for This, with the Charitable
Collection from the Saints on Week-day's Lectures, (according to St. Paul's
Institution, 1 Cor. 16.) will be a very pretty Competency, and shall maintain
his Dear Consort, the Lady Presbyter, as Modish as the finest Lady Bishop of
them all.

And whereas we never continue long in any one Opinion, but separate daily,
from separation to separation; I hold it expedient, that once in every Fourteen
Days, (which shall be the New and Full of the Moon, the true Moderatrix of our
Brains) we have a Solemn Meeting in my Sanctified Parlour; where our Prophet
shall give us a Concise Exhortation of two Hours long, or such a matter; and
then we may Admonish him of such things, as in the matter or manner of his
former Labors, were not correspondent to our Humors; and may direct him (for
the future) how long, how broad, how high and how deep he shall teach us, how
gently or tartly he shall handle our Sores, and when he shall restrain, when
enlarge our Liberty. And then refreshing our selves in a Christian manner, with
a chirping Cup of Canary, and such good things as the Gentlewomen Priscilla and
Dorcas will minister to us (being Devoutly Consecrated by a long winded
Benediction) every one shall depart home with such precise Heedfulness, as may
prevent the scurrilous Tongues of the Malignant Tories; for I must tell you, we
have a sort of scoffing Ishmaelites, that will undertake to see Sin, where God
cannot, and with their black Mouths, will Persecute the Meekest Isaac upon
Earth. Witness their strict putting in Execution their Commissions to disturb
our Public Meetings, and their scandalous stigmatizing us by their Popish
Pamphlets; but I think we are pretty even with them in this last particular,
though our Pockets sometimes pay for it. Witness our dear Baldwin, Smith, and
Beloved Janeway, etc.

These with some other things (I know not well what) are the Compendium of my
Thoughts, leaving nothing material to the Care of my Successors, but the
Subversion of the Cross-Isle, the demolishing of the Arches (if without danger
it be feisible) and the Turning of the Main structure North and South, (which
now most offensively stands East and West) or taking it all asunder for a purer
Edification. However though we are now such Beasts to turn Stables into
Churches, yet let us abhor turning Churches into Stables; we will rather choose
the former.

Now only remains that in a pretty Diminutive Vote, you please to give your
Brotherly Assent unto the Premises. --

Never was Vestry shaken with such a Thunderclap! The Air seldom suffers such
a Holy Violence: Your loud Christian Clamor brought this Earth into such a fit
of Trembling, that (I am partly persuaded) the Graves were in some doubt they
should be dispossessed of their Guests: But I am sure this Gale has driven out
Billows of joyful Tears at my Eyes, and blown my Zeal into an extinguishable
Conflagation, which had well nigh pufft me up into another Ecstasy. This is Vis
Vnita indeed, that can set all the Elements on Work thus at a Clap. Your
unanimous Approbation (my Zealous Brethren) Obliges my extremest Abilities to
the Prosecution of my Intendments, resolving as long as the Old Word
(Magistratus indicat virum) stands firm, my Demeanor shall express me to the
Life, and make the Whigg as Famous to Posterity, as the Roundhead.

And if the well tuned Vox Populi of this Precinct shall Honor me to be your
Common-Council-Man, my Learned Oratory in Guild Hall, and Pious Devotion in the
whole Service, shall render me as Pragmatical and Phanatical a Member in the
Civil Government, as possibly I am or can be in the Ecclesiastical.

Of which you may expect shortly an Account.

-- Semel Insanivimus Omnes. FINIS.

