ENGLANDS SETTLEMENT MISTAKEN: OR A Short Survey of a Pamphlet CALLED ENGLAND'S
SETTLEMENT Upon the two solid Foundations of the Peoples Civil and Religious
LIBERTIES.

PLEADING For a Toleration of all Religions.

Wherein His Ten ARGUMENTS for Toleration are Confuted, as so many Sophisms and
Fallacies.

By a Well-willer to both Civil and Religious Liberties of the People.

London, Printed by D. Maxwell, 1660.

ENGLANDS SETTLEMENT MISTAKEN, etc.
THe Author of Englands Settlement, is by many wise men thought to be a
disguised Jesuit, or a Jesuited Sectary: '[The voice is Jacobs voice, but the
hands are the hands of Esau.] He personates in his words, a Protestant, putting
himself amongst us, as one of us, but his Design is, under a pretense of an
Universal Toleration, of all Religions; as to asperse our both Church and
State, with the ugly crime of Persecution; so especially to plead for Liberty
of Conscience to Papists and Recusants, as shall be made appear in ventilation
of the Tract it self. He has scraped together, out of several Sectarian Books
or Pamphlets, Anabaptists, Levellers, Fifth Monarchy men, etc. no less then ten
Arguments, which as they are very plausible (like a fair picture upon course
cloth afar off) to simple and weak apprehensions; so being looked on nearer
hand, and touched by the hand of a solid understanding, are like the Apples of
Sodom, which touched turn to ashes, and prove but so many threadbare Sophisms,
or transparent Fallacies, often confuted. His method of proceeding (that they
that have not his Tract may see what he has said, and judge the better of it)
is this:

1. He seems, out of pity and compassion to the Nation, (whiles he is secretly
piling up his barrels of Gunpowder, (once more) under the Parliament House, to
blow it up, by procuring an Act of Toleration for all Religions) to exemplify,
and bewail out past and present miseries, as the Amazement of the world, and
the intolerable burden of the nation; for so he says; [They experience, that
their so much talked of, and so often promised liberty, has proved nothing but
real and almost intolerable Slavery: their plenty has been turned into
miserable poverty; and their peace, into endless troubles] How truly let others
judge.

2. He tells us (what indeed we find) [There has been a curse upon the
Government these ten years; it has been all that time a rolling, like Sysiphus
stone, and inconstant like the Moon: The judgments of God have been very
terrible and universal, both over Church and State, and have gone round over
all sorts of Persons, as well of high as low degree. For the late English
Church has been quite overturned, the King himself, the Head thereof,
tragically beheaded, and his posterity rigorously excluded. The Nobillity is in
a manner degraded, the house of Peers abolished, the Ancient Gentry slighted,
the Merchants and Commons, by decay of trade, and by the unhappy conjunction of
extraordinary Taxes, impoverished, Yea the Parliaments themselves, have not
gone without some chastisement. For their own hired servants, have oftener,
than once, lifted their heels against them, and without any lawful Authority,
but according to their own pleasures or interests, have dissolved, called,
annihilated and revived them. Only the Soldiers, whom God has used as
Instruments to punish others, may seem to have gone hitherto unpunished] How
true this is also let others judge.

3 He seems to take upon him to be a prophet, and to foretell what is like to
come upon those (the Army) that have not yet smarted: for so he says: [Every
thing must have its time, to come to maturity: and God Almighty has begun
already to manifest his judgments, upon some of their principal Heads and first
Movers: O. P. his posterity, and others of his chief Officers etc. which may
serve for a warning for all the rest, to prevent Gods Judgments, ^est they sall
heavily upon them, here, or hereafter] They may do well to consider it, and lay
it to heart

4. Having done this, he inquires into the causes of these judgments and divine
visitations, and our so long unsettlement: and resolves well in general, [Some
very heinous sin or sins have provoked them; but what these sins are in
particular, is not so easy to determine, to every man's satisfaction.] Yet he
goes on, in the search of them, and first gives us his own judgment upon the
case; [it may probably be affirmed, if not averred as a certain truth, that
Soul-tyranny, or coercive power over men's consciences, is the principal sin
that has drawn down these judgments from heaven, (for some reasons,) For first
it is an heinous sin in it self, (as he will show shortly) and especially if it
be exercised against the true Religion:] Before we hear the rest, consider
this; First, he should have said, Soul Tyranny is an heinous sin, (not
especially, but) only when it is exercised against the true Religion: Coercive
power exercised against false Religion, is no Tyranny, no sin at all, but an
Act of Justice, or Religion. Secondly he forgot himself in this Assertion; and
did not remember, that in Rome it self, Italy and Spain, etc. where that Soul
Tyranny is most rigorously exercised, (setting up a false Religion, and
persecuting the true, in their High commission, and Inquisition Courts:) there
is as yet, the greatest peace and prosperity, and flourishing of those Nations,
their sins being not yet mature, for their long ago determined judgments.
However, it seems, those Politician, are not of this man's Cabinet Council, that
Toleration of all Religions, is one of the Pillars of a States Settlement: Its
experimented too much, and too long, through many ages, that no hatreds (and
so, no differences,) are like those of different Religions: and (which is
observable) the nearer they come unto an union in matters of Religion, (if yet
there be some difference) the more strong and deadly are their hatreds, the
more fierce and violent their Animosities. The Jew and the Samaritan were; The
Protestants and Papists, The Lutheran Arminians and Calvinists etc. are at this
day, the most deadly enemies. The reason is well given, by one not meanly
learned, [They both plead for their God; and that man has no Religion, that
can put up an Indignity offered to his God.] See that story Act. 19.23. etc.
But Thirdly, he forgot himself once more; and did not consider, that all those
miseries (or most of them) have fallen upon this Nation, since the desired
Liberty of conscience was gratified with a Toleration, or Connivence at least.
And whither they will ever end, till Religion be established in truth, purity
and power, is a problem not yet determined, but may be, ere we have done.

A second Reason why Soul tyranny is so heinous a sin, and cause of our
miseries, he gives to be this; that [This Nation has been deeply gurley of it
above these hundred years] He means forsooth in prosecuting Papists, not for
their Religion, but their Rebellion, and rebellious principles* What is this,
but to call our Church and State Persecutors? But of this more anon.

It is true, (which is his third Reason of our miseries) [Each party objects
persecution to another, as the cause of all their miseries] But one party only
truly: For, as there is but one true Religion, so there can be no persecution
properly but of that, the rest is a just prosecution of errors and heresies,
that destroy not only the Faith, but the Souls of many. And his distinction I
desire may be remembered, Arbitrary Government was one of the alleged grounds
of the late war, etc. p. 5.
as of use hereafter. But that this was the cause, [or principle ground of the
late wars between King and Parliament] is is utterly false: The ground of their
differences (as they held them forth) was the encroachment upon their civil
Liberties, and privileges of Parliament: but I leave this to them whom it
concerns; as for what is made the judgments of others, concerning our miseries,
by Papists, Presbyterians, Royalists Independents it is not worth the while to
debate; Its like every party will remove the objection from it self, and charge
it upon others, let them agree it.

3. He is now drawing toward his main business; [what ever the sin be, that
has drawn the foresaid Judgments upon these Nations; it is certain, with
almost all Prudent and Unbyassed men, that this State especially as matters
now stand, in such a variety of Religions shall never be firmly settled, under
any form of Government, unless it be built upon such a solid Foundation, as may
assert and secure the peoples liberties, both Religious and Civil.] leave but
out these words [especially as matters now stand in such a variety of Religion]
which have a secret design, as we shall hear presently; the thing will be
granted by all prudent men, [that no State can be firmly settled, unless it be
built upon such a solid foundation, as may assert and secure the peoples
liberties, both civil and Religious.] But, I pray, what is that foundation? In
his Title page he speaks of two solid foundations for the settlement of
England; and makes them there and here, to be the peoples civil and Religious
Liberties: when as these themselves, do need a foundation to secure and settle
them upon, which he cunningly conceals and is unwilling to discover; for thus
he asserts again, page 4.
[The two pillars whereupon this State must be settled, are the Spiritual and
civil liberties of the people, that is, in the Parliaments language, as Men, as
Christians.] But upon what foundation, shall these two pillars stand? The
peoples Liberties civil or Religious, are but the walls, or roof of this
building; and as he said before, must be built upon some other solid
foundation, which what it is, I desire to know. He seems to resolveit, into [
just Laws, to free the people from Slavery in their Persons, and Oppression in
their Goods.] And indeed, that may go for one of the foundations to settle a
State upon, (viz) Righteousness, to assert and secure their Civil and Religious
Liberties; but there is another, and a stronger foundation, and that is, the
True Religion established and practiced; of which more hereafter.

For the first pillar or foundation, that of civil liberties of the people, he
says, he shall speak but a little; and I less; it is not our main business in
hand: Three things only he delivers concerning the civil Liberties. [1 That
they were much more violated since the Kings death, then before in his time;
viz. 1. In their Representatives, when the Major part of the Parliament members
were violently thrust out of the House, and diverse of them Imprisoned; and much
more when they were dissolved without any Lawful Authority, by force and power
of the sword, which the peoples servants turned against themselves. 2. By the
change of Government and Election of a new supreme Magistrate, without the
suffrages of the people, etc. 3. When freeborn persons were imprisoned by
Arbitrary power, and inhumanly used in Prison; Trepanning men into Plots, and
then cruelly executed etc. Lastly in their Goods, by exorbitant and continual
Taxes, etc.]

Then 2. like a good Physician or Statesman, he prescribes the Remedies to
these our Maladies: I shall but name them: 1. [That some course be taken to
make the power of the sword subordinate to the civil power; that the Soldiers
be not suffered any more to domineere over their Masters: as the Roman
Praetorian bands did, and the Turks Janisaries do. 2. That no person be
imprisoned, nor his goods touched, without breach of a known Law 3. That at
length the people may be freed from their long and exorbitant Taxes; by
reducing the Army to as small and competent a number as can be, etc. 4. All
possible means used to quicken Trade, etc.] 3. He seems to prophecy once more
to the little comfort of the people. [When all is done, (let them make the best
Settlement they can) the people are not like to be in so good a case, as they
were in the Kings time, etc. The Government settled, cannot be maintained
without a continued Army, and Navy, nor those, without continual Taxes, Excise,
and other insupportable burdens, etc.] which with him, I leave to the
consideration of the Present powers.

He now comes to the [other maine Basis or Pillar, that must uphold the great
Fabric of this State, to make it stand firm and sure, the Spiritual or
Religious Liberties of the people; which consists in this, that no person
professing Faith in Christ, be molested or oppressed in his conscience, for his
judgment in matters of Religion, or in things relating to the worship of God.]
1. That true Religion maintained in its power and purity, is a maine B^sis or
Power of a State, I have often heard; but the peoples Religious Liberties, are
but the product and fruit of that Religion, or of civil Righteousness, in a well
settled State, 2. If by Religious Liberty, he mean, (as he does) Toleration of
all Religions, in all that pretend to conscience; that every man, may not only
think and be on what Religion he please, but practice accordingly, it is to be
feared, it will in stead of a solid foundation, prove a quicksand or quagmire,
and quickly sink, or draw after it the peoples civil Liberties, which is his
other pillar: For is there not a conscience to be made in civil Liberties? And
must not a man follow his conscience in civil things as well as in Religious?
Suppose a man be an Anabaptist, that out of conscience denies all Magistracy;
or a Leveller, or Familist, that hold all things ought to be common, goods and
wives and all; may he be suffered to follow his Conscience in these things? Or
may he be restrained or punished, if he take another man's goods, or abuse his
wife? etc. If so, is not this to exercise a coercive power over Conscience? If
not, will it not destroy, as some Principles of Religion, so all Humane
Society? Let him but make the peoples civil Liberties commensurable, with his
Religious Liberties, that is, that as any man may be of any Religion, so every
man may, in civil affairs, do what seems good in his own eyes, without
restraint upon his Conscience, and see what a Commonwealth he has Settled,
upon the foundations of Civil and Religious Liberties. He may find the pattern
of it, in the 5. or 6. last Chapters of the Book of Judges.

3. But wherein does this Spiritual Liberty consist? [In this, that no person
professing faith in Christ, be molested or oppressed in his conscience, for his
judgment in matters of Religion etc.] If this be the meaning, that no man shall
be molested in his conscience, for his judgment only, in matters of Religion,
and Worship, it will easily be granted; for what Magistrate, or Church, can
take cognizance of men's judgments, while they keep them to themselves? But the
question is, whether every man that professes faith in Christ, must be left to
himself, to publish and propagate his erroneous and heretical judgment to
others; and to practice openly, what worship he, in his erring judgment, thinks
to be true? Besides conscience pretended, (and so Religion) is true or false;
if it be truly informed in the true Religion, he ought not to be molested or
oppressed in conscience, in matters of Religion: But if false; to deny some
kind of molestation (though we allow not opression) to such a conscience, is to
deny charity to a soul running headlong to Hell for fear of troubling a
misleading Conscience: Contrary to that Scripture Rule; [Of some have
compassion, Jude v. 22. 23.
making a difference, and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire:]

Lastly, He makes the Religious Liberty of the people, to consist in this,
[That no person professing faith in Christ, be molested in his conscience etc.]
But this Rule is too narrow, and too strait-laced; allowing a coercive power,
to molest some consciences; viz. of such as profess not faith in Christ; And
such an abortive brat, is that late Act of Parliament (falsely so called) made
in more have, than good Speed, (the night before their last dissolution by the
Army) for Toleration of tender consciences, almost in the same words. For if no
person may be molested for conscience, then not a Jew, that denies and
blasphemes Jesus Christ: not a Turk for Mohammedan worship; not an Heathen,
that worships the Sun, or some old worm-eaten Idol; not any man of any Religion
whatever. All or any of these may set up their Temples, and worship of their
Gods in England, without any molestation of conscience: For they have
consciences as well as other men; and act according to their consciences; as
well as they, and conscience (says he, say all men) may not be forced: Behold
an Universal Toleration indeed. Would he see a parallel to it? He may find it
(I say not, in New Rome, where Jews and others find far more favor than
protestants; but) either in old Rome, where they had a Pantheon of all Gods; or
in Solomon's old age and doting times, allowing, (under the view of Gods own
Temple) high places to all his wives Idols, and a Toleration to worship them:
1. King 11.7, 8. [Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh the
abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem; and for Moloch, the
abomination of the children of Ammon; and likewise did he for all his strange
wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed to their Gods.] England (it seems) is
grown old, and is come to Solomon's dotage; an hundred year (or thereabouts, the
age of Solomon) it is, since the first Reformation from Popery, by protestant
Religion, (so long this Author accounts this our Religion, to have persecuted
the Papists, as above:) and that which she could never be persuaded to do, in
her younger days, ( viz. to grant a Toleration to Papists or other Sectaries)
she now in her dotage, in favor to her outlandish Paramours, the Jesuits,
has by a pretended Parliament, too liberally granted: That which the former
Kings and Parliaments, both when Popish, and since they had the name of
Protestants, would never yield; that which the King of Scots, would rather
loose the Assistance offered by two potent Popish Princes, to settle him in his
Throne, than yield unto: That which Papists and Jesuits deny to yield to
Protestants, in their dominions, that this lower and latter end of a broken
Parliament, has yielded to Papists, and the worst of Sectaries; To the shame
of Parliaments, our Nation, and Religion; But I forbear.

But to the Setlement, he says; [The Government of these Nations as the case
now stands, cannot be firmly settled, without taking away all Restraint over
Men's consciences and granting an innocent Toleration.] This is the question now
between us. In the stating whereof, are these things very considerable. 1. He
qualifies it, with these words, [as the case now stands] which a little after,
he explains by these words [especially when variety of Religions have got
footing in a Nation.] 1. It seems then, where the case is otherwise, that
variety of Religions have got no footing, it may be lawful to lay some
Restraint upon erring consciences, and to deny the most innocent Toleration:
But did he not say universally, no man professing Christ, is to be molested in
conscience, for his judgment in matters of Religion? Which if it were true, no
cases nor exeptions need to be put in; no Restraint must be laid upon men's
consciences, to start or publish some new Religion, according to their
consciences; for that will prove a way to unsettle that Nation or Church. 2.
Must all restraint of conscience be taken away? What, of those consciences,
whose principles are destructive, not only to Religion in the Church, but also
to the peace and safety of the State; as those of Papists, that it is Lawful to
murder Kings, made heretical by the Pope; or to follow Impulses of Spirit, to
kill Antichristian Priests, as the Quakers (the Jesuits disciples) now begin
to assert and avow? That State that will allow such consciences with such
principles, deserve to be destroyed, as having neither Policy, Prudence, nor
Piety: Yet all Restraint, in this case must be taken away, says our Author, and
an innocent tolleration (which is a kind of contradiction) granted: 3. But see
the Impudence of Jesuits: They have been the Instruments to give variety of
Religions footing in the Nation; and now, they tell us, as the case now stands,
the Government cannot be settled, till all restraint of conscience be taken
away, and an Innocent toleration granted: But hear his reasons.

1. [All men know, the freedom of conscience in matters of Religion, is the
last, and highest interest of man, valued by him above all earthly things, and
therefore nothing can be more earnestly desired by him: And nothing is more
repugnant to man, than a Restraint or Coercive Power over his conscience; and
therefore cannot but raise a deep discontent in him, and earnest desire to be
free of that soul-tyranny; and to wish, and work (if it be in their power) and
make a change of that Government: whence it clearly follows, that that state
which puts a restraint upon men's consciences, especially when variety of
Religions has got a footing in it, cannot be well and solidly settled, but is
exposed to unavoidable troubles, jealousies, and danger of ruin.] Thus far the
Jesuit; To which we say, Liberty of Conscience, in profession of the true
Religion, is a thing of special value, and by all desired; but liberty granted
to erroneous and heretical consciences, is a thing most dangerous and
destructive, to their own and other souls, and by no wise man to be desired,
nor by any religious State to be granted. But observe again, those interposed
words (especially when variety of Religions has got a footing in a Nation.)
And again, (especially as the case now stands) observe, (what was noted above)
that it was the design of the Jesuits, on purpose, to break our Religion into
fractions, that so they might plead for toleration of all; upon this ground,
that the State cannot now be solidly settled, if they put a restraint upon men's
consciences: At Rome, and else where, where they are all of one false Religion;
they may, and do put restraint upon men's consciences, that whatever they think
in their judgments, they may not dare to publish their opinions, and set up new
Religions: May not a Protestant Magistrate, lay a restraint upon all Religions,
but the true, by way of remedy, which they do by way of prevention, knowing,
that if variety of Religions be suffered to get footing in a Nation, they will
unsettle the peace of the Nation, as well, as where they have already got
footing: But enough of that; In particular to the Argument, I say many things.
1. It is no Paradox to say, conscience it self (though the body may) cannot be
forced or restrained, (as the will cannot) but is ever seen, when the tongue or
body may be bound: [The Word of God is not bound,] though I be, said the great
Apostle in Prison. The conscience has its freedom, either to practice
according to it, or to suffer in its restraint, not with discontent (as he) but
upon choice, and joyfully too. 2. That Is no good conscience, that desires, and
works to be free from soul-tyranny, by working a change of that Government, by
which it is racked. The Apostles and primitive Christians, (when they had power
in their hand, as the greater number) did not so, but pleaded and urged,
obedience either active or passive, to the worst of Governments. Whence it
appears, that this is no part of the Doctrine of Jesus, but a drop of
Jesuitisme: That restraint of conscience may (lawfully) put men upon designs to
ruin the State, under which they live and suffer. This may be part of the
Politicians Catechism, which he speaks of, hatched in the Conclave of Rome, or
the Jesuits juncto's; but is wisdom earthly; sensual, divelish, yea, too
often practiced by them, as in other States, so in ours of England; His own
instances shall convince him, [that of the foreign Invesion, in the year 88,
and again by a detestible Gunpowder Plot, of some few desperate Papists, etc.]
Detestible Plots indeed, and desperate, not by some few Papists (or as one
called them, unfortunate Gentlemen, not for the undertaking, but unfortunate in
their success) not by some few Papists, but by an Armado the one, the other not
without the Approbation of many Priests and Jesuits, and the Canonization of
the chief Contriver, Garnet, at Rome. True Protestants have ever hated such
Religion, as allows People to rebel against, and endeavor the ruin or
subversion of the State, rather then suffer for Religion: As for those
instances, in France, Holland, Scotland, or any other; I shall not take upon me
to justify or condemn them, because I know not their grounds; they are old
enough, and able to plead for themselves: But this only I shall commend to the
consideration of the present Powers; [That though some other Sects or several
Religions (as he calls them) have made Insurrections, since the change of the
Government (above ten years since) to the danger of the State; yet, those that
are true Presbyterians, have never in the least, devised any Plots, or moved a
Finger against any of the Powers that have been uppermost, but have sat still
in silence and submission, resolved to yield active obedience to their
commands, where lawfully they may, or passive obedience, to suffer, where their
consciences dare not act, or approve.] And to this man, I say, The
Presbyterians have never exercised any Soul tyranny over men's consciences, upon
any of different opinions from them, in matters of Religion, (as never having
had any such power granted them) unless upon their own consenting Members, in a
spiritual way, which himself allows. Whom have they ever punished in their
bodies, mulcted in their goods, cropped off their ears imprisoned, banished, etc.
They abhor the thoughts, (much more the practice) of such soul-tyranny, and
leave it either to the former Government, or to his holy Father the Pope, from
whence it had its Original. Yet these are the men, whom this bold Calumniator
dare asperse [as overturners of the State, (some more precise sort of
Protestants, who past all before, under the name of Puritans) and that upon the
same score of Religion, to be free of all restraint of their consciences, and
enjoy a greater freedom.] The Lord rebuke thee, thou slanderous Tongue; that
restraint was laid upon the consciences of those honest men, who were unjustly
called Puritans, is too evident to be denied: That they might seek to be free
from that restraint, may also be yielded, but not in any seditious, or
tumultuous way; but in a way of Address to the Supreme Power of Parliament,
abhorring the very thought of overturning the State; though by the fraud and
subtilty of some, that have followed, which they never intended: Himself has
told us, what was one, (and a chief, if not the only) cause of the late Wars,
[Arbitrary Government, and encroaching upon the Peoples Civil Liberties. p. 5.]
not at all or not primarily, [upon the score of Religion] though they might
justly fear, that by Arbitrary Government, Religion at last might come to
suffer; as all that know the state of those times, cannot but confess. 3. As
for his innocent toleration, let us hear what he says; [An inoffensive
Toleration in matters of Religion secures all, and cements the Peoples greatest
Interest, to preserve and defend the Commonwealth; whereof we see a near and
clear example in the Commonwealth of Holland.] But 1. Why may he not conclude
the like for Peoples civil Liberties? An innocent, and inoffensive community of
all things, will secure all, and cement the Peoples Interest, to preserve and
defend the Common wealth, wherein they enjoy such freedom: It is propriety
that puts wicked men upon Breach of Peace; that puts men upon stealing one from
another: Let rich men but be persuaded, to let their houses, goods, and money
be free, and common to all, there will be no disturbance in the State; so in
matters of Religion; let men have liberty to be of any Religion, or none, true,
or false; let them blaspheme the Name of God, and Jesus Christ, worship them
with what worship they please, though forbidden; and the Church and States need
not trouble themselves, or sear any troubles. It is the Magistrate, or the
Church, that by denying People this liberty, and laying restraint upon their
consciences, that are guilty of all unsetling disturbances, etc. 2. The
Toleration of the Hollander: I never yet heard a truly religious man to commend
or approve, till now, if now it is, I fear, more out of policy, than piety: But
I believe, if the Hollander had not a better Guard by Sea and Land to secure
and defend his State, than the cement, or untempered Mortar of Toleration; he
had long ere this been reduced, either to his old Master, or to utter
destruction: However, male parta, male dilabentur, when the time comes: We see
the fruit of Toleration in England, since it has been granted; the variety of
Religions, as it has served in one sense, to strengthen a prevailing party, by
the politic Maxim, Divide and Impera: So it has made no small disturbances in
the Church and State; and had they not an Army to quiet them, had long ere
this, laid them in the dust, and the Nation in ashes: And what will be the
issue, God only knows.

2. His next Reason, or Argument, is borrowed from one Mr. Collier, an
Anabaptist at least, if not Jesuited, and consists of many, no less than sour
Arguments, which all have respect to the Magistrate, [As by Coercive power in
matters of Religion, becoming guilty of high Treason, against Jesus Christ, in
usurping upon his prerogative:] But the man has quite mistaken the question,
(as no doubt this Author knows, but would take no notice of it.) This he
undertakes to prove, [That it is unlawful for the Magistrate to pretend any
right of Coercive power, over men's consciences, and an heinous sin in him to
exercise it.] The thing is true in it self, but not to the question. The
Magistrate has no more Coercive power over men's consciences, than the Church
has over men's bodies: Christ only is Lord over the conscience: Magistrates
cannot impose any Laws of their own over the consciences of men, nor force any
to believe or practice, contrary to the Laws of Christ, or contrary to their
consciences; or punish them for not so believing, etc. But the question is,
whether a Magistrate Christian, at least, professing the true Religion, may not
use his power to command professed Christians, to the observance of the Laws of
Christ, and the outward prescribed worship of God, and punish them for not
conforming thereunto? whether also, he may not restrain men from publishing and
practsing of Errors and Heresies, and false worship, contrary to the true
Religion, to the perverting and destroying of men's souls? And if his Arguments
prove not the Negative of these, they prove nothing. But let us hear them.

1. [The Magistrate has received no such power, from Christ in the New
Testament, in matters relating to Faith and Worship: Ergo, Christ has reserved
the power over conscience to himself, as Lord of it.] The whole of this may be
granted, and is granted above, in a right sense, without any prejudice to the
question between us: Christ only is Lord over the Conscience, to prescribe Laws
of Faith, and Worship: 2. The second is the same with the first in fense. The
Magistrate cannot impose Rules of Faith and Worship upon people, etc. But may
he not impose the Laws of God and Christ upon his people? And ought he not
therein to be obeyed? And Punish those that refuse them, or walk contrary to
them? And if he command contrary to those Rules of Christ, though he must not
be therein obeyed, must he not Passively be submitted to? And what if Christ
have not in the New Testament committed such power to the Magistrate, (as will
be proved he has) is it not sufficient that he has committed it to him in the
old Testament. And that not only the Kings of Judah, but Heathen Kings have
executed such a Power? See Dan. 3.29. and 6.26. So that it is a Moral duty of a
Magistrate, known by the light of Nature, as Gods Vicegerent, to publish the
Laws of God, to command obedience to them, and to punish Trangressors: and is
not this a Coercive power committed to the Magistrate? 3. He thus argues; [If
the Magistrates have such a power, then all or some: If all, then Heathen
Magistrates have it, but that is absurd: If Christian only, they may be of
diverse Religions, and command contrary to Christ's Rules, one, one Religion,
another, another, etc.] This is the sum of his Dilemmatical discourse. But the
Answer is easy; this power (we speak of) belongs to all Magistrates, as
Magistrates, (even Heathens as before) though all are not in a capacity, or have
ability to perform it. As in the fifth Commandment, all parents are bound to
instruct, and command their children to know and fear God, and correct their
disobedience; but Heathen parents cannot rightly do it: The power of the
Magistrate (who is pater patriae) is the very same, in a greater latitude, and
belongs; to the same Commandment: though all cannot perform it, but that is
their fault. Obj. [They may be of different Religions or beliefs, and think
themselves in the right, and so every one that has power, will persecute
another; Protestants, Papists, and contra.] At their peril be it, if they
believe falsely, and persecute the true Religion: But ought they to do so? May
they that are of a false Religion persecute those that profess the true
Religion? Did he not say, above, this was the most heinous sin? And may not
they that profess and have the true Religion, prosecute those that are
heretical, to bring them to a true belief and practice: This case is parallel:
A Magistrate may punish offenders against righteousness in civil affairs, Ergo,
He or another may persecute others for righteousness; but (says he) [Allow
this, that diverse Religions may persecute one another, and what confusion will
this bring into a State, into the World?] Sol. 1. Is there no difference
between prosecution of evil doers? and persecution of the innocent, every
Thief, and every Heretic, if punished or restrained, cry out of persecution.
But how unjustly? 2. Has not Christ foretold it, and by his Providence so
orders it, that there shall be persecution of the good for his sake, and for
righteousness sake? yea, and command his people to suffer it (not with
opposition, or a desire to ruin and subvert that State that offers it) but
without impatience, with greatest joy and gladness. How unlike to Jesus, are
our Jesuits? 4. His fourth Argument is this; [Christ has committed his
authority in matters of Religion, relating to worship, to his Church; and
commands to tell the Church, etc. Ergo, Not to the Magistrate.] But 1. Why did
he leave out in matters of Faith, that might have given us cause to suspect the
Jesuit, who allows to his Pope, power in matters of Faith, in his Trent
Creed; but in worship, the Church (he would have us believe) have some latitude
of power, which she has not, except in mere circumstances, not to appoint the
worship it self. 2. For I ask, Has Christ committed his Authority to the
Church, to coin new Articles of Faith, and new forms of Worship? If not, the
Church and Magistrate are herein equal in their power; between whom this
Argument would insinuate a difference. The Church has no Authority Coercive
upon men's consciences, in matters relating to Faith and Worship, more then the
Magestrate has; but both are, in their own way, to publish and look to the
execution of Christ's rules in both: The only difference is, that the power of
the Church is Spiritual, that of the Magistrate Corporal. And they may not
meddle with each other Powers; the Magistrate may no more exercise the
spiritual power of the Church, than the Church may exercise power over men's
bodies or estates. 3. This Disputer, (if he understand what he says) would
insinuate, that Christ has committed Authority over men's consciences, to the
Church, which the Apostle earnestly disclaims, 2 Cor. 1.24. And yet the Church
has some kind of Coercive power over her Members, as appears in her censure of
Excommunication; which our Author says, is a worse punishment, than all the
Magistrate can inflict upon the body; [as giving men over to the World, and to
Satan.] Now look back a little, and sum up all. It is a general rule, laid down
by all sides; [Conscience may not, must not be forced in matters of Religion,
by any Coercive power:] Then, neither by the Church, nor Magistrate, neither
spiritually nor corporally: The Church may no more force conscience, than the
Magistrate; yet the Church exercising and executing Examination upon an
Heretic, or scandalous person, exercises a Coersive power; and (as they will
say) over their consciences; for they verily believe themselves in the right
Religion: Therefore, either the exercise of Coercive power by the Church, is
also unlawful, and so he has destroyed the power of the Church in matters of
Religion, as well as of the Magistrate, or else, it is no force over men's
consciences, but over the errors of their consciences. And laftly, If it be
lawful for the Church to restrain and chaftise an Heretic by her spiritual
censures, without any force to her conscience; Why may it not be lawful for the
Magistrate to restrain such a soul destroying Heretic, by bodily punishments,
and yet without force upon his conscience? Why may not the Magistrate deliver
such a man to the Jailer, as the Church delivers him to the Devil? Especially,
the end of both being, (as much as in them lies) to save his soul: Whence I
conclude against him; this Power of the Magistrate, is no Usurpation of the
Dominion of Christ, or the Power of the Church; much lefs, Treason against
Christ: Thus weakly has M. Collier argued hitherto; we shall hear of him again
are long.

3. His third Reason is borrowed from as wise an Author, [The Vindicatour of
Sir Henry Vane. [Nothing can be more against the spiritual good of People, than
to make them hypocrites in Religion, professing to believe what they do not]
Learned Soul! Has not the State and Church of England commanded all their
People to frequent our Congregations, under a penalty, every Lords Day? Has
not this man accordingly frequented them? And has he been all this while an
hypocrite, professing to believe, what he does not? But if force in Religion
make men hypocrites, why did God commend Abraham to circumcise all the males of
his family? Why did the Godly Magistrates command all their Subjects, under the
Old Testament, to serve the Lord, according to the worship prescribed? Did God
or men intend to make them hypocrites? Which they must have done, if Coercive
power did make them so: Alas, most men are hypocrites already, though they be
not forced to worship God; therefore Coercive power does not make, but find,
and discovers hypocrites: Must not God be obeyed, though men be hypocrites? But
real Christians, (who only can truly be forced against conscience) do not turn
hypocrites, but refuse obedience, and choose to suffer, which discovers their
faith and patience, and bring much glory to God. There must be persecution (as
well as Heresies) that they which are approved may be known, It is therefore by
accident, that such force makes men appear hypocrites, by commanding them to
obey the Laws of God; the Law of God irritates corruption, but causes it not,
Romans 7.13, 23. If then God, or men from God, command men to worship God;
according to his will, they find many hypocrites, but do not make them such:
They sin, if they serve him not; and if hypocritically, they sin also; and its
hard to say, which is worst: But this is some of the new light of this age;
that Children must not be taught their Commandments, Creed, or Lords Prayer, or
to read the Scriptures, because they are yet hypocrites; or none must receive
the Lords Supper, that knows not himself regenerate, lest it make him an
hypocrite. Enough of this.

4. His fourth Reason is taken out of the Levellers Catechism. A Levelling
Principle indeed, to deny the Magistrates power in matters of Religion first,
and then in civil affairs: If all were levelled, and but content to be so, what
need, what use of a Magistrate? But hear their worthy Reason: [It's against the
nature of faith and worship to be forced: Christ has ordained the preaching of
the Gospel, to be the outward means of converting souls, and spiritual
Ordinances for punishment of erroneous and heretical persons, etc.] This has
been spoken to in answering Mr. Colliers first and second reasons, and in the
last before: But I add further, it contradicts it self twice: 1. In saying,
that the preaching of the word is the outward means of Conversion; and yet
denies any force to bring professed Christians to the attending on that means.
2. That they allow spiritual punishment, which is a greater force, for reducing
erroneous and heretical persons; and yet denies not only the Magistrate, to use
any the least force to the bodies or estates of men, but any force at all over
men's consciences: If no force may be used, then not the spiritual, as was said
before. Lastly, he takes for granted (what we utterly deny) that we allow the
Church a power, to punish mis-believers (or mis-livers) in bodies or purses.
Some have done so, but I hope they have had time to repent it, for so
dishonouring the Church.

5. The next is from a better Author, but to as little purpose [From the
parable of the Tares among the Wheat, both must be let alone till the Harvest;
the Wheat are the elect, the Tares are Heretics, etc.] It might be enough to
answer this, that it is a parable, which is a similitude, and must not be
strained beyond its scope, which is, to let us know, that good and bad, upright
and hypocrites must be in the Church, till the end of the World: And yet some
are about to make a Church of all Saints, and to pluck up the Wheat, in
pretense of pulling up the Tares: But 2. By Tares, cannot well be meant
heretical persons (not in Austin's judgment) for he and other Doctors, with the
Scripture, allow Excommunication of Heretics and scandalous persons, which is
not only a plucking up of the Tares, but a casting them out of the Church, into
Hell, without repentance. 3. Our Savior himseif tells us, who are the tares,
the children of the wicked one, and such as do iniquity. Mat. 13.38.41. Now
hence it would follow, that neither Church, nor Magistrate must punish such,
but let them alone to the end of the World; a pleasiing Doctrine to thieves,
and all wicked persons. But if, notwithstanding this parable, it be lawful for
the Church, to punish Heretics spiritually, and for the Magistrate to punish
them corporally; he has mistaken the parable: And if the Magistrate may punish
a murdour bodily, for killing the bodies of men; why should it be unlawful for
him to punish an heretical seducer, that destroys men's souls, and that
eternally? I leave him to consider it.

6. He fetches this next Reason from far [from the judgment of the ancients,
and practice of the primitive Church; Lactan. Tertull. etc. who seem to deny
all force in Religion:] A little may serve for this. There is a difference to
be put between Heathens and Christians, in matters of Religion: The Ancients
speak against forcing Heathens into Christianity, till they first be informed,
and convinced of the truth thereof, not of compelling professed Christians, to
the outward Worship of God, as the King of Judah did. 2. The practice of
Christian Emperors, was accordingly, for the most part, with respect to
Heathens. Yet some of them made Edicts, to command all their subject to be of
the Christian Religion: Justinian, and others, as were easy to instance. 3. In
Pressing this ARgument too far, he forgot himself, that he makes his Pope, and
Popish Princes worse then Turks, and Furies, in their persecution of
Protestants. And let them but give this liberty of conscience to all their
subjects, which he pleads for in England, and lay aside their coercive power,
and I believe Popery will have but a few clients; most of them would quickly
forsake their Church and Religion, especially, if they might have the truth
freely taught by some Protestants.

7. But a reason fatcht from a principle of nature, and natural light, will
convince any reasonable man: [It's against the golden rule of natural
righteousness; do as we would be done by; and do not to others, what we would
not have done to our selves; but who would be content to be persecuted by
others for his Religion? etc.] Truly, no man would, or at least should be
persecuted for his true Religion; but he that would not be prosecuted for a
false Religion, argues himself to be unrighteous, and to violate that principle
of nature; and another like it, Aequo animo paenam, qui meruere luant. Let him
make this rule universal, and thieves, and malefactors will give him many
thanks: What Thieves would be content to be hanged by a Magistrate? Ergo, If he
get to be a Magistrate, he must not hang a Thief, etc. Bring it nearer to
himself, what Jesuit would be content to be executed, for sedition, and
seducement of Protestants, from their Religion, and Loyalty, Ergo. nor should
they persecute Protestants in their Dominions: How likes he this? The Golden
Rule, is made for true rectifyed consciences, not for every one that pretends
it: What in true reason, I would have another do, or not do, to me; that I
should be content to do, or not do to another: If a man should argue thus; I
would not be content to be persecuted for the true Religion, Ergo, I must not
prosecute one that is in the false: Or thus, If I am an Heretic, perverting
Souls, and would not be restrained or punished for so doing; Ergo, I must let
others alone, and not punish them for the same; both these consequences are
false and unreasonable, and mere pervertings and crooknings of that Golden
Rule: This is a Jesuitical consequence; I would not be punished for my seduce
meant in England; Ergo, I may plead for Toleration of Popery, and all Religions:
This consequence, I say, is good now in England, to cheat simple souls; but
would be denied with an Inquisition at Rome or in Spain. Such another fallacy
is that; which follows, a Christian must pray for his Enemies; Ergo, he must
not persecute his brother, be he never so wicked. (q. d.) I must pray for a
Thief or Murderer, Heretic; Ergo, I may not prosecute them to just punishment,
corporally the one, spiritually the other.

8. The next reason comes yet nearer home; ad hominem, as we say; and that is
thus. [It is against our own principles] and the testimony of an Adversary is
most strong against himself: Wherein? In three things.

1. [We profess our selves to be fallible, in judging universally in matters of
Religion, and object it to the Papists, pretending infallibility; but by
persecuting others for conscience, we make our selves infallible, as Mr.
Collier wiely observes.] For this, he has been told; we persecute no man for
his conscience, but may prosecute a man for an erring conscience; which he
still concludes, a just prosecution, with an unjust persecution. 2. We profess
our selves to be fallible, or not infallible, in the Popish sense: He deludes
us, with the equivocation of the words. If he mean that we hold our selves
fallible, universally in all matters of Religion, that we are uncertain of all
points of Religion, and certain of nothing, that were to make us mere Scepticks
in our Religion, and we own not such a fallibility: On the other side, we do
not think our selves infallible universally in matters of Religion, as the Pope
does; but that in some fundamental truths, we are infallible, that is, most
certain of the truths of our Religion, clearly revealed in Scripture, which is
an infallible rule; though we are not always able to apply it. But the Pope as
he makes himself infallible in all points of Religion, which he determines out
of the Pontifical Chair; so he does it, in things besides, and against the
Scripture; and this we object to him, as an heinous crime, and high usurpation
of the prerogative of Jesus Christ, speaking in the Scripture. 3. What need is
there that we must be infallible, to judge and punish an Heretic? why this [We
cannot rationally persecute any man for his conscience, unlesswe we do not only
know that he is in an ertor, but also be infallibly sure, that we are bringing
him to an undoubted truth:] Be it so, then we assume; we may know that the man
is in an error, (if we may know the truth) and be infallibly sure, we are
bringing him to an undoubted truth; Ergo, we may persecute (we say, prosecute)
him for his erring conscience: e. g. We know certainly, that he that denies a
God, or Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, and Savior of the World, is in an
error, and we are infallibly sure, we are bringing him to an undoubted truth,
to profess a God, and Jesus Christ: and Ergo, we may, by his own premises,
persecute, or rather prosecute him for his erring conscience. Whereupon the
following assertion is most unchristian and uncharitable: [It would be better
for us, to let him alone in his (known, damning) errors, than to force him to
ours, which we, (not falsely as he) truly esteem truth.] [The very mercies of
the wicked are cruel:] 4. These men seem to be Scepticks in their Religion; for
if there be any Religion, or rules of faith and worship delivered in Scripture,
we may come to be infallibly sure, that this is the Truth of God, and thereby
discover errors, and consequently may prosecute them, though we be not
universally infallible. The Magistrates of the Old Testament might not force
any man's conscience, more than now; nor were more infallible, than ours are
now; yet having a clear rule of Religion, and worship given them; they
compelled their subjects to observe it; why may not ours do so now, having a
clear light, and greater illumination? Is it not a certain and infallible
truth, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and only Savior of the World? If
not, what an uncertain thing is Christianity, which depends upon that one
principle? If it be, shall any man professing the Christian Religion, be
suffered to deny that truth, and blaspheme that holy name with impurity,
because the Magistrate, or Church, is not in all things infallible? Lastly, as
to this first principle, ex ungue leonem; we may descry and discover (the Fox)
the Jesuit, by his strong plea for Toleration to his Recusants, or Papists.
Though he speak in the person of Protestants, as if one of them; yet his
secret, or open girding at the State, shows what he is; [Who having laid aside
the King, by whom, and for whom, those laws (of restraint) were made, which is
indeed the abolishing of those Laws; yet we keep up the penalties of those
Laws, in vigor against Recusants, which seems to be a very irrational Act:]
And puts this Jeer upon the present powers, (by way of thanks or scorn) for
their granted soleration, [That as we have not one particular positive Religion
settled, for undoubted truth amongst us: So we purpose not any one Religion to
the Recusants, to be followed by them, but at most hold them out a medly of all
Sects professed in the Nation, etc.] Quis tulerit Gracchos, de Seditione
querentes? The Subtle cursed Jesuits, self condemned men, have broken our
Religion into so many Sects and Fractions, to keep us from Settling the true
Religion, and then make themselves merry with our divisions. The Lord rebuke
them. This to our first principle.

2. The next is: [We have always pretended a general Toleration for all tender
consciences, of which kind, there are some amongst the Prelatical and Popish
party:] And yet they only are excepted from Toleration by the Parliament: for
so he means it. But he goes on still, [Grant it to a poor sneaking foolish
fellow, that can scarce speak sense, and has hardly a groat in his purse, to
lose for his conscience, and deny it to men of Honor, Prudence and Estates,
suffering merely for their conscience, as having no tender consciences.] 1. Me
thinks I hear the proud Pharisees speak, in this Jesuit, [This people that
knows not the Law is cursed; and Lord I thank thee, I am not as other men:]
He calls mean simple Christians, Sneaking Fellows, as if they had no conscience,
because they have no Estates; He may remember, [Not many Wife, not many Noble
or Mighty.] were called, or honored to be primitive Martyrs; to suffer merely
for conscience: They had too much to lose, to dare to profess Christianity;
[But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise,
etc.] He may read the rest, 1 Cor. 1.26 etc. And he makes men of Honor,
Prudence and Estates, to have tender consciences, merely for suffering in their
Estates: whereas he knows many such may and do suffer only, for the Religion
delivered them by Tradition from their Fathers, or out of some carnal respects:
If a man desired to be loose and profane, he need not choose an easier Religion,
than Popery: And the Devil has had his Martyrs and Confessors, as well as
Christ: Martyrs Satanicae virtutis, as Cyprian: etc 2. But I have, I confess,
often wondered, that those in power, who pretend so much favor to all tender
consciences, should so often, by name, except the Prelatical and Popish party;
when as, there may be as tender consciences in some of them as in some, whom
they tolerate; and also, their laxe and loose principles, and these reasons
carry toleration for all, or none.

Some Satisfaction I received from one, that also pleads for Toleration, (as I
thought) for all Religions, (for his Arguments are as strong for all, as for
any) why the Popish party should not have any Toleration granted them, above
all the rest. Let him be heard speak in his own words. [As for Popery and
Idolatry, J. Mil^on. tract. of civil power, in Ecclesiastical causes. p 35.
why they also may not plead to be tolerated, I have much less to say: Their
Religion, the more considered, the less can it be acknowledged a Religion; but
a Roman principallity, rather endeavoring to keep up her old universal
Dominion, under a new name and mere shadow of a Catholic Religion; being
indeed more rightly named, a Catholic heresy against the Scripture, and
except in Rome, supported mainly by a civil and foreign power; justly therefore
to be suspected, not tolerated by the Magistrate of another Country. Beside^,
of an Implicit Faith which they profess, the conscience also becomes implicit,
and so by voluntary servitude to man's law, forfeits her Christian Liberty. Who
then can plead for such a conscience, as being inthraled implicitly to man,
instead of God, almost becomes no conscience, as the will, not free, becomes no
will. Lastly, for Idolatry, (whereof the Romish Church, is justly charged, to
be deeply guilty) who know; it not to be evidently against all Scripture, both
of the Old and New Testament. And therefore a true Herefie, or rather Impiety;
wherein a right conscience can have naught to do, and the works thereof so
manifest, that a Magistrate can hardly err, in prohibiting, and quite removing
at least the public and scandalous use thereof.] How this will please Jesuits,
or how they will answer it, I he there know, nor care: But I satisfied my self,
with one or both of these considerations. 1. That they might except them, not
out of conscience, but out of state policy; because, on the one side; if the
prelatical party should have a Tole ration, they might in time return to
challenge and take from them, those fat and sweet morsels of the Bishops
Revenues, which some of them have swallowed down, and would be loath to vomit
up again. On the other side, if the Popish party should be tolerated (I will
not say, they should lose a good Revenue from Sequestration of two parts of
their Estates, though some give this for a reason) their Principles are
destructive to Heretical Magistrates, as the Pope can easily make them, and so
subversive of their New Commonwealth: That's one. 2. The other consideration to
stay my wonder, was, That, that exception was so often inserted, by some
Jesuitical finger, that if ever that party got power into their hands, they
might the more colorable deny Toleration to those, who being in place, did
first deny it to them: for this is a maxim amongst the Sectaries [They that
deny toleration to others tender consciences, I Milt. ubi supra. p. 36.
deserve not to have it for themselves] And then they that now plead for
Toleration of the worst sort of tender consciences, will at last, grant more to
those, whose consciences are truly tender, and most rightly principled: I wish
I may be a false prophet, in this consideration. But hear the next.

3. [It is against another Principle of ours; we allow people the Bible in the
vulgar language, and press them to search the Scripture, to find out the mind
of God, and at last by our coersive power, will have them believe, as the the
Church believes; we bid men (as wisely Mr Collier speaks) see with their own
eyes, and yet put them to see with others eyes.] We bid men (with our Savior)
to search the Scriptures, and with the Bereans, not content themselves, to
believe as the Church believes, (that was the Colliers, and the Papists
belief) but to try the truths held out by Church or Magistrate; which if they
do faithfully and sincerely, they will see the truths with their own eyes: [If
any man, will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of my self, Jo 7.17.] And we suppose and take for granted,
(which this man makes doubtful) that there is a pattern of sound words, the
true faith and worship of God, held forth first in the Scriptures, and then by
the Church or Magistrate; and thereupon exhort men, not to take any thing upon
trust of men, which is not faith, but ignorance, or Popish credulity; but in
matters of Salvation, to search and see by their own eyes. And if it happen
that private persons mistake error for truth, they must either be meekly
willing to hearken to instruction, (which is a sign of a good conscience) or
resolve rather to suffer for their judgment, than to disturb the peace of the
Church or State: For while they keep it to themselves, none can take notice of
it, or judge them for it. But this dispute allows them, either to resist the
coercive power, and labor their subversion (as in his first Argument) or else
to be tolerated, though never so damnably heretical, and practically
destructive to themselves or others. True charity of Protestants, bids those
that have the charge of their souls (which both Ministers and Magistrates have,
in their own way.) First, with meekness, and much patience to instruct them,
and if they still continue obstinate, like mad men to mischief themselves and
others, to lay setters of restraint upon them, either spiritual or corporal,
that they may do no further hurt.

9. The next Reason is this: [It was against the judgment of King James, and
other Kings, and against the peoples frequent petitions, for toleration, etc,]
First, for King James, two of his sayings are produced; [That God never plants
a Church, by violence and bloodshed.] True, for he left that for the Jesuits
amongst the poor Indians: So spoke Tertullian and Lantanc. above; Religion is
not to be forced upon Heathens; God does not first plant a Church by violence,
much less by bloodshed; but when a Church is planted (as a Vine) he allows
pruning and purging of it, by spiritual censures; which (in this man's sense) is
a kind of force upon conscience: And the Magistrate being a guardian, or
nurse-keeper of the Church, as Gods vicegerent, is to publish and maintain
Religion, in the puri^y of it, which cannot be done without coercive power, not
upon men's consciences, but upon their bodies or estates. His other speech,
[That he never intended any persecution any against the Papists, for conscience
sake, but desired to be secured for civil obedience, which they cannot deny.]
Not to tell him that King James did not own, but oppose their Religion as
false, [whose Faith is Faction, whose Religion is Rebellion:] he knows who said
it: If he did restrain them from practicing it publicly, it was not
persecution of them for conscience sake, but prosecution of an erring
conscience: But I say, when they were restrained from exercise of their
Religson, it was with respect to a principle of their Religion, denying to give
him security in civil obedience; from a stated-destroying opinion and practice
of theirs, [That it is lawful, yea, necessary, if the Pope command it, to
murder and kill heretical Kings;] Whereof his predecessors and himself, had
frequent experience, in such like attempts; the examples of other Kings in
tolerating other Keligions, I fear, is rather out of political Interest, than
real piety: As for that scandal upyn the powers, [That the State in persecuting
them now, will be greater persecutors then the old Magistra^^s and Bishops
were, yea, than the Spanish Inquisition it self:] I leave to them to answer, or
chastise such Jesuitical insolence. One thing aspersive upon the Bishops and
others, is foully, and foolishly affe^ted, and easily wiped away. [They to prove
the lawfulness of their vocation, against the Puritans, derived their orders
from Rome; yet concurred with the State to make the Laws, that any that
received orders from Rome, were Traitors, which was most ridiculous.] But 1.
The Puritans did not brand their vocation from Rome; in the first Protestant
Bishops in England; some of them were ordained Presbyters by such; the
Browninsts and Anabaptists did that. 2. The Bishops with the State, made a Law,
that none of their Ministers should take orders from Rome, in a State way;
first, because that was a denial of our ministry to be good at home. Secondly,
it was an owning of the Popes supremacy spiritual, in England; which appears by
this, that they so far allowed ordination by a Romish Bishop, that they did not
re-ordain those Priests, which were converted unto the Protestant Religion. But
if Papists and Jesuits be of the same opinions as before: That heretical
Magistrates may be murdered, and maintain revelations, and impulsies of spirit,
to kill any, whom their spirit bids them kill, (which our young Quakers have
learnt of them) as the State or Government, what ever it be, (though Kings be
gone) have no reason in policy to tolerate such; so it will be no persecution
of them for conscience sake, but a wise and just prosecution of them, for such
destructive principles, as make the owners of them unfit to live amongst men,
in any civil society. And as for the petitions of the people, for liberty of
conscience; as they were made tendered by some few Sectaries, whose loose
opinions and practices will abide no government, not by the generality of the
most and best people of the Land; so in a rightsense, it is grated by these,
[That a care be had of truly tender consciences, viz. [Who profess faith in
Christ, and live peaceably, in godliness and honesty;] But they only desire
some discipline may be exercised upon such, us either deny Jesus Christ,
directly, or by necessary consequence, or live not peaceably, but by earnest
propagation of their errors and he resies, destroy both their own and others
souls, and disturb the peace of Church and State; or have neither godliness nor
holiness in their lives. Yet these that plead for such a Government, are the
men against whom he cunningly inveighs p. 25. [As dangerous persons, that
desire to domineer and tyrannize over other men's consciences; and as their
judgments are not greatly to be heeded, so themselves are rather closly to be
looked too, lest they set all on fire again], as the Jesuits have lately done,
as the ^^cendiaries of all States, when ever they come: And again, he stirs up
the Nation against them p 30. [It were just, that such boutefeues.]

10. Lastly, (says he) [coercive power is against our own Interest at home,
and the Protestant Interest abroad; at home, because by fit, we say a
foundation of persecution to our selves and posterity. If it be lawful for us
to persecute others; so it will be for them, toward us if they get power: So
Mr. Collier] According to the proverb, like to like, quoth the Devil to the
Collier; for what a fine new way have these men found, to frustrate the
predictions of Christ, and his (...) [In the World (...) shall have
tribulation, Job. 16. last. All that will live Godly, shall suffer persecution,
etc.] Their best Interest were to sit still, and meddle with no bodies sins or
errors: How foolish was Paul to excommunicate those Heretics, that is, in this
new canting Language, to persecute them; if it was lawful for Paul to persecute
and molest them for their faith and conscience, it was lawful for them to
persecute and excommunicate him; and what a disturbance might this cause in the
Church? Foolish Politicians; the profession of the Gospel in truth and
sincerity, looks not at our own Interest in the World, but expects persecution;
teaching men to deny themselves, to forsake all, their goods, their peace,
their lives, were not this as politic an Argument in a Corporation, where
Officers are Annual: [Be favorable to drunkards and prosane persons in this
your year, lest one of them get into place next year, and persecute you: It is
for your Interest, lest you lay a ^oundation of persecution, to your selves, or
your posterity; for if it be lawful for you to exercise coercive power over
others, by the same rule of reason, it will be lawful for others to persecute
you.] 2. Say the same for the Protestant Interest abroad; [If we persecute m^n
of their Religion here, they will persecute ours there, etc.] If be shall say,
there is not the same reason in matters civil, as in Religion; I shall choke
him first by a Scripture Instance; Nehemiah was a prudent man, but he had not
learned the Jesuits politics: He used coercive power toward the Heathen
Merchants (as well as his own Nations) in a matter of Religion, the profanation
of the Sabbath; threatening to lay them by the heels, if they brought any more
Wares to sell, on that day: How imprudently with respect to the Jewish Interest
abroad! Did he not lay a foundation of persecution of his Countrymen, in their
dominions, in that, or some other point of their Religion? Secondly, I confute
his policy, by Scripture reason: The Magistrate is the Minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Romans 13.4.] Therefore, he
must either say, that it is not evil, for an heretical seducer to destroy the
subjects souls, or else the Magistrate must use coercive power to restrain and
punish such; let his Interest be what it will, at home or abroad. In a word,
there is as great a distance between persecution, and prosecution, as between
innocence, and wickedness, truth and error; and surely both ought not to enjoy
the same privileges, shall truth have but a Toleration, as well as error? He
must therefore make this consequence (the foundation of his error) good; [It is
lawful for truth and innocence, to presecute error and wickedness. Ergo, It is
lawful, by the same reason, for error and wickedness, to persecute truth and
innocency] or be shows himself a very Sophister, Cheater, (...) S^ducer, and
that he has done suff^^^ntly, in all his reasons.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
IF this little discourse, for removing the false foundations of Englands
Settlement, find favor and acceptance with thee; expect shortly (if God
permit) another like it, ^^ying down, and fixing the true and solid Foundations
of its Settlement, Righteousness, and Religion; together with the true and many
causes of our so ^o^g unsettlement: Fare well.


