ENGLAND'S Remembrancer. Setting forth The beginning of Papal Tyrannies, bloody
Persecutions, Plots, and inhuman Butcheries, exercised on the Professors of the
Gospel in England dissenting from the Church of Rome.

WITH An account of all, or most of the Martyrs that were put to death by the
cruel Papists in this Kingdom, until the Reformation in the Reign of King Edw.
6. and Queen Elizabeth.

ALSO The first rise of the Writ de Heretico comburendo. For Burning of
Heretics.

Well worth all Protestants perusal, that they may unite as one Man against the
Hierarchy of the bloodthirsty See of ROME.

Religio and timor Dei solus est, qui custodit hominum inter se societatem.
Lactant. LONDON, Printed, for E. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill.
1682.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Protestant Reader,
FOR such I suppose thee to be, who will take the pains to read over these
Collections, or take a view of this little Tract, called Englands Remembrancer,
wherein we have set forth, without any partiality, the bloody Persecutions of
that Antichristian Church of Rome, so we may well call her, since Persecution
is a certain Mark of the Beast; and whatever particular Church takes up that
Weapon, so far deviates from the true Catholic Church of Christ, as it makes
use of it being absolutely contradictory to the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles. The Protestants of the Church of England laid the Foundation of their
Reformation with the blood of many Martyrs, suffering Death and torments for
their Opinions. They were all Dissenters from the Church of Rome, and they have
sufficiently blamed, as they justly ought, their horrid Persecution for
Conscience sake, seeking by compulsion to put their heavy yoaks on the necks of
others, and yet they had Law on their side, and their Religion was then
established by the Laws of the Land; however, I think there is no Protestant,
but does justly call the putting to death, tormenting, imprisoning, and ruining
so many Men and Women for their Opinions, Persecution; and tho the Church of
England has not law to put any to Death, yet no question there may be many, so
blindly Zealous, as would do as much as the Papists have done before them, and
therefore let them not be angry, if that Spirit which some have of late showed
against Dissenters, be called Persecution, tho they have Laws of their side.
But this is nothing; our dread and fear proceed from a farther prospect of the
great hopes the Papists have, of once more Establishing their Idolatrous
Religion; and truly, though we believe that God in his mercy may deliver this
poor Nation from so great a Scourge, yet we cannot say, that the Hopes of the
Papists are in vain, since we our selves do not slackly endeavor, to bring
ruin on our selves, and to be helpful in promoting their designs, being ready
to set Protestants together by the Ears, reviling, persecuting, and troubling
one another, insomuch that many have shown, that they had rather join with the
Papists, than admit of any other Protestant Dissenter, to live unmolested, and
to enjoy their peace, opinions, and Conscience. This Spirit of late blown up by
secret boutsers, raging as it does, makes the subtle Popish Clergy laugh in
their Sleeves, and begin to believe they need not the help of any damnable and
murdering Plot, since they perceive we are framing Plots and Designs against
our selves, and if they let us alone, shall readily, by our animosities, make
way for the setting up their Church in this Kingdom, which they with all their
hellish Artifices could never do. Divide and impera, divide and reign, is a
known Maxim, and we are doing that our selves as fast as we can for them. At
this time therefore, I thought there could be nothing more necessary to all
sorts of Protestants, of what denomination soever, than the beholding, as in a
little mirror, the horrid and bloody Persecutions of those of the Romish Church
in England, when they had power in this Nation, and by this Pocket
Remembrancer, you may be able to perceive to what horrid Tyranny all Professors
of the true Gospel of Christ must submit themselves, giving their Bodies to be
burnt, imprisoned, tormented, and abused, or else against their Consciences
become Idolaters, and damn their Souls. Alas! there are no Arguments to be used
against these men, when armed with the Sword of Power: what they have done they
still do, where they reign, and will most certainly do the same again, if not
in a greater and more bloody manner, as soon as they should have established
their Dominion, by the help of a Popish King. You therefore who are negligent
and careless, and act as if you were asleep, or are indifferent, what Religion
is uppermost, and you also who are so hot and zealous, for persecuting all
those who dissent from you, and you likewise (for such there be) who are ready
to shake hands with the Papists, pleading for them, and account them harmless
and loyal, or at least better than Protestant Dissenters; all of you I say,
read this little Book of their Tyrannies, and as sure as Truth, you shall feel
the Scourge and Scorpionian sting of these men, and must draw in their iron
Yoke, unless you will act against your Consciences; the very same Tragedies
that were acted before, under Popish and bigoted Kings, upon others, shall be
then acted over again upon you, your Wives, and Children, upon your Goods,
Lives, Friends, Kindred, and Estates. Fires will again be inkindled in all
quarters of this Land, the Tyranny and Cruelty of the Inquisition shall sit
upon you, the Priest shall Lord it over you, and of Freemen, you shall become
slaves; ignorance and superstition shall put down knowledge and Religion by
Authority. On the other side, you who are true professors of the Gospel of
Christ, may make use of this Remembrancer, in which you will behold the great
patience and meekness of such, whom God honored with Martyrdom, and suffering
in his Cause, that if ever the like persecution be permitted by the Judgment of
Heaven, in this Nation, for our manifold sins and debaucheries, which flow
through the Land, and for the Spirit of Rage and Persecution of one another,
that has lately gone forth in some measure; I say, you may be prepared by
these examples of holy dying men, how to behave your selves, and to believe,
that God will give to such as rely upon him, extraordinary Comforts and
supports in their Afflictions. It may also serve to stir up those lukewarm
Protestants, who run with the stream, or have not heard of, or else soon forget
the Persecutions and Tyrannies of the Romish Church, to have an aversion and
horror to such men, and such a Religion, as will cut their throats if ever
established by Law among us. You have here an Epitomy of all Mr. Fox's 3 great
Volumes, which few can purchase, and fewer have time to read; therefore I have
collected for the Protestant Reader, briefly the most material stories of the
whole, which are faithfully and truly set down, and I hope God will give a
blessing to these my true endeavors, and this very useful Book at this time;
that all Protestants of whatsoever denomination, may join together in the bond
of unity, to oppose this Bloody, Cruel, and Common Enemy, of all that profess
the Truth of the Gospel, and to endeavor, that the Hierarchy of Rome may never
get Power, and Dominion in this Land: Which I pray God avert, and protect us
from. And to which Prayer, let all good People say, Amen.

The Introduction.
THe Corruptions and great abominations, together with the Heretical,
Idolatrous, Impious, and Blasphemous Doctrines and practices of the Church of
Rome, as also its bloody Persecutions abroad, have been shown in several
volumes, and by several Authors: but since, what has been transacted by that
Church in our own Kingdom, more nearly* concerns us; I have here given you a
true view of the Persecutions of the Papists, from the beginning, against all
such as dissented from them, and would not bow down to their Images, or Worship
God after their way; by which you may see, what Spirit they are of, quite
contrary to that of Christ and his Apostles, and to what slavery we should be
brought, if God should permit once more the Papal Authority to get footing in
these reformed Kingdoms; which for so many years, at the expense of blood, and
the lives of many holy Men and Martyrs, have shaken off that Tyrannical Yoke of
the Sea of Rome.

It is my design, not to transcur the Bounds of our own Country, for where ever
the Papists have set up themselves, they have continu^lly exercised the like
bloody power of the Sword, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and the practice
of his Successors for some Centuries, when the purity of the Gospel was
professed, in times near the first lighting up of the bright Candle of
Christianity. But I shall show, and expose to the World, in this little Tract,
the bloody Cruelties, and Persecutions of that Idolatrous Church, exercised in
this Kingdom, only against such as dissented from them, or that opposed the
evil of their Doctrine, and practices.

After that Errors were crept into the Church, and that the Romish Church had
sought and obtained by many impious practices, the supremacy over other
Churches, she endeavored to maintain this her usurpt Authority, by Tyranny and
bloody Persecution, as she does to this Day, where ever her rule is permitted.
That is a most ridiculous Question of some of the Papists to many ignorant
Protestants* Where was your Religion before Luther? All your Forefathers in
England were Papists; why should you then change your old Religion, for many
hundred years established in England, for one of a new date, and but of the
other days standing? This has taken with some, but they are such as are very
ignorant, or else they may reply to such Querors, that though the Name of
Protestants be new, and came from Germany in Luthers time, from protesting
against the Romish decrees, that were to have been imposed upon them, yet the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Protestant Churches, are as ancient as
Christianity itself, and nearest to that of Christ, and his holy Apostles and
Successors in the primitive times, before Rome came to challenge a supremacy
over other Churches, or to pretend to be the Spiritual Head of the World.

In all Ages, and through the most Corrupt of times, the purity of the Gospel
has been preserved, and like a shining light, has manifested itself, in its
dissent, from the evil and sinful practices, and from the false and heretical
Doctrines of the Church of Rome; and has been still persecuted by it, long
before the times of Luther, as is manifested by the Albingenses, and the
Waldenses in France, as also in Germany, and Italy itself, where many
professing the purity of the Gospel, and testifying against the errors and
corruptions of the Romish Church, fell under the bloody Sword of its
Persecution.

But designing (as I have said) to speak only of our own Country, we shall
begin with the earliest Persecutions of the Romanists in this Land, who always
hated Dissenters from them, or such as would not own their unjust Supremacy
over their Brethren. Christianity began very early in England, and a Christian
Church was planted here almost as soon as at Rome, and continued without any
acknowledgment of her Authority all the time of the British Reign; for the
British Churches never owned any foreign Church supreme, or above them, or
suffered any to exercise Dominion or Authority over them, but submitted
themselves to their Kings, and their Metropolitan, as their head. Austine the
Monk was the first who endeavored to bring into this Land the Authority of
Rome; and because the British Bishops would not own it, he stirred up the
Heathen Saxon Kings, then Conquerors of this Land, to persecute them, and
others Converted to Christianity, and of the Papistical Principles, of setting
up the Church of Rome above others to kill and destroy the British Christians,
as dissenters from them. But yet, till about the year 980, the purity of the
Christian Doctrine preserved itself against Popish errors; about which time,
Popery, that is, the Supremacy of that Church, or the owning it to the head
over others, getting ground in England, as well as in other places, and with
it, all the filthinesses and abominations, which dissenting Protestants disown,
and speak against; all that any ways opposed this supremacy, and erroneous
Doctrines, were persecuted, and troubled by them, tho they were not as yet come
to fire and faggot, wanting not will but power to do it. I shall but mention
only that good Bishop of Lincoln, Robert Grosthead, who wrote against the
wickedness of the Popish Clergy, in the time of King Henry the 3d. which vexed
them so much, that Pope Innocent would have had the Bishops bones, after his
death, to have been dug up, and flung out of the Church, where he was buried,
and intending to have wrote to the King of England for that purpose, he was
stricken by the said Bishop (appearing to him in his sleep) with his Crosiers
staff, reproving him of his wicked intention, which prohibited him from
proceeding therein. After which time, the Papal wickednesses increasing in this
Nation, Satan was let loose, and greater Persecutions began to arise, against
those who made a profession of the Gospel, and opposed the Romish Superstition,
or dissented from it. I shall therefore here end this introduction, and begin
the History of Popish persecutions here in England, about the Reign of King
Edward the 3d, about which time they began more eminently to appear, and so God
willing, I shall briefly prosecute them to our own times, through that flood of
Martyrs blood shed in Queen Mary's days.

A TRUE VIEW OF ALL THE Popish Persecutions AND CRUELTIES IN ENGLAND.
The First Part.
LOng before the nam^ of Protestants gave a distinction, of such as dissented
from the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, and made them subject to the
Persecutions of Papal Authority, there were several, who by the purer Light of
the Gospel, had discovered the great errors, and many Abominations of that
Church increasing in England, that durst withstand the wickedness of the
Priests, Monks, and Friars, and by writing and preaching oppose their wicked
Actions, and horrible doings, and show them to the World, for which they were
sure to run the risque of cruel and barbarous usage, from their Hands, and
suffer for a good Conscience, adhering to the Doctrine of the Apostles and
their Successors, in the Primitive Times, before the many Corruptions, that now
overwhelm the Romish Church, were crept in amon^ them. These may be called
dissenters from the^^ erroneous Doctrines, vicious Lives, and evil prac^^ces.
Among these in the time of King Edward the third, may be accounted the Author
of the Plo^^mans Complaint, though he was not known, whi^^ little Treatise put
the Monks and Friars in^o a Rage, it so plainly laying open all their
wickednes^^ and evil practices; The Persecutions of Armachan^^, and the
abominable errors and abuses of their D^ctrines. This did but whet the Rage of
these e^^l men, and though they could not show it to the Author of that wholesome
Treatise, they expresse^ i^ against his writing, what they could, and ^ad he
been known, his Life had been in danger.

The next that publicly owned the Pure light of the Gospel, in those dark
days of blind Superstit^on and error, was Richard Fitzrafe, known by the name
of Armichanus being by King Edward the 3d made Archdeacon of Litchfeild, and
then Commis^^^ to the University of Oxford, where he was bred ^^der Bakenthorp,
and lastly Archbishop of Arm^^^ in Ireland. He preached in London openly
against the Friars, for which he was cited to appear before Pope Innocent the
6th, which he did, and there to the death most valiantly opposed the
Corruptions Crept into the Church, both by preaching and writing, being several
ways persecuted by them: He dyed in Avignion, after 7 years banishment from his
Native Country.

About this time, in King Edw. the 3d's Reign and about the year 1367. That
plotting and state co^founding Order of the Jesuits began to be know^ in the
world, in the 5th year of Pope Urban the 5^^ and the Papal Clergy in England
being grown ^o odious to the laity, through their vicious Lives, a^^ evil
Manners, the Lords in Parliament desired the King that the great Offices of the
Crown, which were usually executed by the Clergy might be taken from them,
which accordingly were removed, and put into the Hands of the Temporal Lords.
This K. also by Parliament, holden in the 27th and 38th years of his Reign, by
statutes made, the Popes Supremacy in England was much abated, his Jurisdiction
in this Realm much lessened, and his Papal power restrained, causing all
Controversies in Law either Spiritual or Temporal, to be determined in the
Kings Courts, and that if any one should appeal, or Consent to an appellation
made to the Court of Rome, should incur the writ of Praemunire, being put out of
the K's Protection, Loss of Lands and goods and imprisonment during the Kings
pleasure. This begot, or rather increased, the Hatred of the Romanists, against
the Kings of England studying their ruin and overthrow, for the setting up
their arbitrary Papal Jurisdiction in this Land. And about this time, a certain
Hermit; disputed in St. Paul's, against the Doctrine of the Sacrament, for which
they imprisoned him, and kept him in hold till he dyed. It is also to be
observed, that in the 5th year of the said King Ed. the 3d, at a Parliament
holden at Westminster, the 24th April, 1376. a Bill was preferred against the
Usurpations of the Pope in England, attributing thereunto, all the Plagues,
Murrains, Famines, and Poverty, that had invaded the Land, and required a
redress of many Grievances and encroachments of his usurpations, rehearsing
many particulars, so that the Tyranny and usurpation of Rome, was grown in
those days intolerable, and would now be much more so, since they after this,
showed an implacabl^ Rage against their opposers, and all such who professed
the purer Light of the Gospel, or found fault with their erroneous Doctrines,
and wicked Lives.

But the most eminent Light, by God raised up in those days and appearing
bright and shining above the rest, detecting the foul errors of the Romish
Church, was the famous John Wickliff, from whom his followers, dissenting from
the Church of Rome, were called Wickliffians whose story I shall give you in
Brief. In the reign of King Edir. the 3d, and much about the year of our Lord
1371. this Wickliff flowrished: He was a Public Reader of Divinity in the
University of Oxford, and reputed among them all for a great Clerk, and man of
learning, and parts, a deep Schoolman and well studied in the points of
Divinity, and also of Philos^phy of all kinds; And with his strong Arguments
and sound reasoning, he confounded his opposers, and made his very enemies
acknowledge his abilities. He was a man in great esteem of that valiant and
prudent Prince^^ing Edward, being by him sent with Commission, joined with
other Lords and Ambassadors into I^aly, to treat with he Popes Legates,
concerning affairs betwixt the King and the P^pe. The Chief business was, that
the Bishop of Rome should no more intermeddle in the Distribution of Benefices
within his Kingdom, but that all B^sh^ps that were under his Dominion, should
enjoy their former and ancient Liberty, and be confirmed of their
Metropolitans, as had been in the Ancient times. This set the Pope and P^pish
Clergy a raging, and Wickliff being in this Matter n^ small obstacle to them,
Confounding them with h^s learned Arguments, so that they termed him He^^ick,
as they still do all that stick fast to the rules of the holy Scriptures, and
to the purer Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; they set themselves against
him, and endeavored their utmost to ruin him. Those days wherein he lived
were days of thick E^^p^^^ Darkness and gross Ignorance, and the people only
retained the name of Christians, having nothing of the nature of Christ in
them, or following his Example in any thing. They were Id^latrous, and taught
by their P^iests to worship nothing but what they saw, Images and Cracifixes,
and indeed there was scarce any thing they saw, that they did not worship, as
Relics of Saints, Consecrated Beads, A^^us Dei's, and such trumpery. The
Doctrine and Office of Christ was utterly unknown to the people, no^ the use of
the Law, and benefit of the Scriptures, the power and efficacy of the Holy
Ghost, Free Grace, Justification by Faith, Remission of Sins, and the like were
never treated of. Lear^ing and Divinity was utterly unknown to the Priests and
preaching friars, and those among them who seemed learned, were mere
Sophisters, studying Aquinas, and Scotus instead of St. Peter and Paul, and led
the blind and ignorant people into superstition; Ceremonies, and human
Traditions, which they taught i^stead of the Scripture, in which the whose
scope of Christian perfection depends; And th^s being wholly degenerated from
the true Cat^olick institution, they fell into all manner of ex^re^m tyranny
and persecution, changing the poverty and simplicity of Christ, into Cruelty
and wickedness of Life and manners. Thus, in these times of horrible Darkness
and Ignorance, and when there seemed ^o be no manner of spark of Christ's pure
doctrine left, Wickliff, by the providence of God, sprung up, and as a bright
and shining light, let the world see the errors and impieties of the Church of
Rome.

After he had for a long time professed Divinity at Oxford, and perceiving the
true Doctrine of the Gospel to be defiled and adul^erated, with many filthy
^^rentions, and after long debating with himself, concerning the danger he
should run into, by going about to detect these errors, so fast embraced by the
R^m^sh Church, and in meddling with them, who had power to crush him; yet his
mind being inspired of God, he could not rest, till he had set his study and
bent, to endeavor a Regulation, by his preaching and teaching, of these gross
errors that were every where taught and maintained. But fi st he began warily,
attempting his Adversaries with Logical and Metaphysicial Q^estions, of the
Form^ of things, and of the intelligible s^b^tance of the Creatures, and such
like, which began attention to other matters, which he soon began with great
Art and learning to dispute of. This stirred up one K^^inghum a Carmelite to
dispute against him, by which me^n; Wickliff fell upon the matter of the
Sacrament, their errors therein, and other abuses in the Church. But this bit
so sore, that it was not to be en^ured, and a who^e glut of Monks and Friars,
fell into a Rage and madness against him, fighting for their Gods, their
Altars, their paunches, and Bellies. Then the Archbishop Simon Sudberry,
deprived him of his Benefice, which he had in Oxford; However being befriended
by many noblemen, and in favor of the King he bare up against the Monks and
Friars his implacab^e Enemies, and the Archbishop himself, till about the year
1377. He had for his special maintainors the great John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, the Kings Son; and the noble Lord Henry Peircy, both which were his
great Friends, embracing the Truth of His Doctrine, and perceiving the impurity
of that professed by the Roman Clergy, together with their most abominable and
vicious Life. But for the appearing of this noble Duke, for the Truth and
siding with Wickliff, the Romish Clergy perfectly hated him, and the Bishop of
Winchester most horridly asperses him of Bastardy, making the Queen upon her
Death bed to Confess it to him, that he was not the Kings Son, nor hers, for
lying in at Gaunt, the child she had was Smothered, and fearing the Kings
displeasure, she caused this John of Gaunt, being a poor woman's Son then newly
brought to bed, supposititiously to be brought up instead of the dead Prince.
Thus, for his owning Wickliff, he had this wicked abuse put upon him, by that
proud Prelate. But the Duke, not enduring the affront, caused him to be
condemned by Parliament, and his temporalities confiscated, and the said Bishop
was prohibited to come within 20 miles of the Court, But not long after by the
means of Alice Pierce the Kings Minion, being well bribed, and by the
intercession of the whole Company of the Bishops, he was again restored. But
now Wickliff as I said, about the year 1377. was forbid to preach any more, and
cited to appear before the Bishops, which was on the 19th of February: The Duke
of Lancaster and the Lord Henry Peircy, both accompanied him, and caused out of
every order of the Friars, a Batchelour of Divinity to be chosen, which were 4
to join with Wickliff, and to Assist him.

But so great was the disorder and variance between the Bishop of London,
Courtney, and the Duke of Lancaster, and the Lord Henry Peircy, in the behalf
of Wickliff, that nothing was done, and the Assembly was broke up, being held
in St. Paul's Church, the Duke and the Bishop threatening one another. Thus he
escaped at this time, and Continued unmolested all the time of King Edward the
3d, but afterward in the Reign of King Richard the Second, though he was a
favourer of Wickliffs Doctrines, yet the Duke and Lord Peircy not intermedling
in the Affairs of state as before, but living privately, the Bishops took their
time to trouble him, again, and exhibited several Articles against him, to Pope
Gregory the 11th, who presently sends his bull to Oxford for the Apprehending
of Wickliff, and for the silencing him, and rooting out his Doctrines, and
writes also to the King against him. The Bishops now hoping to ruin this holy
man, cite him a Second time, who appeared, but there came a Command to them
from the King not to give any definitive sentence against him, so that he by
that means escaped them a 2d time.

Not long after the Rebellion of Jack-straw breaking forth, and the Kingdom in
a Combustion, the Bishops perceiving the Doctrine of Wickliff daily to
increase, and that he had many followers, they procured the Vicechancellour of
Oxford, William Barton,, in the year 1380 to put forth an Edict against
Wickliff and his followers, which again brought him into trouble, not having
his former supports to help him, and his Articles which he had maintained, so
stoutly against the force of his Adversaries, were condemned as Heretical in
1382. About the same time one Hereford with Rippington and Ashton all
Batchelours of Divinity were cited before the Bishops, and persecuted for
holding the tenants of Wickliff, and Hereford and Rippington were
excommunicated. Also one Thomas Hillman a Batchellor of Divinity, was at the
same time troubled by them for the same cause. Hitherto there was no Law to
burn any man for Religion, and had they been contented with the power of
excommunication, it had been well, and had not stirred up the Civil Magistrate
to be their bloody and Cruel executioners, so that we may account these first
Persecutions but light. But now their malice and rage being increased, the K.
being but young, and overawed by the Pope and the proud and imperious clergy of
the Land, who bore great sway, they circumvented the King, and got
surreptitiously a statute made without notice of the Commons, called an Act of
the Parliament holden at Westminster An. 5. Rich. 3. l. in which power was
given to Sheriffs, and other Civil Magistrates, to imprison any for Religion,
upon the Certificates of the Bishop: which caused great Persecutions but this
Act was shortly after repealed at the entreaty of the Commons: However, the
Bishops supressed the kn^wl^dge of this Repealing, and unjustly under color of
the former Act, wrought horrible troubles, against all such as opposed them, or
were f^vou^ers of Wick^iff: and they also so wrought upon the King, that he
sent forth his Letters against Wic^^ ^f, and for the suppression of his
Doctrine, both to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to the Vic^ch^ncellor of
Oxford Robert Riggs, who was himself a f^vourer of Wickliff, and for which he
was afterward displaced. As to Wickliff himself, he was f^in to sly, and hide
himself from the persecution of the Popish Prelates, but God preserved him from
their Malice, and at last, repairing to his parish of Lutt^rworth, where he was
Parson, he quietly and in Peace departed this Life, about the beginning of the
year 1384. But though they could not fully reak their malice on him whilst he
lived, yet when dead, they showed all the spite imaginable against his Books
and Bones: for at Oxford they caused all his Books they could light on to be
publicly burnt. They say he had wrote 200 volumes, being a most painful and
sedulous writer, as well as preacher, of whom, and of whose holy and godly life
and Conversation, the whole University of Oxford gave a public Testimony under
their hands and Seal, in the Year 1406. Whose Doctrines also were publicly
defended by John Hus of Bohemia, who was martyred for the same. But for all
this the Popish Clergies inveterate malice against Wickliff, appeared 41 years
after he was buried; for, by a Decree of the Synod of Constance, they caused
this holy man's Bones to be dug out of his Grave, and burnt, and the Ashes to be
flung into the River.

The Doctrine of Wickliff notwithstanding daily increased, to the no small
grief of the Popish Clergy; and his Followers, or those professing his
Doctrines (which were contrary to those of the corrupt Romish Church, and many
of them, or most of them, such as the Protestants now hold) began then to be
called Lollards, for they had then Nicknames, as well as now, for such as
professed the purer Light of the Gospel. After Wickliff was gone, they set
themselves to suppress these Lollards, as they called them, the Pope
interpreting the Word from Lollum Cocle or Darnel, and one William Swinderly, a
Priest, in 1389. was brought into great trouble by these men, for holding and
preaching some of Wickliff's Doctrines; and was condemned by the Bishop of
Hereford for an Heretic; but Swinderly appealed to the King, and to the
Parliament, and during King Richard's Reign he was protected from their
Violence; but it is thought he suffered Martyrdom afterward in the days of
King Hen. 4. when the Popish Clergy had got more power. About the same time
also they persecuted Walter Brute a Layman, but bred up in the University at
Oxford, and a graduate there: accusing him of Heresy, and for saying that the
Sacrament of the Altar was not the very Body of Christ, but a sign and memorial
of him, and that he had avouched the Pope to be Antichrist, and that the
Sentence given against Swinderly was unjust. For these things he is brought
before the Bishop of Hereford, where he learnedly maintained his Assertions
against them; but being put to horrible Trouble and Vexation, was forced at
last to make a Submission, which was, that he submitted to the Censure of the
Gospel, the Church, and General Councils, and to St. Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose,
and Gregory, and to his Bishop as his Subject. And so he escaped at that time,
but whether he suffered afterward is uncertain. About this time Pope Boniface
the 9th made a Bull against the Lollards, and sent it to King Richard 2d. who,
by the Instigation of Courtney, then Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop
of Hereford, the Popes Legate, issued out his Letters against the Lollards, as
Heretics, so that by this means many were forced to do Penance, and to
abjure, many were imprisoned and evilly entreated; but during his Reign none
were burnt.

The manner of doing Penance.
The Town of Leicester was interdicted, and many of them forced to do Penance,
which was after this manner: They went about the Cross barefooted, and
bare-headed, and nothing on their Bodies, both Men and Women, but their Shifts,
in one Hand a Crucifix, in the other a large Wax Taper lighted, and from thence
marched to the Cathedral, where they stood (after they had made a procession
about the Church) all the time of Mass: this also to be done three times,
during the Market. After this manner they sought to punish such as made
profession of the Gospel. And about the same time the Londoners favoring one
Peter Pateshull, an Austin-Friar, who having embraced the Doctrines of
Wickliff, preached against the corruptions of his Order, many of them were
converted by him; and the Doctrines of Wickliff spread very much in the City:
For which they were malic'd by the Bishops, and complained o^ to the King, who
was so incensed against the Mayor and Sheriffs, that he removed them from their
Office, and made Sir Edward Darlington Warden of the City, and then removed his
Court, and the Terms to York, thinking thereby to dispight the Londoners. But
this so alienated their Hearts, that by losing their Love, he also not long
after lost his Crown and Life to Henry Duke of Lancaster, called Henry the 4th.

The first Act for burning of Heretics, William Sawtry the first that was
burnt.
Henry the 4th being but an Usurper and Tyrant, was fain to comply with the
Prelatical Clergy, who had a great stroke in deposing their lawful Prince, that
he might the better assure himself of the Crown, which he had unjustly taken.
Till now the Sufferings and Persecutions of the Lollards, or such as made a
profession of the purer Light of the Gospel, was but slight, in comparison of
what they now began to suffer, for there was as yet no Law for to put an
Heretic to Death, though they had made use of the aforementioned Statute in
the 5th Year of King R 2d. to molest, trouble, and imprison good and pious men,
but now in the 2d Year of this King Henry the 4th, they obtained a Law or
Statute for the burning alive such as were convict of Heresy, made especially
against the Lollards; and the first that so suffered upon this Statute was
William Sawtry, the Parish Priest of St. Scithes in London, who had preached
against worshipping the Cross, and the Images of Saints, against Pilgrimages,
and Transubstantiation, and other Popish Heresies, for which he was cited
before the Bishops, and convicted of (as they called it) Heresy, and then
publicly degraded of all his Sacerdotal Ornaments, and made a Layman, and
then delivered over to the secular Power to be put to death, according to the
new made Law which they had with great joy obtained, for the extirpating the
Lollards. Thus the King, who had deposed his lawful Prince, and usurpt the
Crown, was the first that put men to death for Religion in England, by the
unmerciful burning of their Bodies, at the Instigation of the cruel Popish
Prelates. And this William Sawtry was the first that so suffered for the Gospel
by the Papists in England, who was burnt Anno 1400.

The burning of John Badby Tailor.
After this unusual Exe^ution of Sawtry, a great fear and dread fell upon all
the People, but yet God would not leave his People without Testimony, for
notwithstanding this cruel Act, many maintained the Tr^ch, and among the rest
one John Badby, an Artificer, and Layman, who w ^ ^he next that suffered in
the Year 1409. He was convicted before Tho. Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbu^y,
with other Bishops his Assistants, of certain Articles, in which he is said to
affirm, that the consecrated Wafer was not the real Body of Christ, which he
averred to be true, to the face of all the Bishops, and gave his Reasons for
the same, upon which they pronounced Sentence against him as an Heretic, he
remaining constant to the Death, and could not be wrought upon by any
persuasions, to give his Conscience the Lie, upon which he was delivered over
to the secular Power, who had got the Kings Writ ad comb^rendum Haereticum, by
force of which he was brought to Smithfield, and there put into an empty
Barrel, and bound with Chains to a stake, with Fagots a bout him, and being in
this posture, they brought the Sacrament to him in great Pomp, asking him how
he believed it, and whether he would yet recant and save his Life; but he told
them he believed it to be hallowed Bread, and not Gods Body, upon which they
set Fire to the Fagots; upon the seeling of which he cried Mercy, and the
Prince being present, caused the sire to be withdrawn, endeavoring to save
him, and promising him a Pension; but he refused all, remaining constant,
inflamed with the Love of God, and calling on the name of Jesus, the Fire was
renewed, and he was burnt to Ashes.

The Statute Ex Officio.
The Cruelties of the Popish Bishops with their power more and more increasing,
by their influence on the said King, in the same Parliament, they procured the
Statute Ex Officio; in which it was enacted, that no man within the Realm
should preach privily or openly, without License obtained of the Ordinary, nor
that any should presume to teach, preach, or write any thing contrary to the
Catholic Faith, or determination of the holy Church, (as they then called that
of Rome,) nor keep or frequent any Conventicles, or any manner of Schools
touching the Sect of the Wickliffians: And that any person having any heretical
Books, Writings, or Schrols, containing the Wicked Doctrines of Wickliff,
should within 40 days after Proclamation of this Statute, bring them to the
Ordinary of the place: And if any shall do contrary to any of these Commands,
the Ordinary by virtue of this Statute, within the precincts of his Diccess,
may imprison them at his pleasure in his own prisons; or any others vehemently
suspected to be infected with, or a favourer of such Doctrines, and heretical
Opinions, until he or they shall by order of Law purge themselves of such
Opinions, or else openly recant the same: And that also the said Ordinary have
power to fine such person or persons for the King, and to return such Fines
into the Exchequer; and further such person or persons convict by the Ordinary
and his Commissaries, he may keep him or them in their own prisons at his
Discretion; and further, if the said persons so convicted, remain obstinate,
and will not abjure or recant their Opinions, that then they shall be delivered
over to the secular power, and the Mayor, Sheriffs, and other Officers of the
County, City, or Borough, being present, after Sentence pronounced against
them, shall take the persons so offending, and sentenced, and cause them to be
openly burnt in the sight of the people.

The Archbishops Constitutions.
This cruel Statute being obtained, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas
Arundel, put forth certain Constitutions to be observed. That no man should
undertake to preach without a License from the Ordinary, and they to be limited
what to say. That none should suffer any to preach in their Churches, unless
they produce such Authority. That whosoever should preach contrary to order
should be severely punished by his Ordinary. That no Schoolmasters shall teach
Children any thing of Religion, nor suffer their Scholars to expound the
Scriptures, nor permit them to dispute concerning the Catholic Faith, the
Sacraments, etc: That none of Wickliffs Books be kept in any School, house, or
place, nor Sold by any Bookseller. That no man dare to undertake to translate
the Scriptures, or any part of them into English. That no public disputes be
made concerning the Sacrament, or any other points of the Catholic Faith: None
to speak against Images, processions, Tapers Crucifixes, etc. under penalty of
being proceeded against as Heretics. With several others of the like kind,
which I here omit; But by this the Reader may judge, what Tyranny, oppression,
and cruelty, goes along with the Popish Religion, and what we must expect to
have here again, if ever it comes to be set up in this Realm, which God forbid.

Notwithstanding all this severity, many thorowout the Land professed the
Gospel, some Publicly, and others privately, some stoutly enduring
Persecution, and others through fear forced against their Consciences to
Recant. Among the rest, one William Thorp was very much persecuted by the
Archbishop Arundel, who in a very learned manner defended himself, and wrote a
certain book called his Testament, in which he fully laid open the corruptions
and vices of the Popish clergy: What became of this man is uncertain, but it is
most likely that he died in their Prisons, for they kept many in perpetual
durance, and obscure, that none could tell what became of them. So one John
Ashton another professor was kept in Prison till he dyed, in the year 1382.

Poor men doing Penance.
John Purvey also had great trouble about the same time, by the said
Archbishop, who at last was forced to Recant, to get out of their cruel
clutches. This proud and imperious Prelat Arundel, caused several poor men for
neglect of bringing straw to his Stables, as they were ordered, to undergo
penance, bare footed and bare headed, with each a great burden of straw at his
back, going before the procession on which some one wrote these verses,

These Baggs full of straw we bear on our backs
Because my Lords Horse his Litter did Lack:
If ye be not good to my Lord Graces horse,
Ye are like to go barefoot before the Cross.
After the Death of King Henry the 4 in the year of the Reign of his Son King
H. 5th, the Prelates procured another statute de Comburendo Heretico, in which
it was ordained, that all such who would not abjure these opinions of the
Lollards, contrary to the received Catholic Faith, should after conviction
forfeit all their goods and chattels, and their bodies openly burnt alive. And
upon this, and the former statute Sr. Roger Acton Knight, John Brown, John
Beverly, and others, to the number of 36 persons were burnt in St. Gyles's
fields in January 1413.

The cruel Persecution of the Lord Cobham.
The next noted man who was persecuted by these Tyrannical bloodsuckers, was
Sr. John Oldcastle Ld. Cobham, who was a favourer and Principal maintainer of
good men, called by the Popish Priests Lollards, who could not bring their
consciences to submit to their wicked impieties, and gross Idolatries. Arundel
had caused certain Inquisitors, who brought in Articles against the Lord
Cobham, for being a mighty maintainer of suspected preachers in the Diocese of
London, Rochester, and other places, and that he assisted and relieved them,
and that he himself had not a true belief of the Sacrament, penance,
pilgrimages, worshipping of Images, and of Ecclesiastical power and
Jurisdiction: Which process was awarded against him as a most pernicious
heretic.

The Lord Cobham being a great man, and in favor also with the King, these
blood thirsty Prelates first make their complaints against him to the King, who
having heard them, spoke himself in the behalf of the Lord Cobham, desiring
them to deal gently with him, and to seek to reduce him to the Unity of the
Church by fair means, promising them his assistance therein. And accordingly he
sent for that worthy Lord, and privately admonished him to submit himself to
the Church. To whom the Lord Cobham answered, that next to God he owed his
Obedience to the King, as his sovereign, and that he should ever obey him as
his faithful liege man, and all his Laws, and ready to fulfill his will in all
things, but as to this touching the Pope, and his Spirituality, he did not owe
any suit or service, for that the Scriptures had taught him that he was the
great Antichrist, the son of Perdition, and open enemy of God. which the King
hearing, and taking ill from him, forsook him, and left him a prey to his
bloody Adversaries, who much desired his Death. He was thereupon cited before
the Archbishops, and not appearing was Excommunicated, and then cited again.
This good Lord finding himself involved in troubles, wrote a rehearsal of his
Belief, and sent it to the King, But the King would not receive it, but ordered
him to be taken into Custody, and delivered to his Adversaries his Judges. The
good Lord beholding himself forsaken, offered to bring 100 Knights and
Esquires, to come in for his purgation, to clear him of Heresy, and also
offered himself, to fight for his Life, according to the Law of Arms, with any
man living, in the quarrel of his Faith, the King and the Lords of his Council
only excepted. Notwithstanding all this, the King suffered him to be summoned
in his own privy Chamber, upon which he appealed from the Archbishop to the
Pope, wherewith the King was more highly displeased than before, and he was
thereupon arrested and carried to the Tower. After that he was brought before
the Archbishop of Canterbury, The Bishops of London, Winchester, and others,
where he strenuously and with great judgment argued his case, but at last they
pronounced a definitive sentence against him for an Heretic. Which done the
good Lord fell on his knees and prayed for his enemies, and so was carried back
to the Tower. After that, sentence of Death was given against him, but by what
means is not known, he escaped from Sr. ^ob. Morley, Lieutenant of the Tower,
and got into Wales, where he continued 4 years. Not long after, the Archbishop
had pronounced his sentence upon this Lord, he dyed with his tongue swelled in
his mouth, that he was not able to speak (...) and it was looked upon as a
judgment of God, upon him, being a great persecuter of good men. The King vexed
at the escape of the Lord Cobham, offered a sum of Money to any that could take
him dead or alive, and at last, after 4 years concealment, the Lord Powis,
whether for gain, or his hatred against such professors of the Gospel is
uncertain, he caught the Lord Cobham, and brought him bound to London in the
year 1417. the Parliament then sitting, the said Lord Cobham being outlawed,
and excommunicated by the Bishop was brought before his Peers in Parliament,
and at the Instigation of the Prelates, he had sentence passed upon him, to be
drawn through London to the Gallows in St. Giles's and there to be hanged, and
burnt hanging. Tho Treason was pretended against him, yet it was for the matter
of Religion that he was put to death, as Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments
sufficiently proves, which brought him into the hatred of the Bishops, and they
brought him into the hatred of the King, which occasioned his Death and
Martyrdom.

Much about the time, or a little before the Execution of this worthy Lord, one
John Claydon of London Coriar, suffered for the sake of the Gospel, being
arrested by the Archbishops order upon suspicion of heresy which he denied
not, but owned his Doctrines, for which he was imprisoned by Braybrook Bishop
of London, and at last sentenced for an Heretic, and delivered to the secular
power, and not long after, he was had to Smithfield and there burnt for his
Religion. 1415. Some say one Richard Turming a Baker was burnt with him.

Henry Chichley succeeded to Arundel, and he following his steps, made more new
and severe Constitutions against the Lollards, thinking thereby to suppress
them, fearing the downfall of their Papal Authority, which they sought to
maintain with cruelty and Tyranny: whereupon a strict Inquisition was made in
all parts against those professors of the Gospel, and many forced to abjure to
save their Lives: Among the rest Ralph Munyen being more obstinate, was
condemned to perpetual imprisonment. And in Kent, whole families were forced to
fly, and leave their Habitations, the Persecution was so great: 16 of them
named in the Register of Canterbury.

The burning of William Tailor Priest.
King Henry the 5th dying, his Son Henry the 6. succeeded, of but a year old,
and in the first year of his reign, Wm. Tailor a Priest was burnt for his
Religion in Smithfield, Anno 1422. being first degraded by the Popish Prelates:
And on the first of March he suffered with much Christian Constancy. In the
year 1424. John Florence a Turner, in the Diocese of Norwich, was disciplined
Publicly in the Cathedral of Norwich, by sentence of the Bishop 3 Sundays one
after another, and likewise 3 Sundays afterward in his own parish Church of
Shelton, for holding several of Wickliff's opinions. About the same time
several other persons of the same Diocese, were persecuted for Lollards, and
many forced to purge themselves, and to swear against their Consciences, or run
the danger of suffering Death for being Heretics: Many were imprisoned and
cruelly handled, and some of them burned, as Father Abraham of Colchester,
William White, and John Whaddon Priests. And about fourscore men and Women in
Suffolk and Northfolk, forced to abjure, contrary to their minds and
consciences. Others of them were enjoined penance and publicly disciplined,
and among the rest one John Beverly was Whipped, from the Bishops palace in
Norwich, and round the Market place, cruelly tearing and tormenting his body,
by order of that persecu^ing Prelate. Also John Skilly of Flixon miller, for
receiving into his house White and Whaddon, who were Martyred, and for holding
several of Wickliffs opinions, was Condemned to be imprisoned for 7 years, and
to eat nothing but bread and water every Friday, during that time, and also in
the beginning of every Lent, and Maunday Thursday to do open penance. Several
others were forced to ab^ure and to do open penance. None can imagine ^he
grievous sufferings that the people of God endured in those days, and it would
be too tedious to ^numerate, some of them, being accused for having a ^ible in
their house. And in the year 1430. one ^ohn Hovedon a wool winder and Citizen
of London ^as burnt near the Tower, as Fabian writes. About the same time
Nicholas Canon in Northfolk was forced to abjure, and had 3 public disciplines
about the Cloisters of the Cathedral of Norwich and imprisoned besides. In the
year 1431. Thomas Bagley Priest an adherent to Wickliffs Doctrine, was burnt in
Smithfield, about the midst of Lent, after he had been degraded: And also Paul
Craw was burnt the same year. Anno 1439. one Richard Which, was burnt, who,
being a priest, was first degraded, and then burnt on Tower Hill for an
Heretic. He was esteemed a very holy man, in so much that after his Death, the
people went to the place where he was burnt, and there prayed, and reared an
heap of stones, and set up a cross in his Memory; which troubled the clergy,
and made them get a prohibition from the King, to hinder and punish such as
should resort thither as to Pilgrimage. And not long after, by reason of the
malice of the Cardinal of Winchester, and other Prelates, the good Duke of
Gloucester was arrested, and in few days after found dead in his Bed. About the
year 1456. when Thomas Burrscheer was Archbishop of Canterbury, Reynold
Peacock Bishop of Chichester, a good man, was brought into trouble and
persecuted by his fellow Prelates, for holding several opinions contrary to
their Romish Doctrines, and for his faith and profession of the Gospel.

After he had been cited before the Archbishop. and other prelates, and much
pains and endeavors used to bring him from his opinions, they at last drew up
a form of Recantation, which they forced him to declare to the people, by many
menaces and hard usage, for all which he was detained in prison, and what
became of him was not known.

The Burning of John Goose, and others.
We have briefly gone through the reigns of those Princes since the Clergy
obtained the Writ de Comburendo, for the burning of Heretics, and none has
escaped that cruel punishment, more or less, in any of their reigns since King
Rich. 2d. and for ought we can see, is rather likely to increase, than
decrease, for in the Reign of King Ed. 4th of the Line of York, who succeeded
King Hen. 6th whom he caused to be murdered, we find Anno 1473 one Jehn Goose a
godly servant of Jesus Christ, was condemned to the fire, and burnt on Tower
Hill in the month of August: Being delivered over to the secular power, into
the hands of Sheriff Belisdon, he endeavored all he could to cause him to
renounce his opinions to save his Life, but this constant Martyr would not
hearken to the Temptation, but desiring the Sheriff to let him have some
victuals to refresh him, the Sheriff commanded the same, and he eating a very
hearty Dinnet, as if he were unconcerned and giving God thanks for his meal and
refreshment, he said, that he should pass a sharp shower e're he should go to
supper; after which being led to the place of Execution, he dyed with great
Constancy and praising the Lord, yielded up his Spirit to God. Ex polychron.

The Burning of several others.
In the reigns of King Ed. 5th and his Bloody Uncle and Usurper King Rich. 3d
we do not find any Martyred, their Reigns being but short, and full of Trouble,
but in the Reign of King Hen. 7th about the year 1494, there was a very ancient
Lady about 80 years of Age, named Joan Boughten, burnt in Smithfield, for
holding the opinions of Wickliff. She dyed on the 28 of April, being very
constant, and returned to the menaces of Bishops, that she knew her self
beloved of God, and his holy Angels, and that she feared not the Fire, and in
the midst thereof she cried to God to receive her Soul. She was much beloved,
and her Ashes were carried away by such as secretly professed the Gospel, and
kept as a Relick.

In the year 1497 several were forced to do penance bare footed and bare
headed, with faggots on their shoulders before St. Paul's Cross, during the
procession and Sermon there. And in the following year 1498 in the beginning of
May, a priest was burnt. And the same year in Northfolk was burnt a very Godly
man named Brabram, and another in July, that year burnt in Smithfield.

In the year 1499. above 60 persons in Buckinghamshire, in the Diocese of
Lincoln, William Smith being then Bishop, were forced, to penance with faggots
on their shoulders, for the Gospels sake. And at Amersham in the same County,
was burnt one Wiliam Tylsworth, a godly Martyr; in a Close called Stanly, Anno
1506. He was about 60 years of Age, who being bound to the Stake, and the
Faggots about him, ready to suffer, the barbarous Papists caused his only
daughter, being a Married woman, to set fire to her own Father, her Husband
John Clark doing penance at the same time, with a Faggot before the fire, with
many others. And the next day after one Father Roberts was Martyred at
Buckingham: At whose burning there were 9 Persons forced to bear Faggots for
penance. And two or three years after, at the same Town of Amersham, were
burnt Thomas Bernard an Husbandman, and James Morden a laboring man, both in
one fire. And at the same time there were thirty more, who bare Faggots and
were burned in the right cheek: The manner thus: Their necks were tied fast
with Towels to a Post, and their hands bound, that they could not stir, and so
the Iron being hot, was clapped to their cheeks being stigmatized for the Gospels
sake. And this we must look for again, whenever Popery comes to have Dominion
in this Kingdom. At the same time one Father Rogers was kept in the Bishops
Prison, for 14 weeks, night and day, and so cruelly handled with cold, hunger,
and Irons, that when he was let forth of prison he could never go upright as
long as he lived.

The Cruel handling and Murder of Thomas Chase.
In the same year 1506, at Amersham also, one Thomas Chase, of that town, was
cruelly handled in the Bishops prison, being a man of a very Godly and Sober
behavior, speaking against the idolatry and superstition of the Papists, for
which he was condemned to the Bishops prison at Wooborn, called little ease,
where he lay bound and manacled, with Gyves, Fetters, Chains, and Irons,
pinched with hunger and thirst, having nothing given him but by Chaplains, who
mingled with their Alms, bitter tants, scoffs and jeers, threatenings and
flowtings, all which this good man patiently endured: Saying Blessed are they
who suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Mat. 5th. For theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. And blessed are you when men revile and persecute you, etc.
When the Bishop and his creatures, seeing they could not prevail upon this most
constant Martyr, with all their Cruelties, they at last privately strangled him
in prison, and then wickedly bruted abroad, that he had hanged himself in
prison: So that we see it is no new thing, for this viperous brood, first to
kill and murder a man, and then to defame him, and make himself the Murderer:
But this lie was easily detected; for none could stand upright in the place,
and he had so many Irons and Manacles on his hands and feet, that he could not
stir to ease himself, and they had bruised and maimed his body after a most
shameful manner; and that it might not be seen, and their cruelties and Murder
detected, they caused him to be privately buried in a Wood in the high way
betwixt Wooburn and Ma^low. But it was brought to light by means of a woman,
that looked after him in the prison. In the year 1507 one Thomas Norris was
burnt in Norwich. on the last of March. Also in the same Kings Reign Lawrence
Ghest, having been two years kept prisoner in Salisbury, was at last brought to
the stake, to be burnt, and thinking to move him to recant, they brought before
him his Wife and 7 Children. Yet Religion and constancy overcame nature, and
not hearkening to them, desired they might be removed, for that they were but
blocks in his way, and that they would be but an hindrance of his good course,
which he was running toward the Mark of his Salvation: And so fire being put
to him, he finished his Life, renouncing not only Wife and Children, but also
himself to follow Christ.

Diverse persecuted at Coventry.
In the Reign also of King Henry the 7th at Cheping Sadbury, a Godly and
Religious woman was Condemned to be burnt for an Heretic, by one Doctor
Whittington the Bishops Chancellor, who himself went to the fire to see the
Sacrifice of this good Woman, Condemned by him, who suffered with great
constancy; but it is very remarkable, that at the returning of the people into
the Town, after the burning of this faithful Martyr, and among the rest this
Doctor Wittington, that a Bull breaking loose out of a Butchers Staul meeting
them, and having received a blow with an ax, which had made him furious and
raging mad, he ran among the throng of the people, who giving way and shunning
him, he hurt none, till he came where this Doctor was, who also sought to run
from him; But the Bull as if directed from above, and by the vengeance of God,
he ran with all his force, upon the Chancellor and goring him in the belly
till his Guts came forth, he immediarely dyed; a miserable spectacle of Gods
wrath, against such Violent persecutors of his people.

William Sweeting and John Brewster Martyrs.
These were the chief Martyrs that suffered hitherto for the sake of the
Gospel, to the end of the Reign of King Hen. 7th, though we read of diverse
others, especially in the Diccess of Coventry and Leitckfield, who suffered
imprisonment, and great troubles, by the Papistical Bishops* for Speaking
against the real presence, Images Purgatory, Pilgrimages, the Popes Supremacy,
cating Flesh in Lent, Merits, and such like Popish Tenants; with which we will
end this first Part, being indeed but a small gleaning, of a more plentiful
Harvest of Martyrs, under the Reign of K. Hen. 8. who though he took away the
Popes Supremacy, and for lucres sake, overthrew the Abbeys, and wicked Nests of
Monkeries, in this Land, yet burned the Lollards (as they called them) and such
as professed the more pure light of the Gospel, as you will perceive in this
following second part, which, I shall as briefly, as I may, touch upon.

The Second part. In which are noted such Martyrs as suffered under the Reign
of King Henry the 8th, before the Reformation.
Persecution by Fitz-James Bishop of London.
WE are now come to the Reign of King Henry the 8th, in whose time many Godly
men, who professed the Gospel and the Doctrine of Wickliff (who began, the
first reformation in this Kingdom long before Luther) suffered persecution for
their consciences sake, under the tittle of Lollards, as they then nicknamed
them. In the years, between 1509 and 1517. in the Diocese of London, several
were made to abjure, before Richard Fitz-James the then Bishop, who was in his
time a most cruel persecutor of Christ's Church. Among the rest on Joan Baker,
Thomas Walker, William Potter, John Forge, Thomas Godard, and more to the
number of 41 who were brought into trouble, because some of them did not show
sufficient reverence to the Crucifix, others for speaking against Pilgrimages,
and saying some that were burnt for their Religion, by the Popish power, were
true Martyrs: And others again for Speaking against the Corporal presence in
the Sacrament, against holy days, and Fasting, against invocation of dead
Images, and against the pride and immoderate riches of the clergy, and some
again only for keeping company with such as were suspected of Heresy, and for
reading of English Books, with such like, for which many of them were used like
slaves, by the Instruments of Fitz-James, who dying, Cutbert Tunstal succeeded
him, who following his predecessors steps, violently persecuted all such as
professed the Gospel, and caused many through fear of his cruelties to abjure,
bear Faggots o^ their shoulders, in public procession before the Cross, and to
wear after a disgraceful manner, a Faggot painted upon their sleeves, or some
other part of their outward garments, during their lives, or so long as it
pleased the Ordinary, to terrify others. But among these, two poor men, who
had abjured, and had worn the infamous badg, enjoined them, the one named
William Sweeting, the other John Brewster, being poor-labouring men, were fain
to fly out of the Diocese of London, by reason of the persecution, their
Consciences accusing them for what they had done; the former getting to
Colchester, became the holy water Clerk to the Parson of the Parish of Mary
Magdalen, for which cause he had his infamous Badg taken away, the other John
Brewster, being hired for a labourer in the service of the Earl of Oxford, by
his controler, had his Badg taken off, but such was the intolerable pride and
cruelty of the Popish Clergy at that time, that notice being given, that these
poor men had relapsed to their former errors, after they had abjured, they were
both laid hold on, and brought up to London, were excommunicated, and on the
8th of October in the year 1511 were both burnt in Smithfield, though it is
said, that through fear of death, they would have submitted.

The Martyrdom and cruel handling of John Brown.
About the 4th year of the Reign of King Henry, one John Brown, going home in
the Gravesend Barge, chanced into the company of a Priest in the same Barge,
and sitting too near the proud and surly Priest, the Priest asked him, if he
knew him not, that he sat upon his clothes: John Brown told him, he did not
know him, nor what he was. I tell thee then said the other, that I am a Priest.
What Sir said John Brown are you a Parson, or Vicar, or a Ladies Chaplain? No
quoth he again, I am a Soul Priest: I sing for a Soul. Do you so Sir? said the
other, that is well done: But I pray Sir said he where do you find the soul
when you say Mass? I cannot tell, replied the Priest. Then said the other where
do you leave it when mass is done? I cannot tell thee, said the Priest. If you
can tell neither where you find it, nor where you leave it, when your Mass is
done, said John Brown, how do you know how you save it? Go thy ways said the
Priest, thou art an Heretic, and I will be even with thee. As he was; for nor
long after John Brown, not thinking any thing, was surprised in his own house,
set on horse back, and his feet tied like a Felon under the horses Belly, and
so carried to Canterbury, and there was kept from Low Sunday till the Friday
before Easter, his wife and family not knowing what was become of him. There he
was most cruelly handled by the Bishops Warham and Fisher, as he related
himself to his own Wife before his Death, and the Soles of his feet being set
upon hot coals, till they were burned to the bones, so that he could not set
them to the Ground, to make him (as he said) to deny his Lord, which he
resolved not to do, and so endured their torments, and being condemned to be
burnt, at his own Town of Ashford, whither he was carried, and the night before
he was burnt, set all night in the stocks, where his Wife came to him, whom he
exhorted to continue, as she had began, in the fear of God, and to bring up her
children virtuously in the fear of God. And the next day, being Whit-Sunday
even, this godly Martyr was burnt, and standing at the stake, with his hands
lifted up, he prayed thus:

O Lord I yield me to thy grace.
Grant me mercy for my trespass.
Let never the Fiend my Soul chase:
Lord I will bow and thou shall beat
Let never my Soul come in hell's heat.
Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, thou have redeemed me O Lord of Truth.

One Chilton the Bailiff seeing his Children at the fire, bid them fling them
in too, for they would spring up Heretics from his Ashes. This was the end of
this Martyr burnt 1517.

The Horrid Murder of Mr. Hun in the Lollards Tower.
The next we shall briefly treat of is one Richard Hun, Merchant Tailor of
London, esteemed a very worthy man. This man had a child at nurse in Middlesex,
in the Parish of St. Mary Matsilon, which dyed, on occasion of which there
fellout a quarrel between the said Rich. Hun and Thomas Dryfield, the Parson of
the Parish about a Mortuary, which he claimed very unjustly, and sued Mr. Hun
in the Spiritual Court, but Mr. Hun by advice of Council took out a writ of
Praemunire, against Tho. Dryfield; this enraging the whole horners nest of
Priests, hanging together, thought it not to be endured, that a Lay man, should
thus be able to withstand the power of Priesthood, though in his own just
defense, and fearing if they should suffer this Priest to be condemned at Hunt
Suit, there would be a way opened for the rest of the Laity to follow the
example. Therefore to put a stop to this, and to be revenged on him, they
contrive, to exhibit certain Articles against him, and accuse him of Heresy,
before the Bishop, who thereupon apprehended him, and committed him to the
Lollards Tower at Paul's. So that none of his Friends were suffered to come at
him. And from thence, by the instigation of Dr. Horsey a cruel persecuter, and
the Bishops Chancellor, he was had before the Bishop at his manor House at
Fulham, where he was examined, and certain Articles laid to his charge. That he
had taught and published, that Tithes were not ordained as due by God, but by
the Covetousness of Priests: That the Bishops and Priests were the Scribes and
Pharisees that crucified Christ: That they were only preachers and praters, but
no doers of Gods word: That he should say, he would defend the opinions of Joan
Barker, that was forced to abjure: That he should say, the Bishop and his
Officers deserved punishment, rather than the aforesaid Joan Barker. Lastly
that he kept Heretical Books, damned by the Law, such as the Apccalips in
English: The Epistles and Gospels in English, Wickliffs damnable works, and the
like. To which he gave in his Answers, and was after his examination sent back
to the Lollards Tower under the charge of Charles Joseph the Sumner, and John
Spalding the Bell ringer; by the means of these two wicked fellows, the bloody
Papists brought about their design of Murdering this Man; for about two nights
after, his last commitment, he was found hanged on a Beam in the aforesaid
Tower. Spalding after the Murder got himself our of the way and left the Keys
of the Prison with one of his companions, to deliver to the Sumners Boy, who
usually carried Mr. Hun his Meat. The Boy going into the Prison, about 10 of
the Clock in the Morning, on the 4th of December, with two others found Mr. Hun
hanging with his face to the wall, who being astonished, went and informed the
Chancellor being then at Church, after his Contrivance, who went with certain
of his Colleagues to the Prison, and finding him hanged, after their usual
manner, he caused it to be blazed abroad, that he had hanged himself. But for
all that the People suspected more truly the contrary, and that they had
murdered him. Whereupon a Contention arose between the Bishop, who took his
Clergys part, and averred he had murdered himself, and the Citizens, who laid
his Death to the charge of the Bishops Officers; And causing the Coroner to sit
upon view of his body, and according to Law, to choose an Inquest, and to give
their Verdict, vexed the Bishop and Papists so much, that the Bishop proceeded
ex Officio as in case of Heresy against the dead person supposing that if he
were condemned of Heresy, that they durst not find it but that he had
murdered himself; whereupon they objected several new matters against him, too
long to relate, whether true or false it matters not, for they were such as a
good man might not be ashamed to own. These Articles they cause to be
proclaimed at Paul's Cross the Sunday following, and according to certain rules
and prescripts of the Bishop, a Solemn process was framed against the dead, for
whom none dareing to appear, sentence was pronounced against the dead carcass,
for Heresy, and the same delivered over to the secular power to be burned,
which decree was performed in Smithfield, on the 20th day of the same month,
being 16 days after they had Murdered him, to the great grief and disdain of
the people.

Norwithstanding, after all this tragical and cruel handling of the dead Body,
and their fair and colorable show of Justice, yet the Inquest staid not their
diligence, in searching out the truth, and the cause and means of Mr. Hun^'s
death, insomuch that they were called before the Lords Chief-Justices, and also
before the King himself, and his Privy Council, about this matter, and the
determination at last was left to them, and after great search and
deliberation, they found by good proof, and sufficient Evidence, that Doctor
Horsey the Bishop of London's Chancellor, Charles Joseph the Sumner, and John
Spalding the Bell-Ringer, had privily and ma^iciously committed this Murder,
and therefore indicted them all three as willful Murderers. Notwithstanding,
by the power of the Bishop of London, with Cardinal Woolsey, then in great
favor, the next Sessions, the King's Attorney General pronounced the
Indictment against Dr. Horsey to be false, and untrue, and that he was no way
guilty of the Murder. Being thus freed he went away to Exeter, and for shame
durst never after appear in London. The aforesaid Inquest found, by most
evident signs, that the said Mr. Hun could not have hanged himself, and that
his Wrists had-been hard bound with Cords, and they found that bis Neck had
been broken below the silken Girdle, they had ^anged him in, and that there
were two streams of Blood on his Jacote, a great clodder in the lappet of his
Coat, which could not happen to him after ^e was hanged: Besides there was no
place for ^im to get up to do the deed. But besides these ^roofs, Charies
Joseph freely confessed of himself, that (...) those Heresies laid to Mr.
Hunn's charge, were wrote and invented by the Chancellor, and also, that he,
and John the Bell-Ringer, together with Dr. Horsey himself, who assisted them,
murdered the said Mr. Hun, who was lying on bis Bed, and at the bidding of the
aforesaid Chancellor, who said, lay hold on the Thief, they fell upon him, and
broke his Neck, and that he the said Charles Joseph put the Girdle about Mr.
Hunn's Neck, and that John the Bell Ringer, helping him to lift the dead Body,
the Chancellor put the Girdle about the Staple, and so left him hanging. Thus
you may see Godfreying is no new thing among them, Murder is their Trade: and
this was the cruel end of this man, only for opposing the Power of the Lordly
Priests, and which good People, you must look for again, if ever the Popish
Tyranny get footing in this Kingdom. Lay it to heart.

The Martyrdom of John Stillman.
It would be endless to relate all the troubles the people of God then
suffered, in the Reign of this King, or to enumerate the persons who were
forced against their Consciences to abjure, in the year 1517. in and about
London, about 35 persons were compelled to abjure, among whom was one George
Laud, the Prior of St. Sith. Some of them afterward being troubled in
Conscience recanted, and suffered death, among the rest, one John Stillman who
about the 24 day of September 1518. was apprehended, and brought before Richard
Fitz-James then Bishop of London, at Fulham, and charged for speaking against
the worshipping of Images, and for that he had commended Wickliff, and said he
wa^ a Saint in Heaven; and that his Book called Wickliff's Wicket, was a good
and holy Book: From thence he was had to the Lollard^ Tower, and or the 22 day
of October. brought before the Consistory a^ Paul's. and there examined by Thomas
Head, the Bishops Vicar General, upon several Articles objected against him, and
he the said John Stillman owning the truth, and persevering in the same, he was
condemned of Heresy, and delivered over to the Sheriffs of London, on the 25th
of the same Month, and publicly burnt in Smithfield.

Thomas Man and Robert Cousin Martyrs.
The next in order was Thomas Man, who, the 29. of March 1518. was likewise
burned in Smithfield: He had for diverse years been persecuted and imprisoned,
forced to abjure, and to do Penance; after which they kept him in a Monastery
as their servant, from whence he escaped, his Conscience troubling him for
denying the Truth; but being retaken, he was proceeded against as a relapsed
Heretic, by the aforesaid Thomas Head, Vicar General, who produced false
Witnesses against him, who swore several Articles that they said were Heresy,
and though he charged the Witnesses of Adultery and Theft, he could not be
heard, and those they had assigned him for Advocates being Papists betrayed his
Cause, and wrested his Words to his destruction; upon which he was condemned as
a relapsed Heretic, with these gloseing words Rogamus attente in Visceribus
Jesu Christi ut, etc. In English thus. We desire in the Bowels of the Lord
Jesus Christ, that the punishment and execution of due severity of thee and
against thee in this part may be so Moderated, that there be no rigorous
Rigor, nor yet nodissolute mansuetude but to the health and wealth of thy soul
etc. This Sentence Thomas Man said was like that of Cajaphas against Christ,
when he said to Pilate. It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, But
if thou letst him go thou art not Caesar's Friend. So they said it was not
lawful for them to take away Thomas Man's life, but they delivered him up to
the Sheriffs of London, who caused him to be burnt without any warrant for the
same.

About the same time one Robert Cousin, who had been instructed by Thomas Man in
his flight, was martyred at Buckingham. The chief articles against him were,
that he had persuaded one Joan Norman after she had bowed a piece of silver to
be offered to a Saint, for the health of her child, not to carry it, and told
her she needed only to pray to Heaven; And that she needed not to confess her
self to the Priest, but to God, and that she might drink as well before she
went to M^ss on the Sunday, as on any other day. For these Perilous Doctrines
this poor man was sacrificed, to the Lusts of the Popish Priests.

Much about the same time Christopher Shoemaker was burnt at Newberry, for
professing the Gospel, and Speaking against worshipping of Saints, and going on
Pilgrimages. And in the years 1520 and 1521 many received the Light of the
Gospel, in and about Newberry, Buckingham, Henly, Amer^^m, in the Diocese of
London, in Essex, at Colch^ster, (...) Suffolk, and Northfolk, and many other
places, so that it spread very much before Luther appeared.

Cruel perc^cution by the Bishop of Lincoln, Children Compelled to set fire to
their parent.
About the same year a most Cruel persecution was made against these
Gospellers, or such as professed according to the Gospel, by John Longland
Bishop of Lincoln, who brought into trouble above 450 persons, most of them
poor ignorant men many of them only for having in their houses, and reading
some English Books. And having gotten the Kings Letters to the Sheriffs and
others, to assist him in the Suppression of Heretics, he laid about him like a
bloody Tyrant, Causing all that he suspected to abjure, do penance, or be
burnt, So that he forced above 50 persons to abjure their opinions, against
their consciences for fear of Death. But many of them recanting were laid hold
on, and Suffered Martyrdom, among whom were Thomas Bernard, James Mordent,
Robert Rave, John Norman, Thomas Holms, and John Scrivener, at the burning of
this last, his own children were Compelled to set fire to their Father, a
Barbarity heardly to be paralleled among the Heathen.

Seven Martyrs at Coventry.
Much about the same time 7 godly martyrs sufer'd at Coventry, viz. Mrs. Smith
a Widow, Rober^ Hatcher a Shoemaker, Archer a Shoemaker, Hawkins and Thomas
Bond both Shoemakers, Wrigsham^ Glover, and Landsdale an Hosier; one of the
chi^ crimes objected against these persons was, the teaching their Family the
Lords Prayer, and the te^ Commandments in English, all which were burned in a
little Park near the city Anno 1519. This thing being noysed abroad, and the
people grumbling because of their hard usage the Bishop and his Priest^ gave it
out, that they were not burned for havin^ the Lords Prayer, Creed, and ten
Commandment^ in English, but for eating Flesh on Fridays: so th^^ you see they
mended the matter much. About^ years after one Robert Silkby, was burned at the
same place, for the same crim^s. About the sam^ time Mr. Patrick Hamtiton, and
Henry Forest of St. Andrews were both Martyred in Scotland.

Thomas Harding Martyr.
Under the aforesaid John Longland Bishop of Lincoln, suffered Thomas Harding
of Chesham in the County of Buckingham, being force^ with his wife to abjure by
the said Bishop, with many more being enjoined penance ^n^ wearing Badges of
Faggots which he did till the year 1532. Being also ordered to live in a
certain place, and no where else, to fast every Corpus Christi Even, and to go
on Pilgrimage during his life every year to Ashrige, and there make his
offerings both him and his Wife. But Thomas Harding neglecting, and being
troubled in his mind, retired into the Woods in private on the Easter Holydays,
whilst others went to church to bow down to the Idols, he was espied at his
prayers, which he read out of an English Book. And the Officers of the Bishop
being made acquainted with it, they went immediately to his house, and searching
narrowly, found Certain English Books hid under the boards of the flower, most
of them parts of the Holy Scripture. Upon which he was had before the Bishop
then at W^oburn, where being examined, he was sent to the Bishops prison called
Little ease; Where he endured much hardship both of hunger and pain, but they
seeing him to remain constant, the Bishop soon after condemned him as a
relapsed Heretic to the fire. committing the charge of his execution to
Rowland Messenger, Vicar of great Wickham, who accordingly had the aforesaid
Martyr to Chesham, where he dwelt, where he made a sermon in the behalf of the
Popish Clergys Jurisdiction, making Thomas Harding to stand before him all the
time: And after sermon was done he caused him to be brought before the High
Altar, where he asked Tho. Harding if that he ^elieved, that the Substance of
the Bread after Consecration was any other than the Body of Christ ^orn of the
Virgin Mary. To which he repyled he belie^ed what the Articles of the Creed had
taught him, That our Savior Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, that he
suffered under Pontius Pilate, and that on the Third day he arose again from
the Dead, and sits now in Glory at the right hand of God the Father.

After this he was had to a man's house, where he remained all night in prayer,
and about 10 of the clock the next morning, the aforesaid Vicar Rowland, with
many Billmen to guard him, hurried him away, many men and women following him
lamenting, and others Rejoicing thereat. When he was bound to the stake he
desired the people to pray for him, and as soon as they had set fire to him, he
prayed God to forgive his enemies, and with great patience lifting up his hands
toward Heaven, he said Jesus receive my spirit, when one of the wicked Crew,
t^king up a Billet flung it at him, and dashed out his Brains. And proclamation
was made a^ the same time that whosoever should bring a Fa^got toward the
burning of an Heretic should have 40 days pardon. At the same time there was
generally a great persecution of all good men, and w^men, dissenting any way
from the Romish Idolatry through out the whole Diocese of Lincoln.

In the year 1530. about the time of the fall^^ of Cardinal Wolsey* one Thomas
Hitten a Preacher^ Maidston, being much persecuted by the Archbisho^ of
Canterbury, Warham, and Fisher Bishop of R^chester and after they had tormented
him, and ke^ him in prison, they at last caused him to be burnt (...)
Maidstone, for his Constant profession and testimon^ of Jesus Christ, and of
his free grace and salvation which he still maintained to the death.

The story of Thomas Bilney Martyr.
Thomas Bilney was brought up in the University- Cambridge even from a child,
profiting in all ki^^ of Sciences, ^^d in the Profession of both Laws, b^^ at
last being Converted to Christ, he studied the G^^pel, being much inflamed with
the Love of the (...) Religion and Godliness, an^ by his pious life a^ great
learning, he Converted many of his fellows (...) the true knowledge of the
Gospel viz. Mr Th^^ Arthur, Mr Hugh Latimer, and others; at last he left the
University and went about preaching the Gospel, which begot him many Enemies
and among the rest Card. Wolsey, the Bish. of Norwich, The Friars of Ipswich,
D. Stokes, Sir Th. More, and others, for he much inveighed against the pride of
the Popish Clergy, and the authority of the Bishop of Rome. This enraged
Wolsey, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of
Rochester, Ely, Bath and Wells, with many others who Combined against him, and
caused him and Mr. Arthur who had accompanied him to be brought before them at
the Chapter house in Westminster; where they examined Mr Bilney, whether he
had privately or publicly preached or taught the Opinions of Luther, or any
other Contrary to the Catholic Church; and that whether he had not made Oath,
that he would not preach or defend the Opinions of Luther. To which Mr B lney
made answer, that he had made such an Oath, but not Lawfully. After which they
caused them both to take an Oath to Answer such Questions as they should ask
them. Then certain Witnesses were called to prove the Articles Exhibited
against them, but the Cardinal having other great matters of State to follow,
the business was referred to Tonstal Bishop of London. And on the 20th of Nov.
1527, they were again had before the Bish and several Witnesses sworn to
Articles against them. The chief of which were: That he said the Pope nor other
could let any man to preach the Gospel: That none ought to so: bear preaching
the Gospel for fear of persecution: That he should say every Christian man is a
Priest. That there was no Mediator but Jesus Christ, and that they ought not to
pray to saints. That the curses of the Bishops, against those who preached the
Gospel, should not harm them, but return upon themselves with several others of
the like nature, which were for the most part confessed. Mr. Arthur being
fearful submitted himself But Bilney standing out, they interrogated him upon
34 Articles which he answered with great prudence and moderation, not sparing
to lay out their Idolatrous Worship before them, and for which his sincerity he
was twice pulled out of the Pulpit at Ipswich, by the Friars there, who were
his great persecutors. But among other things, this prophetical man told them,
that the time would shortly come, that others besides him should show and
preach the same Faith and Doctrine, that he did, which was the true Gospel of
our Savior Jesus Christ, and the mind of the holy Fathers, and whereby they
should be brought from their errors in which they had been long seduced and led
aside.

On the 4th of December. Mr Bilney is again brought before the Bishop of London,
in the Chapter house in Westmin* where he is by the Bishop advised to submit,
and to recant his errors, and desired to go aside and to consider of it with
himself, but Mr. Bilney would return no other Answer than this: Fiat Justitia
and Judicium in nomine D^mina, Let Justice and Judgment be done in Gods Name,
etc. and he being still urged to abjure, he would answer no otherwise only
adding: Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus, exultemus and laetemur in ea This is
the Lords day, and we will rejoice in it. Then the Bishop putting off his Cap,
after a little deliberation stood up, and said: In nomine Patris, and filii,
and Spiritus sancti Amen. Exurgat Deus and dissipentur inimici ejus. In the
name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, let God arise, and his Enemies be
scattered. Then Crossing his forhead and Breast, he gave sentence thus. I by
the Consent and Council of my Brethren here present do pronounce The. B ln ^
who has here been accused of diverse Ar^icles, to be Convict of Haeresie. And
for the rest of the s^ntence, we take deliberation till to morrow, Thus for 3
times Mr. Bilney with great Courage, withstood both their flatteries and
threats, when at last for his further trial, that it pleased God weakness
should appear, being tired with their importunities ^horow Infirmity, rather
than Conviction submitted himself, and openly read his Abjuration and
subsc^ibed it: after which the Bishop absolved him, and enjoined him penance,
which was, That he should abide in prison appointed by the Cardinal, till he
was released by him, and also, that the next day he should go before the
Procession in the Cathedral of St Paul, bare headed, with a faggot on his
shoulder, and should stand so before the Preacher at Paul's Cross all the Sermon
time.

But after this, Mr. Bilney took such repentance and sorrow, for what he had
done, that he almost fell into despair, so that some were fain to be with him
day and night to comfort him. And about a year after, coming to Cambridg, he
was in such Anguish of mind, and Agonies, that nothing could do him good, not
being able to eat, drink, or sleep, imagining the whole Scriptures to condemn
him, and to be against him. And not being able to rest, he again openly
confessed his Faith in the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ, being thus for
two years troubled in mind, from the year 1529 to 1531, having a bitter sting
and remorse for his Abjuration; but then coming to have some peace and quiet of
Conscience, he resolved to give over his Life for the Confession of that truth
he had renounced. Upon which he left the University, telling his friend he
would go to Jerusalem, meaning he intended to go to suffer, and immediately
departed to Northfolk, where he first preached privately in houses, to confirm
the Brethren, and an Anchoress whom he had converted, who being in Norwich, he
conversed with and gave her a new Testament of Tindal's translation: and then
he preached publicly in the Fields, confessing his heinous fact, owned the
Doctrine he had abjured to be true, willing all men to take warning by him, and
never to trust to their fleshly friends, in causes of Religion. Upon this he
was apprehended and put into Prison by Nix the Bishop of Norwich. Upon which
several of their Doctors went to see to reclaim him who so strenuously handled
matters that Dr. Cull was himself converted to the Doctrines he maintained. But
the Bishop proceeded against him, and after examination he was condemned to the
fire for an Heretic by Dr. Pells Doctor of Law and the Bishops chancellor then
he was degraded by the Suffragan Underwood by the Assistance of the friars
according to their Popish manner, which done he was immediately committed to
the Lay power to the Sheriffs of Norwich of whom Tho. Necton was one, and Mr.
Bilneys good friend and very sorry for him; but such was the dread he had of
the Popish Tyranny of those times that he durst not refu^e doing his office but
he could not bear to be present at his death and did him all the friendly
kindness he could in his Confinement.

On the Friday night being St. Magnus Eve; the day before he suffered, diverse
of his Friends resorted to him in the Prison of the Guildhall, where he was
kept, and finding him eating some Alebrew very cheerfully, he told them that he
endeavored to keep up his ruined Tenement of his Body as long as he could.
Then exhorting them with godly discourse some of them told him, that although the
fire which he should suffer the next day should be of great heat to his Body,
yet the comfort of God's Spirit should cool it to his everlasting refreshment.
At which word Mr. Bi^ney putting his finger into the flame of the Candle
burning before him, and feeling the heat thereof, he said, I feel by
experience, and have known it long by Philosophy, that Fire by Gods Ordination
is naturally hot, but yet I am persuaded by Gods holy Word, that many who have
experimented the same, have felt no heat, and in the fire no Consumption; and I
constantly believe, however the Stubble of my Body may burn and be wasted by
the outward fire, yet my soul and Spirit shall without pain be purified
thereby, with Joy unspeakable. Then he recited these Scriptures. Fear not for I
have redeemed thee, and called thee by my Name, thou art mine own. When thou
go through the water I will be with thee, and the strong floods shall not
overthrow thee. When thou walk in the fire it shall not burn thee, and the
flame shall not kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God the holy one of
Israel.

The next day being Saturday, with a great Guard of Glaves and Bilmen, they
fetched this constant Martyr out of prison, carrying him to a place called the
Lollards Pit which was encompassed about with hills; as he passed the streets,
he distributed Alms to the poor, by the hands of one Dr. Warner, Parson of
Winterton, his Friend, and one he had chosen to give him ghostly comfort at the
Stake: he was clad in a Lay habit with his sleeves hanging down, and his hair
cut and mangled at his degradation, however he seemed of an upright and
cheerful countenance, being but little in Stature. Being at the Stake while
they were preparing the materials for, his burning, he desired to speak a few
words to the people. In which he told them he was born, and so of necessity
must dye, he had Life with that condition, 'twas natural, but he was there to
testify that he dyed a good Christian, and in a right belief toward almighty
God. Upon which he rehearsed the Articles of the Creed, with the Elevation of
his Eyes and hands toward heaven, and at the Article of Christ's Incarnation,
having a little meditation with himself and coming to the word Crucified, he
bowed himself with great reverence, and then proceeded to the rest. This done
he put off his Gown, and kneeled down upon a little ledg, at the foot of the
stake, for him to stand on, that he might be more Conspicuous to the people,
where he prayed privately, with great fervency, his Eyes and hands lifted up
toward Heaven ending at last with the 143 Psalm which he repeated aloud: Hear
my prayer O Lord, and consider my desire, which he repeated in Latin thrice,
with deep meditation, and then again; Enter not into Judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Having put off his Jacot and
Doublet he stood in his Breeches and shirt, and so was chained to the st^ke,
bidding his friends cheerfully farewell, and when Dr Warner could not speak to
him for weeping, be said to him pasce gregem tuum etc. Feed your flock, feed
the flock, that when the Lord comes he may find you so doing. Then many of the
priests and Friars his enemies, finding the people to murmur much for their
putting him to death, some of them spoke to Mr. Bilney to satisfy the people
concerning them, lest they should withdraw their charitable Arms: upon which
Mr. Bilney said with a loud voice, I pray you good people, be never the worse
to these men for my sake, and tho they should have been the Authors of my
death, it was not they. Then the officers setting fire to the reeds made a very
great flame, which he feeling held up his hands, and then Knocking his Breast
he often cried on the name of Jesus, and sometimes said Credo, Credo: I
believe, I believe: but the wind being very high, it blew the flame from him
with its violence so, that he suffered much ere the wood took fire, and had
strength enough to burn him: at last he bowed over the chain and gave up the
Ghost, which one of the officers seeing, thrust the staple out of the stake
with his halbert and so let the body drop into the fire, and flinging faggots
upon him, he was so Consumed to Ashes: and this was the end of this good man,
Martyr and Saint, as Mr. Latimer calls him, Mr. Bilney, who dyed at Norwich,
1531.

Mr. Bayfeild Martyr.
The next in order that suffered the torment of the flames, by the bloody
persecuting Papists, was Mr. Richard Bayfeild in the year 1532, in the month of
Novem in Smithfieild. He was sometimes a Monk of Bury converted by Doctor
Barnes, and two others of London the said Doctor giving him a Testament of
Tindals Translation, and other godly books in English, which so wrought upon
this Monk, that he made them his daily study, till at last he was found out by
some of the Friars of the Covent, and was by them gaged and cruelly whipped*
and imprisoned in the House, and put in the Stocks for 3 quarters of a year,
ere Doctor Barnes could get him out, which he at last effected by means of one
Dr. Ruffam his friend one of the same House. Dr. Barnes had him with him to
Cambridge, where he studied, and profited so well that he never more returned
to his Covent, but went to Land. where he hid himself for a while, till he got
beyond sea, where he was very useful and assisted Tindal and Frith, but coming
over again to London, and lodging in Bucklersbury, he was betrayed; being
dogged thence to his Bookbinders in Mark lan^, was there taken and carried to
the Lollards Tower, where finding one Parson Patmore imprisoned for the same
Doctrine, he wonderfully strengthened him, and confirmed him by his discourse;
which being perceived, they caused Mr. Bayfeild to be removed to the Bishops
Colehouse. As for the Parson he was afterward, adjudged by the Bishop to
perpetual Imprisonment, from which he was at last delivered by the Kings
Pardon. But as for Mr. Bayfeld, he being now in the Colehouse, was more Cruelly
handled than before, for they tied him to the Wall by the neck, middle, and
legs, to force him to accuse others, but he would not. Several Articles were
put in against him, and among the rest this, viz. that he should say all laud
and praise should be given to God alone, and not to Saints or Creatures. He
very learnedly answered all the Articles put in against him, and offered to
dispute with the most learned of them, the points which he asserted, but they
had other more powerful Weapons to fight with than words, the Papal
Jurisdiction by which they condemned him, first for a relapsed Heretic, and
then sentenced him to be degraded, upon which Mr. Bayfeild being moved more
than Ordinary, said to the Bishop who had pronounced the sentence against him.
The Life of you of the spirituality is so evil, that ye be heretics, for ye do
not only live evilly, but ye maintain evil living contrary to the Gospel of
Christ, and the true belief of Christ's Church. Upon which they proceeded
actually to degrade him; which done they delivered him over to the Secular
power, who received him into their Jurisdiction, without any Writ, but only by
virtue of the Bish. Letters, according to a Stature made, Hen. 4. when they had
degraded Mr. Bayfeild, the Bishop being present, struck him with his Crosier
Staff that he had in his hand, on the breast, with such violence, that he
overturned Mr. Bayfeild, who was on his knees before him, and falling back on
the pavement broke his head, so that he lay a while stunned and in a swone, ere
they could bring him to himself. When he said I rejoice that I am delivered
from the Church of Antichrist, and that I now am of the true Church of Christ
militant on Earth, and trust that ere long I shall be in Heaven with Jesus
Christ, and the Church triumphant for ever. From the Quire they had him to
Newgate, and thence after an hours time which he spent in prayer, they led him
to Smithfield, who went very cheerfully, and there for want of a speedy fire,
he was half an hour alive after they had enkindled the fuel, and when that his
left arm was burning and on a flame, he rubbed it with his right, till it fell
off into the fire from his body, and then he continued in prayer, to the end
without moving. This was the end of this godly stout Martyr on the 20 of Nov.
1532.

John Tewksberry Martyr.
The next that dyed by the hands of the persecuting Papists for his Religion,
was one Tewksbury a Leather seller of London, being converted by reading the
Testament of Mr. Tyndel in English, and was so well verst in all points of his
Religion, that he disputed it before Bishop Tonstall and his Priests for 7 days
together, to their great wonder and amazement; they being not a little troubled
and ashamed, that a Lay ignorant man (as they accounted him) should be able, by
the power of the Scriptures, to resist and overthrow all their Arguments. The
Bishop often urged him to recant his heresies which he so well defended, but he
answered them that he no way erred from the true doctrine of the ancient mother
Church. After which many Articles were objected against him, to which he gave
his particular Answers, but at last, being through many importunities and
threats persuaded, the flesh being weak, he recanted and submitted himself to
penance which was, That he should keep his abjuration under pain of suffering
for his relapse, That the next Sunday he should openly bear a faggot at Paul's
Cross, and the Wednesday following another in Newgate Market and Cheapside: and
on the Friday in Cornhill and Leadenhall; that he should on either sleeve wear
an Embroidered faggot as a badg all his Life time. That he should enter the
Monastery of St. Bartholomew in Smithfield on the Whiteson Eve following, and
there abide, and not come out unless released by the Bishop of London. And that
he should never go out of the Diocese of London without the special leave of
the Bishop, or his successors. But nothwithstanding this, about two years
after, the said John Tewksbury being strengthened in his faith, by the Constancy
and example of Mr. Bayfeild before mentioned, he made an open profession of his
Faith, upon which he was apprehended and carried before the Bishop of London,
and St. Tho. Moor, where diverse Articles were preferred against him, one of
which was that he confessed, that his Abjuration made before Cuthbert Bishop of
London was done by Compulsion, and against his Conscience: and that he had
taken off the Badges of faggots on his sleeves without order and many others
such like, most of which the said Tewksbury confessed; upon which the Bishop
pronounced sentence against him, and delivered him to the Sheriffs of London:
who caused him to be burnt in Smithfield upon St. Thomas Eve, being 20th of
December. 1532. having no writ of the Kings but the Bishops Warrant.

The Cruel handling of Edward Freese.
Edward Freese a Painter by profession, who being at Colchester, and painting
certain clothes for an Inn there, wrote several places of Scripture by which
they perceived him to be one of them they termed Heretics, upon which they
seized him, and carried him away forcibly to London, to the Bishop, and so to
Fulham where the Bishop then was, where he was imprisoned and handled cruelly
with some others of Essex, who had professed al^o the Gospel; most of their
bread being made of Sawdust: then friends and wives being denied to come to see
them, and the wife of this Freese pressing in at the Gate, desirous to see her
husband, the Porter gave her such a Kick on the Belly, she being then big with
child, that the child was immediately destroyed, and she not long after dyed of
the same. The Painter would ever and anon be writing things on the wall of the
prison, and among the rest, one day, he wrote, Doctor Dodipal would make me
believe the Moon is made of green cheese; upon which they put manacles upon his
wrists, so that he could not use his hands, so much as to comb his Head, which
they forced him to wear, till they eat into his flesh, and that the flesh of
his wrists stood up higher than the Irons. After a long suit of some of his
friends, he was brought out of prison to answer at the Consistory, having been
kept 3 days before without either meat or drink, so that when he came forth he
was so much amazed, and out of his senses, with their cruel handling him in
prison, that he Stared like a wild man, and could answer nothing to any
Question was asked him, but that my Lord Bishop is a good Man. They perceiving
him distracted they sent him to an Abbey, but he never came again to his perfect
mind.

Not long after, the Brother of this man named Valentine Freese, and his Wife;
were both burned at York. The same year, this Bishop of London, caused all the
Bibles he could get of Tindals translation, to be publicly burnt.

Mr. Baynham a Lawyer, Martyr.
The next we shall mention, is one Mr. James Baynham a Lawyer and son to a
Knight of Glocestershire well skilled both in the Latin and Greek tongues, and
bred up in the Study of the Laws, of a most virtuous disposition, affable
Conversation, and extremely addicted to prayer and meditation, and reading the
holy Scriptures, visiting poor prisoners and relieving them, just to his
Clients, giving good Council to the poor and widows without fees, and was a
singular pattern for all Lawyers, but notwithstanding his good and holy Life,
he was accused before Sr. Tho. Moor then Chancellor, arrested, and carried out
of the Middle Temple to the Chancellours House at Chelsey, where he remained in
free prison for a time, but when Sr. Tho. Moor saw he could not pervert him, he
handled him cruelly, and caused him to be whipped at a Tree in his Garden called
the Tree of Truth, and after that sent him to The Tower to be racked, Sr. Tho.
Moor himself being present, till they had lamed him, all to have him accuse
others, which he would not. And his wife because she would not discover where
his Books were they sent to the Fleet, and confiscated his Goods. After this,
they had him before the Bishop of London, and interrogated him upon several
Articles, to which he answered with great prudence: The Bishop told him now was
the time for him to save his Life or to lose it, and Sr. Tho Moor useing many
flattering speeches, they at last brought him to submit, tho he could not yield
to many of the Articles which he had spoken against, upon which he was sent to
the Counter, and from thence was several times carried before the Bishop and
Consistory, being Exceeding unwilling to abjure, but at last for fear seeing
the Bishop ready to give a definitive sentence against him, he read and signed
his abjuration; which done, he was fined 20 l. to the King, and penance
enjoined him: which was, the next Sunday to go in the Procession with a faggot
on his shouldier at Paul's Cross, and so to stand before the Preacher during the
Sermon, and after that to remain in Prison during the Bishops pleasure. This
done Anno 1532, not long after he was released, but he had scearce been a month
at home but he continually bewailing his fact of Abjuration, could have no
peace in his mind, till he had declared his offense, to all his Acquaintance,
asking God forgiveness, and the World, before a private Congregation, held in a
Warehouse in Bowlane. And the next Sunday after, he went to saint Austins
Church openly, with a Bible in his hand, and there before them all; with
weeping, declared he had denied God, an^ prayed him to forgive his weakness,
and all goo^ people to take warning by him and not to do as h^ had done; for
the Hell he had felt in his Conscienc^ was greater far than the torment of
Burning: upon this he was apprehended and sent to the Tower and a Process was
drawn up against him, as a relapsed Heretic: They first caused him to be whipped
and after several appearances, and sending him t^ several prisons where they
most curelly handled him, they at last pronounced the sentence against him, and
delivered him to Sr. Richard Gresham Sheriff, who sent him to Newgate, from
whence on the la^^ of April 1533. he was had to Smithfield, and there burned.
It was observed, that being at the Stake in the midst of the Flames, when his
Arms and Legs were half consumed* he spoke these Words O ye Papists, behold ye
look for miracles, and here now you may see a miracle, for in this fire feel no
more pain, than if I were on a Bed of down, but it is to me as a bed of Roses:
After which he gave up the Ghost.

Bent and Trapnel Martyrs.
About the same time John Bent a Tailor living at the Devises in Wiltsheir, was
there burnt, for denying the Real presence in the Sacrament of the Altar. And
also in the same county one Trapnell was burnt, for professing the Gospel, at a
Town called Broadford.

Three men hanged for taking down the Rood of Dovercourt.
The same year, many Images were thrown down in the night, by several persons,
who were troubled at the gross Idolatry committed before them, by the sottish
and ignorant Papists; as the the Images and Crosses in Stoke park. The Image of
the Crucifix in the highway by Cogshall. the Image of St. Petronel in the
Church of great Harseleigh. The Image of St. Christopher by Sudbury. and the
Image of St. Petronil in a Chapel by Ipswich. But above all the rest, the loss
of the Image or Rood of Dovercourt vexed them most, being a noted and famous
Image, and to which many ignorant devotees resorted, the Church door standing
open night and day, for they had caused it to be reported, and 'twas also
believed by the superstitious People, that none was able to shut the Church
door being kept open by this Image, upon which one R^bert King of Dedham,
Robert Debnam of Eastergolt, Nicholas Marsh of Dodham, and Robert Gardner of
the same place, agreed together one night to see if this feigned miracle were
true or false, their consciences troubling them to see the Honor of God to be
blasphemed by the juggling Priests, imposeing upon the silly People. The
roodstood about 10 miles from the place where they dwelt, which they traveled
on foot, and found the Church door standing open, which they found they were
able to shut, and that the dead Image was not able to hinder them, nor to
defend it self, for they made bold to take it down out of its shrine, with the
Tapers burning before it, and carried it about a quarter of a mile from the
place, and then set it on fire, which being dry, burned very easily. But great
inquiry being made after these persons, they were at last found, and
apprehended, all but Robert Gardner who fled and escaped, the other three
before mentioned were hanged ^n chains about half a year after. Robert King
was hanged at Dednam, Robert Debnam at Cattwaycause, and Nicholas Marsh at
Dovercourt.

The Martyrdom of John Frith and Andrew Hewer.
The next whose history we shall briefly recite, ^s Mr. John Frith who was a
young man of godly ^ife and singular learning, being bred in Cambridge, Skilful
in the Latin and Greek tongues, and well ^ead in Philosophy and Divinity, of a
pregnant wit and excellent Conversation, This man falling into ^he Acquaintance
of Mr. Tindal, was by his means Converted, and owned the Gospel of Jesus Christ
in ^incerity of heart. He being Batchelour of Arts a^ong other noted and
learned men who were picked out to furnish Cardinal Woolsies new erected
College, called Christ College in Oxford, was chosen for one: among whom many
had received the light of the Gospel, and often conferred together privately of
the same, which coming to the Cardinals ear, he caused them, and among the rest
this John Frith to be cast into Prison, in a stinking Cave within the College,
where their Salt-fish was laid, so that through the Stink thereof many of them
were infected and dyed: 3 of them dyed within one week one of another, having
nothing given them to ear, but Salt-fish from February to the midst of A^g^st.
John Frith escaping Death was at last rel^ased out of Prison and Confined only
not to go 10 miles out of Oxford, but he not daring to trust himself among
those wolves, that sought to devour him, ^e made his escape, and got away
beyond sea. But after that coming back again into his native Country, and being
at Reading in poor clothes, he was taken for a Vagabond, and put into the
Stocks, where he sat till he was almost pined with hunger and cold, because he
would not declare who he was, for Sr Tho Moor the Chancellor, and great
persecutor, being a bigoted Papist, had offered great rewards to any that
could take this John Frith and had sent to the Sea Ports and other places to
discover him. At last, not knowing what to do he sent for Mr. Cox who was
Schoolmaster of that place, whom he accosted in Latin, and afterward in Greek
reciting several verses out of Homer, Complaining of his hard Condition. His
Eloquence so much wrought upon this ingenious Schoolmaster, that he went to the
Magistrates and got him released, taking him home and relieving him, being much
taken with his learning and wit. After this, often disguising himself, and
changing his clothes, staying but a small time with his friends, for fear of
discovery, he wandered about; but at last being betrayed, he was taken and sent
to the Tower, where he wrote an excellen^ tract concerning the Sacrament, which
Sr. Tho M^^^ thought worthy of answer by himself. But Frith treatise coming
into several hands, did much good, and was some means of Converting Archbishop
Cranmer. He maintained his Arguments so strenuously, and with so much learning
against all the Bishops, that they knew not what to say to him, But in the end,
after many appearances before these wolfish Prelates, on the 20th of June 1533.
he received his sentence from the Bishop of London, to be burnt, thereupon
directing his Letter to Sr. Scephen Peacock the Mayor of London, and to the
Sheriffs, to receive him, he was delivered over to the secular power, who on
the 4th of July following, caused him to be burnt in Smithfield, together with
Andrew Hewet, where he suffered Death with great courage and constancy. For
when the faggots and fire were put unto him, he embraced them declaring with
what quiet of mind he suffered for Christ's Sake, and the true Doctrine, of
which he that day gave a cheerful testimony with his Blood. The wind bare away
the flame from him to his fellow, who was tied to his back, so that he was
Longer in dying, yet God giving him strength he bore it with such patience, as
if he felt no pain or torment, but rather seemed to be joyful for his fellow,
than careful for himself.

As to the other Martyr who suffered with Mr. (...) Frith, his name was Andrew
Hewet born in Fever^^am, in the County of Kent, he was but a young man, and had
been at Apprentise to a Tailor in Waring, Street, but being suspected, he was
betrayed, and had to Prison in the Lollards Tower where one ^rocuring him a
file, he filed off his Irons and made ^is escape, but was not long after
retaken, and u^ed much worse, till at last, after much hard usage, and long
imprisonment, he was condemned to be ^urnt, and suffered in the same fire with
the afore^aid Mr. Frith; when they were at the Stake, and desired the Prayers
of the People; one Doctor Cook a Parson in London, openly admonished ^he People
not to pray for those Martyrs, no more than for a Dog. Mr. Frith desired God to
forgive him, and the People were much displeased.

The Martyrdom of Thomas Bennet
The next that we read of was on Thomas Bennet who received his Martyrdom at
Exeter. He was born at Cambridge, and there Commenced Master of Arts, one well
learned, and a familiar acquaintance of Mr. Bilney, the glorious Martyr we have
spoken of before. Finding the great Corruption of the Clergy to be a great
trouble to him, and fearing to fall into trouble in his own Country, that he
might have the more freedom he went into Devonshire in the year 1524. dwelling
at a Town called Torrington, where he was utterly unknown. Here he kept a
School, being Married, but his expectation being not there answered he went to
exeter, about a year after, where he also taught School, and so maintained his
Family. He was a man of a quiet behavior, of a godly Conversation, of a very
courteous nature, humble to all Men, and offensive to none: and a diligent and
attentive hearer of Sermons. All his spare time he gav^ to the study of the
Scriptures. But when he hear^ of one Will. Stroud, of Newnham of that County
Es^^ was put into the Bishops prison for the sake of the Gospel, he wrote to
him many Comfortable Letters, discloseing to him who he was, and for wha^ he
came into that Country; among other Expressions he had this: That because he
would not be (...) whoremaster, or an unclean person he had marrie^ a Wife,
with whom he had lived out of the Tyranny of his Antichristian persecutors, for
Six years* he having been a Priest and taken Orders. Thi^ man being full of
zeal for Christ and his Gospel beholding daily the gross Idol-tries committed
t^ dumb Idols, and hearing the blasphemies of the Popish teachers, he could not
be quiet in his mind, til^ he had given his testimony against them, and th^^ he
knew the danger that he incurred thereby yet he though^ he should do more good,
an^ be more profitable to the Church of God, by h^^ death, than by his Life.
Therefore desiring h^^ friends, that God would strengthen and support his in
his Intentions, he set upon the door of the Cathedral: That the P^pe was
Antichrist and the Saints were not to be Wo^shipped, but God alone. This did
not a little inrage the Bishop, and all the Priests, and they caused the Mayor
to m^ke a diligent search through the City for the Heretic, who durst put up
this Blasphemous Bill as they cal^ed it, and the most Learned among them were
cal^ed upon to preach against it; but not being able to find out who did it,
they proceed however to curse the par^y with Bell, Book, and Candle, which they
per^ormed with great Fopperie and Ceremony. The Priests being apparelled in
White, and the Monks ^^anding round about, the Cross and holy Candles ^eing
holden up, one of them ascending the Pulpit ^egan his Sermon, with this Text,
Est blasphemia in ^as^is. There is Blasphemy in the Army, etc. Spo^en by
Joshua; Concluding that the damnable Here^ick who had put up that Blasphemous
Bill, was ^amnably accursed, and so besought God, our La^y, St. Peter Patron of
the Church, with all the Ho^^ Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, etc. that it might
^e known, what wicked and accursed Heretic had ^ut up that Blasphemous Bill,
that Gods People might ^voyd the Vengeance. Then the Bishop stood up and said,
by the Authority of God, the Father Al^ighty, and by the blessed Virgin Mary,
of St. Peter and St. Paul, and of the holy Saints, we, Excom^unicate, we
utterly Curse and Ban, Commit and ^eliver to the Devil of Hell, him or her,
whatso^ver he or she be, that have in Spite of God and St. ^eter, whose Church
this is, in Spite of all holy Saints, (...) in Spite of our most holy Father
the Pope, and in ^pite of the reverend Father in God John Diocesan, and the
Worshipful Canons, Masters, and Priests, (...) Clarks which serve God daily in
this Cathedral church, fixed up with wax, a cursed and heretical ^ill full of
Blasphemy, upon the door of this holy church, Excommunicate plainly be he or
she, and ^elivered over to the Devil, as perpetual malefa^^ors and
Schismatics. Accursed may they be and ^iven Body and Soul to the Devil. Cursed
be they, ^e, or she, in Citys and Towns, in Fields and in Ways, in Paths, in
Houses, out of Houses, in all other places, standing, lying, or riseing walking
or running waking or sleeping, eating or drinking, or whatsoever thing they do
besides. We separate them, him, or her, from the Threshold, and from all the
prayers of the Church, from the participation of the Holy Mass, from all
Sacraments, Chapels, and Altars, from Holy Bread, and Holy Water, from all the
merits of Gods Priests, and religious men; and from all their Cloisters, from
all their pardons, privileges, grants, and immunities, which all the Holy
Fathers Popes of Rome have granted to them: And we give over utterly to the
power of the Fiend, them, he or she, and let us quench their souls, if they be
dead, this night in the pains of hell fire, as this Candle is now quenched and
put out (then he put out one of the Candles) and let us pray to God, if they be
alive that their Eyes man be put out, as this light Candle is (with that he pu^
out another Candle) and let us pray to God and to ou^ Lady, to St. Peter and
Paul and all holy Saints that all the senses of their Bodies may fail them, and
tha^ they may have no feeling, as now the light of thi^ Candle is gone out (and
so he put out the 3d Candle, except they, he, or she, come openly now and
confess their Blasphemy, and make satisfaction to God, our Lady, St. Peter and
the worshipful company of this Cathed. Chu. and as this Holy Cross staff that
now falls down, so may they, except they repent and show themselves. Then the
Cross staff falling down, the people gave a great shout, and so the Ceremony
ended. Thomas Bennet was there in presence, and could not choose but laugh at
their foppery, upon which he was laid hold on, but not suspected for the
Heretic, they had cursed, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, they let him go
again. But n^^ long after, his Boy setting up more Bills on the Church door, he
was taken in the Action and then M^ Bennet was seized and cast into prison, he
freely acknowledging the Action, and that he would maintain the doing of it;
upon this they put him into the Stocks with heavy Irons and Bolts, many
dispute^ the Priests and Friars had with him, whom he answered with much
sobriety, and maintained his Assertions with so much learning, that they knew
not what to say to him: But to handle him more Cruelly, as also his wife who
was a partaker with her husband in his sufferings. About a weeks time they
endeavored all they could to cause him to recant, but in vains upon which they
pronounced him an obstinate Heretic, and so Condemned him to be burnt. And the
writ de Comburendo, etc. being procured, and sent from London, they delivered
him over to Sir Tho. Denis Sheriff of Devonshire to be burnt, and being brought
to his Execution, in a place called Liverydole without Exeter, where he behaved
himself with so much moderation and Christian patience, making to the people
such pithy and godly exhortations at his Death, that many of his very enemies
could not but say and Confess that he was a good man, and a servant of God. Yet
one of them when he was at the Stake, endeavoring to persuade him to pray to
the Virgin Mary, and the Saints, he denied, and told them he had but one
Advocate Jesus Christ, who dyed for us, and now sits at the right hand of
the Father, and to him they ought only to pray; which this zealous man hearing,
his name being Barnhouse, he was so enraged, that taking a furze bush on the
end of a pike, he set it on fire, and thrust it into the Holy Martyrs face: At
which the Holy man holding up his hands said, Sir, trouble me not now, and
presently prayed, Pater ignosce illis, etc. Father forgive them, etc. upon
which fire was put to the Furzes and Wood, when Mr. Bennet lifting up his hands
and eyes toward heaven; He cried out, O Lord receive my Spirit, and so
Continuing in his prayers, never stirred or moved but most patiently abode the
Cruelty of the Fire, till his Life was ended.

Great persecution in London.
About the same time, a very great persecution was maintained by Bish^p
Stok^sly, in his Diocese of London, causeing about 138 several persons to
abjure: and the Body of one Mr. Tracy to be taken up and burnt for an Heretic,
because he had spoken against the mass and praying to Saints in his Testament.

About the same time, ten Anabaptists were also put to Death for their
Religion: But now, after that King Henry had married Ann of Bullein, there was
a Cessation of their bloody persecution for a time, and the Church had some
rest from these Tyrants, she favoring those of the Religion, this being the
Mother of our glorious Queen Elizabeth, who was not long after born, and now
the Popes Supremacy was utterly abolished out of England: And many of the High
and ranting Popelings now turned their coats, and preached publicly against
the Supremacy of the Pope, for which they before had burnt diverse for
maintaining it: But Sir Tho. More, and Bishop Fisher, two great persecutors
were beheaded.

Mr. Tyndal Martyred in Flanders.
In the year 1536 Willam Tyndal who may be called the Apostle of this Nation,
was Martyred in Flanders. He was born on the borders of Wales and brought up in
the University of Oxford where he was first Converted to the Gospel, and after
that he removed to Cambridg where he also studied and ripened in the study of
Gods Word. From thence he went into Gloucester Shire and lived with one Welsh a
Knight of that County as a Tutor to his children where he translated the
Enchiridion of Erasmus into English, but being there persecuted by the Priests
of that Country he was fain to fly to London, and thence went into Germany
where he Translated the Bible into English, being assisted in it by Mr.
Coverdale. This translation enraged the Popish Priests so that they procured an
order to have it burnt, desiring to keep the people in Ignorance Afterward Mr.
Tyndal being at Antwerp, where he lay, was betrayed by one Phillips his own
Country man, to whom he had been very kind and familiar* and took him to be his
friend, but he was deceived in him, and carried prisoner to Filford Castle by
the Emperors officers, where he continued till he was Martyred, at the
procuration of his most Cruel enemies the Priests, for no other crime than
translating the Bible. He was first strangled at a Stake, and then burnt to
Ashes by the Emperors decree, Mr. Tyndal crying at his death O Lord open the
King of Englands Eyes. The very same year Queen Ann was beheaded.

Mr. Lambert Martyr.
The next we shall take notice of is John Lambert Alias Nicholson, born and
brought up in Northfolk, but studied at Cambridg, where he was Converted by Mr.
Bilney, and profited very much both in the Latin and Greek tongues: But
perceiving the violence of the times, to avoyde persecution went over into
Germany to Mr. Tyndal, where he remained sometime Preacher and Chaplain to an
English House in Antwerp. till he was disturbed by Sir Tho. Moor, and taken and
brought thence to London, where there was 45 Articles laid to his charge, all
which he answered in writing. He was kept in prison till the death of
Archbishop Warham, when he was released and kept a private School in London, but
not long after, he began to dispute about the Sacrament and real presence,
which brought him into farther trouble: For by the Advice of Gardner Bishop of
Winchester, because the King had Contracted great hatred from the people, for
his demolishing the Abbeys and Monkeries, saying he favored Heretics and
heresy, he was resolved to show the Contrary by his Actings against this John
Lambert, and therefore after several disputings before the Bishops, the King
resolves by Gardners advice to hear the matter himself, where this Holy man
maintained his Arguments with great learning and modesty, for 5 hours against
10 Prelates, who disputed against him, and notwithstanding the Kings f^owns and
taunts, being upholden by the Spirit of God, the main thing being the business
of the real presence in the Sacrament which he denied. At last it being night
and the King willing to be gone, asked Mr. Lambert whether he would live or
dye, for it way yet in his free choice; to which Lambert Answered, that he
submitted himself wholly unto the will of his Majesty. Then said the King,
commit your self into the hands of God, and not into mine. my Soul replied he I
Commend into the hands of God, but my Body wholly to your Clemency. Then said
the King if you commit your self to my Judgment, you must dye, for I will not
be a Patron to Heretics. After which he commanded Cromwell to read the
sentence of Death upon him, which was done to his grief, for he was a great
favourer of the Gospellers, but feared if he should refuse he should incur the
Kings displeasure, and do him no good. But it is said, that Cromwell asked him
forgiveness before he dyed for reading the sentence against him. Lambert having
notice of his death prepared for it very cheerfully, and it is to be noted,
that among all these who had suffered at Smithfield there was none that was so
cruelly handled as this man, for after his Legs were burned to the stumps,
withdrawing the fire from him t^ put him to more torment, two that stood one
eac^ side of him, pitching their piked halberts into his body, lifted him up as
high as the chain would permit them: when he lifting up his hands all of a
fla^^ cried aloud to the people, none but Christ, none b^^ Christ. and being
let down again into the fire he ended his Life, in year 1538.

The Murder of Mr. Packington.
We cannot here pass over the murder of Mr. Robert Packington, who was a
Burgess in Parliamen^ for the City of London, where it seems he was too free in
speaking against the Covetousness and pride of the Clergy, for which they
Stomached him, and knowing him to be a stout resolute man, such another as Sir.
Edmondbury Godfrey, and might do them a prejudice, they resolved to take him
out of the way. They had observed that every morning he went to prayers, at 5
of the Clock winter and Summer to the Church called St. Thomas of Acres, now
Mercers Chapel, being not far from his house, dwelling in Cheapside; upon
which, one morning, as the said Mr. Packington was Crossing the street, to go
over to the Chapel, being a very misty morning, and fit for their black
purpose; he was shot with a Gun, several Neighbors hearing it go off, and the
Laborers who stood at Soper-lane end, saw him fall upon the shot, but the
Murderer could not be heard of, having dexterously made his escape. The blow
heard, they had not the opportunity of putting, or (according to our new
phrase) of shamming the Murder upon himself. But God that reveals the close
designs of the wicked, and brings such horrid Contrivances to Light, for his
Glory and our Instruction, at last brought this Murder to Light, for Dr.
Incent Dean of St. Paul's, being on his Death Bed, had such horrors of
Conscience, that he could not die, till he had confessed that he had hired an
Italian to murder the said Mr. Packington; no doubt as he thought for the good
of the Church; and thus it came to be known, and the horrid malice of the
Clergy, to all that speak or any way Act against them, to be taken notice of.

Two Mad Men burnt for Heretics.
We shall not omit the burning of Mr. Collens a Lawyer, who by occasion of the
lightness of his Wife, whom he passionately loved, fell mad, and besides his
senses, this man one Sunday going into a Church, and seeing the Priest holding
the Host up between his hands over his head, he took up his Dog, and did the
like, which they taking it done in derision, tho he was mad, had him Condemned
and burned for an Heretic: both he and his Dog being burnt in Smithfield, the
same year 1538.

In the same, or the next following year, one Cowbridg was burnt at Oxford,
being also mad, and out of his right senses, and had more need of Physic to
restore him to his right mind, than punishment, and to be sent to Bethlem than
to the fire; but such was the merciless Cruelty of these persecutors, that they
would spare none. However it was observed, that this Martyr being in the midst
of the Flames, lift up his head toward Heaven, and called upon the name of
Jesus till he dyed.

Also the same year was one Puttedew burnt in Suffolk, for jesting only with
the Priest, saying, that after he had drunk up all the Wine himself, he blessed
the people with the hungry Chalice, for this he was Condemned and burned for an
Heretic. And about the same time one William Leiton was burnt at Norwich, for
speaking against an Idol that they were wont to carry about in Procession, and
for saying the Lords Supper ought to be administered to the Laity in both kinds.

N. Peke burnt at Ipswich.
About the same time, one N. Peke was burnt at Ipswich, who being at the Stake,
and the Furze and Faggots being set on fire, when he was as black as a Coal,
Dr. Reading being by with a white Wand which he held in his hand, he stroke
Peke on the shoulder, and bid him recant, and acknowledge that the Sacrament of
the Altar was the very Body of Christ, Flesh, Blood, and Bones, and he would
absolve him; to which he answered, I defy both it and thee, and with great
violence spat blood out of his Body, his Veins being broke within him. Upon
which this Popish Doctor in the Name of the Bishop proclaimed that whosoever
cast a stick into the fire toward the burning of that obstinate Heretic,
should have 40 days pardon; upon which, many ran and flung sticks into the
fire, to obtain this pardon; such was their blindness and Ignorance.

Not long after by the cunning devices of Gardner Bishop of Winchester, and
other Popish Prelates, the six Articles were obtained in Parliament. The first
of which was concerning transubstantiation declaring the Sacrament of the Altar
after the Priestly consecration to be the very Body of our Lord, with a penalty
that those who should deny this Article, either by word of mouth, or writing,
should be burnt alive, without Abjuration, and all their goods forfeited to the
King, and as to the other five it was made death and felony by the Law, to deny
them, without benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary. The second being concerning the
Sacrament of both kinds, that it ought not to be given to the Laity. The 3d
that Priests may not marry. 4. That Vows of chastity ought to be observed. 5.
That private Mosses are agreeable to God's Law. 6. That auricular Confession is
expedient and necessary to be received, etc. and upon these Articles was
granted by the same Parliament, a bloody and Cruel Inquisition, directed to
certain persons in every shire and County, to enquire into all such Heresies,
Felonies, Contempts, etc. committed or done by any, that they might suffer
according to the Law. These Articles were opposed openly in Parliament by
Cranme^ Archbishop of Canterbury: who afterward suff^red Martyrdom in the days
of Queen Mary, as shall be declared. And among these* we might nominate the
Lord Cromwell who lost his Life in the cause of God, by the craft and policy of
his Popish Adversa^ies, but since it had some other show than that of Religion
only, we shall let it pass and proceed to others.

Dr. Barnes Martyr.
After the Death of the Lord Cromwell, Gardner raged against all that opposed
the Papal power at his pleasure, having now got an Act of Parliament to their
bloody minds: and now 3 noted Divines suffered together in Smithfield, which I
shall briefly mention. The first was Doctor Robert Barnes, who having been bred
abroad at Lovain, and also at the University of Cambridg, was made Prior and
Master of the House of the Augustines, where much to his praise he advanced the
knowledge of good Letters, and caused the Epistles of St. Paul to be read,
causing disputations of the same publicly, which seemed strange to the blind
and Ignorant Scholars. His first Sermon that he made in defense of the truth
was at St. Edward's Church belonging to Trinity Hall in Cambridge, the Sunday
before Christmas day, for which he was accused of Heresy, by two Fellows of
Kings Hall, and Articles drawn up against him, and not long after he was
publicly arrested by a Sergeant at Arms from London, and the University was
searched for Luthers Books: Dr. Barnes was immediately had away to London, and
brought before Cardinal Woolsie, who was then in power. After a long discourse
with him, the Cardinal being highly offended with him, for his preaching
against his Pomp, Power, and Dignity, seeing he could not cause him to recant,
but stood in the justification of what he had publicly delivered according to
his Conscience and the Scriptures, he sent him to the Fleet, from whence he was
had again before the Cardinal, and by the importunity of Gardner, Fox, and
others, he was persuaded at last to abjure, and with some of the men of the
Stillyard, accused also for Lollardy, he publickely bore a faggot. After which
he was remanded to the Fleet, and thence was removed to Austins Fryer's in
London, where being Complained against to the Cardinal, by those who sought his
Life he was removed again to Austin Fryer's in Northampton, with intent to have
him burnt: But he escaped thence, leaving a Letter, as if through despair hehad
gone to drown himself, that they might not pursue him, so that whilst they were
searching the River for his Body, he made his escape to London, and thence
beyond the seas, where he wrote a Book entitled Acta Romanorum Pontificum,
with a supplication to King Henry. There he grew Familiar with Luther,
Melancthon Pomeran, the Duke of Saxony and others, and was not long after sent
over by the King of Denmark, as his Ambassador into England, where Sir Tho.
Moor sought his Life but, Cromwell stood his friend: After that, in the time of
Queen Ann, he returned into England, and was sent by the King as his Ambassador
to the Duke of Cleve. But Gardner getting into the favor of the King, never
left till he had undermined Dr. Barne^ who was at last sent to the Tower,
together with Thomas Garrat, and Mr. Hierom, from whence they never came till
they were carried to their Martyrdom.

Thomas Garrat and William Hierom Martyrs.
Thomas Garrat was Curate in Honylane in London, and having received the
knowledge of the truth, endeavored all he could to promote it, and having a
parcel of Tyndols translation of the new Testament, and other books treating of
the Scriptures, he went privately to Oxf rd to sell them there, to those he
knew well aff^cted to the Gospel. But his Adversar^es having their spies in
every Corner had notice of (...), and imm^d^a^^, some were sent to apprehend
both him and his books at Oxford, that they might be both burnt together, and
after great search he was taken, but made his escape, intending to fly into the
west, but was pursued and taken again and imprisoned, and after much trouble
was forced against his Conscience to abjure: After which he fled again from
place to place, for fear of his persecutors, but was t^k^^ (...) by the
diligence of his Adversaries, and s^nt to the Tower, from whence he was c^r^^ed
to the Stake and burnt with his Companions, Dr. Barnes and Mr. Hierome.

The Death of Barnes Ga^ret and Hierom.
The 3d Companion in this glorious suffering was Mr; William Hier^^, who was
vicar of Stepney and a diligent preacher of God's word, for the comfort and
edification of the People, and had preached diverse sermons with intent to
implant in the Consciences of men the sincere Truth of Christian Religion, and
to weed out of men's minds traditions, dreams, and Popish fancies, in the doing
of which he had contracted the Hatred of the Papists, who were utter enemies of
the Gospel of Christ: and for this they sought this good man's Life: The
occasion they took from a Sermon which he preached at Paul's Cross the fourth
Sunday in Lent, in which, speaking of Sarah and Hagar, he said those who were
born of the free Woman were freely Justified, and the one would think nothing
of false doctrine or Heresy could be gathered from these words, yet he was
charged therewith, and convented before the King at Westminster, for that he
had erroneously taught the people, that all that were born of Sarah were freely
justified, absolutely without Condition either of Baptism or Penance, etc.
Several other things were objected against him, and he was at last sent to the
Tower in order to his Execution. we have spoken of these 3 Martyrs severally,
we shall now join them together as fellow sufferers and Martyrs.

About two days after the Death of the Lord Cromwell, a process was issued out
against these three men, by means of See. Gardner, to which they were never
brought to Answer, but on the 30th of July being Condemned, without their
knowing the cause, and without any hearing, were carried together forth of the
Tower to Smithfield to be burnt. Then Dr. Barnes made his protestation against
several false things laid to his charge, reciting his Faith and Belief in God,
and the Holy Trinity, and freely declared his Opinion of many things, praying
publicly for the health and prosperity of the King, making 4 requests to him
which he desired might be made known to him; the first was, that he might
Continue the head of the Church, and make himself fully and wholly obeyed and
to hearken to the true preaching of such as they were who were about to dye for
speaking the Truth; The 2d was, That his Grace would see that Matrimony might
be observed with more Reverence and esteem, as an Ordinance of God; 3d That
swearers might be punished; 4th was That he would proceed to finish the work he
had begun, and clear Gods word from the traditions of Men. After him Mr. Hierom
and Garrat spoke severally to the people, protesting against Heresy, making
their several Confessions, and exhorting the people to Love, unity, and amity,
and not to be afraid of bearing the Cross of Jesus Christ, forgiving their
Enemies and persecuters, after the example and doctrine of our blessed Savior.
After they had all prayed fervently at the Stake, they embraced and kissed one
another, and with very much cheerfulness rendered themselves to the executioner,
taking their death with much Christian patience and Constancy, which restified
to all the world the goodness of their Cause, and the peace and quiet of their
Consciences.

Three men Executed for Popery.
And here we cannot but take notice of a very strange thing, that at the same
place, and in the same day and hour, that the aforementioned Martyrs suffered,
there were 3 men whose names were Powe, Fetherston, and Abel suffered for
Popery: that is to say, were executed as traitors, by being hanged drawn and
quartered for denying the Kings Supremacy, and on their part were also esteemed
Saints and Martyrs, by the Romish Church: so that a stranger standing by Cried
out, Deus bone, etc. Good God what Religion is in this Nation! here the Papists
are hanged and there the Antipapists or Protestants are burnt.

And now the terrible persecutor and tyrant against Gods flock, Bloody Bonn^r
Bishop of London began to rage, and dip his hands in Blood: one Mekin's a poor
silly ignorant lad, for some rash words was brought to the Stake and burnt in
Smithfield, for which many cried out shame of him. About the same time 3 were
burnt at Salisbury, whose names were Spenser, Ramsey and Hewer, one of them
which was Spenser having been a Priest and was married, and had spoken against
the Sacrament of the Altar. And now upon the six Articles much trouble and
persecution arose in London by means of the aforesaid Bonner, there being no
less than 130 odd persons troubled, presented, and imprisoned for their
Religion.

The Murder of John Porter in prison.
Among the rest, one John Porter, a young man, who had an audible voice, and
read well, used to read aloud in the Bible, publicly set up in Paul's, by
Bonner himself, by means of the Lord Cromwell, and was there chained: but now
things altering for the worse, and this young man reading often in it, for his
own edification, and others who came to hear him read, it came to the Bishops
ears, who thereupon sent for him, and severely reprehended him for it, but the
young man told him that he had done nothing against the Law, and that he
supposed that the Bible was set up there for that end. But Bonner being galled
at his prudent Answer, laid to his charge that he had made Comments on the
text, and gathered great multitudes about him to make tumults; and in the end,
under this pretext and false charge sent this young man to Newgate, where he
was miserably fettered and manacl'd with Irons, both legs, arms and neck,
fastened to the wall in the Dungeon: Being thus cruelly handled, a Kinsm^n of
his with money and friendship for a while bought off his Irons, and he was
removed into the Common Goal, where the Felons were, whose wicked lives,
Cursings and Swearing, was much more intolerable to this good young man than
his former Irons, upon which he sought to admonish them, and exhorted them to
amendment of Life giving them many Instructions out of the Scriptures, for
which he was complaned of, and again carried down into the lower Dungeon, and
so oppressed with bolts and Irons, that in 8 days time he was found dead. It
was reported by some, who lived near, that they could hear his cries and groans
after a most lamentable manner, that it peirced their souls, some nights before
he dyed, and 'twas thought that they had put on him an Engine, which they call
The Devil on the Neck which straining the neck of a man and his legs together
in such sort, the more they stir or strive for ease, the straiter it presses
them, so that within a few hours, it crushes a man's back and body to pieces.
Much about the same time one James Morton and Thomas Bernard were both burnt at
Lincoln by the Bishop there, he one for reaching the Lords Prayer in English
and the other for having in his house the Epistle of St. James in English.

Persecution in Windsor.
In the year 1544 great Persecution of several Gospellers, and good men, fell
out in Windsor, by the means of Doctor London then one of the Prebends there,
and a fierce Papist, and among the rest Persons, Marbeck, Filmer, and Testwood,
were Condemned to dye, Marbeck had the Kings Pardon but the other 3 were burnt
without the Town. Marbeck had begun to translate the Concordance of the Bible
out of Latin into English which stomached them, but they Indicted him for
saying that the Elevation of the Sacrament was the similitude of setting up the
Images of Jeroboam's Calves in the Temple, with other like things. Testwood was
a great musician, and for his Skill in music and singing, was preferred to be
of the Chanters of Windsor, but being a great Gospeller and no good dissembler,
he was taken notice of and fell into several great troubles, but by reason of
his Skill and Art, he found friends; but at last he was Indicted by his
Adversaries, for laughing and deriding the Elevation of the Host. Henry Filmer
was also of Windsor and had been Church Warden there, and in his office, had
noted some exorbitances in some of the Priests and among the rest of the Vicar
of the Town, for which he was maligned, but he was Indicted for saying, that
the Sacrament of the Altar was nothing but a similtude, and if God be in it, he
had eaten 20 Gods in his life time. Anthony Persons was an honest Priest living
near Windsor, who by his excellent preaching and sound Doctrine, drew many
after him, and was much followed, for which the Popelins envied him and bore
him much malice, so that they set privy Spies to entrap him, and having got
matter against him, he was Indicted for preaching in a place called Wingfield,
where he should say: That like as Christ was hanged between two Thieves, even
so when the Priest is at mass, and has lifted the Host over his Head, he there
hangs between two Thieves except he be one that preaches the Word of God
truly. That he had said to the people that they should not eat and tear the
flesh of Christ with their teeth, etc. For Christ said, This is my Body, which
was the Word of God which was to be broken to the people, with such like, to
which he gave his particular Answers: But a Commission was sent down for the
trial of these persons, according to the Act of the six Articles, and the
aforesaid persons clapped into the Jayle: Testwood being sick and in bed, was
haled thence, and forced into prison, going upon Crutches. The chief Judges who
sat on these men were Doctor Capon Bishop of Salisbury, Sr. William Essex
Knight, Sr. Tho Bridges, Sr. Humphry Foster, Mr. Franklin Dean of Windsor, and
Mr. Fachell of Reading.

After very unjust doings, packing of the Jury, being strangers, and not of the
neighborhood, and all of them farmers belonging to the College of Windsor, and
some of them Contrary to the Statute had but one witness appearing against
them, yet they were all of them found guilty by the Jurie, and condemned to dye
the next day by the Court; Fatchell giving the Sentence. There came a pardon
for Marbeck; and the rest seeing their hard lot comforted one another, knowing
that they dyed in a good Cause. All night they spent in fervent prayer to God
to strengthen them, that they might be steadfast in their torments, praying also
for their persecutors, that God would forgive them, since they did what they
did through blind Ignorance and zeal. The next day being Friday, their
execution was respired, but on the Saturday, when they were to dye, desiring to
receive the Sacrament, it was denied them, for they said it was not to be
granted to Heretics, but they might be Confessed if they would. As they passed
through the Streets, they prayed all good people to pray for them, and Filmer
who was Condemned from the testimony of his own Brother, only, as he past by
his door, called several times on him that he might see him, but he would not
appear, however Filmer most Christian like desired God to forgive him, for he
had restified wrongfully against Him. When they were come to the Stake, Mr.
Persons with a cheerful Countenance, embracing the Stake in his Arms, and
Kissing it, said; Now welcome my own sweet Wife, for this day shall thou and I
be married together in the Love and peace of God. Being all bound to the post,
a certain young man of Filmers acquaintance, brought him a pot of drink, which
he dr^nk of to his Companions, who pledged him, at when drinking their
Adversaries made a jesting, reporting afterward that they were all drunk, and
knew not what they said. After they had drank, Mr. Filmer said, my Brethren,
let us be merry in the Lord, for I trust in. God that after this sharp
Brea^fast, we shall have a good dinner in the Kingdom of Christ our Lord and
Redeemer. At which words the Fire being set to the straw Testwood lifting up
his Hands and eyes to Heaven, desired God to receive his spirit, And Mr.
Persons pulling the straw to him, put a good handful on his Head, saying This
is Gods Hat: now am I dressed like a true Sould^ers of Christ, by whose merits
on^y I trust this day to enter into his Joy. And so they yielded up their souls
to God, like meek Lambs, with so much patience and tranquillity, and so great
stedfastness, that amazed the people, and many wished that they had been so
happy as to have dyed with them.

The Persecutors disgraced.
Not long after the whole Conspiracy of the Bishop of Winchester, Dr. London
Simone and Okeham came to be revealed by Gods Providence and how unjustly they
had dealt with these poor men, having also laid a design against several of
the Kings Privy Council, and many Knights and Gentlemen, as favorers of
Heresy, which being made known to the King, he withdrew his Favor from
Gardner; and London, Simmons, and Okeham, Perjurie being proved against them,
rode through Windsor with their faces to the Horses tails, and papers of their
Crimes pinned on their breasts, and Okeham the like at Newberry, where he stood
in the pillory. Thus God by his secret Judgment brought the wickedness of these
malicious Papists to light, and their persons to disgrace, being ever hated of
all men.

About the same time, great persecution was made at Calice, where one Adam
Damlip, Dod, and several others were Martyred. And likewise in Scotland
suffered many Martyrs, in the latter end of the reign of King Henry the 8th of
England, as Mr. Wisehart, Walace, Sr. John Borthwick, and diverse others, so
that many there as well as in England sealed to the truth of the Gospel with
their Blood. But we shall omit foreigners, and speak only of those of our own
nation, as we have at first proposed, having enough and too many executed, and
tormented, by the bloody Papists.

Kerby and Clark Martyred in Suffolk.
In the year 1546, Mr. Kerby and Clark were burned for their religion in
Suffolk: passing over one Henry and his servant burnt at Colchester, and also
one Sary a Priest who was hanged privately in the Bishop of Winchesters Porters
lodge, and that not without the privity of the Bishop himself, as it was
thought, for indeed it would be too long to enumerate all the public and
private Murders of these bloody Papists. But as to the Story of Kerby and
Clark, in brief it was this.

Kerby and Clark of Mendelsham in the County of Suffolk, were apprehended for
Gospellers, and thrown into the Goal, and a Commission was sent down to try
them, the chief of the Commissioners was the Lord Wentworth. Being brought
before them having in Secret prayed to themselves a while with hands and eyes
lifted up, they hearkened to their charge, which were certain Articles put in
against them, concerning the Sacrament, and being there publicly demanded, if
that after the words of Consecration spoken by the Priests, the breed did not
then become the very flesh, blood and bones of Jesus Christ, as he was born of
the Virgin^ they answered No: That they did not believe it, but that it was a
sign to put us in mind of Christ's Death, for the remission of our sins: Upon
his, after they had used (...) ^^g^ment^, persuasions, and threats to these poor
men, to make them alter their minds, in vain; sentence was given against them,
Kerby to be burnt in Ipswich the next Saturday following, and Roger Clark at
Bury before Gang Monday ensuing. Kirby having received his sentence, holding up
his hands, with humble reverence bowing himself, he said, Praised be Almighty
God; and then sto^d still saying no more. And Clark at p^rting from the
Judgment seat said, with some Vehemence: Fight for your God, for he has not
long to continue. which was a Prophecy of the Reformation which happened not
long after. The next day, which was Saturday, Kerby was brought forth to the
marker place about ten of the Clock, where was a Stake ready, wood, broom and
straw for his burning. Having put off his clothes to his shirt, with his night
cap on his head, he was fastened to the Stake with Irons. The Lord Wentworth
and others sitting in* Gallery to see the execution; a very great Concourse of
people being present: One Doctor Righam made an oration or sermon, after which
he examined Kerby concerning his belief of the Sacrament to which he answered
as before, and that he would dye in that Opinion. After which the Sheriff
asking him if he had any more to say, he took off his night Cap, and Casting it
away, he lifted up his hands and said the ^e Deum, the Belief, and other
prayers in the English tongue. And it was observed, that the Lord Wentworth and
diverse others could not refrain from weeping at the humble Carriage of this
holy Martyr. After he had done, he bid the Sheriff do his office, and fire
being set to him, he called upon God, Knocking his Breast, as long as he had
any remembrance left. The people being much affected at the Carriage and
Constancy of this illiterate man, praised God with great admiration.

On the Gang Monday about ten of the Clock, Anno 1546, Roger Clark was brought
out of prison, going on foot to be burnt in Bury: By the way the procession met
him, but he would take no other notice, but kept on his way, only reproving the
people for their Idolatry and Superstition, at which the officers were much
offended: When he came to the place of execution, all things being ready, he
kneeled down at the Stake, and said aloud, the Magnificat in English, making a
kind of parraphrase thereof: After he had done, he was fastened to the Stake,
and fire was set to him, but the wood being green he was almost suffocated with
smoke, and part of him being only scorched, he suffered unmerciful torments,
and his feet being put into a pitched barrel, he was so pained, that he got
them out with Violence. At length, one beating off the Iron ring that fastened
his neck to the Stake, let him fill down into the fire, and so he was at last
Consumed to Ashes. About the same time one Rogers was burnt in Northfolk, by
means of that Bishop, and the Duke, upon the 6 Articles.

But I shall now conclude this second part with the Martyrdom of Ann Askew a
Virtuous and Constant woman in the Cause of Christ, with whom also was burnt in
Smithfield, John Lacells a Gentleman of the Court and household to the King,
Nicholas Belenian a Priest, and John Adams a Tailor.

The Martyrdom and Cruel usage of Mrs. Ann Askew and 3 Gentlemen in Smithfield.
Mrs. Ann Askew had been in great tro^ble for a year before 1546, having been
in several prisons, had before the Lord Mayor, the Bishop, and Council, for
her religion, chiefly for not owning the real presence in the Sacrament being
also most falsely accused of several other Articles, by the malice and
Instigation of the Popish Priests her inveterate Enemies; but by her prudent
Answers to all their intrapping questions, and by the solicitation of her
Friends, she came cut upon bail; but the year 1546. by means of her aforesaid
Enemies, and especially by the power and malice of Bishop Bonner then Bishop of
London, and the Chancellor Writhsley she was brought again into trouble, and
put into prison, being several times examined, they hoping by her means to
detect several Ladys and great persons of her acquaintance, for Heretics; but
all they could do could not make her Confess any to do them injury; which so
enraged them, that they took her from Newgate where she had been imprisoned,
and sent her to the Tower, where they resolved to torment this Innocent
Gentlewomen, but most Constant servant of Jesus Christ. Therefore to make her
Confess, they caused her to be put upon the Rack, where they kept her till she
swouned, and when the Lieutenant of the Tower pitying her weak Condition,
refused to rack her any Longer, The Chancellor himself and o^e Mr. Rich who was
with him, threatened the Lieutenant of the Tower to Complain of him to the King,
for favoring Heretics; this was Sr. Anthony Knevet; but when they saw they
could not prevail with him to torment the languishing Gentlewoman any farther,
the Chancellor and Rich throwing off their gowns, would needs play the
Tormentors themselves, and asking her first if she were with child, she told
them they should not spare her for that, but do their wills upon her, upon
which they laid her again upon the Rack, where they most Cruelly and
barbarously tormented her, till all her bones and joints were pulled out of
their places, she enduring it with most admirable patience, all the time
praying to God, and when they had tired themselves to no purpose, not being
able with all their torments to make her Confess any thing, or accuse any body*
they left her to be carried away in a chair to her lodging, not being able to
stir hand or foot. She was therefore at last Condemned to be burnt, upon that
Article, for denying the real prefence after the words of Consecration, which
she denied, saying, that then their Creed was false, which says, he sits at
the Right hand of God the Father Almighty, etc. This Gentlewoman was born of a
good stock, and might have lived well and plentifully and in great prosperity,
would she have gone against her Conscience, and have denied Christ: But she
gloried in her sufferings, which God en^bled her to endure, and at last sealed
ne^ testimony with her blood, after she had been several ways tormented, and
leaving behind her an example of Christian fortitude for all men to follow, and
by her example and exhortations, the three afores^^d men, Mr. Laces^s,
Belenian, and Adams, were encouraged, and received from her great comfort at
their Death, being burnt with nor in Smithfield. Mrs Askew being not able to
go by reason of her racking, she was brought to the Stake in a chair, where
she was fastened by the middle, with a chain, and so were the rest of the
Martyrs, and all things being prepared, there being a great Concourse of
people, and the Chancellor, the Duke of Northfolk, the Earl of Bedford, the
Lord Mayer and others of quality being present, sitting on a Scaffold, Dr.
Snaxton made a Sermon, after which the fire being ready to be put to them, the
Chancellor sent to Mrs. Askew the Ks. pardon, if she would recant her opinion,
which she utterly refused: Then the same was offered to the rest, but they also
followed her example, being strengthened by her exhortations, upon which the
Lord Mayor cried, fiat J^stitia. and so caused fire to be put to them, which
these Martyrs constantly and without shrinking, or showing any change endured,
till their bodies were consumed. This execution was about the month of June.
1546.

The Reformation begun by King Ed. 6th.

The next year being 1547, King Henry dyed, and the Church of God had a
respite, by the reign of the most pious King Edward the 6th, who begun the
Reformation, and fully extirpated Popery out of his Land, all whose days the
Gospel flourished, and the Church of Christ was established, and he with
singular constancy maintained Religion, but his reign being but short,
continuing but six years and eight Months, and Queen Mary his sister a strong
Papist succeeding, the blessed Reformation was thrown down, Popery again set
up, and fire and flame enkindled, in all places through this Kingdom, by the
means of the Popish Clergy, who most cruelly handled all those who professed
the Gospel of Christ; being a far greater and smarter persecution, than any
that went before, which shall be, God willing, the subject of our Third, and
last part of the Popish Cruelties, exercised upon the Bodies of Protestants,
dissenters from them, or such as professed the true Gospel of Christ, or any
ways opposed their Idolatry and Superstition.

Queen Mary Comes to the Crown.
The third Part. In which you have a brief of all, or most of the Martyrs, who
suffered for the Gospel, by the bloody tyranny, Rage, and persecution of the
Church of Rome, in this Kingdom, under the Reign of Queen Mary.
IT is not our part to give you the History of Queen Marys coming to the Crown,
which was by blood, nor of her falsifying all her Oaths, promises, and
declarations, before she obtained it, that she would not alter the Religion
begun by her Father, and established by her brother, being reformed according
to the Gospel rules, nor how soon she broke them, and reestablished the Papal
Tyranny in this kingdom, after it had been abolished by the Kings aforesaid;
but as we began, we shall as briefly as we can, and with all truth and
sincerity, with plainness, and without flourishes of st^^e give you an account
of the Martyrs, and bloody ^^rsecutions, which fell upon all those who made
^^^fession of the Gospel, or dissented from the ^^^^sh superstition, in the
Reign of this papist^^ (...) influenced by the Popes chief bloody (...) Gardner
and Bonner, Bishops of (...) and London. Queen Mary began her reign 1553. and
in the first year and beginning of her Reign, she released (...) the Popish
Bishops out of prison, and all those w^^^ professed the Reformation were put
into prison, (...) a very great number, among whom was Archbisho^ Cranmer, Mr.
Bradford Ridley, Rogers, Coverdal, Bisho^ of Exceter, Hooper, Bishop of
Worcester, Mr. Ver^^^ Mr. Beacon, Mr. Latimer, and several other emint^^
preachers, were all imprisoned for the Gospel: the Statutes of Prem^nire
repealed; Altars and Mass^^ set up, all people dissenting from the Rom^sh
Religi^^^ without distinction persecuted, for Judge Hales (...) upright Honest
man, who, tho of a contrary Relig^on, had opposed the disinheriting Queen Mary
f^^ being a Popish successor to the endangering his Life was cast into the
Mashalsea, where with ill usage t^ grew desperate, and lost his senses, and when
he wa^ released through melancholy made himself away by drowning. The Lady Jane
Gray and her H^band were beheaded, in the second year of (...) Reign, for tho
they suffered as civil Criminals, being Protestants we only mention them, and
it is observed that Judge Morg^n, who gave sentence o^ this Lady, fell suddenly
after mad, still crying out o^ the Lady Jane till he dyed: The Bishop of
Winch^ster had likewise at the same time, a design of taking away the life of
the Lady Elizabeth, but God preserved her for his Glory, and the comfort of his
Church, frustrating all the wicked designs of he Popish Enemies.

Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer Condemned.
In the year 1554, the Archbishop Cranmer, D^. R dly Bishop of London, and the
learned Mr. Huge Latimer, were taken out of the Tower, and sent to O^ford, to
dispure the points of their Religion there, which they did for several days
with great learning and proof, but however they were on the 20th of April
Condemned for Heretics, and no members of the Church, for maintaining
Heretical opinions. After sentence thus pronounced upon them, by the
Commissioners, who sat at St. Mary's, the Archbishop said; From this your
Judgment and sentence, I ^^peal to the just Ju^gment of God Almighty, trusting
(...) be present with him in Heaven, for whose presence in ^^e Altar I am thus
Condemned. Then said Dr. Ridley: ^^ltho I be not of your company, yet doubt I
not, but my ^ame is written in another place, whither this sentence ^ill send
us sooner than we should by the Course of Nature have come. Then Mr. Latimer
said: I thank God ^^st heartily, that he has prolonged my Life to this end,
that I may in this case glorify God by that kind of Death. Then Dr. Weston
said to them, If you go to Heaven ^n this faith, then I will never come
thither. After their sentence these good men were separated one from another,
and sent to several prisons. Tho these men were thus condemned, yet there were
others who got the start of Martyrdom before them, and therefore we shall treat
of them in their order, ^s they dyed, and first of all we shall briefly relate
the Martyrdom of Mr. John Rogers vicar of St. Pulthers, and Reader of St. Paul's
in London.

The Martyrdom of Mr. Rogers.
Mr. John R^gers a Martyr and servant of God, was brought up in the Universitie
of Cambridge, where he profited much in humane Learning from which place he was
called and chosen, by the Merchants Adventurers, to be their Chaplain to their
Factory at Antwerp in Brabant, where he lived in great content, and with
singular piety for many years, in which time he assisted Mr. Tindale and Mr.
Coverdale in the translation of the Bible into English, and by the Conversation
of these men he came to great knowledge of the Gospel; and perceiving the
abominable errors, superstition and Idolatry of the Church of Rome, he utterly
forsook it, and shook off the yoke of Popery. Therefore Marrying a Wife, by
whom he had ten Children, he removed to Wittenberg in Saxony, where he
increased in godly Learning and got the knowledge of the Dutch Tongue so
perfectly, that a Congregation was committed to his charge, in which Ministry
he diligently and faithfully served for many years, until such time that it
pleased God, King Edward the 6th came to the Crown, and made the Reformation in
England, banishing popery thence; he then desiring to se^ his native Country,
returned into England, and was by Bishop Ridley, Bishop of London, made one of
the Prebends of St. Paul's, and was by the Dean and Chapter chosen Reader of the
Divinity lesion there; in which capacity he continued till Quee^ Mary came to
the Crown, banishing the Gospel and the true Religion, brought again the Popish
Idolatry into the Land. After this Queen was come to London, this Mr. Rogers
being appointed to preach a^ Paul's Cross, he there openly maintained the
Doctrine of Christ, as it was here stablished under K. Edward, exhorting the
People to remain constant to the same: For which sermon he was immediately
called to account, and tho he was at that time acquitted by the Council, yet
the Bishops thirsting after his blood, as soon as the Queen had put forth her
Proclamation to prohibit preaching, he was ^gain called before the Council, and
his Doctri^^ found fault with, and he confined to his House: But it was not
long ere he was taken thence, and sent to Newgate, by the procurement of Bishop
Benner: And on the 21 of Jan. 1555. he was examined upon certain Articles
before the chancellor, which was Gardner Bishop of Winchester. Where he
maintained, that the Church of Rome was not the Catholic Church, and that
Christ, not the Pope, was the Head of the Church. On the 28th and 29 day
following of the same month, he was again examined, concerning the real
presence in the Sacrament, which he would nor own. Then they asked him if he
would come over to the Church of Rome, and submit himself, and receive the
Queens mercy as others had done; but he refused to deny his opinions, or to
embrace that which he knew was antichristian. After they had thus baited this
holy man for two days, they condemned him upon these Articles: That he had
said that the Catholic Church of Rome was the Church of Antichrist, and that
in the Sacrament of the Altar there was no Substantial, Real or Natural body of
Christ.

After his condemnation was read they caused him to be degraded and then
delivered him to the Sheriffs to be punished Mr. Hooper being at the same time
condemned with him, they were both led by the Sheriff from St. Mary Overies in
Southwark, where they were condemned to Newgate. Here he ^ay till the 4th of
February being Monday, early in the Morning the Keepers wife of N^wgate, came
to him and finding him fast asleep could hardly wake him with Jogging, to tell
him he must prepare himself that day to be burnt. Which Mess^ge he received
cheerful^y, and going to put on his clothes I need not st^nd (said he) to
fast^n my points. He sent to Bish p Bonner, that he might see and speak with
his wif^; which was denied h m; Then they searched his chamber for his
writings, but he had hid them in such an abscure place under the stairs, that
they could not find them, but was after found ^y his wife, and one of his
children, by Gods providence, where was his trial, confession and answer to all
his Articles, as they are set down at large by Mr. Fox in his Acts and
Monuments, one of the Sheriffs named Woodroof, coming to have him out of
Newgate to his execution in Smithfield, asked him ^f he would recant his
abominable Doctrine, and ^^il opinion of the Sacrament of the Altar. But Mr.
Rogers answered him and said. That which I h^ve preached I will seal with my
Blood. Then the S^eriff called him Heretic. That will be known says Mr. Rogers
at the day of Judgment. But says the Sheriff, I will never pray for you: Then I
will pray for you said the holy Martyr: Then he was led away on foot by the
said sheriffs men toward Smithfield, he saying the Psalm Miserere by the way,
all the people wonderfully rejoicing at his constancy, with great praise and
thanks to God for the same. As he was going, his Wife met him in the way with
10 Children that could go, and one sucking at her Breast, but this sorrowful
sight of his own flesh and blood could nothing move him, but he constantly and
cheerful proceeded to his death. A little before he came to the stake a pardon
was brought him if he would recant, but he utterly refused it: When he came to
the stake, he found there the Queens Controller, and Sr. Richard Southwell,
both the Sheriffs and an infinite number of People to see him burnt, He used
not many words, for indeed they would not permit him, only he exhorted the
People to remain in that faith and true Doctrine which he before had taught,
and they had learned, and for the confirmation whereof, he was not only content
patiently to suffer and bear all such bitterness, and cruelty, as had been
showed him, but also most gladly to resign up his Life, and to give his flesh
to the consuming fire, for the Testimony of the same. Thus he took his death
with great meekness and wonderful patience, in the defense and quarrel of
Christ's Gospel. When fire was put to him, as it were, washing and rubbing his
hands in the midst of the flame, he cried out, Lord receive my Spirit, till he
was consumed to Ashes. He was the first Protomartyr in Queen Mary's days of
all that blessed company of sufferers, and gave the first adventure upon the
fire.

The Martyrdom of Mr Saunders at Coventry.
The next that we shall mention, who much about the same time suffered by fire,
for the Gospel; was Mr. Lawrence Saunders, who was burnt at Coventry, on the
8th of february 1555. This man was born of good parents, his mother being a
Gentlewoman of good Quality, he was first educated at Eaton College, and from
thence sent to Kings College in Cambridge, where he continued for some time,
and profited very much in his Studies, but his mother intending him for a
Merchant, took him from thence, and bound him Prentise to Sr William Chester
who was afterward Sheriff of London, the same year that Mr. Saunders was
burnt. But God so wrought on the spirit of this young man, that he still
continued his Studies, finding an aversion in himself to the way he was in,
which made him pensive and melanchollick, which being perceived by his Master,
he desired to know what might be the reason of it, upon which he freely
declared his mind, and how he was bent on his Studies, and did not at all
relish that kind of Life; upon which his Master wrote to his friends, and
freely gave him up his Indentures, and set him at liberty; to his no smal^
rejoicing. He was then once more sent to the University, where he increased his
knowledge; and became a great proficient in the Greek and Laune tongues, and
also of the Hebrew, giving himself whol^y to the study of the Scripture, that
he might be a Minister of Gods word, which he ardently desired. He lived a very
strict and Godly life, much exercised in prayer, and thus continued till he was
Master of Arts, and a long time after. In the beginning of King Edwards Reign,
when the Gospel was restored, he beg in to preach; and was so well l^ked of,
that he was appointed to read the Divinity Lecture at the College of
Fothringha. He married a wife about that time, and after the College was
dissolved he was placed to be Reader in the Minster of Litchfe^^d, from thence
he was beneficed in Leicester shire, at a place called Church Laung^on, where
he resided, kept a liberal House, and taught Gods word diligently. From thence
he was called to ^^ke a Benefice in London, being Allhallows Bread-^^eet, which
he accepted, and being minded to ^^ve over that in the Country, he went thither
much about the time that Queen Mary came to the Crown: At which time, preaching
at Northampton, ^reat exceptions were taken at his sermon by the Papists, for
that he inveighed against the Popish Religion as Antichristian. After this they
had a malicious eye against him, and sought for his blood, which he perceived;
but seeing he could not now ^esign his Benefice but into the Hands of a Papist,
^e kept both, constantly preaching, sometimes at ^ondon and sometimes in the
Country, till the pro^^bition came forth which we before mentioned. ^et his
Conscience not giving him leave to desist, tho ^e foresaw the danger he should
incurr, he continu^^d to preach the Gospel, and would not fly the Realm, tho
advised to it by his friends. And it was not long after, that preaching at his
cure in London, he was a^prehended by the order of Bishop Bonner, and carried
out of the Church, and brought before him, where the Bishop accused him of
Treason and Her^sie; to which Mr. Saunders answered with much sobriety,
endeavoring to prove he had done nothing against the Laws, or spoke contrary
to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. After much talk, the Bishop bid him
to write down his mind concerning Transubstantiation, or the Real presence in
the Sacrament. Mr. Sau^ders perceived that Bonner fought his Life, my Lord said
he, you seek Blood, and you shall have it: I pray God, that you may be baptized
in it, that you may hereafter loath blood sucking, and become a better man. And
upon this he wrote his mind boldly, not fearing what they could do, being
willing to seal to the Testimony of the Gospel with his Death. From him he was
sent to the Chancellor Gardner, who after Examination before him (being
secretly nipped by Mr. Saunders answers, for that he had in the days of King
Henry the 8th written a book treating of true obedience, in which he openly
declared the Princess Mary to be illegitimate) sent him to prison, from whence
he was had before the Council, and after several examinations he was condemned;
after which Mr. Saunders at his goeing away said, that he did preach sincerely
the word in its purity, and the he now was forbidden by them to do it, with his
mouth, yet he doubted not, but that his blood would do the same. He was sent to
prison, where he continued a year and 3 months, in which time one that was his
Bedfellow declared, that he had often heard Mr. Saunders say, that he felt the
power of God upon him wonderfully comforting him insomuch, that not only his
Spirit, but his Body also received a taste of the Communion of Saints, whilst he
felt (...) sweet and pleasant refreshing, flow through every part and member
thereof, from the heart, ebbing and flowing like a tide of sweet and Spiritual
flame through his whole body. But such was their cruelty that in all this time,
by the Bishops order, they would not suffer his Wife to come to see him; she
several times attempted it; but one day entreating the Keeper with her young
Child in her Arms, the Keeper took the Child and carried him (being a Boy) to
his father, which rejoiced the Heart of Mr. Saunders, who said, what man would
not lay his Life down before he would make such a fine Child a Bastard, and its
Mother a Whore, as I must if I embrace the Religion of Rome? At last Bonner
came to the prison where he was, and degraded him, and then delivered him over
to the Secular Power, (after he was Excommunicated) to be burnt for an
Heretic. The Sheriff of London took him, and carried him to the Counter in
Bread-street, his own Parish, but he stayed not long there, because an order
was signed for his burning in Coventry, to which place he was carried, and put
into the Common Goal where he spent the night in prayers, and the next day
being the 8th of February, he was led to execution in the Park without the
City, going in an old Gown, and a shirt, bare footed, falling often flat on his
face, and praying to himself. When he came to the Stake, a pardon was ^ffer'd
him, if he would recant, but he refused it saying, it is not I, nor my fellow
Preachers, that hurt ^he Queen, or the Realm, but such as you (speaking to
(...) officers) who resist Gods holy word, and I shall never woke the Truth of
what I have taught, and openly ^^intained. Upon that they cried our, away with
^im to the fire; to which he went with a cheerful Countenance, nothing
daunted, and coming to the take Kissed it, Crying, Welcome Life: Welcome the
^ross of Christ. After they had chained him fast, they ^^t fire to the fuel,
which being green smothered and would not burn clearly, so that they put this
^oly Martyr to intolerable pain, which he yet ^^^tained with admirable
patience, till he fell a^^eep in the Lord, at last, in the midst of the fire.

The Martyrdom of Bishop Hooper.
The next most godly Martyr, who suffered for the Gospel of Christ, by the
cruel and bloody Papists, was that most Reverend and Holy Bishop both o^
G^ocester and Worcester, and who was burnt at G^^c^ster Feb. 9th 1555. This man
was bred a Student in the University of Oxford, where he led a pious and sober
Life, and was a good Scho^lar, but in the time of persecution in King Hen. 8th
days, he was forced to leave the University and to become Steward to Sr. Th^mas
Arundel, but S^. Thomas being a Papist, tho he loved Mr. Hooper yet looking on
him as an Heretic he would not keep him, bu^ sent him privately to the Bishop
of Winchester that he might Convert him: but the Bishop not being able to
answer Mr. Hoopers solid Arguments se^^ him back to his Master, but intending
to do him (...) mischief, he being a Constant persecutor of all good People:
but Mr. Hooper having notice of it, left Sr. Tho. Arundels House and service
and got overseas to Paris, where he stayed not long, before he returned for
England and was retained by one Mr St. Low, but he was not long there before
noti^^ was given of him, and he was fain to disguise himself and fly over to
Ireland, from whence he we^^ to France, and through France into Germany where he
remained, both at Basil and at Zurick in the company of several Protestant
Ministers, who we^^ great friends to him, and where he Married a wi^^ who was a
Burgundian. Here he stayed till the Reign of the pious King Ed. 6th, when
desirous t^^ see his native Country, he took leave of his friend^ and among the
rest the famous Mr. Bullinger wh^ at parting desired him not to forger them
when (...) prosperity in his own Land, tho he should be mad^ a Bishop; to whom
Mr. Hooper prophetically r^plyed that he would constantly write to them, (...)
that he should not be able to write them the la^^ news of his death, for that,
where he should ta^^ most pains he should be burned to Ashes; b^ that you will
hear of me (said he) tho I shall (...) be able to write it to you. After he was
return^ to England, he preached constantly, once and m^^ times twice a day,
being much beloved and followed: He had a grave and austere look, eloquent of
tongue, Const^nt in his teaching, not altered by any promotion, nothing could
corrupt him, pure of life, and unspotted of reputation, of unblemished manners,
of great patience, sparing in diet, yet liberal in his house keeping. At last
he was called to preach before the King, who liked him so well, that he made
him Bishop of Gloucester, and afterward of Worcester, both which Bishoprics he
held at one time. It is observed that when he was made a Bishop, he took for
his Arms, or else it was prophetically given him by the Heralds, A Lamb in a
fiery Bush, and the sun beams deseending from heaven upon the Lamb, which was
an Hierogliphic of his suffering by fire, which afterward came to pass. He
continued in his Diocese of Gloucester till ater the Death of King Edward, and
that Q Mary came to the Crown, when being sent for up to London by the Queens
order, his friends Counseled him to fly, but he refused it saying, tho he
formerly did so, when he bad no charge, yet now being called to be a shepherd
of souls, it became not a Bishop to fly from his flock, and tho he knew the
danger of staying, yet he would willingly seal to that Doctrine he had taught,
with his Blood. Being come to London he was had into examination by the
Council, where his Marriage was urged against him, which he maintained to be
Lawful by the Law of God. Then they examined him upon the 6 Articles,
especially that of the real presence in the Sacrament, which he denied, and
showed his Arguments for his opinion, according to the holy Writ: alleging
this Text, Quem ^portet coelum, etc. Whom the Heavens shall contain until the
Restoration of all things. But this did ^ot satisfy, he had several disputes
with the Bishops and Doctors upon this point, and was several times examined
before them, keeping him in prison almost 18 months. He was kept in the Fleet
so strictly, that none of his friends were suffered to come to him, and the
more to torment him Babington the then Warden, put him into a room over the
Common shore, which stunk like Carrion, gave him the Sciatica, and other
diseases, where he had nothing to lie on but a pad of Straw, and an old
Coverlet to throw over him, and when the Warden was told by some of the
Warders, that they thought he would dye, he groaned so much; let him dye (said
he) if he will, there will be a good rid dance of him, and so Commanded the
doors to be kept fast locked upon him. At last after many Conferences and
Examinations, seeing they could not bring him over to them, Articles being
exhibited against him, he was at last Condemned, and delivered over to the
Sheriffs, he being first deprived of his Bishoprics, and after he had been
some time in Newgate, Bishop Bonner with his Assistants came and formally
degraded him. After which an order was granted for the writ de Comburendo, etc.
and that he should be burnt at Gloucester, which did not a little rejoice this
good man, that he should die in his own Diocese, and there confirm the Doctrine
he had taught, with his blood. On the 5th of Febuary early in the morning, he
was delivered to some of the Queens Guards, who conducted him on horseback to
Gloucester, and delivered him to the Sheriffs there, in order to his Execution
the next Day; the Lord Chandois and several others, being made Commissioners
for that purpose. That night before his death, he went to bed early, and having
had his first sleep, which was sound, he spent the rest in prayer, having
desired of the Sheriffs that he might not be disturbed by any, till they came
to have him away, which was granted, and about 8 of the Clock the next morning,
with a great Guard they fetched this good man to carry him to his burning, to
which he walked on foot, in a borrowed Gown, multitudes of people bewailing
him, crying, and wringing their hands. But he exhorted them to patience, and
told them he came not to dye as a Traitor, but because he would not account
that Heresy and false Doctrine, which he preached to them when he was their
Pastor. He looked very cheerfully, as he went, and more ruddy than usually, but
he was Commanded not to speak to the people; so they stopped his mouth, which he
was fain to submit to, tho it grieved him to see the people weep so bitterly,
but lifting his eyes to heaven, he prayed to himself when he came to the Stake,
and the preparation was made for him, near unto the great Elm, near the
College of Priests, where he used to preach to the people, he kneeled down,
beckning to several that he knew, to hearken to his prayers, but the Officers
did all they could to keep the people at a distance, that they might not hear
him. In the midst of his prayer, a Box was brought and laid before him, in
which they said was his pardon, if he would recant, at which he cried out, if
you Love my soul away with it, if you love my soul away with it: defiring them
not to interrupt his prayers. Then said the L. Chandois seeing there is no
remedy, dispatch him quickly. At which the good man speaking to the Sheriffs,
told them, all the favor he desired of them was, that he might make an end of
his prayers, and that he might have a quick fire. His prayers being finished he
pulled off his Gown, and gave it to the Sheriffs to be delivered to him that
lent it, and stripping himself to his doublet and breeches, he thought to be
burned in them, but the Sheriffs made him strip all off to his shirt, which he
submitted to, and taking a point from his Hose he trussed up his Shirt between
his legs where they caused about a pound of Gunpowder in a bagg to be placed,
and as much under either Arm: then they brought Iron hoops to put about his
legs, neck, and middle, but he refused them, saying that he knew God would
give him strength to endure the torment of the fire without them; yet at last
he was persuaded to suffer one about his middle, and his belly being swelled
and big by lying in prison, it pinched him much. After he was placed, he looked
about and saw the people round him bitterly weeping, but not being suffered to
speak to them, he lifted up his eyes toward Heaven and prayed to himself.
After he had done, the executioner came to ask him forgiveness, to whom he said
he knew not that he had ever offended him; to whom he replied: I am appointed
to set fire to you to burn you; In that said Mr. Hooper thou do nothing
offend me, God forgive thee thy sins and do thy office. Then the reeds being
put about him, he took them in his Arms and Kissed them, giving order how they
should be placed: presently fire was ordered to be put to him, but by reason
the faggots were green and also very few, they put this holy man to
intolerable torments, and the wind being also strong, blew the flame from him
so that he was only scorched by the fire. Then they fetched some dry faggots
and made a new fire, but all the reeds being gone, they burnt his neither
parts, and never reached his upper parts, only scorched and Shriffled his Skin,
and burnt his hair. All which time this holy Martyr was heard to pray as one
without pain, O Jesus the son of David have mercy upon me, and receive my soul:
After this second fire was spent, he wiped his eyes with his hands, and
beholding the People he said with an indifferent loud voice. For God's Love
good People let me have more fire, and all the while his neither paris were
burning. Then they made a 3d fire more extreme than the other, and then the
bladders of Gunpowder broke, which did not much good, by reason the wind was so
Violent; then he prayed with a loud voice, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit: these were the last words he was heard to speak; but
when his lips and mouth were black as a Coal, and his tongue swelled, they
were perceived to move till his lips were quire burnt away. Then he knocked his
breast with his hands till one of his Arms fell off, and then he knocked it
still with the other whilst water, fat and blood fried out at his fingers ends:
at last they renewed the fire when bending his body over the hoop of Iron he
yielded up his Spirit.

On the same day that this last mentioned holy Martyr suffered at Gloucester,
Dr. Rowland Tailor the Constant Martyr of Jesus Christ in the behalf of his
Gospel was burnt at Hadley in suffolk, where he had been the Parson all the
Reign of King Edward the 6th and upon the bringing in of Popery under Queen
Mary he was disturbed at his own Church, thrust out, and Popish Mass Celebrated
before his Face; but he endeavoring all he could to hinder it, complaint being
made to Gardner Chancellor and Bishop of Winchester, he sent for Dr. Tailor by
his Letters missive to come before him at London, which he readily obeyed: But
his friends knowing the Cruelty of that persecutor, advised him to fly and save
his Life but he utterly refused it saying: Tho he knew they had neither Justice
or Equity on their side, and that he looked for nothing at his Popish
Adversaries hands but Imprisonment or Cruel dearn, yet since he knew his cause
to be good, and Righteous, and Truth upon his side, he would not flinch, but
appear, and be willing to dye in so good a cause, for that he was satisfied in
his Conscience, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome led them to Idolatry,
Superstition, Errors, Hypocrisy, and Lies. After he came to London, He was
examined before the cruel Chancellor, who called him Knave, Villain, Fool, and
such like unchristian expressions (for which the Doctor humbly reproved him)
and seeing he could not make him turn to his Idolatry, he sent him prisoner to
the Kings Bench, where he lay almost two years. At his going away from the
Bishop, he kneeled down on the floor, and lifting up both his hands with a loud
voice he said: From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable
errors, Idolatries, and abominations, Good Lord deliver us. When in prison, he
so preached to the rest of the prisoners there, and used such godly
exhortations and discourses, leading also so strict and holy a life, that he
wrought upon many and converted them from their Superstitious errors. He was
also very Charitable while he had it, relieving others, tho he had a Wife and 9
Children: but they soon deprived him of his benefice, so that he had nothing to
support him, but the charity of good people, which with Gods providence he
found sufficient. Several examinations he had before the Bishops, where he
strenuously maintained his positions, for the Clergies Marriage, and against
the Corporeal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but at last, they overcame
him, with their Temporal Weapon, persecuting power, backed by Statute Law, and
by it they Condemned him, with Mr. Bradford and others to death, as Heretics
to be burnt alive. After this sentence he was degraded, by Bishop Bonner in
prison, and they were compelled by main force to put on their Popish Trinkets
upon his back, he refuseing to do it himself, and after they had notch'd his
Hair and paired orscrap'd his fingers ends, and with all their foppish
Ceremonies stripped him of his Popish habiliments, when the Bishop should have
struck him on the Breast with his staff, seeing the sturdiness of the Doctor,
who was a portly bigg man, Bonner was afraid, and omitted that last Ceremony,
lest the Dr. should have struck him again. The next day after this his
degradation, which is like the last unction for the burial, at two of the Clock
in the morning the Sheriffs took him and delivered him to his Guards, who were
to Conduct him to Hadley to be burnt there, at which he rejoiced being willing
to seal the Doctrine he had there preached with his blood. His Wife fearing
they would have him away by night (for they feared daylight and the people) she
watched all night with two Children in the Porch of St. Buttolphs Church near
Algate, which way she knew he must pass, and about 3 of the Clock it being very
dark she heard the noise of the guard, at which she ran out to her husband,
where was such a moaning and pathetick greeting, or rather separation, that the
Sheriffs wept, but forced her to depart and led him to the sign of the
Woolsack, where he was put on horseback with a hood over his face, a place made
for his Eyes to look out at, and a slit for his Mouth that he might breath;
After this manner they carried him along that he might not be known; all which
he patiently suffered. When he was come to Suffolk many of the Gentry and
Justices of the peace met him, of his friends and acquaintance, all
endeavoring to persuade him to save his Life, by Recantation, offering him not
only pardon for his Life, but great promotions, even a Bishopric. But this
good and constant professor of the Gospel, strengthened by Gods holy Spirit,
refused all those Temptations; coming to Hadley he rode through the Town, where
the poor people were assembled with grievous Moans and Tears, Kneeling down and
with lifted up hands, prayed to God to strengthen him, to whom he said (That he
had preached to them Gods Word and the Truth, and that he was now come to seal
it with his blood. But the Officers reproved the people and kept them off; when
that they came against the Alms houses, what money he had left, he put it into a
glove and flung it to them, having no more need of money now, for they led him
straight to the place of his execution without the Town on a Common. The
Council and Bishops had threatened to cut off his Tongue unless he would promise
not to say any thing to the people, of which promise the Sheriffs now put him
in mind, telling him, it was not permitted him to talk, so afraid were they to
hear the Truth. When he alighted from his Horse, he tore his hood from his
head, and said, I thank God I am now even at home. And when the people beheld
his notched crown, and his reverend white beard disfigured, they fell into a
grievous weeping and lamentation crying out, God save thee good Dr. Tailor.
Jesus Christ strengthen thee and help thee, the Holy Ghost Comfort thee, with
such like godly wishes. He would fain have spoken to the people, but the Yeomen
of the Guard would not permit him, for astoon as he, opened his mouth, one of
them ran a tipstaff into it; when he was come to the place he sat him down and
caused one to pull off his Boots, then he stripped himself of his Cloths to his
shirt, which done, he stood up and with a loud voice said, Good People, I have
taught you nothing but God's holy word, and what I have taken out of the
blessed and sacred Scriptures the Bible, and I am come hither this day to seal
it with my Blood. With that one of the Guard Struck him over the Head with a
stick, and cried, is this the keeping your word you Heretic? Then seeing he
could not be suffered to speak, he kneeled down and prayed, they Keeping off
the people that they might not hear him, threatening such who pressed near, to
trample them under their horses feet, when he had done he went to the Stake and
Kissed it, and placed himself in a pitched barrel they had prepared for him,
they then bound him with chains, and several of the people being commanded to
put up the fagots about him refused, tho threatened with Imprisonment, and they
could scarcely find any to do it, he was so beloved; but one took a f^ggot and
flung at him, which broke his head, so that the blood ran down his face; O
friend, said the Doctor, I have harm enough, what needed that? After that he
said the Psalm miserere in English, upon which the Sheriff struck him over the
mouth with a stick, saying, you knave speak Latin or I will make thee. At last
they set fire to him, and the Dr. holding up both his hands called upon God and
said, merciful Father of Heaven, for Jesus Christ my Saviors sake receive my
soul into thy hands, and so he stood still without either crying or moving in
the midst of the flame with his hands folded together till one with an halbert
struck him on the head and beat out his Brains, and then his Body fell into the
fire. This was the end of this most blessed Martyr.

The Cruel Handing of Tho. Tomkins.
On the 8th of February, 1^55, there were no less than 6 persons condemned to
be burnt at one time their names were Pigot, Knight, Hawks, Lawrence, Hunter,
and Tomkins; this last was burnt in Smithfield on the 16th day of March
following. He was a Weaver by trade, and dwelt in Shoreditch, of a godly and
upright life, just in his dealings, very Charitable to the poor, Constant in
prayer, without which he never would begin his work. This man was accused among
others for an Heretic, and had before Bishop Bonner at Fulham, where he kept
him half a year in prison, during which time, they often had him to
examination, and seeing be was but an ignorant man, yet so conversant in the
holy Scriptures, and so well able to maintain his opinions, the Bishops grew
imaged against him, and when he could not overcome him by arguments, he
buffeted him on the face, and plucked off part of his beard and then, as he
said, that he might look more Catholic, he caused his Buber to shave him, and
made him work every day to make his Hay: but one day above the rest several
tyrannical Priests like himself, being together they sent for this Tomkins to
hear him dispute, and ^s^er a while, to try his constancy, Bonner took him by
the hand, and holding it over a wax taper which stood burning upon the Table,
held it so long, till the sinews shrunk, and the water and blood spirted out of
the flesh into their faces; he all the while showing no sign of pain or hurt,
for as he professed afterward that he was so rapt and carried forth in his
Spirit, that he felt no pain. But this did not serve his turn, for this bloody
Butcher of Gods Sts. not content with this punishment, caused him to be wholly
consumed to Ashes in Smithfield on the day aforesaid, where he sealed his Faith
with a Cruel death, which he bore with admirable constancy, to the glory of
Gods holy name, and the confirmation of the Weak.

William Hunter Martyred at Burntwood.
On the 26th of the same month, was burnt at Burntwood in Essex William Hunter,
who was a youth of not above 19 years of Age, and was an Apprentise in London,
to a Silkweaver, and being commanded to go to mass and to receive the
Sacrament, his Conscience not permitting him, he refused, for which he was
threatened to be laid hold on, and his Mr. fearing he should bring him into
trouble, sent him away to his Father, who dwelt, at Burntwood in Essex, where
he continued about six weeks, when one day reading in the English Bible, which
he found in the Church, the Vicar and one more, called him heretic but he
disputed with them after such a manner, that they could say nothing against him
but they went and complained to the Justice of Peace, who sent for Will. but he
having some notice of it fled, and hid himself, upon which the Justice sent for
his Father, and threatened to send him to prison, unless he would find out his
son; at which the old man was much troubled, yet promised to look about as he
did, tho not with any intent to discover him if he had known where he had been:
but the good son hearing that his Father was like to be brought into trouble
for him, came from the place where he was hid to his Father; and tho he would
have persuaded him to the Contrary, he would not leave him but went home with
him; where he was no sooner come, but he was taken by the Constable and carried
before one Justice Brown, who would needs dispute with this youth concerning
the real presence in the Sacrament; but Will. Hunter being too hard for him, he
flung away the Bible in a Rage, and sent him up to Bishop Bonner, who also
argued the case with him but finding that he could not prevail upon him, he put
him into the Stocks in his Gate House, where he continued 2 days and 2 nights
without any thing but a Crust of Bread and a Cup of water, which he would not
touch. After this the Bishop sent for him again, and finding him still in the
same mind, refuseing to deny his Faith, he sent him to the prison where the
Convict were kept, and caused him to be laden with as many irons as he could
bear. There he lay near three quarters of a year, having only a halfpeny a day,
of the Bishop, for bread and drink. In which time he had been 4 or 5 times
before the Bishop, sometimes threatening him with burning, at other times
flattering him and offering him perferment, as to make him a Freeman, and to
give him 40 l. to set up his trade, or else he would make him his Steward,
finding him a witty young man; But he answered that unless he could convince
his Conscience by the Scriptures, he could not turn from his Faith and from
God, for the Love of the World, for that be accounted all worldly things but
loss and dung in respect of the Love of Christ. After this he was Condemned and
sent to Newgate, and thence to Burntwood to be Martyred. Thither he was
carried, and received by the Sheriffs, he showing an Admirable Constancy. His
father and mother being of the same faith, tho tender of him, rejoiced to see
his undaunted Constancy, he being so young a man his mother saying, she was
heattily glad that she was so happy, as to bear such a child who could find in
his heart to lose his life so willingly for Christ's name sake. Ah mother (said
William) for the little pain I am like to suffer, Christ has promised me a
Crown of Joy. You may be glad of that; then his mother kneeling on her knees
said, I pray God to strengthen thee to the End, for I think thee as well
bestowed as any child that I ever bare. The night before he was burnt, he saw
every thing in his dream that happened the next day and related it when he
awaked, to his fellow prisoner, who was also burnt not long after in another
place, which we shall mention, and every Circumstance of it was fulfilled: when
he came to the place of execution according to his dream, the Queens pardon was
offered if he would recant, but he refused it, but goeing to the Stake stood
upright against it, to which they bound him; and whilst they were placing the
faggots about him, he desired the People to pray from him so long as they saw
he was alive, and desired they would quickly dispatch him. Then the Justice
said that he would pray no more for him than for a Dog. Then said William I
pray God, Mr. Brown, this my death be not laid to your charge, in the last day:
however I forgive you. I ask no forgiveness of you replied the Justice, (...)
God do not forgive you (said William) my blood will be required at your hands.
Then being ready to put fire to him he cried, O son of God sin upon me; and
it was observed upon those words, it being a dark and cloudy morning, the sun
immediately shined forth, and so full on his face that he was forced to turn
his head another way; at which the people mused. Then taking up a faggot of
broom in his Arms, a Priest who he had seen in his dream came to him, with a
Popish book to persuade him to recant, to whom he used the same wo^ds as he had
done in his dream, Away thou false Prophet, beware of them good people, and
come from their wicked Abominations, lest you be partakers of their plagues.
Then quoth the Priest, look how tho^ burnest here, so shall tho^ burn in Hell.
Thou hest thou false Prophet, (said William) away thou false Prophet, away;
fire being then put to him he lifted up his hands toward Heaven and said,
Lord, Lord, Lord, receive my Spir^^ then casting down his head into the flame,
Smother and Smoke, he yielded up his life, for the Truth, sealing it with his
Blood, to the praise of God.

Two Gentlemen of Essex Martyred.
The very same day, that this last holy Martyr suffered, Mr. Higbad and Mr.
Caston, both Gentlemen of good repute in Essex, suffered likewise in several
places. They were both of them true servants of God, and professors of the
Gospel, for which they had been clapped up into Colchester Go^l, and Bishop
Bonner coming thither, had them to examination, but seeing he could not reclaim
them he caused them to be carried to London, where he kept them in strait
prison, till they were brought to their public examination at the Consistory
of St. Paul's, where several Articles were exhibited against them: and to which
they severally put in their Answers, but in fine, not Truth but power
prevailed, for when the Bishops saw they could not bend them to their minds,
they made use of the Temporal Sword, or rather fire to cut them off* For they
condemned them to death, and delivered them to the Sheriffs of London, who
carried them to Newgate, and after they had been there 14 days they were
carried without Algate, and delivered to the Sheriffs of the County of Essex,
Who caused them to be bound and carried away in a Cart, to the places of their
habitations, where they were to suffer, the one to Hornden on the Hill, the
other to Rayly, where on the said 26 day of March, they did most constantly
seal their Faith, by shedding of their blood, by most cruel fire, to the Glory
of God, and to the great strengthening of the godly.

Because we intend this Book for a Manual or small pocket book and of easy
price, that every one may be able without great hurt to themselves to purchase
it, we are forced to be very brief in the sequel, and as it were just to name
them to you, for indeed there was let forth such a glut of Innocent blood being
above 300 Martyrs besides such as dyed privately in Prisons, not made known or
remarqu'd, that we are not able to give you the full relation of them all, in
this narrow compass, which we have allotted to our selves: But what is most
moving and worthy observation, shall not be omitted; so that you have magnum in
parvo, a great Volume in a little Book.

Three more burnt in Essex, and B. Farrar in Wales.
William Pigot, Stephen Knight, and John Laurence, had been condemned as we
told you before, and now upon the 28th day of March Pigot was burnt at
Braintree, and Knight at Maldon in Essex. Lawrence having been a Priest, was
first degraded by Bonner, and then sent to Colchester, where on the 29th of the
aforesaid Month, not being able to go or stand, by reason his legs had been so
worn with heavy Irons in prison, and his body weakened he was carried to the
fire in a chair, and so sitting showing great constancy, was consumed to Ashes.
When he was in the flames a great many young Children, that could but just
speak and run about, came near and cried, Lord, strengthen thy servant, and
Keep thy promise: Lord strengthen thy servant, and Keep thy promise; Which
being rare, was no small Manifestation of the Glory of God. For out of the
Mouths of Babes and sucklings will he be glorified.

On the 30th of the same Month, Robert Farrar Bishop of St. David's in Wales,
that worthy and constant Martyr, suffered at Caermarthen, in the place, on the
South side of the Market Cross: Where he most constantly, in the behalf of the
Gospel, sustained the torments of the Fire. He had been cited to London by
Gardner, had before the Council, and after several examinations and disputes,
not being by any means to be wrought upon to deny the doctrine of the Gospel,
which he had taught, he was sent down into Wales, where by certain
Commissioners constituted for that purpose he was condemned and then degraded,
and lastly as we have said; executed. Before he went to suffer, one of his
friends much bewailing him, in that he must suffer so painful a death as that
of Fire seems to be, this constant Martyr and Bishop said to him, That if he
saw him once to stir in the pains of his burning, be should then give no credit
to his Doctrine. And as he said, so he performed, for he stood so patiently in
the midst of the Flame, never crying or stirring, but holding up his hands till
burned to stumps, and till one with a Staff stroke him on the head, and beat
him down into the fire where he was consumed to ashes.

Rawlins White burnt at Cardiff.
In the same month one Rawlins white was burned at Cardiff, the chief Town of
Glarmorgan Shire in Wales. Thi^ Rawlins was by profession a Fisherman belonging
to Cardiff, a very good and pious man, tho ignorant in Letters, but breeding
his son at School, he caused him every night to read to him out of the
Scriptures in English, to his great comfort and instruction, which continued
all the time of King Edward. But when Idolatry and the Remish Superstition came
in, for this (he still continuing the same) he was threatened, and at last sent
for by the Bishop of L^^daff, upon which some of his Friends knowing the
Danger, advised him to fly, but he told them he had learnt a better Lesson, for
should he presume to deny his Master Christ, Christ would at the last day deny
and Condemn him, and therefore said he I will by his Grace, bear witness of him
before Men, that I may find him in everlasting Life. The Bishop having examined
him and finding him resolute in his opinions, sent him to prison where he was
kept an whole year, but at first not so strictly but he might have got away if
he would. After which the Bishop sending for him asked him if he had changed
his mind? To whom he stoutly replied; Rawlins you left me Sir, and Rawlins you
find me, and by God's Grace Rawlins I will Continue. After this he was put in a
very vile, loathsome, dark prison or dungeon, in the Tows called Cockmarell:
where however he most cheerfully passed away his time in prayer and singing of
Psalms. Being Condemned by the Bishop and the writ de Comburendo, etc. being
procured, he had notice given him over night, to prepare himself for Death the
next day: upon which he sent to his wife for his Wedding Garment, which it
seems was a large white shirt he had kept to be shrouded in, and now was
resolved to be burnt in it: with great grief and many tears his wife obeyed
him, and not being permitted to come at him, she and her children met him the
next day, as he was going to the Stake, which sight moved the old man seeing
their bitter weeping, insomuch that Stopping a while, his tears gushed forth
and ran down his cheeks and white beard, for he was above threescore years of
age. At last as it were coming to himself and striking his Breast he Cried out:
Ah, flesh, stayest thou me? would thou fain prevail? But do thou what thou
can by Gods Grace thou shall not have the Victory. When he came near the
Stake he sell flat on his face to the ground, Kissing it, and after he arose,
finding some of the Earth Sticking to his nose he said, Earth unto earth and
dust unto dust, thou art my Mother and ^^to thee I must return. It was observed
that his very nature ^eemed to be changed, for whereas before he used to go
^tooping through labor and age, and had a dull and melanchol^^ck Countenance,
that now he went bolt upright, and look^d bri^k and cheerful, to the great
amazement of the be^olders. After he had set himself against the Stake in his
^^irt, as the Smith was Knocking in the staples of the chain (...) the Stake,
Friend (said he) Knock it fast, for perhaps the flesh may be weak and may
strive for it self: but God of his great mercy give me patience to abide the
extremity. After that, when they placed the reeds and faggots about him, he was
as busy as the rest, and seemed less concerned, putting and ordering them
about him for his best advantage of being soon dispatched. They had a Priest
there, who undertook to preach or speak to the People, but when he came to
speak of Christ's bodily presence in the Sacrament Rawlins opposed him, and put
him to silence, upon which some cried out, put fire to him, put fire to him,
which being done, there was a great and sudden flame, in which he stood rubbing
and bathing his hands, till, his sinews cracked without any show of pain, and
then wiping his face with his flameing hands, at last he cried out, Lord
receive my soul, O Lord receive my Spirit; which he continued, till his mouth
was burnt, and that his Body falling over the Chain, he was wholly consumed to
Ashes. And this was the end of this godly old man, for the Testimony of Christ,
and his Gospel, and for which, according to his Faith, without any doubt, he is
rewarded with a Crown of everlasting Life.

George Marsh burnt at Chester.
The next that we shall mention is the Martyrdom of George Marsh, who was burnt
at Chester, by the Bishop there, Dr. Coats. He was a Lancashire man bred a
Farmer, married and had children, yet afterward he went to Cambridg, fell to
his Studies, and at last took orders, and was a Curate in the time of King
Edward the 6th, but in Queen Mary's days being detected, he was sent for by the
Bishop, and being in some perplexity in his mind, whether he should fly or no,
some of his friends sent him word, that he should stay and boldly Confess Jesus
Christ, upon which having hid himself, he went and delivered himself up to
those who sought him, who carried him to the Bishop, where he so wisely
answered to all their objections, that they could not find matter to take away
his Life: yet the Bishop sent him to prison in his own house, where he kept him
4 Months, not suffering any of his friends to come near him, or to give him any
relief, and where he suffered great hardships; the Porter was commanded to take
notice of any that came but to enquire after him, and to give their names to
the Bishop, so that many were afraid of being brought into trouble for asking
after him. From the Bishop he was had before the Earl of Darby who examined
him, after which perceiving he was not able to bring him to his bent, he
committed him to another prison, being a cold windy stone house, without bed to
lie on, only a few Canvas lent Clothes, where he contin^ed in this manner for
some time, seeing no man but the keeper, who brought him meat and drink. After
this he was again examined before the said Earl, yet Mr. Marsh very prudently
and warily answered their intrapping questions concerning the Sacrament;
saying, he believed Christ present in the Sacrament, which so enraged them
seeing he would give no other answer, that they sent him to Lancaster Goal,
where he was put among the Felons, and 3 times caused to hold up his hand at
the bar, with bolts upon his Legs tho they had nothing to object against him.
He used to preach and exhort the prisoners, for which he was threatened and
reproved, and the Bishop coming to Lancaster caused him to be more straightly
kept and cruelly handled; several times was he had before the Bishop and
examined, and Articles were put in against him, one of which was, that among
other most damnable and Schismatical Heresies, he had said, that the Church and
Doctrine taught and set forth in King Edwards time, was the true Church, and
that the Church of Rome was not the true and Catholic Church. At last the
Bishop read the sentence of Condemnation against him, and after he had done,
now said he I will pray for thee no more than for a dog. But I will pray for
you said the holy Martyr. He was then delivered to the Sheriffs, who put him
into an hole or dark dungeon, where none were suffered to come at him or speak
to him. When the time came of his execution, he was led forth to the place,
being without the City of Westchester, and being come to the Stake a black Box
was showed him, in which they said there was the Queens pardon, if he would
recant: He told them that he had no desire to dye, and would accept of her
Graces mercy, being her true Liege man, but if he could not have it without
such Conditions, which tended to pluck him from God, he would not receive it.
After that he began to speak to the people, but the Sheriffs told him, there
must be no Sermoning there, so afraid were they of hearing the Truth, upon
which Mr. Marsh Kneeling down sell to prayer, which done he stripped himself to
his shirt, and so was chained to the post, and the faggots put about him. Over
his head they had placed a firkin, with pitch, and Tar, and by reason the wind
blew hard, and the fire did not dispatch him, but melting the pitch, it fell
upon him, and put him to intolerable torment, notwithstanding he bore it
patiently, standing a long time without moveing, having all his flesh so
broyled and puffed up, that they thought he had been dead, when on a sudden,
spreading his hands abroad, he cried out aloud, Father of Heaven have mercy
upon me, and so yielded up his Spirit into the hands of the Lord; All the
people saying he dyed with admirable patience and was a Martyr. He was burnt in
April, 1555.

The story of William Flower Martyr at Westminster.
On the 24th day of April the same year, one William Flower was Martyred in the
Church yard of St. Margarets Westminster, where it seems, in his zeal, he had
struck a Priest, that had been saying mass, and had wounded him, for which he
himself was afterward troubled, but said he had such an impulse then upon him,
that he could not forbear, tho he confessed it was not according to the
Doctrine of Christ, to smite any man. He knew the fact would bring his Life
into jeopardy, and he was prepared for it, being resolved not to deny the
Gospel he had professed. This William Flower lived then at Lambeth, having a
Wife and children, tho he was bred first a Monk of Ely, till his eyes being
enlightened by the Gospel, he left that life and became a Secular Priest,
preaching in diverse places; at last marrying, he studied physic and taught
School in several places, when at last living at Lambeth, his zeal against
Idolatry carried him forth too furiously, for which he was had before Bishop
Bonner, who sent him prisoner to the Gate house, where after some time he was
again brought before the Bishop, who sought all ways to make him recant his
opinions, but in vain; for he resolutely told him: That the Heavens should
as soon fall as he recant his opinions, but for his assault of the Priest, he
was sorry, and submitted himself to his Lordship, and the punishment he would
inflict. But this would not serve the Bishop turn, for after several Articles
exhibited against him, and witnesses produced, he was condemned, degraded and
delivered over to the secular power to be burnt. On the 24th of April
aforesaid, he was brought to the place of his execution, in St. Margarets
Churchyard, where after he had prayed audibly and servently, he desired all
People to forgive him, and all that he had any ways offended, for he forgave
all the World. This done, his right hand was first fastened to the Stake and Cut
off, at which they could not perceive that he so much ^s shrunk, only a little
moved his shoulders. Then being fastened to the Stake, fire was set to him,
which burning about him, he cried with a loud voice O son of God have mercy
upon me. O Son of God receive my soul, three times; till his Speech was taken
from him, then lifting up his stump, and his other Arm, he stood, his lips
moving, till he was stricken down to the ground, where he lay with the neither
parts of his body burnt, and the upper only scorched, for want of fire, his
lips still being seen to move, till they dispatched him.

Mr. Cardmaker and Mr. Warren burnt in Smithfeild.
you see scarce a day passes, without burning and destroying Gods people in one
place or other, for on the 30th of May following, one Mr. Cardmaker, who had
been an observant Friar before the dissolution of the Abbeys, and afterward a
Prehend in the Church of Wells, and after that in the time of King Edwards he
married and was a Minister, being made Reader at St. Paul's, which very much
incensed the Papists against him, and one Mr. John Warren an Upholster in
London were both burnt in one fire in Smithfeild. As Soon as the tide turned,
Mr. Cardmaker was clapped into Newgate, and as soon as popery was settled and they
had got the Act for their purpose, in putting the fiery Laws, in Execution
against these protestant dissenters, he was brought before the Bishop and
examined, and several articles exhibited against him concerning the bodily
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which he would in no wise deny, but
offered to maintain his opinions as truth by the H. Scriptures: and when they
saw that they could by no means make him recant, he was condemned to be burnt,
and at the same time with John Warren. This John Warren was formerly condemned
to be burnt in the days of King Henry the 8th with Ann Askew, but then pardoned
by the King, but they now finding him professing the Gospel which he always
Constantly did, Bonner the cruel persecutor of God's people laid hold of him,
and had several Articles brought against him, which he plainly confessed, being
only the Truths he had owned and declared, and willingly yielded himself to be
put to death for a Testimony of them. On the 30th of May they were both brought
to the Stake in Smithfield, and whilst Mr. Cardmaker was in private conference
with the Sheriffs, who were perswadeing him to recant, and which discourse
lasted a long time, Mr. Warren was stripped and fastened to the Stake, it was
rumored by some of the Papists, that Cardmaker would turn to save his life,
and by the long discourse he had with the Sheriffs, the People began to Suspect
it would prove true, but when at last they saw him depart from them, and strip
himself to his shirt, and kneel down at the Stake, shouting aloud they cried
out, God be praised: the Lord strengthen thee Cardmaker, The Lord Jesus receive
thy Spirits; and this continued till the Executioner put fire to them, and that
they both with great constancy and alacrity of Spirit, passed through the flame,
to everlasting rest and peace, among God's holy Martyrs, to enjoy the Crown of
Victory prepared for them.

Two more burnt in Essex.
On the 29th of the same month was also Condemned John Simson, and John Ardley,
both husbandmen of Essex, and in Bonners Diocese, who soon dispatched them, for
their Conscience sake: tho they offered, to save their lives, all their
estates, or what ever they had, so their Consciences might be free, but nothing
but their blood would serve their turns, and therefore they were sent into
Essex, where about the 10th of June they both suffered the fire in several
places. Simson at Rochford, and Ardley on the same day at Railey, in which
places both finished their Martyrdom most quietly in the quarrel of Christ's
Gospel.

Mr. Hawks burnt in Essex.
On the same day was burned Mr. Tho. Hawks, whom we have formerly mentioned to
have been Condemned with 5 other Martyrs, whose storys we have given you; but
this Gentleman, for he was one and bred a Courtier, having served the Earl of
Oxford all the time of King Edward, was respited till this time, in hopes to
prevail with him to recant, tho in vain, for he was most constant and resolute
not to deny his Faith, for he boldly told the Bishop, that if he had an hundred
lives and an hundred bodies, he would give them all to be torn to pieces reather
than abjure and recant. He was first taken, because he had kept his child 3
weeks without Christning it, because it was against his Conscience to yield to
their Popish Ceremonies, as their Oil, Salt, Cream, Spittle, Candle, and
conjuring Water, which he decalred, was not of divine Institution, but men's
foolish Inventions. For this he was had before the Bishop, and he being a man
of parts, and a gentleman, much pains was taken with him, and he was much
pitied, for that he was a very handsome man, of a fine make, and sweet
Countenance, and of an excellent sweet nature. But all this was nothing to the
Love he bore to God, for whose sake he forsook all the offers and pleasures of
the world, to undergo a rigorous Death. After his Condemnation aforesaid, he
was sent into Essex, and delivered over to the Lord Rich to see him burnt, who
brought him guarded to the place of execution, which was at Coxhall in Essex. A
little before the time, he used much exhortation to his Friends, to be steadfast
in the Faith, some of which were greatly confirmed by him, both by his talk and
example, but much more by his death, for some of them, who feared the sharpness
of the punishment, and thought it was intolerable to the flesh, desired of
him, if he were able, to give them a private sign when he was burning, if it
were to be born, which he promised to do, and if that the pain were tolerable
and might be quietly born, he would lift up his hands over his head before he
gave up the Ghost. After he came to the place, with fervent prayers made to God
he with great patience and meekness addressed himself for the Fire, being bound
to the Stake with a chain, an innumerable company of people encompassing him
and lamenting him. After he had spoken many things to the Lord Rich, concerning
their shedding thus the innocent blood of Gods Saints, and that his prayers
were ended, they set fire to him, in which he continued long and when that his
speech was taken away, with the violence of the fire, and his skin shrivled and
drawn together, and his fingers ends consumed in the flame, and the rest of his
Arms and body burning, so that all men thought he had been certainly dead,
suddenly and contrary to all expectation, being mindful of his promise to his
friends he reached up his hands over his head, burning of a light fire, and, as
it were rejoyceing, clapped them together 3 times, to the amazement of all the
people; upon which arose such an outcry or shout, especially by those who
understood the sign, that the like had not been heard. After which this blessed
Martyr sinking down into the fire gave up the Ghost, being a most Constant and
faithful witness of the Gospel.

Thomas Wats Martyred as Chelmsford. with 3 others in Essex.
Thomas Wats also of Essex, having been sent up to the bloody Bishop Bonner,
after many examinations and appearances, he was condemned to the fire and sent
down to Chelmsford in Essex, to be Martyred the Lord Rich being ordered to see
him executed, where his wife and 6 Children came to him, to whom he said: My
dear Wife and children, I must now depart from you and hence forth know you no
more, but as the Lord has given you to me, so I give you again unto the Lord,
whom I charge you to obey and fear, and beware you turn not to this abominable
Papistry, against which by God's Grace I shall anon give testimony with my
blood. Let not the Murdering of God's saints cause you to relent, but take an
occasion thereby to grow stronger in the Lords quarrel, and I doubt not but he
will be a merciful Father to you. Two of his weeping Children offered
themselves to be burnt with him, but he kissing and Hesting them, bad them
farewell, and so was carried to the fire. When he came to the stake, he kissed
it, and then spoke to the Lord Rich these words. My Lord beware beware, for you
do against your own Conscience, and without you repent, the Lord will revenge
it, for you are the cause of my death. After which he suffered the fire as the
rest, and no doubt received his Reward in Heaven.

On the 14th of June the same year, Nicholas Chamberlin was burnt at
Colchester, and on the 15th Thomas Osmond was burnt at Maintree, and William
Bamford alias Butler the same day at Harwich, all which* sealed to the
Testimony of the Gospel with their blood.

I shall now proceed to give you briefly, the History of the noted Mr.
Bradfood, a godly Preacher and holy Martyr for the Gospel of Christ. Mr. John
Bradford was born at Manchester in Lancastershire, being brought up in Learning
by his parents, attaining to great perfection in the Latin tongue, in ready
writing, and in Accounts, which preferred him to the service of Sr. John
Harrington Knight, who was Treasurer of the Kings Camp and buildings, by him
Mr. Bradford was employed, both at home and abroad beyond seas, and he was in a
thriving way, and ready for great preferment; But God having otherways
designed this then young Man, called him, to the Gospel, and to the study of
the H. Scriptures. Finding a call in himself, he immediately embraced it,
looking upon it as the Spirit of God, that prompted him to forsake worldly
Riches, preferment, and Honor, in the way he was following, and to retire to
Cambridge, for the benefit of his studies, and to sit him for the Ministry. He
had not been in the University above a year, but he obtained the Degree of Mr.
of Arts, and not long after he had a fellowship given him in Pembroke Hall;
Where the learned Bucer being acquainted with him, stirred him up to the
Ministry And Dr. Ridley Bishop of London, made him a Deacon, giving him license
to preach, and made him also a Prebendary in his Cathedral Church of St. Paul's.
In this office constantly preaching he continued 3 years, sharply reproving
sin, declaring Christ crucified, oppugning Heresies and Papistical Errors, and
earnestly persuaded all to a godly Life But after Queen Mary came to the Crown,
and had introduced the abolished Popery, Idolatry, and Superstition, he
flinched not, neither would he fly as many did, but continued his diligent
preaching until deprived of that Liberty by the Queen and Council on the 13th
of August, in the first year of Queen Mary, Dr. Bourn Bishop of B^^^ preaching
at Paul's Cross in the behalf of Popery, the people were all in an uprore at his
sermon, and one among the rest flung a dagger at him as he stood in the Pulpit,
and narrowly mist him; He seeing his life in danger, desired Mr. Bradford, who
was ner him, to pacify the people, which he readily did, stepping forth, spoke
to them in such sort, and sheltrin^ the Bishop, that he saved his Life, for it
was verily thought, that if it had not been for Mr. Bradford, the people had
torn the Bishop to pieces, they were so much incensed by his sermon. At which
time o^^ called to him, and said, Mr. Bradford, Mr. Bradford, you now save him,
who will shortly help to bu^^ you, which proved true enough; for from this very
Act of Charity, finding how much he was beloved by the people, and fearing his
Doctrine and abilities they called this sedition and a Commotion, and he was
sent for before the Queen and Council, where his preaching was objected against
him, and was a^ last committed to the Tower, and then into other prisons, as
the Kings Bench, the Counter and Newgate into all which he was cast for his
conscience sake and because he would not embrace the Romish superstition. All
the time he was in prison, he preached almost continually, and when in Newgate,
would g^^ once a week among the Felons and Thieves, preachin^ to them and
exhorting them, doing a great deal (...) good amongst them. Preaching, reading,
and praying seemed to be his whole Life. He eat but one meal a day, and that
but little. He was almost continually on his Knees: Often museing and bitterly
weeping to himself. He was somewhat tall of person, of a sanguine complexion,
with an awbourn hair and beard. He seldom slept above 4 hours in a night, and
always read in his bed till sleep came. He counted that hour ill spent in
which he did not some good. He was very Charitable and Liberal to his fellow
prisoners. He was much beloved through his winning carriage, even of his
Keepers, who gave him such liberty, that he might have got away if he would;
nay, they often let him go forth on his word, which they were sure of, he being
always most punctual. He was several times brought before the Chancellor and
before Bonner, and other Bishops, and much pains was taken by several of the
most learned among them, to bring him over to them, but in vain; for he so
confounded them with the Scriptures, and manifested the Truth to them
concerning the presence of Christ in his Sacrament, that they knew not what to
say to him, but having the power in their hands, they condemned him as an
Heretic, to be burnt, and reading the sentence to him, when the Chancellor
came to the word Johannes Bradford Laicus, ha! (Said he) is he no Priest? to
which Mr. Bradford replied, no, he never was Priest, nor beneficed, nor
Married, nor a Preacher, till public Authority had Established Religion. After
which he fell down on his Knees, and heartily thanked God, that he counted him
worthy to suffer for his name sake. They had kept him near 2 years in prison,
and he was now condemned on the last of January, from which time, to the 1st of
July, they kept him in prison, where they had several conferences with him, but
he still kept constant and unshaken in his faith. Not long before his burning
he dreamed all the order of it as it afterward happened. They had an intent to
have sent him to Manchester to have been burnt there, but their minds altering
they ordered it to be done in Smithfield. One afternoon as he was walking in
his Chamber, the Keepers wife came running to him almost out of Breath, and
amazed and crying, O Mr. Bradford I come to bring you heavy news. What is that
said he? That you must be burned, and your chain is now buying. Mr. Bradford
pulling off his Gap, and lifting up his eyes toward heaven, said I thank God
for it: I have looked for it a long time, it is no unexpected thing, the Lord
make me worthy of it. The rumor of Mr. Bradfords burning soon spread through the
City, and by 4 a clock in the morning people began to gather together in the
streets: As he was passing between Nowgate and Smithfield, his Brother in Law
came and took him by the hand, to take his last leave of him, for which
Woodriff the dogged Sheriff struck him over the head till the blood ran down
his face, which grieving Mr. Bradford, he desired him to remember him to his
Mother, and others of his friends, and so dismissed him. This sheriff was a great
persecutor of Gods Saints, rejoicing much at their sufferings, whereas his
brother never saw their Martyrdoms with dry eyes, much pity and Commiseration.
But God met with him, for not long after Mr. Bradfords burning he was suddenly
struck with a dead palsy, so that for 8 years till he dyed, he could not turn
in his Bed, but as he was helped. When Mr. Bradford came to the place, he fell
flat on his face and prayed to himself a good space. At the same time, there
was to suffer with him, for the same cause one John Leaf a London Apprentice to
a Tallow-Chandler, a mere stripling of 18 or nineteen years of Age, at the
most, who had most stoutly and resolutely confessed his Faith touching the
Sacrament before Bishop Bonner, touching auricular confession, and other points
to which he argued very orthodoxically, having been well grounded therein, by
the Holy Martyr Mr, Rogers whose Scholar he was. After he had been condemned,
whilst in prison, the Bishop sent to him a Recantation in writing, and also his
confession, bidding him to choose, which he would sign, the one was for his
Life, the other his Death. The young man could not write nor read, therefore
caused the writings to be read to him, and when he had heard the recantation,
he disliked it, and said he would not sign it, but hearing his own confession
read he said, he approved that, and thereupon pricked his finger with a needle,
he took of his blood, and made a mark on the paper, and bid them tell the
Bishop, that he had already signed that with his Blood. This young Man having
undauntedly signed this Bill, was the same day brought with Mr. Bradford to the
stake, where he also lay flat on his face on the ground praying, on the other
side of the stake, till the Sheriff bid them dispatch, for that the press of
the people was great. At which words they both stood up, when Mr. Bradford
taking a faggot in his hands, he Kissed it, as likewise the stake, then
stripping himself, he went and stood by the stake and said, O England, England,
repent thee of thy sins, repent thee of thy Sins. Beware of Idolatry, beware of
false Antichrists, take beed they do not deceive you. Upon this the Sheriff bid
them bind him and tie his hands if he would not be quiet. O Mr. Sheriff, I am
quiet said Mr. Bradford, God forgive you. To which one of his Officers replied,
you had best hold your peace, if this be your learning, you are a Fool. Mr.
Bradford saw how it was; that he might not be permitted to speak, he answered
not, but saying as he forgave all the world, so he asked forgiveness of all
men, and desired the people to pray for him. Then turning his head to the young
man who suffered with him he said be of good comfort Brother: for we shall have
a merry supper with the Lord this night, then embracing the Reeds, he said,
Strait is the way, and narrow is the Gate that leads to eternal Salvation and
few there be that find it. Then fire being put to them they both with great
patience and constancy ended their lives in the Fire, without any alteration in
their countinances, being void of all fear hoping to obtain (as no doubt they
did) the heavenly reward for all their sufferings.

The next day after Mr. Bradford suffered in Smithfield, one William Minge a
Priest, should have suffered at Maidstone, but that he dyed in prison. On the
3d of July one James Trevisam in Lothbury paris^ dyed a prisoner, being lame
and ill used, and when he was dead, because he was an Heretic (as they termed
him) they would not let his wife bury him in the Churchyard, nor have so much
as a Coffin to put him in, but was forced to carry him on a Table into the
fields, and bury him there without Moorgate.

On the 12th day of July 4 men, viz. John Bland Minister of the parish of
Adisham in Kent, John Frankish Vicar of Rolvindon, Nicholas Shetterden and
Humphry Middleton, all of the same County, were long imprisoned at Canterbury,
and after several examinations and Articles exhibited against them, they all
standing firm to the Truth, for the Gospels sake suffered all in one fire, at
two several Stakes, in the City of Canterbury.

In the same month of July, Nicholas Hall a Bricklayer, was Condemned by the
Bishop of Rochester, for maintaining that under the forms of Bread and wine,
was not the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ after Consecration, but that
the Body of Christ was in Heaven only; with some other things concerning the
Superstition of the Mass, for which he was burnt at Rochester about the 19 of
July.

Christopher Waid was of Dartford in the County of Kent a Linen weaver,
Condemned also upon the like Articles, by the aforesaid Bishop of Rochester,
and burnt at Dartford, in the same month of July, at a place called the Brimth
without the town, the Common place of Execution of Felons. As he was goeing to
his Martyrdom one Margery Pooly of the Town of Tunbridg a widow, who was
afterward Martyred, said to him, you may rejoice Waid to see such a company
gathered to celebrate your Marriage this day. Being come to the place, he
stripped himself and put on a fair white shirt delivered to him by his wife, when
coming to the Stake, he took it in his arms and embraced it, and Kissing it, he
set his back to it and was fastened to it with an Iron hoop, standing in a
Pitched Barrel: being thus settled he spoke with a clear and cheerful voice the
last verse of the 86 Psalm. Show some good token upon me O Lord, that they who
hate me may see it and be ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me and
Comforted me. Near to the Stake was a little Hill where stood a Friar with a
Book in his hand, ready to speak to the People, but Wade cried out so eagerly
to the People, to beware of the Doctrine of Antichrist, that the Friar went
away amated and said nothing. The Sheriff bid him to be quiet and dye
patiently, then putting the reeds before his mouth, he made a hole with his
hands, that his voice might be heard, but some flung faggots at the hole and
hurt his face: when at last fire being put to him he cried out often, Lord
Jesus receive my Soul, without any sign of Impatience; at last holding up his
hands above his head, he continued in that posture without moving them, even
after he was dead, as if they had been propped up with Stakes; being a token to
his Enemies, according to his prayer, of his Constancy, to their shame and
Confusion.

Margery Pooly and Dirick Carver Martyrs.
Margery Pooly a widow, was also Condemned by the aforesaid Bishop of
Rochester, and suffered at Maidstown in Kent in the same month. And on the 22d
of the same month at Lewis in Sussex, was burned Dirick Carver, who was a man
of small learning, yet blessed by God with temporal Riches, which yet was no
hindrance to him in professing the Gospel, tho after he was imprisoned the
Ravenous Harpies left little for his wife and children. After he had been
several times before the Bishop, and his confession read to him, he owned it,
and being asked if he would recant, or stand to the same, he replied That he
would stand to his confessions, for your doctrine is Poison and Sorcery, and if
Christ were here (said he) you would put him to a worse Death, than he was put
to before. You say you can make a god, you can make a Pudding as well. Your
Ceremonies in the Church are full of poison, and beggarly rudiments, and
auricular confession is contrary to Gods Word, with diverse others the like,
which made the Bishop hasten his condemnation. When he came to the Town of
Lewis in order to his burning, the people called upon him, beseeching God to
strengthen him in the Faith of Jesus Christ: He thanked them and prayed unto
God, that he of his mercy would strengthen them in the like Faith. When he came
to the stake he kneeled down, and made his prayers: After he had done, they
took his book and threw it into the pitched barrel; And as soon as he had stripped
himself, he went into the barrel prepared for him himself, and taking up his
book, he flung it among the people, but the Sheriff commanded them in the
Queens name, on pain of Death, to throw it in again, that it might be burnt.
Then the blessed Martyr lifting up his voice said, Brethren and Sisters,
witness all of you that I am come here this day to seal with my blood Christ's
Gospel, because I know it is truth. It has been here truly preached, but now is
not. Because I will not deny God's Gospel and be obedient to Man's Laws, I am
Condemned to dye. As many of you as believe upon the Father, Son and holy
Spirit unto everlasting Life, see you do the works appertaining to the same:
And as many of you as believe on the Pope of Rome, you believe to your utter
Cond mnation except the great mercy of God help you. Immediately the Sheriff
said; If thou do not believe on the Pope thou art damned both body and Soul.
Speak to thy God (said he) that ^e may deliver thee now, or else strike me down
to the example of the People. But the Martyr replied the Lord forgive you your
sayings. Then with a loud voice he said to the people. Dear Brethren, I ask you
all to forgive me, if I have offended any of you, in word or in deed. Then he
prayed and said: O Lord my God, thou have written, He that will not forsake
Wife, Children, House, and all that ever he has, and take up thy Cross and
follow thee, is not worthy of thee. But Lord thou know I have forsaken all
to come unto thee. Lord have mercy upon me, for to thee I commend my Spirit,
and my Soul rejoices in thee. When the fire was put to him, he gave a spring
up into the flame, and cried, O Lord have mercy upon me, and so ended his Life.

Stening and Iveson Martyrs.
On the 23d of the same month, was also burnt at Stening, another named John
Launder of God-Stone in the County of Surry: one of the same Town a Carpenter,
named Thomas Iveson was burnt in the same month at Chichester. And on the 2d of
August one James Abbeys a young man being by, the Bishop of Norwich wrought
upon him to recant, and gave him money which so burdened his Conscience that he
could have no rest till he had carried the Bishop his money, and owned his
opinions, for which on the day aforesaid he was burnt at Bury.

Greater and hotter the persecution grew daily, and they began now to be
fleshed in blood, tho nothing satiated, but still greedy of more. On the 8th
day of August the same year, one Mr. Denly, a Gentleman, was Martyred at
Vxbridge, having been Condemned by the bloody Butcher, Bonner. When fire was
put to him he fell a singing a psalm, which Doctor Story a Popish persecutor
hearing, he bid one of the Sheriffs Officers fling a faggot in his face, to stop
his mouth, which the fellow did, and hit him so full in the face, that the
blood ran down; upon which Mr. Denly was silent, clapping both his Hands upon
his face: Then said the Popish Doctor to the fellow: Thou have marred a good
old song. At last the holy Martyr spreading his hands abroad in the midst of
the flames, sung again, and so yielded up his spirit into the Hands of God,
rejoicing. On the 28th of the same month in the same place, one Patrick
Packington, condemned by Bonner, was burnt; being urged to recant, he told them
no: their Church was the Church of Satan, and he would never turn to it. At the
same time, one John Newman was Condemned by Bonner, and burnt at Saffron
Walden, for that he argued against the bodily presence of Christ in the
Sacrament; they told him, tho he could not see it with his bodily eyes, yet it
was there under the forms of Bread and wine, and that the Bread and Wine was
only a Quality or Accident; to whom the Martyr replied that if they could show
him a Quality or Accident without a Subs^^nce, h^ would believe them, not else;
Besides, he used this Argument so them: That if the Body of Christ were really
and Bodily in the Sacrament, then whosoever received the Sacrament received
also the Body: But the wicked receiving the Sacrament, receive not the Body of
Christ: Therefore, the Body of Christ is not really in the Sacrament. Tho they
knew not how to answer this, they knew how to burn him for his opinion, which
they did, endeavoring to convince him with Fire and faggot This man was a
Pewterer by trade. Much about the same time one Richard Hook was burnt at
Chichester in Sassex for the same cause.

About the latter end of August Six more whose names were, William Coker,
Wi^^iam Hopper, Henry Lawrence, Richard Collier, Richard Wright and William
Steer were all burnt together in one fire at Canterbury for the Gospels sake by
the Papists unmercifull Tyranny.

Elizabeth Warren Widow, and others Martyred.
Toward the latter end of A gust, also Elizabeth Warren, the widow of John
Warren the Upholster, who was Martyred before, was burnt at Stratford Bow,
being persecuted by her Kinsman Dr. Story; who was so Zealous as not to spare
his own kindred, for the cause of the Popish Church. The chief Article against
her was, that of the real presence, which she Constantly denied; for being
urged to recant, she told them she never would, do what they could, for (said
she) If Christ be in an error then I am in an error; upon ^h^ch she was
Condemned and suffered as above said.

George Tankerfeild and Robert Smith Martyrs.
On the 26th of August one George Tankerfeild a Cook, suffered at St. Albans,
in a Green called Romeland, near to the Abbey there. All the days of King Edward
he had been a strict Papist, but when he perceived their bloody Cruelties in
the days of Queen Mary, it made him begin to doubt of their Religion, as not
agreeing with the Doctrine of Christ; upon this he began to read the Testament,
and prayed earnestly to God to open to him the Truth, that he might be thoroughly
persuaded, whether it was of God or no; and if it was not, that he might
utterly abhor it in his Heart. God heard his prayer, and he found day^y a
working in him more and more, which made him to detest and abhor the Religion
he had so long ^mbraced, and the Lord inlightning his mind, he went no more to
mass: after which being si^k and l^me, he could not but openly profess his
Religion, and declare his mind, for which he was had before the bloody Bishop
Bonner, and several times examined, and as usual, when before Condemnation he
was urged to Recant, he boldly told the Bishop, that he would never forsake his
opinions, unless he could refell them by Scripture, for (said he) you Condemn
all men, and prove nothing against them. Upon which sentence was read against
him, and he was delivered over to the secular power. When he was brought to the
Town of St. Aloans from London, being kept at an Inn there, he caused a fire to
be made in his Chamber, and putting his bare foot to it, he was forced to
withdraw it through the Smart; upon which he said, The flesh would persuade him
one way, and the Spirit another. The flesh said, O fool will thou burn when
thou need not? But the Spirit said, be not afraid, for it was nothing in
respect of fire Eternal. The flesh said, leave not thy Friends who love thee:
But the Spirit said, The company of Jesus Christ exceeds all fleshly Friends,
with the like discourse more at large on this subject; but at last the Spirit
got the Victory, and he went joyfully and with great Resolution to his Death,
and when he was at the stake, and the Faggots placed about him, a Priest would
have persuaded him to believe in the Sacrament of the Altar, upon whiah he
vehemently cried out, I defy the Whore of Babylon, that most abominable Idol.
Then the Mayor bid them to set fire to him, saying if he had but one load of
Faggots in the World, he would give it to burn the Heretic, Fire being put to
him, he desired the people to pray for him, and so embracing the fire he bathed
his Arms in it calling on the name of Jesus till he was out of his pain.

In the same Month, at Vxbridge, suffered Mr. Robert Smith, who had been a
servant belonging to Sr. Thomas Smith, and a Clerk at Windsor, but was in the
second year of the Queen imprisoned for his Opinions, and with several other
kept long in durance. At last he was several times had before Bonner, who
finding he could not prevert him, condemned him to the Fire. When he came to
the stake, he spoke to the People, endeavoring to comfort the People who
bewailed him, willing them to think well of his cause, and not to doubt, but
that his body dying in that quarrel, should rise again to Life. And, said He, I
doubt not but God will show you some sign thereof. And it happened to the great
Confirmation of the people, that after he was almost half burnt, and that his
Body was as black as a Coal, and drawn together in a lump, all men thinking
that, he had been dead, suddenly he rose upright before the people, and lifting
up the burning Stumps of his Arms, and Clapping them together, did as it were
declare to them the rejoicing of his Heart, then bending down again, and
hanging over the flames, he slept in the Lord, and so ended his Mortal Life.

Much about the same time, two more were Martyrd, being Condemned with the
above mentioned Martyr, by the bloody Butcher of Gods people Bonner, the one
was named Stephen Harwood, who suffered at Stratford, the other Thomas Fust who
was burnt at Ware. In the same month also suffered another of their Companions,
named William Hale who was burnt at Barnet, where he Constantly sealed his
Faith with his Blood. There were at the same time 3 more Condemned to be burnt,
viz: George King, Thomas Leys, and Joon Wade, but these were so Cruelly handled
in the prison of the Lollards Tower, belonging to the Bishop, that they dyed
before they could be executed, and were buried by night in the field. The like
was done to one William Andrew a Carpenter, who dying in Newgate was cast out
in the fields like a dog, till some Charitable People buried him.

Mr. Samuel, a Minister, Martyr.
The next whom we shall mention in this brief Martyrology, is one Mr. Robert
Samuel, a godly and zealous Preacher, and Minister of Gods word at Barfold in
suffolk, where he faithfully taught his flock all the days of King Edward, but
upon the setting up of Popery, he was put out of his Benefice, as many more
godly Ministers were, and that because he would not put away his wife, and
conform to the Romish Superstition; however not giving over his care of his
flock, he preached to them, and taught them privately and by stealth, till he
was laid hold on, and clapped into Ipswich Jail, but he did not long Continue
there, before he was removed to Norwich, under the power of the most cruel and
persecuting Bishop of that See, who had no mercy. Thinking by Cruelty to
prevail upon this good man, they used him when in their Clurches most
inhumanely and Barbarously, for they chained him bolt upright against a post,
so that he could not lie down, and so that his toes could but just touch the
ground, and in this manner they kept him a long time, allowing him but one bit
of Bread and 3 Spoonfulls of water to maintain his Life, for further torment,
so that his Stomach was clung together for lack of food, and he could have eat
his own flesh. Being thus tormented, and still continuing constant, to the
admiration of his Tormentors, he endured with great patience extreme pains, and
almost intolerable torments. O worthy Constancy of the Martyr! and O pittiless
hearts of the Papists, whose hearts were made of Adamant and would not be moved
to relen! When he had been thus tormented several days, he fell into a slumber,
and he beheld one standing by him, clad all in white, who said to him; Samuel,
Sam^el, be of good cheer, take heart, for after this day thou shall never be
either hung. (...) thirsty. Which proved true, for from that time as he
declared himself, he never felt the least hunger or thirst, which continued
till he was Martyred which was not long after; and it was said by diverse that
beheld him burnt, that his Body, when in the flames, did shine as bright as new
tried Silver, to the great amazement of the beholders. He suffered on the 31th
day of August Anno 1555.

About the beginning of September following, one William Allyn a laboring man,
but very upright and honest, and of an unblemished reputation, was Martyred at
Walsingham, for denying to fall down before the Cross, and to follow in
procession when he went to the Fire. By reason of his former upright
coversation, he was suffered to go untyed, and when he came to suffer, and the
chain was fastened about him, he showed such constancy that he stood quietly
without the le^st noise or shrinking till he dyed.

Roger Coo and Thomas Cob Martyrs.
In the same Month of September, Roger Coo of Milford in Suffolk Sheerman, was
brought into trouble, and brought before the Bishop, who had a long dispute
with this poor man, among other his discourses, he asked him if he would not
obey the Kings and Queens Laws? To which he replied, as far as they were
agreeable to the word of God he would. Whether they agree with the word of God,
or not (said the Bishop) we are bound to obey them, if the King were an
Infidel. Mark the large Conscience of this Popish Bishop. To which this honest
Martyr rep^y'd If Shadrac Mesac and Abednego had so done, Neb^chadnezzar had
never confessed the living God. But in the end, after many troubles and
afflictions, he was Condemned, and suffered at Yexford in Suffolk where being
very aged, this blessed Martyr ended his days. The same month, was burnt in the
Town of Thetford, one Thomas Cob, a Butcher, being condemned to the fire by the
Bishop of Norwich, his bloody Chancellor Dunnings.

In the same Month also at Canterbury about the 6th day five persons were burnt
in one fire, their names were, George Catmir, Robert Streater, Anthony Burward,
George Brodbridge and James Tutt^, Condemned by the Bishop of Dover upon the
Ar^icles of the Sacrament.

It will be too tedious to give you the relation of all that suffered, for now
bonfires were made of man's flesh, by these Tyrannous Papists almost through out
England, but fell more or less in those places, where the Bishops were more or
less merciful or tyrannical, and we find the chief persecution and havoc to be
made in London, and the Counties about it, as Essex, Northfolk, Suffolk, Kent,
Surry, and the like: yet in other places we find several Martyred: for about
the midst of this month, Thomas Hayward and John Goreway were Condemned, and
burnt at the Town of Litchfield.

Robert Glover and Cornelius Bongey Martyrs.
On the 20th of September, two blessed Martyrs, to wit, Robert Glover and
Cornelius Bongey, were burnt at Coventry. Robert Glover was the Son of a
Gentleman of good estate, whose elder Brother John Glover lived in Coventry,
and was one who professed the Gospel, for which the Bishop of that Di^c^ss sent
to apprehend him, but the Major being his friend, gave him timely notice of it,
so that with another Brother, he made his escape, leaving R^bert in his Chamber
who by reason of a long sickness was not able to go out of it, or scarce from
his Bed, yet these Papistical Catch-poles, full of all manner of cruelty, not
finding the prey they looked for, violently haled this Martyr out of the House,
and carried him before the Sheriffs, who knowing he was not the person
nominated in the warrant, would have dismissed him, but the Bishops
Catch-poles, would, right or wrong, though in a very weak condition, have him
before the Bishop which they did, who examining him, and finding that he also
held the same opinions with his Brother, and also learnedly disputed the same
with the Bishop, being a Master of Arts of the University of Cambridge, he was
sent to prison (mark the Bishops Charity) and put into a Cold place next the
Dungeon in Lichfeild, without bed, only a pad of straw to lie on, which in his
condition, was enough to have killed him; had not God in his great mercy
supported him. From thence he was had to Coventry, where he was kept in prison
strictly, without letting his relations come at him, and without Pen, Ink and
Paper, or any Books, but a Latin Testament and Prayer book he had about him
unknown to them: After he was condemned, and the writ for his burning came
down, he found himself very heavy and lumpish, at which being troubled, he
complained to a friend, n^med Austin, fearing that God had forsaken him. His
friend bid him to wait the Lord's pleasure which he did, fervently praying that
God would send him comfort, yet he Continued heavy, pensive, and without
alacrity, tho not distrusting, till the day he went to be burnt, and he was no
sooner in sight of the Stake, but he was suddenly replenished with the power
and Love of God, feeling such comfortable and heavenly Joys, that he Clapped his
hands together, crying out, O Austin Austin, He is come, he is come, with such
joy as if he had escaped some eminent danger, rather than going to dye, such
was the wonderful change of this good man. With him was Burned Cornelius Bongey
a Capper of Coventry condemned by the same Bishop, and both patiently dye I
together praising the Lord. As for John and William the other Brothers, who
fled, they both not long after dyed, the latter in Shropshire; the Former some
where in the Country near Coventry, being often sought for; so that by lying in
the woods he caught cold and an Ague which killed him, he was privately interred
in a Churchyard, without Parson or Clark, but it coming to the Ears of the
Bishops Chancellor he sent a Command to the Parson, to have him taken up and
his body to be thrown into the high way, the Parson returned answer, that the
body was by this time putrified and stunk, that none could come near it: he
then sent word, that he should lie for a year, and that then his bones should
be dug up and thrown into the high way, for horses to trample on them, and that
then he would come and hallow the Church yard. Williams body lay two days and
a night without burial, being cast out in the fields, till some Charitable
people buried it by night in a broom field. several others they served after
the same manner, and taking up the bones of others, not letting them rest quiet
in their Graves.

On the 9th of October following, were condemned, and on the 16th burnt at Ely,
two more, the one named R^b. Pigot a painter, the other W^^liam Wolsey both of
Wishbich These two tho burnt together, were of different tempers, the former
was meek, gentle and humble, saying often to his adversaries, he would yield to
them if they could convince him by the Scriptures, but he could not do any
thing against his Conscience, the other was bold, stout, and vehement,
detesting their doings, and showing a great aversion of Spirit against them,
knowing he should receive nothing from them but Cruelty, unless he would prove
an Idolater like them, and forsake Christ and his Gospel. He was therefore much
afraid of his companion, seeing him so meek and humble, lest he should yield to
their persuasions, but he held out with great Constancy. Wolsey had so great a
desire to the Crown of Martyrdom, that being sick in prison, he was so afraid
of dying, that he was extremely troubled, being overjoyed when the day of his
execution came, which he called his Glad day. When they were at the Stake, they
sung 106 psalm, and so joyfully received their Martyrdom with great Constancy
praising God.

On the very same Day, Month, and year, in which the last mentioned two Martyrs
were burnt, vi^ the 16th of O^tober, 1555. suffered at Oxford thos^ two great
pillars and lights of the Protestant Church and true proof sors of Christ's holy
Gospel, Doctor Nicholas Ridly Bishop of London, and the ever famous Mr Hugh
Latimer, of whose disputing and Condemnation at Oxford, together with the
Archbishop of Canterburtes, Doctor Cranmer, their fellow sufferer, we have
already spoken, but here we shall as briefly as we can, give you the History o^
their Lives and Martyrdom.

The History of Bishop Ridly Martyr.
Doctor Ridly, descended from a right worshipf^^ stock in Northamptonshire, was
brought up at Schoo^^ and thence translated to the Universi^y of Cambridg^
where he extremely profited in his Studies, being one of great memory, acute
wit, and profoun^ Judgment, so that he attained to great Learning and became
famous becoming head of Pembroc^^ H^ll, where he commenced Doctor in Divinity.
After this he traveled to Paris, and at his retur^ was made Chaplain to King
Hen. 8th, and afterward promoted to the Bishopric of R^chester, and from
thence in King Edward's days, was translated to the sea of London, where he
Continued preaching and teaching the true and wholesome Doctrine of Christ to his
flock, except hindered by extraordinary occasions; most Holy days and Sundays he
preached some where or other in his Diocese, the people every where swarming
after him like Bees, so sweet was his eloquence. But he not only taught
diligently but also lived holily, teaching them as well by his Life as
Doctrine. He was a straight upright man, both in Body and Mind, of an handsome
m^ke, and good Complexion, gentle and meek to all men, and a lover of his
Relations. He bore malice to none, and was apt to forgive Injuries. He loved
and cherished Goodness where ever he found it, and hated evil tho in his
nearest Kindred. He was very Conversant in prayer and meditation in his
greatest prosperity, for as soon as his Clothes were on he prayed by his bed
side on his Knees, for half an ^our, and thence he went to his Study, where he
Continued till 9 of the Clock, and from thence he came to the Common prayers
read in his Family before Dinner, and this he daily Continued. His ^able was
free but chaste, all discourses there being grave and edifyint; after dinner he
sometimes played at Chess, and unless business called him abroad, ^e went again
to his Study till 5 of the clo^k, when ^e again went to prayers with his
family. After supper he would recreate himself for an hours space, and then
retire again to his Study; where he continued till 11 of the Clock at night,
the usual time of his going to Bed, which he never did, without praying to God
on his Knees by his bedside as in the Morning. And that we may see the
diffe^erce between a good and an evil Bishop, or between this man and Bonner,
and to show the latters wicked ingratitude, we shall mention how kind Bishop
Ridly had been to Bonners Relations, cherishing his Mother and sister as if
they had been his own For all the time he was at Fulham, he never would sit
down, till he had sent for his Mother Bonner, (as he called her) being Bishop
Bonners own Mother, and dwelling in the Town, and when come, allways placed her
at the upper end of the Table, let what persons of quality soever dine with
him, and would make an excuse and say, that was his Mother Bonners place, and
would seat her there, giving her the same respect as if she had been his own
mother, and that he had been born of her Body; the like he did by one Mrs.
Bungie Bonners own Sister, whom he cherished as if she had been his own: yet
the ungrateful Butcher Bonner, when he was restored to his Bishopric, by Queen
Mary, proved the bloody persecutor of this good Man to death, and not only of
him, but dealt cruelly and unjustly by all his Relations, extorting from them
all that they had, and had not some stood between, he had taken away the Life
of Bishop Ridleys own sisters husband: such difference is there between a good
Bishop according to the Gospel, and an evil persecuteing papistical Bishop
according to the Popes Doctrine.

The first occasion of this good Bishops conversion to the truth, was by
reading of Bertrams book of the Sacrament, and by his conferring with Doctor
Cranmer and Peter Martyr, who confirmed him, and in which he continued to his
Death, and sealed with his blood. You have already heard how this Bishop
together with Dr. Cranmer and Mr. Latimer, were condemned at Oxford, after
their several learned disputes there, with the Papistical Doctors, where they
were kept prisoners in several places, till they came to dye, Dr. Ridley and
Mr. Latimer being burnt in one fire, as we shall relate; only first a word or
two of the education of this good man Mr. Hugh Latimer.

The History of Mr. Latimer Martyr
This champion of Christ's cause, was the Sun of Hugh Latimer of Thirkesson in
the County of Leicester, an husbandman of good repute, being his only Son, he
bred him at School, and being very prompt at 14 years of Age he was sent to the
University of Cambridg, where he gave himself to the Study of Divity. Being
made a priest, he was a most zealous observer of all the Popish superstition,
believing if be were a Friar he should never be damned, with other
superstitious fantasies, observing servilly all the Popish decrees, and in his
blind zeal a great enemy to to the professors of the Gospel; thus he continued
till it pleased God to convert him to himself, by the means of Mr. Bilney, whom
we have spoken of. After he was converted he soon left his old manner of Life,
and began publicly to own and preach the Gospel, for which he was for a time
silenced by the Bishop of Ely, but getting a License,, he continued there for 3
years teaching and preaching both publicly and privately, and with that
applause and power, that his very enemies could not but admire him, for the
Bishop himself one day coming in and hearing him, was compelled to commend him,
wishing that he had the lik^ Gi^. At last he was cited before the Cardi^al, and
accu^ed by his Adversaries, by several Articles, about the worshipping of
Saints, which be dery'd, and praying to the Virgin Mary; Purgatory, and several
other Popish tenants, for which be endured great troubles and persecutions by
the B sh^^s of London and Canterbury, Tokesly and W^^ham, about the year 1531.
And he had then hardly escaped their Clutches, but by the favor of ^^e King,
by the means of Dr. Butts the Kin^^ Physician who rescued him from the hands of
his enemies, and by the assistance of Cromwell, advanced him to the B^shoprick
of Worcester. Where be continued ^^m^ f^w years, ^nstructing his Diocese, like
a good B shop* and a diligent and faithful Pastor where he likewise endured
several troubles, etc. persecu^ions, be^^g brought before the King by his
Adv^rs^ries, who thought to have put him into the Tower, but the King
perceiving the Integrity of this good man, his heart relented, and he dismissed
Mr. La^tme^ to the grief of his enemies, But being pressed hard upon the 6
Articles, not being able to do any thing against his Conscience, he of his own
voluntary mind resigned up his Bishopric; and when among his friends, putting
off his Rochet, he thanked God he put off so heavy a burden. However he could
not be free from troubles, which his Popish Adversaries followed him with
though he kept silence till the Reign of the blessed King Edward: All whose
days be preached constantly twice every Sunday, and often before the King who
was delighted with him, though he was very aged, being above threescore. He was
a Prophet, and foretold the persecution that followed after, saying he knew he
should be put to Death for preaching the Gospel and that Gardner was reserved
in the Tower for that purpose, as it proved; For he was no sooner released by
Queen Mary, but he sent a Pursivant for this good Bishop, who having notice of
it, refused to fly, but had prepared himself for his Journey to London against
the Pursivant came who wondering at it, he said to the Messenger my Friend, you
are welcome to me, and I go as willingly with you to London, being called
thither by my Prince to render an account of my Doctrine, as ever I was to go
to any place in my Life, and doubt not as God has enabled me to preach his word
to two excellent Princes, so he will enable me to witness the same unto the
Third. After which the Pursivant departed, and left him to go by himself, or to
have departed the land, which his enemies would have been glad of, fearing his
stoutness and constancy should do them more hurt, than his Death would do them
good, as no doubt it did. Coming up to London, and riding through Smithfield, he
said smilingly that Smithfield had long groaned for him, and now he was come.
After he had been before the Council, he was sent to the Tower, where he was
kept very strictly, and it being winter and very cold and frosty, was kept
without any fire by which means the good old man was almost starved to Death
with cold which made him say to his Keeper, that he should tell his Master the
Lieutenant, that if he did not look better to him he should shortly deceive
him, upon which the Lieutenant put more Guards upon him, and came to demand of
him the reason of his words, Indeed said Mr. Latimer, you expect that I should
be burnt, but except you let me have some fire I am like to deceive your
expectation, and die of cold. Afterward he was with Bishop Ridley and
Archbishop Cranmer had to Oxford, to dispute with the Popish Doctors there, as
you have heard, and where they were all condemned to the fire, the best way
they had of confuting them. But it was observed, that appearing before the
Commissioners, that when all of them upon reading the Commission, at the naming
of the Cardinal as Legate a Latere from his Holiness the Pope, they all put off
their Caps, Bishop Ridley who stood uncovered before, put on his Cap, as not
owning the Popes supremacy; and being chid for so doing as a contempt to the
court, he told them he honored them as the Q. Commissioners, but should never
acknowledge the Popes supremacy; upon which they caused his C^p to be taken off
his head, which he suffered. And when they came to have him d^graded, ^f er
their superstit^o^s manner, he would by no means yield to it, so that they were
fain by mere force to put on the Popish Trinkets, and to perform their A^^sh
ceremonies of degradation against his will be all the time vehemen^ly enveying
against them, insomuch that some would have had him gagged, to have made him
Silent.

After they had thus degr^ded him, the night before he was to suffer, he washed
his feet and L^gs and shaved his B^ard, and appeared to his Friends so
unconcerned, that they had never s^en him merrier in all his life, inviting
them to his marriage the next d^y, and desired his Brother-in-law and his
Sister to be there, and when his Brother ^ster'd to W^tch with him that nigh^,
^e would not suffer him, telling him he intended to sleep as quietly that night
as he ^ad done in any of his Life, which he did, and that tho in the morning he
should have a sharp breakf^st yet he was sure of a pleasant and sweet supper.
On the Northside of the Town, in the D^ch over against ^a^el Co^ledy, the place
for their ex^cution was appointed. Mr. Lat^mer all ^igh^ was earnest with God
in prayer, to whom he made 3 requests, which were heard and granted: The ^^t
was, That as God had made him a preacher of his word, so that he would give him
strength to seal it with his death, and with his h^^r^s blood; and it so came
to pass, that he showed a^mi^able const^ncy, and the fire opening his breast
near his heart, the Blood was seen to gush out in such abundance, running down
his body into the fire, as if all the Blood in his body had been gathered to
that pl^ce. The second request was, that God would restore the Gospel to
England, which also came to pass: And the Third was, that he would perserve the
Life of the princess Elizabeth, from the Malice of her soes, that she might be
the glorious Instrument of the Gospels restoration: which also came to pass.
As they passed through the streets, a world of people crouding to see them, for
fear of any tumu^^ the L. Williams was Commissionated to see the execution
performed, Doctor Ridly went in a black Gown furred and faced with faines, such
as he was wont to wear when a Bishop, and a Velvet Tipper furred about his
neck, a Velvet Cap upon his head, and a corner Cap upon the same, going in his
sl^ppers and led between the Mayor and an Alderman. After him came Mr. Latimer,
in a poor old worn out Bristow frize frock, with a Keirchief about his head,
and on it an old burton'd Cap with a new shroud under his Coat, that hung down
to his feet, being ready for the fire, so that many wept to see him so poorly
clad, who lived so well, and had been a Bishop. When Dr. Ridly saw him coming
after him, O are you there, said he: yes said Mr. Latimer, I am coming after
you as fast as I Can. When they both came to the stake Bishop Ridly holding up
both his hands and looking toward heaven prayed, and seeing Mr. Latimer come,
he ran to him and embraced him and Kissed him saying, Be of good heart Brother,
for God will either assuage the fury of the Flame, or else stre^gthen us to
abide it. With that he Kneeled down at the Stake Kissing it, and then fell to
prayer, and Mr. Latimer behind him, both earnestly calling upon God. After they
arose, and talked a little while together, when Dr. Smith who in King Ed. days
had renounced Popery, now embracing it, preached to the people on this Text,
Tho I give my Body to be burnt etc. inveighing very much against the opinions
of the Lutherans: after he had done, both Dr. Ridly and Mr. Latimer had a
desire to have replied to what he had said, but as soon as they began to open
their mouths, some ran to them and stopped them, telling them, unless they would
recant, they should not be suffered to speak. Gods will be done, then said
Bishop Ridly, but so long as I have breath in my body, I will never deny my
Lord Christ, and his known truth. Then he said with a loud voice: I Commit our
cause to Almighty God who will indifferently Judge all. Then Mr. Latimer said,
what is hid shall be revealed. They were then Commanded to make themselves
ready, which they did, and were both Chained to the Stake, and Dr. Rilleys
brother-in-law brought each a Bag of Gunpowder to tie about them, which they
accepted of as sent them from God. Dr. Ridley stripped himself and gave away
his things among his friends, there being great striving to have some
remembrance from this good Man: but Mr. Latimer suffered himself to be stripped
by the officers, having nothing worth bestowing. Dr. Ridly being now at the
stake prayed saying; holding up both his hands: O heavenly Father I give thee
most hearty thanks, for that thou have called me to be a professor of thee,
even unto Death. I beseech the O Lord have mercy upon this Realm of England,
and deliver the same from all her Enemies. Then he made a Request to the Lord
Williams, to entreat the Queen to be good to several poor people, to whom he
had let Leases, that they might enjoy them; which he promised to do, but
Bishop Bonner like a wretch took them all from them. Then fire was put to them,
when Mr. Latimer said be of good comfort Mr. Ridly, and play the Man, we shall
this day light such a Candle by God's Grace in England, as I trust shall never
be put out. Dr. Ridly when he saw the flame approach him, he cried out, In
manus tuas Domine commendo Spiritum meum: Domine recipe Spiritum meum, that is,
Into thy hands O Lord I commend my Spirit: O Lord receive my Spirit, which
latter part he often repeated in English, Mr. Latimer crying as vehemently on
the other side, O Father of Heaven receive my Soul. Who receiving the flame as
it were embracing it, soon dyed, with little or no Pain. But Bishop Ridly by
reason of the fire being ill made, endured great torment, having all his lower
parts burnt, before his upper were touched, so that he was heard to cry to them
often, for the Lords sake to put the fire to him, I cannot burn, and then
crying out, Lord have mercy upon me, he Continued a long time, and all one side
of him remained untouched, till a^^^^st t^^ G^^^owe^cr ^^^k fir^, after which
he w^^ (...) se^n to move ^y more. And this was the e^^^^th s^^ two ^oly
Martyrs, and Blessed Bishops, for the Gospel of Christ's sake, by the hands of
persecuting Papisis, and by the Religion ^hen established by Law. The Death of
p^^se^^ting Gardner.

Wit in a w^ilt af^^r, the B oody persecuting P^^l^^ Steph^^ G^^d^^ dyed, for
that day, the last mentioned M^rty^s were put to death, tho the Duke of No
^^hfolk and other persons of Quality came to dine with him, he would not go to
d^nner till 3 or 4 of the Clock, expecting to hear of the Death of these w^m^n,
and ass^on as his man ri^^^g post had br^^ght him word of it, he began to be
merry, and sat down to dinner, but was emmediately struck with the hand of God,
the first but ^e put unto his mouth, being carried from the Table, Continuing
for ^5 days in great Torments, nor being able to evacuate Nature any way, and
his Tongue (that had so often blaspher^ed God) swollen, and black, lolling out
of his mouth till he dyed.

Tho he we^e dead yet persecution Continued and the Devil found Instruments to
do his Work. For in the Month of November three flour Champions of Jesus Christ
suffered in one Fire in Canterbury viz J^hn w^bb Gentleman, George Ro^er and
G^egory Park, being all condemned to the fire by the Bishop of Dover and
Nic^o^as Harspfield. As they went to the pl^ce of their Martyrdom they sung
Psalms; two of them were will stri^ken in years but R^per was a younger man, of
a fresh Complexion, going all ^ith whi e Linen and their gowns upon it* They
all shew^d great Constancy but R^per especially who coming to the place le^ped
for Joy, and when fi^e wa^ put to him he streatched out both his A^ms into ^^e
^l^mes standing like a Cross unmevable, and so continued never stirring them
till they were both burnt ^ff and afterward his Body to Ashes. Several dyed in
Prison in the ^^llards Tower through the b^ ^^arity of the Papists, and were
Cast into t he open fields for dogs and swine to tear with command that none
(...) him, yet by night some were ^ound to be ^o C^^^table as to fling Eart^
over them.

Archdeacon Philpot burnt in Smithfield.
The next (...) m^^t^^^ W^^ ^^ought to the st^ke, by th^se blood s^^k^^^, w^ Mr
J^^^^ (...) Archdeacon ^f Winc^^^^* ^^e w^^ the (...) Gent^ema^ ^f (...) go^d
f^^m^ly, in (...) brought up in N^^^ Co^^cag^ in Ox^^^^, (...) died the Civil
^^ws, 6 or 7 yea^s w^^ (...) ^^ral Arts (...) ^^ence, and ^sp^^^ly (...) in
which he profite^, and more (...) Hebrew: He was of a pre^an^ ^^^t, (...) and
resolution, fervent in Religion, ^ree from (...) ^^^tery and hypocrisy, and
hated ^^ssi^^ulati^n F^^m Oxford he went to travel, to improve himself, going
through Italy, and other parts where he increa^^d his knowledge, and lost nor (as
many do) good m nners, and Love to God. Returning into England, he was made
Arc^d^acon of Winchester in King Edw^rds days, under the Bishop Dr. Poinet, who
had succeeded Gardner. But after that Queen Mary came in, and caused a
Convocation of Prelates to Assemble about Religion, this good man believing
they might there speak freely, he manfully maintained the cause of the Gospel
against all its Adversaries; for which he was afterward ^^p^^ioned, and after
a twelve months time or more, w s had to be examined before Bishop Gardner, and
afterward before Bonner, and other Commissioners, which examinations, and his
s^lid and leart^ed An^^ers, may be read at large in Mr. Fox's Martyrologie. He
was carried to the Bishop of Lond^^'s Colehouse, where he was k^pt, and sh wed
the Stocks there, which were made for me^ and Legs, and hands, to torment poor
men with, to bring them to their bent, and through excessive torment and
hardship to make them ^^o^nt against their Consciences. After this blessed
Martyr had been convented before the Popish Bishops 14 times, and they saw they
were neither abl^ to pervert or confute him, Bishop Bonner read the sentence of
Death against him, condemning him upon 3 Articles. The first, that he was
fallen from the C^tholick Church. The 2d That he had most Blasphemously spoken
against the Mass and called it Idolatry. 3d. That he had denied the real
presence of Christ's Body and blood to be in the S^crament. After which they
pronounced him an Heretic. to whom Mr, Philpot replied I thank God that I am
an Heretic out of your cursed Church, But I am none before God. God bless you
and make you repent of your cursed doings, and let all men beware of your
bloody Church. After this he was had to Newgate, where the cruel Keeper loaded
him with Irons, till one of the Sheriffs being made acquainted with it, sent
his Ring off his finger to the Jailer, to take them off. He was not long there,
but he had notice to prepare himself the next day to dye, which he Cheerfully
received, spending his time in prayers. In the Morning about 8 of the Clock,
the Sheriffs came for him, who came to them with a Joyful counteuance, and was
led to the place of execution in Smithfield; when he came to the stake he
kneeled down saying these words, I will pay my vows in thee, O Smithfield;
After he had kissed the stake, shall I disdain (said he) to suffer at this
Stake, seeing my Redemer did not refuse to suffer a most vile Death upon the
Cross for me? Then he said the 106, 107 and 108 Psalms, and when he had done
praying, he gave money to the Officers, and so was bound to the stake, and fire
was soon set to him, and in the midst of those fiery flames he yielded his soul
into the hands of Almighty God, like a Lamb without struggling. And this was the
end of this holy man, on the 18th day of December 1555.

Seven Martyrs burnt together.
The fires rather increase than diminish, and there is no satisfying these
Popish Canibals, with the humane flesh of Dissenters; And which they long to be
at again, but we hope God has more mercy to poor England, and hi^ flock there.
We are now come to the year 1556, and they begin it with the burning of no less
than 7 Martyrs in one fire in Smithfield, on the 27th of January, their Names
were Thomas Whittle a Priest, Bartlet Green a Gentleman, John Tudson an
Artificer, Job. Went, Tho. Brown, Isabel Forster a wise, and Joan W^rren alias
Lashford a maid. These, as they were burnt together so were they all condemned
together. But we shall mention something of them particularly, though as
briefly as we can, First Whittle being a Priest was turned out for owning the
Gospel, yet he would privately preach sometimes, but it was not long before he
was brought before Bonner, who finding his Answers not suting his proud stomach
he buffered the poor man about the face, head and neck, the marks, of this
Bishops fists remaining in his flesh several days. He was then sent to the
Colehouse, and put into the stocks and so tormented, that for ease he
subscribed a Recantation, that was brought him; but after he had done it, and
was released, he found such an Hell in his Conscience, that it gave him ten
times more pains than ever he had suffered: so that he could have no peace till
he had got the bill of Recantation out of their hands, though he knew Death
would follow upon it. But he had no sooner freed himself of the snare, but he
found peace and Joy within, and being condemned, went cheerfully with the rest
to the fire, and sealed his Religion with his blood.

Mr. Bartles Green was the son of a Gentleman, and bred up in the Romish
Religion in Oxford, where he was at length Converted by hearing the Divinity
Lectures of Peter Martyr, and though he was removed to the Temple to study the
Laws, yet he would not leave his practice of reading and studying the
Scriptures, and of divinity, but daily increased therein, till it was at last
known, and then he had many temptations to return to the Romish Religion, and
great proffers made him of preferment, but God was pleased to keep him, that he
abode in the faith and like a good Champion fought the good fight of Faith, and
gave his Testimony to the Truth of the Gospel with his blood.

T^omas Br^wn lived in the Parish of S^. B^^d^^ in F ee^^i^^er, being presented
for not going to Mass, upon which Bo^^er took him to task but this Layman so
handl^d the Bishop with his Answers, that s^e^^g he could not b^^t ^im with
Reason or Scriptu^^, the other being too hard for him, he f^d t^ his sword of
Cutting off the Heretic, and so condemned him to the fire, with t^^ rest,
where he manfully suffered with them.

J h^^^dson was ^n Apprentise in London, in the Parish of St. (...) B^t^^^, in
the Dioc^ss (...) London, he being com^l^i^e^ of for an Heretic, was sent to
the Bishop, w^^ ex^mined him upon the Articles of the Sacrament, which he
owned, not being unwilling to Confess his faith, for which he was soon
cond^mned and suff^red with the rest.

In like manner, upon the same Article, in not ye^^ling to own the bodily
presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, John W^nt was also Condemned:
He was a Shecr nan by trade, an^ of the Diocese of London, and stoutly owned
his Faith, before the Bishop, who urgeing him often to recant and s^ve his
Life, he replied: That ^e never would, but by Gods leave, he would stand s^m
and Constant to what he had declared, being only the Truth, and no other answer
would he give; upon which being condemned he was committed to the Sheriffs, and
with no less Constancy than the rest suffered the fire.

With these five men were condemned also two women, the first was wife unto
John F^ster Cu^ler in Flee^street, her name Is^bel, who b^ing had before the
Bishop for not coming to Mass, the freely acknowledged her Faith, and was
sundry times examined and urged by the Bishop to recant, and to return to the
Catholic Church; to wh^^ she replied, that she would not by Gods grace go
from what she had professed, and that she acknowledged her self of the
Catholic, tho not Romish, Church, being never ^ut of it. And when he saw no
persuasions would work her to deny the says, she was condemned and Const^ntly
suffered with the rest.

The last of these seven M^rtyrs, was Jo^n ^ashfor^^ being the d ng^^er ^f on^
Robert L^shford a Cutler, who dying, her Mother married John Warren an
Upholster of whose Ma^^y^dom, and also her Mothers Elizabeth Warre^ we h^^^
spoken, and now the d^ughter was also bro^ght to the Stake; she was a maid of
about 20 years of Age, and was brought before Bonner that ^^merc^fal Butcher,
before whom she Confessed her says, and told him she could not go to Mass,
nor acknowledge the bodily presence in the Sacrament, and h^ seeing he could by
no Persuasions make her turn from her Religion, she was condemned and suffered
in the same f^^e with the rest, le^ling her faith with her blood. And thus
these 7 blessed Martyrs ended their lives, in the flames, being sent to heaven
in a fi^ry Chariot.

On the 31 of the same m^^th, and year, no less than 5 more ( viz. 4 women and
one man) suffered in one fire at Can^^^^^y: Their names were J^hn L^mns, a
young man, Ann Alb^ight, Jo^n C^^more, Ag^is S^^th a widow, and J^^n Sole a
Married wife: all of them being condemned for the same things, denying the
Popish Mass to be a Sacrament, but Idolatry, for which they all joyfully
received their Martyrdom, with ^reat constancy; when they were in the midst of
the Flames they all f^ll to singing of Psalms, to the ^reat am^^^n (...) of
their persecutors, some of them wee^ing to b^ ho^^ them.

Archbishop Cranmer Mar^^'d (...) Oxford.
In pursuance (...) this (...) view of ^^^istical persecutions, we shall ^^^e
yo^ a very ^^^^^nct Relation of the Life and (...) of that ^^st worthy and
Religious Prelate, Dr. (...), Ar^hbishop of Canterbury. who suffered for the
Gospel sake at Oxford, On the 21th of March (...). He was born in
Not^^ghamshire of a very (...) ^^mily, bred up carefully at School, and sent to
the University of Cambridg, where he profited w^ll in his Studies, and was at
last made Fellow of (...) College. When he was Master of Arts and Fellow of the
College, he married a gentleman's daughter, and so lost his Fellowship, and was
made thereupon Reader in Buckingham College. But not long after, his wife dying
in Childbed his old Companions desirous of his Company chose him again Fellow
of the College, where he grew in great repute, and Commenced Dr. in Divinity,
and was commonly appointed one of those who were to examine such as were to
take the Degrees of Batchelours or Doctors of Divinity; now he favoring the
knowledge of the Scripture, often put by such whom he found ignorant in the
History of the Scripture, which extremely enraged the Priests and Friars, many
of which Mass-mongers could not tell who was Sol^mons Father, so little were
they acquainted with the History of the Bible, studying other Authors to little
purpose. This First begat the envy of the Papists against him. He was however
chosen to be one of the Fellows of the Cardinal's new founded College at
Oxford, which he refused, not without the great indignation of that proud
Prelate. But it happened, that whilst he Continued at Cambridg, the plague raging
in the University, that he removed to a friends at Wa^tham, and the King
passing that way, some of his followers, as Gardner his secretary, and Fox his
Almoner, lying at the same house with Dr. Cranmer, whom they knew, had
accidentally some discourse of the Kings scruple of Conscience, for marrying
his Brother's wife and upon the Divorce he had sued for at Rome, and the
proceedings thereupon, which was the general Discourse at that time. Dr.
Cranmer without any design, declared his mind so to the purpose, telling them
that he thought they did not go the ready way to work, by prosecuting the Laws
Ec^lesiastical, when it had been more proper, to have (...) the point
discoursed by Divines, and the au^^ority of the Word of God, in the Scripture,
which ^^ght be better done in England, and in the Univer^, than at Rome. This
being told to the King, he caused Dr. Cranmer to be sent for to him to London,
to the Doctors great trouble, not desiring to interest himself in the business,
but the King sending his peremptory command, he was forced to obey against his
mind, and having by several discourses well satisfied the King, he commanded
him to write his mind fully on the point, and ordered the Earl of Wiltshire,
to entertain him in his house at Durham place, and to let him have Books and
what ever he wanted. Accordingly Doctor Cranmer wrote his mind fully, and
delivered it to the King, in which he showed by the Authority of the Scripture,
and of general Councels, and ancient Writers, that the Bishop of Rome, had no
such authority whereby he might dispense with the word of God and the Holy
Scripture. This opened the Kings eyes, and rejoycingly he asked the Dr. if he
durst stand by it, which he told him he would even to the Popes face at Rome,
if he would be pleased to send him thither; whereupon the King sent the
question to most of the Universities of Europe to be disputed on, and by most
it was Concluded, that no such Matrimony could be Lawful by the Word of God or
Authority of the H. Scripture. The King also sent Dr. Cranmer to dispute the
point at Bonnonie, where the Pope then was, with his Ambassador the Earl of
Wiltshire, and several other Doctors and learned men in company. When they came
before that proud Antichristian Bishop, he sat inthroned in great State, under
a Canopy, in Rich Robes and Sandals on his feet, which in a proud manner he
held out to the Earl to Kiss, but he disdaining it, stood still, but his
spaigniel by what instinct we know not, ran to his held up foot, and caught it
in his mouth so rudely and unmannerly, that the old Bishop was somewhat
afr^ghted, which made the English men smile. But after the first Complement,
the Earl told him from his Master, that he had brought with him certain learned
men, who were there ready to prove, that no man jure divino could or ought to
marry his brothers wife, and that the Bish^p of Rome, could or ought no^ to
d^spence to the Contrary. Prom^se was made that the point should be discussed,
but the old fox, after many put offs and delays, ^^ut them away without a^^^ing
so ingrareful a dispute. The E^^b^^s dot, and the rest returned home, but Dr.
C^^mer by order went to Vienna to the Emperor, to answer what the Emperors
learned Council could say against it, and he so satisfied the great and Learned
Cor^^^tus ^gr^ppa, with his reasons, that no public Disputation would be
suffered to be had; for which that learned m^n fell into the Emperors
disple^su^^. Upon his return home having done to the King such singular
service, and Archbishop W^rren then dying, the King made Dr. Cranmer Archbishop
of C^^^^bu^ in his place. Here he got the Envy of all the Popish Prelates his
enemies, for oppugning the Popes authority, but this good and worthy man showed
himself a Bishop, according to the Rule of St. Paul, answering in all respects
that of the 1 Timothy 3. and that to Titus Chap. 1. A Bishop must be faultless, as
becomes a Minister of God. N^r Stubborn, nor ^^gry, no drunkard, sighter, nor
given to filthy lucre, but Charitable, a lover of Goodness, sober minded,
righteous, temperate, cleaving to the truth, and able teach or instruct. All
this he was and that in an high degree. He studied much, riseing at 5 of the
Clock in the Morning, Continuing private till 9. from which time ^o D^nner, he
spent in hearing suitors, or minding the King Affairs. I shall not go about to
give you the history of this good man's life, which was ex^mpla^^ not of ^ll
the troubles and persecutions he in^^^ed, from his Enemies, the chief being
Gardner the Bishop of ^enchesie^, in this Kings days, who always, stood by him
and well perceived the Integrity of the Archbishop, and the implacable hatred
of his Enemies, so that in his days he was preserved in the King^ Favor, and
afterward he was dear to (...) E^^^rd, and one who assisted in the
Reformantio^ of Religion, writing his Faith in 5 books concerning the
Sacrament. But as soon as Queen Mary come to the Crown, yo^ may be sure she
would ^emember what he h^d done as to ^e^ Mothers divorce, and was indeed his
bitter Enemy, tho he was very, ^^rdly brought to subsc^ibe against her, for the
Lady Ja^^. We have ^lready told you how he was had from the Tower, with Bishop
R^^ley and L^^mer to dispute at O^ford, and the issue thereupon, that he was
condemned, and where be continu^d a prison^r about 3 years, they using all ways
an m^nner of means to cause him to recant, and sin^ing that force and
threatening would not do, they tried flattery and fair means, but he had
resisted all things, till a^ l^st, resolved they were he should be burnt, upon
which they degraded him, and tho he told, them, they being but Bishops, and ^e
their superior, they could not rightfully degrade ^im their Archbishop,
however, saying, as they were the Popes Delegates and Commissionated by the
Queen, they had power to do it, and so they use^ all their to^pish Ceremonies:
Bishop Bonner using him roughly and u^m^nnerly: All this needed not said the
Archbishop, for I had fl^ng off all this gear long ago. Then being stripped to
his Jacot, they put on him a Be^dles old gown, and a Townsmans Cap, and so
delivered ^^m over to the s^cular power. Yet for all this, being extreme
desirous to have him recant, they afresh set upon him, trying all ways to
allure him, with promise of Life, and hopes of Reward, and so importunate they
were night and day, never ceasing to solicit^ him that at last human^ frailty
appeared, and he was overcome, and they got him to sign a Recantation against
his Conscience. The Queen received it very gladly, but bearing Revenge and
malice in her heart, she nevertheless resolved he should dye, and for that End,
dispatched away Dr. Cole to preach at St. Mary's at Oxford, and to declare his
Recantation. Cranmer was now Miserable, being tormented in his Conscience for
what he had done, and too late began to perceive the Malice of his Enemies, who
thirsted for his Blood. Subtly and treacherously they dealt with him, not
giving him any notice of his death, but still put him in hopes of his Life,
urging him publicly to make his Recantation in St. Marys, for which end they
had prepared a stage in the midst of the Church; to which place they led him,
whilst Dr. Cole mounted the Pulpit, to make his Oration. The Lord Williams, and
several other Commissioners, were there, with a multitude of people, thinking
to hear the Recantation of the Archbishop. But things could not be so closely
carried, tho they kept all people from the Archbishop, that might inform him,
but he began to surmise they intended to put him to Death, and at last plainly
perceived it, when they gave him money to distribute to the poor, as he passed
through the streets to the Church. It was a lamentable spectable to the people,
to behold the Metropolitan and Primate of England. standing with his bald head,
and reverend gray beard, in an old tattered gown, on the stage, exposed to the
Contempt of all men; which sight made many weep, especially seeing the Tears
running down his Cheeks and beard: As he thus stood by a pillar, he lifted up
his eyes and hands toward heaven, and prayed privately to himself, till Dr. Cole
began his sermon, the first part being passed over, he turned his whole
discourse upon the Archbishop, exhorting him to take his Death pariently, and
to glorify God with his Conversion, from his heresy, since it had pleased.
God to reclaim him, saying that before in his prosperity he was not worthy of
Life, but now since he could not Live, he seemed unworthy of Death: But he
promised that Masses and Dirges should be said in all the Churches in Oxford
for the succor of his soul, if he continued to dye a good Catholic. Cranmer
with extreme grief of mind heard out his Sermon, showing by his Countenance the
agitation of his spirit, and when he had done and that all men expected he
should have read his recantation, he pulled out of his Bosom a writing, which
he had prepared, and began to read, Good people I beseech you all to pray to
God for me, that he may forgive me my sins, and especially one which I ^ominate
to you by and by: then Kneeling down ^e made a most excellent prayer which
being not long I shall here recite.

O Father of Heaven, O Son of God Redeemer of the World, O holy Ghost, three
Persons and one God, have mercy upon me, most wretched Catif and miserable
sinner. I have offended both against Heaven and Earth, more than my tongue can
express. Whither then may I go, or whither shall I fly? To Heaven I may be
ashamed to lift up mine eyes, and in Earth I find no place of refuge or Scucor.
To thee therefore O Lord do I run, to thee do I humble my self, saying, O Lord
my God, my sins are great, yet have mercy upon me for thy great mercy. The
great mystery that God became Man was not wrought for little or few offenses.
Thou did not give thy Son (O Heavenly Father) unto death for small sins only,
but for all the greatest sins in the world, so that the sinner return to thee
with his whole heart, as I do here at this present. Wherefore have mercy on me
O God, whose property is always to have Mercy. Have mercy upon me O Lord for
thy great mercy. I crave nothing for mine own merits, b^t for thy names sake,
that it may be hallowed thereby, and for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's sake. And
now therefore our Father, which art in Heaven hallowed be thy name etc. Then
riseing up he desired he might exhort the people, before his death, that God
might be glorified and they edified.

He then began an excellent Exhortation, pressing them to brotherly Love, and
showing the Vanity of the world, exhorting to Alms, and obedience to the Queen,
with many other excellent things, and at last He made a short Confession of his
Faith, repeating the Articles of the Creed, continuing: I believe every Article
of the Catholic Faith, every word and sentence taught by our Savior Jesus
Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, in the new and old Testament, an^ now (said
he) I am come to the great thing th t so much troubl^th my Conscience, more
than any ^oing that ever I did or said in my whole Late, and that is the
s^tti^g my hand to a writing C ntrary to Truth, which I now renounce, being
done only for fear of Death, and for as much as my hand offended against my
heart, this my hand shall be first of all punish^d for it, and ass^on as I can
come to the fire shall be first bur^t. As for the Pope, I refus^ him, as
C^ri^^s E^^my and Antichrist, with all his f ^s^ D^ctrin^. As for the Sacrament
I believe is as I have taugh^ it in my Book, against the Bish^p of Winc^ester,
which shall stand at the last d^y, before the Judgment of God, where the
Papisti^^ Doctrine Contrary thereto shall be never able to appear.

All the people being amazed, looked one upon another and all the Priests and
Friars were in an uprore, seeing their great expectation frustrated, and Cole
bellowed from the Pulpit stop the Heretic: Mouth, pull him down, pull him
down. Upon which the rabble of Priests and Friars laid hands on Cranme^, and
pulled him off the stage, and all things being prepared for his burning, in the
same place where the Martyrs, R^^ey and Lat^mer suffered, they haled and
dr^gged him thither, to which place all the co^^any r^n, yelping and hauling at
the good Archbish^p. When he came to the place he kneeled down, making but
short prayer^, seeing them so ^ager to have his Life, and putting off his
garments to his sh^rt, which hung down to his seer, which were ^^re, as
likewise his head, being thus stripped, they f^s^ned the holy Martyr to the
Stake, with a chain, and after several of them ^ad tried in vain to move him to
recant, and saw that he was steadfast, they caused fire to be set to him, into
which as soon as i^ began to burn, he thrust his right hand, which had signed
the Recantation which he h^ld therein steadfastly and unmoved, (s^eing that once
therewith being of a st^me be wipe^ his face) that all men might see his hand
was burned before his body was touched. His body abode the burning and torment
of the Flame with such Constancy and stedfastness, that he was not seen to stir
or move any more than the stake, to which he was fastened, showing to their
amazement a noble Constancy of mind, and heroic fortitude. His eyes were seen
to be lifted up toward Heaven, and he was heard oftentimes to repeat, whilst
his hand was burning, O unworthy right hand: at last in the greatest of the
flame, he gave up the Ghost, useing these his last words, O Lord Jesus receive
my Spirit. This was the end of this blessed Martyr, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop
of Canterbury, who suffered about the middle of the Reign of the Cruel Queen
Mary.

Two women burnt at Ipswich.
About the same time suffered in the Town of Ipswich in Suffolk two simple
women, ^he one named Ag^es Potten the other Joan Trunchfeild the wife of a
Shoemaker, both for that they denied the bodyly presence of Christ in the
Sacrament: they both dyed with wonderful Constancy, exhorting the people at
their death, today hold on and believe the word of God, and to despise the
ordinances of the Romish Antichrist, and after fire was set to them; they stood
holding up their hands, and calling on the name of God in the midst of the
flames, till they dyed.

In the same Month of march on the 24th day, three men were burnt in one fire
without Salisbury, in Wiltshire, for the same cause as other Martyrs before
them, for denying the Popes Supremacy, Purgatory, and that murdering Article
of the bodily presence; their names were John Mandrel an husbandman who had
long professed the truth and in King Henry 8. days had done penance. William
Coberly a Tailor, and John Spicer a free-mason, all 3 Companions both before,
and at their Deaths. They died with great fortitude, and when the Sheriff
offered them pardon if they would turn, one of them replied, not for all
Salisbury. And John Spicer said O Mr. Sheriff must you be the Butcher of these
Papists, and be made guilty of Shedding innocent blood before the Lord, Coberly
was longer in burning than the other, and when his Arms were burnt off, and his
body hung over the chain black and shrunk up, so that all thought he had been
dead, he suddenly rose up again, and then fell down and dyed.

Six men Martyred in Smithfeild.
About the 23d of April 1556. were burnt in one fire in Smithfield, no less
than 6 blessed Martyrs, two of them being Ministers, viz Robert Drakes Minister
of Tundersley in Essex, and William Times, Curate of Hookley in the same
County, This Times, upon his examination before Bonner, one of his Articles
being for denying the Popes Supremacy, told him that he owned no more than what
his Lordship had maintained in print. Where have I written any thing against
the Church of Rome? said the Bishop angrily. In your Preface replied Times to
the Chancellors Book, Stephen Gardner, which he wrote purposely against the
authority of the Romish Church, where also you in your preface inveigh against
the Bishop of Rome, reproving his Tyranny and falsehood, calling his power false
and pretended only, and this is still extant. This much abashed the Bishop, and
made him speak, more gently afterward, saying, it was done in perilous times,
and when it was death to have declared otherways, but that the Chancellor and
himself had since owned their errors, as he would now have him to do, but Mr.
Times told him that would be against his Conscience, and he would never do it,
for what he himself had wrote against the Popes Supremacy was according to the
Scriptures, and he would prove it; upon which he entered on his proofs and was
much too hard for them all in the Scriptures, but at last he was condemned,
with the rest whose names were Richard Spurge Sheerman, Thomas Spurge Fuller,
John Cavel Weaver, and George Ambrose Fuller, all of Essex, and of the Diocese
of London, and so condemned by Bonner, and suffered together in one Fire, in
Smithfeild, with the true Constancy of other holy and blessed Martyrs.

In the same Month of April, at Rochester suffered John Harpool and Joan Bench
in one fire. Also in the same month suffered at Cambridg, John Hullier a
Minister, brought up at Eaton School, and afterward Scholar and Conduct in
Kings College in Cambridge, where he at last suffered, being condemned by the
Bishop of Ely, for preaching the truth, and owning the Gospel, and disavowing
their Idolatry and Superstition.

Essex was fruitful in Martyrs, and the fires were so frequent, that we can but
just name them to you. On the 28th of April, Six were burnt together at
Colchester, being condemned to the fire by the Bishop of London, or rather
Butcher of London, Bonner, cheerfully ending their lives, to the glory of God's
name, and the great encouragement of others.

This bloody Bonner had mercy on none, all went to pot who came under his
Clutches, one Hugh Lavercock a Painter by trade, of the Parish of Barkin 68
years of Age, and a Cripple, and John Apprice a poor blind man, were both
accused to the Bishop, who sent for them to examination, which was about the
Sacrament, the bodily presence of Christ, in the same, which they denied, and
Lavercock told him that their Doctrine was contrary to the Scriptures. and the
Blind Man said, you are not of the Catholic Church, for ye make Laws to Kill
men, and then make the Queen your Hangman. This so enraged the Bishop that he
immediately caused the definitive sentence of excommunication to be pronounced
against them, and so delivered them over to the secular power to be burnt, they
were carried from the Bishop to Newgate, and on the 15. of May 1556. were both
drawn through London to Stratford le Bow: when they were come to the stake,
after they had put the Chain about them, the Cripple flung away his Crutch
merrily saying to the blind man his fellow sufferer, Be of good cheer Brother,
for my Lord of London is our good Physician, he will shortly heal us both, thee
of thy blindness, and me of my lamenest. And so patiently, fire being put to
them; these two poor men but holy Martyrs, suffered in the fire and praising
God, yielded up their Souls into his hands, whose name to the end they
Constantly confessed.

The very next day after these suffered, being the 16th of May, 3 women were
Martyred in Smithfield, a fourth was condemned with them, by Bonner, whose name
was Margeret Ellis, but she dyed in Newgate before the day of their execution:
the names of the other 3 were Katherin Hut a widow Joan Horns a maid and
Elisabeth Thackvel. These being examined upon several Articles but especially
that of the Sacrament which chiefly touched their Lives, Katherine Hat told the
Bishop that she denied it to be God, because it was a dumb God, and made with
men's hands, and Joan Horns said, If you can make your god bleed or show any
Condition of a living Body, I will believe you, and not else: And as for the
Romish See, I forsake all its abominations, from which good Lord deliver us.
Those 3 innocent women were condemned for the cause of the Gospel, had to
Smithfield, and willingly gave their Bodies to be burnt, dying more joyfully in
the flames, than many in their beds: such a Lord is God, glorious and
wonderful in all his Saints.

A blind Boy and a Bricklayer burnt at Gloucester.
In the same month of May at Gloucester, suffered one Thomas Croker a
Bricklayer; and a blind boy named Thomas Drowrie, who had been much confirmed
in the Faith by Bishop Hooper. This boy being examined upon the Article of the
Sacrament, by Dr. Williams the Bishops Chancellor, and being asked if he
believed the bodyly presence in the Sacrament, the boy answered boldly no, he
did not believe it Then being asked who taught him that heresy, That did you
(said the boy) in the Pulpit of this Church, where you told us in your Sermon:
That the Sacrament was to be received Spiritually by Faith, and not Carnally
and really as the Papists have heretofore taught. At this the Dr. was vexed, but
says he to the Boy, do you as I have done, repent, and you shall live or else
be burnt, Tho you (said the Boy) can so easily dispense with your self, and
mock God, the World and your Conscience, yet I cannot, nor will do so. Then said
the Chancellor, I will read the sentence against thee. Gods will be done
replied the blind boy. And so he was condemned with the other before mentioned,
and delivered over to the secular power, both of them in one fire, Constantly
and Joyfully yiedling their souls into the hands of the Lord Jesus.

On the 21st of the same month of May, three men were burnt together at Beckles
in Suffolk, their names were Thomas Spicer a Labourer, John Denny, and Edmond
Pool, whom they were so hasty to put to Death, that they burnt them before the
writ de Comburendo came from London. When they were at the stake they prayed,
and recited the belief and when they came to the Article of belief, in the
Catholic Church, a Knight that was by said that is well, it is the best word
you have said yet. To which Pool answered, Tho we believe in the Catholic
Church, we do not believe in the Romish Church. Then fire being put to them
they praised God in the midst of the flames, with such an audible voice, that
it seemed wonderful to all those who stood by and heard them. But some were so
wicked, that they bid the people to fling faggots at them, to stop their
mouths, which however none would do.

Several other Martyrs, and 13 in one fire.
In the next Month of June, on the 6th day 4 more were burnt in Lewis in
Sussex, after long Imprisonment; their names were Tho. Harland a Carpenter,
John Oswald an Husbandman, Thomas Avington a Turner, and Thomas Read. In the
same month in the same Town, was burned Thomas Wood a Minister, and Thomas
Mills a lay man. Several dyed in prisons which we do not mention.

We shall now mention a large malfire of humane flesh no less than 11 men and
two women burnt together at Stratford on Bow, condemned by Bonner, three more
were condemned, but reprieved by the Cardinal, these on the 27th of June were
drawn from Newgate to the place aforesaid, most of them being of Essex; their
names were Henry Adlington a Sawyer, Lawrence Parnam a Smith, Henry Wye a
Brewer, William Hallywell a Smith, Thomas Bowyer a Weaver, George Searles a
Tailor, Edmund Hurst a Labourer, Lion Cawch a Broker. Ralf Jackson a serving
man, John Derifal a Labourer, John Routh a Labourer, Elizabeth Pepper the wife
of a weaver, and Agnes George the wife of an husbandman, whose husband was
afterward condemned, but saved by the Death of the Queen. When they were
brought to the place, they were divided, and put a while apart into two several
Rooms, then the Sheriff going to one company told them, their companions had
recanted, and had saved their Lives, advising them to do the like, but they
answered, That their Faith was not builded on man, but on Christ Crucified: The
Sheriff finding no good to be done with them, he went to the other company,
telling them the same lie, to whom they answered, as their brethren had done,
that their Faith was not built on man, but on Christ, and his Word, etc. These
11 men were tied to 3 stakes, and the women were put in amongst them loose;
Elizabeth Pepper being at the same time, 11 weeks gone with child. These poor
Creatures showing great love one to another, and such Constancy in their
Martyrdom for the sake of their Savior, that all the beholders marvailed very
much, thus resigned their Souls and Bodies into the Hand of their Creator.

Roger Bernard and others Martyred at Norwich.
No less valiantly on the 30th of June, suffered the pains of Martyrdom by
fire, at St. Edmunds-bury, Roger Bernard a Labourer, Adam Foster an husbandman,
and Robert Lawson a Weaver, condemned by the Bishop of Norwich. These ended
their Lives most triumphantly, showing their Constancy in their Faith, and
making a most Joyful, end, to the praise of God, and incouragment of others in
the same Quarrel.

Julius Palmer Martyred at Newberry.
In July following, the 16th day, suffered that memorable Martyr, Mr. Julius
Palmer, with two others in one fire at Newberry, whose History I shall briefly
relace. This Julius was born in Coventry of good parentage, his father being an
Upholster, and a Merchant, and had been Mayor of that City, he was bred at
School, and sent to Oxford, where he profited much in the tongues, and
Philosophy, and many times supplied the place of the Gr. Reader in Magdalin
College, where he became Batchellor of Art, and became at last Fellow of the
said College, when he began to study divinity: He was of a very civil
behavior, courteous, pleasant, and cheerful, without affectation, and of great
simplicity, not knowing how to dissemble, an indefatigable Student, riseing at
4 of the clock every morning to his Studies, and sitting up till 11 at night,
so that in a little time he profited much. He was admitted to the office of a
Reader in Logic, and thus Continued a stiff and zealous Papist, till the
Reformation, and then owned the cause of the Pope so far, that he was expelled
the College, and was fain to go and teach School privately, Continuing thus all
the Time of King Edward, and when Papistry was restored by Queen Mary, he was
also restored to his fellowship in the College, having for his Religion
undergone much hardship: yet see the providence of God, to bring this man home
to himself, for it was the blood of the Martyrs, which is the seed of the
Church, and their Constant sufferings, which made him first to begin to look
into the Doctrine they professed, and it so pleased God to open his eyes, that
in a short time he began to see clearly the Superstition and Idolatry of the
Popish Church, and being one who knew not how to dissemble against his
Conscience, he was soon taken notice of, and seeing they began to have ^n evi^
eye upon him, lest they should expel him the College, he voluntarily left it.
The cursing with excommunication, burn^ng, hanging, drowning, racking
Scourging, and persecuting men for Religion made him see and know it could not
be of Christ, who Commands the quite Contrary, and this made him cry out when
he heard of the Constant Death of Bishop Hooper, Ridley, Latimer, and others: O
Raging Cruelty! O Tragical Tyranny and more than Barbarous. Being about to
leave the University, growing daily more fervent in the Truth, one of his
intimate Friends asked him, whither he would go, to whom he Answered, I know
not, But the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. Let God do as he
please I will commit my self to him and to the wide World. And being advised by
another to beware of the fire, for it was no easy matter to burn he replied, I
have yet escaped it, but I verily believe it will be my end, at last, welcome
be it by the grace of God, it will be easy to be suffered, by the grace of
God. He for some time kept School at Reading in Barkshire, but after a time
being found to be a Gospeller he was forced to fly thence, and repairing to his
own Mother, who was a Papist, and had heard of his turning from their Religion,
hoping to obtain some monys due to him by his fathers will, and asking her
blessing as he used to do, the unnatural Mother Cried out, thou shall have
Christ's Curse and mine, where ever thou go; being troubled at this heavy
greeting, and amazed for a time, he at last said, ah! Mother you may give me
your curse, which God Knows I never deserved, but God's Curse you Cannot give
me for, he has already blessed me. With that she reviled him, giving him most
bitter taunts, calling him Renegade, and one who had embraced a new upstart
Doctrine. It is not new (said he) but as old as Christ and his Apostles; with
that she charged him to go out of her sight and never see her afterward,
flinging to him a piece of Gold, and so leaving him to his sorrows. But being
sought after, it was not long e're he was taken, and cast into prison, in a
Dungeon prepared for thieves and Murderers, and there left for a time hanging
by the hands and feet in a pair of Stocks so high, that no part of his Body
could touch the Ground: in this Cave or Dungeon he remained 10 days, under the
Tyranny of an unmerciful Keeper. After this he was several times examined
before the Mayor of Reading, and before the Bishop of Sarums Chancellor; from
Reading he was had to Newberry, and clapped in the Jail there, where he found two
others, namely John Guin and Thomas Askin, poor simple men, who were Martyred
with him. Here he had his last examination, and was condemned with the two
aforesaid Persons by Dr. Jeffrey. Many endeavors were tried to make him
recant, and great proffers of preferments to tempt him, but nothing would move
him, and he also confirmed his fellow sufferers in their Faith: Happy are you
when men revile you; and persecute you for Righteousness sake. Rejoice and be
glad for great is your reward in Heaven. Fear not them that can kill the Body,
but are not able to touch the soul. God is faithful, and will not let us be
tempted further than we can bear. We shall not end our lives but make a change
only for a better life. With the like comfortable speeches he cheared his
fellow Martyrs, and caused tears to fall from others who heard him. When they
came to the place of execution, they fell all 3 on their faces, and prayed, and
Mr. Paimer recited aloud the 31 Psalm: After that two Popish Priests urged him
to recant, but he cried to them away, away, tempt me no longer: Away I say from
me all ye that work Iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my Tears.
Forthwith they stripped themselves, went to the stake, Kissed it, and were
bound to it, then Mr. Palmer said: Good people pray for us that we may
persevere to the end. And for Christ's sake beware of Popish teachers for they
deceive you, with that one of the Officers threw a faggot at him, and hit him
on the face that all the blood ran down. When the fire was kindled, and begun
to take hold of their Bodies, they lifted up their hands toward Heaven, and
quietly and cheerfully as if they felt no pain, cried, Lord Jesus Strengthen
us: Lord Jesus assist us. Lord Jesus receive our Souls. And thus they all ended
their Lives without any struggling, only Julius when that all people thought him
dead, being almost burnt to pieces, he was on a sudden seen, as if awaked out
of a sleep, to move his tongue and Jaws, and heard to pronounce softly the name
of Jesus, and so being burnt to Ashes yielded to God his soul.

Three burnt in Garnsey, with a child which came out of the Mothers belly.
I did not intend to mention any out of England that were Martyred, but these
in Garnsey being our Kings subjects, and the Example profoundly Barbarous, I
could not refrain mentioning it. On the 18th of July this year, Katherin
Cawches, Guillemine Gilbert her daughter, and Perotine Massey another daughter,
were burnt together in one fire for the Gospel, the Mother in the midst between
her two daughters, and the youngest Perotine being big with Child, the fire
seizing on the belly of the Martyr, it burst on a sudden, and the Child sprung
out alive through the flames, being a fine boy, and was taken and laid on the
grass, but the wicked bailiff caused it to be flung into the fire again, and to
be burnt with the Mother for an Heretic. So that this Infant was baptized in
its own blood, was born, and died a Martyr.

About the same time 3 more were burnt at Greenstead in Sussex, 2 men and 1
woman, their names were Thomas Dungate, John Foreman, and Mother Tree. Not long
before a poor Simple man named Thomas Moor was burnt at Leicester, for saying
he believed his Maker to be in Heaven, and not on the Altar. On the 22d of
August following Joan Waste a blind woman suffered in Darby. And on the 8th of
September following Edward Sharp, an aged and devout person was Martyrd at
Bristow: And on 25th another who was a Carpenter suffered, in the same place.
On the 24th of the said September 4 more received Martyrdom at Mayfield in
Sussex, two of their names were John Heart, Thomas Ravensdale, the one was a
Shoemaker, the other a Currier. Also one John Horn and a woman about the same
time were burnt at W^tten Vnder-Hedge in Glocestershire. On the 11th of October
a Shoo-maker suffered at Northampton. With several others who dyed in prisons
in several places that are not mentioned; Five were starved to Death, in
November in Canterbury Castle, who were condemned to be burnt. Their names were
John Clark, Dunsten Chittenden, William Forster, Alice Pothins, and John Arches.

Dear Protestant Reader, I doubt thou art almost tired with the Continuance of
these tragical Histories, I shall therefore have to a conclusion, God not
permitting any long Reign to this bloody persecuting Queen. We are now come the
year 1557, in the beginning of which Cardinal Pool visits the University of
Cambridg, where he causes on the 9th of Jan. the bones of the famous Bucer and
Paulus Phagius, professors of the Gospel, to be taken up, and with a solemn
procession to be publicly burnt, with all their Books. Thus devillishly
mallicious are these Papists, that they will not let men lie in quiet in their
Graves. At Oxford this Cardinal in his visitation did the like by Peter Martyrs
wife, whose bones he caused to be taken up and despitefully buried in a
dunghill. About the 15th of this Month of January 6 men were burned at
Canterbury, in one fire, their names were Kemp, Waterer, Powling, Lowick,
Hudson, and Hai. Two more, Stephens and Philpot, at Wye, and on the 16th one
Final and Bradbridg were burnt together at Ashford, in the same county. In
February following, as if the Magistrates and Bishops were slack in ^estroying
Gods people, whom they called Heretics, a new bloody Commission is sent
abroad, and new Inquisitors are made to torment and burn the professors of the
Gospel. And not long after out of Essex, that fruitful place of holy Martyrs,
were sent to London from Colchester no less than 22 persons at one time, men
and women, all bound with ropes one to another and so guarded up to London
after a strange manner. On the 12th of April 5 were burned in Smithfield, whose
names were Thomas Loseby, Henry Ramsey, Thomas Thirtel, Margaret Hide, and
Agnes Stanly. In May following 3 others viz Morant, Gratwait, and King, were
burnt in Southwark. On June the 18th 5 women and 2 men were burnt at Maidstone
in Kent, their names were Joan Bradbridg, Joan Mannings, Elizabeth a blind
maid, Walter Appleby, and Petronel his wife, Edmund Allin, and Katherine his
wife. On the 30th of the same month were burnt at Canterbury 3 men and 4 women.
I shall but name them, John Fishcock, Nicholas White, Nicholas Pardo, Barbara
Final, a Widow, the wife or Widow of Bradbride formerly mentioned and
Mariyt'd, the wife of one Wilson, and the wife of Benden: All these suffered
for the Gospel. The horrible usage of these poor Creatures in the Bishops
Prison is unspeakable, where they lay upon straw, and had but 3 farthings a day
apiece, allowed them; a halfpeny for Bread, and a farthing for bear, on which
God enabled them to Live. On the 22th of June no less than ten Martyrs suffered
together in one fire at Lewis in Sussex, their names were Richard Woodman,
George Stevens, W. Mainnard, Alexander Hosman his servant, Thomasin Wood his
maid, Marg^ry Morris, James Morris, her Son, De^is Burgis The wife of Ashden,
and of Groves. On the 13th of July Simon Miller and Elizabeth Cooper were burnt
at Norwich. on the 2d of August suffered no less than ten Martyrs at
Colchester, Six in the Morning, and 4 in the afternoon. Their names were
Bongeor. Purcas, Benold, Agnis Silverside, Helen E^rine, Eliz. Folks In the
afternoon were burnt. W. Munt and Alice his wife, R^se Allin their daughter,
and John Johnson. When Munt and his wife were taken, the woman being sick in
bed, desired her daughter to fetch her some drink, and as she was passing
through the room one Tyrril, of the race of that Tyrril who Murdered King
Edward the 5th met her, and bid her to give her Father and Mother good Counsel,
to whom the maid repyled; Sir, they have a better instructor than I am; For the
holy Ghost does reach them, who will not suffer them to err. Thou naughty
huswise (said Tyrril) art thou of that mind? it is time to look to such
Heretics. That which you call heresy (replied Rose) is the true Worship of
the living God. Then Gossip (said this persecutor) I perceive you will burn for
company with the rest; not for companies sake, but for Christ's sake, who I
hope in his Mercy will enable me to bear it, if I am compelled thereto,
returned the Maid to him again; with that this cruel Tyrril, took the candle
which she had in her hand burning, and held the back of her hand over it,
burning, it till the very sinews cracked and burst in two. And seeing the Maid
did not cry out, why thou whore said he, wilt not thou cry? She replied he had
more reason to cry than she, for she thanked God, she had no cause but to
rejoice. Thou young, strong, beastly whore, said he, get thee: gone: When she
came to her Mother, and showed her her Martyred hand, her Mother asked her how
she could endure it; to whom she replied, that at first it was some little pain
to her, but the more it burnt, the less she felt, or well near none at all. The
like cruelty you heard of Bonner, who also served a blind harper after the same
manner, with a burning coal. Likewise one George Eayles a Tailor by profession,
but privately preached the Gospel to the great Comfort of many good people,
taking great pains therein drinking only water, and earing little, lying in the
woods and Fields, which secured him for some years, but at last he was taken,
and had to London and there condemned for a traitor, for meeting in traytorous
companies or Conventicles, and stirring them up against the Q. though nothing
of that nature could be proved against him, yet he was condemned and executed
after a barbarous manner, at Chelmsford in Essex. On the 5th of August suffered
Rich, Crashsield at Norwich. About the same time a converted Friar and a Woman
who was Sister to the late mentioned George Eagles were burnt at Rochester.

Martyred at Lichfield Mrs. Joyce Lewis.
About the same time suffered Mrs. Joyce Lewis, she was a Gentleman's daughter,
tenderly bred up all her Life, and Married to Mr. Tho. Lewis of Manchester. who
was her 2d Husband. She had been all her Life time a Papist, and so continued
till the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, and that she saw such Cruelties
exercised against the Gospellers, and especially upon the burning of that
learned Martyr, Mr. Lawrence Saunders, whom we have mentioned, she began to
enquire more narrowly into the matter, and more especially conversed often with
Mr. John Glover, living near him in Coventry, who taught her and instructed her
in the Truth, so that she being thoroughly convinced of the Popish errors, and
their damnable Doctrins, she refrained from going to Mass, but her Husband one
day forcing her to go to Church against her will, when the Priest went to
sprinkle her with holy Water, she turned her back to him, upon which she was
next day cited to come before the Bishop; but her Husband being enraged at the
fellow who brought it, set his dagger to his throat, and made him eat the
citation, and drink an health to it afterward; but upon this, they were both
had before the Bishop; the Husband submitted himself, and was bound in a
recognisance of 100 l. to bring his Wife, after a months time given her to
Considers which the unatural husband did, rather than to undergo any farther
trouble, and the poor Gentlewoman being Constant, and rather resolving to
suffer, than to deny the Truth, was committed to so nasty and stinking a
prison, that her maid who went with her, not being able to endure it swounded;
but God gave her strength, and tho she had many Temptations, yet by the power
and assistance of God's holy Spirit, she overcame them all, she was several
times had before the Bishop, who reasoned with her, endeavoring to make her
come to Mass, but she still answered him, it was against her Conscience, and
not Commanded in the Word of God, for if he could show them there, she would
with all her heart receive, esteem and believe them. To which this Popish
Bishop replied: If thou will believe no more than is in the Scripture,
concerning matters of Religion, thou art in a damnable case. Upon which she
being somewhat amazed, told him his words savoured of ungodliness. She was then
condemned, but after her condemnation, she was kept a whole year, ere she was
burnt, but at last seeing they could not pervert her, they procured the burning
writ, and she having notice of it received the news very cheerfully, spending
the night before her Martyrdom in prayers, receiving great Consolation and Joy
in her Spirit, in that God had accounted her worthy to suffer for his sake; The
next morning, refusing the Priest, they had sent to take her confession, she
went to the stake prepared for her a^ Leichfield, being accompanied with
several of her friends, and several of her Neighbors and acquaintance, she
being beloved, and many of them drank with her at the stake, all which were
noted by the Friars, and made for so doing, to undergo public penance. When
she was tied with the chain, she showed such cheerfulness and patience, that
all were amazed and most of them could not abstain from weeping, who beheld
her. When the fire was set to her, she neither struggled or stirred, only
lifting up her hands toward heaven, she was quickly dead: the under Sheriff
being her Friend, had prepared such stuff, as soon dispatched her. And this was
the end of this good and blessed Gentle woman and Martyr.

Four burnt at London, 2 Women at Colchester, etc.
On the 17th of September 1557 Ralf Allerton, James Austoe, Margery Austoe his
wife, and Richard Roth, suffered all in one fire, at Islington; on the same day
and year were burnt at Colchester in one fire, two godly women, Agnes Bongeer
and Margaret Thurston. About the same time one John Noys a Shoe maker of
Laxfield in the County of Suffolk was burnt. On the 23d of September the same
year Cicilly Ormes a poor simple woman was burnt at Norwich, for professing the
Gospel. At her Death she utterly renounced Popery, and admonished people to
beware of its Idolatry: When she came to the stake, she Kissed it, and
embracing it, she said, welcome thou Cross of Christ, being bound to it, and
fire being set to her, she said: My soul does Magnify the Lord, and my Spirit
rejoices in God my Savior, and in so saying she set her hands together right
against her breast, casting her eyes and head upward, she stood without moving
till her Arms being burnt in two, fell into the fire, and so yielded up the
Ghost as if she felt no pain.

On the 18th of November following, John Hollingdale, W. Sparrow, and Richard
Gibson, being all condemned by Bonner, suffered together in Smithfield. On the
22th of December, were also burnt in Smithfield John Rough a Minister, and one
Margaret Mearing, in one fire. On the 28th day of March following being the
year 1558. Cutbert Symson who had been a Deacon in the Congregation, of the
last mentioned Minister, Mr. Rough, was burnt in London. He was like another
Stephen, most Zealous for Religion and never ceased, laboring earnestly how to
help and preserve others from the Popish Tyranny. This man keeping the Books of
the Register of the names and accounts of the Congregation, Mr. Rough, before
Martvr'd, had a vision of his trouble, that came suddenly upon him, and lest
they should find this Book and thereby know all the names of Gods Saints,
belonging to the Congregation, to bring them into trouble, being warned in his
dream, be caused Cutbert not to carry that book about him, as be was wonted to
do; for it so fell out, he was laid hold on, and because he would not Coufess,
and betray those of the Congregation, he was had before the Recorder of London,
and the Constable of the Tower, but he absolutely denying to Confess any thing,
they set him 3 hours upon the rack, but not being able to move him with their
torments, they loosed him and sent him to prison for that time, but the Sunday
following, he was sent for again, and being asked if he would ye* Confess the
Heretics, shortly answered, that he never would, upon which the Lieutenant of
the Tower swore by God, he would make him, and presently caused his forefingers
to be bound together, and then betwixt them, thrust a sinall forked Arrow,
drawing it backward and forward, Cruelly tormenting and curting his fingers,
but still finding him Constant and resolute, these bloody and Tyrannical
Papists racked him twice more, and set him 3 hours in an Iron Engine, in the
Tower, called Skevingtons Gives, all which he with great patience suffered, and
they could not get their wills of him. And Bishop Bonner was forced to confess,
that so patient a man he had never before seen, being thrice racked in one day,
and it was pity he was an Heretic. The night before he was burnt, he heard his
prison doors as he thought unlock, about midnight, he saw an apparition of
great brightness to enter the dungeon, saying nothing to him but Ha! and then
departed, but the sight thereof filled him with extraordinary Joy and comfort.
With this Constant Martyr Cutbert Symson, suffered also Hugh Fox and
J^h^^evonish, for the same cause, all ending their lives on the day and in the
place aforesaid, with great Joy and alacrity to the Strengthening of others.

On the 6th of April following, was burnt at Haverford West in Wales, one
William Nicholson a plain simple man, who there laid down his life for the
Gospel.

Three Martyrs burnt at Norwich.
On the 19th of May following, was burnt at Norwich in one fire, Will. Seaman
an husbandman, Tho. Carman a lay man, and Thomas Hudson a Glover, all of them
condemned by the Bishop of Norwich Hudson had often prayed to God that he might
suffer for the Gospels sake, and when he was taken, he was so far from flying,
that he cheerfully met the Officers saying, welcome friends, welcome, my hour
is now come: you are they that shall lead me to Life in Christ; I thank God for
this, and the Lord enable me thereto for his mercies, sake. When they were
brought to the pl^ce of execution, which was without Bishop gate in Norwich,
called Lollards pit, after they had made their prayer, to God, they were
chained to the Stake, when Hadson, not feeling that Joy in Spirit he used to
do, he d^sired them to stay a while, which some believed was that he might
recant, but he falling on his Knees, prayed with great Vehemence to God, to
visit him with his spirit, and at last he received that comfort he desired, and
then he arose up with great Joy, as a man new changed even from Death to Life,
and said: Now I thank God I am strong, and pass not what man can do into me:
And so fire being put to them, all three suffered most Joyfully, Constantly,
and manfully, and were Consumed with the Fire, glorifying God, to the terror
and amazement of their bloody persesecutors, and to the comfort and
strengthening of their Brethren.

The 29 of the same month, were burnt also for the Gospels s^ke 3 more together
at Colchester, their Names were, William Harris, Richard Day, and Christian
George, who dyed cheerfully and willingly.

The Seven last Martyrs burnt in Smithfield.
On the 27th of June following, being Anno 1558, were burnt together in one
fire in Smithfield 7 blessed Martyrs, all condemned thereto by the bloody,
butcherly Bishop Bonner, who gloried in his shame; the names of these men were
Henry Pond, Raignold Estland, To. Southam, Ma^thew Richarby, John Floyd, John
Holyday. And Roger Holland. This last was a Gentleman's son of Lancashire, of
great kindred, and many friends, being bred a strict Papist, and bound Prentise
in London, where he lived so lewd and debauched a Life, till the beginning of
Queen Mary's days, that there was little likelihood of his coming to be burnt
for the sake of Chrisls Gospel. But it pleased God at last to work upon him, in
the midst of his riot and licentious Life, being given to dancing, fencing,
gaming, banqueting, and all manner of luxury, and one night having lost 30 l.
at play of his Masters money, he grew troubled, and resolved to run away and go
beyond seas to France or Flanders, and making a Bill under his hand,
acknowledging his debt to his Master, he privately made his case known to the
servant maid in the house, who was a religious maid, and one who professed the
Gospel, and desired her to give his Master that Note, when he was gone,
premising to pay him so soon as he was able, if he would keep it from his
friends, for if they should know of it, they would never look on him, and it
would be his Ruin. This maid pitying the young man, and hopeing to reclaim
him from his Evil ways, having some monys by her, left to her by some of her
friends, she kept the note and fetched him 20 l. to pay his Master, upon
Condition he would leave his leudness and debauchery, read the bible, pray to
God, and frequent sermons, and to leave all his Papistical Books and licentious
Ballads, and Ribaldry, and to lead a new life, giving him a great deal of good
and grave advice. He promised what she desired, and endeavoring it, God so
wrought upon him, and strengthened him in this good way, that in some time he
left off all his wicked and debauched Companions, and became a strict professor
of the Gospel, to the great Admiration of all those who had known his former
wicked Life. After some time he bought several good books, and going into the
Country to his father carried them, and bestowed them among his friends whereby
his father, and many others began to taste the Gospel, and to abhor the Idolatry
of the Papists; his father giving him a stock to begin with, his time being
out, he goes to London and repairs to the maid, who had generously lent him the
30 l. pays her* and in return of her kindness Marrys her. Having a child by
her, he caused it to be privately baptized, for which he was laid hold on and
cast into prison, and diverse times had before Bonner, who by reason of his many
and great kindred (the Lord Strange being one of them) he sought all he could
to have him recant, and save his Life, but he was a stout and noble Champion,
and would not be perverted by any means: He told the Bishop that he had been
bred a Papist, and then lived in all manner of sin, being absolved by the
Priests, so that he made no Conscience of committing any crime, whilst in their
Church, for he knew that for a little money, he could be absolved from all his
wickedness, and begin again anew, he could eat flesh on Frydays, whore, swear,
drink, game, and all was well enough, so long as he went to Mass, but now the
he lived a strict and sober life, leaving their Idolatry, he must be persecuted
to death, being called by the light of God's Word to Repentance, and that by
Priests, who blaspheme God, and lead Scandalous lives, without punishment, some
of them, having 6 or 7 Children apiece, to his knowledge, by four or five
sundry women. He told them many other crimes and Enormities of their Church, to
the Bishops face, too long to rehearse, which so enraged the Bishop, that he
read the sentence against him, nor permitting him to speak any more, saying he
was one of the m^st blasphemous heretics, that ever he heard of. He heard his
sentence of Condemnation very patiently, and when they would have had him away,
he desired to speak two or three words, but the Bishop Cried, away with him,
way with him; at last, some of his friends prevailed, not knowing but he might
recant, and being permitted to speak he thus prophesied: I tell you (said he)
that God has now heard the prayers of his servants, which have been poured
forth with tears for his Afflicted Saints, which you daily persecute, as you do
us. But this I s^ ^o you, moved thereto by his holy Spirit, that God will
shorten your hand of C^u^^^ ^^d t^^^ nor B^^thre^ t^^a sh^rt time will be able
to (...) ^^^e, so to ^t you shall not be able to persecute them (...) more: For
mark me, after this da^^n this place, (...) ^^^h I and (...) B^^thren, and
fellow Marty ^s are to suffer, no more shall undergo the try^^^ of F^^e and
faggot. Upon this Bonner said, I ^ow perceive Roger that thou art as mad in thy
^^^^sie, as ever was Joan B^^cher. Thou would f^^^ be accounted a railing
prophet, and tho thou and all the rest of you, desire to see me hanged (...)
shall live to burn you, ye^ I will burn all of you (...) co^^ under my h^nds,
that will not wo^s^ (...) bl^ss^d Sacrament of the Altar, for al^^ (...)
prating. And to they haled him away, but th^^ H^l^ man was no false prophet,
for he and his 6 Companions above named w^o were burnt with him, were the last
who suffered in that place, for the testimony of the Gospel. That day these
holy Marty^s suffered, a proclamation was made, that none should dare to speak
or talk a word to them, or receive any thing from them, or touch them, on pain
of Imprisonment, without bad or mainprise. Notwithstanding, the people cried
out, d^siteing God to strengthen them. When they all came to the Stake Roger
Holland embracing it said aloud Lord, I most humbly thank thy Majesty, that
have called me from the State of Death unto the Light of thy heavenly Word, and
now unto the fellowship of the Saints, that I may sing and say, Holy, holy,
holy Lord God of hosts. And Lord, into thy hands I Commit my Spirit. Lord bless
these thy people, and save them from Idolatry: so being fastened to the Stake
with the rest, looking up toward Heaven, praying and praising God, with the
rest of his fellow Martyrs, he ended his Life, and exchanged for a better, with
great Courage, holy resolution, and manlike Constancy.

Six Martyred at Brainford.
Not long after the Martyrdom of these 7 last mentioned in Smathfield, viz. on
the 14th of July following, Six more suffered in one fire at Brainford. Their
names were Robert Wills, Stephen Colt^n, Robert Dynes, Stephen White, John
Slade, and William Pikes a Tanner. All these were condemned By Bonner, and
ordered to be burnt at the place aforesaid. When they came to the stake, they
made their prayers with great humility, like so many Lambs prepared for the
slaughter, th^n and res^ing themselves, they went joyfully to the stake, to
which they were bound, and the fire being put to them, and flaming about them,
they yield (...) their Bodies, Lives, and Souls, into the hand of Jesus, for
whose cause they suffered. The last mentioned William Pikes, being a very
godly, holy and religious man, not long before he was taken, as he was reading
the B^ble of Mr. Rogers his translation in his Garden, 4 drops of blood fell
down upon the Bible, from whence he could not tell except it came out of the
Element, upon which he called his wife, and showed her the prodigy, blotting
out one of the drops with his finger At last he said, I perceive the Lord will
have blood, his will be cone, and give me grace to abide the trial. And it was
not long after that be was apprehended. The same man being in Newgate, fell
extremely sick, so that none looked he could have lived 6 hours, being given
over for a dead man; upon which he prayed, and desired of God, that he might
glorify his name at the stake, which came to pass accordingly God hearing his
prayers.

The Cruel Whipping of Thomas Hinshaw by Bonner.
This Bloody Bonner, who in a matter of 3 years space, had destroyed one way or
other, about 200 Martyrs for the Gospel, having one Thomas Hinshaw an
Apprentice in London before him in Examination at Fulham, and not receiving
satisfactory Answers to his mind, he set him in the stocks all night with bread
and water only, the next day he sent his Archdeacon Harpsfield, such another
persecutor as himself, who calling this young man, who was about 19 or 20 years
of Age, Prevish boy, asking him whether he thought he went about to dams his
Soul, or no, unto which the said Thomas answered, that he was persuaded, they
labored to maintain their dark and devilish Kingdom, and not for any Love to
Truth. This put the Archdeacon into a Rage, and away he goes to Bonner, who
furned and fretted, not being able to have his will of a young man, presently
he sends for him into an Arbor in his Garden, untrussing him, he caused the
young man to Kneel down, and to lie over a bench, where with his own Episcopal
hands, he wore out a willow Rod upon him, who bore it all patiently, till this
s^^u^ whipping Bishop, who had none of St. Paul's Characters in him, could lay
on no longer, for want of B^eath. With this, and other ill ^su^ge, this poor
young is an fell sick, and so continued in a ^^ngring St^kn^ss, till he was
treed by the Death of this Popish Persecuting Queen Mary.

The Whipping of John Wills by Bonner.
Besides, this young man, there was another named John Wills a Capper, and was
brother to the above mentioned Robert Wills, Martyred at Brainford; he was kept
for some time in Bonners cole hole at Fulham, and put into the Stocks, being
taken at a meeting in the fields at Islington: Bonner had him several times in
Examination, rapping him often on the head with his stick, and flirting him
under the chin, and on the ears, when he crossed him: The poor man often
mentioning the Scripture to the Bishop, Ha^^ Sirrah, said he, What have you to
do with Scripture? Do you believe the Scripture? To whom this honest confessor
replied that he did: why then said this learned Bishop, St. Paul says if the
man sleep the woman is at Liberty to go to another man and then would thou
having a wife be content she should go to another man, when thou art asleep?
And yet this is Scripture. As thou see the Bodies of the Heretics burnt in
Smithfield, just to do their souls hang burning in hell, for forsaking the true
Church. They call me bloody Bonner, a vengeance of you all, I think you have a
delight in burning, but if I might have my will, I Would soon be rid on you all,
for I would sow up all your Mouths, put you into Sacks, and drown you: O
excellent Popish Bishop! But seeing the honest Capper no ways approving his
Doctrins, he caused him to be untrussed, and in his Arbor, this Whipping fat
paunch'd Bishop, exercised himself on his hinder parts, with a willow Rod,
which being spent, he sent for a birchen Rod, with which he clawed off the poor
man, till he could Labor no longer. This man was delivered from his tyranny,
by the Death of the Queen.

A Child Scourged to Death in Bonners house.
We will also take notice of another cruel Whipping in this Bishops house,
either by himself of his Ca^plains; one John Fetty of ^^e kenwell, being for
the cause of the Gospel in the Lollards Tower, where for many weeks he had
endured great hardship, being often tormented in the stocks, it chanced that
one of his Children, a Boy of about 8 or 9 years old, came to the Bishops
palace, to see if he could get into the prison, to see his Father, and being
met by one of the Bishops Chaplains, who asked the child what he would have?
who told him he came to see his Father that was in prison in the Lollards
Tower. Your Father then said the Priest is an Heretic. No said the Child, he
is no Heretic, but you are Heretics, for you have Balaam's Mark: With that
this hard hearted Priest took the Child in, and among them stripping him, whipped
him all over, till he was of a gore blood, and then in that condition sent him
to his Father, which cut the poor man to the heart to see him so cruelly
handled. He then asked the Child who had done it? the Child replied a Priest in
the Bishops house, with Balaams Mark on him, had used him thus; with that the
cruel hangman, carried the Childback, where they to cruelly handled the poor
Innocent, that (...) about 15 days after he dyed. The Bishop hearing that the
Child was about to dye, f^aring he should be called to account for it, released
the Father, and so saved his Life, for murdering his Child's.

Richard Yeoman a Minister, Martyred.
On the 10th of July, one Richard Yeoman of 70 ^ears of Age was Martyred at
Norwich. This Richard Yeoman was a Minister, and had been the Martyred ^.
Tailors Curate, and to whom he had left his care, but being turned out, and a
Popish Priest put in, having a Wife and being aged, he fell into great poverty
wandering about with a few Pinns, Tape, and Laces and such like to sell, and
where he durst he often preached and instructed good people, in the true
doctrine of Christ., After long wandering about he came home secretly to his
Wife, who locked him up in her Chamber, going abroad to get and beg Victuals to
maintain them, but at last it was suspected, that he was in the house, and in
the night when in bed together, they broke into the house, where their Popish
Adversaries found them; Ha, said the Priest, I thought we should find a Rogue
and an Whore together; upon which the old man told them, they were lawfully
Married, and they did ill so to ^erm those who came lawfully together by Gods
ordinance, which he would own: They then forced him to rise, and had him to the
Cage, where they kept him all night, and where he found one John Dale who had
been kept there two or 3 days. Thence they were had before the Justice, and
from him sent to the Jail at Norwich, where Dale dyed before he was executed,
Yeoman being examined by the Bishop, who finding him resolute in owning the
truth, he was condemned, degraded, and delivered over to the secular power to
be burnt, and so on the day, and in the place aforesaid he suffered, sealing
his testimony with his blood, passing through the torments of the fire to
everlasting peace.

Mr. Thomas Benbridg Martyr.
I am now come near to a conclusion of these cra^^ persecutions of the Papists,
and shall end w^^^ mentioning one or two more. Mr. Thomas Benbridg of the
Diocese of Winchester, was a Gentlem^^ of Estate, and might have lived in all
plenty (...) Earthly pleasures, all which he forsook for the sak^^ of the
Gospel, and of his soul, which was more der^^ than all earthly delights and
pleasures, for which cause being apprehended and brought before the Bishop, he
had several disputes with him, but i^ the end he was overcome by their cruel
Topic the Fire, to which he was condemned: Coming to the stake very richly
clad, his coat ^^^ing laid all ove^ with Gold and Silver lace, his Cap of
Velvet and other things suitable, which he cast off at the stake, i^^ being tied
thereto, was willed by Dr. Seaton to recant, and that he should have his
Pardon, but he refusing it, the Dr. willed the people not to pray for him no
more than for a Dog, and because he said to the Dr. Away thou Baby^o^man, away!
some would hard had his Tongue cut out, but his Adversaries seeing he would not
yield, tried a new way to Tormen^^^ him, and instead of putting him to death,
they rather roasted or broyled him with a few Faggots, that he might through the
great torment of the sire recant, for they burnt part of his legs, and scorched
his face and heard, i^ in a ^itious manner, so that the pain being so great, he
cried out he would recant, upon which the fire was withdrawn, and he was led
back to prison; but he was so troubled at what he had done, that he could have
no quiet or peace in his conscience, till he had given under his hand that be
utterly renounced that forced Recantation and that he was willing to dye for
the Gospel, which he had and d^d still profess Upon which his Popish
Adversaries being enraged, that day seven-night after, he was had again to the
stake, where they as before, rather broiled him than burnt him to Death, which
he then manfully endured, and so at la^^ slept in the ^^^rd, July 19. 1558.

Four Martyred at St. Edmunds-bury.
About the beginning of August, and a little before ^^een Mary sickned, 4
Martyrs were burnt toge^^er at St. Edmunds-bury, by the Bishop of Norwich, ^^e
names of these were James Ash^ey a B^tchelor, ^^on Cook is Sawyer, Robert
^l^^es a Sheerman, and Exander Lane a Wheel-wright.

In Ip^wich on the 4 of November, one Alexander ^^uch and Alice Driver were
Martyred, the aforesaid ^^^e Driver having both her ears out off, for com^ring
Queen Mary to Jezabel. When they came to ^^e stake singing of Psalms, the
Sheriff was so cruel ^^d chur^^sh to them, that he interrupted them, and ^ould
not let them stay to pray, but would have ^em fastened to the stake, and was
enraged to see ^^y take them by the hand, threatening to have them (...) prison,
yet they would not forbear: Thus they ^xpressed their malice to these poor
wretches, but his wicked Sheriff died within 3 weeks after, which ^as lo^k'd on
as a just judgment upon so cruel a ^ersecutor.

In the same month 3 more were burned at Bary, ^^eir names were Philip H^mfre^,
John David, and Henry David his Brother. At Exeter a poor ^oman was burnt,
being the wife of one P^^e^, of about 56 years of Age, and being a silly
ignorant ^oman, in the esteem of the Priests, they thought ^hey should be able
to overcome her, but they ^^avelled in vain, and all they could do could not
^ervert her, being strengthend by the Spirit of ^^od: When the came to the
stake, she showed ^^eat cheerfulness and alacrity, and said, I thank ^ee O God,
this day I have found what I long ^^ught ^^r. And being u^ged to recant Nay
(said she) God ^^rbid I should lose Eternal L^f, for this Carual and ^ort life,
I will never turn from my heavenly husband, ^^my earthly hu^band, from the
fellowsh^p with Angels, to morial Children: And if my husband (...) h^an be
faithful, then am I theirs. God is my F^^^ God is my Mother, God is my Sister,
my Brother (...) Husband: God is my friend, most faithful. F^^^ being put to
her she cried out, God be mercif^^ me a S^^ner, God be merciful to me a
Sinner, as so Continued whilst she had life.

The last Martyrs burnt in Queen Marys days
The last that suffered for the Gospel in the day of Queen Mary, and that but 6
or 7 days, before her death, were three m^n and 2 women, (...) the 10th of
November, at Canterbury: their a m^^^ were J^on Corajord Christopher Brown,
Jo^^ H^^^ Alice Snoth, and K^therin^^ (...) an aged woman: These Five closed up
the rage of Que^^^ Marys persecution for the rest money of that w^r^ for which
so many had dyed before, and geve^ their Lives me^kly and patiently, suffering
the violent malice of the Papists The matte^ for which they were judged to the
fire was, for believing that the Body, Blood, (...) Bones of Christ was not in
the Sacrament of (...) Altar. Upon which, these poor people were (...)
communicated, in these Words: In the name (...) our Lord Jesus Christ* the Son
of the most mig^^^ God, and by the power of his Holy Spirit, and the Authority
of his holy Catholic and Ap^^^lick Church, we do hereby give into (...) H^^ds
of Satan to be destroyed, the Bodies of all these Blasphemers, and heretics,
that do maintain, etc Upon this they were delivered over to the secular power,
and such was the inveterate malice of these Papists, to those who professed the
Gospel, that although they well knew that the Queen was given over by the
Physicians, and that the could not live; yet they had a mind to dispatch these
poor wretches, and to rid them of their lives, blasphemously making use of the
names of God and Christ in their Excommunications, to torment the Bodies of the
Saints with fire, and (...) give their Souls to the Devil, and all to ar^^ ^o
their bloody ends. When these Five came (...) the stake, they prayed very
fervently to God, ^^at he would have mercy on the Nation, and ^^at their Blood
mig^t be the last that should (...) shed by the violent Rage of the bloody
Papists; and so it was, that God heard their prayers, for ^^ese were the last
who suffered for the Gospel (...) her Days; for on the 17th of the same month
^he dyed, and the glorious and renowned Queen ^hiz^^eth her Sister succeeded,
and put a full pe^iod to the rage, reign, and bloody Tyranny of ^he Church of
Rome, in England, and restored the ^eformed Church as now Established, to its
splen^^our and purity, which having passed the fiery ^^val, and drunk so deeply
of persecution, one would believe should never go about to persecute others:
But God preserve this Nation from the dreadful Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome,
and let all people heartily say Amen.

FINIS.

