England's Standard: To which all the Lovers of A just and speedy SETTLEMENT,
BY A safe Parliamentary AUTHORITY, In City, Country and Army, are desired to
repair. OR, A REMONSTRANCE OF The Lovers of the COMMONWEALTH, Inhabitants of
HAMPSHIRE. Delivered to The Council of the Officers of the Army, November 21.
1659.

LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.

To the General Council of the Officers of the Army: The Remonstrance of the
cordial lovers of the Commonwealth, inhabitants of Hampshire.
SHOWS,
THat being very sensible that the Enemies of this Commonwealths peace and
Safety are exceedingly lifted up in hopes and expectations that the present
distractions will bring about their long-desired opportunity to introduce the
Yoke and tyrannical Government of the late Kings family; and finding also, to
our great grief, that many that have heretofore been opposers of the same,
through the subtilty and insinuations of the said Party, are ready to comply
with them, under pretense that there is no other possibility of Settlement: We
therefore judge our selves bound in duty to God, our Country and Posterity, to
manifest and declare, That our true and cordial affections are so fixed to the
love and desire of a firm and just Commonwealths Government, that no fears,
sufferings nor hardships shall (through the assistance of God) in the least
measure alter our resolutions, but that we shall be ready with the hazard of
our lives, and all that is near and dear unto us, to oppose both the open and
private Enemies of the same: And we account it also our duty, as far as in us
lies, to strive that a period may be put to these long Distractions and
Miseries which thereby are fallen on the Nation, which as hitherto have been
beneficial to none, but a few ambitious self-seeking persons; so we also
visibly see, never can nor will; and that unless the Lord in mercy be pleased
to put a period to the same, we can expect no less then that a present total
destruction will ensue, or at best a servile submission to the will and
pleasures of them that shall be strongest. For the prevention of which, we
cannot in our judgments find any remedy under heaven, better, easier and
speedier, then an unanimous agreement of the well-affected Party, on such
Principles of common good and safety, that may secure the Rights of all just
interests. And to the end it may be obtained, we do in the bowels of pity and
compassion to our poor, almost-ruin'd Country, implore this from you, that
finding by sad experience the hearts of men are generally so base and corrupt,
that there are few or none but are Enemies to the Liberty and Prosperity of
their Country, (when they may enrich themselves thereby) but only for want of
time and power; and that it is to be feared, what men soever shall come into the
supreme Power or Authority, will make it their business (as heretofore) under
fair pretenses, to enrich themselves, and perpetuate their ambitions designs,
unless there be some sure, firm and unalterable Limitations and Restrictions
agreed on by the consent of the people, to prevent the same: That therefore you
will with all speed and vigor join with us, to invite all the Lovers of their
own and their Countries peace and safety, to center in an Agreement (according
to the substance of these following Heads) and that all those that shall own,
agree to, and subscribe the same, shall be capable to be Electors or Elected
for all future Representatives, and none else: And that you will speedily after
the signing the same, desire and persuade them to choose their Members; that so
by a visible and safe Authority, the Nation may be secured from the power and
designs of foreign and domestic enemies; and all Interests that are useless,
oppressive, and destructive to the general good and just Liberty of the Nation,
may be taken away.

1. That no person or persons whatsoever, on pain of High treason, shall assume
or challenge to themselves any power, right or interest in making or altering
of Laws, but those that shall be immediately elected and empowered by the
people that shall enter into and own this Agreement. 2. That it shall not be in
the power of any Representative to establish any Government by a King, Single
person, or House of Lords; nor to continue the Legislative power in themselves,
or make Laws for the continuation of it in others above the space of two years
together at the most, upon pain of the highest punishment that can be
inflicted; that so every man may taste of Subjection as well as Rule, and may
be equally liable to the Laws that he shall make for others. 3. That seeing it
is not in the power of humane creatures to confer any spiritual gift or
authority on their Representatives, and that they can receive no larger power
then the people are capable to give them; that therefore it is not nor shall be
in the power of any Representative to intermeddle with things spiritual or
supernatural, nor to compel or enforce any person or persons, directly or
indirectly, by Law, against their own free will and consent, to pay to the
maintenance of a National Ministry, but leave all people free to pay their own
Pastors and Ministers, according to the infallible rule of the Gospel, the
practice of the Primitive times, and the present practice of many Reformed
Churches in foreign parts. Provided nevertheless, that it is not hereby
intended or meant, that the Parliament shall be restrained from any power (in
making Laws) to prohibit the profession of any Religion not Christian, neither
the public profession of Popery, which is incorporated with the interest of a
foreign power, inconsistent with public safety and society. 4. That no
public Salary-man shall be capable to sit in Parliament, nor during his
session there, shall be invested with any Salary-Office, nor shall have any of
the public Treasure conferred on him, under any pretense whatsoever, on pain
of High Treason: (the place of an Ambassador, and the charges thereon
expended, only excepted.) 5. That the Logistative power shall be kept separate
and distinct from the Administrative power. That all Representatives that shall
be chosen by virtue and according to this Agreement, shall be and are hereby
ordained to be the Supreme Authority of the Nation to make and alter Laws, to
make War and Peace, and to raise money for the same. Provided they act not
against, nor endeavor to destroy or take away all or any of these five
Fundamentals. And it is hereby agreed and declared, That whatsoever person or
persons shall under any pretense whatsoever use power or force to dissolve the
said Authority, whilst it acts nothing against the five aforenamed Rules, or
use force to destroy those Laws which they shall make, shall be deemed and
accounted Traitors for the same, and suffer punishment accordingly.
By this way of Agreement, formerly practiced in most Nations, when a former
Government (through necessity, for their preservation) has been cast off, we
can (with the blessing of God) expect a speedy and secure Settlement, to the
content and benefit of all just men, and just interests; and also rationally
hope for a reconcis^ation of those that are now exceedingly bent against the
Settlement of a Commonwealth: and in the prosecution hereof, we shall with all
alacrity join with you in the utmost hazards. But if you shall oppose the
substance hereof, we cannot expect any sure and lasting Settlement, neither can
we see how you can clear your selves of the guilt of all the Blood and Treasure
that has been spent, or of the Miseties which for want of such a Settlement
will inevitably ensue. However, we have discharged our duties, and leave the
success to God, who we are assured will not suffer his glory and his peoples
good to be overthrown.

Now seeing these things we have here mentioned and desired are of such an high
concernment, we are constrained, for the prevention of scandals and aspersions
which may be cast on them or us, to show these Reasons for the same.

It cannot be denied by any person that understands what the Government of this
Nation was, That the King was pretendedly limited and bounded by his Oath, to
govern according to those Laws that should be made by the people, and that the
Parliament was a Skreen between the Kings Prerogative, and the Peoples
Liberties: but this proved to little purpose; for that he being a standing
power, and (as he pretended) unaccomptable for any thing he should do, and had
the power of conferring all places of profit and honor on whom he pleased, he
and his Court had generally such an influence and interest in choosing
Parliaments, that seldom any considerable number, who were not his mere
Creatures, were elected; and so by Parliaments, his own, and not the peoples
interest was promoted: Or if he at any time found the Parliament endeavoring
to bound his Prerogative, it was his practice presently to dissolve it.
However, if there were Bounds and Restrictions put to the King, and that there
was a power intended to bridle his designs: why should any man plead for no
bounds, neither of time, nor of power, to be put to the Parliament? When the
King ruled, the Parliament was intended to be a Skreen between the Kings
Prerogative, and the peoples Liberties; and shall we now have no Skreen between
the Parliaments power and will, and the Peoples liberties, proprieties and
safeties? Shall they have power to raise what moneys they please, and share it
amongst themselves? shall they set up (as of late) many great Salary-Offices,
and keep pluralities of the best of them to themselves? shall they have power
to destroy men without a cause, and take their Estates to themselves? We do not
by any part of this Agreement tie up their hands from doing good, but only
from destroying us. And is not a Parliament free, that has an absolute power
to do good, Unless they have also an absolute unlimited power to do mischief,
and make Laws to protect themselves therein? surely this is such an absurdity,
that none but a grand Impostor (that aims chiefly at his own designs) can
plead. Should any future Parliament act coutrary to the substance of all or any
part of this Agreement, what rational unbyassed man can expect safety? If they
can set up a single person, why not Charles Stuart, as well as any other? If
perpetuate the power in themselves, or in any number of persons, why is it not
better to have it in one? one Family will be at a cheaper rate made rich then
many; men that are honest, and love their Country, may apostatize and prove
enemies; which lamentable late experience sufficiently has taught us. Is it
not better to make such Laws that may bind the worst and subtilest heads from
hurting us, then to be always at the mercy of honest men; which probably have
appeared so, thereby to get an opportunity to do hurt to the purpose? If
Parliaments may set up what form of Church Discipline or Worship they judge
best, why not Prelacy o^ Popery, as well as Presbytery; and so consequently a
compulsive maintenance for the Ministers of the same? Did not Parliaments in
Edward the Sixth's Reign set up Prelacie, and own the Professors thereof? And
did not Parliaments (consisting of a great number of the same men) in Queen
Mary's days, establish Popery, and make such cruel bloody Laws, by which many
Protestants were burned? this in these days is worth taking notice of, to
prevent the like. The National Ministry that must be by compulsion provided
for, surely at present is meant Presbytery, and their Adherents; and how
Orthodox they are, let them by the heaps of their infamous fawning Addresses,
to the late single person, be judged: and what they deserve, let their Sermons,
and the fruits of them in Cheshire and elsewhere, claim. If the public
maintenance should be taken from them (as it was from the Prelacy) and
conferred on the Ministers and Pastors of separate Congregations, and none
else, what a flood of Envy and Reproach would they cast forth! But surely,
considering what blood they have been guilty of, what desperate perils they
have often involved this Nation in, and how mercifully God has preserved it
from their designs; they are not a people so to be feared, nor (in point of
policy) so to be pleased, as some may pretend; unless the end of all successes
and victories must center in taking away the Estates of the Conquerors, to
please and strengthen the Conquered, that so at last they may be enabled to
satiate themselves with a cruel and bloody Revenge. However, we have not in any
measure desired any more Liberty of Conscience, nor security of our Estates,
but what may be equally due to them, if they have not been, nor shall not be
guilty of the breach of the peace of the Nation. We claim no more then what is
due to us by the Law of God and Nature, and we are bound in conscience to our
selves and Families to assure it. But at last, if notwithstanding all this,
nothing will please our Enemies, but Death, Banishment or Imprisonment, or
denial of our Religion; it behooves us to prevent the same; and if they suffer
in the end, they may justly blame their own obstinacy for it. We heartily wish
that all the Parliament, nay, all the Magistrates of the nation, were or may be
nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to the Church of Christ, that they would
cordially make it their work to relieve the poor, and cloth the naked
Christians, and with the great Estates which they possess (and for which they
must give an account) to take a delight in doing good. Let them do the work of
Christ in the way of Christ, and not in or by the way of Antichrist; for that
is not required at their hands. Why we, by this Agreement, restrain public
Salary-men from sitting in Parliament, we give this Reason, That experience
has taught us, that great damage has and may arise thereby to the nation in
general: to particularize: Those people never think of lessening, but
increasing the number and benefit of Offices; so that it often has fallen out,
that Parliament Men by Salary-Offices, have yearly received many thousands of
pounds, when they have been non-resident, and have not paid 100 l. yearly, to
execute their place: this is the reason that vast unnecessary sums of the
public Treasure have been consumed, to the impoverishing of the Nation. We do
not in the least deny, but that there may be, and are many Salary-men both in
the Army and elsewhere, that are as able, and may be as much confided in, as
any people in the Nation; and we should be glad that they might proceed in
freeing their Country from captivity, and building of Laws or walls of safety
about it; and that they, with Nehemiah, would not eat the bread of the
Governor, for that the bondage is great: but that they should be employed in a
double capacity, or render void a certain safe principle for the nations ease,
may be a precedent of dangerous consequence. And that Parliament men ought not
to receive or share among themselves any of the public Treasure, is of
absolute necessity: had the long Parliament been restrained from it, as also
from giving large unwarrantable gratuities, the nation had been some hundred
thousand pounds better then now it is; the soldiers had not been enforced to
sell their Arrears for little or nothing, the public Faith-mony had been paid;
and in all likelihood, if they had been restrained from advantages to enrich
themselves, and been bounded in their Sessions to sit but a short time, they
had made such good Laws, and such a sure Foundation of Government, that might
have secured the Nation and themselves, and engaged the people in their
affections to them, for the good they had received by them. Notwithstanding all
this, we know it is and will be the great cry of the implacable Royal Faction,
both old and new, for a Free Parliament, chosen as formerly, without any
Qualifications, and to sit and make Laws without Restrictions; this indeed is
their Masterpiece to bring in Stuarts Family; it being visible, that by such
an Election few or none would be elected, but those that would espouse the
Stuarts Interest, and so under a pretense of Law and Equity, inthrone him, to
the utter destruction of all the honest party, whom they brand with the Titles
of Sectaries and Heretics, thereby to render them more contemptible to the
people in general, then the most vicious persons in the land, whilst they
themselves more justly deserve those titles, by differing more from the
Precepts and Practices of Christ, the Apostles, and Primitive Churches. We are
as much for a just Parliament Authority, as any people in the nation, and do
declare from the sincerity of our hearts, we cannot possibly, in the least,
imagine how this nation can be secured in its liberties and proprieties, but by
constant successive Parliaments, limited both in time and power: for this being
done, they will not rashly thrust the Nation into wars, knowing they must
equally contribute to the charge, and not be in a capacity to enrich themselves
by great Offices, in prosecuting the same. Had the Nation been thus settled
before (causelessly) the Spanish destructive War was begun, it would in all
probability, together with the miseries that have thereby happened to the
Nation, have been prevented. Although Parliaments have been guilty of high
miscarriages, yet this is not a ground sufficient to lay them aside, and center
in a worse way: it may as well be alleged, that all Magistracy has generally
made use of its power for their own Advantages; and therefore that all
Magistracy and Government ought to be laid aside, and all things left to run
into Anarchy and Confusion.

To conclude: We profess in the integrity of our hearts, we desire a real
Reformation in Church, according to the written word of God, and the example of
the Primitive times; and a true firm and lasting settlement of the State, that
we may have Rulers (as in the old time) that may execute justice and judgment,
and be a terror to those that shall do evil, and a comfort to those that do
well. And we declare we have no design nor desire, in the least measure, to
ruin and destroy any of our fellow-Natives and Countrymen; as is clearly
manifest, by what is before specified. And we do earnestly desire all Interests
that are consistent with common safety, and persons that desire to do as they
would have others should do to them, may consent and agree with us herein; and
we hope if the love of peace and settlement be not hid from their eyes, they
speedily will.

THis Remonstrance being read, and the Presentors thereof withdrawn, they were
again called, to whom the Chairman, Colonel Barrow, returned this Answer: That
he was commanded to give the Remonstrators the thanks of the committee, for
their good affections to the Public; and to let them know, they were
proceeding on things of the same nature.

FINIS.

