ENGLAND'S Remembrancer: BEING A COLLECTION OF Farewel-Sermons, Preached by
diverse NON-CONFORMISTS IN THE COUNTRY.

Revel. 3.3. Remember how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast --

London, Printed in the Year, 1663.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe great Importunity of some serious Christians has been the occasion of
bringing these Notes to light; and a singular care not to wrong the Authors,
has procured as exact and perfect Copies, as could possibly be expected;
excepting what Errata's have happened in the Printing.

They are not sent forth upon any bad design; but it is very much desired, and
also hoped, that they may do good. When our Fields are not so fruitful, it is a
comfort if our Garners are not quite empty, but that some of the old store is
left. When our special Bosom-Friends are at a distance, that we cannot see
them, it is some satisfaction if we can here from them. When our sins have
driven so many of our Teachers into corners, that we cannot hear them in
Public, it may be some help to us, that this way we may converse with them in
our houses still.

And though it has been the great sin of many English Professors to lust after
Quails, to affect new airy Notions, and to loath heavenly Manna, because it was
common (how many of us, alas! that surfeted upon our plenty, thereby provoking
the Lord to send years of scarcity) yet it is possible, that some by this time
may have recovered their appetite to sound and wholesome Food: To such the
ensuing Sermons no doubt will be welcome.

And is it not now high time to be sensible of what we have lost? As Jerusalem
in the days of her affliction remembered (with grief of heart) all her pleasant
things which she had in the days of old, Lam. 1.7. They were sorrowful for the
Solemn Assemblies, whom the Lord Promised to gather, and bring again, Zeph.
3.18, 20.

And would it not be our wisdom to make the best advantage of what we yet
enjoy? If we are kept shorter in respect of Public means, the greater should
be our care to improve all private helps. If we have less plain and practical
Preaching, the more need to give attendance to Reading. If we are unfaithful in
a little, why should we be entrusted with more? were there never so many to be
found amongst us, that pray daily for the restoring of their Ministers, yet
while our unprofitableness that cast them out, still continues, there is little
hope that prayer alone should bring them in again.

And so the more we see amiss abroad, should it not the more provoke us to
reform at home? He that would have his House a Bethel, must see to the
cleansing of it; and put away those things that would provoke the eyes of God's
Glory. How should an Holy God delight to dwell there, where Sin and Satan (his
greatest enemies) bear rule? Oh that our Houses were indeed consecreated as
little Churches to his Service! surely, then the Lord himself would be a little
Sanctuary to us; Yea, so we might hope further to see his Power and Glory, even
as we have seen them in the great Congregation. They that join themselves to
the Lord, to serve Him, and to love the Name of the Lord, to be His Servants:
every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, the Lord has Promised
that He will bring them to His Holy Mountain, and make them joyful in His House
of Praise, Isa. 56.6, 7. O let us choose the things that please Him, as ever we
would have our Pleasant things. Indeed, was [Holiness to the Lord] more
engraven on us, then there would be greater hopes, that we should yet possess
the Land, and inherit His Holy Mountain.

But (alas) what do we (any of us) crying out of the sins of the times? what do
we complaining of Disorders and Corruptions in Church Assemblies, if in the
mean time we neglect to reform disorders at home in our Families; and overlook
Corruptions in our own Hearts? Would not this bewray great Partiality and
Hypocrisy?

Good Reader, Be serious when thou viewest over these Sermous. Examine what
thou read, comparing it with the un-erring Rule of Sacred Writ. Turn to
those Texts of Scripture, where, for brevity sake, the places are only noted,
the words not recited. If thou come with a sober unprejudiced mind, thou will
find here the words of Truth and Soberness. These Sermons, most of them, were
Preached and Heard with Sad and Mournful Hearts; O, do not thou bring a vain
light spirit to the perusal of them. They come forth recommended to the
Blessing of God by Prayer; Let it be thy earnest Prayer to God also, that thou
may profit by Them. Without His Blessing all Means are ineffectual.

If thou gettest any Light or Heat, any Quickening or Comfort from them, bless
the Lord for it, and be more mindful of these whom He has covered with a Cloud
in the Day of His Anger: Who have sometimes Prophesied in Sackcloth, and are
now clothed in Sackcloth, because they may not Prophecy. O strive together
with them, in Prayers to God for them. What Great things have sometimes been
done by Prayer? By Prayer Joshua commanded the Sun; Sun, stand thou still upon
Gibeon: And the Lord hearkened to the voice of a man. Sure we are, he that has
caused the Sun to go down upon so many of our Prophets; yea, has caused their
Sun to Set at Noon; He can so order it, that at evening time it shall be light,
Zech. 14.7.

Now Beg hard of God on the behalf of those who are Peaceable and Faithful in
this our Israel; that He who has the hearts of Kings and all Men in His hand,
would give those His Servants to find favor in the eyes of our King and
Governors, that after the example of good Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30.22. they may
countenance and encourage all such as would teach the good Knowledge of God in
the Land.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 18. read fruitful. P. 11. l. 2, 3. r. To show that Christians
are to remember, how for the manner they. P. 14. l. 33. r. sorrow. P. 17. l.
25. put out to. P. 21. l. 30. r. wantonness, -- deadness; l. 31. r.
worldliness. P. 23. l. 14. for enjoy, 1. have. P. 30. l. 30. r. deserts. P. 31.
l. 22. dele by their sins. P. 39. l. 1. r. another. P. 47. l. 9. f. III. take
3. l. 27. r. (...). l. 33. r. Loquitur. P. 48. l. 24. r. now that. l. 32. r.
remove. P. 53. l. 27. r. reclinemus. P. 58. l. 12. f. this r. His. P. 71. l.
13. dele that. P. 73. l. 21. r. (...); l. ult. r. several controversies. P. 77.
l. 9. r. think themselves wise; l. 15. r. it is. P. 60. l. 21. dele to go. P.
84. l. 20. r. tendiculam; l. 24. r. Bonus. P. 91. l. 18. r. This is. P. 94. l.
23. r. halting; l. 28. r. so true. P. 96. l. 31. r. replentes. P. 98. l. 18. r.
that answered; l. 26. r. go on. P. 108. marg. r. Tarnov. P. 110. l. 17. f. ye
r. we. P. 119. l. 34. r. as to say. P. 120. l. 6. r. (...). P. 122. l. 15. r.
to be saved; l. 16. dele us. P. 125. l. 33. r. dearly. P. 126. l. 17. f. his,
r. their. P. 129. l. 3. r. deny Christ; l. 10. r. many of us Christians. P.
135. l. 32. f. them, r: whom. P. 137. l. 32. r. others. P. 138. l. 25. f. dulce
r. datae; l. 26. r. voluble. P. 140. l. 2. f. we, r. may. P. 150. l. 6. r.
forbear; l. 11. dele not. P. 152. l. 25. r. labitur and labetur, etc. l. 29. r.
indesinenter. P. 157. l. 20. r. humane apprehension. P. 159. l. 10, 11. r.
exceed all expressions. P. 177. l. 14. r. restraint. Correct the Figures from
page 180 to 193. P. 180. l. 13. r. old. P. 181. l. 35. r. vis unita. P. 185. l.
32. r. incollumen. P. 189. l. 28. r. heaviness. P. 198. l. 25. r. individuum.
P. 200. l. 28. r. minutatim. P. 204. l. 1. dele non. P. 206. l. 22. r.
Authority. P. 207. l. 1. r. of Christ. P. 210. l. 12. r. as accomplished. P.
214. l. 5. r. Phil. r. 23. P. 215. l. 1. r. (...). P. 216. l. 11. r. (...). P.
224. l. 15. r. to do. P. 229. 31. r. (...). P. 231. l. 30. r. lay it not. P.
235. l. 1. r. a wrong. P. 241. l. 2, 3. r. which they. l. 29. r. double. P.
248. l. 32. r. from want. P. 260. l. 16. r. off from. P. 261. l. 3. r. but I
hasten. P. 274. l. 14. r. (...). P. 277. l. 16. dele as it were: l. 32. r. his
own. P. 279. l. 14. f. that, r. our. l. 22. dele but. P. 282. l. 16. r. As
when. 283. l. 14. r. of suffering with Christ. l. 15. f. image, r. death. 285.
l. 23. r. practice it. l. 29. r. supply, and we shall overcome. P. 311. l. 15.
f. Her, r. his. 313. l. ult. r. Midian. 319. l. 15. r. Achaia. 320. l. 20. r.
glorying. 326. l. 15. r. despondent. l. 17. r. (...). P. 328. l. 17. r. (...).
336. l. 12. r. burnt offerings. 345. l. 16. r. God makes. 368. l. 15. r.
inferior world. 394. l. 13. r. Cross of Christ. P. 416. l. 14. r. improve.
422. l. 12. Troublers. P. 431. l. 32. r. Not mentioning. 448. l. 9, 10. r.
against the Mountains. 451. l. 11. r. Security. 452. l. 25. r. warm. 456. l.
22. r. your own. 464. l. 18. r. have not.

There are other faults besides, but these especially are to be corrected.

SERMON I. Preached, Friday June 27. 1662.
Revel. 3. v. 3. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold
fast and repent, etc.


I Have gone through the whole second Chapter of this Book, and the two first
verses of this, in my course of preaching the Friday-Lecture. I shall enter
upon this third verse at this time by God's assistance. The words contain
further counsel and direction given by our Savior Christ to this Church of
Sardis, in order to her recovery from that formality and spiritual deadness she
was sunk into. Two Directions Christ had given her in the second verse; Be
watchful, and strengthen, etc. There are three more added in this, Remember,
etc. hold fast, and repent. The third in order, and first laid down in this
verse, is, to remember; Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard.
This is prescribed as a means to recover them from their spiritual decays and
deadness, and to cure them of that formality and hypocrisy they had been
guilty of. Christ had told them in the former verses, that they had a name to
live, but were dead, and that their works were not perfect or full before God.
Now the way to cure them of these distempers, was, to remember how they had
received, and heard; implying that it was forgetfulness of those Truths, Rules
and Directions they had received in, and heard from the Word of God that was
the cause of their declining, and that the way to recover vigor and liveliness
in Religion, and to fill up their works, was, to remember how they had
received, and heard. So that the way to bring either Churches or persons to
their former vigor in Religion, and to a thorow-reformation of things amiss,
is to bring all things to the Test of God's Word, to weigh them in the balance
of the Sanctuary, and to try them by those Divine Truths they have formerly
received and heard. Briefly to explain the words.

Remember.] This may be taken, first, for the act of that particular faculty of
the soul, called Reminiscentia or Memory: and so to remember, is to recollect
or call back a thing or object, formerly heard, received, and laid up in the
Memory.

Secondly, It may be taken for an act of the Judgment, and so to remember, is,
seriously to weigh and consider Truths formerly received and heard: and it may
be well understood here, so as to take in both senses.

How thou have received] (...). Some render it (...) qualia, and would have it
refer to the quality of the things or truths they had received and heard.
Remember what Doctrines were delivered by Christ and his Apostles, what kind of
Worship was instituted and practiced by them. This sense of the words I shall
not exclude, but the word relates rather to the manner how Truths and
Ordinances were delivered to them, and received by them. Several Doctrines
might be raised from the words.

Doct. 1. That one great cause of declining in Religion both in Churches and
particular Christians, is the forgetfulness of those Truths they have formerly
received and heard; the forgetting what and how they have received and heard.

Doct. 2. That the best way to recover and reform a declining Church or person,
is to bring them back to the Rule of God's Word, which they have received and
heard, to reduce both Doctrine, Worship and Practices to the first Institution,
as it is contained in the Scriptures.

There are other Doctrines that I might raise and insist on from these words;
but I shall sum up all I intend to speak from this direction, in this one
Doctrine.

Doct. That it is the duty of Churches and particular Christians, and a special
means to recover them from formality, declinings and deadness in Religion, and
the exercise of Grace, to remember what and how they have received and heard.
Christians should remember old Truths that they have received and heard long
ago. They should remember what Truths they have heard, and what Ordinances they
have enjoyed, and also after what manner Truths and Ordinances have been
dispensed to them, and received by them. It is our duty to take care we be not
forgetful hearers; that we suffer not Truths to slip out of our minds. Hearing
and receiving Truths and Ordinances, is not the All of a Christians duty. There
must be also (as the Text tells us) a remembering how we have received and heard.

In handling this Doctrine I shall observe this method. 1. Prove the Doctrine
from Scripture. 2. Explicate it, and therein show both what it is to remember,
and what it is we are to remember. 3. Give reasons of the Doctrine. 4. Apply it.

First, For the Scripture Proof of this Doctrine, see this duty enjoined to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. and the particular directions there given were in
order to the furthering of this great Duty in the Text, namely, remembering how
they had received and heard. This duty is further pressed, Prove. 6.21. Prove.
7.1, 2, 3. Isa. 42.23. Who will hearken and hear for the time to come? Now if
men should hear for the time to come, then they must remember what they have
formerly heard: for, no more will be ours in the time to come, but what we
shall have (at least) a savoury practical remembrance of. And as this is a duty
commanded, so it has been conscientiously practiced by the Saints of God: See
the great care of David in the discharge of this duty, Psalm. 119.11, 15, 48,
97. And so also the Virgin Mary, Luke 2.51. and in many other places, is said
to have pondred and laid up the sayings of Christ in her heart. The Memory is
the storehouse and treasury of the soul, in which her spiritual treasures are
laid up. There are three things (says Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick.
one) we should be very careful to keep in our remembrance; former sins, to
make and keep us humble; former mercies, to make us thankful; former Truths and
Ordinances to make us faithful.

2. The second general is, to explicate the Doctrine, and there first to show
what it is to remem^er. That I shall but name.

First; To remember, is to recollect and call to mind. This is our duty in
reference to what we have received and heard. We must recollect, call to mind,
and ruminate upon Divine Truths, formerly received: we must (as it were) chew
the cud. This is the way to make sound and clean Christians. It is the
simisitude Chrysostom uses: They were clean beasts under the Law (at least
that was one requisite to make them so) that chewed the cud; and he is like to
make a holy spiritual Christian, that delivers Truth to his Memory whilst he
hears it, and is able and careful to call it to mind again afterward.

Secondly, To remember what we have received and heard, is not only to
recollect, but also seriously to weigh and consider Truths, and bring them home
to our hearts by particular application.

3. The third general, is, to show to you what it is that Christians are thus
to remember. This I shall open under two heads. First, show it is the duty of
Christians to remember what they have received and heard for the matter: 2dly,
how they have received and heard as to the manner.

First, It is the duty of Christians to remember what Truths and Ordinances
they have received, and been made partakers of. And if any ask what Truths
should be remembered? I answer, That every Truth of God is precious, and ought
to be treasured up by us in our hearts. No one Truth ought carelessly to be let
slip. The very fragments of Divine Truth should be taken up, that none of them
be lost. The very dust of Gold is precious. There is not the least Truth that
ever any of you heard or received, but may be of use to you at some time or
other. But there are some Truths which we should be most especially careful to
remember, namely, the main Foundation-Truths, and such as are most necessary to
Salvation.

1. It is the duty of Christians, and a special means both to keep and recover
them from formality and deadness in Religion, to be very careful to retain in
their memories those Fundamental Doctrines and Principles of Religion they have
received and heard, that are contained in the Scriptures, and have been opened,
confirmed, and applied from them, in expounding, preaching, catechizing, and
such other Ordinances as you have enjoyed. You must labor to remember old
savoury-Truths that you have heard many years since; Christians should chew
them over again by meditation. This is the course Christ directs his Church to
in the Text, to recover them from deadness in Religion. He does not bid them
look after new Notions and high Speculations, for these will but puff up the
minds of men, and not enliven them; but he bids them remember how they had
received and heard. The like direction Paul gives to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.13, 14.
Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have received of me, etc. The
vital Doctrines of Faith in Jesus Christ, and concerning the Person, Natures,
Offices, and Benefits of Christ, with the Truths depending on these: Oh! these
should never be forgotten by those who have received them. And also the
vivifical Doctrines of Repentance from dead works, Love toward God and our
neighbors. You have heard these Truths opened, confirmed, and applied to you
many and many a time, both from the mouths of former Ministers now dead and
gone, and such whose labors you have occasionally enjoyed. And I trust that we
also, whose Ministry among you is now toward a period, may say as Paul when he
was taking leave of the Ephesians, Acts 20.20, 21, 26, 27. though we
acknowledge in great weakness, and with many mixtures of sin. Well, beloved, It
is your duty to remember these Truths you have heard; and the rather, because
time may come, either by reason of the hand of God in a way of sickness upon
you, or God may send a famine, or if not, a scarsity of the Word upon a People
for their sinful abuse of former plenty, and then when you may not have so
frequently and abundantly the Word afresh opened and applied to you, it will be
of great use to remember what and how you have received and heard. If old
Errors should be broached under the notion of new Truths, Christians should
bring them to the standard of God's Word (according to that, Isa. 8.20.) of
what you have received and heard. If any shall go about to cry up Doctrines of
conditional decrees, man's free will, falling from Grace, or the like; if you
remember what you have heard, you will be able to say, We have not so learned
Christ.

2. It is the duty of Christians, and a means to recover them from deadness and
formality of Religion, to remember as the Doctrines of the Gospel they have
received and heard, so also what they have received and heard in and from the
Word of God concerning the Worship of God, and the Administration of
Gospel Ordinances, and to bring all things imposed and practiced in Divine
Worship, to the Rule of God's Word; to enquire whether they be such things as
have the warrant of the Command of Christ, or practice of the Apostles of
Christ. It has been the design of Satan, and the work of the corrupt hearts of
men in all Ages, to be making Additions to the Commands of Christ, and to be
mingling men's Inventions with the Institutions of Christ in matters of Worship.
Churches are very apt to degenerate from plain Spiritual Worship, and the
simplicity of the Gospel of Christ into a name to (...), a mere outward form of
Religion, and a gay and pompous way of worshipping God, such as may most please
the flesh and fancy of men. Now in such a case it is the duty of God's People,
to remember how they have received and heard. They should remember that God
has said he will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4.23, 24. and what
Christ has said, Mat. 15.3, 10. and Mark 7.7, 8, 9. Read these Scriptures at
leisure. This was Christ's Doctrine. And when the Church was very much
degenerated, God bids them, ( Jer. 6.16) Ask for the old paths, where is the
good way, and walk therein. Not the old paths of Custom, Tradition, the opinion
and practice of forefathers; but those ways that are as old as your Bibles
are, as the Word of God and the Gospel is; for these are the good old way.
Other ways may be old, but not good. When things of men's devising are put upon
men, and crowded into God's Worship, Christians should run to their Bibles, and
ask, Was it so from the beginning? Did Christ and his Apostles preach, pray,
administer and receive Sacraments thus? how did they appoint them to be
dispensed? Christians should account it wisdom enough to follow their direction
and example. Certainly they worshipped God decently, yet they contented
themselves with what they had received of the Lord, without making additions of
their own. When any thing is obtruded upon God's People in matters of Worship,
they should try all things by the Word of God. It is a saying of Cyprian to
this purpose, in an Epistle of his; Si canalis aquam ducens subito deficiat,
nonne ad fontem pergitur? etc. If the Conduit-pipe or Cistern which was wont to
give forth water plentifully, suddenly stop, do not men go to the Fountain to
find out the cause, whether the Fountain be dry, or the veins stopped? etc. Sic
^^portet facere Dei sacerdotes si in aliquo nutaverit aut v^^^llaverit veritas,
ad originem Dominicam, and Evangelicam, and Apostolicam traditionem revertamur,
etc. Let us return to the Word and Gospel, and Apostolical tradition; that
which is truly so called, and can be proved from undisputable authority to be
such. This is a safe Rule, and the way to keep Churches from corruption, and
rightly to reform them if they be in any thing corrupted.

3. It is the duty of Christians, and a means to recover them from spiritual
deadness, to remember what they have received and heard, for the directing of
their practice, and ordering of their conversations. They should remember
practical Truths, the Commands, Counsels, Exhortations, Directions they have
found in and heard from the Word of God. These should be had in everlasting
remembrance. They are to be remembered by Christians all their days, and never
to be forgotten. Though some notions should through weakness slip out of your
minds, yet practical Truths should be written not in the dust, but on your
hearts, as on marble, and engraven as with the point of a diamond, never to be
razed out. Oh Beloved, many, many of these have you received and heard. You
have been pressed unto public, family, secret, relative duties: you have been
directed how you should hear, read, pray, confer, receive Sacraments: how you
should carry your selves as Magistrates, Ministers, People, Husbands, Wives,
Parents, Children, Masters, Servants; in commerce, traffic and dealings with
men. Oh remember these things. And especially, if such times should come when
you may not hear so much and often of these things as heretofore you have done.

4. It is the duty of Christians to remember the reproofs and warnings against
sin they have received and heard. The remembrance of these will be a means to
kee^ ^ou from sin. You have been many times warned to take heed of sin, as a
most venomous Serpent, and the most inveterate enemy both of God and of your
own souls. God has sent his Messengers rising early, to warn you to take heed
of all sin. You have been warned to beware of Profaneness, Sabbath-breaking,
Error, Superstition, yea and of Hypocrisy, Formality, Deadness, Apostasy; you
should remember what and how you have received and heard, so as to take heed of
these and all other sins, and especially when you shall be in an hour of
temptation, when these sins may be rise and common, and grow in fashion.

5. It is the duty of Christians, and a means both to keep and recover from
deadness, to remember the forewarnings they have had of God's Judgments. You
have been told of God's Judgments against sin in general, and against such and
such sins in particular. You have been told of Afflictions, Sufferings,
Persecutions that you must look for. You have been told of these in the written
Word, and by Gods Ministers. And you should especially remember these, when you
see Judgments coming, or feel them already executed. Remember those warnings in
the Word of God, John 16.1, 2, 3, 4, 33. Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. O Christians,
you have been forewarned that Error in Judgment, Wantonness in Opinion and
Practice under the Gospel, loathing of Manna, would bring a famine of the Word,
that decays in and leaving of first Love would cause God to remove his
Candlestick, that deadness and formality would cause God to come, as a thief in
the night, to take away the Gospel, and all your precious things. O therefore
Christians, when you see such Judgments coming, or feel them upon you, remember
what and how you have received and heard: and this Remembrance will be a
special means to bring you to Repentance.

6. And lastly, It is the duty of Christians (...) ^emember the comforts they
have received in, and heard from the Word of God; those grounds of comfort,
precious Cordials, and strong Consolations you have read and heard to bear up
your hearts under the sense of sin, and apprehensions of God's wrath, and in a
time of dissertion, and against the fierce and fiery assaults of Satan, the
strength of corruption, weakness of grace, difficulty of duty, as also under
afflictions from God, and sufferings and persecutions from men. This will be a
means to keep the hearts and hopes of Christians alive in the saddest
conditions they can be brought into. It will be of great use in an evil day.
And thus I have showed you what it is for the matter Christians are chiefly and
especiallp to remember.

Secondly. For the further explication of the duty in the Doctrine, I come now
to show how, for the (...), Christians are to remember how they have received
and heard. And this is more expressly spoken of in the Text, and that under two
heads. 1. They are to remember how Truths have been delivered to them, and
Ordinances dispensed amongst them. 2. How and after what manner they have
received and embraced the Truths and Ordinances of God.

First, It is the duty of Christians to remember how the Word of God has been
preached and Ordinances dispensed to them; and that in these four particulars.

1. Christians should remember how plainly and in what simplicity of the Gospel
of Christ, the Word, Sacraments, and other Ordinances have been dispensed; how
close and home the Word of God has been brought to their hearts and
consciences. This the Apostle Paul often minds those of, to whom he writes, and
this as a means to keep them from being taken with flourishes, external pomp,
and emp^^ things in Religion, 1 Cor. 2. five first verses; As if he had said to
them, as I may say to you, You have not been fed with gingling expressions,
mere flourishes of Rhetoric, or empty speculations, but with plain and wholesome
Truths: you have had Ordinances not in the dress of men's inventions, but in the
simplicity of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 2.17. and 4.2. Paul was very jealous lest men
should be drawn from the simplicity of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. So that I say,
the remembrance of the plainness and simplicity, in which the Gospel has been
dispensed among men, will be a means to keep them from being taken with a mere
outside Religion and way of Worship.

2. It is the duty of Christians, to remember how purely you have received and
heard, with what purity the Word, Sacraments and other Ordinances have been
delivered, and dispensed without the mixtures of men's inventions; how you have
received the sincere milk of the Word without sophistication, and Sacraments
without any of the sinful additions of men's own devising. Thus you have
received them in the Scriptures: thus Christ and his Apostles delivered them;
and so have faithful Ministers, their successors, endeavored to do. 1 Cor.
11.23, 24. That which I have received of the Lord, I have delivered unto you.
Paul, though an Apostle, added nothing of his own head. 2 Cor. 2.17. and 2 Cor.
4.2. Oh Christians, it is your duty to remember this, and will be a means to
make you in love with, and adhere to, pure Ordinances, and fortify you against
all sophistications of them, when you see men corrupting of them, or adding to
them.

3. It is the duty of Christians to remember how powerfully they have received
and heard, with what power the Word has been preached and Ordinances dispensed
among you; not so as to tickle your ears and please your fancies, but to reach
your hearts, come home to and work upon your consciences: how the Gospel came
to you not in word, but in power, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. commending it self to your
consciences, as the Apostle phraseth it, 2 Cor. 4.2. Has not the speech and
preaching of the faithful Ministers of Christ among you, in some measure been,
as Paul says his was, not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit, and in power, 1 Cor. 2.4? Have not you found the
weapons of your spiritual warfare, such as Paul mentions, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. even
mighty through God? Oh! Christians should never forget this, but continually
remember it all their days.

4. It is the duty of Christians to remember how plentifully they have received
and heard; in what great plenty they have enjoyed the Word and Ordinances of
God. Oh Christians, you should remember what dews, yea, showers of heavenly
Manna God has rained about your tents; ye have not been straightened in God. If
you be straightened it is in your selves, even in your own bowels. The heart and
mouth of God, yea and the hearts and mouths of God's Ministers they have been
opened and enlarged to you, 2 Cor. 6.11, 12. You have had the Word in season,
and out of season, the Word frequently preached, and Sacraments frequently
administered; you have had line upon line, and precept upon precept. Christians
should remember how much planting and watering they have had. You should
remember, Christians, what great pains, cost and charges God has been at with
your souls to bring you home to himself at the first, and to make and keep you
lively and fruitful ever since; O keep this for ever in your minds, as a means
to make you lively and fruitful.

Secondly, It is the duty of Christians, to remember, as how Truths and
Ordinances have been dispensed, so also how and after what manner they have
been heard, received and embraced by them. This will be a means to keep the
heart lively, and to keep from degenerating into deadness and formality in
Religion, and in the Service of God. And this in several particulars.

1. It is the duty of Christians, and a means to keep and recover them from
deadness, to remember how seriously, with what seriousness of spirit they
attended on the Service of God and holy duties, at their first entertaining of
them. Christians at first are wont to wait on Ordinances as matters of great
weight and moment, yea as matters of life and death, to read, hear, pray,
meditate, receive Sacraments as for their very lives, and as if every one were
the last they should enjoy. So those hearers of Christ received the Word, Luke
10.48. they hung upon his lips, received the Word as the Word of God.
Christians, this should be remembered by you, especially when you grow slighty
and formal, you should say to your souls, It was not wont to be thus with me, I
was not wont to hear, play, receive Sacraments in this formal manner. This
remembering how you have received, will be a means to keep your hearts lively,
and to cure you of spiritual deadness.

2. Christians should remember how they have received and heard; namely, with
what high estimations and appreciations of the Word and Ordinances you heard
and received them; how highly you prized the Word and the Dispensers of it; how
you ran after them, as those who see the Sun but one half of the year are ready
to run after it, and even to adore it upon its first approach. Did you not
esteem the Ambassadors of Christ, even as the Angels of God? How beautiful were
the feet of them that bring glad-tydings? Were you not ready to do as those
Galatians, Gal. 4.15? When at any time you seel your estimations to abate, of
the Word, Ordinances and Ministers of Christ, Oh then remember how you have
received; say to your hearts, Are Ordinances worse than they were? Is there any
change in the Word? or rather, am not I grown worse? Is not the change in my
own wretched heart? The remembrance of this will be a means both to keep and
recover you from deadness.

3. It is the duty of Christians to remember with what lively affections they
heard and received the Word and Ordinances of God; the difficulties they were
ready to break through to enjoy them, the fight of afflictions they were ready
to endure. So Christians, you should do as you are exhorted, Heb. 10.32.
Remember what baths of godly sorry and compunction of spirit you found in
hearing; what earnest pantings after Christ and his Ordinances. Could you not
once say, as the Psalmist, Psalm. 42.1, 2. and 63.1, 2. and 84.1, 2. Remember
what flames of Divine Love to God, Jesus Christ and his People, you once felt
burning in your hearts. Remember those Raptures of Joy you have felt, while you
have been with joy drawing Waters out of the Wells of Salvation. Remember with
what delight and complacency you conversed in holy duties, what zeal you had
for God and his Ministers; how even the zeal of Gods house eat you up. O when
you begin to feel your affections cool and grow flat, say, Why am I thus? Is
not God and Christ as lovely and desirable, the Ways of God as delightful and
pleasant as ever? Such a remembrance, how you have received, will be a means to
keep up a lively frame of heart in most dead times.

4. Christians should remember with what readiness of mind they heard and
received the Word of God; with what holy resolutions to obey the Truth, and to
give up themselves to be guided by it, and to walk with God, to live and die in
Gods ways, and for them too if God called them to it. Thus God's People have
received the Word. So did those mentioned Isa. 2.2, 3. and Acts 10.33. and so
have you, if ever you received it savingly. Oh remember this, as a means to
quicken you when you find holy resolutions to cool in you.

5. Christians should remember with what impressions upon their hearts they
have received the Word and Sacraments. Oh remember, Christians, what
impressions Truths and Ordinances were wont to leave upon your hearts, what
work they made in your souls, what wounds were given to sin, what
heart-meltings and heart-revivings you have found, while one while your hearts
have been melted, yea even dissolved into penitential tears, and another while
filled with raptures of spiritual joy. What workings of Faith, Love, Desires?
Has it not been thus with you sometimes Christians? Oh remember this, to
quicken you when you grow dead, and can, yea do, sit under Ordinances with few,
if any, such impressions as these are.

6. And lastly, Remember with what efficacy you have heard and received the
Word and Ordinances of God. You should remember what gracious effects have been
wrought in, and produced on your souls by these. Oh Christians, you should
remember what good you have got by the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, Communion of
Saints: what communion with God you have enjoyed in them, and what of God you
have received by and through them; what quicknings, what comforts you have been
made partakers of, while you have been attending upon them. Have you not found
the Word and Sacraments, and other Ordinances of God, wounding, yea killing
your corruptions, enabling you to overcome temptations, strengthening of grace,
enabling you to duty? Has not God spoken Peace to your souls in and through
these? Has he not administered comfort to your souls in times of dissertion
under sore afflictions, against most bitter sufferings, and most hot and fiery
persecutions? Oh remember this, to keep your hearts alive in, and your love
warm and lively unto those precious Truths and Ordinances you have received so
much good through, how much soever they may be despised and scorned by others.

SERMON II. Preached, Lord's Day, July 6. 1662.
Rev. 3.3. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast,
and repent, etc.
BEloved, when I entered on this verse in my co^^^ of the Friday-Lecture, I
little thought that I ^a^^ so short a time to preach among you. I hoped I sho^^
have enjoyed some further opportunities for some ^ew weeks, at least as long as
the Act of Uniformity ^llowes. But it has pleased God by his wise and holy
Providence to order it otherwise, I being suspended from preaching here, from
this day forward, for Nonconformity: how regularly or legally on man's part, I
shall not dispute, but leave to the righteous God to determine. I desire that
both you and I may not eye man, but God in this dispensation. I did not think
to have preached my Farewel-Sermon to you from these words; but having begun
this Text, and finding the matter of it so seasonable and suitable to rhis sad
occasion, I shall by God's assistance proceed in the handling of it. Being
probably like to preach no more unto you, I judge it very seasonable to leave
the Exhortation in the Text with you, to call upon you, that you would remember
what and how you have received, and heard, and (...) hold fast those wholesome
Truths you have heard, and those precious Ordinances (at least the remembrance,
impressions, and gracious effects of them) that you have enjoyed and been
privileged with; and also to repent of those sins, which have provoked, and
may further provoke God to come on us as a thief, to take away many of his
Ministers from among us. The words as I have already showed, are Christ's
counsel to a languishing Church, and to decayed Christians, to repair decayed
Godliness and Religion in a Church, and in the hearts and lives of particular
Christians, which renders them more seasonable to these days we live in, and to
the condition of many of our souls. I have already opened the Doctrine, and
confirmed it by several Scriptures; Namely, That it is the duty both of
Churches and particular Christians, and a special means to recover them from
formality, decaies and deadness in Religion and the exercise of Grace, to
remember what and how they have received and heard. I should now proceed to
give you the reasons of the Doctrine, but I shall choose rather to reserve them
to the Application, and then press them, as Motives to enforce the Counsel and
Exhortation grounded on the Text and Doctrine; and so shall immediately proceed
to Application.

Use 1. The first Use is of Information.

1. It informs us, that there is somewhat more required of Christians, than
bare hearing of Sermons, receiving and partaking of Sacraments, and other
Ordinances. It is not enough to hear and receive, but it is the duty of
Christians also to remember what and how they have received and heard; what
good they have got by, and what communion with God they have enjoyed in the use
of the Word and Ordinances.

2. It informs us, what it is we are to make the rule of our Faith and
Practice, namely, the Word of God contained in the Scriptures, and the Truths
you have heard, rightly grounded thereon. They ought to be the Standard to which
we should bring all Doctrines preached, all things introduced into Divine
Worship, and imposed upon us in practice. Bring all things to this Test. It is
your duty to search and study the Scriptures, and bring all things to the Law
and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to these, it is because there
is no light in them. You must not believe every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God. When either Doctrine or Worship is corrupted in a
Church, the way to reform both, is not to fly to humane Authority or Antiquity,
but to the golden Rule of the Word; this is the only safe Rule. Other rules may
err, but this is infallible.

Use 2. The second Use is of Reproof, To reprove forgetful hearers, such as
seem very eager in hearing and receiving Divine Truths, and attending on
Gospel Ordinances, but are not careful to remember what, and how they have
received and heard; such who return not on the things they have heard, but
leave all behind them. Such (as a Divine expresses it) who come from Duties as
from a Grave, where they leave their dearest Friends behind them, not as from a
Dole from whence they carry somewhat with them. Of such hearers as these the
Apostle James speaks, Jam. 1.22, 23, 24. Yet I speak not here, of that
forgetfulness, which proceeds merely from weakness, which is bewailed, and is
the burden of their souls. This is indeed an infirmity to be bewailed; yet
deserves rather pity and compassion from men, than reproof; but the
forgetfulness this Doctrine reproves, is that which proceeds from carelessness;
when men do not make conscience of the duty pressed in the Text; namely,
remembering how they have received and heard.

Use 3. But the third and last Use of this Doctrine, which I shall further make
and insist on, is a Use of Exhortation, To exhort all of you to the practice of
the Duty in the Text. Oh labor to remember what and how you have received and
heard. I am like no more to speak to you publicly in the Name of the Lord. Let
me therefore leave this Counsel and Exhortation with you, as that which may be
of great use to you, in hours of temptation that may come upon you. I beseech
you, Beloved, by the mercies of God, in the bowels of Christ, and out of the
respect you bear to your own precious and immortal souls, that you would labor
and endeavor to remember those soul-saving Truths and precious Ordinances you
have received, heard and enjoyed, and those impressions you have felt upon your
hearts from them. Oh be not forgetful hearers! let not the Truths of God slip
out of your minds. Beloved, I may say to you, there is scarce any Truth
necessary to salvation but you have heard of it, once and again from some or
other of Gods Messengers that have been sent unto you, though not without the
mixtures of sin and weakness, as to the instruments (which God in mercy
pardon.) You have heard what God is, and how he will be worshipped, even in
spirit and in truth, and not according to the inventions and traditions of men;
you have heard the Doctrine of God's Decrees, and of his works of Creation and
Providence opened and applied. You have heard of the sinful and miserable
condition of a man in a natural condition. You have heard the Doctrine of the
Covenant of Grace, and of the means of our recovery by Christ alone. You have
had Christ set before you in his Person, Natures, Offices, Obedience,
Sufferings. You have heard many other both Theoretical and Practical Truths set
before you in Preaching, Expounding, Catechizing; and by these you have been
antidoted against Popish, Socinian, and Arminian errors, and many others. Oh
labor to remember these, keep them by you as a choice treasure, lay them up in
your heads and hearts, that you may be able to bring out of your treasury
things both new and old. O! let not any of the Truths of God slip out of your
minds, or be as water spilt upon the ground. Ministers must dye, but let not
the Truths of God dye in your hearts. Ministers may be forcibly parted from
you, and have their mouths stopped, as ours and many others are, and are like to
be; yet let not the Word of Truth depart out of your minds, when we are gone.
Let the Word of God, even that Word of his we have spoken to you in his Name,
abide with you for ever: Let it live with you, and let it dye with you also. Oh
let truths be written on your hearts, as with the point of a Diamond, never to
be razed out. A stony heart is a grievous plague; but an iron memory is a great
mercy. Oh therefore remember what you have heard in point of Doctrine, and
remember also the counsels and directtions you have had given to you, as to the
performance of public, family, secret, relative Duties. Remember the warnings
you have had against sin. Sinners, you have been warned against your sins. Thou
Drunkard, Swearer, Sabbath-breaker, Unclean person, thou enemy to Godliness,
thou scoffer at, and persecuter of Religion; yea, you Formalists, Hypocrites,
that rest in civility, morality, or outside-performances; you have been warned
of the danger of your condition, of the wrath of God hanging over your heads
for these sins; of the necessity of repentance for, and from your sins, and of
faith in Christ, if ever you be saved. Remember the fore-warnings you have had
of God's Judgments, of the things you now fear, yea feel. Have you not been
told many a time, Christians, what wantonnesses in opinion and practice, the
deadnesses, worldlinesses, decaies, carnal policy, divisions of Professors
would bring upon them? And you that are Saints, remember what soul-refreshing
comforts you have had in and from the Word of God. Remember how plainly,
purely, powerfully, plentifully the Word of God has been preached, and
Ordinances dispensed among you. And remember also with what seriousness of
spirit, high estimation, holy affection, readiness of mind, strong resolution,
powerful impressions you have heard and received the Word and Ordinances of
God, and what Gracious effects you have found of them.

Now to press this Exhortation, as a lesson I would leave with you. I shall
first lay down some Motives: 2ly, Some Directions; 3ly, Helps to enable to
performance of this duty. The Motives shall be what I might have laid down as
Reasons of the Doctrine.

Mot. 1. The first Motive to stir you up to this Duty of remembering how you
have received and heard, is this, That the Truths you have heard, and
Ordinances you have partaken of, they were not of use only for the time past or
present, while you were or are hearing or receiving of them; but they are of
use a great while after. The Sermons you have long since heard, and Sacraments
you have received, may do your souls good the longest day you live. The virtue
and use of the Word and Ordinances may and does often put forth it self long
after the participation of them; and therefore you should remember them that
you may bring them forth for use in the time to come, which you cannot do, if
you let them slip out of your heads and hearts. The Truths of God are as
Treasuries and storehouses, which are not only for present use, but for time
to come, for men to live on a great while after, in times of want and scarcity.
And know this, Christians, you may have ocasion to make use of every Truth you
have heard, before you dye at one time or other, even those which while you
hear them may seem less useful. To a man in prosperity the Doctrine of
Sufferings and Afflictons may hot seem so seasonable; or to one in adversity;
to press the duties of one in a prosperous state; but yet these may come to be
of great advantage to you. The Sermons you have heard many years since, and
which you hear this day, may prove food to your souls many years hence. Isa.
42, 23. Who is among you that hears for the time to come? Oh Christians, do you
labor to be such hearers.

Mot. 2. Remember how you have received; remember old Truths, former Sermons,
Sabbaths, Sacraments: for the time may come, and you know not how soon, when
you may have little else to live upon, but the old store, even what you have
formerly received and heard. You may be cut short in your spiritual
opportunities, you may have few, at least comparatively, of those helps you
have in joyed, or enjoy Ordinances in such a way, as may not yield satisfaction
to your consciences; and then the remembrance of what you have received, and
what communion with God you have enjoyed, will be very precious. Time may come
(bear with the expression) when you may have little but cold dishes to feed
upon. In a time of scarcity, when there is little corn to be reaped, it is some
comfort to have it in the barn or storehouse. The corn Joseph laid up in years
of plenty, helped to preserve himself and whole family, yea all the land of
Egypt. And, if you be careful to remember how you have received and heard, you
may be able to feed your selves and others in a time of scarcity of spiritual
opportunities, if for your and others sins God should bring it on you. Let me
therefore leave the counsel in the Text with you; Go to the old store. Feed on
cold meat, when you may want warm: Warm it again on your hearts, by meditation
and a practical remembrance of the Word. Those things, which when you had full
meals and full stomachs you lightly esteemed, when your souls are hungry, and
soul-provision is scarce, your commons short, then you may find and taste much
sweetness in them.

Mot. 3. A third Motive to excite you to remember how you have received and
heard, is this; Consider that God remembers how you have received and heard,
and he will make you remember it also, and call you to an acc^u^t for the
things you have received and heard. He remembers all the Truths that have been
delivered to yo^, the Warnings you have had, the Sermons you have neard, the
Sacraments you have received, and all other means of Grace you have enjoyed;
though you forget them, he remembers how plainly, purely, plen ^^ully, and with
what affection you have received th ^. And consider further, God will call you
to accou^^ or all these things, what good you have got by them; what
inprovement you have made of them, ^hether you have been brought to Repentance
and ^^ith by them, and what progress in Faith and Holi^^^^ you; who profess
your selves to be Saints, have m ^e under them. Oh therefore seeing God
remembers these, do you also remember them.

4. A fourth Motive to excite you to this Duty of remembering how you have
received and heard, is: Consider the great benefit, and usefulness of this
remembrance; it will be of very great use and advantage to your souls. This I
shall somewhat largely insist on. And the particulars I shall hint under this
head, may serve hot only as Motives to excite you to the practice of this
duty, but also as Directions, to direct you what use you should make of the
Truths and Ordinances you have formerly received.

The first Benefit of remembering how you have received and heard, is; That it
will by the blessing of God upon it prove a choice Antidote against Errors in
Doctrine, and also against corruptions in the Worship of God; if ever any of
these come to be vented among you, or obtruded and imposed upon you. If
Doctrines come to be preached that tend to the beating down the power of
Godliness, or practice of holiness, or that prejudice the free Grace of God in
Election, or Justification, crying up conditional Decrees upon foresight of
Faith or Works, or perseverance, or advancing Works in the business of
Justification: or such Doctrines as advance the power of Nature, the freedom of
man's will, assert, that true Believers may finally and totally fall from Grace;
the remembrance of what you have received and heard, with the experience of the
Work of God in your own hearts (you who are Saints) will antidote you against;
and help you to confute these and such like false doctrines; And teach you to
say, We have not so learned Christ. The reason why men slide into new errors,
or old ones new vampt, is because they let slip old truths; if you forget
truths you have heard, you lose your touchstone to try Doctrines by, and then
you may be easily cheated with counterfeit metal instead of Gold. You will be
like a Ship that has lost its Anchor or Compass, you will go you know not
whither, and be in danger of splitting upon the Rocks. And this will also
antidote you against humane inventions, mingled with and obtruded on men in the
Worship of God. You will be able to say, We have not so learned to Worship God;
and teach you to reason, Did Christ or his Apostles appoint Ordinances to be
thus or thus dispensed? Labor therefore to remember and make this use of your
remembrance how you have received and heard.

2. A second use or benefit of remembering how you have received and heard, is
this; It will be by God's blessing a notable means to shame and humble you for
all your uneven, unworthy, and unsuitable walking unto those savory Truths, and
precious Ordinances you have been partakers of. It will make you ashamed of
your deadness, dullness, formality in Duties, and declinings and decaies in
Grace. And you should endeavor thus to improve your remembrance of former
receipts of mercy. It will make you say to your souls, Has my conversation been
suitable to Divine Truths? Have I followed the directions and taken the warnings
God has given me? Oh what a vile sinful wretch have I been! And am I to walk
so unanswerably to the Grace of God in the Gospel? It will make you blush when
you remember how plainly, purely, powerfully, plentifully Ordinances have been
dispensed to you: To think, Oh that I have had so impure a heart and life under
such pure Ordinances! that there has been no more of the power of Godliness
expressed in my conversation, when I have lived under such powerful
Administrations! that I have brought forth so little fruit, that I have been
and am no more fat and flourishing in the Courts of God under that plenty of
Heavenly Manna that has been rained down upon me, and those soul-fatting
Ordinances I have partaken of! Thus improve your remembrance how you have
received and heard. When you find your hearts to grow dead and cold, O then
say, Was it wont to be thus? Where are those high estimations, those lively
affections, those holy resolutions, that seriousness of spirit, those powerful
Impressions and gracious Effects of the Word and Sacraments that I have found
in and under them? Oh let this consideration excite you to this Duty in the
Text, and make this use of former Gospel-enjoyments and the good you found in
them, to shame and humble you that you have made no better improvement of them.

3. A third Benefit of remembering how you have received and heard, is, That,
through the blessing of God upon it, it will be a means and help to keep from
sin in practice; It will be a special Preservative against the Infection of the
sins of the days and times into which you may be cast. As you desire to be
preserved from sin, make conscience of this duty; and it will be a means to
recover you again when you have fallen into sin. Psalm. 119.9, 11. Hiding the
Word of God in his heart was a means to keep David from sinning against God.
Attending to the Word of God, is prescribed by him as a means to cleanse the
ways even of a young man. This will keep you from being superstitious, profane
and loose, when others are so; but if once you forget what and how you have
received, you will soon swim down the stream with others, and quickly be
overrun with sin. Peter first forgot the word of warning Christ had given him,
and then he soon forgot himself and his own duty, and fell into that foul sin
of denying his Lord and Master. Oh therefore remember how you have received and
heard, and improve your Remembrance of it, to preserve you from falling into
sin, and to recover you when you are fallen. When you are tempted to sin, say,
I have been otherwise taught, I have not so learned Christ, I have been warned
against these and these sins. As Peter's forgetfulness of Christ's words was
the cause of his fall, so it was the remembrance of what Christ had spoken that
helped to raise him up again, when he was fallen. And you should endeavor to
improve the remembrance of the Words of Christ unto this end.

4. A fourth Benefit of this Remembrance how you have received and heard, is,
That it will be a spur to quicken unto Duty, and a means to excite and
strengthen Grace. 2 Timothy 1.6. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Pet. 3.1, 2. In all
these places you will find that this Remembrance of what men have received and
heard, is a means to stir up the gifts and graces of God's Spirit in them. When
you remember what you have received from God in Ordinances, and in the
performance of holy Duties; it will make you desirous to converse in them, and
to love them the better, the longest day you live. You will say, It is good to
be here; you will never be weary of waiting upon God, whilst you retain a
favoury remembrance of the sweetness, power and efficacy you have found and
felt in the Word and Ordinances of God. And this will be also a means to
increase and strengthen Grace in the Soul. Grace in the Soul is nourished by
the same means by which it is begotten. Those Promises that inclined the heart
to believe at first, will now, being remembered and fed upon by Faith, raise
Faith to higher pitches and degrees. Remembering your former experiences of
God's helping you, when you have been in straits, will help you to trust in God
in future straits and trials. Labor therefore to remember, and to make this
use of the remembrance of what and how you have received and heard, to quicken
you to a more constant attendance on God in Ordinances, and to increase and
strengthen Grace in your souls.

5. The Remembrance how you have received and heard, will be of great use and
advantage to your souls; for it will keep up in your judgments an high
estimation of, and in your affections a sincere love to those precious Truths,
and those plain, pure, powerful dispensations of Ordinances you have partaken
of, even then when by sickness, or any other hand of God upon you, you may be
deprived of the actual enjoyment of them. If God should remove Ministers and
Ordinances from you, or you from them, that you cannot enjoy them as you have
done, yet the very remembrance of them will be precious, when you remember what
heart-warmings you have had under them. Labor to make this use of the
remembrance of old Truths and former Enjoyments, to make you esteem and love
them.

6. A sixth Benefit of remembering how you have received and heard, is, That it
will keep up in you earnest and hungring desires after, and stir up in you a
mighty Spirit of Prayer, for the keeping and restoring, when you have lost
them, those precious Truths and Ordinances wherein you have found so much of
God. It will cause you to say with the Disciples, Lord, evermore give us this
Bread. It will and should cause you to cry to your Father for the Bread of
Life, to say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 42.1, 2. Psalm. 63.1, 2. David remembered
what he had seen of the power and glory of God in the Sanctuary; and this sets
his soul a longing for the restoring again of those blessed opportunities he
had been privileged with. O make this use of this Remembrance, how you have
received and heard, to cause you to wrestle with God in Prayer for the
continuance and restitution of those comfortable Sabbaths and Sacraments, that
pure and powerful Preaching, Praying, and Administration of Ordinances God has
vouchsafed. It was this remembering of what, and how he had received, that made
that holy Martyr, Bishop Latimer, cry out, Lord, restore the Gospel once again
to England. And in such, or the like cases, it should make you, and will make
you pray, that God would restore the Liberty of his Ministers, and the Power
and Purity of his Ordinances, and try you, whether you would not through his
Grace improve them better than you have done.

7. A seventh Benefit of this remembering how you have received and heard, is,
that it will bring into your souls the comfort and sweetness of former Truths
and Ordinances. It will be as the rouling of a sweet morsel under your tongues.
You may hereby reap the benefit of former Sermons and Sacraments many years
hence. Many times Truth is more sweet, and makes a more powerful impression on
the soul in the meditation and repetition of it, than it did at its first
delivery. And so it may do in you, if you be careful in the practice of this
duty.

8. And lastly, The remembering of what and how you have received and heard, may
and will bear up you hearts under, and fortify them against all Sufferings and
Persecutions you may meet with in the ways, and for the sake of Christ; when
you shall remember the warnings Christ has given you, John 16.1, 2. and the
grounds of comfort you have found in the Word of God. Improve your remembrance
of Truths for this end. So much for the Motives to stir up to the practice of
this duty in the Text. And these eight last particulars may serve also to
direct you what use you should make of the remembrance of what and how you have
received.

I shall proceed to add some few Directions, to direct you how and after what
manner you should remember what and how you have received.

1. Direction. Remember what and how you have received and heard, Thankfully.
Oh be thankful (Christians) that you have enjoyed the Word and Ordinances of
God so long, and that with so much plainness, power, purity, and plenty. Though
you should never enjoy them more, yet you have cause to bless God, that have
enjoyed the Word, Sacraments, Ministers so long above, not only your desi^^s,
but also your expectations. Especially be you thankful that have received
Christ and Grace through these; that you have received Grace before you have
lost any of the means of Grace, that Christ and your souls have met, before you
and Ministers have parted.

2. Direction. Remember how you have received and heard, Penitentially and
sorrowfully.

1. Penitentially and sorrowfudly; That you prized and improved Truths and
Ordinances no better, got no more good by them, grew no more in grace under
them, gained no more power against corruptions, or ability to do and suffer, by
them, while you did enjoy them.

2. Remember how you have received sorrowfully, if you have lost or should lose
any of your opportunities. When the Ways of Sion mourn, sure the Sons of Sion
should mourn. You should be sorrowful for the Solemn Assemblies, the reproach
of them should be a burden unto Christians. You should remember your
Gospel-enjoyments with tears, as those, Psalm. 137.1* 2. even weep when you
remember Sion. As the Psalmist, Psalm. 42.3. Chrstians in such a case should
bewail the loss of Ordinances and of so many of God's Ministers.

3. Christians should especially remember Gospel mercies Penitentially in the
want of them, when, and that they by their sins, have helped to sin them away,
by their unfruitful and unworthy walking. Know (Christians) they are the sins
of Ministers and People that stop the mouths of Ministers, and deprive a People
at any time of any of the tokens of God's presence. You should in such a case
and condition with sorrow of heart say, we once enjoyed comfortable days of
the Son of man: but by our deadness, spiritual wantoness and unfruitfulness we
have now sinned them away.

3. Direction. Remember what and how you have received, Affectionately and
Practically. It is not a mere notional, but an affectionate and practical
remembrance of Truths received, and Ordinances enjoyed, that I now press to.
Remember them with burning and inflamed hearts. So remember Truths as to
practice them; to love Truth and to live in Truth, and Ordinances, so as to
live up to them, so as to have pure hearts answerable to pure Ordinances, the
power of Religion in your conversation suitable to powerful administrations.
Remember the Word of Truth to direct your practice, even as a Compass to sail
by in a troublesome Sea and a dark night: and as a copy to write after. So
remember what you have heard, as to set on the practice of duties you have been
exhorted to, and directed in; and to avoid the sins you have been warned
against. So remember as to improve your remembrance of Truths to those eight
Uses, before specified, namely, as an Antidote against error in Doctrine and
corruption in Worship, to humble for, and keep from sin, quicken to duty, make
you prize, love, pray for, long after the Word, for your comfort and support
under Sufferings.

Having given you some Directions how you should remember what and how you have
received and heard, I shall now close this Doctrine, by adding some Means and
Helps to enable you to the performance of that duty I have been exhorting you
to.

1. A first Means or Help to enable to remember what you have received and
heard, is, Labor after a sincere love to the Word, Ordinances and Ministers of
Christ. Love Truth, and you will the more easily remember it. You will not
suddenly or easily forget that you dearly love. Affection is a very great help
to Memory. Receive Truth in your love and affection, and then you will keep it
in your minds and memories. A man will remember what his mind and heart is set
upon. A special means to keep Truths in your heads, is, to labor that they may
be engraven in your hearts. Look upon the Word and Ordinances of God as your
Treasure, and you will be sure then, at least practically to remember it. Men
scarcely forget where they have laid their Treasure or their Jewels, though
they may, where they have laid things of lesser moment. Love does and will
renew and revive the object loved in the mind and in the thoughts. Affection to
Divine Objects is the safest Lock and Key to secure Spiritual Treasures. Psalm.
119.97. David loved the Law, and then he could do no other but make it his
meditation all the day long.

2. A second help or means to enable you to remember what and how you have
received and heard, is, Application; to apply and appropriate Truths and
Ordinances to your own souls. Labor to insure your interest in Christ, the
Covenant of Grace, and the great Truths of the Gospel; and that will much
further your remembering of them. You will be careful to remember what you look
on as your concernments. Though men may forget others business, they will
hardly forget their own, especially if they be matters of great concernment, a
matter wherein their whole estate is concerned, or a matter of life and death.
And such are the things you have received, and heard in the Gospel. When you
hear the Word, say, there God spoke to my soul. Men forget truths because they
are apt to put them off to others, and not to look on themselves as as
concerned in them: Oh therefore look on thy soul as concerned in what thou have
heard and received, and this will help thee to remember it.

3. A third means to help you to remember what you have received and heard, is,
Serious and frequent meditation, and contemplation on what you have heard. This
is a great help to memory. Divine meditation fixes Truths in the head, and
fastens them in the heart, Luke 2.19. she kept those things, because she
pondered them. Be therefore much in meditation.

4. A fourth means to further your remembrance of what you have received and
heard, is, Holy conference. This Moses directs to, as a means to keep the
things of God in the heart, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. This is as the driving home of
the nail. That which one forgets, another may remember. Improve private
conference, and speak often one to another; and when you meet together, be more
spiritual, savory and profitable in your discourse than heretofore you have
been; and then especially, when you may have fewer public opportunities. Time
may come, when this may be one of the best helps you may have. It may be God
may cut you short of many public advantages, to chasten you for your not using
or improving private communion of Saints, and to quicken you to use and improve
holy conference and other private duties, more and better.

5. A fifth means to help you to remember what and how you have received and
heard, is, Earnest and fervent prayer to God, that He would strengthen your
memories, and give his Spirit to you according to his promise, to bring all
things to your remembrance. Commit Truths to the Spirit's keeping, and trust
not only to your own memories. Often plead that promise with God, John 14.26.
Christ would not trust his Disciples alone with his Sermons. He knew their
memories were slippery. But He intrusts his Spirit to bring things to their
remembrance: and the Spirit can and will bring Truths to your remembrances, in
the most seasonable time.

And lastly, Endeavor to practice the things you have received and heard, and
that will be a means to help you to remember them. Labor to get good by the
Word and Ordinances, and you will not soon forget them. He who daily writes
after a Copy, will be better able to remember it long after. Psalm. 119.93. I
will never forget thy Precepts, for by them thou have quickened me. Those
Sermons, Sacraments and other Ordinances, in and by which God has quickened and
comforted you, you will not forget.

So much for handling this Doctrine. Might I have had liberty to preach to you
as long as I hoped, and the Law allowed, I should have handled the two other
Directions in the Text, Hold fast and Repent. But seeing I am like to preach to
you no more, I shall briefly touch upon them, and leave them with you in a way
of Exhortation.

A fourth Direction Christ gives to this Church in order to recovering of her
from her deadness and formality, is, To hold fast what she had received. The
Doctrine, is, That it is the duty of Christians, and a means to recover
declining Churches and Christians, to hold fast what they have received and
heard. And indeed without this you cannot be strengthened by it. That which you
have lost and let slip, will do you but little good. You must not only
remember, but also hold fast. I shall not handle this Doctrinally: Time will
not permit it. And besides, I have formerly insisted on this Doctrine and duty
from the 13th and 25th verses of the second Chapter. I shall therefore only
leave the Exohortation with you; Hold fast what you have received and heard.

And here I shall briefly show you, first, What you should hold fast. 2ly,
Against what. 3ly, How you may do it.

First, What you should hold fast. (1.) Hold fast the Doctrine of the Gospel
you have received and heard. Do not let go any Truth of God. Buy the Truth, but
sell it not at any rate, Prove. 23.23. You may meet with those that would pluck
it from you: but be sure you hold it fast, 2 Timothy 1.13, 14. (2.) Hold fast the
plain, pure, and powerful Ordinances of God. Oh do not let these go; at least
not through your default. Let them not go for want of prayers and tears to keep
them. But may some say, How if they should be gone? How if God for our sins
should take them away? Why however, yet (3.) Be sure you hold fast a high
estimation of the Word and pure Ordinances of God. If ever you should want
them, yet prize and esteem them as your treasure; let the want of Spiritual
Mercies, teach you more to value the worth of them. Though you should lose many
of your mercies and opportunities, yet be sure you do not lose your esteem of
them. (4.) Be sure you hold fast your love to the Truths and Ordinances of God,
as well in the want, as in the enjoyment of them. Love the Word, and love the
Ministers of Christ, even then when you may be deprived of them. (5.) Hold fast
your appetite and stomach to the Word and Ordinances of God: though you should
lose some of your meat, take heed you lose not your stomach with your meat. If
you have less food, yet you should labor to have the better stomachs. Oh beg
of God, that though he should suffer your food to fail, yet that he would not
take away your appetites, but keep them fresh and lively. In temporals it would
be a mercy if men wanted meat, to want a stomach: but in Spirituals it will be
a mercy, though you should have little food, yet to have a good stomach
continued. This will be a pledge of Gods returning and restoring wanted and
desired mercies. For God has said, He will satisfy the hungry soul with
bread. (6.) Lastly be sure you hold fast the good you have got by the Word,
Prayer, Sacraments, the Ministers and Ordinances of Christ. Though you should
part with these things themselves, yet be sure you retain and hold fast the
good you have got by them, and those impressions of God's Spirit that have bin
made on your hearts, through and under them.

And all this you must hold fast (which leads) to the 2d Particular, against
(1.) The fraud and deceit of Seducers, and Deceivers, who would go about to
cheat and cozen you of the great and precious Truths of the Gospel, and of the
true instituted Worship of God. The Apostle tells you, that such will a rise
that will privily bring in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. and the Apostle
Paul speaks of the sleights and cunning craftiness of men, their methods to
deceive. They will perhaps plead Antiquity, Tradition, the Authority of the
Church, the Suffrage of Ancient Fathers, Custom, Example, yea seeming Reason
for many Opinions and Practices. But Christians, be not cheated of your
Religion; but that which you have received of the Lord Christ, and has been
delivered to you by the Apostles in the Word, those Truths and instructions of
Christ, do you hold fast.

Secondly, Hold fast the Truths and Ordinances of Christ, as against the fraud
of Deceivers, so against the force and violence of Persecutors. As you should
not be fawned, so neither should you be frighted out of any one Truth or
Ordinance of God, or out of your love to, desires after, or owning of them.

Thirdly, And the means to enable you to hold fast what you have received, are,

1. Diligent attendance on the public Ordinances and Worship of God, if, and
when you can enjoy them in any measure according to Gods will, though not
altogether in that manner you desire, and they should be administered in. I hope
that for those many praying, believing, hungry souls sake, that are to be found
in this place, God may provide you in his due time with some such Teachers as
may give you some wholesome food, and not feed you with stones instead of bread.
For some such I doubt not will be found, if God shall vouchsafe to you the
mercy of a faithful Minister. Though I dare not advise you actively to join in
any thing that is in it self, or in your judgment evil, till you be satisfied
about it; yet I must advise you to take heed of separation from the Church, or
from what is good, and God's own Ordinance. If sound Truth be powerfully
preached, make use of, and improve that, though you cannot approve every thing
the Minister does. I the rather add this, because there are many that if
Ministers do but mention the loss of Ministers, are ready presently to accuse
them of monopolizing all Religion to themselves, and to their party. But far be
this from me and others. I well know while the best of men are on earth, there
is likely to be variety of apprehensions; and some men of sound judgments in
the main, and of holy lives, may satisfy themselves in the lawfulness of some
things, which others judge sinful. And if God send such to you, though I do not
bid you approve their practice, or justify what they do, yet bless God for
them, and improve their gifts and graces. And yet at the same time you have
just cause to bewail the laying aside of so many hundreds of Ministers. Had so
many hundreds of Ministers dyed a natural death in one day, you would have
looked upon it as a great judgment: And sure it is no less when so many shall
dye a civil death.

2. A second means to enable you to hold fast what you have received, is, To be
much in conference; in considering one the other, to provoke to love and to
good works. As this is a help to remembering, so also to holding fast what you
have received, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25.

3. Hold fast the Word and Ordinances, by prayer that God would continue them,
and that he would keep them in your minds and hearts.

4. Be sure you hold fast God and Christ by faith. It is God that vouchsafes
all these to you: If the streams should fail, be sure you hold fast the
Fountain, and you will be, and do well enough.

5. The fifth and last Counsel and Direction Christ gives to this languishing
Church, is, To Repent. Whence observe;

Doct. That Repentance is a sovereign means to repair decayed Religion and
Godliness in a Church, and in the souls of men. Repentance is the souls
Physic, that purges out ill humors, heals the souls distempers, and restores
it to a healthful constitution.

I intend not to handle this, but to turn it into an Exhortation: Let me leave
this Counsel and Exhortation with all of you this day, as that which probably
may be the last, and I am sure is the best Counsel I can give. Oh Repent,
Repent; both sinners and Saints. Repent thou Drunkard, Swearer,
Sabbath-breaker, Unclean person, thou Opposer of Godliness, or what ever else
thy sin be; Remember thou have been called on to repent this day! O repent
while it is called to day, before the things that belong to your peace be hid
from your eyes. Repent even all, both bad and good, of those sins that have
brought these Judgments upon us, which this day we lie under. More particularly,

1. Repent of that Opposition against the Gospel, and against the Ministers and
Ordinances of Christ that any of you have been, or a^e guilty of: For this sin
provokes God to take away Gospel-Mercies from a People. It Is true indeed, that
we may say and bless God for it, that for the time we have labored among you,
we have met with as little of this, as any have done in a place of this
bigness. Yet some there have been, that have been guilty of this, though not
many: and they may have time enough to repent the hastening of their own
calamities. Repent of this sin. Consider what God says of such, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

2. Repent of your Unthankfulness for the Gospel. Repent of your not enough
prizing Ordinances, of your too much loathing, or at least (even by the best)
too little loving Spiritual Manna.

3. Repent of your Barrenness and Unfruitfulness under, and too little
improvement of the Word, Sacraments and Sabbaths you have enjoyed. Bewail your
sin, that you have got no more good by all these, that you have laid up no more
in your years of plenty, against years of scarcity.

4. Repent of that too much Wantonness in Opinion and Practice that has been
to be found among Professors under choicest Gospel-enjoyments; that you have
played by the light, and with the bread that God has vouchsafed to you, and
not wrought by the one, or fed heartily upon the other: which may justly
provoke God to put out your light, and take away your bread.

5. Repent of your decays in Religion and Grace, for which God threatens to
remove the Candlestick from a Church and people, Rev. 2.4, 5.

6. Lastly, Repent of that Deadness and Formality in Religion, and in the
Worship of God, which you see to be in others, but most of all, of that you
find and feel to be in your own hearts. For, for these and such like Sins it
is, that God comes as a thief on Churches or Persons. And to stir you up to
repent, Consider,

First, If you do not Repent, God will come as a thief on you, even suddenly,
unexpectedly, when you least think of it; and that, to take away your Treasure,
your most Precious things, which are so in themselves, and should be so in your
esteem, even his Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Ministers, and all the tokens of
his Gracious presence. This will God do, if you do not repent, but remain
hard-hearted and formal, still contenting your selves with a name to live.

2. Consider, If you do repent of the evil you have done against God, God may,
yea you have ground to hope he will, repent of the evil he is doing unto you: He
can find out ways agreeable to his Word and Will to continue or restore
Ministers to People, and People to Ministers. He may yet return and leave a
blessing behind Him. O therefore Repent; let us all set upon this work of
Repentance.

And now Beloved, I have finished what I at this time intended to speak upon
this Text, and probably with that my Testimony in public among you. Let me
beseech you seriously to consider and set upon the practice of the Duties I
have in the Name of the Lord from this Scripture exhorted you to. Beloved, It
is no small grief and trouble to my self and Fellow Laborer, to part with you.
It was in our hearts to have lived and died with you, and among you, if God had
seen it fit; But the will of the Lord be done. We must acknowledge to the glory
of God, and ^our just commendation, that great has been the encouragement we
have found among you, from God, from you, and from our Honorable Patron. From
God in his remarkable Providence in bringing us first among you, in vouchsafing
his Gracious Presence to and with us since, and in giving in some considerable
fruit of our weak unworthy labors; for we may say, that a great door and
effectual has been opened, though of late there have been many adversaries.
And great has been the encouragement we have received from you also; from your
great affection to us, and especially from your ready entertainment of our
Labors, and forward and cheerful submission to the Ordinances of Christ that
have been dispensed among you; which, though it cannot but add much to our
grief in parting from you, yet it is no small addition to our comfort also. We
have also received much encouragement, and many undeserved respects from the
honorable Patron of this Place: for all which we heartily bless God, and no
less heartily pray, that God would recompense his and your respects to us a
thousand fold into his and your bosoms. And I trust we can in sincerity say
for our selves, that we have not sought yours, but You; and that it is not the
loss of our places, and outward accommodations that trouble us, but the loss of
our opportunities of serveing our God, and your precious and immortal souls in
the work of the Gospel. It grievs us to think of the shares and temptations you
may meet; with for when the Shepherds are smitten, the Sheep are like to be
scattered. If God shall send such among you as will (in the main) be faithful to
God and your souls, it will afford much hearts-ease to us, and satisfaction to
our spirits. We have for above eleven years preached to you by our public
labors; God now calls us and many others to preach to you by our silence. And
the very silence of so many Ministers, if blessed by the Lord, may prove the
most powerful and effectual Sermon to People that they have had. This speaks
Gods displeasure; this bids both us, and you, look into our and your hearts and
ways, what it is that has provoked God to send upon us this sad dispensation.

The silence of Ministers calls aloud on us all to humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God. It bids us repent of our sins, the causes of Gods
Judgments. It calls on you to prize and improve Ministers and Ordinances
better, if God shall continue, restore, or further afford them to you. Yea,
Ministers silence should cause People to speak the more, and louder to God in
prayer for the continuance and restoring of Ministers and Ordinances to them.
When you do not hear so much, and often from God in preaching, let God hear the
more and oftener from you in prayer. Ply the Throne of Grace. Give God no rest,
till he make Jerusalem a Praise in the earth. And as our silence should make
you speak the more to God, so also the more and oftener one unto another in holy
conference, to provoke to love and to good works. And I beseech you Brethren,
pray for us. What ever God may do with us, or whithersoever we may be driven,
we shall carry you in our hearts; and when and while we remember our selves to
God, we shall never forget you, but present you and your souls concernments
daily unto God at the Throne of Grace in our prayers. And we earnestly beg this
of you, as, that you would remember what we have spoken to you in the Name of
the Lord; so that you would remember us to God, and let us have a room and
share in your hearts and prayers. When you get into a corner to pour out your
hearts before God, carry us to God upon your hearts: Do not forget us, but lift
up a prayer to God for us, your (we hope we may say) faithful, though weak,
unworthy Ministers, who have labored among you in the Word and Doctrine.

I shall say no more, but conclude with these two Scriptures; the one, Acts
20.32. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all those that
are sanctified. The other Scripture is, that request of Paul to, and prayr for
the Hebrews, Heb. 13.18, 19, 20, 21. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good
conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the
rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of
Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that Great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in
every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ. To whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

SERMON III.
Phil. 2.12. Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence; work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling.
BEloved, I am now (it seems) to bid you Farewell; and I rejoice I have this
one opportunity more of preaching to you. Though it is sad to think of parting,
(if my poor pains might have been any way profitable amongst you) yet I cannot
wonder that here the course of my public Ministry is stopped. When I first came
to you, I expected to have dwelt in silence; and to have been free among the
dead long ere this day. Now this is like to be the last Sermon I shall ever
preach to you here, my hearts desire and earnest prayer to God is, That more
good may be done by this one, than has been done by many Sermons past. That if
you that see me this day, should see me here no more, yet you might have cause
to bless God for what you shall now hear, even while you have a day to live.
The words of a dying friend are wont to make a deep impression; so should the
words of a departing Minister. Beloved, I am confident that both you and I must
give an account of this days Work to the Judge of all the World. Wherefore I
would be so serious even in all I say unto you, as if I were immediately to
give up my account to God: and I desire and beseech you, in the fear of God,
and for the love you ow to your own souls, that you would as seriously attend
to what shall be spoken.

This Exhortation of the Apostle even now read unto you, depends on, and is
inferred from what goes before; as appears from the Illative [Wherefore.] The
Apostle having spoken of the humiliation and obedidience of Christ (as he was
obedient unto death, v. 8.) and of his glorious exaltation that followed
thereupon, he presses these believers to obedience and continuance therein,
from Christ's example, and the blessed end thereof, viz. their own Salvation.

Note. The Life of Christ is a Christians Copy. An exact, an excellent Copy
indeed for us all to write after.

Learn of me, says he. And what grace, what virtue is there, that ye may not
learn of Christ? Never was there such love to God and man, like that which
wrought in the heart of Jesus Christ. Never was there self-denial or humility
comparable unto Christ's. Never any zeal, any holiness like Christ's. O beloved,
no danger of our being too holy, too precise, since it is impossible, but that
when we have done our best, we shall fall far short of out Copy here. They that
censure Christians now, and charge them with overmuch strictness, and making
too much ado in Religion; much more that these (had they lived in his days)
would have found fault with Jesus Christ. But I have no more to say to these
here, who are enemies to the power and strictness of Christianity, only a word
to you my Friends: Don't ye think much to bear reproaches for Christ here, who
hope at last to appear with him in Glory: We would be like him in his glorified
estate, what reason then, we should be conformed to him in humiliation, and in
an holy conversation. But let this serve as touching the coherence.

In the words themselves you may observe,

I. A weighty Exhortation, [Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling.] Where you have 1. The duty it self, Work out your salvation. And 2.
The manner how it must be done, with fear and trembling.


II. The manner how the Apostle presses this Exhortation, 1. By a sweet
compellation, [My Beloved.] 2. By a prudent commending of their former course,
[as ye have always obeyed.]


III. Another Argument may be couched in these words, [not as in my presence
only, but now much more in my absence.] i.e. Though ye have not me present
with you, yet God is present with you, and the eye of the Lord is on you still.
And this would further evidence your sincerity, that what you have done in
Religion, was not ( Pharisee-like) to be seen of men, if you obey and work on,
not only in my presence. And indeed it is a work of necessity, and as much need
you should follow it close now, as ever; yea [much more in my absence] says
he. While I was with you, I was most willing and ready to do what in me lay to
promote your Salvation; but now, if you have not so much help from me as when I
was amongst you, ye had need take the greater pains your selves. Children that
were but too careless while their Father was with them, had need learn to take
care when he is gone.

My Beloved, (...), one Copy has it, (...), my Brethren. But I shall not stay
at the compellation, which you so frequently meet with. -- As ye have always
obeyed] (...), as some read it. O^ with Grotius, we may understand (...), as 2
These. 1.8. or, (...), as 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. obeyed the Gospel, or obeyed the Word.
As ye have always obeyed; Obeyed what? Loquiter de obedientia, non erga
improrum hominum traditiones, sed erga Deum, ejusque Evangelium, says Zanchy.
He speaks not of obedience to the traditions of sinful ungodly men, but of
obedience to God, and his Gospel. Ye have obeyed always, i. e. from the time
that you first received the Gospel. Not but that they had fallen into many
particular acts of disobedience even since their conversion; but they now no
more followed a course of disobedience as they had done before. Their desire,
will and purpose, care and study was constantly to obey.

Note. That good beginnings must be seconded and backed with good proceedings,
and crowned with an answerable conclusion. It Is not enough to begin, but we
must end in the Spirit. For this the Church of Thyatira is commended, that her
last works were more than her first, Rev. 2.19. O Christians, you that have set
forth, that have entered into the ways of God, go on, I beseech you. You have
had a Name to live, and more than a Name, I trust. Religion has flourished in
this Town, the Lord grant it may flourish still. O may it take such deep root
in your hearts, that all opposite power, (let men and devils do their worst)
may never be able to pluck it up. It follows,

-- Not in my presence onely] i. e. while I am among you, calling earnestly
upon you to follow your work, [but now much more in my absence] that you have
fewer helps, and greater hindrances.

Note also by the way, That Christians are not sure they shall always have Gods
Ministers at hand. When the means of Grace are brought to a place, none can say
how long the same shall be continued. As when the children of Israel were
encamped, and had pitched their Tents, they could not tell how soon the fiery
pillar would move, and call them forth again.

Now, how does this blame the folly and security of the most, who are careless
of improving Gods Ministers while they are continued amongst them. Indeed, this
minds your poor Ministers (at least that have been yours) of their falling
short. Oh, may we not remember our faults this day! Oh, our want of diligence,
that we have done no more good while we have had opportunity; that it has not
been our meat and drink to feed the souls of others, so much as it ought to
have been. Brethren, we will not excuse our selves, we dare not; the Lord is
lust in threatening at this day to lay so many of us aside, who have laid out
our selves no more for him, and the good of souls. But have you nothing to
charge upon your selves, who have been our hearers? The Lord knows, whether in
the course of our Ministry we have vented our own fancies, or have not declared
the will and mind of God to you; and whether you have heard and received it as
the word of God. I hope it has been our desire not to withold any thing that
was profitable; and has it been your care indeed to profit? Oh! I must tell
you, it grieves us at heart to think that we shall leave so many of you in
gross ignorance, after means of knowledge; that we should leave so many of you
in profane courses, after many plain reproofs; that we should leave so many of
you strangers unto Christ, who have heard so much of him, and have been so often
invited, persuaded, and pressed to come in to him. And howsoever many will
think, there is no loss of us; yet one day you will see what your souls have
lost, who have enjoyed Gods Ordinances (though dispensed by never so weak and
contemptible instruments) and have not regarded to improve them.

Here I would have spoken a word to others of you, who have got something,
though not so much as you might have done. Let what has been wanting in your
former proficiency, be made up (as it were) in after-humiliation and
repentance. And if you are conscious to your selves, that your unprofitableness
may have some hand in stopping the mouths of your poor Ministers, let the
thoughts of it cause you now to open your mouths, and lift up your your cries
more earnestly in prayer to God for them. It follows,

-- Now much more in my absence.] q. d. if ever you desired to promote your
salvation, now much more it concerns you to mind it; if you want other Monitors
to stir you up to diligence here, you had need be more watchful over your own
souls, you should have the greater care of them your selves. As the Syriac
Version has it, But now when I am absent from you, much more with fear and
trembling work the work of your salvation.

Hence note, That the want or loss of Ministers, of means formerly enjoyed,
will not warrant or excuse our cooling in Religion; but should rather produce a
greater care and solicitousness in the working out of our salvation.
Disadvantages here are no plea for remisness, but rather ought to provoke unto
greater industry. And for our encouragement, the Lord will not forsake such as
diligently seek him. Were we not straightened in our selves, we should find we are
not straightened in him. When we may want ordinary helps, yet he can convey his
Grace, and manifest himself extraordinarily unto our souls. Remember, when
outward means, and provisions fail, God has hidden Manna for his people. If he
leads them into a Wilderness, he knows how to feed them there, Rev. 12.6. In a
solitary place he can speak to their hearts. I may here allude to Isa. 37.30.
Ye shall eat this year such as grows of it self, and the second year that
which springs of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant
Vinyards, and eat the fruit thereof. Be not ye wanting to your own souls, and
you shall find God is not. Do you in good earnest intend the business of your
salvation? follow your work close, and trust God to provide for you. The Lord
will turn stones into to bread, before he will suffer your souls to starve.
Well (beloved) as many of you have showed your selves a willing and a forward
people (blessed be God) while Ministers have been present with you, laboring
among you, hold on still when we may be removed from you. I hope we can say
from our hearts, We are glad when we are weak, (when we are of least account,
under most contempt in the world) if ye are strong; and this also we wish, even
your perfection. Yea, Beloved, now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. This,
if any thing, will keep our hearts alive under our troubles. O look to your
selves, that ye lose not those things which ye have wrought. If we must not be
suffered to preach any more in public amongst you, yet it would be a joy to us
to see and know, that in our former Labors we had not run in vain, nor
labored in vain. But I proceed,

Work out your own salvation. The meaning is not, that they should merit their
own salvation (that were to take Christ's work out of his hand) but strive and
endeavor with might and main to be partakers of that Salvation and Redemption
purchased by Christ. And this every one ought to mind, and lay out themselves
about, as the chiefest business they have in the world to look after. Oh how
should we fear, lest any of us should in the end come short of it!

Work.] Note, That a Christian-Profession is not an idle Profession, it sets
men a-work. If we are in Christ's Vinyard, we must be Laborers, Matt. 20.1, etc.

Your own Salvation] or, the things that conduce to your Salvation. Follow the
things that accompany Salvation, your own Salvation. Elsewhere in Scripture it
is called the Salvation of God. The Lord is the Author of Salvation, that it is
properly called, His Salvation. It is also called our own salvation, as we are
partakers of it.

Work out your own salvation.] Note, That Religion teaches us first and
chiefly to look to the state of our own souls. This would learn us especially
to eye our own hearts, to observe our own duties, and to secure the condition
of our own souls. Many work not at all, but are busiebodies: Very busy
concerning this man and the other, but do nothing for themselves. Many could
like to enquire of others, with Peter, Lord, what shall this man do? Rather
than with the Publicans and Soldiers that came to John's Baptism, Master, what
shall we do? Now how unlikely is it that they should do much to promote the
salvation of others, who neglect, are unwilling to be at any pains about their
own?

With fear and trembling.] Metalepsis, pro eo quod est, cum summa diligentia,
With the greatest diligence, says Vatablus. With humility and lowliness of
mind, as Camero, who observes these words used together five times in
Scripture, ( scil. Psalm. 2.11. 1 Cor. 2.3. 2 Cor. 7.15. Ephesians. 6.5. and in the
Text) and always in this sense. As elsewhere the Apostle has opposed the word
(...), to fear, unto the word (...), Romans 11.20. The Papists from this Text
would exclude a particular persuasion of ones Salvation, and commend doubting
and hesitation in this matter. That which the Scripture excites all the
faithful to use their best diligence to obtain, as a means to facilitate their
passage and entrance into Heaven, (2 Pet. 1.10, 11.) this the Papists would
dissuade us all from looking after, and declaim against, as an impediment in
the way to Heaven, a thing that would hinder our progress therein. But the fear
and trembling in the Text, is not such as is opposite to Faith, or to a
certainty of ones Salvation (a glorious Crown which is sometimes set upon the
heads of Believers, even here below) But such fear as is opposite and contrary
to security and self-conceit. Indeed these are two grand impediments to the
working out of our Salvation, which the Apostle is very careful here to remove.
Security makes us negligent and careless of doing what we ought. Pride makes
us arrogate unto our selves what properly belongs to the Grace of God and
Christ. As there are two main Designs Satan is continually driving on the
world; and where one fails, he prosecutes the other.

1. He does what in him lies to keep men in security, as by Nature we are all
in a state of Security. Romans 3.11. There is none that understands, there is
none that seeks after God. And the Devil knows we are his own sure enough, if
he can but keep us at this pass.

But 2dly, If we have our consciences awakened, that we can have no rest, but
must do something in Religion; then he has this after-game to play, he will
seek to puff us up with conceits of our own works and abilities. To countermine
whose destructive, hellish designs, the Apostle gives us this direction here,
Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God (as he
further adds in the next verse) which works in you both to will and to do.
But mark it, this holy fear commended to us in the text, is so far from
disturbing, or excluding peace of conscience, and a particular persuasion of
our good estates, as that it most directly conduces unto, and likewise secures
and senceth the same. As Calvin well observes, Facit nostri dissidentia, ut
fortius reclinamus in Dei misericordia^: The more we distrust our selves, our
own strength, the more we shall see a necessity of relying on the Grace of God,
the way to establishment. We cannot stand of our selves, on our own legs; yet
is there no danger of our falling, while we are careful to lean on the Grace of
God, and Christ.

There are many things I must omit and pass by, to come to the main Doctrine,
(which may be the last Doctrine I shall ever have liberty to preach to you.)

Doct. The great business we have in this world, which requires our constant
and chiefest care, is, the working out of our own Salvation.

Note, when I say, this is the great work we have here do, I do not mean as
exclusive of, but as including our glorifying God. As God's glory and our
happiness are linked together in Adamantine chains, and cannot be separated. In
seeking the advancement of God's glory, we should certainly provide for our
fouls everlasting welfare: as on the other hand, if we have no care of our own
souls, it is impossible we should make it our work to advance God's glory.

Now in the prosecution of the Point, I shall first briefly open, and then
apply it.

Explication. To show what it is to work out our Salvation.

1. It is employed here, that we must have an Holy Calling. We must be partakers
of the heavenly calling. Else there is no possibility of working out our
Salvation. As the Apostle speaks, Heb. 3.1. Wherefore holy brethren, partakers
of the heavenly calling -- We must give diligence to make our calling sure, as
we are exhorted, 2 Pet. 1.10. O that I were able to say that of you all, which
the Apostle says of the believing Corinthians, Ye know your calling, brethren.
Indeed there is a bare external calling, and many that have this, I say there
are many that have an external calling and profession; but this is not enough,
you may have it, and yet break, and be undone, for ever. Again, there is an
internal, and effectual calling; when a man is not only willing to take up a
profession of Christianity, but has his heart and will drawn over to Christ:
And this sets the soul in a state of Salvation. Romans 8, 30. Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called. And this is indeed a prerequisite here. We
must first be savingly wrought upon, before we can work out our Salvation. O
Sirs, I beseech you take heed of resting in a civil conversation, or a mere
external profession: For in the Name of God I testify unto every one of you
this day, that there is no calling in the world on which your souls can live,
but that inward effectual calling. It Is not a Ministers calling that will save
him; though that be something higher then being called a Professor. Judas his
Apostleship (which was the highest degree of the Ministry) could not save him.
So a man may be a Preacher of the Word, and yet in the end prove a castaway.
Then think it not enough that thou art a Professor. But as it is in 2 Timothy 1.9.
who has saved us, and called us whith an holy calling; as ever you would be
saved, look after this Holy Calling.

2. Again, As we must have an holy Calling, so we must see that we follow our
Calling. As it is not enough, that a man has a calling, but if he would live
by it, he must follow his calling. So Christians that would work out their
Salvation, must daily exercise themselves unto Godliness, must follow after
Righteousness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness. We must be daily at work with
our hearts to get them into a more holy and heavenly frame: Be continually
employing and laying out that stock of Grace the Lord has put into our hands.
We should follow on to know the Lord, after he has made himself known to us:
And labor to walk worthy of Him, who has called us unto His Kingdom and
Glory. Herein should we exercise our selves continually to have consciences
void of offense both toward God and toward man. O Christians, follow your
callings. You have two callings, your particular Callings (which I meddle not
with at this time: as there is no need to press many of you to follow them, you
are at them early and late, some of you, so that you leave little time for God,
you suffer your particular Callings greatly to entrench upon the other, which
is) your General Calling, your Calling as Christians, as Saints. O Sirs, now
see that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called; That it may
appear you have not received the Grace of God in vain. Be holy in all manner of
conversation. Deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly, and
righteously and godly in this present world. Labor daily to grow in Grace, go
on in the work of Sanctification; and thus your vocation would be evidenced to
be saving and effectual. O we beseech you Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord
Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God,
so ye would abound more and more. For this is the will of God, even your
Sanctification, 1 These. 4.1, 3.

(3.) One thing more I must add here, which the Text indeed does more directly
point at; We must ever abide in this our calling, must hold on in the course
and practice of Christianity to the end. To allude to that in 1 Cor. 7.20. Let
every man abide in his Calling. What ever we do, we must never lay down this
our heavenly Calling. Work out, says the Apostle, (...), not simply, work, but
work out. Thus we must never give over our work, till we can say it is
finished, till we come to the end of our work, the end of our Faith, the
Salvation of our souls. We should fear being like to Israel there, Hos. 8.3.
Israel has cast off the thing that is good. Or like those Apostates, 2 Pet.
2.20, 21. who after they had known the way of Righteousness, turned again from
the holy Commandment delivered unto them: after they had escaped the pollutions
of the world, were again entangled therein, and overcome, whose latter end was
worse than their beginning. It is not enough, only to have begun well: but we
must [press forward toward the Mark,] for the price of [the High Calling] of
God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. He that is righteous, let him be righteous
still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. We must see that we never be
ashamed of our profession, not a shame to our profession. And the God of all
Grace, who has called us into his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, make you
perfect, stablish, strength, settle and confirm you unto the end, that ye may
be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I now come to make some improvement of the Point. And (because I want time and
strength to speak more fully to it) I shall limit my self only to one branch
of Application.

Use. And I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation. O that my
Counsel might be acceptable to you this day! That if indeed I should never have
liberty of preaching to you more, yet this Word, this Exhortation of mine
(mine, did I say? nay, this Exhortation of the Apostle) might ever be fresh in
your thoughts, and as it were, continually sounding in your ears. O whatever
you do, or leave undone, be ^ure to look after your main business, to work out
your Salvation.

And now what I might have brought in as Reasons of the Doctrine, I shall offer
to you here as Motives to enforce the Exhortation, to press you to the duty.

(1.) Consider, there is no work you can set your selves about, so necessary as
this, to work out your Salvation. Either do this, or you do nothing. Leave this
undone, and you are undone for ever. You know the wages of the slothful and
unprofitable servant, [Cast him into utter darkness, where is weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth.] If we are loath to be at any pains for Heaven,
this slothfulness shall be scourged at last with the endless, insufferable
pains of Hell. Though there were never so many Lions in the way to Heaven, yet
should we resolve to go on: and otherwise we are sure to fall into the Lions
mouth, that our souls shall be made his prey.

(2.) Consider, the work of our Salvation sticks no where, if it stick not at
us; it sticks not on Christ's hand. O how did he sweat at this work, the
purchasing of Salvation for us! It drove him into a bloody sweat; yet he went
through with his work. And now he is able to save to the uttermost all that come
to him: and he would be the Author of eternal Salvation unto all that obey him,
Heb. 5.9. This blessed work sticks not on the Father's hand, who is willing all
men should be saved, first coming to the knowledge, belief, and obedience of
the Truth. God excludes none from Salvation, who are willing to be saved in
that way the Gospel sets forth: He excludes none, who exclude not themselves.
The work sticks not at the Spirit neither, who is so often moving and persuading,
yea striving with us, to set about this good work. How unreasonable a thing is
it now, if the work sticks on our hands, who are most concerned to promote it!
Oh how strange, if it should stick here!

(3.) Consider, this is the end of all the labors of God's Ministers. They are
sent from God, to show you the way of Salvation. They are God's Stewards, and
Overseers, to call you to, and direct you in your work. Ah, Beloved, it is well,
if so many of them, as are now like to be laid aside, be not therefore taken
off their work to punish the negligence of the most, because Hearers have been
too mindless generally of their work. Verily, this will be unprofitable for
you, that your poor Ministers should have bestowed on you labor in vain.
Though we would bless God for any the least success, for blessing our
endeavors unto any; yet surely, we should have had more comfort at this day,
could we have seen more good done, that souls had less need of us.

(4.) Consider, that diligence in working out of your Salvation would not
obstruct, but rather promote and bring a blessing on other works you have to
take in hand. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness (let your
main care be laid out that way, take most thought for your souls, and for the
life to come) and all these things shall be added unto you. Believe it, Sirs,
Godliness is the greatest gain: for that it has the promise, both of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. See Deuteronomy. 29.9.

(5.) Again, have not many of us done something this way already? If we would
not lose the things we have wrought, then let us go through-stitch with out
work. O let us not be weary in well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if
we faint not. O my Friends, how sad it is, to faint and tire in the way to
Heaven! As it is the portion of such to lie down in sorrow: Let us therefore
fear (as the Apostle exhorts in Heb. 4.1.) lest a promise being left us of
entering into his rest, any should seem to come short of it. That we should have
been once in a fair way for Heaven, but since we were not careful to hold on
our way, and therefore have fallen short at last; O how would such thoughts
eternally torment us! Blessed be God, I may say in reference to many of you, as
the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 5.12. That this is the true Grace of God, wherein ye
stand. Wherein if you continue and persevere, you shall ere long see the work of
Grace in your souls crowned with Glory. And I am persuaded, am confident of
this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in many of your souls,
will perform, will carry on the same, un^il the day of Jesus Christ. And
therefore gird up the loins of your minds: up and be doing: for now is your
Salvation nearer, than when first ye believed.

6. I add but this one consideration more, The more pains you are at here in
your lifetime in working out your Salvation, the more peace and comfort may
you expect in the hour of death. The rest of the laboring man is sweet. They
that now are taking most pains for Heaven, when they come to dye, enter into
peace indeed. O the vast difference betwixt those who in fear have wrought out
their salvation here, and those that have wrought out their destruction without
fear! We shall see a difference betwixt these one day. And as I have told you
often, I tell you this once more, It is better, (better a thousand thousand
degrees) to go toiling, and sweating, to go sighing and weeping, yea, or
bleeding to Heaven, than to go slugging and sleeping, or to go singing and
dancing to Hell.

Now perhaps some of you are ready to say, These are weighty considerations,
and we are now convinced how much it is our duty and our wisdom to set about
this work, and therefore we resolve upon it, if you would give us the best
direction you can about it.

Here I would close up this subject with some directions; but first let me give
you two or three necessary cautions.

1. Take heed of having your heads, hearts and hands too deeply engaged in the
World. They that make that their great study and business to be rich in this
World, take a ready way to destroy their souls, 1 Timothy 6.9. Many in their over
eager desires to embrace this present World, have let Heaven go, have lost that
for ever.

2. Take heed of following men's examples further than you see them to follow
the Rule of God's Word: the world is ever full of bad examples; if we would walk
safely, we must walk by Rule. If we think it enough only to do as the most,
there is little hopes of our working out our salvation, Matt. 7.13. The word of
Christ must judge you hereafter, O let it guide you here. As many as walk
according to this Rule, peace shall be upon them, and mercy. In matters of
Religion, of Salvation, believe none, follow none, further than there is ground
for their opinions and practices in God's written Word. Were we to follow men's
examples, or men's traditions in matters of Religion, besides the Scriptures,
then will not this follow, viz. That the Scriptures are not a perfect Rule, (as
the Papists teach) that it must be eeked out with unscriptural traditions, and
the commandments or documents of men. And do but once admit this, and we shall
have no certain Rule at all.

3. Take heed of consulti^^ here with flesh and blood. In the matters of our
Salvation, not the Flesh (who is ever at that, Master, spare thy self) but
Conscience, informed out of God's Word, must be our Counselor. Our souls
interest, and our carnal interest are many times cross to one another. Hence it
is, our Savior so much insists on the duties of self-denial, and taking up the
Cross. Yea, he further tells us, He that finds his life, shall lose it; and
he that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. You know, great works are
seldom perfected at a small charge. A rich Mine, it will cost a man something
before he comes to it; but when he has found it, it soon recompenseth him for
all his former pains and expenses both. Heaven and Salvation is such a
Treasure, though we should lose all our earthly comforts, this would certainly
repair all our losses, and make, and enrich our souls for ever.

4. Take heed of delaying to set to this work. Oh! have we not delayed too
long? Have we not lost time, and lost special opportunities, lost such
advantages for carrying on this work, as (for any thing we know) we may never
enjoy again. It is high time now to awake out of sleep, to shake off Spiritual
sloth, to apply our selves to the work in good earnest: who knows but the day
of our visitation, the time of our life, and of God's patience, may be very
near an end. It may be the eleventh hour. However, the longer it is ere we set
to our work, the more difficulty we shall find in it.

I now come to the Directions.

1. See that you understand your work. Be ye not unwise, but understanding what
the will of the Lord is. Yea, study to be filled with the knowledge of his
Will. Rest not in good meanings. My People are destroyed for lack of knowledge,
Hos. 4.6. ^ee here, though bare knowledge cannot save one; yet many a one is
destroyed for lack of knowledge. Beloved, though we may not be permitted to
preach publicly; yet I know not, that it would be any crime for us to instruct
such in private, as repair to us for assistance and advice. O that poor souls
were as ready to make use of us, as we are willing to afford them the best help
we can!

2. Be sure your Groundwork be good. Build on the Rock, Christ; so indeed you
need not fear but your Work will stand. Other Foundation can no man lay. If ye
build besides this Rock; or build partly on Christ, and partly on your selves,
the work will come to naught. We are quite lost and ruined in our selves, that
we must be taken off from our own bottoms, brought out of our selves to Jesus
Christ, or we cannot be saved.

3. Do all in Christ's strength, Phil. 3.13. This way the Apostle Paul went to
work. Then the work of our Salvation is like to go forward, when we have
Christ, the Savior, putting to his helping hand, and joining with us. O as
ever you would have your work to prosper, be sure you take Christ along with
you.

4. As Noah being moved with fear, fell to work, and prepared an Ark to the
saving of himself, and of his house; so let us work out our Salvation with
fear. We should have a reverent fear toward God, to quicken us to duty, and to
awe and make us exceeding serious in duty. Again, we should have a jealous fear
of Satan, and our own sinful, deceitful hearts, to look narrowly to them, who
(like Sanballat and Tobiah) will do but what they can, to hinder and take us
off our work.

5. Labor much with God in prayer. Thus there were hopes the work would be
going forward. Observe what immediately follows the Text, It is God which
works in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. When it could
^^^aid of Paul, Behold, he prays, then was Ananias ^^nt to confirm him, that
he might receive his sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 9.11, 17.
The Work is great, to work out your Salvation, and it is possible you may want
some helps you have had, yea, and meet with greater hindrances, new
difficulties in it: O, pray in strength to carry you through. It may be, you
shall not have liberty to hear so much, to quicken you the more to prayer. You
may have fewer hearing-opportunities, that you shall have more time to pray.

6. Up and be doing, when you can find the Spirit at work in your hearts.
Attend to the motions of God's Spirit. This is a special season not to be let
slip, when we have an offer of his cooperating Grace.

7. Do all as in the sight of God. Set the Lord ever before you. Eye-service is
a fault in our servants (condemned, Ephesians. 6.6.) but a virtue in God's servants.
Indeed could we but ply our work, while God's eye is on us, we should never be
idle, or ill-employed.

8. Let out the strength of your spirits in the weighty matters of God's Law,
and not about trivial, unnecessary things. Such things as God no where
requires: of which he says, In vain do they worship me after the traditions of
men. If we make our* selves busy in building hay and stubble on the
Foundation, our work shall be burnt, and we shall suffer loss.

(9.) Improve the day time, God has allotted to you wherein to work. The day of
Grace, O that we had known our day! we have had a large space, and a fair
season of working granted to us; and yet I am afraid that (as to the most of
us) little of our work is done. The consideration of our former loss of time,
should cause us henceforward to double out diligence. Now let not a day pass
over your heads, wherein you do not some way further th^^ ^^^rk of your
salvation. Especially improve the Lor^^ Day. Sabbath-dayes are days of resting
from outward labors, from secular emploiments; yet not to be spent in
idelness; they are the harvest-time for our souls. And when will ye work, and
bestir your selves, if not in harvest? The Lords Day is to be spent in such
works as more directly tend to the promoting of our Salvation. And the more you
should see this work going forward, the more would Sabbaths be your delight:
You would not be for those vain recreations, that sinful liberty, you may see
others take, on God's Holy Day.

(10.) Sit down and count the cost. So you might be prepared to go through with
your work. If you reckon right, you will see, let Salvation cost what it can,
it can never cost too much. Romans 8.18. I reckon (says the Apostle, and we need
not fear to take his account here) that the sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory to follow. I would have said a word
more to this, but have prevented my self in speaking to the third caution.
Therefore here I conclude my Sermon, and Exhortation, desiring that the Spirit
of Truth may bring these things to your remembrance. Beloved could I have
thought of any word, more profitable and generally useful for you, you should
have been sure of it.

It may now be expected, I should speak something touching my Deprivation. O
that the Lord would lead Ministers and People each into their own hearts, to
find out the cause of this sad dispensation; as we read of the Fathers: (in
another sense) He causes us this day to pass under a cloud.

I know some think, and will not spare to say, that we wilfully bring this
Obscurity on our selves. But the Lord, the searcher of al^ hearts, knows, and
will manifest to the world one day, whether it was a meet humor, or whether
indeed it was not Conscience, that would not suffer us to comply with the
things now imposed. The Lord knows, we dare not adventure on the checks,
reproaches, smitings of our own hearts and consciences; though it follow, that
our mouths be stopped.

Beloved, I cannot forget the respects you have shown to me, how you chose me
at first, under great bodily weakness, and were willing to procure me
assistance. I have not wanted outward encouragement among you: but above all, I
have often thought, when I have come to my public work here (unpreparedly
enough, God knows) yet I have found the fruit, help, and benefit of your
prayers for me. That I must acknowledge, those few years I have spent amongst
you, have been the best, to me the most comfortable years I have spent in the
Ministry. That might I have liberty, the Lord knows, I would most gladly spend,
and be spent for you. Nothing but death should part us. And howsoever we are
separated, yet I pray, we may live in one another hearts; and that we may more
earnestly than ever, strive with God in prayer one for another. More I would
have said, but strength and spirits fail; and further, I would spare you.

Now how glad should we be, if those that shall follow us, may do more good
amongst you, then ever we have or could have done. The Lord carry on his own
Work, and (though He quite lay us aside, though He should never honor us so
far, as to make any further use of us, yet) we could rejoice, to see Gods Work
prospering, Religion (and that not only in a form, but) in the life and power
of it promoted, and more and more set up in this place. So I commend you to
God, and to the Word of His Grace, who is able to build you up, and to give you
an inheritance among all them that are Sanctified.

SERMON IV.
1 King. 18.21. And Elijah came unto all the People, and said, How long halt ye
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow
him.
IT is not a thing indifferent, what Religion men are of, whether they are for
God, or Baal. That is a pernicious opinion, that affirms, You may be saved in
any Religion. Again, it is not enough, that we are of the true Religion, but we
must be true to it. And so much we may learn from faithful Elijah both his
Doctrine and practice. When Israel went a whoring from God, he was jealous for
the Lord, 1 Kin. 19.10. He continued to stand for God, His Truth, and Worship,
even when he could not see one more of his mind, to be his second. So here he
durst plead for God, when there was none found to take his part. Note, (by the
way) that in the worst of times, in times of most prevailing corruptions, yet
the Lord is not wont to leave himself without witness.

It Is further observable, Israel had never degenerated more than in Elijah's
days; Yet never had they been privileged with greater means. Many Prophets at
this time raised up amongst them, see ver. 4. of this Chapt. and Elijah among
the rest.

Note. Extraordinary means sometimes serve only to heighten and fill up the
measure of a Peoples sins. See Mat. 23.34, 35.

And now comes a dreadful Famine. The Prophets shut up, and the Heavens shut up
together.

Elijah had foretold the drought, Chapt. 17.1. And after three years he is sent
with good news, that rain was coming, Chap. 18.1. Ahab seeing Elijah, v. 17.
when he should have acknowledged his own sin and guilt, he wrongfully accuses
God's Prophet. Art thou he that troubles Israel?

Note. It is no new thing for God's Faithful Messengers to be accounted enemies
to the State.

As Elijah said, I am not better than my Fathers. Are we better than Elijah,
and other of God's Prophets, who have been thus censured? Why then should we
look for better here?

Note. Again, observe, Wicked men are very prone to mistake the cause of
troubles and calamities.

See Jer. 44.18, 20, 21, 22. where there is most guilt, commonly there is least
ingenuity, or grace to see and acknowledge it. It Is natural unto sinners, we
have it by kind, from our first parents, to transfer all blame (as much as we
can) from our selves to others.

But how deeply soever Ahab is pleased to charge him, Elijah is ready to clear
himself and the Truth. He desires that himself and the prophets of Baal might
come to a fair trial: So he doubts not but to prove himself by a miraculous
sign, to be the Servant and Prophet of the most high God, and show them to be a
pack of most wretched Impostors. Ahab yields to a discussion of this business,
either out of curiosity, expecting some strange discovery; or through fear,
being awed with the present Judgment they lay under, not knowing but upon
refusal, the Prophet might have some other dreadful Message to deliver; or in
hope and expectance, upon his yielding herein, to have the Judgment removed.
Some such way he is persuaded, and inclined to call the prophets of Baal, and
the Heads of the people together unto Mount Carmel, where being assembled,
Elijah sets upon the people in the words read unto you, How long halt ye? --
Where you have,

1. A chiding expostulation, [How long halt ye --?] Why halt ye? How
inexcusable is it, you should halt in so plain a path, be in doubt, unresolved
where the case is so clear? Again, that you should continue so long unsettled,
contracting an ill habit to your selves. As an arm or leg put out of joint, and
not looked to in time, hardly ever keeps its right place again.

2. A serious Exhortation, [If the Lord be God, follow him:] What is here
added, [if Baal, follow him] is spoken by way of concession, but indeed forbids
the worshipping of Baal, til it could be made out that Baal was God.

How long] There is an Emphasis here. Thus the Prophet sets an Accent upon
their sin of halting.

Note. That long continuance in any sinful course, is a great aggravation of
sin. It is sad at any time to fall into sin, but far worse to lie in sin.
Therefore he says not, Why halt ye? but more emphatically, How long -- Many
such expostulations in Scripture, Exodus 16.28. HOW LONG refuse ye to keep my
commandments? Number. 14.11. HOW LONG will this people provoke me? And* HOW LONG
will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have showed among
them, Jer. 31.22. HOW LONG will thou go about, O thou backsliding Daughter?
Hos. 8.5. HOW LONG will it be ere they attain to innocence?

How long halt ye] The speech is metaphorical, to set forth their inconstancy,
unresolvedness in Religion, their dividing betwixt God and Baal. As one that
halts, inclines his body now to one hand, and straightway to the other; so the
Israelites would profess themselves the people of God, and seemed in some
things to follow his Word, when in other things they were quite turned aside to
Idolatry. They were circumcised, and thereby engaged to the service of the true
God, and yet were drawn over to the Worship of Baal, and bowed to that
Heathenish Abomination. Now, but that I like not to strain Metaphors, and
writhe them besides their proper scope, I might hint this note (from the phrase
of speech here used) that they are but lame Services and Sacrifices, that men
of divided hearts present unto God.

If the Lord be God, follow him.] Here the Prophet assayes to reason them out
of their Idolatry, to argue them into the right way, the true Worship of God.
As the Lord reasons with them, Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father, where is mine
honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear? Note by the way,

That nothing is more reasonable than the true Religion. The Lord never
enjoined his servants to pluck out their right eyes. No, we may be his servants
on better, and more honorable terms. I grant indeed, some points of Doctrine
to be believed are most mysterious; yet what duties to be performed, that are
not plain? It must be confessed, some Articles of Faith are above the reach of
Reason, so that we cannot comprehend them (e.g.) the Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of the Godhead; the incarnation of the Son of God, etc.) yet being
revealed by God in his Word, our belief of them is most reasonable: Because it
is impossible we should have greater evidence of the truth of any thing in the
world, than the Testimony of the God of Truth, who can neither deceive, nor be
deceived; What better proof can we desire than the Word of God, that cannot
lie? But then as for the Rules of practice laid down in God's Word, how sweetly
do these comport with right Reason? As Reason will demonstrate, that there is a
God, an Eternal, Infinite Essence, who has His being of Himself, and gives
being unto all things else; so it will teach us, that this God ought to be
worshipped, should have homage from all his creatures: And that he ought to be
worshipped according to his own Will and Mind, as he himself is pleased to
prescribe and appoint, rather than according to men's fancies and inventions:
That the honor which is due to God, should not be given to others, to idols.
As Elijah here, If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him.
They that fall off from the true Religion, fall from right Reason too. They
th^^ do not act like men, that forsake the true God to follow idols; as is
implied, Isa. 46.8. Remember this, and show your selves men; q. d. One would
not think ye were men; who would take you for reasonable creatures, if ye dare
to prefer, or compare dumb idols to the living and only true God?

Now the Doctrine I would speak to from these words, you may observe from the
first clause here.

Doct. Halting in Religion is very sad and sinful.

This point I shall endeavor (with the Lord's assistance) to explain first,
then to confirm, and last of all to apply.

First, For explication, that you may understand what it is to halt in
Religion, take a few distinctions.

Thus; there is an halting in Principle; and again, there is halting in
practice.

Again, Halting in Principle is twofold; As this evil quality is seated either
in the directing, or in the commanding-power of the soul. There is an halting
in the heart or will, and in the mind or judgment.

1. When the heart is unfixed, unstedfast, (...), the double-minded man, he
that has an heart, and an heart, is partly for God, and partly for Mammon; he
that is not resolved for God, that is not brought to center wholly upon God,
and that cleaves not to him with full purpose of heart, is one that halts in
God's sight, be his outward course and carriage before men never so fair and
smooth. The Weathercock may point toward the Sun, while the wind is in a right
corner, or it may seem to be fixed, when cross winds are not abroad; and yet it
is a Weathercock. A false heart, an hypocrite may seem to look toward God,
and Religion for a time, may seem well-grounded in Religion, who yet will turn
aside, will turn about when the winds are contrary.

2. When the Judgment is not settled, when men are wavering in opinion, like
Reeds shaken with the wind, like children tossed to and fro, now of one
persuasion, by and by of another. It is sad thus to halt. How can the traveller
go on cheerfully, who is uncertain whether he be in the way or no? Indeed, some
are too credulous, Prove. 14.15. The simple believes every word; but the
prudent man looks well to his goings. The sober, wise traveller, when he is a
little at a stand, he deliberates with himself, and when others tell him, his
way lies here or there, if he understands the coast of the Country, that helps
him to judge whether they set him right or no. But the simple is ready to
believe every one he meets with; and hence he is often turned out of his way; I
say, some are of too easy belief. Again, some are slow to believe, like
Nichodemus, How can these things be? Like Thomas (except they may see and
understand the reason and manner of things) except they may see things plainly,
they will not believe. Yet there is no sound Christian, but he believes all
Divine Truth implicitly; that is, he believes the Scriptures to be most
certainly true, and all things therein contained; though there are many things
to be found there, which he has no distinct knowledge of. I pray, mistake me
not, I am not for a Popish implicit Faith, a believing as the Church believes;
but for our giving an assent universally to all that God has said. As there is
a general repentance and humiliation for unknown sins; so a general, implicit
belief of unknown Truths. And further, the true Christian has an explicit
belief of all Fundamental, necessary Truth. He must first steadfastly believe,
ere he can sincerely make a profession of the Truth, or cheerfully suffer for
it.

Again, some are unresolved concerning the present Truth. As the times vary, so
does men's opposition against the Truth. Sometimes one Truth mainly opposed, and
sometimes another. Now it is of very great consequence to be settled in the
Truth of the Season. As the Apostle Peter says of those to whom he writes, 2
Pet. 1.12. that they were established in the present Truth; (...), i.e. in the
Truth of the Gospel ( Non tantum promissa sed reipsa exhibita, as Beza) Christ
was the Truth and substance of those Types, and Shadows under the Law, but he
was further off from them, then he is from Beleivers, under the Gospel.
Therefore those legal Types and Shadows give place, the Body and Truth being
come. This is one sense given of that passage. But there is another
interpretation given of it, which is to my present purpose [established in the
present Truth] i. e. in that Truth which at this present time is most under
debate. As that was the great question of those days, Whether the way of the
Gospel, the Christian Religion, or Judaism, was the true way? And thus several
ages have raised controversies about Religion. In every age there is some
special Truth, which is as a (...), a Shiboleth, a mark of distinction betwixt
sound Professors, and such as are spurious. As (v. g.) this Truth, That Jesus
is the Christ, was the trial of men at first, when the world stormed at him,
and at all that confessed his Name. Afterward when Arrianism sprung up, and
prevailed in the world, the Deity of Christ, His being one in essence with the
Father, was the touchstone whereby Professors were tried. Where Arminianism is
rife, the point of special, Free Grace, becomes a main note of discovery.
Sometimes that false and absurd Opinion of Christ's real, corporal presence in
the Sacrament, has been cried up by men of corrupt minds, as their great
Diana; and persecution set on foot, and raised up against those, who would not
come over to that gross conceit; then those that were sound in the Faith would
be at more then ordinary pains, to be clear in the Doctrine of the Sacraments.
Where Popery prevails, and men's traditions and inventions are set up in the
room of, and as of equal credit or profit with the Ordinances and Institutions
of our Lord Christ, the Authority and absolute perfection of the Sacred
Scriptures, together with the Glorious Offices of Jesus Christ are plainly
struck at, desperately undermined. Which points, if men be not clear, and
steadfast in, when the temptation comes, they will easily be carried away with
the error of the Wicked. It is nothing to condemn old errors, that are laid in
their graves long since, while one is not established in the present Truth.
Either not to hold this, or to hold it loosely, is of very dangerous
consequence. Only I grant, in controversies about lesser matters men, of sober
and pious spirits may be either at a stand, in the dark, or of different
apprehensions. Yet it is to be noted, that where such are in the dark, and
doubtful, they would gladly be informed, heartily pray for satisfaction, and
would be as thankful for it, if once obtained: so, what opinion such embrace,
or receive, it is not because such an opinion would some way accord with their
worldly interest: but because in their apprehension it looks likest to Truth. A
sound Christian receives the Truth, in the love of it: and you need do no more,
to work him to the entertaining of any truth in Religion, then only satisfy his
judgment, that it is a truth. He receives not Divine Truths for self ends, or
by-respects; neither dare he (out of respect to carnal self) reject any Truth.
But for any to cherish doubts in their minds, upon design, that they might have
something to say, for their parting with the Truth, when it is dangerous to
hold on in the profession of it; to adventue no farther to Sea, then (if a
storm should come) they might soon get to shore again; to engage no further in
the profession of the Truth, then they might face about, and make a fair
retreat, when this meets with opposition; (though the men of this world will
judge it a point of Policy, yet indeed) it is an argument of base hypocrisy,
and treachery. And such studied Scepticks in Religion are next neighbors to
downright Atheists. But a thin mud-wall betwixt them, that is soon broken down.
But so much of halting in principle.

Again, there is halting in practice. Unevenness in conversation, when that is
not ordered aright. Now it must be acknowledged, the best men on earth walk not
so evenly with God as they ought. But here take a distinction or two. There is
an halting in some particular steps or acts: and in ones ordinary, in a
continued course. I say,

1. There is an halting in some particular steps, or acts. This is incident to
the Saints themselves. Such as walk uprightly in the main, yet at one time or
other have their sinful slips. Faithful Abraham halted before Abimelech. Yea,
that Grace which seemed strongest, even his Faith, was sinew-shrunk sometimes.
As Job's patience was otherwhiles sinking under his burdens. So David, the man
after God's own heart, turned aside once shamefully in the matters of Vriah.
Peter halted with the Jews, Gal. 2. He is there charged amongst others, that he
did not [(...)] foot it aright. Thus the best of God's Saints have sometimes
trod awry.

2. But then there is halting in a continued course. This is worse than the
former. The Faithful too often meet with rubs in their way, that for the present
stop them, but they recover themselves again, and proceed on in a right course:
Whereas all natural men are quite upon a wrong bias. Their heart is bent to
backsliding from God. As there is a phrase, Isa. 44.20. A deceived heart has
turned him aside. Hypocrites have a corrupt bias within, that is still drawing
them aside into crooked paths. And the double-minded man is unstable even in
all his ways.

Again, there is an halting through infirmity, from the remainders of
corruption: and a resolved, deliberate halting, from the reigning power and
predominancy of corruption.

The former is found in the Godly, but it is their grief and burden. Peter upon
a sudden push of temptation, halted down, and fell foully, into a denial of
Christ, and that with such circumstances as might make any Christians ears glow
and tingle to hear recited, Mat. 26. yet afterward he was far from applauding
himself herein. He went out and wept bitterly. As one of the Ancients says of
some that fell through weakness in time of Persecution, Vicit eos paena, non
avertit perfidia; negarunt semel, sed quotidie confitentur; negarunt sermon
sed confitentur gemitibus, ululatibus, flecibus, liberis, non coactis vocibus.
They denied in word, but afterward confessed with sighs, and groans, and
tears. The Faithful sometimes halt through infirmity; but it is their grief.
Others that halt deliberately, far unlike them, neither can they fairly pretend
sorrow for it; Alas, it is their choice; they approve of it, and think
themselves, in taking their liberty, in having so great a latitude about the
matters of Religion, much wiser then those who are more precise, and
straitlaced.

But so much for Explication, to show, what it is to halt in Religion, and how
many ways men are subject to it. Now that is very sad and sinful, you have as
much affirmed, Hos. 10.2. Their heart is divided: now shall they be found
faulty. God will be served with all the heart, and with our whole soul: and to
divide it betwixt Him, and others, is a thing He cannot endure, He cannot
brook. It were easy to produce other Scriptures, that speak to this purpose,
but we shall have occasion to make use of them in the following discourse;
therefore I wave them here to proceed to the Demonstrations of the Point.

And I shall evidence the great evil of halting in Religion, 1. From the nature
of the thing it self. 2. From the whence it proceeds; 3. from the consequences
and effects.

Demon. 1. Halting in Religion must needs be exceeding evil, that considered in
it self, is directly opposite, and contrary to God, from whom the true Religion
is derived, and unto whom it returns. It is both contrary to God's Nature, and
to his Mind and Will.

Contrary to Gods Nature. He is still the same, with him is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning. Now how unlike to God are they that are off and on,
ever and anon changing; one thing to day, another to morrow; yea, it may be,
seemingly devout while on their knees, but vain and profane when on their
feet. Good and upright is the Lord. Thou most Upright. Thou most Upright do
weigh the path of the just. Then surely they are contrary to him, who are for
crooked ways. The Lord that is faithful, Isa. 49.7. Heb. 10.23. He is faithful
in all his promises to us. How unlike to God are they, who are false in their
engagements, playing fast and loose with him!

And how contrary this halting in Religion is to God's Mind and Will, you may
learn from what is said of those Mongrel-Worshippers, 2 King. 17.33, 34. In v.
33. it is said, They feared the Lord, and served their own gods. But in v. 34.
They feared not the Lord. Such serving of God is as no serving of him. There Is
one [But] which takes off the luster of all Amaziah did; He did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, BUT not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. He
began well, but afterward turned away from following the Lord, v. 27. So, we
find this as a Blot in the story of some of the good Kings, whose Acts are
recorded in Holy Writ; Such, and such a one reigned well, did that which was
right in the eyes of the Lord, only the high places were not taken away: And
here they fell short.

Demon. 2. Halting in Religion must needs be very evil, which comes from such
ill causes. Such as the cause is, such is the effect. Now here I shall not
insist on the Fall of mankind, which is indeed the prime cause of all that
halting in Religion which is in the World. I shall not stay at that sinning
sin, the corruption of man's nature (which was consequent upon his fall) which
makes way for all those sinful warpings, crooked windings and turnings in the
course of our conversations. But I will come to some more particular and nearer
causes. And so this halting I am speaking of, is either from a bad head, or
from an evil heart, or from both.

1. From a bad head. As we may see those that are troubled with the Vertigo,
etc. that have bad heads, how ill they can guide their feet. Thus, corruption
of the judgment, false Principles received into the mind, cause the soul to
halt and turn aside.

Many Heretics of old thought it lawful enough to bow their bodies to an
Image, to an Idol, so that they kept their hearts for God. But this was
doubtless a false Principle. They whose hearts were true to God in Israel,
would not so much as how the knee to Baal.

Many of them taught, It was enough to believe with the heart; that confession
with the mouth was not necessary: Though (as Anastas. Sinait. well determines)
to be restrained by any fear of persecution, a libera fidei confessione, est
quaedam species Abnegationis: Not to confess Christ, is to deny him. No mean
betwixt these, Matthew. 10.32, 33. Some hold it lawful enough to profess the
contrary to what they believe. Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli. Whereunto
the Doctrine of equivocation, and mental reservation, maintained by the
Jesuits, is as near a kind as may be. The Christians in Justin Martyrs time
were of other Principles, We had rather dye (says he) for the Confession of
our Faith, than either lie, or delude those that examine us; otherwise we might
readily use the common saying, Jurata lingua est, animus injuratus est; My
tongue only is sworn, my mind unsworn. Such principles as these they were far
from approving of. Some hold that men may be saved in any Religion. It is not
very likely that such should stick to the true. But such are the false
principles that teach men to play fast and loose with God. These would teach
men to deny Christ with Peter, but not to repent with Peter.

Further, many halt from a doubting Conscience, or from an erring Conscience;
and it is sad being left to the conduct of but a doubting Conscience, Romans
14.23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. That man halts in his course, who is
drawn to this or that, sed titubante Conscientia (as Beza terms it) with an
hobling, hesitating Conscience. The Apostles Rule, v. 5. is, Let every man be
fully persuaded in his own mind. Again, how sad is it, being led by an erring
Conscience! Indeed, such a soul is in a miserable strait. Ordinarily it is a
sin to follow Conscience when it erreth. When Conscience determines that to be
a sin which is a duty; or that to be our duty which is a sin, we cannot follow
the dictate of Conscience here, but we sin. Nor can we go against Conscience,
though erring, but we sin too. And therefore woe unto them that call evil good,
and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness. But this
is one cause of halting in Religion, Corruption of the mind and judgment. When
a man cannot well discern his way, no wonder if he be often turning aside.

2. From an evil heart. The corruptions of the heart are like a strong bias,
drawing the soul off from God. Here (1.) Unbelief. An evil heart of unbelief is
one cause of halting. Heb. 3.12. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God: q. d. Would
you not depart from the living God: O then take heed of unbelief, the cause of
souls departing from him. As it is by Faith that men come to God, ( Heb. 11.6.)
so it is by unbelief that they depart from God. In Heb. 10.39. They that draw
back, and they that believe, are opposed to one another. Pray, mark what it was
that kept the Disciples close to Christ, when others fell off from him. We
believe and are sure (say they) that thou art the Christ. -- Lord, to whom
should we go? Thou have the words of eternal life, John 6.68, 69. If we are
halting in our course, it would argue us full of unbelief: That we do not
believe the Word of God. Do we believe God's promises, and yet turn aside for
the vain proffers of a deluding world? Do we credit Divine threatenings; when
yet these are not of so much force to deter us from sin, as the frowns and
threats of men to drive us into sin? Did men fully believe there is so much
evil and danger in every sin, as the Word of God declares there is, they would
immediately see cause to be more afraid of the least sin, than of the greatest
sufferings in the world. Did men really believe what the Lord has said of such
as obey him sincerely, and follow him fully, they must necessarily conclude
thence, that integrity is the best policy, and Godliness the greatest gain. But
when men choose either to decline a way of duty, or to comply with a way of sin,
for fear of sufferings, or in hopes of some worldly advantage, this bewrayes
abundance of unbelief. Thus men really call in question the truth of what God
has spoken, and interpretatively give him the lie. And is not that a wicked
heart that dares give God the lie?

Again, Halting argues we believe not God, that he is such a God as indeed he
is. So holy, that he hates all sin; so just, that he will not acquit the
wicked. A gracious God, rich in mercy to reward his faithful servants: Infinite
in Power, to protect those that fear and put their trust in him; but to destroy
all those that forsake and rebel against him. A God everywhere present,
omniscient, that eyes and observes us in all places, companies, employments.
Who would forsake, or turn aside from the living God, that believes him to be
such a God? But unbelief is the root of disobedience, (as in the Greek, the
same word (...), signifies both.) This is the cause of inconstancy, the root of
Apostasy. How is it possible that any other than bad fruit should spring from
such a bitter and poisonous root?

2. Hypocrisy is another cause of halting. As Constancy is the daughter of
sincerity, so unstaidness is the natural offspring and product of Hypocrisy,
Psalm. 78.37. Their heart was not right with him, (then it follows) neither were
they [stedfast] in his Covenant. As on the other hand, the upright in heart are
opposed to such as turn aside into crooked ways, Psalm. 125.45. Hypocrisy
makes men zealous about needless ceremonies, but careless of the substance of
Religion. The Scribes and Pharisees (who are therefore called hypocrites, Matt.
15.7.) were earnest for the observation of their traditions, while they
regarded not to go cross to known, express commands of God. They were not
afraid in sundry cases to set aside God's command, to hold up men's traditions,
Matthew. 15.2, 3. Mar. 7.8. Hypocrisy will put men upon some duties, while there
is an allowed neglect of others, and those more weighty, Mat. 23.23. Hypocrisy
will take men off from some sins, while other sins are still retained. As Jehu
destroyed Baal out of Israel, but departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, 2
King. 10.28, 31. It will teach men to avoid open, gross, scandalous sins, while
they have no care to get cleansed from secret sins, from inward,
heart-corruptions, Matthew. 23.25, etc. Hypocrisy will allow men to condemn,
will put them upon speaking against the sins of former times, while it teaches
compliance with the sins of the present times. Hypocrisy will suffer men to
live in those sins which they condemn in others, Matt. 23.29, etc. And what is
all this but shameful halting? Hypocrisy will teach men to make a fair show
sometimes, to act a part in Religion, for the compassing of some carnal end,
which being once obtained, the Play is done, and they are found other men than
they appeared and personated before. Hypocrisy is a paint that will not endure
the fire. Let fiery trials come, and these soon mar its beauty, lay open its
deformity, Hypocrisy is but the putting of the sheep-skin on a Wolf or Swine,
which if once it be shorn, you would not expect it should grow again. The last
estate of the Hypocrite ordinarily is worse than the first, Matthew. 12.45.

3. Base sinful self-love, and inordinate love of the world. Carnal self is a
great hinderance and pull back to us in a Christian course. Therefore Christ
calls upon every one that would follow him, to deny himself, Matthew. 16.24. Our
base hearts will seem to comply with a Divine Command at one time, but out of
self-respect; and dispense with the same command at another time, out of
self-respect. Some that were constant in the performance of Family Duties,
seemingly strict in the observation of Sabbaths, etc. while these things have
been in fashion, can readily lay all religious duties aside, when they become a
matter of reproach. Some that seem to stear their course Heavenwards while they
meet with prosperous gales, who can soon tack about when the winds are
contrary. How should they do other than halt in Religion, who have more respect
to their Credit and Reputation in the world, than to God's Honor? See John
12.42, 43. How can ye believe (says our Savior) who receive honor one of
another, John 5.44. As the Apostle James, Whosoever will be a friend of the
world, is the enemy of God, ^am. 4.4,

Many love their carnal ease more than their work, more than God's service.
These are only for the easy part of Religion, and so halt in Religion. Many
have more love to their Estates, their earthly possessions: And these will be
only for the cheap part of Religion, and halt that way in Religion. This
Ointment might have been sold for so much, says Judas, whose mind was chiefly
on the Bag. Holy David was of another disposition, I will not serve the Lord
with that which costs me nothing. One thing I must tell you here, If our
Religion be not such as weans our hearts from the world, the world will deaden
them to the exercise of Religion. If the love of God, we all profess to have,
be not such as consumes inordinate love to the world, our love of the world
will smother the love of God, not suffer that to live and breath in us. See
Matt. 6.24.

4. A sinful cowardice and fear of man. Prove. 29.25.

The fear of man brings a snare. Ponit offendiculum, Lavater Tremel.
it causes many to stumble. Ponit tendiculam, it lays many fast. As we read,
John 7.12, 13. Among the people some said of our Savior, He is a good man --
Howbeit, no man spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews. Seducit turbas,
Ludol. Carth.
clarius Sonabant. Sed Bonus est, pressius susurrabant. There were great
numbers, and many of great note in the world, that cried out aloud, He seduceth
the people. But that he was a good man, it was whispered amongst some, but
scarce any found that durst speak it out.

The fear of man would plainly argue our forgetfulness of God, Isa. 51.12, 13.
By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, ( Prove. 16.6.) whereas by the
fear of men, many depart from the Lord. The former is a Sovereign Antidote
against sin, an excellent means to preserve us from it, ( Neh. 5.15. Exodus
20.20.) The latter greatly exposes unto sin. As we have a sad instance in
Peter, being surprised with fear, how was he whorried into the denial of his
Lord and Master; when as he should have been more afraid of this, than of a
thousand deaths. Thus you have heard some of the causes of halting in Religion.
Other might be named, but I forbear.

Demon. 3. Halting in Religion may further appear to be exceeding evil, in
regard of the evil effects, the sad consequences of it: And that, both in
respect of God, of the godly, of sinners, and of ones self.

1. In respect of God. 1. Hereby God is dishonored; his Name polluted. It was a
Law among the Jews, Lev. 21.9. The daughter of any Priest, if she profane her
self by playing the Whore, [she profaneth her Father, she shall be burnt with
fire.] More holiness would be expected in such a one, as the daughter of a
Priest; thus the crime in her was greater. She prophaneth the Name of her
Father. Then what a profaning the Name of God is this, for such as are called
his People, to go a whoring from him? The sinful slips and falls of Professors
cast dirt (as it were) on the Name of God; since they are taken to belong to
him. And how just a thing it is that God should spit in their faces, put them
to shame, who care not thus to throw dirt in his face.

Thus indeed the sins of such as profess God's Name, and stand in a nearer
relation to him, are worse than the sins of others. The miscarriages of
strangers, of those that are without, reflect not so much on God to his
dishonor, as the miscarriages of those who are within his Household and Family,
as the Church is called. The Commands of God are violated and broken by others
also; yet the holy Name of God is not so polluted by others. But the Name of
God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is written, Romans 2.24.
Better in this respect, men would never take up a Profession, than to rest
here, without taking any care for a suitableness of conversation, Ezekiel. 20.39.
As for you, O house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, Go ye, serve every one
his Idols; and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me: but pollute ye
my holy Name no more -- q.d. If ye will not be ruled by me, then go and serve
your Idols altogether, appear what you are: but make no more show of being my
People, to reproach and disgrace me. It was a great dishonor to God, that it
should be said, These are the Lord's People -- Ezekiel. 36.20. Hence, as the sins
of those who have his Name called on them, are so far worse, a greater dishonor
to God than others: so the more open and public their warpings are, still the
more dishonor unto God. Therefore the Lord was so quick and smart with Moses,
with that eminent Saint, that faithful Servant of his, that Favorite of
Heaven, Moses, who was so far honored, that the Lord spoke to him face to
face, even as a man speaks to his friend: Yet, Numb. 20.12. The Lord spoke unto
Moses and Aaron, Because ye believe me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the
Children of Israel; Therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the
Land which I have given them. For this halting of yours before the Children of
Israel, you shall fall short of Canaan, you shall nor have the honor of
leading them into the promised Land. Now if you do but look back to Numb.
11.21, 22. you will find Moses bewraying unbelief: but privately; before God.
And there the Lord only reasons him out of it, v. 23. Is the Lord's hand
waxed short? Whereas in this other place, when he smote the Rock twice, his sin
was public; here Moses and Aaron dishonor God in the view of the People;
wherefore the Lord clapped that smart sentence on their backs, which no
importunity in prayer could ever take off again, or get reversed. See Deuteronomy.
32.50, 51.

2. Hereby the Truth and Ways of God are much discredited. They are deep
wounds, which the Truth receives in the house of its Friends. It is long, ere
the scars wear out. When any the professed followers of Christ and his Truth,
are taken tripping, Religion it self must bear the blame, and the way of Truth
be evil spoken of. This is their Religion, say carnal men. How earnestly does
the Apostle exhort Christians in general to walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith they are called, Ephesians. 4.1. And Phil. 4.27. Only let your conversation
be as it becomes the Gospel. So likewise he lays a strict charge here upon
several sexes, estates, and conditions, The younger women must take heed, they
give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully, 1 Timothy 5.14.
Servants that are under the yoke must see to carry so in their places, that the
Name of our God, and [his Doctrine] be not blasphemed, 1 Timothy 6.1. The aged
women must be patterns of holiness, setting others a good example [that the
Word of God be not blasphemed] Tit. 2.5. Christians halting in the way, causes
others to speak evil of the way of Christianity.

3. The Kingdom of God, and His Interest is by this means weakened. It loses
more by the haltings and falls of Professors ordinarily, than by the fury of
Persecuters. As Jacob complained of his Sons cruelty toward the Shechemites,
Ye have troubled me, to make me stink among the inhabitants of the Land, who
will gather themselves together against me. As David complained of Joabs
baseness in falling upon Abner, I am this day weak, though anointed King. The
Kingdom of Christ is weakened and obstructed very much, by His followers
haltings, and miscarriages. Others are hereby kept off from Religion, who
otherwise might have been coming on. Yea, they that decline the profession of
Religion for fear of Persecution, and sufferings, are not so far from the
Kingdom of God, as those who are cast off this other way. These have a loathing
of Religion, it stinks with them; whereas the other may be convinced in their
consciences, that it is the best Way, the Way of the Righteous, only they are
discouraged from closing with it, because of those hard measures the Righteous
ordinarily meet with in this world. But this shows us the great evil of men's
halting in Religion, this hinders the progress of Religion, this obstructeth
the Truth and Kingdom of Christ, that the Gospel cannot have so free a course
and passage, as otherwise it might. Hence many look upon Religion as a way of
deceit, as if it taught men to play the hypocrites, to be one thing in
Profession and the contrary in Practice. Which is as true, as that the Sun is
the cause of darkness. Indeed God has given a straight and perfect Rule, to
draw all the lines of our conversations by: but when our hand shakes, when we
turn aside in our course, keep not close to our Rule, many foolish by standers
are ready to censure the Rule it self, and say, that is crooked.

2. In respect of the Godly. For any that have entered into Religion to halt in
Religion.

1. It is a matter of reproach to the Godly in general. Let not them that* wait
on thee be ashamed for my sake, says the Psalmist. O why should the Faithful
be put to shame for our sakes? Indeed they will not think much to bear reproach
for the Lords sake: but Why should they be reviled, evil-spoken of, why should
they bear reproach for our sakes? As Nehemiah says of Shemaiah, that
False-Prophet, Nehem. 6.43. therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid,
and sin, and [that they might have matter for an evil report.] This the wicked
wait, and long for, and ever ly at catch here, to get any matter for an evil
report. To say, These are your Professors. --

2. It Is an occasion of sorrow to the best of Gods People. It greives them at
the heart, to see the Name of God thus dishonored, Religion discredited, poor
souls endangered. Certainly the Apostle Paul was not a little moved, greived,
at Peter's halting, Gal. 2. when he withstood him to his face. Now, is it
nothing to make the hearts of the Righteous sad, whom God would not have made
sad?

3. It Is an occasion of sin to those that are weaker. Peter's judaizing was a
compelling of the Gentiles to do likewise, Gal. 2.14. Thus some of the Jewish
Converts, yea, Barnabas himself was carried away with the dissimulation, ver.
13. This is a teaching the Lords People to transgress. We should fear to use
our own liberty, where weak Christians would be stumbling at it. ( Romans 14.13,
21. 1 Cor. 8.9, 12.) We may be an occasion of wounding the consciences of our
weak Brethren sometimes, by our preposterous, unadvised use of things
indifferent, and lawful in themselves: And if it be sinful, to use our liberty,
where we may know it will, offend and scandalize our weak Brethren; how much
more to halt outright, and lay the stumbling block of our iniquity before them?

3. In respect of sinners. How sad are the consequences of this halting in
Religion? Woe to the world, because of offenses. Woe to sinners.

1. Hereby their minds are further prejudiced against Religion and Godliness.
And what a sad thing is it, that any who profess to serve God, should carry so,
as to prejudice others against his service. True it is, sinners have naturally
a very great prejudice against God and Godliness. The carnal mind is enmity
against the Law of God. No need to do any thing to increase this prejudice, and
enmity found in them. But what is said of the Priests, Mal. 2.8. Ye are
departed out of the way: [Ye have caused many to stumble at the Law] is true of
halting professors. Whereas they should be Guides to the blind, lights to them
that are in darkness; by halting in Religion, and walking unsutably to their
profession, they are Blinds rather, and Stumbling Blocks before others. But see
Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not put a stumbling block before the blind. And Deuteronomy.
27.18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander out of the way.

2. Hereupon their mouths are often opened against Religion. Many set their mouth
against Heaven, seeing such halting in Religion. It ought to be our care, by
well doing, by our strict, circumspect, and upright walking, to put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men. We should be so wary, that they, that even watch
for our halting, would fain take us tripping, might have no evil to say of us.
Our conversations should be winning, at least convincing. But uneven walking,
all halting in Religion will open the mouths of unruly talkers. How sad to give
the wicked any occasion to blaspheme!

3. Hereby their hearts are further hardened in their own sin and wickedness:
and their hands more strengthened. As is said of those lying Prophetesses,
Ezekiel. 13.22. Ye have strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way. This is a great encouragement to sinners, to go on
in their evil ways, to see others miscarry. Noah's being once overtaken,
emboldens many to go on in a course of Drunkenness. David's once falling into
that foul sin of Uncleanness, Adultery, makes some altogether shameless in
sinning, so that they no more regard how they wallow in the mire. Bishop
Gardener, one of the Marian Apostates and Persecutors, cried out on his
deathbed, That he had denied his Master with Peter, but never repented with
Peter. Thus, halting in Religion is very mischievous to sinners, an occasion of
their overthrow, an hastening of their destruction, as it puts them further and
faster on in a way of transgression. Now what a sad thing is it, thus, to have
a hand in the sins, and consequently in the ruin of the souls of others.
Instead of leading and drawing men toward Heaven, to lie in their way, and to
be ^n occasion of their stumbling and downfall into Hell!

4. In respect of ones self.

1. Thus Conscience is defiled, guilt contracted. Such shall be found faulty,
Hos. 10.2. As Peter was to be blamed, Gal. 2.11. He was an holy man, an eminent
Apostle, yet his Holiness, his high Calling, would not hide his miscarriage
here; but on the contrary, was greatly blemished by it. Men soil themselves
shamefully by halting, and turning aside into any crooked ways. See 2 Pet.
2.20.

2. There is a cause of inward troubles. Thus Conscience is gauled. Halting in
the body (you know) is very troublesome and painful. Great peace have they that
love God's Law, and walk on evenly with upright hearts in that plain path; they
shall find his ways, ways of pleasantness, and his paths peace. Whereas they
that leave the paths of uprightness, walk in ways of darkness, Prove. 2.13.
where they shall meet with little quiet or comfort. Light is sown for the
Righteous, and gladness for the Upright in heart: yea, unto the Upright there
arises Light in the darkness. In midst of outward troubles he has still much
inward joy and peace. This is our rejoicing [the Testimony of our Conscience]
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, [not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
Grace of God] we have had our conversation in the world. This was a comfort to
holy Job, Job 23.10, 11, 12. To the Faithful, Psalm. 44.17, 18. But halting in
ones course uses to bring great inward troubles. Daved's fall wounded his
conscience, and a good while after that, he bled inwardly, and complained (
Psa. 51.) that he went with broken bones. What followed Peter's halting in the
High-Priest's hall? He went out, and wept bitterly. Others that have forsaken
the Truth, to avoid Sufferings, have thereupon been arrested with those terrors
of conscience, and haunted with those inward horrors, in comparison of which
the greatest sufferings from men were light and easy to be born; as it was
with Francis Spira.

3. Halting in Religion exposes and enclines one to fall further and more
foully, if not to fall quite away. See what followed upon David's halting in the
matters of Vriah: Alas, he was not set sound, he went not upright again for
many months after; It was a great while ere he was fully recovered, and cured
of it. Peter giving a little way to sin, and consulting more his outward
safety, than his inward peace, soon halted down, and fell into a shameful
denial of his Master, even with cursing and swearing, as if he would that way
seem to have been rather trained up in the Devil's School, than in the School
of Christ. O Sirs, how sad it is to be halting in Religion, to be winding and
turning here; alas, such know not what they may turn to at last! As when a man
begins to fall down a steep hill, he knows not where he shall stop; he may fall
to the bottom, and (for any thing he knows) be crushed in pieces with his fall.
Thus some who carried fair sometimes, after they began to halt, and decline in
Religion, have proceeded from evil to worse: Some have fallen from one Error
to another, till at last they have come to be mere Scepticks and Seekers; to be
any thing, and just nothing: Others have fallen from a plausible profession,
first, to immoderation in the use of lawful things, to a pampering of the
flesh, and an over-eager pursuit of their outward pleasures, and vain
recreations; and from thence to downright profaneness, visible ungodliness, and
so at last into plain Atheism. Ah Beloved, what need to look well to our feet
here! Halting in Religion is next step to Apostasy, falling off from Religion.
If this halting be not cured, it will end in Apostasy, will turn (...) quite
out of the way, Heb. 12.13.

Now lay all these things together, and sure it will appear very evil to halt
in Religion.

1. If we look at the thing it self, it is directly contrary to God. 1. To his
Nature and Attributes; 2. to his Mind and Will.

2. If we look to the causes of it. 1. It argues great corruption of the
judgment. 2. A corrupt heart; An evil heart of unbelief, hypocrisy, etc.

3. If we look at the effects and consequences: both in respect of God, of the
Godly, of sinners, and of our selves --

Use, 1. For Instruction. Seeing it is so exceeding evil for men to halt in
Religion. 1. It should teach us to be very cautious, how we censure others to
halt here without ground. We should fear to lay such an heavy charge as this
upon those that are innocent. How ill the Lord took it from Job's Friends that
they were so rash in their censures of him. Gal. 2.14. When I saw, that they
walked not uprightly -- I said unto Peter before them all, etc. [When Psaw -- ]
So the matter must be evident. And when it is so, then let men tax, then
reprove, and spare not. The case was plain here before Elijah, that the People
were drawn off from God, and running after Baal. This I thought good to note
here to prevent the mis-application of the Doctrine.

To hold Communion in public Worship, which is the Worship of God for
substance, though there are corruptions in the manner of administration, when
Christians are careful not to communicate in those corruptions, but mourn at,
groan under them, breath after, pray for purity in God's Worship; I say, to
join in public worship that has corruptions in it, with these qualifications,
is unjustly censured as halting betwixt God and Baal. While all necessary,
Fundamental Truth is publicly professed, and maintained in a Church, is taught
and held forth in public Assemblies, and the corruptions there, (though great,
yet) not such as make the Worship cease to be God's Worship; nor of necessity
to be swallowed down, if one would communicate in public Worship; while any
Christian (that is watchful over his heart and carriage, as all ought ever to
be) may partake in the one, without being active in, or approving of the other;
there God is yet present, there He may be spiritually worshipped, served
acceptably, and really enjoyed. The Sacrifice of a faithful Israelite, an
Elkanah, was pleasing to God, even when Hophni and Phineas were Priests. And no
doubt, it was written for our instruction, our Lord Christ, (who is and ought
to be a Christians pattern, who could never be charged with the least halt in
his course, who never trod one step awry, who was as zealous for purity in
God's Worship, as much against corrupt mixtures of men's inventions there, as
any can pretend to be: Nevel was there any in the world of whom that was true,
The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up; Yet we find) He used to attend on the
public Worship in his time, notwithstanding the many corruptions brought into
it, and notwithstanding such formalists, and superstitious ones as the Scribes
and Pharisees (who were ready to magnify their traditions, above the Word of
God; though such as these) did officiate in it; Luke 4.16. That He went into
their Assemblies, not to join in any worship they had amongst them, but only to
bear witness against their corruptions, is no where written; but rather the
contrary i^ held forth in Scripture, where he acknowledges himself a member of
the Church of the Jews, and approves of, and justifies their Worship, as right
for the substance, that Salvation might be attained therein, which he denies to
be attainable in any other way of Worship, then used among the Gentiles, John
4.22. Ye worship ye know not what (says Christ to the woman of Samaria) We
know what we worship (including himself among the rest, that worshipped God
aright) for Salvation is of the Jews.

But may this suffice here, to prevent a great mistake, and mis-judging, which
many Christians of late have discovered themselves but too forward unto?

2. This also lets us see, how sad it is to be of the Popish Religion, which
teaches halting. This is a Religion, that teaches halting; wherein it
differs from ours, from the true, it teaches nothing but halting. Halting in
Faith, enclining in part to God's written Word, and in part to their unwritten
Traditions. Halting in Obedience, betwixt God's Commands, and the Decrees and
Constitutions of the Pope, or their Church. Halting in Worship, betwixt God and
Saints; betwixt God, the living God, and dumb and senseless Images. The Apostle
Peter was blameworthy, when he halted betwixt the Jews and Gentiles: ( Gal.
2.) The Popish Religion allows and teaches Dissimulation and Equivocation
before men. The Religion of the Samatitans was a strange composition, when they
feared the Lord, and served their own gods: such is the Religion of the
Papists, who add to the Worship of God a multitude of Jewish and Paganish Rites
and Ceremonies. How intolerable is their confounding of Christ and Moses; how
abominable their joining their own works with Christ's merits in the business of
Justification? How dishonorable unto Christ, and dangerous, undoing to
themselves, their depending partly on Christ's mediation; and partly on the
Saints intercession? O What a miserable lame Religion Popery is! A Wavering
Religion! A Religion (as we may hope) that shall not stand long. It is sure to
fall, and to be crushed in pieces with its own weight. The Lord keep us and
ours, that we never come under it. Better dye and perish in a Wilderness, than
return to this spiritual Egypt.

Use 2. For Reprehension and Humiliation, that so much halting in Religion is
to be found amongst us.

1. What halting among our common Professors!

Halting between GOD and Mammon. Though you know what Christ says, Matthew.
6.24. You cannot give your hearts both to God and to the World. If you would
give them to God, you must take them off from the world: if they are set on the
world, you do not give them to God. Ezekiel. 33.31. Again,

I wish there were nothing to be found, like halting between God and Baal. Some
more observant of the Custom of the place, than of the Scripture-rule in their
Worship. Some that worship God partly according to his Word, and partly after
their own and others fancies, besides, or against the Word. How ill the Lord
takes this, may be guessed at, by that passage, Matthew. 15.9. In vain do they
worship me, q. d. they might as well do nothing.

Halting between God and Belial. Modo Ecclesias, modo Theatra replentas: Some
for the place of God's Worship to day, and for a Playhouse, or the Tavern, or
Alehouse to morrow. One while for the Service of God, another while for the
satisfying of their lusts. Some that have their good moods now and then (their
Consciences being awakened by a powerful Sermon, or some smarting rod, by a
sharp correction) come to them now, and you would think they were ^^lly
resolved to break off their sins, and turn to God; whereas a temptation does no
sooner present it self again, but they are drawn away by their own lusts, and
enticed.

How many that are turning with the various companies they fall into. That can
carry fairly and smoothly, while in company with such as are of note for
Religion, and an holy strictness; and are as ready to fly out, be vain, and
carry like one of the fools in Israel, when they are in place were they may
take their liberty, in the company of such as are loose and profane.

How many that will turn with the times, seem very forward in Religion, while
it is a thing in fashion; but cast it off again, if once it grows out of credit
in the world. Like the Samaritans, who would pretend kinderd to the Jews, but
only while they were in a prosperous state.

2. Come to the best of us, such as are upright in the main; O how much halting
yet may such be taxed with! How great unevenness in the frame of our spirits.;
our hearts sometimes up in holy duties, but soon down again: our affections
sometimes lively; but soon flat, and dead again. Alas, What inconstant
creatures are we! Aliud stantes, aliud sedentes. One thing in religious
services, another out of them. If we get any warmth into our spirits on the
Lords Day, how soon that we take cold again, when we go into the world. How
great unevenness in the course of our conversation: At one time a little
diligent, at another time exceeding sloathful in our business. One while
serious, and conscionable in the practice of secret duties, another while too
ready upon any slighty occasion to neglect and omit them, or else to slubber
them over. One while fruitful in our discourse, desirous to do some good to all
with whom we converse; other while as barren as may be.

How faint and weak sometimes in our resistance of sin; whereas we should go
from strength to strength. Do we not many times suffer a foiled, routed enemy
to rally again? are we not sometimes worsted by those very lusts, which before
we had put to flight, driven out the field. What shall we say, that after some
conquest of our corruptions, we have turned our backs again, have yielded unto
and been overcome of them?

How ready to shrink at the apprehension, the approach of Sufferings! How
little have we to say for God, his Truth, Ministers, etc. when there may be the
least danger in owning God, and His Interest here? Like these in the Text,
answered never a word. How willing to spare our selves! Too ready to venture
the favor of God, to keep the favor of men; or to venture upon His
displeasure to avoid man's displeasure. Other whiles we seem full of confidence
in God, and sometimes again as full of fears. O what cause have the best to be
humbled, even such as do not hover, or hang in suspense betwixt two contrary
ways, such as are set in the right way, yet alas, we go very weakly, lamely
here. What cause to complain of feeble knees! Do we not find a clog of
corruption at our foot, which is a great hindrance to us in our spiritual
course? There is flesh as well as spirit; and hence (as Jacob halted in his
wrestling with God, so) do we halt in our walking with God. The Child of God
(says Mr. Perkins) is like a lame man, that goes the right way, but yet halts
at every step. This should be matter of humiliation, and lamentation to us all.

Use 3. Hence, be persawded to take heed of halting in Religion. Now my work
shall be to give (...) some moving considerations, to press you to an holy care
and watchfulness over your selves here: and afterward conclude with
Directions. Motives.

1. Consider, halting is very unseemly. The Linsey-woolsey-coat is but an
uncomely garment. How ill does it become a Child of God, the Kings daughter,
Psa. 45.13, 14. Lameness or crookedness is a deformity in the body: Not to walk
uprightly is very uncomely among Professors. There is an expression, Psa. 52.9.
I will praise thee for ever, and I will wait on thy Name [for it is good before
thy Saints.]* Constancy and perseverance in God's Worship and Service, and in
our dependence upon Him, this is good before the Saints: And the contrary, to
see souls falling off from God, and His Ways, is evil in their account. They
blush, are ashamed to see it: It is a sad, and strange sight to them. Gal. 1.6.
I marvel (says the Apostle to these halting, backsliding Professors, I marvel)
that you are so soon removed from Him, that called you into the Grace of
Christ. Yea this is unseemly, not only before the Saints, but before wicked
men. Hence it is, that the uncircumcised Philistines do so rejoice, and
triumph, when they can see, or hear that any of Isreal's Worthies are fallen. As
the Psalmist complains, Psa. 38.16. When my foot slippeth, they magnify
themselves against me. They insult over the Righteous, when they see them fall
into any trouble and distress; and no less, when they fall into sin, when they
can take notice of any thing in their carriage and practice unbecoming their
profession.

2. Halting in Religion is most unreasonable. No fair pretense that can be put
(...). As the Lord expostulates with them, Jer. 2. (...) What iniquity have
your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and are ^^lked after
vanity? What a strange course they take, w^^^ turn aside from God, from the
true God, to walk after vanity. The People were convinced of the folly of such
a course in Josh. 24.16. God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, to serve
other gods: That were a folly and madness indeed. God forbid we should forsake
our own mercy, our happiness, to follow lying vanities. How foolish was the
Prodigal, in leaving his Father's House, to feed upon husks? When the Galatians
were halting in Religion, how strangely the Apostle bespeaks them, Gal. 3.1. O
foolish Galatians, Who has bewitched you? -- and verse 3. Are ye so foolish?
What, so foolish? q. d. none can be more foolish than thus. If the Lord be not
God, why do we follow Him at all? And if He be God (as nothing more sure) Why
do we not follow the Lord fully? If it be not good to be truly religious, why
do we make any profession of it? why are we not open avowed Atheists? And if it
be good indeed, Why are we no more careful to walk up to our profession? Thus
if we did but attend to Reason, it would inform us thus much, that either we
should quite lay down our profession, or endeavor to bring up our lives to our
profession.

3. Halting in Religion is exceeding hurtful. As there is an expression, Jer.
7.6. Neither walk after other gods to your hurt; That some instead of cleaving
to the Lord, followed Baal-peor, was it not to their hurt? Deuteronomy. 4.3, 4. see
Ezekiel. 6.22. If we belong to God, and yet are halting in our course before Him,
we may look to smart for it here; if we are turning aside from him, He will
fetch us in with the rod, Psa. 89.30, etc.

4. We have gone ^n halting too long already. It is more than time we ^^^ld now
seek for cure, that we should now mend of it. Has not this been our manner
from our youth? As Moses said of the Children of Israel, Ye have been
rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you. Have not we been
still at this pass, at ^ff and on, playing fast and loose with God? I may here
allude to that in Josh. 22.17, 18. Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us,
from which we are not cleansed unto this day: but that we must turn away this
day from following the Lord? We have been too long unsteady and uneven in our
course.

5. This halting in Religion is hard to cure. And the longer any soul goes on
in it, it is still so much the worse. As a leg out of joint, the longer it goes
so, it is so much the more difficult to set it right again. Oh that this was
seriously considered! every step we take awry, we are making work for
Repentance. And as it is not so easy, but exceeding painful, to have a broken
leg set right and sound again; so it is no such easy matter to have a lapsed
soul restored by ^^pentance.

6. If we have made any progress in Christianity, to halt now would deprive us
of the comfort of it. O what comfort is to be found i^ close walking with God!
The whole world, if you search it through, has no such cordial for a fainting,
dying creature, as the sense of ones integrity and former upright-walking
before God. When Hezekiah had received the sentence of death, this was more to
him than all his Kingdom again, Isa. 38.3. On the contrary, when we are halting
in our course, we undermine our own peace, lay a foundation for inward
troubles, jealousy of our estates. John, 8.31. If ye continue in my Word, then
are ye my Disciples indeed: Mark it, If ye continue -- But otherwise you would
only seem to be my Disciples. It Is not enough to begin well, but we must
continue: And otherwise all that we have done in Religion, or suffered upon
this account will be lost and in vain, Gal. 3.4. And if our goodness be but as
the morning cloud, and early dew, that soon passes away, even such will our
hopes be. Our comfort will hold out and continue no longer, than we hold fast
our integrity.

7. Halting will really set us back, cast us very much behind in our Christian
course. A lame man makes but a bad traveller. So halting Christians drive on
very heavily in the ways of God. A man that is careless of keeping in his way,
no wonder if he comes late and weary home. And if we are often turning into
crooked paths, how will this hinder us in the way to heaven? This is going
about indeed; and no getting thus to heaven, but we must return by weeping
cross. Thus every step we take awry, is one step out of our way.

8. It is a most unworthy thing to halt with God. He keeps touch with his. No
God like him, that keeps Covenant with them that walk before Him with all their
heart, 1 Kings 8.23. No God like him for this: All besides Him are found lying
vanities. It was horrible blasphemy that message which Senacherib sent to
Hezekiah, Isa. 37.10. Let not thy God in whom thou trustest, deceive thee.
Little danger or fear of this. Never to this day, that the Lord deceived any
one soul that trusted in him, and was faithful to him. 1 Samuel 10.19. Ye have
this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities,
and your tribulations. Most disingenuous and ungrateful creatures! If we cast
him off now, he would not have dealt so with us. If we forsake him, he would
not have forsaken us. With an upright man he will show himself upright, Psalm.
18.25. This motive the Apostle uses to persuade unto Christian stedfastness
and constancy, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without
wavering; for he is faithful that has promised. God would be true to us; then
should not we be true to him?

9. Others obstinacy in their false and evil ways should provoke us to
stedfastness in the ways of God. Jer. 2.11. How many rooted in their errors,
that there is no stirring of them? how many wedded to Superstition? how many
doting upon their old heathenish customs, like those, Jer. 44.16, 17. no taking
them off? How many hardened in sin; so resolved upon the pursuit of their lusts,
as there is no turning of them? And do not all these shame and condemn us, if
our hearts are not as much fixed upon God, if we cleave not as close to Him,
his Truth and Ways?

10. I add but a word more. How should we fear to halt with God, lest it
provoke the Lord even to depart from us. O Sirs, do you desire it may go well
with the Land, whereof you are Inhabitants, with the Church of which you are
Members? would you have it to go well with England? then take ye heed of
halting in Religion. See Josh. 22.18. If we turn away from following the Lord
to day, to morrow he may be wroth with the whole Congregation. If such as
profess his Name are turning further back from him, how may such provoking of
his sons and daughters cause the Lord to abhor us! will not this make a way to
his Anger; or, rather make the gap wider, like a great breach of the Sea, never
more to be repaired? I say, halting in Religion may provoke the Lord to depart.
As we read of the Israelites, Psa. 78.57, to 62. They turned back, and dealt
unfaithfully, like their fathers: they were turned aside, like a deceitful bow.
When God eard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel; so that he
forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, etc.

I come now to the Directions I promised, with which I conclude. And would you
halt no more in Religion -- (1.) Get a clear sight and knowledge of your way.
Labor for a distinct knowledge both in matters of Faith and Practice. Thus get
your way made plain. He that walks in the dark, goes he knows not whither, and
stumbles at he knows not what. He that walks in the Light, is not in that
danger of stumbling. We must first know, before we can be established in the
Truth, 2 Pet. 1.12. First prove, and then hold fast, 1 These. 5.21. We must know
the certainty of those things wherein, we have been instructed, that they may
be most surely believed of us, Luke 1.1, 4. They that receive the Word with
much assurance, as the believing Thessalonians did, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. there is hope
that they will venture all, rather than renounce or part with the Truth. 2 Timothy
3.14. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been
assured of. There must be a learning of the Truth, and assurance that it is the
Truth, if we would continue in the Truth. So Col. 1.23.

Here 1. Be very clear in the grounds of Religion. They that would ^ot be
fluctuating in Religion, must get their minds well ballasted with the knowledge
of the grounds of Religion. They that would stand in a storm, must see they
have a basis of their own, a good foundation laid, that they do not pin their
Faith on others. Indeed I know not what should hinder, but an ignorant
Protestant may soon turn a confident Papist. But Catechism, Instruction in the
Principles of Christianity, was one main engine, whereby our Reformers battered
down Popery. The foundation is a principal part of the building: so the lowest
Principles (as it is observed) the lowest Principles of Religion in one sense,
are the highest Principles. If you would have the house to stand, lay the
foundation well: an error in the foundation is destructive to the building.

2. Get your minds established in the present Truth. It concerns Christians to
be very clear in those Truths for which they may be called to suffer. And when
ye are assured you have the Truth on your side, you may go on boldly, you need
not fear. Let the world storm; you have a strong City, Isa. 26.1, 2. Be
established I say, in the present Truth.

And so be at pains to aquaint your selves with your present duty. Be wise
concerning the times, to know what you ought to do. While you know you are in
away of duty, let others censure, reproach, or persecute you, yet what should
hinder but you may go on cheerfully? O how comfortable a thing it is, to know,
and be assured, that if troubles do befall me in the way I take, they overtake
me in a way of duty. This greatly emboldened the Prophet Daniel to pray before
his God, as he did afore-time, Dan. 6.10. Come on it what will, he is sure it was
his duty to pray after that manner. While we are in way of duty, we may trust
God to bear us out. Or, if we suffer in his service, we should yet have no
cause to complain of an hard service. He that considered Nebuchadrezzar, what
hazards and hardships he had been put upon in serving His Providence, and would
not let it go unrewarded, Ezekiel. 29.18, etc. much more that he considers his
suffering Servants, who are exercised with many troubles here, that attend
their observing his Commands, who commit themselves to Him in well-doing.

2. Get your hearts set right. This is another general Direction. The upright
heart will hate every false way. But where the heart is not right, such a soul
is not steadfast with God. Psalm. 78.8. -- A generation that set not their heart
arigth (then it follows) and whose spirit was not steadfast with God. As we
would not halt, as we desire to walk in a straight and even course, our eye
must be single.

3. Be humbled in the sense of your former sinful warpings. They that are
pained, and afflicted in the sense and remembrance of their former sinful slips
and falls, will look better to their feet and take more heed to their ways.
When the soul has experienced, that it is an evil thing, and bitter, to
forsake the Lord; it will fear to turn aside from him again. On the other hand,
where men are not humbled for the irregularity of their former course, they
will be likely to go on in the same course still, Jer. 44.10. They are not
humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my Law. But
deep humiliation is a proper means to cure halting. We never read, that Peter
denied Christ after his repentance and humiliation for that sin: nay, how
boldly does he preach Christ afterward, as you see, Acts 2. etc.

4. Walk circumspectly. If you would not halt, observe every step you take,
take heed of falls; yea, of the least stepping awry. Give not a little way to
sin. O fear at any time deliberately to venture upon any sin, or on any
temptation to sin. Do not wilfully dash your foot upon the stones. To be afraid
of the least sin, to be ready to flee from temptations, is no argument of
cowardice or pusillanimity of spirit, but a proof of spiritual wisdom, a
necessary piece of Christian Policy. And the more we are afraid of sin, the
less danger of our shrinking at sufferings. Indeed it is wisdom, to take heed
of the least slips. When we begin to fall, none knows how far we may fall, or
how long it may be ere we recover our selves again. The sin is great, to
account any sin little. We ought to be so afraid of sin, as not to venture on
those things that have the appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

5. Set to the mortification of thy beloved sin especially. Cut off the right
foot that would offend thee, and cause thee to stumble. It is thy beloved sin,
that right eye, that right foot, which most enclines thee to halt, is the
greatest impediment to even, upright walking. He that sets up any Idol in his
heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, estranges
and separates himself from the Lord, E^ek. 14.4, 5, 7. Covetousness, the love
of money, seems to have been Judas his beloved sin, and what did this bring him
to at last? not only to the forsaking, but further put him upon the betraying
of his Master. Where any darling-lust is spared and indulged, there a Barabbas
is preferred to Christ. This may seem a very hard saying; as it is sharp
service, to mortify ones earthly members, to pluck out a right eye, and cut
off a right foot; yet it is indispensibly necessary for the cure of halting:
while men favor the right foot, they cannot but halt in their course. On the
other hand, we shall then walk uprightly before God, when we keep our selves
from our own iniquities, Psalm. 18.23.

6. Set forth in Religion with a serious purpose, and fixed resolution never to
draw back. There is a force and virtue, a vis impressa, that comes from an holy
resolution here, that carries the sou^ on in a more even course. The stronger
our resolutions are (provided they be not taken up in our own strength) the
more steady and uniform will our motion be. Therefore Barnabas exhorted them,
Acts 11.23. that with purpose of heart they would cleave to the Lord; (...)
there, is as much as (...). Says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn,
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. So Dan. 1.8.
But Daniel purposed that he would not defile himself with the portion of the
King's meat, nor with the wine which he drank. Daniel purposed, resolved: and
this kept him free amidst temptations to defilement that way offered. Holy
resolution for God, is a strong Bank against a flood of Temptations; is a good
Bulwark against the shot and assaults of Adversaries. And no taking of the
Garrison, till a breach is made here. Yea, it is to be noted, that though to sin
against clear conviction, does very much aggravate sin; yet not so, to sin
besides ones serious purpose and resolution. When the heart is resolved for
God, devoted to his fear, has freely, cheerfully sworn Alleagiance to him, and
yet is drawn to some sin; this would rather argue weakness, than wilfulness; or
the violence of temptation, rather than any eagerness of such a soul to break
forth in a way of transgression. Therefore, as we read of engaging the heart to
approach to God, ( Jer. 30.21.) so let us see, we engage our hearts to stick
close to God. Say not always, Shall I, shall I? but at last come to this
resolve, If the Lord be God, to follow him: If this or that be the Truth, to
stick to it: if this or that be a sin, to avoid it, and in our places oppose
it: If such a thing be a duty, and well-pleasing to God, to countenance and
practice it, come on it what will.

7. Walk humbly with thy God. Be ever sensible of thine own weakness, how
unable thou art to stand, or go alone. Take this along with the foregoing
Direction. When you have resolved on your way, yet you ought to consider, that
the way of man is not in himself. It is the Lord that keeps the feet of his
Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9. A proud creature, one that is lifted up in his own
conceits, is near a fall. Vzziah's heart was lifted up to his destruction, Hab.
2.4. Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him. While he would
seem some great Mountain, he is a mere empty bubble, Junius. Ternov.
that cracks and breaks and vanishes into air. We read of some of the
Martyrs, that when they saw the storm coming, were very jealous of themselves,
that they should never be able to endure the brunt, that they should never hold
out; who yet stood unmoved in the evil day. Again, others there were as full of
self-confidence (as the former were of self-suspition) who triumphed before the
victory, or fight, that in the day of trial soon turned back and forsook their
colors. Some that boasted very much before they put on their Armor, who put
it off with shame. We may say of this sin of Pride, It has cast down many
wounded; yea, many strong ones have fallen by it.

8. Set the Lord ever before you, as the Psalmist did, Psalm. 16.8. The Lord
before whom I walk, says Abraham, Genesis 24.40. See Genesis 48.15. And particularly
eye, and get clear apprehensions of these Attributes of God, etc.

(1.) His Alsufficiency. Genesis 17.1. I am God Alsufficient, walk before me, and
be thou perfect, or upright. If you should meet with enemies, with opposition
in a way of upright walking; yet know God is Almighty to defend you. If you
should be put upon straits, or sustain great losses here, God is alsufficient
to supply your wants, repair your losses, and every way to bestead you.

(2.) His unchangableness. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. However men
may vary from what they have formerly professed: He is still the same. However
the times may change, the Lord changes not. And so the Truth is as dear to him,
integrity and constancy in his Servants are of the same value and account with
him, as ever they were.

(3.) His faithfulness. He is the Faithful God, that keeps Covenant, that
forsakes not his Saints, unto whom we may most safely commit our selves in
well-doing, 1 Pet. 4.16. And these Divine Attributes presented to the soul,
would increase Spirits, very much encourage us to close and even walking with
God. Moses endured, as seeing him who is invisible. And had we such a sight of
God, did we see him to be an alsufficient, unchangable, faithful God, it would
help us to hold out, to follow him fully.

(4.) Again, eye His Omnisciency. His eyes are upon the ways of man, and He
sees all his goings, Job, 34.21. He tells all our wanderings. When Peter was
turning his back on Christ, his Lord and Master looked on him all the while. As
he beheld guile-less Nathaniel under the Fig Tree: So he likewise beheld Peter
halting in the High Priests Palace.

(5.) His Omnipresence. O that we had Moses eyes to see him that is invisible.
Doubtless he is not far from any of us. No fleeing from his presence, Psa.
139.7. etc. That we cannot sin, but in the face of our Judge. What? are ye not
afraid to turn aside from God, his Truth, his Commands, while the Lord himself
stands by, and observes all our carriage?

(6.) His Holiness, Justice, and Severity against sin. If any draw back, his
soul can take no pleasure in that man. Only such as are upright in the Way,
that are his delight, Pro. 11.20. As God is displeased at men's halting before
him, so he is ready to manifest his displeasure. And what a fearful thing is it
to fall into the hands of the living God, even as to fall into a consuming
fire! Such of God's Attributes, as these last mentioned, would very much awe
us, make us fear to depart, or turn aside in the least from him. But so much of
the eighth Direction.

9. Look to Jesus as your best guide: And strive to follow his steps. Observe
how Christ carried in this world. He did no sin, neither was guile found in His
mouth. His love to man without dissimulation. His zeal for God, free from the
least mixture of self-seeking. He had the wisdom of the Serpent, and the Doves
innocence most exactly contempered, duly proportioned in him. He knew how to
converse with sinners, without the least communicating in their sins. He was
one and the same in all places, at all times. Far from studying a compliance
with a corrupt and sinful generation; rather he made it his work to do all that
might be, to change and amend it, to set a crooked generation straight. He was
ever more careful to discharge duty, than to provide for his own safety here.
In doing the work, his Father sent him about into the world, he waved and set
aside self-respect, ( John 5.30. and 8.49, 50.) The Truth and Honor of God was
dearer to him, than his own life. O Christians follow this your Guide. If we
are Christians, we ought to walk, as Christ also walked, 1 John 2.6. We are
unworthy of the name of Christians, if it be not our care and endeavor to
follow Christ. Now wherein we are followers of Christ, we may be confident we
go right; so far we halt not in our course. Therefore observe and eye Christ
more. Consider how he carried upon earth. And where you are at a stand, think
(if you can) how Christ would have carried, what he would have done in the like
case with yours.

10. Reckon upon troubles in this world. Expect to meet with crosses in your
Christian course. As Paul and Barnabas confirmed the souls of the Disciples,
and exhorted them to continue in the Faith* and that through much tribulation
we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. When we look to meet with
the Cross in our way, we shall not so soon stumble at it. On the contrary, the
Disciples were offended at Christ's passion, and shrunk away from him, being in
a great measure surprised with it: (for, as many fair warnings, and express
items as they had from our Savior to prepare for his sufferings; yet they
would not let those sayings sink down into their hearts) still their thoughts
were upon Christ's reigning here as an earthly King, and on some great worldly
advancement, which they expected under Christ.

11. Be going forward. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright. Though I
do not determine this to be the sense of the place; yet it is a truth, if we
take it thus, The further we go on in the ways of God, the more strength we
shall find to hold out, and continue in them. The way of the Lord is strength
to the upright. The Righteous shall hold on his way, and wax stronger, and
stronger. Here they that run fastest, are least weary. Whereas if we sit still,
we shall soon grow lame and stark. O take heed of standing still! Be going
forward. Grow in Grace. Let it be your care to grow in Grace, as you fear to
fall from your own steadfastness. Weaklings are aptest to stumble and fall.
Therefore let us be going on from strength to strength. It is a good thing
indeed, that the heart be established with Grace (Heb. 13.9.) Where note, it is
one property of Grace to establish the heart: And the more Grace, the more
inward establishment. Add to Faith, Virtue -- (says the Apostle Peter) Let
these things be in you, and abound -- And if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall, 2 Pet. 1.

Here I might instance in sundry particular Graces, that you should be growing
in especially. You heard before what corruptions especially, and most
frequently, are a cause of halting: Now strengthen those Graces that are
opposite thereunto. Labor to increase, and excel in Faith. By Faith Enoch
walked with God. By Faith Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin.

In sincerity. Being really what we seem to be. The more truth in our inward
parts, the more Evenness and Uniformity in our outward Conversations.

In self-denial. They that would follow God fully, as Moses did, must deny
themselves, as he did; who refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter,
that he might be found the faithful Servant of God.

In an holy contempt of the world. Labor to sit looser in your affections to
the world, if you would stick close to God. Demas falling in love with this
present world, and affecting its embraces, shook off holy Paul once, and (as
some tell us) turned Priest afterward in an Idols temple. Though others
suppose he fell not so far, but soon recovered again. However, the danger was
very great, see 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Many alas, stick fast in the world, stick fast
here, so that they know not how to take a step, how to set a foot forward in
the way to Heaven.

In love to God, his Truth, and Ways. This would cause you to cleave to him.

In Patience. We have great need of Patience too, that we be not wearied, nor
faint in our minds. We must run with patience the race set before us. Without
patience, we should soon be run out of breath.

12. Lean ever upon Christ. As you would not halt in your course, lean hard
upon Christ. While we desire to grow in Grace, yet we should fear to trust to
Grace received. It was the cause of Peter's foul and shameful fall, his self
confidence, conceiting that he was strong enough now to stand alone. A
Christian is stronger in the Grace that is in Christ, than in the greatest
measure of grace inherent, and derived from him. Our Cisterns would soon fail,
were they not fed with an Everlasting Spring. Rest not in what you have
received, ceived, but be continualy going out to Christ for more. It is not
enough that his Grace and Spirit has once entered into us, to set us on our
feet; but he must also take us by the hand. There is a promise, Zech. 10.12. I
will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in His Name,
says the Lord. And as the little Child soon falls, if it holds not by its
Nurse, or by its Father: so we have met with many a knock, many a fall, many a
slip, and strain, by letting go our hold of Jesus Christ. A Believer never
walks safely but in the hand of Christ, or leaning on his arm.

13. Get under the sense of God's love, to walk in the Light of his
Countenance, as it is Psalm. 89.15. The joy of the Lord would be your strength.
This would make His Ways Paths of pleasantness. Did we but see all fair and
clear over head, how might it encourage us to go on in our Christian course,
though it should be a little foul under foot? Yea, if the Lord had once cast
his mantle, had cast a skirt of Love over us, this would engage us to follow
him; we could not choose then but follow hard after Him. If enemies rise up
against us, though a multitude of dangers, and outward evils should surround
us; yet we should not be dismayed, but think our selves safe enough under the
Banner of His Love. We might more quietly repose our selves under the Banner of
his Love, than under the protection of an Army with Banners. It is something to
have a sense of the Truth of Religion: but more, to have experience of the
Goodness thereof. How hardly should any persuade or draw us contrary to our own
experience? should we not resolutely stick to, continue and persevere in those
ways, wherein we have met with God, and have many times been delighted,
ravished with his presence?

14. Be much in the duty of self-examination. Be frequent in that noble,
spiritual act of self-reflection. Often ask your hearts this question, Whether
they are in the way or no? and how uprightly they carry in it? One that has a
jealousy, a suspicion of his servant, would not let him go long, without
calling him to a reckoning. Our hearts are very wily, and deceitful, we had
need every day take account of them, as Achish of David, [Whither have ye made
a rode to day?] Though we should fear being deluded by them, as Achish was by
him. Without often reckoning with, without a serious and strict examination of
our hearts, we shall never keep them true to God, or our selves.

15. Desire others of the Faithful to watch over you, to admonish you, and tell
you of it, when at any time they see you starting aside. Let the Righteous
smite me. Entreat those your fellow-travellers to put forth their helping hand,
when they see you slipping and ready to fall.

16. Lastly, Let this be your earnest suit daily unto God, that he would hold
up your goings, that your footsteps slip not. As the Psalmist prays, Teach me
thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path. He must not only show us our way,
but also lead us on in it. So again, Psalm. 143.8, 10. Let us be earnest with
God here, As the Psalmist, Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard after thee: (and
mark what follows) thy right hand upholdeth me. And here let us plead that
Branch and Article of His Gracious Covenant, where he promises, I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.40. The Lord
is faithful to establish you, and keep you from evil. Now unto him that is able
to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of
His Glory with exceeding joy; To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and
Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen.

SERMON V.
Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity.
I Shall look no further back to the precedent verses, than may give light to
the present Text.

Ver. 21. The Apostle drawing to a conclusion of this Epistle, gives an
honorable Testimony of Tychicus, one dear to him, and faithful in his
Ministry, showing the causes moving him to send him to them.

1. That by him they might know the state of his affairs, how it went with him.

2. That he might minister comfort to their hearts.

Ver. 23. contains his Valediction to his beloved Ephesians, in which he
desires all health and happiness for them: Peace be to the Brethren.

In which words we may consider,

1. What he desires; Peace, Faith and Love.

By Peace some understand, according to the Hebrew phrase of the Old Testament,
Salutem and faelicitatem, all kind of good. Others, more suitable to the New
Testament phrase, understand Peace of Conscience, acceptance of our persons,
and reconciliation to God in Christ, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

By Faith and Love, he means the increase of those Graces.

Pacem ^c faelicitatem fratribus omnibus exopto una cum Charitatis and Fidei
incremento, etc. as one paraphraseth on the place.

2. For whom he desires these things, to the Brethren, that is, the Faithful
in Christ, whether Ministers or others, who are sometimes distinguished from
private Christians, Acts 15.23. The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren. But here we
may take them jointly: For at Ephesus were many Ministers, Acts 20.17.
Ministers and private Christians are all Brethren in Christ, Gal. 3.28.

Paul, though not inferior to the chief of the Apostles, is not ashamed to own
Christians of the lowest form for his Brethren. Philem. 16. he calls Onesimus a
servant, a brother, beloved. Faith, by which Believers are united to Christ, is
a like precious in the highest Apostle, and the lowest Christian, 2 Pet. 1.1.
To them that have obtained like precious Faith with us.

Nay Christ himself disdains not to call his poorest members Brethren, Heb.
2.11.

3. From whom he desires these Graces, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ; even from the Fountain of all Grace, which is God the Father, as the
first cause; and Jesus Christ, as the second cause, as he is Mediator between
God and man, by and through whom the Father is wont to dispense to us all
things necessary to Salvation, all things pertaining to life and godliness.

As all the plenty of Egypt passed through the hands of Joseph, Genesis 41.55. Go
to Joseph, what he says to you, do, said Pharaoh to the People when they cried
to him for corn. So if any man lack Wisdom, Love, Faith, let him go to God the
Father by Christ, Heb. 13.15. By him, etc.

The Text is a reduplication of this Votum Apostolicum, for so some read it,
Gratia, inquam, adsit omnibus, etc.

In words it is more contracted, but in sense more comprehensive than the
former verse; thus, I w^sh Peace, Love, Faith to the Brethren; yea Grace, all
spiritual and heavenly blessings to you, and all that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity.

By Grace he means omnimodam Gratiam, all sorts of Grace; having mentioned
already Peace, Love and Faith, which are excellent graces, yet are they not all
Grace; therefore he adds Grace, that he may take his leave of these his beloved
Brethren, in the same manner as he resolved to come to others, Romans 15.29. --
In the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.

In the Text are two principal parts.

1. A Character of a right Christian, a Christian indeed, as Christ said of
Nathaniel, Behold an Israelite indeed; he is one that loves our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity. For the Apostle wishes not so great good to all that
pretend love to Christ, to Hypocrites, but to such as love him unfeignedly.

2. The subject matter of his wish, what it is he desires for sincere lovers
of Christ, it is Grace: Not outward good things, as health, long-life, riches,
honor, though he excludes not them; nay, Peace in the largest sense may
include them, and Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and that
which is to come. But the Apostle willing to give them a brief Epitome of his
large heart, and good wishes for them, does it in this one word, Grace, as not
knowing any b^t^er thing for them.

Doct. 1. Jesus Christ is our Lord. He is Lord of all, A^ts 10.36. but
especially he is Lord of his Church, which is his house, Heb. 3.6. 1. He built
the house; it is He that made us, not we our selves. 2. He has moreover bought
us, Acts 20.28. the Church which he has purchased with his own blood. 3. Him
has God the Father exalted to be a Prince, etc. Acts 5.31. and Phil. 2.9.
Wherefore God has highly exalted Him, etc.

Use. Let all things in the Church be regulated according to the Institutions
of our Lord Christ. Let Ministers, who are Stewards over the House of God, be
wise and faithful, to preach no other Doctrine, administer no other Sacraments,
exercise no other Discipline, introduce no other Rites into Divine Worship than
what they have good warrant for from the Lord Jesus Christ, and can say with
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.23. I received of the Lord that which I delivered unto
you.

2. Let all that profess hope of Salvation by Jesus Christ, receive him for
their Lord to rule over them, as well as for their Savior to redeem them. Why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Luke 6.46. So we
profess in our Creed, I believe in Jesus Christ our Lord: and so in the close
of our prayers, -- through Jesus Christ our Lord. So let it appear in our Lives
and Gospel-becoming-conversations.

But this I pass over.

There are two Doctrines arising from the two several parts of the Text, which
I am to insist upon.

And as I am to preach this day, not knowing whether I shall ever have the
liberty to preach again; so I would have you to hear, as not sure whether you
may ever hear again.

Doct. 1. It is the character of a right Christian, to love the Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity.

2. The Apostle wishes Grace to all that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity, as the best thing he could wish them.

1. Of the first; It is the character of a right Christian to love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity.

Qu. To love Christ in sincerity, what is that? (...), according to the letter
of the Original, is as much to say, as in incorruption. So read the Interlin.
and vulgar.

Jesus Christ the Incorruptible God. So reads the Ethiopick.

Arab. Amore non vitiato, neque culpato, that love Christ with a love not
faulty nor blameworthy; which agrees best with the sense of Interpreters, who
render (...) by (...), incorruptly, sincerely, not feignedly. It being the
Apostles purpose by this phrase to exclude all rotten Hypocrites from the
benefits he wishes to good Christians.

Ubi notandum est hoc Apostolicum votum non in sceleratis hypocritis, sed in
sinceris tantum Christi Discipulis, qui viz. Christum incorrupto animo
diligunt, locum habere. Vorstius.

More particularly. To love Christ in sincerity, is the act or affection of a
gracious heart, whereby, knowing the excellency and worth of Christ, he desires
union with him, prefers him, communion with him, and obedience to his
Commandments before all things in the world.

1. What it is to love Christ. 2. In sincerity.

1. Love of Christ implies knowledge of him, of his Worthiness and high
Deserts. Right Love is no blind affection, but arises from Light and
Understanding of the loveliness of the Object upon which it is placed, and to
which it is carried forth. Cant. 5.10. The Church describing at large the
Excellencies of Christ, whom her soul loves, concludes, ver. 16. He is (...),
altogether lovely, or desirable.

2. From knowledge of the worth that is in Christ, springs desire of union
and communion with him. A man desires to be near his Friend in whom he
delights, loves his company, converseth with him. Cant. 2.3. I sat down
under his shadow with great delight. Psalm. 86.11. Unite my heart. David desired
to dwell in the House of God for ever, because he loved him, Psalm. 23. ult. The
wise Merchant buyeth, gets into his possession the Pearl which he prized,
Matthew. 13.46.

3. Hence follows an high esteem of Christ, so as he prefers him to all
other things whatsoever. He sees no beauty, excellency comparable to his.
Cant. 5.10. The chiefest of ten thousand. Psalm. 63.1. My soul thirsts for
thee.

4. Lastly, The loving soul is most obedient. 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ
constrains him so, as he thinks nothing too hard to do or suffer, nothing
too dear to part with for Christ's sake. Amanti nihil durum.

2. What it is to love Christ in sincerity.

1. It is to love him with the whole heart, according to the utmost extent of
that phrase, Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, etc. Isa. 26.8. The desire of our soul is unto thee. This is
to love without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. To love, not in word and in tongue,
but in deed and in truth. 1 John 3.18. Where love is sincere, there is idem
velle and nolle, as if two hearts were in one body. We love Christ sincerely,
or with all the heart, when his will is ours, our will is conformable to his;
when his Laws are so wrirten in our hearts, that we are wholly his to be
commanded; as men subscribe their Letters to their friends, Yours to be
commanded.

2. It is to love him more than all other things, to love him with a
transcendant love. John 21.15. Love thou me more than these? (...), more than
these Nets, Gain, Profits, Pleasures, Credit, or Life it self? or more than
these persons thy fellow- Disciples? Luke 14.26. If any man come after me, and
hate not his father and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea
and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. So Mat. 4.20, 22. The
Disciples left their Father, Nets, Ships, they forsook all to follow Christ.
Abraham forsook his Country and his Father's house, in obedience to God's Call.
Acts 19.19. Those Converts forsook their Gain and their gainful Trades, for
Christ and the Gospel.

3. It is to love whole Christ. Christ in all his Offices, to love him as our
Prophet, to submit to his instruction, Acts, 3.23. every soul that will not
hear that Prophot, shall be destroyed from amongst the People: It is to love
him as our King, to submit to his Government, to be ruled by his Laws, to live
according to his Gospel, to suffer no other Lord besides him, to have Dominion
over us. Luke 19.27: Those mine enemies which would not that I should Reign
over them, etc. It is to love him as our Sanctification, to be as willing to
save (...) from our sins, as from Hell. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made of God to
us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, etc.

4. To love him for himself, and not only for his benefits. This is love of
complacency, love of delight, when we love Christ, as the Apostles, and the
good Women, who loved him in disgrace, in his poverty, that ministered to him of
their substance, Luke 8.3. who followed him naked, stripped, condemned, hanging
on the Cross, Luke 22.33. Lord I am ready to go with thee into prison, to death.

That is, Amor concupiscentiae. Love of our selves, when we love him only for
gain, for what he brings along with him, as the People, John 6.26. who
followed him for the loaves, who would needs have made him King when he fed so
many thousands with a few loavs; they thought him a fit man to victual a camp,
to maintain an Army with light charge, to deliver them from their subjection to
the Roman Empire. This is not sincere love, such love is not lasting; when the
hope of gain and advantage is gone, this love will be gone.

Now follow the Reasons of the Point.

1. It is the character of a right Christian to love Jesus Christ in sincerity.
Because he is altogether lovely. In him concur what ever is requisite to the
object of love. As, 1. Goodness is lovely, Non amatur certe, nisi bonum, etc.
What ever we love, we look upon it as good. It either is so indeed, or it
appears so to us. Jon^^han upon this account loved David for his Virtue, his
Valor. Prove. 24.26. Every man shall kiss his lips that gives a right answer.
Wisdom, Learning, Ingenuity, and such like graces, procure Love, Mark 10.21.
Jesus beholding him, loved him for his ingenuity. Therefore Saints love the
Lord Jesus Christ, for he is good, goodness it self, Psalm. 45.2. Grace is
poured into thy lips, Cant. 1.3. Therefore do the Virgins love thee. There is
none good but God, and Jesus Christ, he is eminently good, infinitely good; he
received not the Spirit of Grace by measure, but, in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily. He is the Fountain of all goodness; the good in
the creature is derived from his goodness, a drop of his Ocean, a beam from the
Sun of Righteousness; of his fullness we all receive.

2. Beauty is amiable, therefore Jacob loved Rachel: Ahasuerus loved Esther.
Upon this account Jesus Christ is most lovely, who is the brightness of his
Fathers Glory, the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3. Though carnal eyes
see not his beauty, Isa. 53.2, 3. He has no form nor comeliness: and when we
shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. But the Faithful
who looked on him with spiritual eyes, beheld his Glory: The Glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, John 1.14.

3. Similitude, likeness of nature and manners procures love, except it be by
accident, as a proud person hates one that is as proud as himself: and so does
one of the same calling, envy another of the same profession, Non in quantum
est similis sed in quantum est proprii boni impeditivus, as Aquinas gives the
reason. Now in this respect, Jesus Christ has highly merited a Christians
love, because he took on him humane nature, and became like to us in all
things, save sin, Heb 2.16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels,
but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Noah by falling into sin, fell into
shame, and lay uncovered in his tent, to the derision of his ungracious son
Ham: Sem and Japhet, his better-natured sons, took a garment and [for grief]
went backward, not enduring to look upon their Fathers nakedness. Our First
Parents by disobedience exposed themselves to shame and derision, and all their
Posterity to ruin remediless, had not the Lord Jesus gone backward, that is,
from Heaven to earth, and so covered poor man with his skirt, lest the shame of
our nakedness should appear. There is a Law, Lev. 25.25. If thy brother be
poor, etc. Our Father Adam was seized on a fair Possession, but he sold it for
no valuable consideration, he was never able to redeem it, nor any of his kin:
for it cost more to redeem a soul. The good Angels, though as friends they
might commiserate lost man, yet were they not able to recover for him his
forfeited inheritance, Gods Favor and Eternal Happiness; and if they had been
able, yet by Law they might not do it, being not in a capacity, because they
were no kin to man. The Son of God therefore being able to do this unspeakable
kindness for fallen man, as being God bless^^ for ever, mighty to save, took on
him our flesh, that he might be of kin to us, and so by right in Law redeem
that possession which our Father sold. O therefore love the Lord, all ye his
Saints. For,

4. He has loved us. Magnes amori^ amor, Love b^getteth love. We love him
because he loved us first, 1 John 4.10. Lord, he is worthy, Luke 7.5. much more
is Christ worthy, For he loves our Nation. Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave
himself for me. The tongue of men and Angels is not able to set forth the
height and length, depth and breadth, of the Love of God in Christ. God so
loved the World, etc. Rev. 1.5. To Him that loved us, and washed away our sins
in his own Blood, be Glory and Love, Service, etc.

I purposely spare to add more Reasons of the point, it being of it self so
agreeable to reason, and a thing confessed by all Christians.

Use. 1. Of Instruction. If sincere Love to Christ be a distinguishing
character of a right Christian, then surely there be but few right Christians;
for there be few that love Jesus Christ in sincerity.

1. There be many complemental lovers of Christ, that say, They love him withal
their heart; as the Papists, who wear his Picture, and bow to a Crucifix, yet
crucify him afresh in his Saints; the superstitious persons, who cringe and
make low courtesy at the rehearsing of the syllables of the Name [Jesus;] yet,
do they not blaspheme that worthy Name by their unchristian practices? Do they
not take his Name in vain whilst they seem to show reverence to his Name? Did
the Jews honor Abraham really, to whose memory they pretended much respect? We
have Abraham to our Father, say they, we be Abraham's Seed, Joh. 8.33. To whom
our Savior answers, ver. 39. If ye were A^^ahams Children, ye would do the
Works of Abraham. If these men loved Christ with all the heart, they would not
hate whom he loves darely, nor persecute his faithful Members, nor take his
Name in vain. How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me?
said Dalil^h to Sampson. Psalm. 78.36. They did flatter with their mouths, and
lied unto him with their tongues.

2. There are that love Christ, but not with a transcendent Love; they love Him
a little, but the world much more; 2 Timothy 3.4. Lovers of Pleasures more than
lovers of God. Joh. 12.43. They loved the praise of men more than the praise of
God. Can that man be said to love his wife with a conjugal Love, that loves
another woman above her? Can those be said to love Christ sincerely, that love
themselves or their lusts, and prefer them before Christ's Commands, that make
provision for the flesh to fulfill its lusts? contrary to Romans 13. ult. Do they
love Christ or filthy lucre, who laugh in their sleeves, and applaud themselves
in their covetous practices, whilst the Minister is preaching against his
covetousness. Luke 16.14. The Pharisees, who were covetous, heard these things,
and they derided him. Do they love Christ or money better, who are so void of
charity, that though they see a Brother or Sister naked, or destitute of daily
food, yet will neither fill them, nor warm them, nor give those things which
are needful to the body, but hide themselves from their own flesh? Christ will
one day confute their fond pretenses of love to himself, to be meet
self-delusion, when they shall hear from the mouth of Him, the Judge, Depart,
etc. for I was hungry, and ye fed me not, etc.

3. There are Christians that love Christ as a Savior, but not as a Prophet;
as a Priest, but not as a King. Do these love him in sincerity? (...) Christ
divided? Did the Harlot love the Child with the love of a Mother, who would
have had it divided? Solomon was wise enough to discern she was not the true
Mother, that had not the bowels of a mother. And the Lord Christ, who is
greater than Solomon, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, Rev. 1.18. Who tries
the reins and heart, will easily perceive that man is no lover of Christ in
deed and truth, whatever he may affirm in word and tongue, who divides between
Salvation and Sanctification, who opposes one of Christ's Offices to another;
who refuses to take Christ's Yoke upon him, will not stoop to the Scepter of
his Rule and Government, though it is a Golden Scepter of Grace* and his Yoke is
easy, and his Commandments are not grievous. Christ came to set us an example,
That we should walk in his steps; he came not only to suffer and dye for our
sins, but to rule over us, to take upon him the Government of his Church, Isa.
9.6. He shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, Luke 1.33. The Gospel is
his Royal Law, Jam. 2.8. which he establishes in his Kingdom, and to which he
expects a conformity in all his Subjects. The Turks own Mahomet's Law for
their Rule, and live up to it.

The Jews receive Moses Doctrine, and live exactly according to the letter of
it, and the sense they have of it. And how can those Christians be said to love
Jesus Christ sincerely, who profess to receive his Doctrine as a Rule, but walk
contrary to it?

4. There are Christians who love Christ not for himself, but for something
else: Some follow him in hope of gain, as Judas, Demas, like those mungrel
people that went along with Israel out of Egypt, Exodus 12.38. which were the
first that fainted, and set them on murmuring and lusting, Numb. 11.4. Some
followed Christ for the Miracles they saw him work, and professed to believe,
John 2.24. but he did not commit himself to them, because he knew their hearts
were not right with him. Some followed him, Joh. 6.66. but took offense at his
Doctrine, and so went away. Who ever follow Christ for by-ends, love him not in
sincerity, not for himself; but as boys and idle persons love many holidayes,
not for Holiness sake, or Saints sake, but for plays sake: So these love
Christ, for commodity sake, or credit sake; which respects, when they fail,
there is an end of such love.

Use 2. The principal Use of this Doctrine, had need be for trial. Let every
one that names the Name of Jesus Christ, prove the sincerity of his Love. Give
me leave to persuade you, my Beloved, as to try your Faith in, so your Love to
Jesus Christ: Gal. 6.4. Let every one prove his own work, so shall he have
rejoicing in himself, etc.

1. Christ will not take good words, a fair prof^ssion of friendship for
sincere Love. He tries reins and heart. Rev. 2.23. His eyes behold, his
eyelids try the Children of men. Metaph a palpebris pressis, From them that
press down their eyelids, that they may look wishly, narrowly. He will weigh
our Love in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and quickly epsy if it be too
light; He can distinguish between flattery and sincere love.

2. Many pretenders there are in the world, but few unfeigned lovers of Christ.
Mat. 25.44. Lord when saw we thee an hungry? etc. Lord we have been in thy Name
Baptized, we have worn thy Livery, we have heard many a Sermon, we have been
often feasted at thy Table, as Luke 13.27. yet the answer is sad, I tell you I
know not whence you are, depart from me, etc. Had these loved the Lord with an
unfeigned Love, they had not received so harsh a doom, which they might easily
have understood, had they in time taken a trial of their Love.

3. Our hearts are also false and deceitful in this very point of love to
Christ. Peter was as confident of his sincere love to Christ as we can be:
though all men should deny, yet he would dye first, yet ye know what proof he
made. Insomuch that afterward, John 21.15. when our Savior put to him this
question, Love thou me more then these? he being taught more modesty by the
woeful experience of his false heart, answers not to the degree of love, but
only that he loved Christ.

4. It is possible that many Christians may hate Christ as much as we do^ the
memory of those Jews that crucified him, albeit we be strongly persuaded, that
if we were called to formal trial, we would rather dye than openly deny him or
his Gospel: Do we from our hearts detest the mention of Annas, Caiaphas, Judas
and that rabble which conspired the death of the Lord of life? In like manner
did those Jews abhor the memory of Korah, Dathan, Abiram and the rest of those
that rebelled against Moses. Do our spirits rise in indignation against them
that stoned Stephen, persecuted the Apostles, forbiding them to Preach to the
Gentiles that they might be saved, 1 These. 2.16. With no less displeasure were
they moved against the memory of Ahab and Jezebel, and those, though their own
Princes, who slew the Lord's Prophets, Matt. 23.30. If we had been in the days
of our Fathers, etc. The name of Abraham they had in high esteem, he being the
prime person of their Progenitors, with whom God Almighty made that glorious
Covenant, wherein they had the privileges of the Firstborn. The memory of
Moses was amongst them very precious, with whom God was pleased to talk face to
face, who received the lively Oracles to give unto them, Acts 7.38. To have
upbraided the softest spirit in that Rebellious people with treachery or
disloyalty against the Messiah, when he should be revealed, would as much have
moved his choler, as to tell some forward professor amongst us, he would betray
his Lord, were he now on the earth, for half the money that Judas did: yet
these men brake first in their love to Abraham, so our Savior tells them,
John 8.39. then in their fidelity to Moses, John 5.45, 46. and the Prophets,
Matt. 23.35. No marvel then if they took offense at our Saviors life, his
carriage and conversation amongst them, and afforded him such entertainment as
they did. Let not then Hypocrisy deceive us, by suggesting these or the like
suppositions (they are the words of Dr. Jackson) if we should be urged by the
Turk or Jew to deny him, we would sooner die the death he did, then do it, or
were he present in person to exhort us to such duties as his Messengers enjoin
us, we should sure be as forward as any man living to do them; these or the
like imaginations do but foretoken our need of that apology, and argue our
inclination to use it, though alas, it cannot stead any in that day of trial,
Lord when saw we thee naked, or an hungered? When in the Pulpit or preaching in
our streets, deterring us from evil and exhorting us unto good?

Much more to this purpose, see in Dr. Jackson of Justifying Faith.

That we may not therefore deceive our selves with vain pretenses of love, let
us try the sincerity of it, and weigh it in the balance of the Sanctuary.

Notes of sincere love to Christ.

1. The first shall be that which you have in, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil. Lovers have enemies and friends in common, Genesis 12.3. I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee. God will be a
Friend to Abraham's friends, an Enemy to his enemies. Who love Christ
unfeignedly hate sin which he hates, Rev. 2.6. Sin is evil, the greatest of
evils, The work of the Devil, which Christ came into the world purposely to
destroy, 1 John, 3.8. If thou art a friend to sin, any way of wickedness; If
thou love Ignorance, superstition; If thou love a false oath, Zech. 8.17. If
thou love flaggons of wine, Hos. 3.1. If thou delightest in scorning, Prove.
1.22. if thou make a mock at sin, Prove. 14.9. If thou hate knowledge, despise
duty, scoff and scorn at Holiness, which Christ commands, thou love him
not. If thou regard iniquity in thy own heart, if thou allow of it in thy
children, thy friends, if thou plead for sin, undertake the patronage and
defense of it, thou proclamest thy enmity and hostility to Jesus Christ: But if
thou hate and abhor the way of lying, Psalm. 119.163. If thou hate every evil
way ( Psalm. 119.128.) in thy self first, then in others; as he that hates a
Toad, hates it most in his own bosom, as says D. Sibbs: if thy hatred of it
be universal against the whole kind; if thy hatred be rooted irreconcilable, so
as there is no appeasing of it, but by the crucifying and abolishing of thy
hated corruptions; this is right hatred of sin, which argues thy conversion to
be sound, and thy self an unfeigned lover of Jesus Christ.

Note 2. Who love Christ in sincerity, love what ever has relation to him. As,

1. His House, and Worship there performed. Saints love Communion with Christ,
love to be where he is, The Lord loves the gates of Zion, his People love the
threshold of the Sanctuary, Psalm. 120.14. Thy servants take pleasure in her
stones, they favor the dust thereof, Psalm. 26.8. Lord I have loved the
habitation of thy House, and the place where thy Honor dwells. Psalm. 122.1.
I was glad when they said, Let us go up to the House of the Lord. Our feet
shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem.

2. Saints dearly love the Truth and Word of the Lord. As their voice is sweet
to him in prayer, Cant. 2.14. So his voice in his Word is sweet to them, Psalm.
119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? Yea sweeter then honey to my
mouth, verse. 72. The Law of thy mouth is dearer to me then thousands of Gold
and Silver. The very reproofs of Christ are precious to them, Psalm. 141.5. Our
love to Christ is not right if we be impatient of admonition, if we cannot
endure reproof for sin, but swell against it, it is a sign we love sin, which
cannot consist with unfeigned love to Christ.

3. His Messengers are welcome, and their feet beautiful, Romans 10.14. Because
they are the servants of Christ, and show us the way of savation, therefore we
have them in reputation, Phil. 2.29. Because they are over us in the Lord, and
admonish us, therefore we esteem them highly in love for their works sake, 1
These. 5.13. But if we repine, stomach, or malign his Ambassadors taxing our
crimes, though in sharpest terms; or, if we neglect to examine our hearts and
consciences at their request or instance, it is a sure token our persuasions of
Faith and love unto him are but fancies, that we are still in the gall of
bitterness, enemies as cruel to him as these Jews were, etc. Dr. Jackson.

4. His Day, the Lords Day. Rev. 1.10. is to all sincere lovers of Christ a
joyful Day, a Day of delight, Isa. 58.13. On this Day Christ appeared to his
Disciples after his Resurrection; upon this Day he still appears to his
People, making near approaches to their souls, in his blessed Ordinances,
teaching them, inlightning them, comforting their hearts, and persuading the
things concerning the Kingdom of God, Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts burn
within us, whilst he talked with us, and opened unto us the Scriptures?

5. The Lords Table, where he feasteth his Friends, as Cant. 5.1. and bids them
welcome, saying, Eat, O Friends, Drink, yea drink abundantly, O Wel-beloved* I
appeal to the consciences of many sincere Christians, when they have taken most
pains with their own hearts, to get them into frame against a Sacramental day,
when they have been deeply humbled in self-abhorrency, broken in confessions,
with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered; if God have not spoken peace to
their souls, Son, daughter, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven: if their
hearts have not danced for joy, as David did before the Ark?

6. The Lord's People, his faithful Members, are they thy friends, thy
companions, of thy intimate society? do thou prefer them to others, Psalm.
16.3. as the only excellent ones, 119.63. I am companion to all that fear thee;
to all, even to poor Saints as well as rich, despised as well as honorable;
do thou relieve them in want, succor them in misery, visit them if in
Prison, and therefore, because they belong to Christ, have much of Christ in
them? This he takes kindly, Mark 9.41. because they belong to Christ.

7. Do thou love the Day of Christ's appearing? which though it be black and
gloomy, a terrible day to the proud, and all ungodly enemies of Christ, yet is
it a day much to be desired by all that love the Lord, who may rejoice and lift
up their heads in joyful hope of this Days approach, their Redemption draws
nigh; now is their Salvation nearer than when first they believed; now shall
the Elect receive the end of their Faith, and Hope, and Prayers, and Tears, and
Sufferings. 2 Timothy 4.8. It is made a character of the righteous, that they love
the appearing of Jesus Christ, Heb. 5. ult. Unto them that look for him: Tit.
2.13. Looking for, etc. Not only looking for, but hasting to the coming of the
Day of God, 2 Pet. 3.12.

3d. Note is in Christ's own words, John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments, all, one as well as another, hard as well as easy. John 15.14.
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Abraham is called the
Friend of God, and his friendship was tried and approved by his obedience to
those hard Commandments of leaving his Country, and offering up his only son,
his son Isaac whom he loved. The partial obedience of most people is no
obedience at all, argues no sincere love to Christ.

4. To suffer for Christ, to part with our dearest interests for him, argues
sincere love to him. Jacob endured a hard service of seven years for Rachel,
which though long, because hard, yet seemed to him but as a few days, for the
love he had unto her. Jonathan endured his father's displeasure for David, whom
he loved, and was well content to part with his hope in the Kingdom, because he
loved him as his own soul. The Martyrs (Rev. 12.11.) loved not their lives unto
the death. The Apostles went away rejoicing they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for the Name of Christ. If we dare not adventure to suffer the spoiling
of our Goods, dare not hazard the frown or displeasure of a Landlord, dare not
suffer the loss of Name or Reputation for Christ and his Gospel; how dwells
his Love in us?

5. Who love the Lord in sincerity, will not easily part with Him, his
Comforts, his Graces, his Presence and Power of his Ordinances. Exodus 21.5. The
servant that loved his master, and the family, would not go out free; Love
prevailed above Liberty, which is very desirable. To sincere Christians the
absence of Christ is grievous, how they mourn to part with Ordinances, in which
they have found sweet communion with Christ. David in the Wilderness how he
longed after God! Psalm. 63.1. With sorrow and weeping tears the Disciples take
their leave of St. Paul, Acts 20. ult. when they were to see his face no more.
Those people that with those Jews, Acts 13.50. expel Ministers out of their
coasts, or with them, Luke 4.29. thrust Christ out of their City, or with the
more mannerly Gadarens, who besought him to depart from them; who can be
content to suffer a famine of the Word, rather than be at the cost of
maintaining a Preaching-Minister; they will not buy the Truth so dear; who are
well enough pleased to see their Ministers removed, burning and shining Lights
put under a bed or a bushel, Teachers driven into corners; do give a plain
demonstration how little love they have to Jesus Christ; it is evident they
prefer their Swine, their Gain, their Money, to Jesus Christ.

Now I beseech you, Brethren, take a little pains to try the truth of your Love
to Christ. It will be the greatest comfort to your souls of any thing in this
world, if upon good ground it may appear you are of them that love the Lord in
sincerity. What bonefires of joy may such Christians make in their hearts, in
the saddest times, and darkest night of affliction? Psalm. 112.4. To the upright
arises light in darkness. If you love Christ, be sure ye are of him beloved.
Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me. To you he will be a neverfailing friend
in trouble, in sickness, in all afflictions, in life and death; and at the day
of Judgment, to them he will pronounce that heart-chearing sentence, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc.

But if by the foregoing Evidences, taken out of the Scriptures of Truth, the
contrary do appear, and we be not found amongst Christ's real Friends, but
however we may flatter our selves, among his enemies, and of them that hate
Him, then shall we from his mouth hear that heartbreaking doom, Depart from me
ye cursed, etc. I never knew you. And if any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

SERMON VI.
Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity.
WE come now to speak to the second Doctrine, which is this:

Doct. 2. The best thing in the world is Grace; not gifts, parts which are
Gratiae, gratis datae, of an inferior nature, which the Apostle elsewhere
wishes for his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14.5. But here, being to take his leave of
his People, wishes for them saving Grace; such as Faith, Remission of sins,
Fellowship with all Saints in the general Resurrection. So Haimo, in locum.

That Grace is so excellent a thing, appears in this, That the Apostle in all
or most of his Epistles, both begins and ends with it. His first salutation in
the entrance, is, Grace be unto you, and Peace, to which he sometimes adds
Mercy. Grace to renew our nature, Peace of conscience, Mercy for pardon of sin.
If we find sin pardoned, our persons accepted, our natures altered, then may we
comfort our selves, etc. says Dr. Sibbs.

In like manner David took his leave of Ittai, 2 Samuel 15.20. Mercy and Truth be
with thee. Such was Christ's valedictory Prayer for his Apostles, John 17. for
Grace to be kept from the evil of sin, ver. 15. for Sanctification, ver. 17.
for Unity, etc.

Prove. 3.13, 15. and 4.7. Wisdom, i.e. Wisdom to Salvation. Grace is the
principal thing.

Reasons of the Point.

1. Grace promoteth the highest end of man, which is, (1.) the Glory of God, to
which end we were born, and for which cause we came into the world. 1 Cor.
10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of
God. Grace helps to serve God acceptably, Heb. 12.28. Grace teaches to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live godly, etc. Tit. 2.11. (2.) Reason
teaches to live as men, Grace as Christians; it enableth to every good work,
teaches us to do our duty to God, our neighbor, to our selves. It reaches to
pray acceptably, to hear as the Word of God; to keep Sabbath, to show mercy, to
forgive injuries, to do all in obedience; which makes much to God's Glory.

2. Reason. Grace is the best thing; for it promoteth the Salvation of the
soul, which is the best part. Sin is the plague, destruction of the soul, 1
Kings 8.38. Grace heals, sanctifies, saves the soul. Sin infecteth every
part, faculty: Grace sanctifies all. Sin blinds the eye, hardneth the heart,
poisoneth the affections, corrupts the life, defiles, deformeth the whole
soul. Grace enlightens the eyes, softens the heart, cleanses, beautifieth,
purifieth, makes lovely what Sin had made odious. Ephesians. 2.5. By Grace ye are
saved.

3. Grace is the best thing; for it makes a man better, beneficial to others.
Riches, honors, prosperity render few better, many worse. Grace makes bad
Parents good, and good ones better; better Children, better Husbands, Wives,
better Ministers, People, Masters, Servants, better Neighbors, Friends, better
in all Relations. Without Grace a man is unprofitable, hurtful; Lions, Bears
are wicked men called in Scripture, yea Dogs, Swine for their brutish
qualities. Grace rectifies the crookedness of nature, Emollit mores, etc.
sweetens men's manners, suffers them not to remain wild. A heart taught by the
Grace of God, is full of pity and compassion, shows mercy; the hand helps,
relieveth, the tongue speaks to comfort, edification; no corrupt communication
is heard, but gracious words from gracious hearts, Col. 4.6. Paul wrought upon
by Grace, preaches the Faith he once destroyed, Gal. 1.23. Onesimus, before
Grace received, was unprofitable, but now by Grace converted, is become
profitable, as his name imports, Philem. 10.

4. The Excellency of Grace appears hence; It renders a Christian acceptable to
God, as well as useful to man. And that is the highest of a poor Christians
ambition, that he may find favor in the sight of his God; that his services
and sacrifices may come with acceptance before God, Mal. 3.4. Parts, gifts
commend us to men only, Grace gives us favor, approbation with God. And this
is the other branch of the Schools distinction, Gratiae gratum facientes, which
they prefer to Gratiae gratis d^lu^ta It is the prayer of the upright heart,
not of the volu^ble tongue, that is God's delight, Prove. 15.8. The Lord is nigh
to all that call upon him, that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 145.18. But the
sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to God, Prove. 15.8.

5. Grace is the best thing, because it lasts longest, it endures for ever,
Riches are not for ever, nor does the Crown endure to all generations, Prove.
27.24. Pleasures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11.25. Carnal mirth is soon
at an end, like the crackling of thorns, Eccl. 7.6. But Grace abides. 1 Cor.
13.13. And now abides Faith, Hope, Charity. 1 John 2.17. The world passes
away and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of God abides for ever.

6. Grace is the best thing, because it helps in time of most need, Heb. 4.
ult.

(1.) Grace helps in time of affliction, it comfort, quieteth the heart.
Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted unless I had believed. Grace gives interest in God,
who is a present help in trouble. It interesteth in Gods Power, Wisdom, Mercy,
Goodness. Grace can look up to God, see him smile when men frown, see him at
peace in man's hatred. Stephen looked up, saw Heaven open, Christ ready to
receive him. Paul saw the Lord encouraging, Acts 23.11. Be of good cheer Paul.

(2.) Grace helps in the hour of death. Prove. 14.32. The Righteous has hope
in his death. When there is no comfort in Riches, Offices, Friends; vain is the
help of man. Grace disarmeth the King of Terrors: O Death, where is thy sting?
Death is welcome to a gracious person, as a messenger sent to conduct him to
his Father's house, to his own Country, to his best Friends, to Jesus Christ
whom his soul loves. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord.

(3.) At the day of Judgment, Grace will find favor, will make the Judge our
Friend, our Advocate. Grace will cloth the soul with Jesus Christ, his Robes,
his Righteousness. Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments, Rev.
16.15.

1. Use of Instruction.

1. Take notice what a Blessing it is to enjoy the means of Grace, to live in a
valley of Vision, to sit under a powerful Ministry, to have the benefit of good
Education, religious Parents, their Instruction and holy Example, to have
Bibles, Catechisms, Sabbath-dayes, and Sacramental-dayes, the Market-dayes for
Grace by the blessing of God, upon which the soul may be converted, and ^e be
made wise to Salvation. Happy is that people that are in such a case; yea,
thrice happy are they who improve the means to the Ends aforesaid: happy we, if
we know in this our day the things that belong to our peace.

2. Then the best pains, labor, cost, that any of us can bestow, is to lay out
our selves in the getting of Grace; that time is best spent which is spent for
Grace. With all thy getting, get Understanding, Prove. 4.7. says Solomon. And a
greater than Solomon has told us, That Godliness is the best part, Luke 20.
ult. Mary has chosen the good part, etc. Whilst others are laying up riches
that perish, treasures that vanish away, clothes that wax old, gold and silver
that rust, Christians are storing their hearts with Grace: Whilst others are
making their Lands and temporal Estates sure, Christians are making their
Calling and Election sure: Whilst others are laying hold on advantages for this
present life, Christians are laying hold on Eternal Life.

3. The best portion Parents can lay up for their Children, is not riches,
worldly greatness, but Grace, the favor of God, interest in Christ and the
Covenant of Grace. The best Trade they can teach them, is the fear of the Lord,
to keep holy the Lords Day, to fly Vice, to follow after Virtue, to exercise
them in Godliness.

The second Use is of Reproof.

To reprove the too slight esteem men have of the Grace of God, undervaluing a
Pearl of such price, trampling under foot a Jewel more worth than the Gold of
Ophir. How long, O ye simple worldlings, will ye love simplicity? How long will
ye rise early, set up late, eat the bread of carefulness, and all to load your
selves with the thick clay of the world, the dust and dung of the Earth, and in
the mean time neglect Saving-Grace? Wherefore do ye spend money for that which
is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? Isa. 55.2. It is
chiefly for this, that the Wisdom of God charge worldlings with folly, who
yet applaud themselves for the only wise men, Luke 12.20, 21. So is he, ( i. e.
a fool like the rich man in the Text) that lays up treasure for himself, and
is not rich to God.

Hearken I beseech you, ye despisers and abusers of the Grace of God, be
convinced of the worth of that ye so neglect. 1. God himself is styled, The God
of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of Hope, Romans 15.13. The God of Patience,
Romans 15.5. He it is that sanctifies, justifies, pardons iniquity,
transgression and sin.

2. It is Grace which God reserveth as a portion for his Children, his peculiar
People, his best Friends, 2 Cor. 12.9. My Grace is sufficient for thee. James
2.5. Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith? Abraham gave
gifts to the Sons of the Concubines; but the Inheritance he reserved for Isaac.
So God gives the Earth to the Children of men, earthly blessings, Psalm. 115.16.
but Grace and the good things of Heaven, are his Childrens portion. Esau had
the fat of the Earth, but Jacob the Dew of Heaven.

3. It is Grace which Saints desire, long for, labor for above all things, and
are satisfied with. Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon
us; this is better than abundance of Corn and Wine. Psalm. 63.5. My soul shall
be satisfied as with marrow and fatness.

4. Grace is the end of every Ordinance. The Word is called, The Word of Faith,
The Word of Grace, Romans 10.8. Acts 20.32. The Ministry is, The Ministry of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. The Gospel is, The Ministration of the Spirit, 2
Cor. 3.8. The Dispensation of the Grace of God, Ephesians. 3.2.

Prayer is a coming to the Throne of Grace, for this end, That we may find
Grace, Heb. 4. ult. The Sacraments in their right use, do seal and confirm
Grace, Romans 4.11.

5. It is Grace which Satan chiefly aims to rob Christians of; by tempting to
sin he seeks to withdraw us from Grace. He tempted Job to drive him from his
integrity. He desired to sift Peter, that his Faith might fail him. Luke 22.31.
He walks about, seeking whom he may devour, by spoiling them of God's Grace.

By all which appears the excellency of Grace; the greater is their sin who
undervalue it.

The third Use is of Comfort for the poor and needy Christians, who are
troubled at their outward wants. Hearken, O thou poor soul, art thou afflicted
at thy poverty, nakedness, sickness, yet art rich in Grace; is not that better
than gold, health, beauty, strength, friends, favor of Great Ones? O be
thankful: say as Mat. 11.25. Father I thank thee, etc. the lot is fallen to
thee in a goodly place, thou have a pleasant heritage; I am sure thou would
not change conditions with the wealthiest, healthfullest, beautifullest
graceless person in the world. Others have the nether springs of earthly
riches; thou have the upper Springs of heavenly Treasures. Others have the
blessings of God's left hand, the fullness of this world; thou have Benjamins
Portion, a double Blessing, even the Blessing of the Right hand, the Grace of
God which brings Salvation. Say as Psalm. 116.12.

Last Use is of Exhortation.

1. To graceless persons, That they would above all things labor after Grace.
Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, i. e. not so much as for
that which endures.

Motives.

1. Grace is most excellent. There is an ^ttractive virtue in things of worth.
If carnal eyes were but opened to see the Excellency of Grace, Mirabiles sui
excitaret amores, It would ravish the soul in desires after it. But Grace's
Beauty is internal, so is not discerned but with spiritual eyes. The Kings
Daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. Our Life is hid with Christ in
God, Col. 3.3.

1. That which makes the possessours of it excel, that is truly; excellent.
The Righteous is more excellent than his neighbor: What makes him so but
Grace? as much as the brightest day excels the darkest night; the star, a
cloud; heaven, earth; so much a gracious Christian excels a graceless person.

2. Grace prepares and fitteth for Glory; so do not riches, they often hinder.
Coelum non capit magna onera Portantes; God many times strips his People of
riches, lest the love of them should retard or hinder them in their heavenly
Journey. Mark 10.23. How hardly shall they that have riches, enter into the
Kingdom of God! Which in the following verse our Savior explains thus, How
hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!
implying, It is hard to have riches, and not to trust in t^^m.

3. A third excellency of Grace is, I^ satisfies as well as sanctifies, the
heart; It fills the soul with content, in the absence of created comforts. I
have enough, says Jacob, now Joseph is alive. I have enough, says a gracious
soul, now God is reconciled, now Christ is mine, Thy favor is better than
life, Psalm. 63.3.

4. The benefit, comfort of Grace is eternal, the riches of Grace are durable,
Prove. 8.18. Other riches perish, Eccles. 5.14. they accompany their owners but
to the grave at furthest, there they leave them: whereas Grace accompanies the
soul in death, and after death to all eternity.

2d Mot. From the necessity of Grace. Bread is necessary to this life, Grace is
much more to life eternal. Without it the best sacrifices are not accepted,
Prove. 21.27. Without it we cannot withstand our enemies. 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom
resist steadfast in the Faith. Without it we shall not be able to bear the
Cross, ye have need of patience. Heb. 10.36. By Faith the Saints endured
affliction, were tortured, had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea,
moreover, of bonds, and imprisonment, Heb. 11.25, -- 35, 36. Without Grace we
can neither suffer nor obey the will of God, not go on comfortably in a
Christian course. Heb. 11.8. By Faith Abraham obeyed. In a word, without it we
cannot be saved. John 13.8. Except I wash thee thou have no part in me. Christ
came by water and blood; by water to regenerate, by blood to justify. S^ Dr.
Sibbs.

3. It is possible for them that have no Grace, with care and diligence to
obtain it. It is the privilege of New-Testament-times to be seasons of more
plentiful Grace than were the Old-Testament-times: for so is that place to be
understood, John 7.38. The holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not
yet glorified: Whether we take the holy Ghost there, for gifts and spiritual
endowments, or the Efficacy of the Spirit accompanying those gifts, in neither
sense was the holy Ghost given so plentiously before as after Christ's
Ascension on the day of Pentecost, and afterward; Ephesians. 4.8.

When he ascended on high he gave gifts unto men. God the Father reserved the
^a^^ donative of his Grace for honor of his Sons Ascension, unto the last
times, as the Gospel Times are called, whereby so many millions of souls have
been converted to Christ. So then it being our lot, with Capernaum, to be
lifted up to Heaven, in regard of spiritual enjoyments, take heed with the same
people, lest we be cast down to Hell, for want of good improvement of so high
privileges.

Take with us therefore these brief Directions, that we may not fail or come
short of Grace.

1. Be sure thou have an high esteem of Grace: for God will not cast his Pearls
before Swine, carnal people that prize them not. We may easily overvalue these
sublunary things, bestow more serious thoughts, labor, sweat, time, money on
them, than they are really worth. But we cannot possibly set too high a rate on
Grace, which we are bidden to covet, follow or pursue, seek, ask, knock for,
strive for, 1 Cor. 12. ult. Heb. 12.14.

2. This estimate we shall not set upon Grace, except we be sensible of our
want of it. We need not seek a thing we have in our hands. Most men perish
through lack of Grace, which they seek not, labor not for, because they
persuade themselves they have it already. Be thou poor in spirit, destitute,
blind, naked; If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives
liberally, viz. to them that ask so, in sense of want. God is not like unto man
in this respect: Men send gifts and presents where is least need; and so for
them, they that are poor may be poor still: Semper eris pauper si, etc.

God gives Grace where most need is, He feeds the hungry, he inviteth the
poor, Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts.

Survey the state of thy soul, when thou go to Prayer, to the Word,
Sa^^ament. As when you go or send to the Market you consider what is wanting,
that supply may be made. When thou go to God's Ordinances, thy Spiritual
Market, enquire what is lacking, and there pour out thy heart to God, put up
earnest cries for the work of Grace and Conversion, for a new heart. God has
promised no less than the holy Spirit to them that ask, Luke 11.13. (i. e.)
that ask so, as in that parable our Savior teaches, with fervency and
importunity.

3. See thou hunger and thirst after Grace, keep a continued desire and longing
after it, for so the Participle implies. Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they that are
hungring and thirsting. Psalm. 143.6. My soul thirsts after thee as the
thirsty Land. How is that? When the Earth is chapt, and gapes through long
drought, it never cease gaping and craving till the Heavens hear the Earth,
according to Hos. 2.21. So let the thirsty soul do. Psalm. 123.2. As the eyes of
a servant, etc. so our eyes wait on the Lord until he have mercy on us.

4. Delay not the time, take the first opportunity, slip*not one Market Day to
gain so excellent a Commodity; Seek the Lord while he may be found, call on him
while he is nigh. When Shops are shut up, it is too late to make our Markets.
Many are afraid of having Grace too soon, they are loath to be holy too soon, to
be sanctified too soon, as if Grace were a burden. But why not rather fear we
lest we should come too late, as did the foolish Virgins, who dearly rued it,
as all shall who in this their day will not know the things of their peace.

5. If thou will have Grace, be content to buy it, though without money,
without price; in buying you part with one thing for another whereof you have
more need, so must thou here; though heavenly commodities are not to be valued
for Silver, you know what Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, Thy money perish
with thee, etc. yet must thou part with that which (it may be) thou valuest
above Silver, i. e. thy lusts, Isa. 2.20. Idols of Silver, costly sins must be
parted with, of them thou have no need; if thou part not with them, they will
ruin thee; if thou cast not them away, they will cast thee away. Sin and
Grace, reigning sin, a way of wickedness, is inconsistent with Grace; God and
Belial, the Ark and Dagon will not agree under the same roof. The Spirit of
God, is a holy, pure, delicate Spirit, will be grieved, and at last will be
gone, if that unclean spirit the Devil be entertained by a voluntary
resignation of thy heart, to the love of any course of sin or impiety. If the
blessed Spirit of Grace will vouchsafe to be thy guest, O prepare him a
lodging, as Paul writes to Philemon, ver. 22. of that Epistle, Purge thy self
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit.

6. Diligence in the use of means, constant attendance on the Ordinances of
Grace, is necessary to the obtaining of Grace. Frequent daily the Throne of
Grace by fervent prayer, wait duly at the posts of wisdoms house by attentive
hearing the Word, make conscience of sanctifying the Lords day, be not thou
absent from Gods house when he deals his dole of Grace and Blessing to his
People, use the society of Gracious persons, whose communication is savory, and
their words minister Grace to the hearers; and be constant in exercises of
Godliness; follow Paul's counsel to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate on these
things, continue in them, give thy self much unto them, that thy profiting may
appear. The diligent hand makes rich, when drowsiness clotheth a man with
rags, which is as true in spiritual as in temporal things.

2d. Branch of Exhortation. If Grace be the best thing in the world, let
Christians that have Grace already labor for further degrees of it; Grow in
Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. Grace and sanctification is not perfect at once, but has
its several ages and periods of growth. We read of the Embrio, or the forming
the new man in the womb, Gal. 4.19. The newborn babe, 1 Pet 2.2. little
children, 1 John 2.13. young men, ib. aged Christians, ib. and Psalm. 92.14.
shall bring forth more fruit in old age.

To this purpose are the commands in Scripture, to abound more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. that your love may abound, Phil. 1.9. always abounding in the work
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult.

They are likewise commended who are rich in Grace and fruits of holiness,
Matt. 15.28. O woman great is thy Faith! Matt. 8.10. I have not sound so great
Faith, no not in Israel. So on the contrary, dwarfs in Christianity are
blameworthy, Matt. 6.30. O ye of little Faith. 1 Cor. 3.4. Are ye not yet
carnal? that is, babes in Christ, as ver. 1. more flesh than spirit.

Motives to grow in Grace.

1. That we may answer, not frustrate God's expectation. Luke 12.48. Where much
is given, there much is required; Isa. 5.3. I looked for grapes; and well he
might expect store of fruit of a Vineyard so husbanded.

2. Much Grace will produce much Obedience; greater Faith, greater Obedience,
and that hereafter will conduce more to the glory of God, Romans 4.20. Abraham
being strong in Faith, gave glory to God: The more Grace the better lives will
Christians lead, whereby God is more glorified, John 15.8. Hereby is my Father
glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit.

2. Much obedience will be more to our own comfort, for God will reward every
one according to his works. 1 Cor. 15. ult. Knowing your labor not to be in
vain in the Lord. If there be degrees of Glory, sure they are bestowed
according to improvement of talents here: He that had gained ten pounds, had
Authority over ten Cities; and he that had gained five pounds, was made Ruler
over five Cities, Luke 19.17, 19. He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6.

2. Here in this life God usually metes to us as we measure to him, according
to our obedience so is our comfort, Luke 6.38. Where no care of obedience, no
comfort; little Faith, little comfort: hence Christians of little Faith, little
obedience, are much disquieted about their comfort and assurance.

3. We need much Grace to conquer many corruptions, great lusts, to resist
strong temptations. Some sins like those Devils, are not easily cast out, Matt.
17.21. It is by Faith Christians overcome the world, 1 John 5.4. but a little
Faith will hardly overcome the temptations on the right hand, from worldly
prosperity, temptations on the left hand, persecutions of the world; it must be
a strong Faith that must stop the mouths of Lions, subdue Kingdoms, quench the
violence of fire, Heb 11.35. small strength of Grace will be more like to faint
in the day of battle, than conquer strong opposition. Prove. 24.10. If thou
faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.

4. There be hard lessons to be learned, hard duties to be performed in
Christianity, whereunto is requisite more store of Grace: Some stick at easy
duties, how will they go through with harder? Who cannot hold out with soot-men,
how will they run with horsemen? They who are tired with family duties, how
will they perform those of self-denial, heart-examination, mortification? which
are as the cutting off the right hand, or plucking out the right eye: How will
they love their enemies, forgive injuries, fobear revenge? to the performance
of which Christians need pray, as, Luke 17.4. Lord increase our Faith. If God
bid us do some great thing, as to lay down our lives, we ought to refuse none
of his commands, How much less ought we not to stick at duties of so easy a
nature?

5. Christians may be brought into great straits, out of which to extricate
themselves, they need store of Grace, much Faith, more wisdom, great courage.
Let not your hearts be troubled, says Christ to his Disciples sorrowing for
his absence, John 14.1. How shall they remedy that? Ye believe in God, Believe
also in me; Some Faith they had already, but they will need more to prevent
trouble of heart. Hab. 1.2. The Prophet complains of bad times, violence and
spoil all along that Chapter. How shall the iniquity of times be helped? See
Chap. 2.4. The Just shall live by Faith, the best remedy for sad times; then
they must have Faith, store of Faith, that intend to live upon it; when times
are so bad, that Believers have nothing else left but Faith to live upon. In
great storms we need great courage, ^est we sink. Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be
afraid, etc. his heart is fixed.

6. The best evidence of truth of Grace, is growth. If plants grow, if young
cattle thrive, be sure they live; when Christians thrive not, are as ignorant
now as they were seven years ago, are as lukewarm, etc. they may suspect
whether ever they were born again, or began to live the life of Grace.

Helps to grow, besides those which belong to the former branch of Exhortation,
which may be useful here.

1. Beware thou judge not thy self strong when thou art weak, nay, when thou
have no Grace at all, as is too usual, Laodicea-like, Rev. 3.17. Thou say, I
am rich, and increased with goods, etc. Prove. 13.7. There is that makes
himself rich, yet has nothing: Thou may have long time enjoyed the means,
yet not have made answerable progress in practical Godliness. Some children go
to school seven years, yet arrive not at so good degrees of learning, as others
do in half that time. Israel in their wilderness wanderings spent near forty
years in going eleven days journey, Deuteronomy. 1.2. Heb. 5.12. Some at sixty years
Profession are inferior to others of sixteen; who for the time they have had to
learn, ought to be teachers of others, had need one teach them the principles
of Religion, and have need of milk, etc.

2. Beware thou never entertain a conceit of having Grace enough, nor ever
stint thy self to a certain measure of Grace; of worldly riches a man may have
enough and surfeit, but of Grace thou can not surfeit, can not be too greedy;
thou may love the world too much, can not love Christ too much, can not
have too much humility, too much meekness, zeal, so it be according to
knowledge: here the proverb is most true, Store is no sore, much Grace will be
no burden.

3. Be sure thou live, be in Christ, for dead things grow not; in Christ is all
fullness, of him must we receive, John 1.16. in him are all treasures of wisdom
and knowledge; The branch cannot grow that is cut off from the stock, John 15.4.
no more can ye except ye abide in me. Christ is Author and finisher of our
Faith, and all Grace; to him must we be united, receive influence from him,
have much recourse to him, communion with him.

4. Be very humble, ascribe all thy sufficiency to God. He must be as the dew
to Israel ere he can grow as the Lilly, Hos. 14.5, 8. from me is thy fruit
found. God has great respect for humble Persons, because they will be most
thankful, and ascribe all their fruitfulness unto God, which proud Persons
arrogate to themselves: Therefore God will teach the meek, has respect to the
lowly, gives more Grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6.

5. Improve what thou have, exercise Grace received, exercises in Learning,
Scholastic disputatious, declamations, speaking Latin, increase learning.
Acts intend habits. The more a child exercises his writing, reading, the
better he will write and read; the more a Christian puts forth acts of
Piety, Charity, Mortification, Prayer, etc. the more Pious and Gracious he will
prove himself. To him that has shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance, Matt. 13.12. It is not in spiritual as in corporal things, the more
you use them, the more you wear and waste them; but as it is with a fountain,
the more you draw, the more it springs, labitur et labetur.

6. Beware of whatever may blast and hinder the growth of Grace; as, 1. Take
heed of growing strange, neglect not communion with God; Gracious walking is
walking with God; in-disinenter cum Deo ambulavit, is said of Enoch. 2. Beware
of all sin, especially pride, that blasteth Grace, as humility preserves it,
God resists the proud, but gives Grace to the humble. 3. Formality,
barrenness in duty. 4. Worldliness, as shining of the Sun puts out fire, so hot
pursuit of the world causes cooling and decaying in Grace. 5. Ill company,
society of graceless persons, is a great quench-coal to Grace; the body is not
so apt to catch the plague from persons infected, as evil communications, and
ill conversation of lewd companions, is prone to corrupt the mind and manners.
Who walks in the Sun, shall be tanned, though he walk not for that end; who
is much in the Mill, may discern it in his clothes; who sits in the
Apothecaries shop much, will smell of his Ointments: So he that converseth with
the froward, graceless sinner, will learn of his ways and be like him: For the
worst precepts, counsels, examples prevail most.

SERMON VII.
1 Samuel 30.6. But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
THe difference betwixt the friendship of God, and the friendship of men,
appears best in a day of adversity; for then the latter proves fickle and
deceitful, but the former durable and lasting. A notable instance whereof is
represented in this portion of Scripture, wherein we have David's friends and
followers turning his enemies, but God continuing his fast friend, in whom he
may encourage himself.

In the words we have these three Generals.

1. The person concerned, and that is David, a Prophet of the Lord, and Ruler
of his People, by the appointment of God. David encouraged himself.

2. His behavior, he encouraged himself in God; comforted and strengthened
himself in Jehovah his God.

3. The occasion of this behavior, and that was the great distress he was in,
which is hinted in the beginning of the verse; David was greatly distressed;
for the people spoke of stoning him. He was an Exile already, driven from his
Country, and from his habitation, by the rage and jealousy of Saul: His City,
Ziglag, was sacked and burnt by the Amalakites; his Wives and Children carried
captive; and, which was worst of all, his Friends and Followers spoke of
stoning him, looking on him as the cause of all the misery that had befallen
them: this was a sore distress, he had nothing left now wherein he might
comfort himself, God only excepted. David was greatly distressed; but David
encouraged himself in the Lord his God.

Hence we may take notice by the way, That God many times suffers his own dear
and precious Ones to be greatly distressed. David was a man after God's own
heart, yet David was greatly distressed. This might be abundantly strengthened
by the condition of the Church and People of God in all Ages. And this God does
for these ends amongst many other;

1. To take his People off from an arm of flesh, from leaning upon humane
props, that they should not trust in themselves, or any other, but in God
alone. 2 Chr. 20.12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. 2.
Cor. 1.9. We had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust
in our selves, but in God, which raises the dead.

2. To prove their Graces, to try their Faith and Hope. God will see whether we
can hold out in a storm, whether we can trust him without a pledge in our
hands; he will see whether we can encourage our selves in Him, when we have no
outward mercies to lead us to him.

3. To magnify his own Name by their deliverance. It Is the strongest argument
we can urge to God in our troubles, What will thou do for thy great Name? The
greatness of the distress greatneth the deliverance out of it, and this
advances the glory of the Deliverer.

But come we to the words which we have pitched upon, which hold forth the
behavior of David in his distress; he encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
Whence we may gather these two Doctrines.

1. That Believers have an interest in God; the Lord his God.

2. There Is enough in God to encourage a Believer when greatly distressed.
David was in great distress, sorely beset with troubles; his enemies destroying
on one hand, his followers gathering stones to stone him on the other hand; but
for all this he encouraged himself in the Lord his God. I shall begin with the
first of these.

1. Believers have an interest in God. We have the Saints everywhere using
this phrase, which holds forth their propriety in God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord our
God is One Lord. Josh. 14.8. I wholly followed the Lord my God. John 20.28.
Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God.

This interest and propriety in God, holds forth these three things.

1. A nearness to God. It Is the misery of graceless persons, that they are far
off from God: But now Believers are nigh to God. The Psalmist calls this one of
Isreal's privileges, Psalm. 148.14. He exalts the horn of his People, the
praise of all his Saints; even of the children of Israel, a People near unto
him. O it is a privilege indeed to be a People near to God. Ephesians. 2.13. But
now in Christ Jesus, you who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood
of Christ. Believers are brought night to God, they are even set under his wing
of Providence and special Protection.

2. A Relation to him. [Our God] implies some very near relation to God; he is
the Believers Father by Grace: it is the misery of the Wicked that God is not
their Father, but they are of their father the Devil, as our Savior tells
them, John 8.44. But every Believer is related to God, as a child to his
father. 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be to you a Father, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty. We are not only made night to God, but nigh
in relation: He that can say, My God, may say also, My Father. This relation is
held out in this interest and propriety.

3. A Right to God. Whole God is a Believers, God and all he has, all he is,
all he can do. This is a vast privilege; My God, there is my right and title to
him; He is the Believers portion, his inheritance, his estate made sure to him:
he may call God his, and the Power of God his, the Wisdom of God his, the
Goodness and Mercy of God he may call it all his, he has a right to it. Thus
you see what is held forth in this Interest.

Come we now to show how Believers do obtain this their Interest and Propriety
in God.

1. The foundation of this Interest is laid in the free Love of God to their
souls; We can show no other ground of all those rich heavenly privileges
Believers enjoy, but only this, because God loved them from eternity; this is
the bottom of all; every one of our privileges is laid in God's love: Whom God
loved from eternity, them he chose from eternity to be a People nigh unto him,
that should have interest and propriety in him: Hence it is Believers are
called Elect and Chosen ones, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world.

2.'It Is ratified and made sure by the Covenant of Grace. When God having
brought the soul over to himself, and enriched it with Faith and other Graces,
comes actually to strike covenant with him, than is this interest and propriety
in God established, and made firm; this appears from the very tenor of the
Covenant of Grace, Jer. 31.33. This shall be the Covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel after those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my People; God has given his People an interest in himself, and
he has confirmed this by Oath and Covenant, he has sworn that he will be the
Believers God.

Come we to apply this Doctrine.

1. Have Believers an interest in God? We may here stand and wonder at the
honor that is bestowed upon Believers. Surely the outward glory of Solomon
fell short of this; to be a People near to God is a high honor: to be related
to him is a great dignity, but to have a right to God and all in God, is a
privilege not to be fathomed by humane arms; and yet this honor have all the
Saints, though in their outward condition never so poor and contemtible; it is
the greatest honor in the world to be able to say, My God. If David was filled
with admiration that he should be son in law to the King; How may the hearts of
Believers run over, when they consider what honor they have, in being Sons of
God!

2. Have Believers an interest in God? Then in vain do Satan and his
Instruments labor to make them miserable: Can any man be miserable that has
an interest in God? Men would have judged David a miserable man, but he has a
friend to stand by him, in whom he encourages himself. Will God forsake his
People? will he suffer men to spoil his Jewels? No, they do but polish them: if
Satan and his instruments could dissolve this interest, and pluck Believers out
of God's arms, than were their misery at hand, but this they cannot do. God
feels the blows which Believers receive. Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me?
He is touched with all their injuries; and surely he is able to save them.

3. Have Believers an interest in God? Then has God also an interest in them,
and this Believers must know and remember; this propriety is mutual betwixt God
and his Saints; as he is theirs, so they are his, not their own: This must put
us in mind of our duty, that we do not altogether dwell upon privileges, and
forget duty: We must not boast of our propriety in God, and serve our selves,
and our own lusts. As God in his Covenant says, I will be their God, so he
adds, and they shall be my People: and for this end he promises to put his
Laws in our inward parts, and write them in our hearts, that so we may yield
him Covenant-obedience. Remember Christian, thou art not thine own, but God's;
it is not for thee to serve, love and please thy self, but God. As we have right
to all God has, and can do, so has God right to all we have, and can do; our
gifts, parts, strength, time, and estates must be laid out for God.

4. Have Believers an interest in God? then let them pity such as have not, and
strive to bring them under this happiness; let our souls bleed within us to
consider how many thousands are strangers, yea, and enemies to God, and without
God in the world. Can thou call God thy God? there are many thousands in the
world that cannot do this: Can thou call God Father? O how many are there
that cannot do this in Faith! Pity such and pray for them, yea labor by all
means to bring them home to God: See whether there be no such in your families,
or amongst your kindred and neighbors: Are not many of these in the gall of
bitterness and in the bond of iniquity? if so, pity such souls, and labor to
pray them in to God, that they also may have an interest in him.

5. Have Believers an interest in God? This speaks exceeding great joy and
comfort to Beleivers; such as can say with David, The Lord my God: If we knew
God better, we should understand more of this great consolation: The serious
thought of this interest in God, is able to make a Believers joy to exceed all
bounds. The consolation will empty it self into these four channels;

1. If God be thine, thou then art Gods, and he will own thee, he will preserve
thee, he will provide for thee, thou need not torment thy self with
carefulness who have such a God to care for thee. There is as much comfort in
that last branch of the Covenant, they shall be my People, as their is in the
former, I will be their God.

2. If God be thine, then is his Christ thine, thou have an interest in Christ
and all his Sufferings, his Merits and Righteousness; He is made of God to us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption: whole Christ is thine,
Christ and all that he has done, Christ and all that he has suffered, Christ
in his Person and in his Portion, thou may say of him with the Spouse, My
Beloved is mine, and I am his.

3. If God be thine, then is his Spirit thine, to lead thee into all Truth, the
Comforter to abide with thee, the Spirit of Grace to sanctify thee; the
Witness to testify thy Sonship to God, and to seal thee unto the day of
Redemption; this Spirit is thine if God be thine.

4. If God be thine, then is his Kingdom thine, his Glory thine, It Is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, a Glorious Kingdom, whose
builder and founder is God; an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that
fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you: such as can call God theirs, shall
be sure one day to Reign with their God in the Kingdom of his Glory.

Proceed we to the second Observation from the words, which was this.

2. There is enough in God to encourage a Believer, when greatly distressed.
It Is clear from this instance of David, he was greatly distressed, as you have
heard, yet, he encouraged himself in his God. Follow him from hence to the 23.
Psalm. the 4. ver. and there you may find him insulting over the greatest of
troubles, through his strong confidence in God; Though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me, thy
rod and thy staff they comfort me.

Unto this instance of David, we may add another like it, Hab. 3.17, 18.
Although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine,
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat, the
Flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no Herd in the stalls;
yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. Though
he should lose his pleasant and delightsome things; the Fig Tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine, though he should lose his
necessary things; the Fields shall yield no meat, and there be neither Flocks
in the fold nor Herd in the stall, yet he knows where to find comfort, I will
rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation.

In the pursuit of this Truth I shall touch at some things in God, wherein lies
a Beleivers encouragement, and so close with a word or two of Application.

Now there are these things in God for a fouls encouragement in the midst of
troubles.

1. His presence with them in their troubles and distresses. This was David's
encouragement, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me: I have the presence of God,
he is my companion in my distress. O it is an encouragement to a Christian, to
have God present with him in his troubles; though friends leave him, and
acquaintance forsake him, yet he is not alone, for God is with him, and he is
the best companion in the world, Psalm. 91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will
answer him; I will be with him in trouble: O this is a precious promise, it
takes away all the bitterness of troubles, to have God present with us in
trouble, it sweetneth the bitter Cup, and makes it go down easily. I am
distressed, may the soul say; O but I have more of Gods presence, more
communion and fellowship with him now than ever; this is an encouragement, when
the eye of Faith beholds God present in the time of trouble: God is every where
present; we may say to our comfort, Whither shall we go from thy presence? yea,
Who can drive us from thy presence? If we be cast upon a sickbed, thou art
there, to make our bed in our sickness; if we be shut up in Prisons, and dark
Dungeons, the darkness hides not from thee, but the Night shines as the Day; if
we be banished into the uttermost parts of the Earth, even there shall thy Hand
lead us, and thy Right Hand guide us.

The comfort a Believer has from this presence of God with him, brancheth
forth it self into these two or three things.

1. Here is counsel and direction at hand. It Is an encouragement to a man, to
have a Wise Friend at hand, of whom he may ask counsel in matters difficult:
How much more to have God at hand to consult, who is wonderful in counsel: The
Believer that has God present with him, may consult him in all his straits,
and may have advice from him.

2. By this presence of God, the burden is made lighter; God will lift at the
heavy end, and this is a great encouragement; it is sad to be left to bear the
burden of affliction alone, but when God puts to his shoulder, it becomes more
tolerable, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain
thee, he shall never suffer the Righteous to be moved. O what a comfort it is
to have God present with us, upon whom we may roll our burden, when our
shoulder is ready to faint under it!

3. From this presence of God with a Believer there arises joy in trouble; a
merry heart in the midst of distress. There Is great joy in communion with God,
be our outward condition what it will: God's presence makes Heaven wherever
it comes, though the place be a Prison, yea though it were Hell it self. Psalm.
16.11. In thy Presence is fullness of Joy.

2. His Wisdom in bringing good out of all troubles and distresses. This is
another thing in God wherein a Believer may encourage himself; God who is with
him, is God only wise, a God of infinite Wisdom; he knows how to bring good out
of evil, honey out of the eater. Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God; All things, even sufferings, troubles
and distresses. But how comes this about? Not from themselves, and of their own
nature, but by the Wisdom of God. The soul may say, Here Is a bitter cup, full
of much poison, given me to drink; but I know it will prove healthful unto me,
because it comes from the hand of a skilful Physician, that kills the poison,
and corrects the nature of the unwholsom Drugs. Believers may say of their
troubles, and of the instruments of them, as Joseph to his brethren, You
thought evil, but God meant it for good: So our ennemies, they intend our hurt
and our ruin, but the wise God means it for our good. A Believer may encourage
himself in this wise God, who can bring good out of evil, and light out of
darkness.

There are two Branches of Comfort which grow upon this root, the Wisdom of God.

1. He is transcendently wise above all his and our enemies; though Satan and
his agents be very subtle and crafty, yet they are not infinitely wise, as God
is. He is able to out-wit them all; he laughs at the plots and contrivances of
the ungodly, and counts them foolishness; Job 5.13. He takes the wise in their
own craftiness; when they imagine themselves to be safe in the Castle of their
own wisdom, God ensnares them by a greater Policy, as the Hunter ensnares the
Wild-beast. 2. This wise God is able to make a Believer wise, and He will do
it. He is able to give the wisdom of the Serpent, to such as have the Doves
Innocence. Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who
gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Our
God is a treasury of Wisdom, out of which we may fetch supplies when we want.
Thus Believers have encouragement from the Wisdom of God, in a time of distress
and trouble.
3. Another thing in God, whereby the soul is encouraged in distress, is his
Power, his Omnipotency, and Strength; as he is wise, so he is strong, able to
effect and bring to pass all the contrivances of his Wisdom; a Believer may
betake himself to everlasting strength, and there find encouragement. Prove.
18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs into it,
and is safe. God is a Tower of strength; the Arms of Omnipotency are a good
defense, the Righteous are safe there, nothing can hurt them there. Psalm. 46.1,
2. God is our refuge and strength, a present help in time of trouble; therefore
will we not fear though the Earth be removed, and the Mountains carried into
the midst of the Sea. See how the Church encourages her self in the Strength
and Power of God, even beyond all fear; come what will, we have a refuge to
betake us to. Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah
is everlasting Strength, such Strength as can never fail. Oh how may a
Believer glory, when he is enclosed within such Walls; though he be compassed
about with troubles, yet his comfort is, that everlasting Strength is engaged
for him.

There is a threefold Comfort in this general Encouragement.

1. This Power is sufficient for our deliverance, be our distresses what they
will: though Believers may have many enemies, yet God that is on their side, is
able to save them; He is greater than all. In this the three un-martyred
Martyrs encouraged themselves against the burning rage of an angry King, and
his fiery Furnace: Dan. 3.17. Our God whom w^^serve, is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery Furnace: The proud Heathen cries, Who is that God that shall
deliver you out of my hands? Who, why the God that made Heaven and Earth, the
living God, he can deliver us. The Believer knows that the powerful. God is
able to save him: It was He that shut the hungry Lions mouths, and saved Daniel
in the Den: It was He that filed off Peter's Chains, and threw open the
Iron-gate, that he might escape: He has wrought Miracles for the deliverance
of such as have trusted in him.

2. All the power and strength the enemy has, comes from God, and is limited
by him; the Devils themselves are led up and down in Chains by the hand of
providence: So that if the Believer be frighted by hearing the Lion roar, he is
again encouraged by the gingling of the Chain; he cannot fix a scab upon our
body, without a license from God, as appears in Job's story. Our God has his
hook in the nose of the chief of our enemies; he cannot go whither he would,
nor do what he pleases: and so wicked men, who are Satan's instruments, they
have their power from God, John 19.10, 11. Pila^e boasts of his power to
release, or to crucify Christ; Jesus answers, Thou could have no power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above. But,

3. From this Power and Strength the Believer receives strength to undergo his
burden: it is a strong God that makes patient sufferers: a heavy burden upon
weak shoulders, will make ill work; but when the shoulder is made strong by
strength from above, then it can bear the burden better. Psalm. 138.3. In the
day when I cried, thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my
soul. Believers count themselves to be strong in the Lord, and the power of his
might, when in themselves they are low and weak through trouble and distress; 2
Cor. 12.10. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake; for when I am
weak, then am I strong.

4. The last thing I shall name (in God) whereby the Believer encourages
himself in his distress, is the Faithfulness of God; we have a God to go to in
our troubles, that never was known to fail any that came to him after a due
manner: He is a God of Truth, keeping Covenant and Mercy; whatsoever Promise he
has made to his People in troubles, he will be sure to make all good; Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, but his Word shall not pass away. God in very
faithfulness does afflict, when he sees it is needful, and he is faithful in
overruling all our afflictions; 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but will with the temptation
also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. We may encourage our
selves in the true and faithful God; He is faithful that has promised, who
also will do it: These things principally there are in God, wherein the
Believer may encourage himself, when he is in trouble and distress. For
Application.

1. This gives a check to the immoderate fearfulness of Christians, who are
ready to run out of God's Way to avoid troubles, and are ready to cry out, they
are undone, they shall perish by the hands of these enemies; whereas they ought
not to be dismayed with their own folly and weakness, but to encourage
themselves in the Power and Wisdom of God: What ails thee, O Christian, that
thou art more afraid of man, whose breath is in his nostrils, than of God that
gives life, and breath, and all things? Think not the Lord's hand is shortened,
that it cannot help; or his arm weakened, that it cannot save.

2. We see the vanity of the wicked man's confidence, he encourages himself in
that which cannot save him, but will vanish when he has most need of it; he
encourages himself in his sinful ways, in his own wisdom, and leans to his
own understanding; he encourages himself in the arm of flesh, but he has no
God to encourage himself in; he is without God in the world, God is not in all
his thoughts, there is nothing below God, and an interest in him, wherein the
soul can find encouragement; therefore it is that the wicked are so often at
their wits end, when they are in distress; they have nothing to encourage
themselves in, when once their refuge of lies is swept away, and their
agreement with Hell is come to nothing.

3. We are hence exhorted in all our troubles and distresses, still to
encourage our selves in the Lord our God, in his Presence, in his Wisdom, in
his Power, and in his Faithfulness, let us stay our selves upon these things;
God is the same now as he was in former Ages; he will be the same to thee as he
was to David, to Habakkuk, to the three Children, to Daniel, to Peter;
therefore let the thoughts of God, and the Comforts that are in God, stay up,
and delight your souls; every thing that is good is contained in that Name; let
nothing amaze you, so long as you have such a God to fly unto; your condition
may be low and sad, but is it worse than David's was at this time? therefore do
as he did, and for your direction take with you these two things.

1. Be sure that the Lord be your God, otherwise you cannot encourage your
selves in him: A man cannot rejoice in an Estate which is not his own, or in a
great Man in whom he has no interest; be sure then to get an interest in God;
he gives no encouragement to strangers; he is a consuming Fire to his enemies;
but to his Children and Servants, he is a sure Defense. Get near to God by the
Blood of Christ, beg of Him to take you into his Family, amongst his adopted
Sons and Daughters: when thou can with David call God thy God, then may
thou also encourage thy self in Him.

2. Keep thy Evidences of an interest in God clear, the Testimony of the holy
Ghost witnessing thy Saintship; keep close to God, forsake him not, lest he
cast thee off for ever; fear to displease God, lest he hide his face from thee;
keep up communion and acquaintance with him, and so in all thy troubles and
distresses, thou may encourage thy self in the Lord thy God.

SERMON VIII.
Phil. 1.12. (...). But I would ye should understand, Brethren, that the things
which happened to me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the
Gospel.
THis verse begins the body of the Epistle, and seems to contain the Cause or
Reason why the Apostle wrote this Epistle, viz. to let them know his state, and
the state of the Gospel at Rome; whereas the Philippians might be apt to think
that the Gospel had lost ground, and sustained damage by the imprisonment of
the Apostle; he writes purposely (as it seems) to certify them the contrary; I
would ye should understand, Brethren, that the things which happened to me, have
fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel.

The terms of the Text require a word or two to be spoken to them by way of
Explication.

The things, (...)] these (...) were afflictions, troubles, which he underwent;
particularly, Restraint, Imprisonment.

Happened] This is added by the Translators, to perfect the sense, but perhaps
not so properly as an other word might have been: yet it may pass well enough,
if we take care to exclude chance or fortune. These things did not so happen to
the. Apostle, as though God had not directed, ordered, sent them. (...), quae
secundum me, or, circa me; the things that befell me.

Fallen out] The word is, (...), and signifies, Came: It seems to import that
they came on purpose from the hand of God for this end, they were sent on this
errand, directed to this issue.

The Furtherance] is well translated; not furthering actively, but neuturally,
processus progressus, the progress, advantage, improvement of the Gospel. These
things could not so properly be said to be, (...), in an active sense, active
furtherers or promoters, as neutrally, they were an occasion of its being
furthered.

Of the Gospel] I suppose is properly of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which was
spread by this occasion; as the following words do expound.

There are four Heads in the words;

1. That Troubles, Afflictions happened to Paul. 2. It is implied, that, These
things were in themselves most likely to hinder the Gospel. 3. That yet they
fell out to the contrary, even to the furtherance of it. 4. That the Apostle
desires to let this Philippians to know thus much.
1. That Troubles, Afflictions, particularly, Imprisonment, happened to the
Apostle Paul.

That Paul was now in bonds at Rome, that he lived two years a prisoner in his
own hired house, is beyond dispute. But concerning the Causes of his being set
at liberty, what he did when he was at liberty, whether he went into Spain
after, or how long he lived after, or how he came to be imprisoned a second
time, where, when, and how he dyed, I will not trouble you with the uncertain,
and indeed contrary reports and conjectures of Historians: It is enough for my
purpose that he was now in prison for the Gospel. This has been the common
entertainment, the ordinary usage of the Prophets and Messengers of God; As I
might show you out of the History of the life of Michaiah, Hanani, Jeremiah,
John Baptist, and the Apostles generally, according as was prophesied to them,
Luke 21.12. They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering
you up to the Synagogues, and into Prisons.

2. It is implied here, that this imprisonment, this restraint of the Apostle,
was in its own nature most likely to hinder the Gospel. So thought the Rulers
of the Jews, Act. 4.17. That it spread no further, let us restrain them, tie
their tongues, straightly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man
in this Name. And indeed, if the Churches rest, and the liberty of her
Ministers do conduce to its edification and multiplication, Acts 9.31. then her
Persecutions, and the Restraint of her Ministers, must in its own nature tend
to the straitning and hindering of the Gospel; this needs no proof: To oppress
the Preachers of the Gospel, is to suppress the Gospel that they preach. This
the Apostle plainly supposes here; this ^e knew, and therefore would have them
to know, that through God's infinite goodness and wisdom, it had fallen out
otherwise in his case. This was the reason that he so much desired to let them
understand how things had fallen out.

3. That those things fell out not only to the not hindering, but even to the
furthering of the Gospel. Now that I may have the more liberty to prosecute the
matter couched under this Observation, I shall put it into more general terms,
and lay down this Point or Proposition, That

The restraining of the Ministers of the Gospel, does sometimes fall out to the
furthering of the Gospel. I retain the word [fall out] to in^imate, that it is
besides the nature of Restraint to further the Gospel. And thus the three first
Observations are contracted into one. This Proposition I shall come down to by
three steps or degrees. I shall premise three things that have an affinity to
the Proposition that I have laid down.

1. That the oppressing and afflicting of the Church of God, does frequently
fall out to the increase, enlargement, and multiplication of it. True indeed,
when the Church had rest, it multiplied, Acts 9.31. But even under the greatest
distress and trouble, it multiplies too. The babes of Israel were not lessened,
although they were killed, nor made the fewer, by the drowning of many. A
miracle yet again made good in the spiritual Offspring of the Church, whose
Children spring up even from the Ashes of the dead; According to that, Sanguis
Martyrum Semen Ecclesiae, The Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church.
The Church of God, so often compared to a Woman, makes good the Observation of
Physicians, she never brings forth, either more children, or with more ease,
than when she undergoes the most hardship: The greater the labor, the easier
the travel. The Church of the Jews multiplied more in Pharoah's Brick-kills,
than they would have done in his Court: they were fatter with gathering
stubble, than the Egyptians were by reaping the Corn. The Church of Christians
grew up to a miracle, under the ten Roman Persecutions. And even in our own
Church of England, in the days of Queen Maryes Reign, it is observed, that
there grew up more good Members, than afterward when it had a better Head: As
if the Church, like the Poet's Hydra, had been strengthened by her falls. This
is the singular goodness of God to his People, in blessing them where no hope
is; and his remarkable Judgment upon the Wicked, their Oppressors, in making
void their great hopes, and frustrating their wicked works, by making his
Church the true Palm Tree; Quae sub pondere crescit, The more load you lay on,
the less they feel it: Nay, instead of groaning under it, they grow under it.
So that it seems, that Promise made to the Church, Mat. 16.18. The gates of
Hell shall not prevail, is a meiosis: They shall not only not prevail against
it, but it shall even prevail against them. That Promise in Mark 10.30. is not
made good only to the Children of God in their comforts, but even to the Church
of God in its Children, an hundred fold with persecution. I know not what power
there is in sufferings, over the spirits of men, but I believe it may be said
of some Martyrs, (as of Sampson, that he killed, so) that they have converted
more at their death, than in their lives. The Book of Martyrs is not wanting in
examples of that kind. And as their sufferings work by way of affecting, so
their courage and constancy in suffering, work by way of convincing, convinces
the very Adversary of the goodness and righteousness of their cause. All men
will wonder, and judge it a strong delusion indeed, if men should adventure to
dye for Humor or Fancy. However, though the way how it comes to pass is not so
clear, yet the thing is undeniable; And when we have done our best to find out
the reasons of it, yet the Hand, the extraordinary Hand of God must be owned,
and confessed to be in it.

2. That the afflictions that are upon a Believer, do always fall out to his
advantage.

1. To the advantage of his comforts. Tribulation does at some distance work
Hope, Romans 5.3, 4. Now Hope is accompanied with great Consolation. Believers
are bidden to rejoice, when they are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, 1
Pet. 4.13. And to count it all joy, when they fall into diverse temptations,
Jam. 1.2. And sure I am, the Children of God have found by experience, that as
God has increased their Afflictions, so he has sensibly multiplied their
Comforts; which (says Dr. Preston somewher^) is the meaning of that Promise,
Mark 10.30. they shall receive an hundred fold with Persecutions: i. e. the
more their Trials abound, the more their Comforts shall abound. It is ordinary
with our gracious God, to make up outward and temporal losses, with inward and
spiritual supplies; and to recompense outward trouble and affliction with
inward refreshings and consolations. He usually appears most to his People,
when the world, and the good things thereof are least in sight. Though he may
seem to speak roughly to them many times by his providence (as Joseph to his
brethren) yet at the same time he puts corn into their sacks, comfort into
their souls; yea, and that so much the more comfort too, 2 Cor. 1.5. -- as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ.

2. To the advantage of their Graces. These God exercises, confirms, and
enlarges by afflictions. Tribulation works Patience, Patience Experience,
Experience Hope, Romans 5.3. by this, lust comes to be purged out, ( Psa.
116.67.) Temptations resisted, Sin prevented, Duty performed, Earth despised,
Heaven desired, Self denied, and Christ Exalted. The enemies of God's People
hack and hew them by oppression, reproaches, persecutions: Why this does but
furbish their Graces, square and fit them to be a spiritual building unto God.
The Devil tempts them, to destroy and damn them: And hereby they are brought
nearer to God, set upon the greater watchfulness, gain the better experience,
and are brought into an higher esteem of the blood of Christ. Afflictions do
one way or other, fall out to the advantage of a Believers Graces.

3. To the advantage of their Glory. Though God do not properly reward men for
their suffering; yet happily it may be said, he will reward according to their
sufferings. If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him, says the
Scripture: and it seems that according to degrees of sufferings, God will give
degrees of Glory. What shall we have, says Peter (that have suffered such
things) that have forsaken all and followed thee? verily, says our Savior,
every one that has forsaken houses, etc. shall receive an hundredfold, and
shall inherit everlasting life: but ye shall sit upon twelve thrones judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel, Matt. 19.27, 28, 29. It will not repent thee,
Christian, of thy low, mean, despised, afflicted condition in the world, when
every affliction thou have suffered for Christ, shall be as a Sparkling-Jewel
to give a luster to thy Crown of Glory. Doubtless, if there be degrees of
Glory, (as we have reason to conclude there are) Gods suffering Servants, and
amongst them especially his Martyrs, shall sit down in the chiefest Mansions,
and the highest Rooms in the Kingdom.

3. That the sufferings of Gods Ministers (in the general) do many times fall
out to the furtherane of the Gospel. Here are two things that I might speak to.

1. Afflictions make them the better Christians. It may be that through great
intentness upon public administrations, and constant cares and pains in
feeding the Flock, the Shepherds may sometimes have neglected themselves, and
the state of their own souls; It may be they may not have studied their own
hearts, nor attended the particular concernments of their own souls so as they
might have done: as though one should say in Solomon's words (whether it be the
direct meaning of them, I do not say) Cant. 1.6. They have made me keeper of
the Vineyard, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept. And it may seem good to
God, by afflictions to bring them home, to set them a task to do in their own
hearts, to quicken them to the study of their own souls.

2. Affliction makes them the better Ministers: And that will be for the
advantage of the Gospel. No such Ministers as they that are trained up in the
school of affliction. It was meet, says the Apostle, that the Captain of our
salvation should be made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. And indeed, (to
allude to that) even these Captains in the Church-militant, even our Ministers,
are much perfected and qualified for their work by sufferings. How shall he be
touched with a feeling of the infirmities of others, who is not tempted as they
are? to allude to the Apostle, Heb. 4.15. Spiritual afflictions, conflicts,
temptation do excellently qualify a Minister of the Gospel, and enable him to
comfort the afflicted, succor the tempted, strengthen the weak, answer
objections, resolve doubts, and to rescue from Satan those that are taken
captive by him. And troubles from without, these do also through the blessing
of God, and the Spirit of God sanctifying them, make the better Ministers too.
Who can instruct unto Faith, and Patience, and Hope, better than they, whose
condition in the world has long called them to the exercise of them? Who can
speak with more weight and power concerning the things of Heaven, and the World
to come, than they that by long sufferings are become crucified to this present
world? Who shall better, or more effectually persuade to the hatred of sin,
than they that have felt the smart of it; or to prize the blood of Christ and
the promises of God, than they who have largely tasted the sweetness of them?
How excellently will all that laziness, coldness, worldliness that is apt to
overgrow us in a time of prosperity, be scoured off by afflictions, if God
sanctify them! And then behold what zealous, industrious, heavenly, serious
Ministers shall be seen coming out of the Furnace!

Here I might descend to particulars, and show you how (by the goodness of God,
and his wise ordering) the particular afflictions that happen to the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, do fall out many times to the furtherance of the
Gospel. Darius used to say, his poor Soldiers were his best Soldiers. Whether
Christ Jesus will say so or no, I know not; but sure I am, he has said, that
his Soldiers should not entangle themselves with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4. And experience teaches us, that it is a hard thing to have high and
rich concernments in the world, and not to be entangled by them.

As for Reproaches, they have ordinarily this effect upon a good heart, to make
more hardy, valiant, watchful: For though our enemies do not always tell us
truly, what we are, or what we have done, (when they reproach us) yet they tell
us, what we may be, or may do, if we take not heed.

Banishment is either from a particular Congregation, or from a more general
place, as suppose a Kingdom or Nation. These both sometimes fall out to the
furtherance of the Gospel. There are some that will bear witness with all
thankfulness, that God has blessed the Banishment or forceable removal of some
Ministers from their own Congregations (and that not long since) to be a means
of carrying the Gospel to dark corners of the Kingdom, to Congregations whom no
one cared for, to Sheep that had no Shepherd. Many a poor soul (I doubt not)
has cause to bless God, for the spoils of other Churches. Concerning the
latter kind of Banishment I need not tell you, how it has become a means to
transport the treasure of the Gospel into other Lands; the Persecution and
Dispersion of the Apostles and Evangelists from Jerusalem, does so abundantly
testify it. It was well for the world that our Savior gave that Commission to
his Apostles, Matt. 10.23. That when they were Persecuted in one City they
might flee to another: for so it has come to pass that (as the Sun, so) the
Light of the Gospel, setting in one part of the world, has risen to give light
to others.

And this brings me down to the Proposition it self directly contained in the
Text, that, The restraint of the Ministers of the Gospel, does sometimes fall
out to the furtherance of the Gospel. Now the restraint of the Ministers of the
Gospel, is twofold, either Personal, (that we call Confinement or Imprisonment)
or Ministerial, that is Suspension or Silencing. The furtherance of the Gospel
is twofold also, either the furtherance of the Doctrine of the Gospel, or the
Interest of the Gospel. Now both these kinds of restraints, God can make to
fall out to both these kinds of furthering of the Gospel.

1. The Confinement of the Ministers of the Gospel, does sometimes fall out to
the furtherance of the Gospel: And that; 1. Of the Doctrine of the Gospel; and
that by these ways;

1. It stirrs up the world to make enquiry into the cause why Ministers lie in
Bonds: And so the knowl^dge of that way is increased, and the Doctrine of the
Gospel spread. Men, as men, are led by common compassion, to desire to
understand the grounds of men's sufferings: And besides that, if there were no
ingredient at all of compassion, yet the nature of man is curious and
inquisitive. And indeed the nature of Justice, and Government is such, that it
cannot long suffer the Crime of a person under bonds to be concealed. By this
means the sufferings, especially the Imprisonment of the Apostles, carried the
Doctrine of the Gospel to many places where the Apostles themselves never came,
nor perhaps could come; for although they were commanded to go from City to
City, yet fame would go faster and further too, than they could go. It is a
very effectual way to propagate the knowledge of any way, even that the most
eminent propugnators of it, should lie in bonds for the defense of it. It fell
out thus in the Apostle Paul's case here, as he himself explains himself in the
verse next following my Text, So that my Bonds in Christ are manifest in all
the Palace, and in all other places. My Bonds in Christ are manifest] that is,
the cause of my Bonds, the reason of my Imprisonment is come abroad, and so the
Gospel is spread. It were no hard thing to give instances amongst our selves,
(and that not long since) how the person and way, or cause of Ministers have
become famous and notorious by this means, which otherwise would have been more
obscure. But,

2. This Restraint falls out to the furtherance of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
in that it stirs up others, seeing the necessi^ies of the Church, and having
compassion on it, to put their Sickle into the Lords Harvest, and to draw forth
their breasts to the fainting Flocks of God: And so perhaps the Chruch gets two
for one, or an eminent guide in the room of a meaner. It is expressly said, once
and again, that after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 4.12. Mar. 1.14. Our blessed
Savior took that occasion to enter solemnly upon his Ministry. And it seems,
by the Apostle Paul's Imprisonment, Preachers were multiplied: Though some
indeed preached Christ out of envy and strife, yet others out of good will,
ver. 15.

3. It quickens others who are employed in the same work, to discharge it with
more diligence and boldness. This is strange indeed to the eye of reason, that
the sufferings of some should make others not fear to suffer: yet so God has
brought it to pass. So it fell out in the Apostles case here, ver. 14. Many of
the Brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to
speak the Word without fear. Waxing confident by my bonds; that is, by the
courage, constancy and patience which I show in my Bonds. The Apostles Bonds
were an occasion of manifesting his Courage, and his Courage encouraged many;
-- many of the Brethren are much more confident to speak. And indeed, one would
almost envy the incomes of God and his Spirit, upon the Prisoners of the
Gospel, and purchase those spiritual Enlargements with corporal Restraints.

4. When God shall have enlarged them, the consideration of their Restraint
will quicken them to greater pains, care and faithfulness: Oh how will they
then labor to fulfill their Ministry, which formerly perhaps they had been
more remiss in! this evil befalling them, will make them the more industrious
to do the more good. God can also enlarge the hearts of their People to receive
them the more gladly, and their Doctrine the more readily. How welcome do ye
think a Minister rising from the dead, would be to a people, formerly it may be
ungrateful to him? Why some degree at least of such welcome, may a Minister
returning out of Prison find. Absence does usually endear things unto us. And
why may not God make their Imprisonment to endear them and their Ministry too,
to their People? This some of the Prisoners of the Gospel have found.

2. The Confinement of the Ministers of the Gospel, does sometimes fall out to
the furtherance of the interest of the Gospel; I mean, the cause of Religion,
the Work of Grace, the power of Godliness. And that by these ways amongst
others;

1. It is an occasion of exercising the Charity of God's People. We need not go
far to prove, that in times of prosperity, and universal rest, even Professors
themselves, are apt to settle themselves upon their worldly concernments, to
grow earthly minded, and to fully themselves too much with the dirty
commodities of the world. And the Ministers of Christ do find the Prophecy of
their Lord made good by their own experience, that the love of many shall
waxcold. And indeed in times of prosperity and liberty, there seems not to be
such need of the Manifestations of Charity, and the Expressions of Affections,
as in times of Confinement. By this therefore does God try the dispositions of
Professors toward their Ministers, that have spent, and been spent amongst
them, and draw forth the bowels of compassion toward them. Our Apostle's
present condition at Rome, was an occasion of exercising the Philippians
Charity toward him; even then their care of him flourished, Phil. 4.10. This
the Apostle rejoices in, not so much, because it was a supply of his wants, as
because it was an exercise of their Grace, and would abound to their account,
knowing that God would supply their needs, in as much as they had supplied his,
ver. 17.18, 19.

2. It is a singular occasion of quickening the People of God to prayer: And in
prayer, the exercisings of Repentance, Faith, Hope, and Heavenly-mindedness,
are emeninently seen. It was sometimes prophesied concerning Christ the great
Shepherd, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered, Zech.
13.7. And so it was indeed: but it many times falls out otherwise in the
smiting of the Ministers of the Gospel those inferior Shepherds, for thereby
the Sheep are gathered, I mean gathered to Prayer, gathered to seek God. Thus
you know they were gathered together, for Peter, when he was in prison, Acts
12.5. and ver. 12. Many were gathered together at the house of Mary, praying.
This the Apostle Paul calls for from his Philippians, ver. 19. of this chapter:
and from the Jews, Heb. 13.19. Pray for us the rather, that I may be restored
unto you the sooner: for the Apostle was even then a Prisoner at Rome, as the
most judicious Commentators do conceive. It may be the prayers which were
wanting for the preservation, will be abundantly poured out for the
restoration of the Ministers of the Gospel; and this I do account is highly
for the advantage of the interest of the Gospel: There is certainly no great
evil toward us, so long as the prayers of God's People are well maintained:
and indeed, I see not how any good thing can be long kept out, where Prayer,
fervent faithful Prayer, is kept up.

3. It confirms the courage of the People of God (that are so indeed) when they
see their Ministers lie for the defense of the Gospel: it conduces much to
their settlement in the Truth, and encouragement in their Profession.

4. It serves to the uniting of the People of God, and the keeping up of union
and communion amongst them. Now, if ever, will they that fear the Lord speak
often one to another, even when he is removed, that should speak to them all:
See how close the Disciples kept together, when their great Shepherd was
removed, Acts 1.14. and 2.1. The like in some measure may follow amongst the
People of God, upon the removal of their Teachers into corners; and this will
undoubtedly be to the furtherance of the interest of the Gospel -- vi^^ unita
fortior, their combined powers will be impregnable.

So much for the personal Restraint, or Confinement of the Ministers of the
Gospel, and its falling out to the furtherance both of the Doctrine, and
Interest of the Gospel.

2. Ministerial Restraint; that is, Suspension, or Silencing the Ministers of
the Gospel. This does also sometimes fall out, and God can make it fall out to
the furtherance of the Gospel. And that,

1. Of the Doctrine of the Gospel. And that,

1. By putting Christians upon a more strict enquiry into those Points,
Doctrines, or matters of Religion, that the Ministers of the Gospel are
restrained for; and so knowledge comes to be increased, and the truth to be
found out. Some have observed God's good ends in suffering errors to be
broached in the Church; by that means the Truth has been more narrowly look
into, and more abundantly cleared. The erroneous Tenants, and corrupt usages of
the Corinthians about the Lord's Supper, fell out exceedingly to the
furtherance of the Truth in that matter; the Apostle Paul taking occasion from
thence to write that eleventh Chapter of his first Epistle, by which we are
more instructed in the Doctrine of that Sacrament, than in all the Scriptures
besides. Something like may be observed to have fallen out in this case that I
am speaking of. It is something that they are suspended for: And what is it? is
it a sufficient ground of suspension, are the next enquiries? Instances for the
confirmation of this, are not wanting in our own and other Churches. For you
must not expect under this head of Suspension, that I should bring any
Scripture-instances, of its falling out to the furtherance of the Gospel. For I
do not read of any such restraint laid upon the Ministers of the Gospel in the
Scripture. It might have been expected, that Moses should have restrained those
that prophesied in the Camp, I mean Eldad and Medad. Joshua indeed said, My
Lord Moses forbid them. But Moses thought there could not be too many Prophets
in Israel, so that the Lord would but put his Spirit upon them. And as for
Joshua, it was nothing but zeal for his Masters credit, that put him upon it,
as appears, Numb. 11.29. Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? Would
God that all the Lord's People were Prophets, etc. It might have been expected,
that Paul here at Rome, should have showed his Apostolical Authority at least,
and have forbidden them that preached Christ of envy and contention; but he was
glad however, that Christ was preached, Phil. 1.18. But above all, it might
have been expected, that our Savior Christ should have forbidden him that cast
out Devils, in his Name indeed, but was not of his company; he did a good thing
indeed, but he did it disorderly, he followed not him. The Apostles indeed
would have had it so, But Jesus said, forbid him not, Mark 9.38, 39. But if any
man will show me any Scripture-instance of restraining the Ministers of the
Gospel, I doubt not but to show him in it, an instance of such restraint
falling out to the furthera^ce of the Gospel.

2. Such ministerial Restraint does fall out to the furthera^ce of the Doctrine
of the Gospel, in that it gives the m^re occasion to, and lays the greater
necessity on Christians to read the Scriptures and other good Books. That Is
evident. Now by this means Professors come to have good Judgment as well as
good Affections, and knowledge to their former zeal. I am loath to speak here,
lest I should be thought to offend against any of the generation of the Just:
But I pray God to sanctify the reading of the Scriptures and other good Books,
to this end, That as Preaching has made forward Professors, and drawn forth
affections, so reading may make them solid Christians, and settle their
Judgments in the Truth.

3. It ought to open the mouths of private Christians, to discourse the things
of the Gospel, to declare to their neighbors the things of God, and instruct
and edify one another in Soul-concernments. And if they by this means shall be
brought to preach to their neighbors; I mean not that they should usurp the
Ministerial Function, not called thereunto; but by Godly Conversation and
Communication. As David preached in the 66. Psalm. ver. 16. Come and hear, and I
will declare what God has done for my soul. If it shall be thus, and that
instead of one Ministerial Preacher, there shall be many Charitative Preachers
in a town, then I doubt not but it may fall out to the furtherance of the
Gospel. And thus I beseech you, Christian Friends, let it be. Declare the great
things of the Gospel in the way in which you may: do it now if ever. But lest I
should be thought to preach faction, it is good I think, to show my Authority:
It is that of the Apostle, Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the Assembling of your
selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so
much the more as you see the day approaching.

4. This Ministerial Restraint may fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel,
in giving occasion and opportunity to the persons so restrained, to furnish
themselves better for the work of the Ministry. Who knows, but that God may
take some off, from laying out, that they may the better lay in, lay in stock,
lay up store, make provision; and then call them forth again to the Churches
greater advantage, when they shall return far more richly leaden than before.
Nay, who knows, but that some constitutions almost wasted, some spirits almost
spent, do require some cessation? and God is pleased to give a nights rest to
his laborers, that they may hold out the longer, and the better in his
Service: As the husbandman givs a fallow year to his Land, not because he would
not have Corn, but that he may have so much the more: So here, that it may be
to the furtherance of the Gospel. They depart for a season, that their People
may receive them, and enjoy them the longer.

2. Ministerial Restraint, or the suspension of the Ministers of the Gospel
from their Ministry, does sometimes fall out; and God can make it fall out to
the furtherance of the interest of the Gospel, and that by such ways as these.

1. In making the Gospel to be valued, and more dearly esteemed by Professors,
who perhaps began to look upon it with too common an eye, and to grow secure,
cold, and wanton under it. When the meat shall be taken away, and the surfeit
cured, and the stomach restored, then, Oh then, welcome any wholesome meat! The
Word of the Lord will be precious in those days. And not only in making the
Gospel to be more valued by Professors, but also desired by others, that till
then never knew the worth of it. If God send a famine of hearing the Word, it
will make men run to and fro to seek it, Amos 8.11, 12. nay, perhaps make them
run, that never found their legs before. The very want of the means and
ordinances of conversion, may be a means ordained of God, for the converting of
some, or at least for the preparing of them for Conversion. I may add under
this head too, that it may fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel, by making
the Ministers of the Gospel more prized. Their Restraint may well conduce to
this end, Virtutem incolumen odimus, sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi, good
men grow precious cous by their absence. It may be proper for a Minister of the
Gospel, bidding farewell to an unthankful and unkind People, to speak in his
Saviors words to Jerusalem, Mat. 23.39. -- Ye shall not see me hence forth,
till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. And if
restraint of Ministers shall bring forth this fruit, then certainly it will
fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel; for if the Messenger be prized, the
Message will be more likely to be received.

2. This Restraint may be to the furtherance of the interest of the Gospel, In
making former Truths to be remembered, repeated, digested. Alstedius used to
say, That all Learning consisted in that one word, Repete, Repeat: And truly, I
had almost said, all Religion too. Certainly it is wonderfully to the advantage
of Religion, when Doctrins formerly delivered and received, are frequently
brought back to mind and memory. The business of Professors in England has
been, to hear new Truths, and fresh Doctrines still, but not to make good as
far as they have gone. This fault, it may be, God will mend by this means: As
the beast taken off his meat, falls to chewing what he had eaten before. Some
have rightly observed, that they that want their sight, have commonly the
strongest memories: who knows but that God may bring it to pass, that your eyes
should not see your Teachers, on purpose to help your memories in recording old
Truths.

3. It may fall out to the furtherance of the interest of the Gospel, by
quickening and stirring up Christians so much the more to private duties. The
Restraint of Ministers may make many Priests, I mean Priests in their own
families. Methinks it should do thus: Christians should labor to make up in
their Families, what is wanting in Congregations. And if it do thus, it will be
to the furtherance of the Gospel; if the loss of one Priest in a Town shall
bring forth in every Family one.

Thus have I proved, that God has made and can make the Restraint of the
Ministers of the Gospel, fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel it self.

Before I fasten upon any Application, I should interweave three or four
necessary Cautions.

1. The Restraint of Ministers does sometimes fall out to the furtherance of
the Gospel, Yet this does not at all extenuate or lessen the sin of them that
restrain them. If I be lifted up, says our Savior, (meaning, upon the Cross)
I will draw all men unto me, Joh. 12.32. A case somewhat like this that I have
been-speaking to: yet this did not at all lessen the sin of the Jews in lifting
him up; they did it wickedly, Acts 2.23. although God determined and ordered it
mercifully. God makes wicked men many times to usher in good things and happy
events to his People, though they do wickedly in so doing. And indeed they do
evil in bringing good things to pass. To be the Mother of a good event or
success is something indeed, but to be Midwife to it, is no more than the
wickedest wretch in the world may be. The Devil himself doubtless has been a
means to speed many a soul to Heaven, and yet he is in Hell himself.

2. This does not excuse a People from Repentance, who have sinned away their
Teachers. The Restraint of the Ministers of the Gospel is in it self a
Judgment, and inflicted by reason of the unthankfulness and unprofitableness of
a People; And whatever work God can make of our sins, that matters not, it is
our work to repent of them.

3. This does not excuse the prayers of God's People for the enlargement and
restitution of their Ministers. God will do this happily, he will make it to
fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel; yet this does not shut out Prayer.
The Gospel, you see, was accidentally furthered by Paul's imprisonment, yet he
calls to the Faithful to pray for him, and so pray for him that he might be
restored, Heb. 13.19. Nay, though you were sure you should see them restored,
yet the liberty of Christ's Messengers in the Gospel is of so precious
concernment, that you ought to pray, that they might be restored the sooner. So
the Apostle speaks there.

4. Although God can, and although he should make the Restraint of his
Ministers to fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel, yet they ought to be
sensible of it, and humbled under it, as a great affliction, not upon their
Congregations only, but upon themselves too. My dear Brethren in the Ministry,
let us lay to heart our own unfaithfulness, negligence, insufficiency, our own
sin, who had such a prize so long in our hands, and it has been like a prize
put into the hands of fools, that knew not how to improve it, or at least did
not improve it. Oh how good were it to be here, in Pulpits, in Congregations,
if it pleased God! But we must arise, this is not our rest: And God knows
whether our Places must again know us any more. God is our Witness, before whom
we stand, we should gladly redeem our Liberties in the Gospel with any thing on
this side sin; But it is held at too dear a rate; We must part with it; And what
have we more? Only let God pardon our sins, which have robbed us of so precious
a Jewel, and make it to fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel. If the
Prophet Joel call, Gird your selves, and lament, ye Priests, howl ye Ministers
of the Altar; Come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye Ministers of my God: for the
meat offering and the drink offering is withholden from the house of our God,
Joel 1.13. How may I call upon my self, and the rest of the Ministers of my
God, to lament, when the food of our souls, the Bread of Life is withholden
from the Congregations of God! O Lord, seeing thou have afflicted us, affect us
also with our affliction, that we may know this Rod, and thee that have
appointed it, and accept of the punishment of our sin!

Application.

Does God sometimes make the Restraint of his Ministers to fall out to the
furtherance of the Gospel? Learn we then to admire the infinite Wisdom, Power
and Mercy of God, who over-ruleth and disposes of things to the good of his
People, even contrary to their own natural tendency, brings such eminent good
out of such apparent evil, enlargement out of imprisonment, light out of
darkness, daybreak out of dungeons, the Gospel out of the Goal? Who can do
thus, but the God whom we serve? What, shall we need to doubt the Arm of God
in, who can do this?

2. See then how vain and bootless the design of men and Devils are against the
interest of the Gospel, and how little to be feared. If God can make such
things as these fall out to the Gospels furtherance, then what can be an
hinderance? Oh admirable security, to be interested in the Power and Wisdom of
God! what shall hurt him whom God harbors? what shall scorch him whom God
shadows? What need they fear from worldly policy, who belong to that God, who
crosses the nature of things, and makes them bring to pass, not what they
would, but what he list?

3. This may administer matter of support to the Ministers and People of God,
who do this day in England let loose their souls to sorrow, and sink under
their own haviness There is indeed matter of mourning; but my Doctrine stands
by you here, and bids not mourn as men without hope neither. Is not this (my
Friends) the common ground both of your and my sadness this day, is not this it
that troubles us, even to think of the ways of Sion, lest they should mourn,
the precious and eternal Gospel, lest it should be hindered? If that be it, so
here, God can make these things to fall out to the furtherance of it. And O
that he would do so. O that God would so bless the Church we live in, with
Peace, and Truth, and Piety, that we may never be mist, nor our names never be
remembered more; that you may never have cause to complain for want of us, nor
we once to open our mouths against them that shut them!

Now that this sad dispensation may indeed fall out to the furtherance of the
Gospel, let me in the last place exhort my self and you, to do our parts
toward it. Here now I should run over the ways, whereby I told you these
things might fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel: some of which cocern
Ministers, others the People.

1. Let Ministers improve this respite, lay in stock, furnish themselves
better, that when God shall again (if yet again) set them over his Household,
they may be Scribes instructed to the Kingdom of God, and as Stewards bring
forth things new and old, for the maintenanc of the family. Let us give
attendance to reading, and exhortation, not neglect the gift that is in us,
meditate upon the Scriptures, give our selves wholly to them, that our
profiting (by affliction) may appear to all men, when we our selves shall
appear.

2. Let us labor to be patterns of courage, and constancy to others; and not
only so, but indeed examples of the Beleivers, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

3. Let us study our own hearts, dress our own Vineyard better than we have
done, that we may be other kind of men and Ministers hereafter, than formerly
we have been. By these means amongst others I told you, the restraint of the
Ministers of the Gospel might fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel: O be
not wanting in the improvement of so good means, for so good and blessed an end.

The rest concern private Christians chiefly.

1. Be hard at prayer with God, and cease not, till you have prayed us into our
liberties in the Gospel again.

For this, as for all other mercies, God will be sought unto; nay it may be for
this in a more especial manner. For it seems that God has appointed prayer as
a special means for the restoring of his restrained Ministers, Heb. 13.19. I
beseech you the rather to do this, (to pray hard) that I may be restored to you
the sooner. Prayer is that form of speech, which Christians ought to use, that
God would bring back his banished. This restraint, for ought I know, may have
come upon the Ministers of the Gospel, because of them that have restrained
paryer before God, as the phrase is, Job 15.4. However assure your selves that
God will not open our mouths again to preach till you have well opened, wide
opened, your mouths to him in prayer.

2. Be united amongst your selves. To have had Ministers of different
persuasions, has doubtless maintained and kept alive differences amongst
Professors, which otherwise, either had not been, or at least had not been so
long live'd: And I earnestly pray God that upon the unhappy laying aside of
Ministers of one persuasion and another, may follow a happy laying aside of
differences amongst their followers: that upon the ceasing of Paul and of
Apollos, that unsavory speech, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, may cease
also. Do not only pray, but join in prayer, each with, and each for other. And
however you may have too much pleased your selves to be known and distinguished
by other names and titles, yet now, if you agree in the common appellation of
men fearing God, I charge you in the Lord, that ye speak often one to another,
converse familiarly and freely each with other; watch no longer for each others
halting, but watch over each other to prevent and heal all haltings. Let this
separation of Ministers from People, be for the kniting and curing of that
separation that is between People and People.

3. Be much in the Scriptures, and in other good Books. How this may be for the
informing and settling of the judgments of affectionate Professors, I have
already hinted, and but hinted. I am now only to exhort you to it, to press
you to take that course whereby the Gospel of Christ may be furthered. Even
Reading is an Ordinance of God, and therefore you may pray for God's blessing
upon it; nay, therefore ye ought. I speak not of transient, cursory viewing of
Books, but of a serious, solemn, reverent, deliberate, religious exercise of
Reading. Be often smelling to that sacred and fragrant bundle of Myrrh, the
Bible of God; by somewhat in which each spiritual sense shall be refreshed. Ply
your Book, this Book, the harder, now that they are taken off that taught you;
read your Bibles, and bless God that you have Bibles to read, skill to read
them, and liberty to use your skill, that you have your Fathers Will in your
Mother Tongue, which all Christians have not, which God grant we may always
have. And now let good, savory, practical Divinity find some room, more room
than sometimes in your houses, hands, heads, hearts you have professed a great
while; it is time to begin to know somewhat now: And this is a way of getting
knowledge, which will maintain zeal and affection. If it be not the only way, I
am sure it is one of the best means that we have left us, to preserve our
selves from the corrupt Doctrines, and false Opinions, by which we shall be
strongly assaulted, and the minds of many sorely shaken. A well-read Scholar is
but a jejune commendation indeed; but a well-read Christian is a noble
character; Acts 17.11. -- These were more noble, etc.

4. Preach you now in your places, by your communication and conversation. Out
of your calling go not, out of Gospel Order go not, show forth a sober-spirit
in all things; confound not the difference, which God himself has made,
between Ministers and People. But exhort one another; consider one another, to
provoke (not to anger and jealousy, as heretofore, but) to love and good
works, Heb. 10.24. Somewhat more you ought to do, now that we must no more do
what we were wont. Watch over each other lovingly, tenderly, faithfully, in
this absence of your Watchmen. Study to promote the cause of Religion, and to
carry on the Kingdom and Interest of Jesus Christ, as God has given you
talents, and shall give you occasion to lay them forth. If it must be so indeed
that God will take off the Keepers of his Vineyard for a time, let each man of
you become his Brothers Keeper.

5. Reflect upon your former slight and common thoughts of the Gospel, and
Gospel Ordinances, and be humble for that careless and drowsy temper; and
labor to beget and increase in your souls more earnest longings after, and
more suitable valuations of the Ministry and dispensation thereof. To have good
stomachs, sharp appetites toward spispiritual food, will both get meat, and
give a relish to it, whereas the hunger of the body can only do the latter.
Doubtless God's will concerning you in withdrawing the Table, is to reprove
your wantonness and surfetings, and to make his Word precious in these days,
and to the men of this generation. If you would yet again have bread, ask,
long, and cry for bread. They that would have bread of Joseph must buy it, give
money, cattle lands, and all for it, Genesis 47. But they that would have bread of
God, must be hungry for it. As Christians get rest, by being weary, Mat. 11.28.
so they get food, by being hungry, Mat. 5.6.

6. Be more frequent, more fervent in private Duties, in Family Duties, in
what is most secret. Usurp not the Office, and be as much of a Minister to your
Families as you can: I do not say that you now may do somewhat which formerly
you might not, but that you must do somewhat more than formerly you did. Pray
oftener, Catechize more, read more, press the Word read more upon your Families,
and labor to bring them acquainted with it. If you will but be convinced of a
necessity of mending your pace, and doubling your diligence, and will but up
and be doing, you may make the Gospel a gainer. Alas that I should be forced to
speak a word which will be so little for the honor of the Gospel! The
Professors thereof in England are become flow to Duty, and of a drowsy temper:
As to public; specious, but little serious: as to private, perhaps constant,
but very cold; as to secret, I doubt very careless. A Professor of late has
been little or nothing more than another man, save only that he has heard one
Sermon in a week more. Alas, the very best are remiss, and seem to be of the
declining hand. If a serious zealous Christian of another Church, should demand
of our Ministers concerning their people, as the followers of John asked our
Savior concerning his Disciples ( Mat. 9.14.) Why do we and the Professors of
other Churches fast often, etc. but your people fast not, pray not, sanctify not
the Sabbath to any purpose? Is it not because the Bridegrooms are with them? is
it so indeed? The day is just upon you, that the Bridegrooms are taken away;
God grant that our curb may prove your spurt: The less we must do for you, the
more do you for your selves and your Children.

7. Call to remembrance old Truths, repeat in your hearts, and in your houses
too, what ye have formerly received, chew upon the Word that you have formerly
eaten. Who knows but that God may have taken you off your meat, your green and
flourishing Pastures, on purpose to make you find your cud. On the precious
Truths that at this day lie by the Professors of England, as stale commodities,
or meats out of season! verily, one Sermon-less-year will make you make a meal
of the most despiseable and homely dish that was ever set before you. If you
can but suck at old Truths with new appetites, you will find fresh virtue
coming from them: and that Doctrine that was laid aside, as having served one
turn, may be effectually taken up for many other good purposes in the soul. It
is said of our Saviors Disciples once and again in the Gospel, after he
himself was removed from them, Then they remembered the words of Jesus; his
Disciples remembered that he had said this unto them, Joh. 2.22. and again Joh.
12.16. These things understood not his Disciples at the first, but when Jesus
was glorified, then remembered they, etc. The former part of this verse (Ah!)
how true is it of this People of England? Oh that the latter part may be found
so to! that this affliction may prove a rod to bring to remembrance, both sins
committed, and Truths neglected; that so the People of God may be truly
humbled, and the Gospel of God greatly furthered.

In a word, What ever God shall reveal unto you as a pertinent Duty, as a Duty
of the season, as a means to further the eternal Gospel of Christ, that do: In
the mean time praying and purposing (as Elihu says is meet, Job 34.32.) That
which I see not, teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

SERMON IX.
Ephesians. 6.18. With all Prayer, --
DYing Israel gave his Children portions, and to Joseph one above his Brethren,
Genesis 48.22. I would commend one or two parts above what some of your brethren
are content to sit down with; All Prayer. Three are All, as we speak of
principles.

I. Public Prayer. Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I
will seek after, That I may dwell in the House of the Lord, all the days of my
Life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. He
subjected himself to the appointed public means, and resolved his pursuance of
them, in case of hidings.

This Ordinance of Solemn Meetings, appointed,

1. That God's Name may be hallowed. Psalm. 29.1, 2. Give unto the Lord Glory,
worship Him in the Beauty of Holiness. Glory must be given unto the Lord; and
we must always look what way the Lord has prescribed for it; and that is in
his own Ordinances. Singularly is the glory of God's Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
etc. born upon the shoulders of many: this way God rides in triumph. The Kings
honor is in multitude of Subjects. Blessed Parents have a full quiver. Great
Men have many poor at their gates. At an Assize and Sessions, Great Men have
more cognizances, than at private meetings, and this for their honors. When
Men, Women, and Children, lay siege to Heaven, Haec vis grata Deo. Tertul. It Is
the Glory of God to be overcome by a multitude.

2. Herein his People are regarded.

1. Hopes given them of Audience, Mat. 18.20. There Is a threefold cord in this
one kind of Prayer, strong to remove Evils, and a powerful twist to pull down
Blessings. The Ways sure will be mended, when not only rich men with their
teems, but cottages with their scuttles come to the common work.

2. The Godly quickened in the Duty. Growing and thriving People have that
language, Zech. 8.21. Come let us go and Pray, I Will make one in Prayer; O come
let us worship.

3. Others stirred up. When they see a King, a Landlord, a Master, casting a
copy for them, 2 Chronicles. 6.12. Thus they are ready to reason; See, my
concernments are like theirs, but not my heart, zeal, love to God,
watchfulness, preparation, etc. What a fool am I in the midst of the
Congregation! etc.

II. Private Prayer. Josh. 24.25. I and my House will serve the Lord. There
should be right houshold-Order and Government, according to the Rule, amongst
Christians. Col. 4.1. Paul speaks to Masters of Families, to carry like good
Kings, in the first verse, and in the second, minds them of their Priestly
Office; Continue in Prayer.

This Kind instituted;

First, That his Name may be hallowed. The wise and merciful God has a quick
Eye, and a strong Shoulder; as he knows, so he profers to bear burdens,
wherewhith Families are laden: Cast your care on me, for I care for you. When
we lock up our selves at night, and have Prayer, the Key, at our girdles,
letting out our selves in the morning under his Providence, we have him for our
God, and acknowledge him what he is.

Secondly, Families regarded.

1. A bar to domestic Discords. There must necessarily be a studied, intended,
right carriage in the family where Prayers are on foot.

2. Servants and Children, acquainted with their Duties, framed to that Worship
of God, fitted for public Prayer, etc.

3. Superiors in Families hereby are under rich Promises, Genesis 18.17.

4. Affairs of the whole sanctified, 1 Timothy 4.5.

I I. Secret Prayer, Mat. 6.6.

This kind instituted,

First, That God's Name may be hallowed. For the more self is set aside, more
way is made for God's Glory, the Glory of his Omnisciency, etc.

Secondly, Particular regard of man,

1. As to the matter of Prayer. What an Hell the House would be but for the
Closet. If the wife heard the confessed, vile miscarriages of the husband, and
^he husband did but peep into the heart of the wife through an open window, and
so in other relations, -- Sat^n, and corrupt nature, would soon cut the cords
of amity, dissolve bands, knit angry looks, weave vexations gestures, contrive
evil surmises, hinder domestic Prayer, etc.

2. Manner. Secret Prayer is elbow-room-Duty. The kno^s, in the Actus exerciti
quoad indivuum, cut. No Act of Uniformity takes place here. In a word, Thou
may be what thou will be, if ipse locus sis, as Bernard. I leave thee with
thy Bridegroom in secret.

U S E.

Let me hear my Will read (give leave to the impropriety of speech) what I have
bequeathed to you: Your deeds are good, if you have every parcel. You count
right (as we say in Arithmetic) if you answer the total, or All.

1. My eldest Son in the Closet. Read 1 Cor. 11.22. (though in another case)
What have you not houses to Pray in, or despise you the Church? I mean, forsake
you the assembling of your selves together? for one duty to swallow up another,
it spoils All. The whole City to be in the Gates, is not good.

2. My second Son in the Family. You have your House well adorned, but there is
something wanting. A man is a man, though he want an arm or a leg, but is not
integral. Your Prayers are not Mathematically total; but when they are, then
are you.

3. My third. Public Prayer is good when there is a concurrance of Family and
secret. You do well when you believe the History: but to rest in Historical
faith, is not that I commend. I give to every one of you an allowance, and yet
you are found too light. Meant, mean tekel.

But first, What light pieces without allowance.

Secondly, With allowance.

First, We consider secret Prayer.

1. It may be thou make thy closet but a creephole, hiding thy self from
reproof, pleading that thy heart is as good as those that make the greatest
show. Though I make not that appearance in the Church, nor that noise in my
house, yet I pray in secret. Pardon my mistrust, I fear thy prayers are not
constant. Again, thou will say, I pray always. I answer, As it is in point of
Sabbath, when men plead, every day ought to be kept a Sabbath, and then no
Sabbath is kept. So thy praying always, is not to pray at all.

2. Admit thou prayest in secret; Do thou perform Duty out of Conscience to
the Command? If not, thy sacrifice is not accepted. 1 Samuel 15.22. Has the Lord
as great delight in burnt offerings and Sacrifices, as in obeying the Voice of
the Lord? Behold, to Obey is better than Sacrifice, and to Hearken, than the
fat of Rams: For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, etc. If thou say out of
Conscience of Command; then what answerest thou to God, who commands all
Prayer? James 2.11. For he that said, pray in secret, said also, pray in
family; now if thou prayest in secret, and not in family, thou art become a
transgressor of the Law.

3. Thou being a Master of a family, contentest thy self with secret prayer.

1. My Family will not be subject to House-duty. Art thou a King in thy House,
as Jezebel (in a far different case) said, Do thou now govern the Kingdom?
Do thou give up thy Lordship? Lose not thy Authority, O King, say, I and my
House will serve the Lord.

2. Will thou say, I am ashamed to appear in public? If Prayer be a black
deed, than let red cover thy face. Art thou afraid of children or fools (even
such are scoffings Michals) think it not much to be vile in their sight, and
thine own sight too. Be not ashamed of Christ, who is not ashamed of thee his
Brother, but fear lest be be ashamed of thee when he comes in the Glory of his
Father, with the holy Angels, Mark. 8.38.

3. My thronging family business will not permit.

Answ. As we are to pray with all Prayer, so to watch with all Watchfulness; not
only to watch in prayer, and after to hear God's answer, but unto Prayer. He is
a strange God who gives thee Lands, Laborers, etc. and gives thee no time.
Why, has God given thee two Oxen together, two Horses, two Servants together,
but thy hours not two together, but minutatem? this certainly to index to thee,
and to give thee warning, that time is to be improved, and weighed very
strictly, and more regarded than thy Horses, etc. Let me persuade thee to look
after Blessings in God's Way. Daily bread is sweetest that is got by Prayer and
Labor.

Secondly, Light with allowance.

Though I give thee the allowance of that weighty duty of Family Prayer, yea,
if thou could truly say (with the young man) Thus have I prayed from my youth
up, what lack I yet? I must answer thee, One Prayer more is wanting, i. e.
Public Prayer. As it is in Petitions, to ask daily bread, and not hallowed be
thy Name, is but a lame prayer: and to pray for Justification, in that
Petition, Forgive us our trespasses, but not for Sanctification in that
following, and lead us not into temptation, it measures not out the blood of
Christ rightly, which reaches to the purifying of his People as well as
pardoning: because of something wanting, the foresaid Prayer is but a mutile,
halting prayer. So when one limb is cut off, all Prayer is maimed: thy Deed is
imperfect. Thou have both House and Land, but not the Commons thereunto
belonging.

II. Family Prayer.

First, If there be nothing but this Family Prayer, it is not one half of All.

1. I mistrust that something besides the glory of God, moves thee to it; may
be thou wast brought up in a praying Family, and custom puts thee upon duty: or
else the sought applause of thy Family, or Neighbors, thou art desirous to
seem ^o be a good Christian rather than to be so, and seek after the gift of
Prayer rather than the grace of Prayer.

2. I mistrust thou art not constant in duty; may be upon the Sabbath, but not
in thy six days; may be at night when thou have time, but not in the morning:
may be when business is not throng, but seed-time and harvest, or strangers
will easily put thee by.

3. Admit a constancy; it is not obedience to the Lawgiver; for he that has
commanded thee to attend him in thy Parlour, has said the like of the Closet.
Obedience must be copulative and connexive. The Soveraignity of God is alike in
all kinds of Prayer. The disregarding of secret Prayer, is the disregarding the
Soveraignity of him, who is Unicus Praeceptor, Mat. 6.6.

Secondly, But though I give thee an allowance of one weighty kind, viz. secret
Prayer; Yet for all this, thou art not current. For as it is in the
Commandments, to respect one and not another, shows a want of sincerity, and
thou may be ashamed when the wicked call thee an Hypocrite, Psalm. 119.6. So
as it is in the parts of a Commandment, the negative part of the fourth
Commandment, it is good not to labor: but when thou have no respect to the
positive, the sanctification of that rest, thou keeps the Sabbath of the Ox.
As in this, so in Prayer, though thou may be under a kind of promise, to one
kind of Prayer, yet all promises are made to all Prayer.

Obj. If thou replyest, My Prayers should be perfect, if I did like those
public Prayers. --

Answ. Observe this in public Prayers, let this parallel guide thee; I have
known Pillars in the Church, who though they could preach ably and powerfully
at home, had the choice labors of the Learned by them; yet durst not absent
themselves from public Preaching, though the Minister accounted none of the
wisest, nor his Sermons free from light mixtures. The sincere milk of the Word,
was that they desired, and the public instituted Ordinance regarded by them,
did silence them at their own houses; they would walk with the Assembly upon
the roof, so long as the unmoved Foundations would bear them. Prayer is
tolerable for the manner, when I go to the Father through Jesus Christ,
assisted by the Spirit.

Obj. I like not Prayers with such a mixed company.

Ans. We may read in David's Psalms of the constitution of the Church-visible
in Readiness time. Unsound, hypocritical, wicked Professors, amongst David and
others who were sincere. In those times David wishes to have occasion of
public worshipping again, and accounts highly of what he did formerly enjoy,
having gone with the multi^ude to serve God in public.

III. Public Prayer.

First, If thy All be only in public.

1. I must crave leave modestly to mind thee of my mistrust, that thou have
thoughts that the place it self makes prayers efficacious, and thou groundest
the special promise of Audience on it, and not upon Communion of Saints.

2. I fear there is much of self in thee. Thou may go for a good Churchman
in the account of thy neighbors, and may have that reward for thy service;
when in the account of God thou art an ill Christian. Mat. 6.5. And when thou
prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are; for they love to pray,
standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be
seen of men: Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

3. Admit the best, as Isaac to his father, Behold the fire and the wood, but
where is the Lamb? Here is indeed Sacrifice and fat of Rams, but where is
Obedience and harkening to all that the Lord has given in charge?

Secondly. But giving thee the allowance of that weighty duty of Family Prayer,
and yet thou want weight. Though thy house be a Church, resembling it in
this duty of Prayer; Domum vestram non parvam Christi Ecclesiam deputamus, as
of Juliana, to whom Augustine writ: For thou would take it ill to be told,
that thou prayest at the Church, and swearest at home: as Bernard reproves
Eugerius, that the Laws of Justinian made a greater noise in his Palace than
the Laws of God. Admit, I say this, yet thou art not altogether such an one as
I would have thee: For as in Faith, when Charity is wanting, we may call it
right Faith, but it is not right saving Faith; So of thy Prayers, It Is well
thou prayest, but thou prayest not well. If thou should withdraw thy belief
from a Truth revealed in the Scripture, thy Faith is partial: So is thy
Obedience when a duty is declared in the same, and is neglected; when all comes
to all, thou fallest short of that singular and necessary duty of secret Prayer.

1. What if I be bold to say, thou art nothing but what thou art in secret. The
Kingdom of God appears what it is, when it comes not with observation, Luke
17.20, 21. It Is not Spectability, but Glory within which makes the King's
daughter like her self. Hidden ones, under the Fig Tree, are his indeed, whom
he especially eyeth.

2. Let the truly practical judge, whether I be too bold, in saying, that those
that resolutely turn aside to crooked ways, of judgment, of manners, are such,
as enter not constantly into their Closets, daily exercising themselves in
this, difficult, differencing duty of Secret Prayer.

SERMON X.
Luke 24.50, 51. And He led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lift up his
hands and blessed them. And it came to pass while He blessed them, He was
parted from them, and carried up into Heaven.
IN the preceding Chapters, the holy Evangelist Luke, had by the guidance of
the holy Ghost, given account of the state of humiliation, and in this Chap.
holds out the Exaltation of Jesus Christ: This he does in declaring two great
Articles of the Christian Faith.

The first is, the first step and degree of Christ's Exaltation, namely his
Resurrection, which is confirmed by Scripture, by Witnesses who saw him,
handled him, and saw him eat, which the same Luke, Acts 1.3. calls infallible
Proofs, from ver. 1. to the 50th.

The second is this in my Text; He ascended into Heaven. Wherein you have four
parts.

1. Christ leading out as a Captain, or Shepherd, his Diciples from Jerusalem
to Bethany.

2. You find him parted from them, in respect of bodily presence.

3. You have his Ascension, He was carried up into Heaven.

4. Here is his Valediction or Farewell to his Disciples. And surely he who all
the time of his abode with them spoke kindly, called them friends, excused
their failings, and would not over-drive them, nor put them on too harsh
services, lest the bottles should break, and the garments rent, He cannot be
unkind at last. He who began his first Sermon with nine Blessings, Mat. 5.
cannot conclude as the old Testament concludes, with a Curse; He who was
always in the days of his flesh on Mount- Gerizzim, to Bless and Pray for his
Disciples, cannot be so changed as to ascend Mount- Ebal, to Curse at last. No,
but having loved his own, he loved them to the end; here is a parting, but
neither height nor depth could separate them from his love. When the time of
his departing drew near, he let out his love more abundantly, and gave most
signal expressions of entire affection: that love that brought him from his
Fathers bosom was not quenched nor abated by many waters. He had paid dear,
and suffered deeply for his People, he had given his life, and shed his
precious blood for them, yet he is at further cost. He lift up his hands and
Blessed them.

In this last part, Christ's Valediction, you have, 1. An Agent -- and that is
Jesus Christ, who is blessed for ever, to whom all power in Heaven and Earth
was given, who undertook no Office without Call, nor exercised any without
Authority; he Blessed them, and that not without Commission, for God sent him
to Bless.

2. The persons blessed; and they were a select number, chosen out of the
world, given into his hand, called to be Witnesses of Christ's Sufferings,
Resurrection and Ascension, and to Preach the Gospel. Observe here, Judas who
betrayed Christ was not amongst them, but lost the Blessing, and came under the
Curse, prophesied of long before, Psalm. 109.8. Though he had the honor to be
one of Christ's Disciples, dignified with gifts ordinary, and extraordinary,
yet his Apostasy procured him that dreadful Curse, Woe be to that man, it had
been good for that man he had never been born. They that were the constant
followers of. Christ, whom he led out, they are his blessed ones.

3. Here is the action, (...), he blessed them, and in blessing, or while he
blessed, twice mentioned, that we should well consider it.

4. The circumstances of this Farewell, and they are three, the Place, the Time,
the Gesture.

1. The Place, Bethany, it was a Village about fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem,
the Town of Mary and Martha and Lazarus, where Christ raised Lazarus, John
11.1, 8, 18. Bethany at the mount of Olives, so it is called, Mark 11.1.
Reverend Beza, upon Act. 1. 12. where the Ascension of Christ seems to be
from Mount Olivet, understands by Bethany, not strictly the Village, but the
whole tract, containing the Mount of Olives, and that from the Mount near
Bethany Christ ascended. You see Christ could make a house of affliction or
poverty (as Bethany signifies) a place of blessing; he is not tied to places,
but where two or three are gathered in his Name, there is he amongst them;
where true Worshippers are worshipping him in Spirit and Truth, there will he
come unto them and bless them: He preached and pronounced blessing in the
Monnt. The Disciples, John 20.19. were met in a house, and had the doors shut
for fear of the Jews, and Christ came and said, Peace be unto you. He might at
his Ascension have Blessed his Disciples in the Temple, or holy City, but he
led them out to mount Olivet where, or nigh to which Bethany stood. And why?
Some say, lest being seen, new troubles should arise; but the main reason is,
because he would have a select number to be eye witnesses, to testify to the
world that he ascended, according to Acts 10.40, 41. Him God raised up the
third day, and showed him openly, not to all the People, but unto Witnesses
chosen before of God, even unto us -- so Beza, on Acts 1.12. Historia ipsa --
The History it self shows, that Christ would not ascend into Heaven from some
place where there were many Inhabitants, or other Witnesses of his Ascension,
but took only his Disciples into some part of the Mount Olivet, to be Witnesses
of his departure from us, in respect of the humane nature, till the last day.

2. The Time when he blessed them. Just at his Ascension: he had blessed them
before, and does it now solemnly, with hands lifted up; it was the last thing
he did on Earth. He was seen of his Apostles forty days after his
Resurrection, and now that they must see him no longer on earth, he would show
them not only his hands and his feet (as sometimes he did for the strengthening
of their Faith) but his heart enlarged in love and compassion, his bowels
yearning toward them, he here kisseth them with the kisses of his mouth, and
his lips drop sweet smelling Myrrh on them, he speaks kindly to them, Blesses
them, and while he Blessed, (...), he departed.

3. The Gesture used in Blessing, (...), He lift up his hands. Where observe,
it is arrogance and great presumption in the Papists to say, for the upholding
of their Crucifixes and Crossings, that its very like that Christ Blessed them
with his arms cross, as Jacob Blessed Joseph's Sons, Genesis 48.17. See Rhem.
Testam. Where Jacob (as is evident from the text) laid his right hand on the
head of the younger, by a Spirit of prophecy, foretelling that he should be
the greater, and at not all in favor of any their superstitious use of the
sign of the Cross, whereof Valentinus the Heretic was the first that made any
great account; as Dr. Fulke relates out of Irenaeus. We have Christ's Blessing
in the Text twice mentioned, and the gesture not omitted of lifting up his
hands, but a total silence of the sign of the Cross. We may then conclude it is
a cursed addition of the Rhemists, who presume to father that upon Jacob, nay,
on the Lord Christ, which is indeed but a Novel fancy, not in any estimation
with the Apostles, nor the Godly in their time. How can they read and not
tremble, Rev. 22.18. If any man add, God shall add to him the plagues? --

Nor can Christ's using of this gesture, warrant humane Inventions in the
Worship of God, nor the rigorous enforcing of a heap of Gestures, Vestments,
and other unnecessary and ungrounded Ceremonies, so as men must not worship at
all, nor enjoy their properties without them; since lifting up of the hands is
but a natural gesture of Reverence and Authority; neither is there any
consequence in arguing from things written to things Apocryphal. But as bodily
exercise profits little, so large discourses about it are but little to
edification of common hearers. Only let me mind you, that Jesus Christ was
faithful as Moses, and his Apostles kept back nothing that was profitable for
us. Scripture must not, cannot be taxed with deficiency. And, little children,
keep your selves from Idols; O be not tainted with Romish Superstitions, when
her plagues are so nigh at hand.

But the Doctrine which I would this day commend to you from these words, is
this.

Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ went to Heaven, solemnly blessing his Disciples.

In this Doctrine you have two branches; 1. Christ ascended into Heaven: 2.
Christ blessed his Disciples at his Ascension.

1. Jesus Christ went into Heaven, 1 Pet. 3.22.

There are three Reasons why Christ ascended: The first is, that he might
fulfill the Scriptures; In his Ascension he fulfilled Scripture-Types and
Scripture-Prophesies; Christ was typified in the High-Priest's going into the
second Tabernacle alone once every year, not without blood, Heb. 9.7, 24.
Christ is entered not into those Holy places made with hands, which are (...),
the figure of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us. It was prophesied of Christ, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have ascended on
high, thou have led captivity captive. The Apostle, Ephesians. 4.8, 9. expounds
this Text, accomplished in Christ's Ascension.

2. Christ ascended that he might be glorified: He had glorified his Father on
Earth, and finished the work which the Father gave him to do, and then went to
be glorified with his Father, John 17.4, 5. He had been manifest in the flesh,
and then is received up into Glory: He descended, dwelt among men, was a man of
sorrows, and again ascended and sat down at the Right Hand of the Majesty on
high, when he had purged our sins by himself, Heb. 1.3. As it was impossible he
should be held of Death, so it was impossible he should be held in a state of
Humiliation: Ought not Christ to suffer, and enter into his Glory? Luke 24.26.
The Vision of Christ's glorified Body is reserved for Heaven in mercy, one
glimpse thereof in the Transfiguration put Peter in a trance. Christ ascended
to be glorified.

3. It was expedient for us that Christ should ascend.

Obj. O but how can these things be? how much better had it been for us to have
had Christ's bodily presence still on Earth! What a deal of good did he by his
Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Compassion on the Poor, Blind, Diseased, that cried
for help for themselves, children, and servants? Lord, had thou been here, my
brother had not dyed, said Martha: So may poor desolate souls say, Lord, had
thou been on Earth still, this evil, and that storm had not come upon the
Church, or particular members of it. Expedient Christ go? O leave us not!

Answ. In general: Saddest providence and most terrible things, whereby God
answers his People, often carry a great deal of sweetness and comfort in
them, which we through ignorance and unbelief hardly discern. Christians often
loose much by poring on present or imminent evils, and not looking to the sweet
Result and glorious issue thereof. We walk too much by sense, and too little
eye, by Faith, the things that are not seen. Thus the Disciples were loath to
hear that Christ must be put to death: When he was buried, We trusted (say two
of them, Luke 24.21.) it had been he that should have redeemed Israel. Their
Faith was low, not considering that he came to give his Life a Ransom for
many. Such fools, so slow of heart are we to believe. Thus when Christ told the
Disciples, I go my way to him that sent me. They asked him not, whither go
thou? and therefore sorrow filled their hearts, John 16.5, 6, 7. they did not
look to the sweet Fruit which they should reap of his Departure; they would
have found cause of joy, had they seriously considered that Christ went to his
Father, and their Father, to his God, and their God.

But particularly, You have Christ's Word for it, which should silence all
objections, and questioning thoughts. John. 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the
truth, it is expedient for you that I go away.

There were four Expediencies of Christ's Ascension in respect of us.

1. It was expedient for us that Christ should ascend, that he might in our
nature, as our Head and Surety, take possession of Heaven for us. Heb. 6.20.
Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus. He had purchased the
Inheritance, and paid the price, and he went to have seizen and possession for
us. John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you.

2. Christ's Ascension was expedient for us, that he might intercede for us in
Heaven, and now appear in the Presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. and that we
might have that consolation, 1 John 2.2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. And Heb. 7.25. He ever lives to
make intercession. We have a constant, and skilful, faithful Solicitor in the
Court of Heaven, pleading our cause. Is the Church militant oppressed? Jesus
the Angel of the Covenant pleads, How long, Lord, will thou be angry? Zech.
1.12. and he is answered with good and comfortable words, I am returned with
Mercies to Jerusalem, as it follows, ver. 16.

The Lord Christ stands as with a golden Censer, having much Incense, which
he offers with the Prayers of Saints on the Golden Altar before the Throne;
the Smoke of which Incense, with the Prayers of the Saints, ascends before
God out of the Angels Hand. When his People pray on Earth, He, as their
Solicitor, procures a Grant in Heaven, which he sometimes sends down by a
swift Messenger: So he did to Daniel and Cornelius.

So that now being ascended, Believers may triumph. Who shall condemn? It is
Christ that died, is risen again, is at the Right Hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.

3. It was expedient for us that Christ should ascend, that he might send the
Spirit, the Comforter. Joh. 16.7. If I go away, the Comforter will not come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him to you. The sending of the Spirit,
to lead Believers into Truth, to convince the World, to help Believers
Infirmities, to quicken, to comfort, to stablish them, and to abide with them
to the end of the World, is the fruit of Christ's Ascension.

4. Christ's Ascension was expedient, to assure us, that he has fully
satisfied Justice for the sins of his Elect, and left nothing undone of the
great Work which he undertook. Heb. 9.12. By his own Blood he entered once into
the holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. His sitting at the
Right Hand of God is an evidence that he has obtained for us Eternal
Redemption. In his Ascension he triumphed over all Enemies; He had spoiled
Principalities, spoiled them of their Prey, having rescued his Elect; spoiled
them of their Dominion and Power over his Sheep; He had cast out the Prince of
this World, the Accuser of the Brethren; and He made show of them openly, Col.
2.15. Christ having overcome Death and Hell, declares his Conquest, in
ascending as a Conqueror into Heaven.

Take the Application in four Particulars, briefly.

1. Christ is gone to Heaven. Be not deceived by false christ's; Such shall
come, Mat. 24.24. O remember he is not here, but ascended, as he told his
Disciples: Seek not then a bodily presence in the Sacrament; The Heavens must
contain him, Acts 3.21.

The Martyrs, who burned at the Stake (not for ceremonies, etc. as some would
have it, but) for denying Transubstantiation, or the bodily Presence of Christ
in the Lord's Supper (however now-a-dayes, some bespatter them) had a sure
Foundation to build on. The Scripture makes it plain, that Christ's Body is in
Heaven.

2. Christ is gone into Heaven; Christians, let your hearts be there; Seek
those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God,
Col. 3.1. Why do ye grovel on Earth, when Christ your best Friend is in Heaven?
What on Earth can satisfy? or what is to be desired when Christ is gone? Well
may Believers desire, with the Apostle, Phil. 1^.23. to be dissolved, and be
with Christ, which is far better.

3. Let us prepare for Christ's Coming from Heaven. Phil. 3.20. Behold He
comes quickly, in like manner as he ascended; but more gloriously attended,
more manifest, every eye shall see him. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord
when he comes shall find watching, Luke 12.37. We are left to trade with
talents, our Lord will come and reckon with us, Mat. 25.19. Be ready, for the
Son of Man comes in an hour when ye think not, Luke 12.40. O let us watch.

4. Lastly. Be comforted, Christ our Forerunner is in Heaven; He is gone, but
he went about our business. This providence of Christ's departing, looks with
a bitter aspect; it is doleful to consider, Christ is Gone. But as Jacob's
Spirit revived when he knew Joseph was alive, so it is exceeding comfortable
for drooping distressed souls to consider Christ has taken possession of a
glorious House, incorruptible Inheritance, and a biding Kingdom for us. We have
an Advocate with the Father; our Redeemer lives, and we shall see him: All his
Enemies shall be made his footstool. Christ is glorified; his Members however
vilified on earth, shall be like Him, and abide with Him, and He will be
admired in his Saints. He is gone to prepare a place for us, and will come
again and receive us, John 14.3.

And thus much briefly for this first branch; Christ Ascended.

The second is, Christ blessed his Disciples at his Ascension.

But (may some one say) How did Christ bless them?

I answer, (...), To bless, is, to speak well. So Christ always spoke well,
Never man spoke like Him. Grace was poured in his lips, and gracious Words
proceeded out of his mouth. But it has a more special Importance.

1. To bless, is to acknowledge the Blessedness and Perfection of another. So
the greater is blessed of the less. So with the tongue we bless God, even the
Father, and our Souls bless the Lord.

2. To bless, is sometimes to pray for a Blessing. So Isaac blessed Jacob, when
he prayed, God give thee of the Dew of Heaven, Genesis 27.27. And God Almighty
bless thee, Genesis 28. The 1st and 3d. Thus Jacob blessed Joseph's Sons, when he
prayed, The Angel that redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads, Genesis 48.9,
and 16.

3. To bless, is to pronounce a blessing, and that either in the way of an
ordinary Ministry. Thus Aaron and his Sons were to bless the People, saying,
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, etc. Numb. 6.23. So Simeon, Levi and Judah,
Issachar, Joseph and Benjamin, were appointed to stand upon Gerizzim, to bless
the People, Deuteronomy. 27.12. Or else by an extraordinary Spirit of prophecy. So
Jacob blessed his Sons, when he told them what should befall them in the last
days, Genesis 49. And Balaam prophesying the prosperity of Israel, is said to
have blessed them altogether, Numb. 24.10.

4. To Bless, is to make blessed, to give as well as speak a blessing. So
Israel was blessed effectually. Numb. 22.12. Curse them not, for they are
blessed. Thus there are Blessings spiritual, and Blessings temporal; Blessings
of basket and store, etc.

5. To bless, is to set apart from a common, to a holy and spiritual use. So
Christ blessed the Bread, when he set it apart to signify his Body, Mat. 26.26.

Now when Christ blessed his Disciples, the four last of these acceptions of
Blessing may very well be comprised and intended. The gesture used in blessing
them, lifting up his hands, may well suit with pronouncing of a Blessing in way
of prayer. The Gifts and Graces poured on them soon after his Ascension, speak
the efficacy of his Blessing, and that it was not empty words, but Spirit and
Life. And it is evident, that at his Ascension, he set them apart, and gave
them a Commission to go and preach the Gospel.

Other Texts might be cited, proving that Christ's Ascending, did (...), speak
well to his Disciples, as Mark 16.17, 18, 19. and Acts 1.8, 9. But the Text so
fully assures us, that Christ lifted up his hands, and blessed, just at his
Parting and Ascension, that we need no other Confirmation.

To come then to the Reasons why Christ Ascended, blessing.

The two main springs whence his Blessing slowed, are his Love and his
Faithfulness; which two were the reasons of his Humiliation and Transactions.
He loved his Elect; and He was faithful to him that appointed him, Heb. 3.2.
Out of Free Grace and Faithfulness He laid down his Life a Ransom for many; He
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1.5. His Father
had appointed Him, and promised Him to bless, and he faithfully performed it.
He came to bless, and went to Heaven blessing.

There are eight special Reasons or Ends which Christ had in his eye, in
blessing his Disciples so solemnly, when he was leaving Earth to go to his
Father.

1. He would assure his Disciples, that his affection to them, was the same now
at parting, as they had found it from his first choosing them: they might have
thought it strangeness, had he gone, and not left a Blessing behind him, after
all his kindness and compassion. And this is one end, to which are directed all
those gracious and comfortable Expressions, recorded in the, 12, 13, 14, 15,
and 16th Chapters of John, with that pathetical Prayer, John 17. showing him as
tenderhearted toward them at last, as ever. He displayeth his Banner of Love
over them in this gracious Valediction, going to Heaven Blessing.

2. Jesus Christ would have his Disciples, and all that should believe in his
Name, to know that he carried the same Heart to Heaven with him, that he had on
Earth; so that though his bodily presence was removed, yet his Love continued,
and he would be as mindful of them in his Kingdom, as ever he had been on
Earth. And this is another End of his gracious Expressions at, and a little
before his Ascension: He knew how ready they might be, through weakness and
temptation, to question his care, and doubt of his Love; (as the Israelites
about Moses, Exodus 32. As for this Moses, we wot not what is become of him) He
would not have them think, Now Jesus Christ is gone, and his Mercy is at an
end, he has forgotten to be gracious, -- and so sink in despairing thoughts.
No, He assures them, John 16.26. I say unto you, I will pray the Father for
you; rest satisfied, question not but I will remember you, and set you as a
seal upon my Heart, as a seal upon mine Arm; I will carry your names engraven
on my Breast Plate, and make intercession for you; and here he would assure them
of lasting Love, in parting from them with the most notable expression of it.
He solemnly blessed them.

3. Jesus Christ would have his People assured, that he is the Messiah, the
promised Seed, in whom all Nations shall be blessed, Genesis 18.18. The Apostle
mentions this Covenant with Abraham, Acts 3.25, 26. and shows that Christ
came to bless, in pursuit of that Covenant, and to fulfill Scripture. It was
prophesied of Christ, Psalm. 72.17. Men shall be blessed in Him: And Blessing
was his beginning and conclusion in his Ministry upon Earth; the beginning of
his first Sermon, and the close of his Last.

4. He blessed them, that he might not leave them overwhelmed with grief, nor
swallowed up of sorrow at his departure. John 14.1, 18, 27. I will not leave
you comfortless; let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid: --
He knew the loss of his Presence might strike cold to their hearts.

The Children of the Bridechamber might mourn; alas, the Bridegroom is taken
away; they might cry after so good a Teacher and Master; My Father, my Father,
the Horsemen of Israel, and Chariots thereof: -- and sorrow most of all, that
they must see his face on Earth no more. Well, The Lord God had given Him the
Tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in due season, to him that is weary,
anointed Him to comfort them that mourn; and he gives his Disciples a Cordial,
to keep them from swooning and fainting, something to allay their grief, and
bear up their hearts; they could ill let him go, except he bless them; and He
gives them a rich Legacy, My Peace I give unto you, John 14.27. and here a
Blessing which proved very effactual to turn their grief into Joy: For it
follows in the next verse after my Text, They returned to Jerusalem with
great Joy.

5. Jesus Christ would have all his People know, That He will pour down Showrs
of Blessing on his Church and People to the End of the World. This Blessing at
his parting, shall prevail on all Ages, to the strong Consolation of Believers:
The Efficacy of it abides, and shall be on the head of Joseph, on the top of
the heads of such as are chosen out of the world. Christ's good Will was not
only to his Disciples, but also to all that shall believe through their word,
John 17.20.

6. Jesus Christ ascended, Blessing, that he might arm his Disciples against
Persecutions and Difficulties, which they must afterward encounter: He knew
they must meet with much Contradiction in preaching of the Gospel, that they
must seal his Truths with their Blood, and drink of the Cup which he drank. And
to animate them, he will have them eyewitnesses of his Ascension; and (as
Elijah let his Mantle fall on Elisha) he lets a Blessing alight upon them.

7. The Lord Jesus would declare, That he has taken away the Curse from his
People, and has Authority to bless. Gal. 3.13, 14. Christ has redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, that the Blessing of
Abraham might come on the Gentiles. Christ by his Death and Sufferings, has
turned the Curse into a Blessing, blotting out the handwriting against us; and
(as Conquerours use to give gifts, so) He in his Ascension gave and pronounced
Blessings among his People: It was his Coronation Day, the Day of the gladness
of his heart, he was entering into his Ivory-Palace with gladness, where all the
Host of Heaven must ascribe Glory to Him; And He will have some of his Oil of
Gladness run down upon his Members here on Earth.

8. Lastly. Jesus Christ would well fill up all Relations in which he stood to
his Disciples, and be as good and better in point of Love and Faithfulness, in
such Offices and Relations, than ever any was.

Four sorts of Offices and Relations used to bless, especially at parting.

1. Parents did bless their Children; so did the godly Patriarchs, and Job, and
David, etc.

2. Masters their Households and Servants. Abraham blessed his Servant, Genesis
24.7.

3. Kings and Rulers blessed their People; Moses, Solomon, Hezekiah and Esther,
prayed for their People. Melchisedec King of Salem, blessed Abraham, Genesis
14.18. Blessed be Abraham of the Most High God.

4. Ecclesiastical Officers, Priests and Levites, and Prophets under the Law.
Melchisedec, Priest of the Most High God, blessed Abraham: -- And Ministers
extraordinary and ordinary, under the Gospel, bless People.

Now Jesus Christ stood in such Relations to his People; He is their Father,
Isa. 9.6. and Heb, 2.13, 14. and puts the Blessing of a Father on them; their
Master, and blesses the Household of Faith; Their King, and fulfilled that Type
of Melchisedec's Blessing, Heb. 7.1, 6. As Prophet and Priest, yea, Apostle and
High Priest of our Profession, at his entering into Heaven, he with hands lift
up, imparteth a Blessing on his People.

I come now to make some use of this point.

And first, Seeing the Lord Jesus went to Heaven blessing his Disciples, let us
all learn of him to bless, and not curse; yea, to bless them that persecute us,
Romans 12.14. Here you have an exact pattern, the best Teacher, follow his steps:
Render not railing for railing, but contrariwise, Blessing; for ye are
thereunto called, that ye should inherit a Blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. Here is a fair
Copy to write after, a good Lesson, well becoming true Christians: When Christ
was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet.
2.23. His last farewell was Blessing. Alas, Christians, we know not what spirit
we are of, for trivial injuries, ready to be calling for fire from Heaven, and
to have our tongues full of deadly poison, and set on fire of Hell: Therewith
bless we God even the Father; and therewith curse we man, made after the
similitude of God: Out of the same mouth proceed blessing and cursing. My
Brethren, these things ought not so to be, Jam. 3.8, 9.10. O consider for the
moderating of our spirits and tongues, Jesus Christ suffered Contradiction of
sinners, was spit upon, and had the highest injuries and greatest affronts
offered him; and though he could have commanded twelve Legions of Angels to
have aided him, yet he came as a Lamb to the slaughter, and opened not his
mouth; nay he prayed, Father forgive them, Luke 23.34. His own Disciples showed
a great deal of unbelief and disobedience, forsook him in the hour of darkness,
and had many ambitious thoughts, and much selfiish discourse, yet his Love
covered a multitude of faults, so as he blessed them at parting: O let the same
mind be in you that was in Christ, be meek and lowly, be courteous and
pitiful, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, as God, for
Christ's sake, has forgiven you; Let the Fruits of the Spirit, Love, and
Peace, and Meekness, be found in you, and abound.

2. Use. Christ going to Heaven, solemnly blessing, should teach us, to expect
all Blessings from Heaven only through Christ; and that all the Blessings of
the New Covenant are dispensed by the hand of the Mediator; only in him shall
men be blessed. Men's blessings are but blanks, ciphers, vain and of no value,
except Christ bless; There is that blesses himself in his wickedness, saying,
I shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19. but in vain; God's anger will smoke against
that man, There is no peace to the wicked. The wicked flattereth himself, Psalm.
26.2. but his iniquity will be found to be hateful.

There are that bless the covetous, but the Lord abhoreth them, Psalm. 10.3. A
sorry bargain, to have m^n acquit, and the Lord held guilty; man's blessing will
stand in little stead when the Lord shall say, Depart ye cursed; It is not in
all the creatures to render him a blessed man whom Christ does not bless.

To proceed; There is no blessing to be had from God but only through Christ.
Christ is the Emmanuel through whom there is peace on Earth, and goodwill
toward men: he is the true Mercy-Seat with the wings of the Cherubims spread
over it, whence the Lord will commune with his People; He is the true Jacobs
Ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven, from the top whereof the Lord declares
he is his Peoples God, and will be with them in all places whithersoever they
go, Genesis 28.12.13. -- We read, Ruth 4.5. At what time the Kinsman must have the
inheritance, he must have it at the hand of Ruth (to allude hereto) You can
never inherit the Blessing unless you be espoused to Christ. Ye shall not see
my face (said Joseph) except your brother be with you. So here, no seeing the
face of God with comfort, nor prayer heard, nor person accepted, nor sin
pardoned, no souls reconciled, no Blessing obtained but through Christ; Prayers
are but as howlings, if they be not put up in the Name of Christ the only
Mediator. Read Heb. 12.18. etc. you shall find the misery of souls without
Christ, but their happiness being come to the Mediator of the New Testament:
Out of Christ we have to do with God from Mount Sinai in thunderings and
lightnings, in tempest and terrible voices; but through Christ from Mount Sion,
whence better things are spoken than Abels blood spoke. So, Ephesians. 2.12. etc.
Without Christ, and afar off, without God, having no hope, strangers to the
promise; But through Christ made nigh, reconciled, fellow-citizens with the
Saints, of the household of God, the partition wall broken down, he is our
peace. God is a terrible Judge, a consuming Fire to men out of Christ, but in
him a Gracious Father, reconciling this world to himself, not imputing
iniquities: Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings -- But how? or for whose sake?
Why, in Christ, only on his account, In him we have redemption, the remssion of
sin, ver. 7. God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.32. Jesus Christ
is the Light of the world, without which darkness, horror and perpetual
confusion had been upon all mankind; the only Foundation to stand against Hell
gates; no other Name given whereby we can be saved. The way by which we draw
near to God with hope to speed, is consecrated through his blood; the grand
encouragements we have in our addresses to God, are Christ's Merit and
Mediation. Jesus Christ is the only door at which God gives his dole of
Blessings, and by which we can enter into the Fathers presence and favor; He
is the gate of Heaven, He is all in all.

My dear People, The time of my departure from you, not voluntary, but
constrained, seems now at hand; possibly I am speaking the words of a dying
man, and may see your faces no more in this place; it is my comfort I have not
kept back any thing that is profitable for you, nor shunned to declare to you
all the Counsel of God; But have (to my ability) taught you to observe all
things whatsoever Christ has commanded; for so runs my Commission, Mat. 28.20.
And let me tell you, I dare not exceed, knowing that terrible Commination,
Deuteronomy. 18.20. The Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my Name, which I
have not commanded him to speak, even that Prophet shall die. And Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be called the Least in the Kingdom of Heaven. The Scripture tells me what
things I must teach and exhort; And if any man teach otherwise, and consent not
to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
according to Godliness; he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting, etc. 1 Timothy
6.1, 2. Could I find the things which (it is probable) are shutting the mouths
of many hundreds of learned, conscientious Ministers, expressed in, or by good
consequence to be drawn from the Scriptures (which I am sure are sufficient to
furnish the Man of God thoroughly to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17.) I would not
for a World divest my self of the Liberty of my Ministry, nor bereave my self,
my wife and little ones of our Livelihood; nay, I would willingly practice
them, and teach you so to to; I this day appeal to the most High (with the
Prophet, Jer. 17.16.) As for me I have not hastened from being a Pastor to
follow thee, O Lord thou know; Most gladly would I have continued preaching
Christ Jesus the Lord, furthering your Faith and Joy, and driving on the great
Marriage between Christ and your Souls: but sure I am, my Lord needs not my
sinning to carry on his Work amongst you, neither will I charge him with
unfaithfulness, nor his Word with deficiency in pretending to mine own
faithfulness in the Ministerial Function; but I Will patiently commit my self to
Him that judges righteously, endeavoring to follow his steps, who became
poor, that we might be made rich, and suffered greater things for me than I can
do for him; On Him I desire to be found, waiting and keeping his Way, who has
the giving of the Opening of the Mouth, and is thereby known to be the Lord,
Ezekiel. 29.21. He that opens, and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man
opens, can, if he please, restore our Liberties and pleasant things; if not,
here am I, let him do what is good in his fight, The Will of the Lord be done.

Why should I part with you, repining or murmuring at a churlish unkind World,
whilst it is evident the World hated him before it hated us, and my Text tells
us that Christ blessed his Disciples at his parting and Ascension?

Now the Lord Christ who went to Heaven, blessing, bless you this day with the
best of Blessings, the sure Mercies of David, and lasting Benefits of the
everlasting Covenant! The Lord Jesus, the good Shepherd, who gave his Life for
the Sheep, be your Shepherd, and cause showers of Blessings from Heaven on your
Souls, Bodies, Children, Families and Estates; And God, even the Father, for
Christ's sake, grant, that you and I, who are this day parting with grieved
hearts, may at last meet with joy, having all tears wiped from our eyes, and
every sad thought taken from our hearts; to be ever with the Lord, at whose
right hand are pleasures for evermore. And God the holy Ghost abide with you
and me, to guide us into Truth, to stablish us in the Truth, and comfort our
hearts unto the end of the world! The Lord be with you all.

And are we parting? Suffer I beseech you this word of Exhortation. In the last
day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, If any man thirst, let
him come to me and drink, John 7.37. The Apostle at Troas ready to depart the
morrow, preached long at his parting with the Elders of the Church of Ephesus,
who must see his face no more; how fervently did he preach and pray? Acts 20.
Two of Luthers wishes were, That he might have seen Christ in the flesh, and
have heard Paul preach. But my Brethren, what tongue can express the worth of
their Farewel-Sermons!

Though I be a weak earthen vessel, a reed shaken with the wind, yet, shall not
my mouth be open, and my heart enlarged when I must preach to you no more? And
am I leaving you? My Beloved and longed-for, how gladly would I leave you all
in the Arms of Jesus Christ? Shall I leave any of you wedded to your sins and
lusts? Shall I leave any of you glued to the world, and not espoused to one
Husband, even Jesus Christ? Shall my liberty to preach Christ to you, cease,
before you can all say of him, My Beloved is mine, and I am his? O that (if it
were the will of God) it might not be so! Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer
for you is, that you may be saved: My earnest request and suit to you this day
is, that you will come to Jesus Christ, and be married to him for ever: Have
pity upon me, (cries sorrowful Job in another case) Have pity upon me, O ye my
friends, the Hand of the Lord has touched me: Have pity upon me, O my People,
have pity upon your afflicted, grieved, dying Pastor. And this is the pity I
crave at your hands, that you would none of you rest in a Christless condition,
but expect Blessings and Blessedness only through Christ, that whether I come
again to you, or be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye prize and love
Christ fervently, that ye obey him sincerely, constantly, and universally,
having respect to all his Commandments; that ye set a high estimation, and
stick close to his Truths; that ye abhor Evil, and account
Gospel-administrations glorious; that ye stand fast in the Faith, and abound in
every Grace.

Unum erat, etc. said Monica to her son Augustine, It was one thing for which I
desired to live a little longer, that I might see thee a Christian ere I dye:
So say I to you this day (whose cheeks I see bedewed with tears) If my heart
deceive me not, I desire my Natural and Civil life a little longer, that I
might see you Israelites indeed, and grown in Grace. I seek not yours, but you,
O my Flock; I labor not to draw you after me, but after Christ. So far am I
from murmuring at this sad providence, exercising me this day, that I bless God
(who brings good out of evil) that has given so many of his Ministers
opportunity and hearts to confute those Scandals, cast on them by unstable
souls, of being Hirelings, Baals Priests, greedy Dogs; Balaams, loving the
wages of unrighteousness; Diotrephes, and loving pre-eminence; preaching for
filthy lucre; supposing Gain to be Godliness, etc. from whom men ought to
withdraw themselves. -- Let such as are guilty answer as they can; Let Baal
plead for himself. We are sure that the Judgment of God is according to Truth
against them that commit such things: That God, who has so far rouled away our
Reproach, can in his due time make our Righteousness shine forth as the noon
day. Only my Beloved, let me not have cause to take up such sad complaints of
you, that I have bestowed on you labor in vain; that I have piped, and ye have
not danced; that I have mourned, and ye have not lamented; that ye have not
believed my report; that ye will not come to Christ, that ye might have life;
that I come in my Fathers Name, an Ambassador in Christ's stead, and ye receive
not my Message; but if another come in his own name, him ye will receive: that
ye are easily perverted, marvelous soon shaken (See Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.) and
your minds corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, to fall in love
with will worship and empty things of man's devising; but will not be converted,
nor fall in love with Christ, nor take his yoke upon you: Good People, add not
thus to my affliction, but let me have joy of you, that I may say, Ye are my
Crown and Rejoicing; Now I live, seeing my Peoples souls are alive and prosper,
and have their hearts established with Grace, so as they cleave with purpose of
heart unto God, escaping the temptations and pollutions of the world, and
running, like the River Arethusa, through the salt Sea, yet keep their
sweetness, and the Word of God abides richly in them.

Monica Leapid for joy at Augustine's conversion, Cumulatius, etc. My God has
done abundantly for me, that I see thee his Servant. So let me have cause to
rejoice, and say, My God has granted my desire, letting me see you that were
serving diverse lusts, serving the Lord Christ; and you that were dead in sin,
spiritually alive; and you that were Swearers, fearing an Oath; and you that
were lost, found; And you that were haters of Holiness, following Holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord.

Sirs, think not that Angels, or some from the dead should ever come to invite
you to Christ, and testify these things, neither may you expect Christ himself
in bodily presence to preach to you; when he was on earth, He went about doing
good, calling sinners, Come unto me, Follow me; If any man will be my Disciple,
let him follow me: but now his work is in Heaven, where he is about his Peoples
Business, pleading their Cause.

Nay, you may not expect me to be preaching to you any longer, but once more I
am here tendering to you Jesus Christ; I come a wooing in behalf of my Lord and
Master, who was dead and is alive, and behold he lives for evermore: In his
Name who was preaching of old by his Spirit in Noah's time, to souls that by
their obstinacy and disobedience are in prison, in Hell, 1 Pet. 3.19. I come to
tell you, that Except you Repent, ye shall all likewise perish; and except you
believe, ye shall be damned, Mark 16.16. that unless you obey Christ, ye will
fall short of eternal Salvation; and if ye have not the Son, ye have not Life.
I come to tell you, of your poverty and blindness, of your nakedness misery
without Christ, that all your hope will perish, unless it be built on Christ
the Cornerstone, and that you can obtain no Blessing but through Christ.

It Is recorded, that the dead that Sampson slew at his death, were more than
they whom he slew in his life. To allude to it, O that this my dying Sermon,
might shake the rotten pillars on which souls have built their hopes of Heaven
short of Christ; that more sins might be mortified, and more souls quickened
and converted than ever by any Sermon in the course of my Ministry; that now at
the end of the liberty of my public Ministry, you might all be the seals
thereof, being pricked to the heart, and feeling the weapons of our warfare
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Joseph's Brethren thought evil against him, but God meant it for good, to save
much People alive. And O that this sad breach betwixt us this day, might
occasion some poor souls to say, Periissem nisi periissem, I had been undone if
I had not been undone. The smiting of the Shepherd, and scattering of the
Sheep, was the occasion of a Sermon that enlightened me, quickened me: This
breach brought me to Christ, acquainted me with my necessity of interest in
Christ. I am not of the temper of that Emperor, who said, (...), when I dye,
let the Earth be burned; But O that my Civil Death might minister occasion of
your Spiritual and Eternal Life! O that this divorcing day betwixt you and me,
might be the day of your Espousals to Christ!

Dying David bespeaketh Solomon; I go the way of all the Earth: -- Keep the
charge of the Lord thy God, that thou may prosper, 1 Kings 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

My loving People, I am this day going the way of all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, the way of tribulation. I charge you keep the Lord's way; as you
expect any blessing and prosperity, look for them only through Christ the Way,
the Truth and the Life. I charge you before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge both quick and dead (as the Apostle, when his time of departure was
at hand, charged Timothy) that ye rest not without Interest in Christ; and I
leave this Sermon (as Joshua did the Pillar) as a Memorial, that I admonished
and besought you to come to Christ, and become his Servants. O let not the Word
I have spoken, to keep my self pure from your blood, condemn you in the day of
Christ. You cannot plead, We were not bidden to the Wedding-Feast, we were not
called to Christ; No, if you be found out of Christ at that great day, how will
it torture you to consider, How have we hated Instruction, and have not obeyed
the voice of our Teachers? In vain may you wish, O that we had the day of Grace
once again!

Domine cur non modo, etc. said Augustine at his conversion, Lord, why not now
an end of my filthiness? So say I to you, Why not now a parting with sin, and
closing with Christ?

Take these Considerations or Motives.

1. The Lord Christ calls you, whilst we are testifying these things to you;
Whilst Noah was preparing the Ark, Christ was preaching; See that ye refuse not
Him that speaks from Heaven.

2. Others who have had as great hindrances as you have, followed Christ at his
Call. James and John, Mat. 4 22. left the ship and their father immediately, and
followed Christ; neither enjoyments, not employments nor relations could hinder
them. Zacheus, a rich man, of low stature, in a great press, yea, of a wicked
Sect, a Publican, great obstacles; yet he breaks through all, he runs and
climeth to see Jesus. If you come not to Christ, you will be inexcusable.

3. Let the Loveliness of Christ draw you; he is the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly
of the Valley, the bright and morning Star, the Sun of Righteousness, chiefest
among ten thousands, and altogether lovely: O let his Fullness and Perfections
win your hearts, and attract your affections.

4. Let the Love of Christ constrain you; his condescending and dying for you,
to save you from everlasting death: Will not such bonds of Love hold you?

5. The Lord takes exact notice how long your Teachers are laboring with you;
what means you have, and what fruit appears. These three years have I come,
seeking fruit, Luke 13.7.

6. You must shortly appear before the Judge, to give account how you have
profited by all the Sermons and Lectures you have heard, etc.

7. Now is the Ax laid at your roots, Judgment beginning at the house of God;
your Teachers ready to be removed into corners; possibly you may go from Sea to
Sea, and not find that refreshing food for your souls, nor those advantages
which you have had: Now therefore, what mean you, O sleepers? are you set on
fire round about, and not lay it to heart! Let the time past of your life
suffice you to have been servants of sin; It is high time for you to awake out
of sleep and to follow Christ.

8. If you will not come this day, what if the Lord should write you
Christless, and swear in his wrath, You shall never enter into his Rest, nor
taste of his Supper, saying, I would have purged you, and ye were not purged;
never be purged, dye in your sins; he that is filthy, let him be filthy still?

9. Christ is willing to be yours, if you will be his; he will not reject you
if you come; you have as fair Encouragement to come as ever any had.

10. They are very fair terms propounded: Is it not fit you serve him, if you
expect him to save you; that you obey him, if you hope for his Salvation? Had
he bidden you do some great thing, should you not have done it? how much more
when he requires nothing but what is your reasonable service, befitting you as
his Creatures? They are fair terms, Repent and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out; Come to me and find rest: Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou
shall be saved: Be faithful unto death, and obtain the Crown of Life.

11. And lastly, Let your necessity drive you to Christ. Is there but one Ark
in the world to save you from drowning? but one City of refuge to keep off
Vengance from you? O hie thither apace. Is there but one Day Star to shine into
your hearts? but one Son of Righteousness, with Healing under his wings? but
one Sacrifice for sin accepted? But one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus? O get interest in Him: Oh! why do any of you linger, and not
hasten to this Zoar, when Fire and Brimstone are so nigh, so certain to all
that reject Christ? Oh! why do you draw back, when drawing back is unto
Perdition? Know my Brethren, these things as much concern you as ever any souls
in the world; what need have you of Christ, to be your Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption? without Him you are cursed, captivated and
condemned, John 3.18.36. without Christ ye are deaf and dead, poor and
polluted, and have no title to Heaven, to the Promises, nor any thing, but sin
and its wages, Death: Nay, if you obey not whilst Christ calls, Come unto
me, you must with honor hear that other voice, Depart ye cursed: -- Those mine
enemies that would not that I should rule over them, bring forth and slay them
before me.

Let me hint to you on what terms you must be, in your coming to Christ.

1. You must be divorced from your sins; make sure you take off the heads of
your dearest lusts.

2. Disclaim all other Saviors besides Christ; renounce confidence in the
flesh, Phil. 3.3. rest not in your outward privileges nor performances; but
when you have done all you can, say, We are unprofitable servants.

3. Rest not in a bare notion of Christ; take heed lest you sit down with Fancy
instead of Faith.

4. Take a whole Christ, Christ to rule you, to teach, to sanctify you as well
as save you.

5. Give your selves wholly to Christ, without reserve; give him your ear open
to his Calls; his Sheep hear his Voice, and know not the voice of strangers;
give him your eye; look unto him and be saved: give him your hand and feet, to
do what he commands; and come when he calls: give him your knee to bow to
him (not merely in a complement) but to submit to his Laws, and obey him as
King and Lord: especially give him your hearts, let him be enthroned there;
Lift the everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory may enter. With the tongue
you must confess, and with the heart believe, that you may be saved. And take
him for yours for ever; abide for him for many days. Beware of Apostasy, by
which Judas lost the Blessing, and went to his own place.

You see Brethren al blessings are to be expected only through Christ. I
beseech you go home and work these things on your hearts by meditation: wrestle
for a Blessing; say Lord Jesus, who blessedst thy Disciples, bless me, even me
also; I will not let thee go unless thou bless me; cry to him (as the blind,
lame, and diseased cried when he was on earth) Jesus have Mercy on us; and
believe that he is able, willing and ready to bless you. As for me, God forbid
I should cease to pray for you, that the Lord would put his Blessing on you.

One thing further let me mind you of, That you be much in blessing God for his
Love and Faithfulness, in giving his Son, and ascribing Blessing and Praise to
the Lord Jesus; for all spiritual Blessings, and for going to Heaven blessing
his People: Especially I charge you, be careful to spend the Lords Day, which
is precious time, which he has sequestered; and set apart for himself, in a
thankful Commemoration of Jesus Christ, his Grace and Compassion to poor
sinners, and not in sports and past-times: study what you shall render to him
in lieu of such superlative and incomparable Love; and in a due Sanctification
of the Lord's Day, endeavor that the Name of Christ may be remembered through
out all Ages.

The third and last Use, is, Consolation; for I would not leave you comfortless.

1. Here is abundant Encouragement to poor sinners to come to Christ: you that
have trembling hearts, and dare scarce look up to Christ, by reason of your
sins, lest he call you Dogs, and cast you out; who are ready to say, There is
indeed Consolation in Christ, and he has Blessings enough to bestow, but they
are not for me; let me tell you, it is good to be humble and sensible of your
own vileness, but not to be faithless and unbelieving; for unbelief is highly
derogatory, dishonorable to Jesus Christ, and wrong to your own souls, a
rejecting of your own mercy: I could also tell you, it is the most unreasonable
thing for you, to question Christ's pity and tenderness toward poor, heavy
laden sinners, after that he has from Eternity, had his delights with the sons
of men, Prove. 8.31. And in Noah's time he was preaching to save souls, would
they have believed and obeyed. He sent all his Prophets of old, to testify
remission of sins to all that believe in Him, Acts 10.43. The Prophets testify
his tenderness. Consult, Isa. 55. the seven first verses, Ho, every one that
thirsts -- He will abundantly pardon. Isa. 40.11. He shall gather the Lambs,
and carry them in his bosom. Isa. 42.3. A bruised Reed shall he not break.
Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted. Ezekiel. 18.23.
Have I any pleasure that the wicked should dye? Psalm. 72.12, 13, 14. He shall
save the souls of the needy. You have his own Testimony, John 6.37. Them that
come to me, I will in no wise cast out. You have the Experiences of the Saints
recorded for your encouragement: The Apostle Paul, who was a Persecutor, and
confesses himself the chief of sinners, yet he obtained Mercy. The thief upon
the Cross (though before he reviled Christ) yet praying, obtained a very
gracious Answer. Nay, consider, what Christ has done to show himself, in good
earnest, to save souls: He knew what a bitter Cup he must drink, yet, Lo I
come; he became our Surety, and longed to have our debt paid, and his People
redeemed, Luke 12.50. He was wondrously straightened, till his Baptism of Blood
was accomplished: He has sent his Apostles after such signal Manifestations of
Grace to testify it.

And in his Name, my Beloved, I am this day declaring to you, That he is very
willing and ready to receive any that will come to him, and would gather you as
a Hen does her Chickens under her wings; never did any find him backward; nay,
He is more willing to bless you, than you are to receive his Blessings. It Is
some satisfaction when men will come, that he may see the travel of his soul,
Isa. 53.11. He takes it ill, that we are so backward in coming. He loved the
young man that came running, kneeling, enquiring, Good Master, what shall I do?
etc. and had the young man liked the terms, the match had been made, the breach
was not on Christ's part. Nay, Luke 15. he shows, there is joy in Heaven over
one repenting sinner, in three Parables. Draw near then thou drooping dejected
soul, come and see, not only the Hands and Feet of thy Savior; put not only
thy hands into his pierced Side, But behold the heart of thy Redeemer! behold
thy Lord lifting up his Hands and Blessing; and see if there be not ground to
cry out, My Lord, and my God: Had you seen Him after sweating drops of Blood
for you, ascending with such Expressions of hearty Love, could you have
doubted? Had you seen his Hands lifted up in blessing his People on Earth, at
his last farewell, could you doubt of his willingness to bless you?

2. Here is Comfort for the People of God, amidst all the Curses and
Persecutions of the world; Be not afraid; no matter who curse so Christ bless,
Psalm. 109. Let them curse, but bless thou. Christ's Blessing is your Pavilion
from the strife of tongues. For first, Christ blesses effectually, Psalm.
37.22. when Christ will bless, men cannot let. Secondly, Irrevocably. When
Christ blesses men cannot reverse it. Balaam could not curse Israel, when God
had blessed. The Blessings of Christ are without Repentance. Men now cry
Hosanna, anon crucify; but they whom Christ blesses, shall be blessed
everlastingly. Thirdly, he blesses such as bless his Servants, and curses
them that curse them, Genesis 12.3. Fourthly, He blesses his People for men's
cursing, 2 Samuel 16.12. Fifthly, He turns the Curse into a Blessing, Deuteronomy.
23.5. Sixthly, He has variety of Blessings, Blessings of the Dew of Heaven,
and of the Deep. Esau cried, Have thou but one Blessing; bless me also, O my
Father. But Christ's Blessings are an Ocean, never exhausted: He is a Sun, full
of Light, after so many thousand years emanation of Blessings, and irradiation
of the World therewith, he is as full as ever; He is a Fountain always flowing,
and ever full. He has national Blessings, pardon of sin, and peace, and
plenty, Zech. 3.8, 9, 10. The whole 72 Psalm sets out Christ's Blessings.

Would you have a Land rid of Idolatry and Heresy? Zech. 13.2. After the
Promise of Christ, as a Fountain open, the Lord engages, the names of Idols
shall be forgotten, and the false Prophet, shall pass out of the Land. Would
you have blessings on a Congregatition? Good Teachers and all their abilities
and success are from Christ, Eccles. 12.11. Ephesians. 4.11.12. He has a Blessing
for the habitation of the Just. Prove. 3.33. Riches and Honor are his. Prove.
8.18. All fresh Springs are in him: He has plenty of spiritual Blessings,
being the storehouse of his Church, where it pleased the Father that all
fullness should dwell. From him flow Acceptance, Ephesians. 1.6. Justification and
Pardon, Mat. 9.6. 1 Cor. 6.11. Sanctification, Acts 3.26. Illumination, Col.
2.2. All the Treasures of Knowledge are hid in Him, and He opens the eyes of
the Blind: He is the Author and Finisher of Faith, full of Grace; by Him we
have Adoption of Children, Ephesians. 1.5. These are rich Blessings. Moreover,
through Christ we have interest in the Promises, 2 Cor. 1.20. and right to all
our Comforts and Privileges, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All are yours, and ye are
Christ's. Briefly, Through Christ you have Everlasting Blessedness, Heb. 5.9.
Rejoice then in Christ Jesus, O ye Upright, ye are the blessed of the Lord, who
went to Heaven blessing. Read over your Charter and Privileges through Christ;
what is there wanting that heart could wish, for your selves, your Children,
this life, or a better?

Yet consider further with me, Christ went to Heaven blessing; and Acts 1.11.
In like manner will he come again. How will Christ, do you think, bless his
People at his second Coming? What a joyful meeting will there be of the Lamb
and his Spouse, decked and adorned with Graces? how will he welcome his Bride
when he comes again, to receive her to abide with him, who left her whilst
full of spots and wrinkles, so kindly? he then took a few apart, and blessed
them; but then at his second Coming, Gather my Saints together, Earth and Sea
must give up their dead, and never a Saint be lost, but raised at the last day.
Christ blesses Believers at death, receiving their souls, making their bodies
rest in hope; but at His appearing he will bless them, with a glorious
Resurrection, making their vile bodies like his glorious Body, Phil. 3.20.
Saints bodies shall then be glorious, spiritual, strong and incorruptible, 1
Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. No more hunger and thirst, nor cold and weariness; no more
crying nor saying, I am sick, nor pain, nor death, Christ will set them at his
Right hand, and bless them with a sentence of Absolution, Come ye blessed of my
Father.

Well may the afflicted Church on earth, tossed with tempests, cry, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly; Oh! what a time of refreshing shall that be? Act. 3.19.
how shall the Saints then sing Halelujah: Blessing, Honor and Praise be given
to the Lamb, and to Him that sits on the Throne?

O joyful Day, when our Lord Jesus, who went to Heaven With his Hands lifted up
in Blessing, shall come to carry his People blessed, triumphantly in Heaven!

Into the hands of this Lord Jesus, I commit you my Dear People.

SERMON XI.
Psalm. 69.6. Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed
for my sake; let not those that seek thee, be confounded for my sake, O God of
Israel.
The Psalm, for the main substance of it, is David's prayer for deliverance from
the grievous oppression of his cruel enemies; yet it so relates to David, that
many passages do also respect Christ (of whom David was an eminent Type) so the
9th verse is applied, part of it, John 2.17. and the rest of it, Romans 15.3. and
so may more passages in it be applied.

This Petition for deliverance (whether you refer it to David or Christ) is,

1. Propounded in the beginning of the first verse, Save me --.

2. Prosecuted and urged with diverse Arguments, whereof the first is drawn from
the greatness of the calamity under which he lay, ver. 1, 2. Secondly, From his
long waiting and earnest crying, his throat dried, his eyes fail, ver. 3. ^
Thirdly, From the number and nature of his enemies, more than the hairs of his
head, and they very malicious and injurious, hating him causelessly, forcing him
to unjust restitution. Under which also is couched a 4th Argument, viz. his own
innocence as to the matter whereof he was accused, and for which he was hated
and persecuted, ver. 4.

Notwithstanding which innocence of his as to the particulars wherewith he was
charged by men; ^e yet justifies God in permitting these evils to befall him;
for this I take to be part of the sense of the 5th verse. O God, thou know my
foolishness -- and therefore I cannot justify my self before thee, nor accuse
thee of injustice for permitting it to be thus with me. Though the words may
seem also to look another way, viz. to be David's appeal to God concerning his
innocence in those particulars, q. d. Thou Lord who know my foolishness,
from whom my sins are not hid, know my innocence in the things whereof I am
accused. By the way take this Note.

Obs. When men oppress and pesecute most unjustly, yet there is cause to
justify God in suffering it to be so. God's Justice is executed upon us by
their injustice; if men falsely accuse us, yet God can truly charge us. When Job
had to deal with men, he will maintain his integrity against their accusations,
chap. 27.4, 5, 6. but when he has to deal with God, he acknowledges his sin,
will not stand upon his own justification; he will not plead, but supplicate,
chap. 9. throughout. The Prophet Jeremiah grants the conclusion, chap. 12.1.
though he defiers to debate with God about the prosperity of the wicked, and
about God's permitting them to oppress and trample upon his People. If any of
God's People think they have hard measure from men, that they are wrongfully
and injuriously handled as to some particular, yet let them eye God, and
confider their carriage toward him, and they shall find cause enough to say,
as Ezra 9.13. Thou have punished us less than our iniquities deserve. It may
seem hard that the poor Messengers of Christ, who desired nothing more but
libery to speak to fouls that they might be saved, and have daily bread; should
be deprived of this liberty and livelihood, upon such ground; as were not
necessary to be imposed by others, of which themselves cannot submit to,
without losing the peace of their conscience, and credit of their Ministry; yet
who so innocent that he cannot see reason enough to justify God? alas, there
is so much unfaithfulness, luke-warmness, negligence, laziness, and a thousand
other miscarriages to be found in us, as may abundantly justify God in this
dispensation, though he seem to spit in our faces, and to lay us aside as a
vessel wherein there is no pleasure.

But to come to the Text. It may be considered either with relation to what
goes before, and to the scope of the Psalm, and so it is an argument enforcing
the Petition for deliverance, drawn from the ill consequence which would
follow, if God should permit his enemies thus to insult, viz. that hereby the
Godly would be ashamed and confounded, they would stumble and take offense at
his sufferings. Or it may be considered absolutely, and so the Text is a
Petition, That God would prevent that sad consequence of his sufferings, by his
seasonable deliverance, or some other way.

In the words thus considered, observe, first, to whom the petition is
directed, viz. to God, described by a double Title, the one of Majesty, Lord
God of Hosts; the other of Mercy, God of Israel.

2. For whom it is made, and that is the Godly, described by a doudle practice
of theirs, viz. those that wait on God; and those that seek him.

3. The matter of the Petition, and that is, That such might not be ashamed and
confounded.

4. The motive that induced him to make this Petition, or that which gave
occasion of it, and that is included in those words [for my sake] or (as the
Original) in me: that is, because of my grivous sufferings and calamities. The
words are plain, and need no further opening.

Diverse observations would arise from each branch, but I shall only name three.

Observe, 1. God's People are waiters on, and seekers of God. This I pass by.

2. The long and grievous afflictions of God's eminent Servants are apt to
stumble and confound others, even the truly Godly.

3. A Gracious soul fears, and prays against the evil influence that his
sufferings might have upon others.

The second of these I chiefly aim at, in prosecution whereof I shall, 1. Show
that it is so. 2. What it is that men stumble at in the Saints sufferings. 3.
Whence it comes to pass.

1. That it is so, Scripture abundantly bears witness, and experience confirms
it.

Did not Job's Friends sadly stumble at his sufferings? (though not in being a
shamed and confounded, yet) in censuring and condemning him for an hypocrite,
as appears in their debates with him? As David was well nigh gone, and had
almost slipped at the consideration of his own sufferings, and the wicked's
prosperity, Psalm. 73.2, 13, 14. so he declares that others were stumbled upon
the same account, even his People i. e. the People of God, ver. 10. But what
need we multiply instances when we have one in stead of all, viz. the
sufferings of Christ himself; at which not only others, but even his Disciples
and Apostles themselves did sadly stumble? Peter denies, and forswears him,
others of them stager and question whether he was (what he had declared
himself) the Redeemer of Israel, Luke 24.21. all forsake him. The Sword awakes
against the Shepherd, and the Seep are scattered, Zech. 13.7. Thus it has been
in all ages of the Church; though I deny not, that the blood of the Martyrs
has been the Seed of the Church, yet that Seed has not sprung up ordinarily
till following ages, as for that present age wherein they suffered, their
falling into troubles did cause others to fall off, and depart from them. The
Cross has been, and will be a Stone of stumbling and a Rock of offense to
many: men will shun that way wherein they see others plunged, and sticking in
the mire. Therefore has the holy Ghost laid in much for the prevention of this
mischief. This seems to be the scope of Psalm 37. and 73. To this purpose are
recorded both dreadful threatening against those that should be ashamed of
Christ or his Members in their sufferings, such as Mark 8.38. and also precious
promises to those that should boldly own, and openly profess him, Mat. 10.32.
Luke 12.8. all which intimate that there is a propensity in the best to fall
into that sin. Hence it is that the Apostle cautions his Thessalonians that
none of them should be moved by his afflictions 1 Thessalonians. 3.3.

Let me only subjoyn this here (which I desire you to carry along with you
through my whole discourse) That all do not stumble in the same kind, some are
weakened and discouraged, and so either fall off, or play Nicodemus his patt;
others having promised themselves a fair gale of prosperity which should waft
them over safe, and speedily to the heavenly shoat, when they see others tossed
with an Euroclydon, conflicting with the winds and waves, ready to be swallowed
up, or dashed in pieces upon the rocks of affliction, make a retreat, resolving
to venture no further upon that tempestuous sea; so Demas and others in Paul's
time. Some again stumble by passing hard censures upon those whom they see too
meet with hard measures in the world -- These and diverse other ways, which we
shall occasionally touch upon (though the Text points chiefly at one way) do
men stumble at the sufferings of the Godly.

2. Let us enquire what it is that men stumble at in reference to the Godlies
sufferings, and we shall find chiefly three things, all which may be fairly
employed in the Text.

1. Sometimes men (even the Godly) stumble at the persons so afflicted, are
ready to think hardly of them (as Jobs Friends of him) because God deals hardly
with them. How ordinary is it for men to pass harsh censures upon those that
fall under heavy afflictions? and there is good reason, for there being upon
every man's heart an indelible impress of God's vindictive Justice they know the
[(...)] Romans 1.32. the Judgment of God, and that he is the Judge of the world,
to inflict punishments on offenders; knowing also that this Righteous Judge
cannot, will not pervert Judgment; hence they conclude, that those so severely
and signally punished, must needs be guilty of some grievous enormities, or
monstrous impiety; a clear instance we have in the censure those Barbarians
passed upon Paul, when they saw the Viper leap and fasten upon his hand, Acts
28.3, 4. Now this impression of the Divine Justice, remaining upon the Godly
(as being indeed a part of their sanctification) they sometimes forgetting that
afflictions are the portion of God's People, and that they are part of the
child's portion, are ready to judge those to be none of God's Children who are
thus afflicted. Nor do men this way only stumble at the persons of the Godly in
afflictions, but (which is more ordinary) they are shie of owning them, stand
at a distance from them, forsake them. See Psalm. 69.8. 2 Timothy 4.16. This was
our Saviors own case, Isa. 52.14. and 53.23. All in Asia, even Phygellus and
Hermogenes turned away from Paul, 2 Timothy 1.15. Onesiphorus is almost the only
man who was nor ashamed of his Chain, verse, 16. -- It is so in any kind of
affliction.

Tempora si fuerint, nubila solus eris.

But one of the saddest kinds of stumbling in this respect, is, when those that
should be Comforters turn Censurers; when the Godly join with the Wicked in
censuring their afflicted Brethren, as suffering out of obstinacy and
perverseness, because their consciences are not of the same latitude with their
own: yet how ordinary is it? If the conscience of a poor Christian have a more
quick and lively sense of humane impositions, be more tender of violating
Oaths, of corrupting God's Worship by men's Traditions; of doing things which
are doubtful, or carry in them an appearance of evil; though he never so
patiently sit down under his sufferings, yet he shall be whispered about as
either an ignorant, scrupulous, or obstinate fool, even by those who profess to
own the power of Godliness, though in these respects taking to themselves a
greater latitude, both for their principles and practice. This, O this (next
the sense of God's wrath) is one of the bitterest ingredients in the cup of the
Godlies afflictions; yet they often meet with it: And against this we may
reasonably think that David prays in the Text, viz. that the Godly might
neither censure, nor be ashamed of him, because of his sufferings.

2. Sometimes men stumble at the way and profession of the Godly; (which
follows upon the former) they take up hard thoughts even of Godliness it self,
when it goes hardly with the Godly: thus David because of his own sufferings
begun to think his piety vain, Psalm. 73.13. Though the Word has expressly told
us, that we must through many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God; and
men (in Thesi) in the general believe it, yet when sufferings befall
themselves, or others, for Holiness-sake, they forget that Word which speaks to
them as to Children, Heb. 12.6. they conclude that is not the right way which
is strewed with so many crosses, and therefore turn out of it. Hence David
says, Psalm. 125.4. The rod of the Wicked -- lest the Righteous put forth their
hands unto iniquity, q.d. Even the Righteous are apt, by long and grievous
afflictions, to be turned out of the way of Righteousness, and to turn aside
into crooked ways (as ver. 5.) therefore God will take care to prevent it, by
a seasonable deliverance of his People. How many have turned their backs on
Christ, when they have seen others carrying his Cross upon their shoulders? The
story of that King of Morocco is sufficiently known, who would not be baptized
into the Christian Faith, because he saw many poor and ragged creatures who, he
was told, were the servants of Christ. Men will shun that Road upon the Sea,
where they meet with many pieces of Ships split upon the Rocks; nor will they
take up a Calling, the Professors whereof are generally poor and beggarly.
Doubtless the sufferings of the Godly occasion in many a prejudice against
Godliness, in some a turning from it. Against this therefore we may rationally
conclude David to pray in the Text, viz. that as none might misjudge his
person, so neither his profession, because of his afflictions.

3. Sometimes men stumble at the weaknesses of the Godly in their afflictions:
if they see them never so little despond, or faint, or any way waver, not
considering the greatness of their troubles, nor allowing those grains they
ought to humane infirmity: one dead Fly, a cowardly carriage, or act of slavish
fear or sinful compliance in a Godly man, shakes and stumbles others: there is
indeed a scandal given in such miscarriages which is the great sin of those
that give it, yet others should be careful not to take it: offenses of this
nature will come, while men are men, encompassed with humane infirmities; but
blessed are they that are not offended at such things. Some such thing is
intimated in that of Solomon, Prove. 25.26. A righteous man falling down before
the wicked, is as a troubled fountain, or a corrupt spring. A learned
Commentator gives this sense: Cartwright.
A righteous man falling down -- that is, improborum, sive illecebris, sive
comminationibus, fraud aut vi ab officio depulsus: one that is drawn or driven
from his duty by the flatteries or threats of the wicked; such a one is like a
troubled Fountain, or corrupt Spring, that is hurtful to others: As a poisoned
fountain is a public mischief, poisons all the streams that issue from it, and
all those that drink of it; so the miscarriages of such stumble and offend
many, grieve some, and pervert others. When a Pillar of the Church is shaken,
it must needs unsettle those that lean upon it: Such a one was Peter, Gal. 2.9.
and you know that not only the Jews, but even Barnabas himself was drawn away
with his dissimulation, ver. 12, 23. This then may be the sense of David's
Petition in the Text. Lord let me not by any weaknesses, or despondent
carriages, cast a stumbling block before them that fear thee. The sense of the
Petition is well expressed in the singing Psalm.

Let no man doubt, or shrink away, for ought that chances me.

Thus you see at what men are apt to stumble, in reference to the Sufferings of
the Godly.

3. Let us enquire whence it is that men are thus apt to stumble, what may be
the reason of it. Take three.

1. Reas. From that carnal tenderness, and sinful self-love, which is deeply
rooted in every man's nature. Men are loath to undergo hardships themselves, and
therefore take up hard thoughts and sinister opinions of those that do: the
flesh shrinks at Sufferings, and therefore they shrink from those that suffer,
lest they should be necessitated to suffer with them. From this principle it
was that Peter diswaded our Savior from suffering, Mat. 16.22. as appears by
our Saviors reply, ver. 24, 25. If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. q. d. I perceive Peter what thou
drivest at, it is care of thy self more than me that suggests this counsel, thou
would not have me lead in Sufferings, lest thou, should be compelled to
follow, but I tell thee, it must be so; both thou and all others that will
follow me, must take up their Cross, etc. It is hard to drag the Carcass to the
Prison, to the Rack, to the Flames; therefore men (though otherwise good) are
willing to think those in an error, or else too heady and rash in owning the
Truth, that expose themselves to sufferings, especially upon the account of
some smaller Truth: if they should conclude such to be in the right, they must
needs ship in the same bottom, and run the same hazard; hereupon the flesh
for its own security, finds some fault in those forward Sufferers wherewith to
cloak its own backwardness.

Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. --

2. This stumbling at the Godlies sufferings, proceeds f^^ want of due
consideration of what the Word of God speaks, as to the state of the Godly: the
Word is very plain and positive; Christ has not dealt as an Impostor, but has
told us the worst, as well as the best of Christianity, Mat. 16.25. he has
told us of forsaking houses, lands, etc. Mat. 10.17. -- of being delivered up
to Councils, scourged, cast out of the Synagogues, brought before Governors,
etc. So Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. Yet when it comes to it indeed, we do not so
seriously consider these things, nor remember them, either as to our own or
others sufferings, as we ought. This was the case of the Apostles when our
Savior suffered: he had expressly foretold them of his sufferings, Mat. 16.21.
yet they were slow of heart to believe; which he upbraids them with, Luke
24.20, 25, 26. Compare that Text, Mat. 17.22, 23. where he tells them, The Son
of Man shall be betrayed; and they were exceeding sorry, with Luke 9.44, 45.
where he tells them the same things, and (says the Text) They understood them
not, it was hid from them, and they perceived it not. So Mark 9.32. How shall
we reconcile these Texts? the one tells you, They were exceeding sorry; the
other, That they understood it not: I deny not but they may relate to several
times, for our Savior did often inculcate this upon them; yet methinks this
may be the sense: they did understand his words, and the meaning of them, and
were thereupon affected with some present flitting sorrow; but those things did
not, (as our Savior bids they should, Luke 9.44.) sink down into their ears;
they did not, as Mary, lay them up, and ponder them in their hearts: the effect
these things had upon them, were but like the effects of some Romantic
Tragedy, that excites some present affections, but leaves no lasting
Impressions; so that when Christ came to suffer, these things were as much out
of their thoughts, as if they had never been spoken; they had such deep and
radicated apprehensions of Christ's earthly Kingdom, that they forgot all he
spoke of his Death and Sufferings. Thus it is two often; a notion indeed we
have of sufferings, being the lot of God's Children, but we are woefully wanting
when it comes to the Application, either in reference to our own or others
condition; and often we are so taken up with poring on some temporal
conditional promise of comfort, or deliverance (which we mistake for absolute)
that we are ready to conclude our selves, or others, to be none of God's
Children, because such a promise is not fulfilled to us, or not in our time:
this may be a second cause of men's stumbling at the Godlies Afflictions.

3. It may also proceed from hence, That good men do with an eye of sense, pore
upon the Sufferings of the Godly, but do not, with an eye of Faith, look either
at the gracious Promises annexed to them, or the blessed Issue wherewith they
are attended. Observable is that expression of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, -- While we look not at
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. That is it
indeed which makes the Godly account their own or their Brethrens Sufferings,
light, momentary and inconsiderable, while they look, etc. -- But while men
pore altogether on their sufferings, no wonder if they are stumbled, and take
offense: Now this is too ordinary, the best are immerced in sense, and are
incomparably more affected with things objected to sense, than those which are
the objects of their Faith: they look at what the Godly suffer, this their
senses inform them, but they consider not what they do now, or hereafter shall
enjoy, that is the proper act of Faith. This occasions stumbling both ways: For
as to the wickeds prosperity, men look at what they have in the world, and
thereuppon pronounce them happy; but they consider not that their dishes are
sauced, and their drink spiced with the wrath of God; that they have their
portion in this life, Psa 17.14. which is nothing but a bellyful of Gods hid
treasure; that they have here their good things, and must hereafter be
tormented, Luke 16. that they stand in slippery places, Psalm. 73.17. and shall
be suddenly tumbled into destruction. And then as to the Afflictions of the
Godly, men look on what they suffer, and accordingly judge them miserable, but
they consider not how often they are pronounced blessed who suffer for
Righteousness sake; or what precious Promises are made to them; what reviving
Cordials are laid in; or what a Crown of Glory is laid up for them: this is
that which makes many mistake and mis-judge. We consider Job's afflictions, but
not the End of the Lord: We are apt to look on the dark side of a Christian,
and to take notice how he is scorcht with the Sun of afflictions, but do not
observe his inward Comeliness: his Sufferings are in the eye of our sense, but
the present Promises made to him, or the future Recompenses laid up for him,
are not in the eye of our faith; and this causes sad stumbling.

These may suffice as Reasons of the Truth. I now proceed to Application, which
(omitting many other inferences) shall be only this; to caution you against
this miscarriage.

USE.

That which is David's Petition to God here, I shall make mine to you; and what
he desires of God, for the Godly, in reference to his Sufferings, I shall
desire of you all in reference to my own and my Brethrens Sufferings at this
day: The sum of my Caution, Counsel or Request, is, That all of you, whethers
friends or enemies to us, will take heed you be not offended in us, or any way
stumble at our Sufferings. I am bold to go a little beyond the limits of the
Text; for whereas it only speaks of their stumbling that are truly Godly, and
that only by being ashamed and confounded; I extend my Caution to all, both
godly and wicked (for if the Godly, much more the wicked are apt to stumble,
and therefore need cautioning) and to all ways of stumbling, and taking
offense, so as thereby to offend God: Let none therefore upon the account of
our Sufferings, stumble either at our persons, by disowning or mis-judging us;
or at our way, by thinking worse of it; or turning from it, or at any
weaknesses you may possibly discover in us, so as thereby to be discouraged,
and fall from your own stedfastness: These things I might resume and prosecute,
but I shall rather choose to direct my Caution to such as are Enemies, and then
to Friends; to the Wicked, and then to the Godly, that I may (if the Lord
please) remove those stumbling blocks, at which both the one and the other are
apt to fall and miscary, when I have first given you an account of the Reasons
which enduce me at this time to give in this Caution or Counsel.

1. I am afraid, lest by stumbling at our Sufferings, you should lose the
benefit of the Doctrine we have delivered. It was Paul's fear, lest he should
run, or had run and labored in vain. Blame us not if we fear the like: It Is
true indeed, if we have been sincere, our labor cannot be lost as to our
selves, we have delivered our own souls, our work is with the Lord, and our
Reward with our God; we are to receive our Reward not according to our success,
but Sincerity: but our fear (Beloved) is as to you, lest you should have
received the Grace of God in vain: Should you now stumble, and take offense at
our Sufferings, it might undo what has been done in and upon you by our
Labors; Were there no more in i^, but our suffering in our names or estimation
with you, I think I should have either wholly forborne, or but lightly touched
upon this matter; but the danger is yours, you may lose as to your souls;
prejudice against ^our persons, upon the account of our sufferings, may be
prejudicial to the effect, that the Doctrine we have delivered might have upon
your hearts.

2. I am afraid, lest Religion and the Cause of God suffer. As to our persons,
it is a small matter what you or others say of us; it is a small thing to be
jugded of you or of man's judgment: count us what you please, let us be as
Reprobates: only we would not that the Cause of God should suffer, that
Religion should be wounded; this we fear lest you should stumble in, or turn
from the Way which we have endeavored to lead you in: May you but stand fast
in the Faith, and presevere in practical piety, then though we be offered up
upon the Sacrifice and Service of your Faith, we shall joy and rejoice with you
all: but if you stumble at our Sufferings, as to dislike Holiness, to
dis-esteem the sweet and good Ways of God, it will be a bitter ingredient in
our Cup.

3. I am afraid lest you should lose the benefit of ou^ sufferings; Beloved,
it is not for our own sakes only that we suffer, it is for your benefit, that you
may be comforted and confirmed. Read 2 Cor. 1.6. Whether we he afflicted, it is
for your Consolation and Salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the
same Sufferings which we also suffer. -- Should you take offense and be
discouraged, or otherwise stumbled at our Afflictions, you would lose that
advantage you might otherwise get by them; yea, that which might be to your
benefit, would then become your bane and ruin. Upon these and the like
enducements, let me resume to press the Caution upon you all. I shall rank you
under two Heads.

1. On one hand, Such as are already prejudiced against our Persons and
Ministry, that have stood at a distance, and would not come in, nor comply with
our Endeavors for your good; I beseech you, let not our Sufferings heighten
your prejudice, or give you occasion to charge, censure, or condemn us: I see
diverse things at which you will be like to stumble in this kind; give me leave
to remove some of them.

First, You will be ready to say (nay, it is already said by some) That we are
justly buffeted for our faults, that it is nothing but what we deserve, as
having been busy, censorious, and pragmatical Fellows; making divisions and
separations amongst our People; taking upon us power to suspend you from the
Lord's Table, admitting and excluding whom we pleased; exercising a power more
arbitary than ever the Bishops did: this is a Prejudice deeply rooted in the
hearts of many. To which I say;

1. We will in part own the Charge, we will not justify our selves before the
Lord, but will say as Nehemiah, Nehem. 9.33. Thou, O Lord, art Righteous. --
There is sin enough in us to provoke the Lord thus to deal with us.

2. Yet we have cause to bless the Lord, that you have no worse things to lay
to our charge, that you cannot write drunkards, loose, debaucht, unclean
profligate Persons, upon our doors, when we are gone. I hope we shall not in
the thoughts of those that are most prejudiced against us, suffer as Thieves,
Murderers, Evildoers, nor justly be charged, as busy bodies in other men's
matters, 1 Pet. 4.15. It will not I hope be looked upon as presumption, if we
take up Samuels Apology, 1 Samuel 12.3. Whose Ox have I taken? -- Or Paul's, Acts
20.33. 2 Cor. 7.2. that we have not been rigid exactors of that which was our
own, muchless required that which was not our own, both our, and I hope your
Consciences will bear us witness.

3. As to that which the generality of our People have taken most offense at,
viz. Our Strickness about the Sacrament; First, Have we done more than our
Commission warrants us? Have we not often told you the danger, That to eat and
drink unworthily, is to eat and drink your own Damnation? Can you blame us if
we have at once consulted your and our own safety? Will you quarrel or censure
us, because we would not give you that which, in the state you were, would be
to you a Cup of Poison, and would certainly aggravate your Damnation? Forgive
us this wrong. But, Secondly, Who hindered or deprived you of that Ordinance?
was it not your own fault? Have you not been exhorted and entreated to come to
us, that you might be instructed, and fitted for that Ordinance? yea, if you
thought it too much to come to us, have we not offered upon the least
invitation to come to you for that purpose? know you not that the Priests lips
should preserve Knowledge, Mal. 2.7: and that you should seek the Law at his
mouth? yet we have sought to you, and entreated that you would not refuse
instruction, but with many of you have prevailed nothing: nay, have we not
often urged you with this consideration, That your absenting your selves upon
the account of your ignorance, would be no excuse? that as it is a great sin to
come without preparation, so to refuse those helps whereby you might be
prepared to come. You have been told, That it was the duty of every one
professing Christianity, to commemorate the Death of Christ in that Ordinance;
and that it was an undervaluing, and a high Contempt of Christ and his
Benefits, wilfully to withdraw. That in the sight of God, your willingness to
come in your ignorance and profaneness, and your refusing to come because you
might not come in that state, was as if you had so come; and that God looked
upon you as profaners of his Ordinance, because you would have done it if you
might: so that I hope you will have no just cause to blame us in this
particular. What other motive I pray you can be rationally imagined, should
enduce us to this severity, but fear of sinning against God, and of wronging
your and our own souls? had we not been convinced of our Duty, and the Danger
of neglecting it, we could have been content to have purchased your favor by a
general Admission. As for other Crimes charged upon us; as preaching Sedition,
intermedling with State-Affaires, etc. I shall only entreat that you would
review our Sermons, consider our Course of Preaching (which for the most part,
has been upon Catechetical Points) and see if there be any just cause to
fasten such a Charge upon us.

2. But it will be said, If we suffer not for our former faults, yet it is for
our present fault that we suffer: we may if we please submit and continue in
our Places, it is our wilfulness and obstinacy, fear of losing credit,
adherence to a party, etc. that exposes us to suffering. To this I must not
make a full answer, nor shall I reflect upon what is done by Authority; I
acknowledge it my duty to obey passively, and suffer patiently, where I cannot
with a good Conscience yield active Obedience. Yet to hint something.

1. I beseech you seriously to consider, whether it be probable that a man out
of mere obstinacy, or the like principle, should expose himself to such
hardships as we are like to undergo? which of you would do it? make it but your
own case, and you will soon discern the unreasonableness of this charge.
Consider but what Obligations are upon us to continue in our Places and
Ministry, and then see how probable this harsh censure is.

Twofold Obligation.

First, Sacred.

1. Conscience of Duty to God, and to the Souls, of our People; that is a
religious tie upon us, which nothing in the world, but the avoiding of sin can
free us from: Beloved, think not that I or my Brethren make it a light matter
to lay down the Exercise of our Ministry (I say the Exercise; for as to the
Office it self, none on Earth can deprive us of it.) I know that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.16. A necessity is upon me -- I remember that of our Savior,
Luke 9.62. No man having put his hand to the plow -- It is not the heaviest
burden (were it a burden only, not a sin) nor the greatest mere inconveniences
that should drive me from my Station. I well remember when I entered into this
sacred Function, I promised not to lay it down, till I should lay down the
Tabernacle of this Body: and I desire to look upon it as a high dignity which
the Lord has conferd upon me, had I been but a Doorkeeper in the House of
God, etc. Psalm. 84.10. But as to my Obligation, you see how sacred and
inviolable it is. Now my Brethren, you must needs conclude him to have little
conscience, or sense of duty left upon his spirit, who can out of mere humor
and wilfulness, shake off such an Obligation: And this, Beloved, is my hope and
confidence, as to my self, and many of my Brethren, that, should we out of a
surly humor (or the like principle) outrun our Embassy, our own Consciences
would raise a storm as effectual to reduce us, as that which brought back Jonah
to Nineveh, when he fled to Tarshish: Conscience of Duty would, I hope, soon
work out obstinacy and frowardness.

Secondly, Civil.

1. But suppose this Obligation could be shaken off, there is yet a Civil Tie,
which one would think might be sufficient to hold us, and that is, Provision
for our selves and Families; Can it be imagined, that a man would out of mere
wilfulness, expose himself and family to Poverty and Beggary; it may be to
Imprisonment or Exile? if one or two should be so desperately obstinate, yet
that so many hundreds (yea, if reports be true, some thousands) should do it,
is a thing attended with the highest improbability, and those, such (at least
some of them) as for Parts, Piety, Prudence, and other moral and religious
accomplishments, are not inferior to any in the Nation: surely such a censure
must needs argue superlative uncharitableness in those that pass it. You cannot
judge us to do what we do, on mere humor and wilfulness, but you must conclude
us to have put off all sense of Duty to God, and your Souls, all Humanity and
Care of our selves and Families, and in that respect to be worse than Infidels;
in a word, to be Sons of Belial, Men of most wretched and profligate Principles
and Practices: which if you do, remember that, With what Judgment you judge
others, your selves must be judged of God.

2. But give me leave to put you in mind, That the things for which we suffer,
are of that nature, that ordinary Christians are little able to judge of, and
therefore should not rashly judge us for them. Some of them are such as I must
not mention; nor shall I trouble you with many things. To instance in the
business of Reordination, or taking a new Ordination at the hands of a Bishop;
How can I, who have exercised as a Minister for these Fourteen years or
upwards, now take a new Ordination, in a way (to say no more of it) that
supposes me no Minister till then without notorious Dissembling both with God
and Man? Should one of your selves among whom I have exercised, urge on me this
Dilemma, If you were no Minister before, why did you Exercise in that Function,
why did you Preach, Pray, and administer Sacraments as a public Officer in the
Church? how will you justify the Baptizing of our Children, and administering
to us the Lord's Supper? If you were, why do you now seek a New Commission? is
your old Commission expired? etc. I seriously profess, Beloved, should I submit
in this particular, my mouth would be stopped, I should have nothing to say
against such an argument. Will you say there is no hurt in it? Yes, in my
apprehension, it is a taking the Name of God in vain, a perverting of an
Ordinance from its right End, and so in effect, making it no Ordinance; besides
that, it is a tacit condemning of the Ministers of the Reformed Churches, as no
Ministers, because they want Episcopal Ordination; and (which is not the least
mischief) it does, or may give, just Occasion to our People, to question the
Validity of all our Ministerial Actings; and will you say this is no hurt?

To instance again in the business of the Ceremonies, we are not the first that
have scrupled them: they have been a bone of Contention ever since the
beginning of the Reformation; and I fear are like to be while they are thus
pressed. The Question is not, whether men may impose the wearing of a White
Garment, the making a Cross upon a Child's Forehead, etc. but whether men may
introduce into Gods Worship, and impose upon others, such things as are
confessedly of humane invention, annexing them to, or mixing them with God's
Worship, as being significant of inward Graces, as tending to Edification, and
to excite the dull mind of man, or engage him to his duty? Under this
Consideration and for these Ends they are imposed; as the Preface to the
Common Prayer Book tells you: Mean while it is acknowledged, That neither
Christ, nor his Apostles, used or urged these things; yet we must be imposed
upon, and sworn to use and approve them. I appeal to any rational unprejudiced
Christian, whether there be not enough in this case to beget a conscientious
doubting or refusal. Will you say they are not forbidden? no more are thousands
of Popish Superstitions, which yet I hope, our imposers will not approve of:
But I must tell you, that to mine and my Brethrens apprehensions, they are
forbidden in those general Prohibitions, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Prove. 30.6. Col. 2.15.
(surely he that adds to the Worship, adds by consequence to the Word of God) If
you say, What hurt is in them? I ask, Have they not a tendency to draw men off
the spiritual Part of God's Worship, to rest in Formalities? do they not bring
us into more bondage than the Jewish Church, since they had a stated number of
Ceremonies, and those of God's own Appointment; but we, as to the nature and
number of ours, are at men's arbitrament, and must not cease obeying, till they
cease imposing? Do they not prove a sad stumbling block to the more tenderly,
conscientious Christians? and (to add no more) they must needs do hurt in that
they do no good: I fear not to say, that whatsoever does no good (I speak of
men's inventions) must needs be prejudicial and corrupting to God's Worship. I
hope then you will forbear to throw after us those rash and harsh Censures, as
if we wilfully ran our selves into sufferings: I think it a Truth worth our
bearing witness to by the greatest sufferings, That men ought not to impose,
nor we submit to humane Inventions in God's Worship, when introduced upon
pretense of Edification, or engaging men to their duty. Since such things would
reflect upon the Wisdom of God, as if he had not known how to make his own
Ordinances effectual. But I forbear: other Instances I might give, and hasten
to what remains.

Thirdly, There is yet a third thing which may be an occasion of stumbling and
sinning to the profane, and that is, They will rejoice at our sufferings,
because we have sometimes been Troublers of their Consciences: They look upon
us as pestilent Fellows, movers of Soul-Sedition, they could not swear, or
drink, nor oppress, etc. but the Pulpit must ring of it; they hate us, because
we never prophesied good concerning them; and now they are glad not only to be
rid of us, but to see us suffer, etc.

1. But let me tell you, It Is no good argument of Christianity, to rejoice in
the sufferings of any, though your worst enemies. The Command is, Rejoice with
them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15. remember them that
are in bonds as if bound with them, Heb. 13.3. How contrary is your spirit and
practice to these and the like Precepts: as for our troubling you, we did it in
faithfulness to your souls. And for our present troubles, suppose it were upon
the account of an erroneous Conscience (which is the worst that can rationally
be supposed of us) yet so long as it is upon the account of Conscience,
methinks it calls for your Pity and Comp^ssion. But,

2. Let me tell you, There Is no such cause of rejoicing, as you imagine; if you
sin more quietly when we are silenced, Conscience will speak at last, the
flames of Hell (at furtherst) will awaken it, and then you will wish that you
had both enjoyed and improved your faithful Monitors, who out of Love to your
souls, durst not but speak against your sins. Besides our sufferings presage
you no good: 1 Pet. 4.17. If Judgment begin at the house of God -- the Cup may
pass from us to you. When God gives order to begin at his Sanctuary, he intends
utter desolation. In Ezekiel. 12.3, 4. the Prophet is commanded to remove his
stuff, as one going into captivity for a type to the People. You will see us
ere long removing our stuff, what if this be a type to you? sure I am it is a
warning. Let our sufferings be supposed never so just and righteous, yet are
there not among you, even among you, sins as heinous and provoking? Luke 23.40.
Do you not fear God, since you are in the same condemnation? Alas poor souls!
were you sensible, it would be small joy to you to have your Ministers driven
into Corners. But so much to the first sort.

2. I am now to turn my speech to you, whom the Text directly concerns, who
look upon our removal as a Judgment; who are burdened for the reproach of
solemn Assemblies: there is danger of your stumbling (as the Text intimates)
and therefore let me caution you also, Take heed you be not offended by, or
stumble at our sufferings; many ways you may miscarry; it may possibly be a
purling case with you, how to reconcile our suffering in this case with God's
Justice; but remember with the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 12.1. to hold the
conclusion however things go. You may also meet with temptations to call in
question the Truth of that Doctrine we have delivered to you, or to doubt
whether we have taught you the good and the right Way; but that which is most
ordinary, and against which you need to be most cautioned, is, Lest your hands
be weakened, and your hearts discouraged in the Profession of the Truth; lest
the Shepherds being smit^en, the Sheep be scattered; lest by our Sufferings,
you be moved from the Hope of the Gospel. To prevent which or the like
miscarriages, consider;

1. Our Sufferings are not to weaken or discourage, to confirm and encourage
you: you quite pervert the End of our Afflictions, if you draw arguments of
discouragement from them. 2 Cor. 1.6. Whether we be afflicted, it is for your
Consolation -- We are put to lead, that you may the more cheerfully follow, if
called to it. Phil. 1.14. Many of the Brethren in the Lord waxed confident by
my bonds: That was indeed a right Improvement of Paul's Sufferings; I mean, not
that you should run your selves upon sufferings, or do any thing unlawful or
unwarrantable to pull Afflictions upon your own heads. The Serpents wisdom is
commendable when in conjunction with the Doves simplicity and innocence; but if
the Cup (which ordinarily goes round) be put into your hands, our Example
should be your Encouragement to drink it more cheerfully. As for doing any
thing (or so much as speaking) against Authority upon our account, far be it
from us to urge you to it: nay, we charge you to keep the way of Duty and
Loyalty, to Sovereign Authority; The wrath of man works not the Righteousness
of God: but if you be called out to bear witness (as we conceive we now are) to
the Truth of God, or the Purity of his Worship and Ordinances, then we say to
you, look on us and do likewise: than choose rather to suffer than sin. We have
preached the Truth, and we now are called to seal it with the loss of our
Livelihood and Liberty in some measure. Let not our Sufferings weaken or
dis-settle, but rather strengthen your Faith, and heighten your resolution: our
Afflictions should be your Encouragements.

2. Nor should the bitter Scoffs and Reproaches which you may undergo for our
sakes, at all move you: I doubt not you will have the scorn as well as the
loss. It will be said to you in way of derision, as the Sons of the Prophet
said to Elisha, 2 Kings 2.3. Know thou not that the Lord will take thy
Master from thy head to day? So, know you not that your beloved Minister is a
going? As they said to David, Psalm. 42.10. Where is now thy God? So to you,
Where is now your Minister, whom you almost made a God of? This will be a sword
in your bones; such Reproaches added to your loss, will be ready to break the
heart of those who prize their faithful Ministers, as they ought to do; to whom
they are as Chrysostom to his People, equally necessary as the Sun in the
Firmament: But it is your part to arm your selves with Courage and Patience,
and to observe that double Rule of Solomon, Prove. 26.4, 5. Answer not a Fool --
that is, do not render Reproach for Reproach, or Railing for Railing, nor yet
be put besides your Patience or Constancy, which is his design: Yet answer him
according to his folly -- that is, chide and rebuke him, let him know, that
there is no such cause of rejoicing in the loss of a faithful Ministry, that he
shall one day know the worth of that Mercy which now he dis-esteems and
undervalues.

3. Though it must be acknowledged one of God's sadest Dispensations, to take
away a faithful Ministry, to send a Famine of the Word; yet this must not
discourage us, so as to make us desist from Holiness: bless God that you ever
had such a Mercy, and got good by it; bewail sin that has deprived you of it;
but take heed you do not upon this account turn aside, as Joash when good
Jehojadah was dead; and as the Israelites when Moses was gone: rather call to
mind what we have spoken for your Confirmation, give diligence when we are
gone, to have the things in remembrance which you have heard from us: and as an
encouraging Word (with which I shall conclude) assure your selves, that even
this sad Providence, is within the compass of those things in the Promise,
which shall work for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28. The loss of a
Faithful Minister may be sanctified, to effect that good in and for you, which
the Enjoyment has not. You mistake if you think we have done Preaching; no, we
are only called to preach to you out of the Pulpit of the Cross; and I hope it
may be said of us, as of Abel, Heb. 11.4. though we are dead, we yet speak: And
why may it not be hoped, that our Preaching out of that Pulpit, may be more
effectal than out of this? That Is a comfortable Word to those that can apply
it, 1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul -- all are yours; i.e. they are ordained for your
benefit, all God's disposals of us (whatever you may think) are for your
advantage: and through Grace, I shall, in confidence thereof, say with the
Apostle, Phil. 2.17. If I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your
Faith, I joy and rejoice with you all. May but my Sufferings attain their end,
which is your Consolation and Salvation, I shall through Grace bless God, in
making use of me to that purpose: In the mean while, that is a staying Word to
my soul, Luke 13.33. It cannot be that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem; that
is, be taken away before he has done his work. I know God is not tied to one
way, he can make our silence speak louder and more effectually, than all our
Sermons have done.

To conclude then, let me resume my request to you all; Let none of you stumble
or take offense at our Sufferings. Let me humbly use the Words of our blessed
Savior, Mat. 11.16. Blessed is he that is not offended in us. Let not our
Enemies rejoice or censure us; let not our Friends sorrow as without hope, but
let all wait and observe the issue, and I doubt not but God in his own time,
will manifest to the world, that his intentions (even in this thing) were good
toward his faithful Ministers, and waiting People: that this shall be as a
Refiners Fire, and Fullers Soap, to purify the Sons of Levi: that this shall
be the fruit, even the taking away of Jacobs sin, Isa. 27.9. and that the Lord
will not forsake his People, nor cast away his Inheritance; but Judgment shall
return unto Righteousness, and all the Upright in heart shall follow after it,
Psalm. 94.14, 15.

As for the third Doctrine, That a gracious soul fears and prays against the
evil Influence that his Sufferings might have upon others; I shall, as God
enables, put it in practice on your behalf, and shall take up the Psalmists
Words, Let not them that wait on thee be ashamed for my sake, O Lord God of
Hosts: Let not those that seek thee, be confounded, for my sake, O God of
Israel.

SERMON XII.
John 16.33. These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have
peace: in the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world.
IN the beginning of this chapter the Lord Christ tells his Disciples what
they shall suffer in the world, that when sufferings came according to his
prediction, they mi^ht not be offended at, but rather confirmed in the Faith of
the Gospel: and tells them the reason why they shall undergo these sufferings
from the world, from verse 1. to verse 5.

2. He acquainteth them with his departure out of the world, and that they
should want his company and counsel, verse 5.6.

3. Yet Christ tells them it is for their advantage that he goes away;
implying he should do them more good in Heaven than on Earth; especially in
sending the Comforter verse, 7. And here he shows the Spirits Office, as to
the world, from verse 7. to verse 12. Secondly, to them, from verse 12. to
verse. 16. and and in the 16th verse he brings his discourse to a conclusion.

4. We have the Disciples enquiring after the meaning of this discourse of
Christ's, from verse 17. to verse 20. To which he answers, in declaring the
sorrow they shall have after his departure, and that it shall end in joy, yea,
such joy as they shall not be deprived of, verse 20. to verse 23. I will see
you again, and your hearts shall rejoice. This coming again was by the
Comforter, and when he came they should have joy, because a full return of
Prayer, ver. 23. to verse 28.

5. Upon this discourse the Disciples profess their understanding of Christ's
meaning, verse 29, 30.

6. You have Christ's discourse upon this, foretelling their leaving of him at
his passion, and their sufferings in the world, and the peace they should have
in him, from ver. 31. to the end.

In the Text observe, 1. Christ's Assertion, That in the world they should have
tribulation. 2. His Exhortation, To be of good cheer. 3. The Motive to this,
Christ tells them, he has overcome the world.

Doct. 1. That Christ told his Disciples, in the world they should have
Tribulation.

Explicat. 1. What is meant by Tribulation. 2. What is meant by shall have. 3.
Who are meant by You, ye shall have. 4. What is meant by, In the world.

1. What is meant by Tribulation? The word in the Original is (...) the Greek
word signifies Tribulation, Affliction, trouble, distress, whether by loss of
estate, liberty, etc. It signifies any sort of tribulation or affliction that
is for ones casting down, Mat. 24.21. 1 Cor. 7.28. Acts 14.22. 2ly. The Syriack
word, is, Aulzono, it comes of the root Alaz, which signifies he has forced,
constrained, as in Gal. 6.12. And so this word is used for Oppression,
Persecution. And the same word is used, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. And so here, as appears
from the scope of Christ's discourse.

2. What is meant by, Shall have? The word in the Original (...); the theme is
(...). Shall have, being the future tense, implies that the suffering was to
come. It is not you have had, but shall have tribulation. This you are sure and
certain of. And so the Syriack [how e l koun] there, shall be to you, it shall
come.

3. Who are meant by You? does it imply that the Apostles, and they only,
should have tribulation in the world? or, are we to understand it of
Christians, or Christ's Disciples in general? I answer. This discourse is
principally to the Disciples; yet with relation to all Christians that will be
steadfast or constant in the Christian Faith. Matthew. 28.19, 20. -- And lo I am
with you always, etc. i. e. with you whilst you live, and with the Ministers
that shall succeed you in this work to the end of the world. And so in this
chapter, from ver. 22. to 28. is hinted, that Christ will by his Spirit give
comfort, and a spirit of prayer, and gracious answers; and though the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit were proper to the Apostles, yet these belong
to the Church in common, and to Christians in all ages. 2. Christ assures his
Disciples, yea, all that should be his Disciples hereafter, as Mat. 16.24. that
they should meet with the cross; and so advises all that resolve to be his
Disciples beforehand to prepare for sufferings. As in Luke 14.25. to the end.
And so the Apostles, Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 2.12. So that all that will be
sincerely godly, however they may now be free from, yet they shall have
tribulation.

4. What is meant by, In the world? (...). Now (...) is put for this world, in
opposition to the world or life to come, as John 12.25. and 2 Cor. 1.12.

In the world, is a limitation; it is to last only whilst Christians are upon
Earth: it cease when they leave the world, 1 Pet. 1.6. Now for a season ye
are in heaviness. [Now.] And it is said of the Saints, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that
if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, etc. And so the Apostle, Phil. 1.23. and Rev. 21.4. God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed
away. After a Christian has passed over this life, all his Afflictions and
Tribulations are over. It is but in the world, that is the time and date of
them.

Again, In the world you shall have] It is not all the time you are in the
world: though sometimes the tribulations of the Faithful begin at their
conversion, and continue till their death; yet more ordinarily they are but as
storms, Revel. 2.10. Yet this is certain, in the world Christians shall have
tribulation, though when, and how long it is not for us to know aforehand, as
Christ told his Disciples, Acts 1.7. The times and seasons are in God's power.

Secondly, The Reasons why.

1. Because there is an enmity in the world against Piety and Holiness, ever
has been, and will be; and that is the ground of Persecution, and of
Christians Tribulation, Gal. 4.29. As the world hated Christ, John 15.18, 19.
The world, as it is taken for the irregenerate, 1 John 5.19. So every
irregenerate man, Romans 8.7. And this is the ground of their tribulation in the
world.

2. In the world they have Tribulation for the trial of their Graces. As all
Job's were for his trial. And indeed Hypocrites and sincere Christians cannot
be discovered assunder but by persecutions and tribulations, as in Rev. 2.10.
and that is the reason that the Devil and wicked men may prove Liars: for
though God has sufficiently confuted them, yet are they ready to say, as Job
1.9, 10, 11. Does Job fear God for naught? etc. and Job 2.4, 5.

3dly. They are in Tribulation, because they stand in need of it, 1 Pet. 1.6.
especially when they grow proud, sensual, and their hearts are lifted up; as
Psalm. 30.6, 7. So when David had committed murder, etc. 2 Samuel 12.10, 11. God
keeps (as it were) a stricter hand over him than before, 2 Samuel 24. As we say
of children, that correction is sometimes as necessary as food: so is
Tribulation for God's Children.

Fourthly, because it is for their good. As Frost and Snow is seasonable in
winter, profitable for the Corn, killing the Weeds; so is Tribulation, Jer.
24.5. Like these good Figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away
captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the Land of the
Caldeans for their good. As all things shall, so afflictions do work together
for good, Romans 8.28. Psalm. 119.67. And the Faithful should never be in
Tribulation, but that God aims at their good.

1. To work them to humiliation and repentance, as in 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. Deuteronomy.
8.2, 3, 16. so this is God's end, to break our proud spirits, to work us to
humiliation for sin, and to a hatred and forsaking of it, as a main cause of
all our troubtes. And is not this more for our good, than if we should be let
alone in our sins?

2. Again, for the increase of patience, experience, hope, as Romans 5.3, 4, 5.
And to keep us in obedience, to keep us up in duty; afflictions make Christians
more watchful, Psalm. 119.71. And indeed, for practical Godliness the Church
flourished most under the ten Persecutions; and what tends to this, is
clearly for a Christians good.

3. Again, it is for their good, to wean them from the world, to draw out their
desires after Heaven. Nature does incline us to love and like the world, and
constant prosperity does increase our love of it, as seems to be employed, in
Psalm. 62.10. If Riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. But now
tribulation weaneth our affections from the world, helps to raise them unto
things above, according to our duty, Col. 3.2. makes us with the Apostle,
Phil. 1.23. desire to depart, and to be with Christ.

4. Again, it for their good, as it does further their assurance and hope of
Glory: For a Christian may doubt of his sincerity, and that he shall not hold
out in sufferings, but when he finds that through Grace he is enabled to
suffer, it does mightily strengthen his hope, Phil. 1.29. it is promised as a
favor, to be able to suffer; and doubtless it is, because it strengthens
assurance; one that writes of the ten Persecutions, says, Christians did then
seek more for Martyrdom than now men do for Bishoprics.

5. Again, because that the Faith and Graces which they exercise in tribulation
shall be for their honor and commendation at the great day of Christ's
appearing, as 1 Pet 1.7. Rev. 7.14.15. These are they which came out of great
tribulation, etc.

6. Again, because this very suffering of the Saints works for their eternal
advantage. It shall be fully recompensed sometime in this life, Matthew. 19.26.
but especially in the life to come, as 2 Cor 4.17. It works for us, not in a
way of merit, yet in a way of promise, God having promised a compensation in a
high measure to them.

Restrict. 1. That though in the world Christians, we shall have Tribulation,
yet it is not said when. It is not when the Devil will, or when wicked men
will; for they would always have the Saints in tribulation. And if it had been
so, it would not have been said, shall have, but ye have Tribulation. For when
they have it not, it is because the Devil and wicked men are staved off by God,
as Job 1.10. But when God will, they shall have Tribulation, that is, when
there is need for it, 1 Pet. 1.6.

Restr. 2. It is said Tribulation, not how great. It is not so great as the
Devil and wicked men would have: for they are for the utter ruin and
destruction of such; as Job 2.3. he would have had Job's life. And so Esth.
3.8, 9. Haman would have the Jews destroyed. And Psalm. 137.7. The children of
Edom say of Jerusalem, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof. But
God has the bounding of their tribulation, as Rev. 2.10. it is but, -- shall
cast some into Prison, etc.

Restr. 3. For the time of Tribulation it is not here mentioned; it is only
said, in the world, but not how long. It is not so long as the Devil, etc.
would: For as God is said to bound the measure and degrees, so the time, Psalm.
76.10. It shall not be always, Psalm. 125.3. The Devil's time is limited, Rev.
2.10. Yet, as it is certain that in the world we shall have tribulation; so
when, and so much, and of as long continuance as God sees good.

Use 1. If this be so, then Christians are not to think it strange when
tribulations come, 1 Pet. 4.12. It would be strange for a Christian to be free
from tribulation, when Christ has told him in the world he shall have it; and
to have it is more a mark of God's Child than to be without it, Heb. 12.7, 8.
Therefore to be without it, is rather a wonder, than to have it.

Use 2. Expect it, if the words of Christ be true in the Text, and the
Apostles, 2 Timothy 3.12. then expect it. Christ did engage his Disciples to sit
down and make account of it beforehand; as in Luke 14.25. etc. If thou can
not bear tribulation, never take upon thee to be Christ's Disciple.

Use 3. Prepare for it. He is an unwise man that expects it, and does not
prepare for it. Christ has given this warning that we might prepare.

1. Those that have not prepared, have basely fallen off, and taken offense at
the Gospel, Luke 8.13.

2. Those that have been prepared, have been confident; nothing could make them
fall off, no tribulation, Romans 8.35. etc.

Directions.

1. Be sure thou be clear as to thy Principles, be rooted and grounded in them:
and though thou see no sufferings before thee, yet make account of them, as
Mat. 7.24. to ver. 28.

2. Endeavor firmly to believe the Promises concerning the life and world to
come. As Moses suffered with the People of God, having respect to the
recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26. And Christ, for the joy set before him,
endured the cross, despised the shame, etc. Heb. 12.2. This encouraged the
Apostles, 2 Cor. 4.17.

3. Be not confident of thy self, but pray unto God to uphold thee in the hour
of temptation. Peter's confidence and fall should be our warning. And we should
remember that, Romans 11.20. Be not high-minded, but fear.

Use 4. Then do not condemn a Cause, neither be offended with Principles,
merely because the parties that own them may suffer. As the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
3.3. That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for your selves know
that we are appointed thereunto. It is true, suffering is not an infallible
mark, but where Scripture-evidence confirms Principles for which men suffer.

Doct. 2. Christ has overcome the world. Explication.

Expli. 1. What is meant by overcome? The word in the Original is, (...) The
Theme is (...), of not yielding, or giving way, or place; and so here it is
used. I have conquered or overcome by not yielding to the Devils Temptations,
or the worlds Allurements or Threats. So that Overcoming is taken for a
constant adhering to a Cause or Principle, notwithstanding all Oppositions, by
Arguments or Force, receiving the Assaults, keeping Ground, and not giving
back. So it is used, 2 Pet. 2.19, 20. A man is overcome where he yields; but so
long as he keeps the field, he is not overcome: He that keeps the field, if
the other retreats, is Conqueror. So Rev. 2.7, 17. and chap. 3.12, 21. verses,
parallel to Mat. 24.13. Secondly, It is taken for subduing the Enemy,
destroying his Force and Power, seizing of his spoil and prey, making him
yield, and so vanquishing him that he has no further power to resist. So the
Syriack word, Zkiteh, Luke. 11.22. So a man is overcome when he is spoiled of
his Arms and Artillery, and what he has.

2. What is meant by the World? By this is meant all earthly things, so far as
they are temptations to sin, and means to draw us off from the Way of
Salvation, Gal. 6.14. 1 John 5.4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the
World; i.e. the Allurements of the World, as they would draw; and the
Persecutions of the World, that would drive us out of the Way of Salvation; the
World's Temptations that would hinder Christ's effecting our Salvation.

Secondly, How did Christ overcome the World?

1. By bearing Temptations that did arise from the want of such things, as are
necessary for the sustaining natural life, and not being prevailed on thereby
to sin against God, Mat. 4.1, 2, 3. there the Devil subtly makes use of his
want for the engaging him to sin; but though this was a sharp Temptation, yet
Christ fully overcame it, ver. 4.

2. By rejecting the pomp, glory and honor of the World, as they were laid
before him, Mat. 4.8, 9. he overcame this Temptation by the Word of God. So
Joh. 6.15. there was a Temptation to enjoy worldly Greatness, yet he overcame
it by withdrawing himself. Thus Christ overcame the World in the height of its
pomp and glory.

3. Temptations from friends to sin, to avoid evil foreseen; these are great
Temptations, yet these Christ overcame, Mat. 16.21, 22. Christ knowing and
foreseeing his great Sufferings, acquainteth his Disciples with them; Peter
advises him to look to himself (as this way the Christians were assaulted in
the Primitive times) yet Christ overcame and repelled that carnal suggestion,
ver. 23.

4. Christ also overcame the Sufferings of the World, and all the Persecutions
that were raised against him: Persecutions of the tongue, John 9.24. So Mat.
10.25. And after his Agony in the Garden, his buffetting, spitting on, crowning
with thorns, and the ignominious and shameful Death of the Cross: These were
Temptations to sin; but in all these conflicts, Christ overcame, and preserved
himself free from sin.

5. He did not only overcome all Temptations from the World, but the Captain or
General on the Worlds side, who has the Management of these Temptations,
Ephesians. 2.2. Mat. 4.3, to 10. Thus he fully overcame the World, Col. 2.15.

Thirdly, In which of the foregoing senses did Christ overcome the World?

I answer, 1. In both: he overcame by resisting all Temptations he met with
from the World; and enduring all sufferings that were laid on him in the world
patiently and meekly without sin, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. Isa. 53.8, 9. If he had
been drawn to sin by the World, then the World had overcome him; but being
free, he overcame.

2. Christ having thus overcome the World, he did manage his Victory after his
Resurrection, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. and after his Ascension, Ephesians. 4.10, 11.
Thus he did by the preaching of the Gospel, increase his Dominions, calling in
the Gentiles; Thus he did excellently pursue his Victory, to the weakening of
Satan's Kingdom, and the enlargement of his own.

Fourthly, Why is it said, [I have overcome] when the Victory was not yet
perfect?

I answer, 1. Because Christ had then in his own person conquered the World so
far as he had been assaulted by it, or had conflicted with it. And though his
perfect Victory over the World in his own person, was to be accomplished on his
Cross; yet it is said to be already, because he was ^^rtain that he should
overcome in his last and great Conflict on the Cross.

2. Though this Victory be not accomplished fully as to Christ's Members, yet
Christ has so overcome the World, as that it is certain at the Day of
Judgment, they shall have no power to make any further resistance, when the
wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm.
9.17. When those his Enemies, which would not that he should reign over them,
shall be brought and slain before him, Luke 19.27. When the World shall pass
away, and the Lust thereof, 1 John 2.17.

Fifthly, That it is so.

1. Because Christ as he came into the World pure, without sin; so, though the
Devil and World, did to their utmost assault him, yet he was till death, pure,
and free from sin. Our first Parents were overcome when they yielded to sin:
but Christ overcame because he is pure, and free from sin, and ever was so, 1
Pet. 2.22. Heb. 4.15. and this is as it were a plain proof of his Victory; he
was tempted, yet without sin; as the contrary is of the Devil and Worlds
conquest, 2 Pet. 2.19, 20.

2. Because he enjoyed the Crown, the Reward due to the Conqueror, Rev. 3.21.
-- As I overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne; q. d. I
therefore have this Glory and Honor conferred on me, because I have conquered:
If I had been overcome by the World, then I had missed of it. So that Christ
sitting at his Fathers right hand, is an evident Testimony of his Victory; for
he had not had that Glory if he had not conquered.

Sixthly, Reasons why.

Reas. 1. That he might glorify his Divine Power. After that the Devil and
World had overcome Adam and his Posterity, and Man by the own strength and
power could not overcome or get out of his snare, or from under the power of
Satan and the World, Heb. 10.4, to 10. Lo I come; q. d. I come, who am God as
well as man, able to give satisfaction and to conquer the World; and having
undertaken this conflict, and entered the Lists, he overcame for the Glory of
his Divinity.

Reas. 2. That he might accomplish our Salvation. For had he whilst he was upon
earth, been overcome by the World, and so tainted with sin, the work of our
Redemption and Salvation had miscarried, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. In Exodus 12.5. The
Lamb that was to typifie Christ, must be without blemish: Now had Christ been
overcome, so as to be stained with sin, our Salvation had miscarried; but he
overcame the world for our sakes.

Reas. 3. He did this for the Joy that was set before him ( Heb. 12.2.) If he
did win the victory, and gain the conquest, the advancing of his humane nature
to God's right hand, was promised him, if he overcame, and this encouraged him
in his conflict; as appears, Who for the Joy, etc. This he did expect at
God's hand, John 17.4, 5. I have glorified thee on earth; -- and now, O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which I had with thee
before the world was. He was just now at his last and great conflict, is
confident he shall overcome, and minds God of his Reward.

Reas. 4. That he might teach and instruct us how to conquer the World: Christ
conquering by suffering, was for our example; 1 Pet. 2.21. -- Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. And so
we are in our conflicts frequently put in mind of C^rist's, Heb. 12.2, 3, 4.
and so doubtless Christ did conquer and overcome the World, for to give us an
Example: He could have done it as God; but he did it in our natures for this
end.

Use 1. If this be so then, it is for a Christians comfort and encouragement,
that the Captain of our Salvation, has overcome our Enemy, the World, Heb.
2.10. He got a perfect Victory by Suffering. It is the joy of Soldiers that
their Captain has got the field. So it should be of us Christians; for the
Soldiers are not more sure to reap benefit by the Captains victory, than we by
Christ's.

1. Christ has overcome the World in the utmost of its strength and vigor: It
tried its full strength with the want of necessary sustenance when hungry, with
the height of Glory and abundance, Mat. 4.2, 3, 8. with the persuasion of
friends, and extremity of sufferings; yet Christ overcame the World in that
nature; and so assures us that its possible for man to overcome this Enemy in
its full force.

2. Because that this Victory of Christ's is the ground of our Assurance of
Salvation. For after the Devil had conquered the first Adam, if he and the
World had conquered the Second, our Salvation had miscarried, Heb. 2.14, 15. If
he had been basted, we had been lost; but if he had failed in this enterprise,
there had been no hope of our Conquest; therefore we have ground to rejoice
that Christ has overcome the World.

3. There is ground of Comfort that Christ has overcome the World, in that he
has left us a bafled and beaten enemy to conflict with; What an Encouragement
is this? Christ has broken the Serpents head: and though this Enemy did rally
and charge again and again, yet at last Christ did fully overcome. So that this
may encourage us to enter the Lists with this Adversary, and may give us great
hopes of Victory.

4. He has left us the way and method how he overcame the World, viz. by
constant resisting and opposing by the Word of God, and patient enduring of all
assaults, Mat. 4.2, to 10. and if we will but study this Rule, and follow it,
we shall overcome. He tried his full strength on Christ, and was thus
conquered: We have the same Enemy, but weaker, because overcome; and may
rejoice that we know how to conquer him.

Use 2. If this be so, then it is great sin and shame for Christians to be
overcome of the World in any of its assaults, for to be overcome by a bafled
beaten enemy that Christ did overcome. With what face can such as Demas, or
those in Luke 8.13. look Christ in the face, the Captain of Salvation, who
being Conqueror, hates conwardly yielding; especially, he having acquainted us
with the Assaults of this Adversary, and how to overcome them?

Use 3. Let us study his way of conquering, and follow it exactly, and we shall
do so too. This the Apostle did, 2 Cor. 6.4, to 11. they did exactly follow
their Captain. So did the Primitive Martyrs, who had all the same Assaults from
the World as Christ had, but by resisting by the Word, and enduring, they
overcame. And so shall Christians that will closely follow this Discipline in
this War.

Use. 4. If this be so, then in the sharpest Conflicts thou shall meet with,
call to thy conquering Captain for help. He has won the day, and can assist
thee. Heb. 2.18. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is
able to succor, etc. What ever the Assaults is, he is able to give thee
sufficient help. As in that 2 Cor. 12.9. Let us take this course, for it will
be a great shame to us to be overcome.

Doct. 3. That though Christians have Tribulation in the world, yet they are to
be of good Comfort, because Christ has overcome the World.

Explication.

1. What is meant, by be of good cheer? The Word in the Original is, (...). The
theme (...); It signifies, I confide, or trust, Mat. 9.2. -- Be of good cheer,
etc. i. e. trust, confide, be of good heart as to the issue; and Mark 6.50. And
so the Syriack word, [Etlabbw] it is used for to be of good heart, cheer up,
let not your spirits faint, fail, or be dejected. And so it is used in Acts
27.25. And so in 1 These. 5.14. -- Comfort the feeble-minded, etc. put courage
into drooping spirits that are apt to be dismayed. So here, In the World you
shall have Tribulation; but be of good heart.

2. But be of good cheer, you are likely to have Tribulation in the World; and
that I know is likely to be daunting and dismaying news to you: For in that
Heb. 12.11. No chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous. But
this is an adversative particle; though it be so that nature does incline men
to be dismayed and cast down; but be not you so; but act contrarily; be of good
cheer; pluck up your hearts and spirits like men; be not dismayed.

3. For] This is a causal particle, and does intimate the reason why Christians
should be of good cheer. I have had the same conflict with the World you shall
have, and I have got the Victory; this is spoken by Christ in relation to his
full overcoming of the World, and sitting at the Right hand of God: Therefore
be of good comfort, I have beaten this enemy, and have got a glorious triumph:
you have this beaten enemy to fight, and may expect the like issue, Rev. 3.21.

Secondly, The Reasons. Why, have Christians ground of comfort in Tribulation?

1. Because they suffer Tribulation for Righteousness sake, and so are blessed,
as in Mat. 5.11. And so 1 Pet. 4.14. and 3.14. If ye suffer for Righteousness
sake, happy are ye. Now when there is evidence from the Word of God, and
Conscience, that the cause of our suffering is our being Righteous, the
Scripture accounts us blessed.

2. Because it is an evident token to such persons of their Sincerity, and
having Truth of Grace, 1 Pet. 4.14. And this is a sign of a through-work when
men endure, Luke 8.13. As it is a high Gift ( Phil. 1.29.) so a sign of a great
measure of Grace, to be able to believe and suffer.

3. Because that by suffering Tribulation, God is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.14.

When a Soldier can ^^y, I suffer these losses for it; I judged it a cause
worth suffering for: as Mat. 19.27. Now this is for the credit of Christ Cause.
As in the Primitive times against Pagans: In the time of the Vandal Arrians
against false doctrine: And in the time of Popery, against false doctrine and
worship, God was glorified.

4. Because such as do thus suffer, theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.10.
And so the reason is given because that the Prophets that are now in Heaven,
underwent the like Persecutions, Mat. 5.12. and therefore ground of Comfort.
This the Apostle gives, Rom, 8.17, 18. 2 Cor. 4.17. And the examples that are
gone before. And,

5. Because that though Christians have Tribulation in the world, yet in Christ
they have peace. What need a Christian matter, though the Devil and wicked men
be at war with him, when he has peace with God, Christ and his Conscience? as
the Text; so Romans 5.1. Joh. 14.27. And by suffering Tribulation, this is
preserved, therefore rejoice and be of good cheer; this is the best peace.

6. Because of the Profit and Commodity that Christians shall reap by
Tribulation in this Life: As Heb. 12.11. and upon this account the Apostle
speaks, Romans 5.3, 4, 5. And so though the outward man decay, that is, though
estate, health, liberty, and whatever appertains to the outward man decay; yet,
as 2 Cor. 4.16. we are of good cheer, sensibly perceiving spiritual profit by
our great Affliction, and Tribulation.

7. Because by suffering Tribulation, we are made conformable to the Image of
Jesus Christ, Romans 8.29. And though the holy Ghost speaks this of the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.4. Phil. 3.21. yet the Apostle, Phil. 3.10. and so 2 Timothy 2.12. it is with Christ; and a fellowship and conformity to his Image:
Therefore great ground for us to be of good cheer.

8. A Christian is to be of good cheer, because Christ our Captain, bids us be
so* and if he did not see ground and cause thus to encourage us, he would never
have done it. He bad the Disciples, in Mark 6.50. Be of good cheer. It is God
and Christ that have the overruling hand in these Tribulations, as 1 Cor.
10.13. therefore ground of being of good cheer; Christ has bidden us so to be.

2. Why, because Christ has overcome the World? Did not Job overcome the World
by Patience? Job 1.22. And so Moses, who did choose Afflictions? And so Jam.
5.10, 11. So Mat. 5.11. To this I answer.

1. That indeed they are Examples of Courage and Patience; but they suffered as
private persons, or more on a private account: Therefore so eminently we are
not bid, be of good comfort, though something is hinted in Mat. 5.11.

2. Jesus Christ overcoming the World, is of public concernment; he did it in
our stead and behalf. The Devil and World did design to hinder our Salvation by
tempting Christ to sin; if they had prevailed, our Salvation had been hindered:
but his overcoming the world, removed all obstructions as to the meritorious
cause of our Salvation. Hence is that, Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our Justification.

3. Christ's overcoming the World is of greater concernment to us for our
Comfort in Afflictions, than Saints overcoming the world; for theirs was for
their own Salvation; the Scriptures making Promises to him that overcomes,
Mat. 24.13. and Gal. 6.9. But now Christ did it on our account; the Glory
personally was his, John 17.5. before the World was, and that was large; as in
Phil. 2.6, to 9.

4. Christ's bidding us be of good Comfort on this account, because his Victory
has broken the Serpents head; he has left us but the distressed body to
conflict with. And though when we read of the Martyrs Sufferings, we may think
them almost comparable to Christ's; yet never any did nor shall for
Righteousness sake, suffer the like, as it appears, John 14.27. These
expressed in their death nothing like his Agony; especially, Mat. 27.46.

5. There is strength also given by virtue of Christ's Victory to overcome the
World, and so ground of comfort; as the Apostle concludes, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.
this is spoken in respect of suffering Tribulation. And so Phil. 1.29. To you
it is given in the behalf of Christ, etc. and that by Christ's Victory. And so
in Heb. 2.18. And thus there is cause to be of good cheer: As it was said of
Constantine, Sub Cruce Vinces; So Christians.

6. And lastly. His Conquest was of more public Example: Its true, others are
Examples, but Christ mainly, 1 Pet. 2.21. And so Heb. 2.10, 11. He by his
Sufferings was perfected: and so left us some in the way to Heaven, Col. 1.24.
And that is only so much as is necessary for our trial, and further fitting for
Heaven.

Use 1. If this be so, then it is the duty of Christians, in all Tribulations
they meet with in the world, to be cheerful. Christ commands his Disciples to
be so, in the Text. And the Apostle pressed this Doctrine, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Phil.
4.4. This always and evermore must take in the time of Tribulation; seeing
Christ did tells us, and we find by experience, we must have it in the world;
and then when we have it, we should be of good cheer.

1. We have examples of such as have practiced this. The Apostle says, Romans
5.3. We glory in Tribulation. And so in 1 Pet. 1.6. wherein ye greatly rejoice,
etc. speaking of the spirits of Saints at that time. So in that commendation,
Heb. 10.34. And so Paul and Silas sung in Prison. Also the comforts that
primitive and latter Martyrs have expressed, confirm this. No other sort of men
have been like them for this.

2. It is a duty that we sin much against God if we do not practice: because we
have encouragement from our Captain, that undertook and got this Victory for
our sakes, and has left but some straggling afflictions behind, Col. 1.24. We
should be very cowardly, if we do not with good courage follow him, when it is
but, Resist, and he will flee, Jam. 4.7. and but believe, as 1 John 5.4.

Obj. But some may object, If it was in some tribulation, I could be more
cheerful, if from enemies; as Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.

Ans. 1. To this I answer, That Christ has told us, that in tribulation which
we meet with in the world, of what nature and sort soever, we are to be of good
cheer; not in this or that particular tribulation only.

2. Christ has overcome the world in this point; when his Disciple^ fled, and
Peter denied him. And so Paul, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. No man stood with me, but all
forsook me. Yet he had God to stand with him.

Use 2. If this be so, Then a Christian, though he suffer, yet Christ has, as
it were, sweetened it, in bidding us rejoice: He has sweetly mixed this bitter
cup; though it cannot pass from us, but we must drink of it. What a voice is
this in affliction? it is suitable and comfortable, as Mark 6.50.

3dly. It is a great sin, not to be of good cheer in Tribulation. He knows
what the sharpest of afflictions mean, and underwent them; and so knows there
is ground for what he has engaged us to: and if we be not of good cheer, but
cowardly yield, as 2 Timothy 2.12. Him that is ashamed, and cannot patiently and
cheerfully bear tribulation, Christ will not own.

4thly. Let us think of such things in Tribulation, as may make us cheerful.
For in Tribulation it self no man can rejoice; it must be some adjunct that
must make us cheerful in it; As,

1. Sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. and so Hezekiah did, Isa. 38.3.

2. Interest in God, as our God; as in Phil. 4.4. So Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my
portion, therefore will I hope in him. This is the highest ground of comfort.

3. The glorious Issue; as Moses did, Heb. 11.25, 26. and Christ, Heb. 12.2.
and the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.17.

4. Look on it as an Honor, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. and so in Acts 5.4. the Apostles
looked upon it as a badge of Honor. So Gal. 6.17.

5. It is an excellent means to yield comfort in tribulation, to consider the
End God made with suffering Saints, as to this life; Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard
of the patience of Job, and have seen the End of the Lord, etc. So Joseph, and
David.

6. And lastly, Christ's Victory over the world, His Issue and Support we are
like to have, Hob. 2.18. This Christ lays down as ground of comfort; and this
we may take comfort mainly from.

SERMON XIII.
Acts 20.32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and the word of his
Grace, that is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified.
EVery Society shall have a Separation, and every Communion shall receive a
dissolution; the dearest Friends and sweetest Relations, as of Husband and
Wife, of Parents and Children, of Ministers and People, whom Nature,
Providence, and Election, like a threefold-cord has joined together, and this
strengthened with the strongest cement of true intensive love and affection,
shall sooner or later, either by Satan's rage, the malice of wicked men, or the
stroke of death, be parted asunder. Here is no certainty of long continuance in
this world, or of long enjoyment of any society or relation. The Tabernacle
made by Moses, had no continued abiding, but was carried up and down from place
to place, til it was placed in Solomon's temple in the Land of Canaan. God's
People in Scripture are called Pilgrims and Strangers. Whilst they are in this
world they are in a strange Country: like Abraham in Canaan, and Israel in
Egypt; they have no continued abiding until they come to Heaven, the Celestial
Canaan, that place of durable and uninterrupted Rest. And amongst these God's
Ministers have no assurance of their unchangeable residence among, and
ministration to, their loving and beloved People. A plain demonstration whereof
we have in the example of Paul; concerning whose many journeys from one Nation
and Church to another, we have abundant mention made in this History of the
Acts of the Apostles. And in this chapter we have mention made of four; the
first into Macedonia, where the Jews laid wait for Paul, ver. 1, 2, 3. The
second to Troas, where Paul preached in the night, administered the Lord's
Supper, and Eutichus sleeping, falls down from an high window, ver. 6, to 13.
The third to many places, to Assos, Mitylene, Chios, Samos, and Trogyllium,
verse. 13, 14. The fourth and last, more famous than the rest, was to Miletum,
ver. 15. from whence he sends to Ephesus, and calls together the Ministers of
the Churuhes there, ver. 17. and when they were come together, he takes his
Farewell of them; in which speech, he first declares his former manner of life
amongst them, how he had discharged the duties of his Ministry with meekness
and compassion, with diligence and innocence, with courage and resolution,
despising all dangers for the Gospel-sake, etc. In which example of his he
insinuates, not only to the Presbyters of Ephesus, but unto all Ministers unto
the end of the world, how diligently they ought to watch over the Flock,
serving the Lord in all humility, that is, not to pride in their gifts and
abilities; not to despise the wants and weaknesses of others; to sympathize
with the poor and afflicted; to be valiant and heroically constant in preaching
and defending the Truth, notwithstanding the many temptations and oppositions
they were to meet with, ver. 19, 20, 21. Secondly, he shows the condition of
his life at present* that he had a mighty impulse and persuasion of the Spirit
upon him, that bonds abide him in every City, ver. 22, 23. and his Christian
magnanimity, he was not moved with any of these things, nor counted his life
dear unto him, that he might finish his course with joy, and the Ministry he
had received of the Lord, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God, ver. 24.
In the third place, he prophesies concerning the future. And first, what
should befall himself; this was the last time they should enjoy him; And
behold, all ye among whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see
my face no more, ver. 25. And secondly, what should befall them after his
departure: As the absence of the Shepherd invites the wild beasts to fall upon,
devour and scatter the Flock; and as the death of the Husband invites the
wicked to oppress, wrong, and defraud his Widow and Fatherless: So the
departure of Paul, a vigilent and painful Shepherd, a loving and tender Father,
opens a way, and ushers in an opportunity for wicked men to enter in, and play
the part of Wolves and Oppressors against the Church of God. For I know, that
after my departure shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
Flock, etc. ver. 29, 30. and hence exhorts them unto all diligence and care,
for the due performance of their Ministerial Calling; Take heed therefore to
your selves, and to all the Flock of God, ver. 28. as if he should say, You
must not only take heed to others, but to your selves also. To others you must
take heed that they be not seduced with Errors and Heresies: and to your
selves you are to take heed that you incur not God's Displeasure and Rod, for a
neglect, or ill performance of your duty. And this he presses with diverse
Arguments; first, from their Name and Office, they were Bishops and Overseers
over the Flock. Secondly, from the great Appointer and Designer of them unto
this Office, the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, from the end of their appointment and
call to this Office, to feed the Flock. Fourthly, from the Owner of the Flock,
God himself. Fifthly, from the great Price paid to redeem and purchase this
Flock, which was neither Silver nor Gold; these were poor and mean things; but
Blood: not the blood of a mean-man, nor of a nobleman, nor yet of a King; but
the Blood of God! Take heed therefore to your selves, and all the Flock over
which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has redeemed and purchased with his own Blood. Sixthly, from the
consideration of the Churches enemies that should arise after his departure;
which were either foreign, or domestic. Foreign, were the Jews, or Gentiles
not yet converted to the Christian Religion. Such as these he means in ver. 29.
Their domestic enemies were such as were brought up by the Ministers of the
Gospel, but by ambition, covetousness and ignorance should apostatize, and fall
into erroneous and heretical doctrines, superstitious opinions, calling
themselves Apostles, but are not, mixing Christ and Moses together, asserting
the doctrine of the Nicholaitans: Such as these he means in ver. 30. Men of
your own selves shall arise, speaking perverse things, and shall draw away
Disciples after them: And these Enemies, in respect of their nature, are called
Wolves, and that in respect of certain resemblances: what Wolves are unto the
Flock, the same are Persecutors and Seducers to the Church of God. These by
Persecution would be grievous and intolerable: these by the Errors and
Heresies would be contagious and infecting. And after these motives, renews his
former Exhortation, that they would remember and watch, ver. 31. As if he
should say, Seeing Christ has redeemed his Church by his Blood, and I by my
great labors have builded up a Church among you; and seeing you are appointed
by the holy Ghost to be Overseers to the Flock, to feed it; and seeing after my
departure grievous Wolves shall arise to destroy the Flock, some by open
hostility and persecution, some by errors and infection; be so much the more
vigilant and industrious to save and preserve them and your selves: Let not
Christ's Blood be shed in vain, nor my labor lost, nor the enemies of the
Church advantaged, by your careless neglect of your duty, or by being infected
with the leaven of false doctrines; but be laborious and immovable and
courageous, that your People may be preserved, and your selves freed from the
blood of all men. And then for their better comfort and security against
Persecution by open and professed Enemies on the one hand, and against
erroneous, heretical and superstitious doctrines on the other hand, he
commits them to God and the Word of his Grace.

The words of the Text are part of Paul's Farewell to the beloved Ephesians, and
must now be the subject of my Valediction to you. And if you will have a name
for my Text, it is, The Pastors Farewell to his People; or rather, A departing
Pastors Security for his left People. Paul spoke to them as a departing man,
but a living Minister and Apostle. I speak them as a living man, but a dying
Minister. He told them after his departure they should see his face no more;
but in my dying expiring Office I have living hopes, that when the days, for
the slaying of the Witnesses (if now be the time) are accomplished, I shall be
restored to you again, Rev. 11.7, 8, 9, 11, 13.

In the words you have a twofold Remedy, in opposition to a twofold Malady. The
first Malady is the Churches affliction and pesecution, mentioned verse 29. for
which the Apostle prescribes God, as the Sovereign cure and remedy: I now
commend you to God. The second malady is Error and Heresy, by which many
should be deceived, mentioned verse 30. for which the Apostle prescribes God's
Word as the proper remedy; and now I commend you to God and his Word; which is
further amplified, first, by the adjunct title, Grace, and the Word of his
Grace; secondly, by the effects of this Word, first, Edification; secondly,
Life eternal, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance
amongst them that are sanctified. And then the title given to these Ministers
of Ephesus, Brethren; And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of
his Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified. Before I come to the Doctrine I chiefly intend, give
me leave briefly to touch, tanquam Canis ad Nilum, upon one observation from
the Apostles relative name to the Ministers of Ephesus; he calls them Brethren.
Whence note,

Doct. That true and real Christians are Brethren. What the Apostle Paul calls
here the Ministers of Ephesus, is true concerning all Ministers, and all
converted Christians. We read of several sorts and kinds of Brethren in
Scripture: Brethren by Nature, Brethren by Nation, Brethren by Relation,
Brethren by Affection, Brethren by Profession, manner of Employment, and same
Calling in the world: but the Fraternity of Christians, is from the Noblest and
firmest and happiest foundation, Eodem sanguine Christi glutinati, cemented
with the same blood of Christ. This Brotherhood ^f Christians is supernatural,
founded on the New^^rth, and work of Grace in the soul; this term and ^^lative
name is so usual in Scripture in this sense, that ^^^s needless to mention any.
But for further de^^^strations of it, they are Brethren.

1. They have all one Father, even God himself. To them that do receive him he
gave power to become the Sons of God, which are not born of flesh, nor of
blood, nor of the will of man, but by the will of God, John 10.11, 12.

2. They have all one Mother, the Church of God. But Jerusalem which is from
above, is free, which is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26.

3. They have all one elder Brother, Jesus Christ, The first born amongst many
Brethren, Romans 8.29.

4. They have all the same privileges, 1 Cor. 3.23. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.

5. They are clothed with the same spiritual garment, the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, Jer. 23.6.

6. They have the same Divine Nature, Grace and Holiness; whereby they resemble
their elder Brother, and bear the impress and image of their heavenly Father, 2
Pet. 1.4.

7. They are admitted to the same Table, fed with the same food of God's holy
Word; and feasted with the Flesh and Blood of the Son of God unto Life Eternal.

8. They all have one and the same Inheritance. An inheritance incorruptable,
and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the Heavens for them, 1 Pet.
1.4. I cannot stand to enlarge upon these, I leave them to your meditations and
enlargments. From hence you learn these Lessons.

1. That God is no respecter of persons, he regards no man the more for his
dignities, riches, nobleness of birth and pedigree: And esteems no man the less
for his poverty, meaness, and contemtibleness in the world, But every one that
does righteousness of what Nation soever, shall be accepted of him; all men's
blood is alike, the noble man and the mean man, the Englishman and the
Ethiopian have all red blood in their veins, it is sickness and health that
makes the difference; So all men by nature are alike, it is sin and Grace that
makes the difference: Yea, God crosses the great things of the world, to teach
us, what is of high esteem amongst men, is of small account with God. Brethren,
says the Apostle, you see your calling, how that not many wise men, not many
great men, not many noble men after the flesh are called; but God has chosen
the foolish and weak things of the world to condemn the wise and strong, 1 Cor.
1.26. He has chosen the poor of the world, rich in Faith, and Heirs of a
Kingdom, James 2.5.

2. We learn again, True Piety is great preferment. Grace and Holiness lifts a
man up to the noblest relations. Great was the perferment that Joseph was
lifted up unto, when of a prisoner he became the second of Egypt. Great was the
perferment of Daniel, when of a captive he was made chief of the Presidents of
Babylon. But greater was the advancement of Esther, when of a captive maid,
fatherless and motherless, she became Queen to the great Ashasuerus. Joseph's
and Daniels wisdom, and Esthers beauty, were the instruments and means of their
great and honorable advancements: But greater than these is the honor and
advancement of such as are truly Pious, they are Children of God, John 1.11,
12. Heirs of God, Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. espoused to the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords; there is none beyond this, none to be compared to it;
Grace and Holiness is the way and means to be thus advanced. Grace enobles the
mean, and makes the Noble more honorable; as it was said of St. Jerome, so it
may be said of every Noble Pious man; Genere nobilis, Sanctitate nobilior;
Noble by birth, but more Noble by Grace: meaness with Grace is Nobleness; and
Nobleness without Grace is but meaness: Grace brings a poor contemned botchy
Lazarus into relation of the Noblest Worthies of the world, to Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, to all the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, to such as are the most
Excellent of the Earth, the Worlds wonder, Angels delight, the Chariots and
Horsemen of the Nations, the brazen walls and gates of the Kingdoms they live
in: Grace investeth us with the same privileges as the richest Saints of the
world ever have enjoyed, the same Justification, the same Reconciliation, the
same Adoption, the same Life eternal and Glorification.

Secondly, If true Christians be Brethren, than this may exhort us to several
duties.

1. To live in love amongst our selves; the very term bespeaketh affection, and
the affection should never cease, so long as the relation endures. Who should
love more than those who are united in the same Head and Hope, and cemented
with the same blood of Christ? It was an honor to Religion once, and therefore
the Heathens said, Aspice ut se mutuo diligunt Christiani! See how these
Christians love one another! But alas, may we not say, See how they hate one
another! O take heed of discreditting your Profession, of opening the mouths,
and hardening the hearts of the wicked, by envy, hatred, or want of love one
to another. It was the Exhortation of John to his People, when he could preach
no more in the Pulpit, that they love one another; and it shall be mine in
these my dying words, that you love as Brethren: And as the foundation of this
relation is more excellent than others, so let our love be more fervent and
intensive.

2. Labor to maintain peace and unity. This is good and pleasant to behold,
Psalm. 135.1. Let it not be said that a legion of Devils can live in one man in
peace and unity, and yet Christians cannot: Let not inferiors go beyond the
bounds of their duty and place, neither let Superiors stand too much upon their
Prerogatives, but rather for peace sake to abate of what they might justly
challenge upon their superiority; the richer, the elder, the nobler you are, the
more endeavor to be good examples to others, condescending to the infirmities
of the weak, that the golden bond of peace be not broken; we see this in
Abraham, who though he was elder, yet for peace sake gave liberty to Lot his
younger to chose which way he would go to feed his cattle, And Abraham said to
Lot, Let there be no strife between me and thee, between my herdsmen and thy
herdsmen, for we are Brethren, Genesis 13.4. Labor to be of the same judgment in
matters of Religion; it is pleasant to see Brethren of the same mind in matters
of Religion. Consonant sounds upon Musical Instruments sweeten the melody:
there was no hammer nor ax, nor any tool of Iron heard in Solomon's Temple while
it was in building; neither should there be heard or seen discords in the House
of God. Divisions of judgments blunt the edge of Christians love, abate the
fervency of affection, create distance and shiness of society amongst
familiars, gratifies Satan, grieves the Spirit of God, weakens Christ's
Kingdom, and exposes a People to ruin: A Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand; and if one member of the body should fight with another, and each
member of the body scratch, tear and rend one another, how deformed, weak and
near to ruin would that be? Unapt sounds upon Musical Instruments spoil the
melody; the divisions of the Church of Corinth sounded harshly in the Apostles
ears; some said they were of Paul, others of Apollos, others of Cephas: If you
would be comforts and helps one to another, if you would be a credit to your
Profession, and comfort and rejoyceing to your Minister, live in unity of
judgment in matters of Religion; contend not for the shadow, and lose the
substance. Be not substantial about circumstances, and circumstantial about
Substances. In the language of the Apostle, I beseech you Brethren, that there
be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together in the
same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.

4. Be ready to help and succor one another: Nature has created a Sympathy
and Compassion in every relation. The mother pitties and abundantly tenders her
sick child, does all she can to do it good, to ease it under pain, to recover
it from pain and sickness. One brother is ready to condole with the sufferings
of another; to supply his wants; to defend him in danger: As Moses the
Israelite, whom the Egyptian wronged, Exodus 2.11, 12. and how much more should
Brethren in Grace? the dearer the Relation, the more tender Affection. As
Brethren, sympathize ye one with another; Succor such as are tempted; reduce
such as wander; satisfy the scrupulous; confirm such as are staggering; and
raise such as are fallen, by Prayers for them, by Counsels, by Exhortations.
Improve your Gifts and Abilities, your Graces and Experiences, to relieve and
succor them in spirituals, as you would be ready to assist them in temporals
with your estates.

5. Ministers should not lord it over Gods Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. they should
not imperiously lord it over them; nor lay greater burdens upon their
Consciences, than Jesus Christ has imposed: We must do all things for their
edification, not any thing for their destruction: We must further, not hinder
them in their progress to Heaven; take away occasions, not lay stones of
stumbling before them: How disgraceful and intolerable would it be, to see one
Brother to grow proud, lordly, and domineering over the other? would not every
one cry shame upon it? And shall those whom Grace has made equal, usurp
Authority, and rule one over another, when Christ has not given such authority
and jurisdiction? And as Ministers must not lord it over the Consciences of
their Flock, so one Minister must not act Authority over another. The Apostle
Paul was a man extraordinarily called and qualified, and so had an Authority
over other Ministers; but when this extraordinary Mission ceased, the
Superiority of Jurisdiction ceased also: And though he was an Apostle, yet he
acted not imperiously over the Presbyters, but called them Brethren: neither
had he Jacobs voice, and Esaus hand; he spoke not as a Lamb, and acted like a
Lion; but his carriage and deportment, was a comment upon the name. Where
Christ has given no superiority of power and jurisdiction, let no man claim
it, lest he be found an Usurper; whom the Apostle calls in one place, Bishops;
in another place, he calls Presbyters: as in this place, he calls the
Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, Presbyters, ver. 17. (...), He called
together the Presbyters of the Church. And in ver. 28. he calls them Bishops;
Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the flock over whom the holy
Ghost, (...), has made, or placed, you Bishops or Overseers. And the same
Apostle in his Epistle to Titus, calls Ministers, Presbyters, Chap 1.5. and the
same he calls, Bishops, ver. 7. Now if Presbyters and Bishops had not been one
and the same, but names of dinstict Office, Jurisdiction and Power, the
Apostle's reasons in verse. 7. of his directions in the 5th and 6th verses,
would have been inconsequential. And we find the Edification of the Church by
Word and Sacraments, is a duty imposed upon Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the
Flock of God among you. And Paul in his Valediction, injoyns the same Work,
Care, and Diligence to the Presbyters of Ephesus, ver. 28. And we read that
the Power of Ordination did belong to them, and was conferred by the Imposition
of their hands, and not by the hands of a Bishop only; Neglect not the Gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. And we read also in the Scriptures, that
they are called, Rulers; And we beseech you Brethren to know them that labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, 1 These. 5.12. And
again, Obey them that have the rule over you; for they watch for your souls, as
they that must give an account, Heb. 13.17. and therefore seeing they have the
same names, ordained to the same work, to feed God's Flock, to ordain Pastors
and Elders, to rule and govern the Church of God, there cannot be a Superiority
of Power and Jurisdiction in one Minister above another: but I pass by these
things, and leave them to your reading of the Scriptures, and observations of
them; I now come to the Doctrine intended, the Guardian and Protection Paul
committed his Ephesians unto, God and the Word of his Grace, etc. Whence note.

Doct. That God and the Word of his Grace, are the best Security and Comfort, a
departing Minister can commit his People unto.

When the Father of a Family dies, he commits his Wife and Children to his most
faithful, trusty, and assured Friends: And when a Minister departs from and
leaves his People, it lies him upon, in respect of his Office, Prudence,
Desire, and Affection of their Eternal Welfare, to commit them to the best
Protection and Provision he can: and which is the best, we see in the instance
and case of Paul, who, if there had been a better, would have made use of it.
Such were the Dangers by persecution and infection they were to meet with; such
was the love he bore to them, that he thought the best Security and Comfort
could not be too good for them; he commended them to God, and the Word of his
Grace; than which, there could not be a better found. The Doctrine contains two
parts; 1. A Dereliction; 2. A Protection: that a loss; this a Provision to make
up that loss: that, a ground and occasion of Sorrow; this, a ground and
occasion of Comfort: that exposes to Danger; this defends from Danger, secures
in Danger, and delivers out of Danger. I shall a little open the Sore (much I
need not, time and experience will declare it) and then I will show you the
Plaster, and apply it. The Sore we see in* Paul's departure, and experience it
in our selves: He takes his leave of the Ministers of Ephesus; and I of you. I
shall take the Doctrine in two parts. First observe.

Obs. That Ministers must not expect a quiet and settled condition in this
world: their residence amongst their People is not immovable, and inalterable,
but they and their People must part asunder: as providence brought them
together at the first, and continues them for a while together; so sometimes it
suffers them to be parted asunder. The Seeds-man you know stands not still in
one place, but goes from one part of the field unto another, according to the
will and appointment of his Master. Ministers are God's Seeds-men, and the
World is his field, wherein the Seed of his Word is sown; and he calls them
from one place and country to another, and they must obey: they are his
spiritual Clouds, to carry the Rain and Dew of their Ministry, to water the
Seed sown: and as natural clouds are broken by the stormy winds, and carried
hither and thither, to water, refresh and enrich the Earth; so these spiritual
Clouds, God's Garden-pots, are squandred, and carried up and down by the storms
of Persecution, to water, refresh, and make fruitful the Garden, the Church of
God. Upon the Persecution that was at Jerusalem, the Disciples were scattered
up and down, Preaching the Gospel and the Kingdom of God, Acts 8. When they
persecute you, says our Savior, in one city, flee ye to another. I need no
demonstrations, and instances, to evidence the Truth of the Doctrine; the
Experience of the Priests and Prophets under the Law; of the Apostles after the
times of our Savior, and the Ministers of the Primitive times of the Gospel,
are abundant Manifestations of the truth of this Doctrine; and our own
experience this day can set the seal to it, not only I, but hundreds, yea, it
may be thousands more are this day singing their funeral Dirges, and with Paul,
taking their leave of their beloved People. What a strange Mortality is now in
England! did ever England, nay, did ever the Christian World, hear of such a
Mortality, at the same instance of time? how dismal is the day of St.
Bartholomew! On this day was Jerusalem, once the Glory and Beauty of the world,
sacked by Titus and Vespasian. On the Eve of this day, began that bloody
Massacre in Paris. On this day is a great part of Englands Ministry slain;
slain not in their persons, but in their Offices. The dismal transactions that
have befallen the Church of God this day, deserve to be engraved in deep and in
indeleble Characters, on Pillars of the blackest Marble, that the Ages and
Generations to come, may read, and weep showers of tears, to quench Jerusalems
Flames, to wash and bathe the Wounds, of the poor massacred Christians, and
bewail Englands loss. But I forbear any more enlargements, I come to the
grounds* and reasons of it.

1. The first reason, Is barrenness under the means of Grace. When God bestows
upon a People and Nation means of Grace, he expects they should thrive up and
grow in Grace, and bring forth Fruits to his Glory; but if they remain barren,
he removes the means from them. When a man has taken in a piece of ground, to
make a Garden or Vineyard of, and has taken pains, and laid out cost upon it,
to fence it, to manure it, to plant it with the choicest Fruit, and finest
Flowers, he expects a proportionable fruitfulness for the satisfaction, and
recompense for his cost and pains; and if after all is done, and many years
expectations and waitings, it remains unfruitful, and disappoints his
expectations, he withholds his cost, care and pains, he will fence it no more,
dig it no more, he will not do any thing more unto it: Even thus the
unfruitfulness of a People under means provokes God to remove means: God chose
the People of the Jews before all other Nations of the world, to be his
pleasant Vineyard, Isa. 5.11. he did every thing requisite for ornament and
security, for fruitfulness and prosperity; he fenced it; he picked out the
stones from it; he built a tower and a winepress, and planted it with the
choicest Vine; and what could have been done more, that has not been done to
it, verse. 23. but when he looked for Grapes, behold wild grapes! he looked for
Judegment, but behold Oppression! for Righteousness, but behold a cry! ver. 7.
and what will God do to his Vineyard? will he fence it, prune it, water it any
more? No, no, but he will lay it open to the incursion of enemies, and they
shall make it a desolation; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, ver. 5.
Yea, God would remove the Ordinances of his Word, the Means of Grace and Glory
from it; And I will command the Clouds they rain no rain upon it! that is, my
Prophets shall no more instruct them, no more admonish and exhort them, the
rain of their Ministry shall no more fall upon them, ver. 6. And this same
Judgment our Savior threatens against the Jews in his days, because of their
barrenness. And therefore I say unto you, that the Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits thereof,
Mat. 21.43. And when God had waited eight hundred years upon the Jewish Polity,
and after all means, they remained barren, yea, brought forth wild grapes,
under the pains of his Prophets, of his Son, of his Apostles, they would not
believe and receive him and his Gospel, God flings them aside, and takes no
more pains with them; and therefore we find the Apostle, when they would not
embrace the Gospel, leaving them, saying, Be it known therefore unto you, that
the Salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and they will hear it, Acts
28.28. When the old World degenerated into profaneness, wantoness, superstition
and idolatry, and was drowned in voluptuousness, and all the means God had
used, and all the pains he had taken with them by his Spirit in his Prophets
were in vain; Threatenings would not affright and drive them from sin, nor
Promises draw them to piety and purity of Religion; God determines to let them
alone, and take no more pains with them. My Spirit shall not always strive
with Man, Genesis 6.3.

When the Jews in captivity were rebellious, and would not be wrought upon by
the preaching of Ezekiel, God tells him, that he should not be a Reprover to
them, but that his tongue should cleave to the roof of his mouth, Ezekiel. 3.26.

What is become of those seven famous Churches of Asia, of which this of
Ephesus was one, to whom John wrote? are they not become the seat of Gog and
Magog, under the Turkish blindness and superstition! And why? because they
degenerated from their primitive purity, vigor and fruitfulness, into
corruptions in Doctrine and Worship, into Spiritual lethargy and barrenness:
They were planted a noble Vine, wholly a right Seed; but they turned into the
degenerate Plant of a strange Vine. And therefore if you ask me the reason, why
God has suffered so many Ministers to be removed from his People, and so many
Lights in the Nation, to be put under a bushel and obscured? I must needs
answer, Barrenness! barrenness! Englands barrenness is one great cause why so
many of her Ministers mouths ore stopped. England for many generations,
especially of latter years, has enjoyed great plenty of Gospel-enjoyments: God
has seemed to be at extraordinary cost and pains with her, in sending into his
Vineyard pious and painful Ministers, who have been willing and diligent to
employ their talent and talents for the conversion of souls, and building them
up in Grace. But what is the fruit it yields under such multiplied cost and
pains? does it bring forth suitable and seasonable fruit? No! no! May not God
say of England, as once of Israel, England is an empty Vine, bringing forth
fruit unto it self? Hos. 10.1. He may say to England, These three years, these
ten, these twenty years, these forty, these hundred years and more have I come
seeking fruit, but find none! Alas, how many thousands amongst us have leaves,
but no fruit! how many have God and Christ in their mouths, but Sin and Satan
in their hearts and lives! how many have a name to live, and yet are dead! how
many are gilded, but not golden Christians; making beautiful and glorious the
outside, when within they are full of deadness and rottenness! Yea, it were
well if there were no worse (though these are too bad) amongst us; if they were
leaf-bearing trees only. But alas, we find an Egypt in Goshen! a Sodom in
Israel! abundance of the Vines of Sodom, and pregnant Grapes of Gomorrah in the
Vineyard of God! He looked for Grapes, but behold wild Grapes! for Judgment,
but behold Oppression! for Righteousness, but behold a Cry! He looked for
Knowledge, Repentance, Reformation, but behold gross darkness of Ignorance,
Impenitency, Presumption, persevering in sin! He looked that England should
have been his pleasant Vineyard; but, alas, it is a Desert Land, a barren
Wilderness, a Land abounding with thorns, briars and brambles. How does
Ungodliness, like an overflowing inundation, spread it self through the whole
Nation! in all places, in all societies of men, in Cities, in Countries, Towns
and Families! What abundance of Pride, Profaneness, Whoredom and Debauchedness!
what abundance of Drunkenness, Swearing, and Profanation of the Lord's Day is
now amongst us! In a word, what sins were there abounding in Sodom, that are
not committed amongst us! and all this, after the enjoyment of God's Word for
the space of many generations. How many amongst us began to loath the Manna of
God's Word, and to turn aside after false Lights, taking fantastical and
deluding apprehensions for Divine Illuminations, crying down the morality of
the Sabbath, and public Assemblies, and voting the Ministry of England
Antichristian! And have not these things caused many Congregations to want
Manna and Ministers both? is it not just with the Lord, when the pains and cost
he has been at for us these hundreds of years and more, are no better
requited, to withhold cost and pains for the future? Which of you having
entrusted a son or servant with a stock of money to trade with in the world,
and gain advantages by it, when you see them not only negligent and idle, but
prodigal and lavishing in exorbitant courses, would still entrust them with
more? would you not rather take from them what they yet had? And do you not
think God is as careful of his Sabbaths, Word and Ordinances, and seasons of
Grace, as you are of your Coin? And if you will not add fresh supplies to a
state-wasting and consuming son, surely God will not always continue Ministers
and means of Grace unto a barren and unfruitful people. How great and vast is
the stock of Gospel-enjoyments, seasons and opportunities of Grace, that God
has entrusted England with, and yet very barren? how many Sabbaths, and yet in
vain! how many Sermons, and yet in vain? how many Threatenings, Promises,
Entreaties, and yet in vain! how many strivings of the Spirit, and yet in vain!
How has God fed this Nation with the finest of the Flower, and best of the
Wheat, and made the Rock to drop with Honey, and yet how lean, wonderfully
lean are the souls of these Nations, like Pharoah's lean Kine, in the enjoyment
of thrice seven years of plenty of the Gospel! how has he made his Clouds to
rain upon you, even to the emptying and wasting of themselves, and yet in vain!
Are you not Rocks and Mountains, hard and barren now even as before! how little
Reformation in your Parish, in your Families! how little are Husbands and
Wives, how little are Parents and Children, Masters and Servants reformed! how
little is Religion and God's Worship set up in your Families! how little do
you endeavor to bring your Wives, your Husbands, your Children and Servants
to a saving knowledge of God! how little do you catechize and instruct them!
and how little do you labor to see Christ formed in the hearts of your
domestic relations! How few old sins do you leave! how few new duties do you
take up and practice! How little do you endeavor to perform duties in a more
holy, humble, and servent manner than before! May not his Ministers cry out in
the language of the Prophet, they have labored in vain, they have spent their
strength in vain? And judge I pray you, Sirs, is it not just with the Lord, when
our Nation, our Parishes, your Families remain unfruitful after such multiplied
cost and pains, and this for so many years; is it not just with the Lord now to
say, England, such Towns and Parishes, such Families, such Persons are given to
barrenness, let them alone, I will command the Clouds they rain no Rain upon
them?

2. The Second ground and reason of a Ministers removal from a People, is those
persecutions and afflictions that befall them. Sometimes the Persecution falls
upon the Church in general, upon People and Pastors, and then Ministers cannot
with that clearness and justifiableness leave their Flocks; as when some
Ministers only are aimed at. God's Church is compared to a Lilly among Thorns,
to a flock of Sheep amongst Wolves; and Noah's Ark upon the deluge, tossed to
and fro with storms and tempests upon the Sea of this troublesome world. There
is an irreconcilable enmity betwixt the interest of Christ, and the interest
of Satan; and therefore no wonder if the gates of Hell, the policy and power of
infernal darkness are united and combined against the Church of Christ. The
Devil is called a Red Dragon, Rev. 12. A Dragon, denoting his hurtful,
poisonous and destructive nature; and a red Dragon, denoting his cruelty, that
he is delighted in, and becoloured with the blood of God's People; and all the
storms and persecutions that have befallen the Church, he has raised them; He
labors with might and main, with rage and fury, by imprisonments, by
banishments, by fire and faggot, to eradicate, and totally to destroy Christ's
Kingdom and Interest out of the world; either by falling upon the Church in
general, or upon her Lights, Guides, and Watchmen in particular. Remove the
Watchmen, and the Garrison is easily surprised and taken: put out the Lights,
and you are surrounded with darkness: take away the Guide, and the Travellor is
eaeasily seduced; and therefore Satan sometimes in his persecutions, aims
chiefly at pious, learned, painful, and zealous Ministers; because they most of
all, like burning and shining Lights, squander and dispel the darkness of his
kingdom, discover and manifest his hellish and subtle stratagems and methods
of deceiving poor souls, and lead them from them, into the ways of Piety and
Salvation; because they are as God's Boanarges's, and Barnabasses, battering
down the walls of his kingdom, presumption, security and despair, by awakening
men and women out of their spiritual lethargy, and letting them see their
danger and misery, that they may escape it: and on the other hand, by
comforting, raising up such as are dejected, and under temptations to despair;
and on both hands, lessen and weaken his interest in the world: and therefore
the Devil to secure his own interest, and to oppose, to hinder, and to destroy
the Interest of Christ, will have them burnt or banished, silenced, their
mouths stopped, that no more lightning and thunder, no more Cordials and
Comforts come from them, or by violent, onset of hot Persecution, make them
run and fly for it: When they persecute you in one City, flee ye into another.

And as the interest of Satan is one ground of Persecution, so the
irreconcilable enmity betwixt the Interest of Christ, and the sinful corrupt
interests of ungodly men, is another ground of Persecution upon the Church, of
banishing, imprisoning, and silencing Ministers; to be a friend to the one, is
to be an enemy to the other: The friendship of the world, says James, is
enmity with God: and whosoever will be a friend of the world, is a enemy of
God, Jam. 5.4. If Ministers dare, and will comply with the sinful interests of
great men, and become Court-flatterers, and Parasites to Kings, either to
preach up, or not to preach down their State-Corruptions and Wickedness, they
shall have peace and protection. If you were of the world, says our Savior to
his Disciples; that is, of the principles, customs, fashions of the world, the
world would love you; for she loves her own, Joh. 15.19. And this was the
reason why Antichristian false doctrines were so much embraced in the days of
John, because they were doctrines of the world, doctrines pleasing flesh and
blood, and suitable to the principles, customs and interests of sinful men:
They are of the world, therefore they speak of the world, and the world hears
them, 1 John 4.5. Never was there any Interest of Great men, so sinful and
corrupt, nor any Religion owned, countenanced, and established by Authority, so
superstitious, idolatrous and abominable, as to want Defenders and Promoters;
some for favor, some for fear; some for secular advantages, to preserve and
keep what they have, or to gain honors, preferments and riches by it; others
from their choice and election, loving and delighting in that way. The way and
means that Jeroboam and his Council contrived, to withdraw and keep the People
from going to Jerusalem to sacrifice, and to secure the ten revolted Tribes to
him and his posterity, was abominable idolatry; against which they had many
caviates and cautions from God; for which their forefathers had been severely
punished, Exodus 32. Judge. 2.10, 11, 12, 13. and 3.5, 6, 7, 8. yea, for this
their famous King Solomon, lately deceased, was threatened with the renting of
part of his Kingdom from his Posterity, and verified in this revolt, 1 Kings.
11. Yet notwithstanding all this, the sinful contrivance of Jeroboam wanted not
owners and promoters; for besides the Courtiers and the common People, the
lowest of whom he consecreated Priests to the Golden Calves; many of the
Priests of the Lord, who feared suffering more than sinning, complied with, 1
King. 12.27, 28, 31. and 13.33. 2 Chronicles. 11. And how abundantly were the owners
and promoters of Ahabs Idolatry, and Baals worship multiplied; when the
Prophets of Baal were four hundred and fifty; and the Prophets of the Groves
four hundred? Judge of the harvest by the tithes, 1 King. 18.19. and the ten
Tribes so exceedingly infected with his leaven, that of those many thousands
there, there remained but seven thousand only that had not bowed the knee to
Baal, 1 King. 19.10. all which had the security and protection of their Kings
and Councils, when the other were oppressed. Such then that turn with every
tide, sail with every wind, and like water, be of the same color as the
ground it runs over, that can favor and approve Jeroboams contrivance, to
secure his revolted interest; such as can swallow down Ahabs Idolatry, and
approve Jezebels contrived mock-fast, and her charging Naboth with Treason and
Blasphemy, as commendable State-pollicy to get his Vineyard: Such as can pull
down Ahabs Abomination, throw down Baals Temple, and bring fire and fagots to
burn his consecreated vessels, and a bloody sword to slaughter his Priests; and
when all is done, adhere close to the sins of Jeroboam, that he may become a
friend and favorite to the aspiring and prospering Jehu: Such ministers as have
lunacem fidem, as St. Austin said of the Pelagians, that are immutable only in
the mutableness of their judgments and opinions, that can enlarge, lessen, and
change their consciences, principles and practices according to all changes,
rising and prevailing parties and interests; such as these shall never suffer
Persecution, nor be divorced from their People: The bowing rushes, and yielding
reeds, stand safe, when the sturdy Oaks are rent by the stormy winds: but such
Ministers as are pious and faithful to discharge their Duty and Conscience; and
lift up their voice like a trumpet, to tell Israel of HER Sin, and the House of
Jacob of THEIR Transgressions; that can neither preach up, nor connive at, but
preach down the Sins of the Times and Places they live in, shall undoubtedly be
hated and persecuted. What was the reason our Savior was so much hated and
persecuted by the several interests and parties among the Jews, when they
sought to entrapt him to stone him, to throw him down the hill and break his
neck? was it not because he testified against them, that their works were evil?
John 7.7. And if they have done thus to the Master, what will they do to the
Servants? if they have persecuted him, they will persecute these also; and
therefore our Savior fore-arms his Disciples and Ministers, in foretelling
them, that the world would hate and persecute them, because ye are not of the
world; that is, because your Doctrines are not of the principles, fashions,
customs of the world, but contrary to them, therefore the world will hate you,
John 15.19. your Doctrine is an holy, heavenly Doctrine, crossing and beating
down, and condemning the sins and corrupt interests of men, therefore you shall
be hated: if your Doctrine gave liberty to lust, and would let men alone in
their sins, they would let you alone. John Baptists for plain dealing with
Herod concerning his Herodias, had his Head smote off. When the Doctrine of
Ministers opposes corrupt gain, and beats down the sinful advantages and
profits of ungodly men, they will rather part with the Truth of the Gospel,
drive it and Ministers away, rather than lose their sinful and corrupt
advantages. When Paul had preached down the Idolatry of Ephesus, and had turned
much people away from it, Demetrius a Silver-smith, a maker of Shrines for
Diana, fearing hereby he should lose his idolatrous profit, raises an uproar,
and fills the City with confusion, Acts 19. It is an usual thing for idolatrous
Priests, and Parasites of Kings, falsely to accuse God's Ministers of Treason,
Sedition and Conspiracy against Kings; not so much out of love to Kings as to
themselves. Thus Amaziah, an idolatrous Priest, accuses Amos to Jeroboam, of
Treason, and his Sermons were so seditious, etc. that the Land was not able to
bear him; and that his Conspiracies were not acted in corners, or in another
Kingdom, but openly in his Kingdom, in the midst of thy People Israel; where
was the Court, and greatest confluence of subjects, Amos 7.10, 11. but self was
at the bottom of all this; Amaziah had much dignity and profit by the place,
and therefore hated Amos heartily, because he forbad the people to come any
more to Bethel, but to shun it as a place infected with Superstition and
Idolatry, Amos 5.5. How frequent is it to undermine by forged cavillations,
such, whose Piety and Zeal for God and his Honor, preach down those sinful
ways, by which many gain their advancements and advantages? Sometimes they are
accused as dangerous and destructive to the Peace and Safety of the Nation
where they live, and that nothing but Banishment or Death will serve the turn.
Haman accused the Jews, and told Ahasuerus, It was not for the Kings profit to
suffer them, Esth. 3.8. The God of Heaven deliver us from such Priests and
Hamans! and clear up our Innocence as the noon Sun; and turn their wicked
designs upon their own heads; and hang all false accusing Hamans on the same
Gallows they rear for Mordecai! All those Priests in Israel that feared the
Lord, and durst not comply with Jeroboams idolatrous way to secure the ten
Tribes, were thrust out of their Possessions, and from executing the Priests
Office to the Lord, lest they should antidote the People, and keep them from
closing with it, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14. The Prophets that would not connive at the
Idolatries and Whoredoms of Jezebel, but preached them down, and endeavored to
arm, fence and antidote the People against that poisonous leaven, and to draw
them to the Purity of God's Worship, were all of them persecuted, some slain,
some hid by Obadiah by fifties in Caves, and fed with bread and water, 1 King.
18.4. When Elijah had by a wonder convinced the People, That God was the Lord;
and the People, according to his command, had slain Baals Priests, Jezebel
threatens him, and Elijah flies for it, 1 Kings 18.38, 4. -- 19.1, 2, 3, 4.

It would be tedious to recount the several instances of Good men, who upon the
prevailing of corrupt interests and sinful men, have been forced to fly, and
leave their charge. Paul was let down by a wall in a basket, through a window,
to escape the hands of the Governor of Damascus, Acts 9.25. Moses, who was
faithful in the House of God, understanding that Pharaoh intended to destroy
him, fled into the Land of Mediah, Exodus 2.14, 15. We read of our Savior,
that upon several occasions he did withdraw, hide, and secure himself from the
rage of the people. When Herod designed to destroy the Babes of Bethlehem,
Christ was with his father and mother sent into Egypt, Mat. 2.14. He withdrew
when the Pharisees held a Council to destroy him, Mat. 12.13, 14. He fled from
the Tyranny of Herod, when he had cut off John Baptists head, Mat. 14.12, 13.
He hid himself when the Jews would have stoned him, John 8.59. and conveyed
himself out of the multitude, when they would have cast him down an hill and
broke his neck. What shall I say concerning Chrysostom, Cyprian, Athanasius,
and other learned and renowned Fathers of the Church, who were often banished,
and removed from their People? Again, we read in Rev. 11.7, 8. that before
Antichrist shall fall, he shall make war against the two VVitnesses. By
Witnesses some understand Magistrates and Ministers. Magistrates are God's
Representatives amongst men, Psalm. 82.6. Witnesses and Demonstrations of God's
Sovereignty, in ruling, in punishing the wicked, in defending and rewarding the
Good and Virtuous. Ministers are God's Witness, to declare, assert, plead and
maintain God's Cause and Interest, his stupendous Work and glorious Attributes
in Man's Redemption.

Some by Witnesses understand Ministers only, and against these the Beast shall
make war, and by a powerful prevailing of his interest, and of a profane and
corrupt party shall slay them; slay them not in their Persons, but in their
Offices; it is not a natural but a civil death, a routing them from their
Offices, and suspending them from the execution of their duties, whether
Magistrates, Ministers, or both. The ground and reasons why I take the killing
of the Witnesses to be a civil, not a natural death, is in the word of verse 9.
And they of all People, Kindreds and Tongues and Nations shall see their dead
bodies three days and an half; and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be
put in graves. Now it is barbarous inhumanity and cruelty to bury men alive, to
put them quick into the grave; and if they were naturally dead it would be
undecent, loathsome, and unnatural to keep them above ground, exposing them to
every visitant and spectator, and to the tearing and devouring ravenousness of
birds and beasts of prey. Not to suffer them to be put in graves, if naturally
dead, is contrary to the instinct of nature: for of those numberless number of
birds in the air, we may suppose all that are dead are not killed, but many
thousands dye naturally by reason of age. And yet of those many thousands we
find very few or none at all; because nature has taught them when the time of
death draws night to provide themselves graves by creeping into hollow trees,
or holes of the ground, or some courteous bird covers them with leaves.

Further, these Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues that saw their
dead bodies, were friends, Pious and Religions persons, that cordialy owned
loved and affected them; and the more love and affection, the greater care of a
decent and commendable interment. But if you say, they might be enemies that
out of malice to expose them unto greater shame and contempt, would not suffer
them to be buried, it cannot be; because it is contrary to the rules of Policy:
for their dead bodies lying three days and an half, understand three
Prophetical days and an half, that is, three years and an half unburied, would
infect the air, and so produce hurtful and destructive diseases; so that
self-preservation would engage them to inter them, if they were naturally dead.
And in the 11. verse, after the days of their death were accomplished, They
heard a great voice from Heaven saying, Come up hither; so that if they were
naturally dead, this must be a corporal resurrection, a resurrection of the
bodies slain; and before the great and general Resurrection at the last Day,
which is contrary to the Scriptures, which mention but one general Resurrection
of the body, and impertinent to this place, where there is no mention made of
the Day of Judgment, nor of any of the transactions of that Day. And by a voice
from Heaven in that place, verse 11. I understand, with submission to more
deep, learned, and grave judgments, the Supreme Authority of a Nation, that by
enacted Laws shall give liberty and Authority to the slain Witnesses, to
reassume the public exercise of their Ministry and Magistracy of which they
were before deprived; so then I conclude from the rules of decency, from the
instinct of nature, the respective and tender care of love and affection, from
the Rules and Reasons of Policy, from the harmony of Scriptures, from the
barbarousness of burying persons alive, that it is not a natural but a civil
death, slain in their Offices, not in their Persons. Now the place where their
dead bodies shall be slain, and lie unburied, is said, In the streets of the
great City, called Sodom and Egypt: by the City is meant Rome, compared to
Sodom for Uncleaness and Whoredom, to Egypt for Idolatry and Cruelty against
God's People. By the Streets of the great City, you are not to understand it
litteraly and locally of the streets of Rome, but of several Nations and
Kingdom that did belong to Antichrist, that were under the Papal Power and
parts of his Dominion, as streets are parts and appurtenances of a City. For
the words in verse 9. They of the People and Kindreds and Tongues and Nations
should see their dead bodies, seem to me to imply and intimate the several
Nations and Kingdoms where they should be slain; which Kingdoms having shaked
off the Romish Antichristian Iron yoke and bondage, should enjoy the pure and
pow^^ful preaching of the Word, and administration of Sacraments in some
comfortable manner and measure, by a constant succession of pious, painful and
learned Ministers, whereby those Nations and Kingdoms should be much
enlightened; but before the number of Antichrist be run up, and his period
accomplished, Rev. 13.18. these Nations called the streets of the great City,
shall suffer an Eclipse in their Ministers, they should be laid aside as dead
men, and become useless in their public exercises of their Ministry. And
during the space of their civil death, they shall have the warm hearts and
affections of the People, they will not suffer them to be put into graves
alive, and buried quick, but still own them as Ministers desire, long, pray for
their restoration and instalment into their Offices and Places again.

Thus amongst many Reasons I have given you two, why Ministers may not always
expect a continued residence amongst, and ministration to, their People; First,
because of barrenness under means. Secondly because of these afflictions that
light upon the Church and her Lights, Guides and Watchmen.

Now for Application. First, to Ministers. Secondly, to People. A Word to both.

1. Ministers should labor to do all the good they can to, and among the
People to whom they are Ministers. From us, from us our People expect relief:
and how should we endeavor to administer all the helps and advantages we can
for their Salvation; in removing of Scandals, in healing Divisions, in
confuting Heresies, to beat down wickedness, and demolish the strongholds of
Satan! The conscientious Physician, when he sees the health and life of the
Patient committed to him, how diligent is he in watching with, and attending
his Patient? how curious and exact in observing the pulse, the symptoms,
workings, nature and strength of the disease? how careful and diligent to apply
proper Remedies and Physic; sometimes Corrosives, sometimes Cordials, and all
to restore health, and prolong life to his Patient? How much more diligent
should Ministers, Physicians of souls be, in observing the several Maladies,
and Soul-diseases of their People, and to apply proper Remedies? so many
persons, so many patients! so many sins, so many diseases! some are brutish and
unteachable; some are weak, others dull; some perverse, and many ungrateful.
How should they endeavor to make the brutish to understand; to confirm the
weak, and make them strong; to quicken the dull, and make them zealous and
fervent; to allure the perverse, and and make them tractable; to win the
ungrateful, and make them kind? what is the body to the soul? or life temporal
in a troublesome world, to Life Eternal in unspeakable Happiness? the
Excellency of the object should heighten our esteem, and double our diligence.
Precious, precious Souls, lie at the Stake. One Soul is of more value than ten
thousand worlds. Jesus Christ shed his precious Blood for the Redemption of
souls, but not for the honors, dignitys and riches of the world. Now either
Heaven or Hell: And how should the joys of the one, and the torments of the
other, and the eternity of both, add indefatigableness to our labors,
unwearied vigilance to our perspective care, invincibleness to our courage,
irrefragableness to our arguments, ^^d steep our persuasions in tears, and all
to keep you from lodging your selves in everlasting burnings, and bring you to
an Enjoyment of the beatifical Vision of the blessed God! In this decriped age
of the world, the Devils seem to be possessed with some spirits worse than
themselves; they turn every stone, they improve the dregs of their malice, the
height of their power, if by any means, by secret persuasions, by hostile
invasions, by strange delusions; turning themselves into Angels of Light, that
they may drag one soul to Hell: and shall not Ministers take much more pains to
bring them to Heaven? Paul was unwearied in his doing, invincible in his
suffering: How many Cities and Countries did he enlighten with the Gospel?
Jerusalem, Illyricum, Damascus, Arabia, Antioch, Arhaja, Cilicia, Cyprus,
Epirus, Galatia, Mysia, Lycaonia, Pamphilia, Physidia, Phrygia, Selutia Syria,
Troas. Ministers should make the Salvation of Souls their study, their care,
their employment, their practice, their whole business. We must wait on our
Ministry, Romans 12.7. give our selves continually to it, Acts 6.4. We must
fulfill our Ministry, Col. 4.7. The soundness, fatness, fruitfulness of the
Flock, is an honor to the Shepherd. The recovered health, strength, life, of a
sick, weak, dying patient, is an honor to the Physician. It is the glory of
Kings, according to the rules of the great Statesman, (...), to ease and heal
their Cities and Kingdoms of those miseries and calamities they groan and
languish under, to secure their present peace and prosperity, to enlarge their
bounds, and of small to make them great. If the Roman Emperor gloried when he
said of Rome, Lateritiam inveni, marmoream reliqui; I found it built with
Brick, but left it built with Marble. So it is a great honor for Ministers to
do much good to their People; to strengthen the diseased, to heal the sick, to
bind up the broken, to bring back that which was driven away, and seek that
which was lost, Ezekiel. 34.16. When of Lead, Brass, Iron and Tin, they make them
Gold and Jewels for God: when of Lions they make them Lambs; of Rebels, they
make them loyal Subjects, beating their spears into pruning hooks, and swords
into plowshares: when of a barren Wilderness, they make them a fruitful
Vineyard. How exceeding great will that Glory be, which God will give at the
last day, unto his faithful Ministers, when they shall stand forth before God,
his Angels, and all men? Andrew bringing with him his Achaians, whom by his
Ministry he has gained unto Christ: John with his Asians; Thomas with his
Indians; Peter with his Jews, and Paul with his Gentiles; and all the pious and
faithful Ministers of Christ, with all the Children God has given them in
their respective Ages and Generations; and these shall be to them a Crown of
Glorifying in the presence of Jesus Christ at his coming, 1 These. 2.19. and the
time for the accomplishing of all this, at the longest, is very short. Death,
if no other providence may sooner than they are aware of, throw them into an
incapacity of doing any more good unto their People, how should they labor to
do much in a little while? the grand importance of the work, the numerous and
potent enemies, that oppose and hinder it, the uncertainty and shortness of
time to do it in, should make us wonderfully diligent: say and do with Paul, We
seek not yours, but you; accounting the winning of souls to Christ our greatest
gain and glory, Sed, heu, Quantum distamus ab illo! how many say in their
practice, We seek not you, but yours; seek the fleece, and neglect the flock?
How do Ministers run and ride, cap and cringe, to get Ecclesiastical Dignities
and Preferments, and to multiply to themselves Church-revenues, heaping Steeple
upon Steeple, as the Giants of old, Pelion upon Ossa, and upon both these
Olympus, to fill their Coffers, to maintain their Pomp, their full Tables, to
provide portions for their Children, or (which is worse) to administer more
abilities of greater sinning against God; and this great and necessary work
undone, the diseased not strengthened, the sick not healed, the broken not
bound up, that which was driven away, not brought back, that not sought which
was lost: W^ to such Shepherds of Israel, of England, and of all Christian
Kingdoms in the world, that feed themselves, that eat the fat, and cloth
themselves with the wool, but feed not the Flock; but with force and cruelty
rule over them, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. How desperate and dreadful is that Charge God
lays upon the Priests of Judah; his Watchmen are blind, they are all
ignorant, they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark sleeping, lying down, and
loving to slumber; yea, they are greedy Dogs, that can never have enough; they
are Shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one
for gain from his own quarter: Come say they, I will fetch wine, and we will
fill our selves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much
more abundant, Isa. 56.10, 11, 12.

Time will not suffer me to open and enlarge upon these words; I leave them to
your meditations and observations: pardon my trespassing upon your patience;
the pains is mine, the profit is yours.

2. If Ministers are not certain of a continued Refidence amongst their People,
be you then exhorted to make good use and improvement of present
Gospel-Enjoyments: you are not sure of a constant enjoyment of pious, able, and
painful Ministers; and the uncertainty of the future, should make us lay in
store of provision at the present, lest by neglecting present opportunities, we
run our selves upon the damage of a future necessity. The Jews were togather
twice so much Manna on the sixth day, as on other days, because on the Seventh
there was none to be found. The Mariner hoiseth Sails to the present seasonable
and right Gales of Wind. The Husbandman lays hold on the present seasonable
weather, for the reaping and gathering in of the Fruits of the Earth. And all
of you in Summer lay in Provision for Winter. Present Opportunities neglected,
may not in the future be enjoyed. No Manna could be found on the Seventh-day:
the Wind turns and stands contrary: the Summer is ended, no harvest, no reaping
in Winter. A People that enjoy a faithful and painful Ministry, have the Manna
of God's Word falling round about them; they have the pleasant Gales of God's
Spirit to waft them nearer to Heaven; they have an harvest day of, and pleasant
seasons to make provision for Glory: but if you neglect present Seasons, you
run desperate hazzards, and adventure your precious souls upon great
uncertainties. He that sends his Ambassadors to day, may call them back to
morrow. God has threatened, his Spirit shall not always strive with men. The
tongue that is speaking to you this day, will be tied up and silenced before
the next Sabbath. How miserable would it have been with Egypt in the seven
years of Famine, if there had not been vast provisions and innumerable store
laid up in the seven years of plenty! How miserable would they be pintched with
hunger and cold in winter, who have not laid in full and suitable provisions in
Summer! How miserable will they be in a famine of God's Word, who have made no
provision in times of plenty! To be without Ministry and Ministers, without
World and Ordinances, is the most miserable and destructive want in the world.
Where there is no Vision the People perish. A People without a Pastor, are
without a Watchman to warn and awaken them; without Lights to enlighten them;
without Guides to direct and lead them; without Salt to season them; without
Physicians to heal them; without Shepherds to watch over them, to feed and
defend them: and the condition of such must needs be a miserable condition. And
to have such are as spoken of in Isa. 56.10, 11, 12. blind and dumb, covetous
and greedy, and drunkards: or such as are mentioned in Ezekiel. 34. that are
dispersers of the Flock, not dispensers of the Word and Ordinances: with force
and cruelty to rule over you, will be your cross, not your comfort. The actions
of public persons are very influentiall: as is the Praetor, such are the
Citizens: as is the Pedagogue, such are the Children: as is the Pastor, such
are the People; like People and like Priest; and how can there choose but be
Whoredom in Ephraim, and Defilement in Israel, when the Priests commit
lewdness? Am. 6.9, 10. No wonder if that people be made a prey, and brought to
naught, whose Watchmen are blind, whose Preachers are dumb, whose Champions are
lame, whose Physicians are sick, whose Salt is unsavory, whose Teachers are
untaught, whose Guides are ignorant of the Way, whose Pastors are Impostors,
whose Pillars are Pollars, fleecing, but not feeding the Flock: Does not hence
spring the ruin of the Church, the contempt of the Ministry, and all Church
Orders and Ordinances, the corruption of manners, a sinck of sin, and deluge of
profaneness; the starving of Charity; the debasement of Religion; the hazarding
of your Graces; the endangering of your souls for ever? And for a Christian
now to order his conversation aright, it requires that God's Word should dwell
richly in him in all Wisdom; and to be preserved safe and found in infecting
times, it is expedient and necessary that he be fraught with the impregnable
Cordials, and Plague-expelling Antidotes of God's most holy Word. This was the
Preservative and Security of that good King, Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy Word
in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Therefore, my Brethren, for the
glory of God, for the honor of Christ, the credit and ornament of your
Profession, the rejoicing of your dying Minister, and your own Salvation, See
that you walk in the strength of that Doctrine and Word, I have almost for the
space of these four years delivered unto you, as the Prophet Elijah in the
strength of the Cake, until you come unto the Mount of God, 1 Kings 19.8. That
whether I come again unto you, or be absent, yet I may hear of your affairs,
that your conversation be as becomes the Gospel; that ye stand fast in one
Spirit, with one mind, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel.

Now I have done with the Sore, [A Ministers Departure from his Poople] I
should now show you the Plaster, and apply it. But of this by and by.

SERMON XIV.
Acts 20.32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance amongst them
that are sanctified.
These words I have told you are part of Paul's Valediction to his Beloved
Ephesians; the Parts and Arguments whereof I have briefly showed you. In the
words you have a twofold Remedy in opposition to a twofold Malady: The first
Malady was Affliction and Persecution, mentioned in ver. 29. for which the
Apostle prescribes God as the Sovereign Cure and Remedy; And now I commend you
to God. The second Malady is Infection and Heresy, mentioned ver. 30. for
which the Apostle prescribes God's Word as the best Preservative and Remedy,
And now I commend you to God, and the Word; which Remedy is further implified
by the title given to it, Grace, the Word of his Grace. 2dly, From the precious
effects and benefits of the Word, first Edification, secondly Life Eternal, in
these words, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified. Then the relative name Paul gives to the Ministers of
Ephesus, Brethren, from which word you may remember I gave you this Observation.

Doct. That true and real Christians are Brethren. It is not only true in
respect of Ministers, but of all Christians, Pastors and People; I have
demonstrated it briefly, and briefly improved it by way of Application -- But
then secondly, from the Provision of Security and Comfort that Paul commends
his Ephesians to at his departure, you had this Doctrine.

Doct. That God, and the Word of his Grace, is the best Security and Comfort a
departing Minister can commit his People unto.

You may remember I took this Doctrine in two, and gave you this Note or
Doctrine.

Doct. That Ministers cannot always expect a continued and uninterrupted
Residence amongst their People.

This I showed you before and applied it. Now in the last place, and my last
opportunity I come to the Grand Cure, and Sovereign Remedy for the above named
Maladies, [God, and the Word of his Grace.] The Doctrine is this,

That God, and the Word of his Grace, are the best Security and Comfort a
departing Minister can commend his People unto. The Greek word (...) has
diverse significations in the New Testament, but in this place and some others,
it properly signifies, Fidei alicutus depositum servandam trado committo, we
commit something to the care and fidelity of another for security and
preservation. Thus our blessed Savior when he dyed on the Cross, (...);
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23.46. And the Apostle Peter
exhorting the Christians, not to be disponde^ and dejected under the Sufferings
they met with for Christ's sake, but in the midst of their sufferings, (...),
Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls unto him, as to a Faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. Thus the Apostle commits
these Ephesian Ministers, and all the Christians in Ephesus, their souls, their
bodies, and all the affairs and concernments of that Church, both under
Persecution, and in the midst of contagious Heresies and Doctrines, to the
defense and protection of God, and to the direction, light, and preservation of
his holy Word: So that if you please to give a name to my Text, let it be this,
The departing Pastor's Security and Comfort for his left People, etc. -- When
the Father of a family lies upon his deathbed, and ready to take his ultimum
vale of the world, commends his Wife and Children, to the care, counsel and
direction, to the defense and protection of his most trusly, faithful, and
assured Friends, saying, I am now going the way of all flesh, and my dear Wife
will become a discousolate Widow, and my tender Children will be fatherless!
and I shall no more return to perform the duties of an Husband, and Father to
them! no more to counsel and direct them! no more to manage and order their
affairs for them! No more to provide for, and maintain them! no more to succor
and comfort them! No more to defend them from injuries, and oppressions! No
more to right them in their wrongs! And therefore I leave and commend them to
you, to be as a Husband to my Widow, and a Father to my Fatherless. I leave
them to your love to pity them! I commend them to your wisdom and prudence to
counsel and direct them; To your care and faithfulness to manage their affairs
for them! I commend them to your justice, to right them in wrongs, and defend
them from injuries. Even thus this blessed Apostle going to Jerusalem, these
Ephesians should see his face no more. No more he should fight with beasts,
after the manner of men, at Ephesus. He should confute the Erroneous and
Heretics no more. No more should he be with them to appease their dissentions,
reconcile their divisions, he should maintain the Doctrine of Free Grace, the
purity and simplicity of Gospel Worship no more. No more to vindicate the
Resurrection of the dead; No more to perform amongst them the duties of a
vigilent Watchman, and faithful Minister; to rebuke the Obstinate, and such as
walk disorderly; to comfort the Mourners, to strengthen the Weak, to reduce the
Wanderer, to raise and recover them that are fallen. And therefore, seeing I
shall be no more with you, to do any of these things for you, I leave, and
commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace; the best security from, and
comfort under, both Persecution, and infectious and seducing Doctrine. He is a
Watchman and Shepherd instead of all Shepherds and Watchmen: He is a Teacher
instead of all Teachers. And for a people to be left with such Guardians, when
their Minister must depart from them, is good security and comfort for them.
And this I shall show, first, in respect of God; 2dly, in regard of his Word.

First, To commit you to God, is to commit you to him who is furnished with
every thing necessary for Security and Comfort.

1. It is to commit you to the greatest Love. And Love is a strong Security. To
be committed to the defense of an enemy, that hates us with deadly hatred,
there can be no comfort, no security, but a fearful and trembling expectation,
that our defense should prove our destruction. But Love adds strength and
security to mud-walls, when hatred makes stone-walls full of danger. Hatred
seeks the destruction of the object hated, when Love seeks the welfare and
protection of the object beloved. (...); Birds build their nests on high, in
close obscure places, and spare their own cr^ws, to secure and fill their young
ones. The most timorous creatures grow most resolute, and expose themselves to
danger and death, in combating to preserve their young ones, and all from that
storgie and affection Nature has implanted in them. What will not Parents do
and venture to preserve their tender babes in danger? they will venture upon pikes
and swords, upon wild beasts, they will venture through fire and water to save
them. And if there be such love in the creature, surely there is much more in
the Creator: their greatest plenitude is but a drop to his immeasurable Ocean.
Love in the creature is a concrete, finite and imperfect, but in God it is an
abstract, infinite, and Perfection it self. God, says John, is Love, 1 John
4.8. and this Love of God to his People, is an all-conquering Love: this stirrs
up God to stand as a skreen between his People and danger, and primum mobile of
their protection. What is the reason that all the policies and power of
infernal spirits, all the stratagems of the Devil's Agents, all the black
cursings and bloody execrations of ungodly men; all the Popish Fulminations and
thundrings of Anathema's against God's People take no more effect? what is the
reason that there is no Enchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against
Israel? It is God's Love that shields off all. Balaam, you know, following the
wages of unrighteousness, attempted to have cursed Israel; but this Love of God
opposed it, and turned the Curse into a Blessing, Deuteronomy. 23.5. The Lord thy God
would not hearken unto Balaam; but the Lord thy God turned the Curse into a
Blessing, because he loved thee. Hence it is God opposes the opposers of his
People, and destroys their destroyers, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm. The most glorious Potentates and prosperous Kingdoms,
have become contemptible and heaps of ruin, for their opposing, oppressing and
persecuting God's Church. God's Love puts an higher estimate upon the poorest
Saint, than upon all the Sinful, though sceptred, crowned, adorned and adored,
Monarchs of the world. Why did he smite the firstborn in Egypt both of man and
beast? why did he send his Tokens into the midst of Egypt upon Pharaoh and upon
all his Servants? Why did he smite great Nations, and slay mighty Kings? Sion
King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, and all the Kings of Canaan? Psalm.
135.8, 9, 10, 11. Was it not because he had chosen Jacob unto himself, and
Israel for his peculiar treasure? ver. 4. And again, I gave Egypt for thy
ransom, Ethiopia and Sheba for thee. Since thou have been precious in my sight,
thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee; therefore I will give men for
thee, and people for thy life, Isa. 43.3, 4. God in his Love thinks nothing too
good, nothing too great to be done for his Church and People. He not only gives
famous Kings and potent Nations up to ruin for his Peoples temporal
deliverance; but in the stupendiousness of his Love, has given his Son for
their eternal Salvation; John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life; and in and by him has made a full, complete, and abundant
provision, all things needful for your Salvation: He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? Romans 8.32. The faithful apprehension and application of
this Love, will steel you against all sufferings, and make you Reproach-proof,
and Persecution-proof; that you shall not be ashamed of a despised Gospel, a
reproached Religion, and a persecuted Christ: and, Hope makes not ashamed,
because the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5.5. This Love will
comfort you against all temptations concerning sin, in doubtings concerning
Gods presence, perseverance in Faith, and assurance of Salvation. I am
persuaded, says the Apostle, that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.38, 39. To these add the
dearness, strength, constancy, and inviolableness of God's Lewe unto his
Children; dearer than a mothers to her sw^^etest babe, Isa. 49.15. stronger
than the mountains, Isa. 54.19. more constant than the courses of Heaven, J^r.
31.35, 36. and 33.20, 21. it is as sure as God him self is sure, Psalm. 89.34,
35. And for a People to be committed to such a Love, is ground of security and
comfort. When Ministers are taken from you, this will ^bide with you.

2. To commit you to God, is to commit you to the tenderest mercy. Mercy is the
best refuge to the miserable. Whither shall the malefactor flee for pardon, but
to the mercy of his Prince? whither shall the captive go for safety, but to the
mercy of his Conqueror? The pity of an armed Conqueror is better safety than
the flinty-heartednes of a naked captive. Compassion unarms the Armed, blunts
sharpened swords, enfeebles the strong and sinewy arms, when an astorgy arms
the unarmed, sharpens the sword, adds strength to weak arms, and blocks up all
ways and means of securi^y and comfort. A man's pity subdues him, when the
valor, policy, strength and weapons of his enemies cannot conquer him, and
makes him a security to his adversary. This encouraged Benhadad to humble
himself to Ahab, whom, and his Kingdom, he had twice before attempted to
destroy by two formidable Armies: Behold, we have heard that the Kings of
Israel are merciful Kings; let us, we pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins,
and ropes on our heads, and go out to the King of Israel; peradventure he will
save thy life: and it was so, 1 Kings 20.31, etc. And shall the Kings of Israel
have mercy to save their enemies, and shall not the KING of the Kings of Israel
have mercy on his Children? Mercy makes the tender heart partaker of the misery
of him that is distressed. Misericordia quasi miseria cordi, it translates the
misery of another into the heart of the merciful, and enclines them to relieve
and succor them. It is pity that makes you to bind up the wounds of the
wounded, to wash Lazarus his sores, to cloth the naked, to feed the hungry, to
refresh the thirsty. Now the God to whom I leave you, is the God of pity and
Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. all the pity and compassion in the creatures, is
derived from him; and were it all contracted into one, yet it were but a drop
to his Ocean: and as the mercifulness of tender Parents, causes them to pity
their sick Children; so God, like a tender Father, pitties them that fear him,
Psalm. 103.10. yea, he sympathizeth with them in all their sufferings,
accounting their sufferings his: Are they reproached? so is he; are they
persecuted? so is he; are they imprisoned, banished, tormented, put to cruel
deaths? he accounts it as done to himself; and whatsoever Satan does to you, in
tempting you to sin, to despair, in buffeting you, filling your hearts with
heaviness, your mouths with sighs and complaints, your eyes with showers of
tears, he takes it as done to himself: In all their afflictions he was
afflicted, Isa. 63.9. And as, (...), we from our own suffering, learn more to
pity others in the like distress; so Christ's experiences of the worlds
hatred and persecution, of Satan's rage and temptation, does cause Christ to
pity his suffering Members more: We have not an high Priest that cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted as
we are, yet without sin; and in that himself suffered, being tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 4.15. chap. 2.18. Here is a rise of
Compassion according to the degree of suffering. How do the screechings of a
sick Child, the deep sighs and groans of a sick tormented Child, make the
bowels of the Parents roll within them, and melt their affections into tears.
The Harlot, whose the living Child was, could not endure to suffer and see her
Babe to be cut asunder, but denied and acquitted her interest in him, because
her bowels yearned toward him, 1 Kings 3.26. God's Pity to his People, is the
most intensive, when their Afflictions are the most increased: His soul was
grieved for the Misery of his People Israel, Judge. 10.16. It grieves God to see
his lie laden with Iron-fetters, to lie in long, and loathsome Imprisonments,
under cruel Tortures and Tormenting Deaths. When you are buffeted with Satan,
bewailing your sins and miseries, God's Bowels of Compassion are moved toward
you, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, thus,
Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, etc. After I was instructed, I
smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear
the reproach of my youth. Thus Ephraim bemoaned himself, and God heard him, and
marked his expressions, weighed the sorrow and burden of his spirit, and
pittieth him; Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? Since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my Bowels are
troubled for him, and I will surely have mercy on him, says the Lord. And this
tender compassion is not a bare pity, but an helping, relieving, succouring
Pity. Many have compassion, but want ability to help and succor; others have
ability to help, but want compassion: but God has both Mercy to pity, and
Ability to help and save his People; and therefore we have frequently an Act of
Deliverance joined with an Act of Mercy. When Hazael, King of Syria, oppressed
Israel all the days of Jehoahaz, the Lord was gracious unto them, and had
compassion on them, and would not destroy them, 2 Kings 13.22, 23. And the
reason why God did not destroy the Jews in the Wilderness, was because of his
Mercy; But he being full of Compassion, for gave their Iniquity, destroyed them
not, Psalm. 78.38. Mercy steps in and pleades, prevailingly against Justice, for
the preservation of a People: And this Compassion of God, God's People have
pleaded with him for deliverance; Look down from Heaven and behold, from the
Habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy Glory. Where is thy Zeal and thy
Strength, the sounding of thy Bowels and Mercies toward me? are they
restrained? O Lord, thou art our Father, and our Redeemer, Isa. 63.15, 16. This
Mercy is a sin-pardoning-Mercy.

And this will be a refuge to fly unto, when ye are pursued by an accusing,
condemning Conscience for sin committed: this is a Cordial of greater comfort,
than sin a cause of sorrow; a Plaster of a larger proportion, than the wounds
of sin upon your Conscience; it as far excells thy Scarlet-dyed sins, as the
distance is betwixt East and West: As far as the East is from the West, so far
has he removed our transgressions from us, Psalm. 103.12. compared to the
height of heaven above the earth; As the Heaven is high above the Earth, so
great is Mercy to them that fear Him, Psalm. 103.11. And again, My thoughts are
not your thoughts, nor my ways as your ways; for as the Heaven is higher than
the Earth, so are my Ways higher than your ways, and my Thoughts than your
thoughts; and therefore he will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7, 8, 9. Compared to
a Sea that can swallow and cover Mountains as well as molehills, Mic. 7.19.
This Sea of Mercy covered Noah's Drunkenness, Lots Incest, David's Adultery and
Murder, Mary Magdalens Whoredom, Peter's Denial of Christ, and Paul's
Persecution! and covers the mountains and multitudes of sins of all God's
People, in all ages of the world; and will be a Refuge for your security
against the guilt of sin, if you flee unto it: this is a Refuge to secure you
against the violence of the proud, Psalm. 86.14, 15, 16. This is a Mercy so
lasting, that is everlasting: In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a
moment, but with everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says the
Lord, Isa. 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Christ is so merciful a Shepherd, as in the days of
his flesh he had compassion on the multitude, because they were sheep without a
Shepherd; and now he sits upon the Throne of Glory: he has not laid this
tenderness to his Church aside, but will either provide fresh supplies, or
support and preserve his People under want of ordinary means, by an
extraordinary manner. And to this Mercy I commend you, that, as a shield, will
defend you from the Curses, Divinations, Enchantments, Anathema's of your
enemies; that will destroy your Persecutors; pity you under all your
pressures, redeem you from your miseries, ^ecure you against the guilt of sin
committed, and provide for your want, and relieve you by some ordinary or
extraordinary way.

3. This is to commit you to the greatest fidelity. They that will defend and
secure others, must be faithful as well as merciful: Faithless defenders, are
worse than open pursuers; they rob us of the safety we expected, and expose us
to the danger we least feared. Jaels peace was Sisera's death. And how often
did faithless Dalilah attempt to betray Sampson to the Philistines, Judge. 16.
And David must not lodge in Keilah, because the Inhabitants would deliver him
up, 1. Sam. 23.11, 12. Ahabs Children lost their heads by the unfaithfulness of
their Guardians, 2 King. 10. How many famous and strong Castles, well-fenced
Towns, and formidable Armies, have been destroyed by the treachery of faithless
Guards and Commanders? Open fields have more security with Faithfulness, than
the strongest walls with Treachery. Nothing safe committed to the custody of
faithless persons; Orphans wronged and defrauded, your Estates imbezeled, your
Persons betrayed, your Lives exceedingly endangered; and what comfort or
security can there be in such Guardians or Protectors? But to be committed to
such Keepers, whom Favor cannot win, nor Preferments corrupt, nor Rewards
bribe, nor Fear, nor Threatening; nor Dangers discourage, but remain resolute
and faithful against all, is great Security and Comfort. And such an one is
God: He is the faithful God; faithful to make good his Promises; faithful to
preserve whatsoever is committed to him. The Apostle would not have committed
the Ministers, the Affairs and Concernment of the Church of Ephesus, to God, if
he had not been a faithful God. Christ when he dyed, said, Father, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit. And Peter exhorts the afflicted Christians in his
days, to commit their souls unto God, as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19.
And how many Martyrs, when they have become whole offerings to God, have given
their souls in charge to God, Father into thy Hands I commit my spirit:
whatsoever is laid up in the hands of God, is safe and secure; He cannot be
bribed by Promises, Rewards, or any other way, to surrender any thing that is
committed to his custody: He is faithful to the least Beast of our Herds, to
the least hair on your heads, Luke 21.18. And if he be faithful in the least,
he will not be unfaithful in the greatest: He is faithful to keep your persons
in dangers, not to give you up to the rage and ruin of your enemies; The Lord
will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the Earth;
and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his Enemies, Psalm. 41.2. And
David prays, that God would secure him against false Accusers; Deliver me not
over unto the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses are risen up against
me, Psalm. 27.12. He is faithful to preserve you from Temptation; He binds up
Satan that he cannot tempt you when he would; and when he gives Satan leave to
tempt, yet God will be your refuge in the temptation: God is faithful, who will
not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able to bear, but with the
temptation, will find out a way for your deliverance, 1 Cor. 10.13. Thus he
prayed that Peter's faith failed not, Luke 22.31. his Grace was sufficient for
Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7. he is faithful to preserve your Graces, your Knowledge,
Faith, Love, Hope, Patience, Humility, etc. if God did not keep them they would
soon wither, decay, and come to nothing; Satan would soon rob you of them, sin
would soon wast and destroy them; but he will not lose the least dust of this
Gold; He is faithful to preserve your Joy, and Peace of conscience. Our
Comforts have need of his protection as well as our Graces. How soon would
temptations, sin, and persecution blow our Comforts away, if not preserved by
him. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace,
John 16.33. Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you,
ver. 22. Neither reproaches, nor imprisonments, nor persecutions shall quench
your joy, for he can make you sing in prisons, and rejoice in tribulation for
his Name, Acts 16. Rom 5. And though your Graces be weakened, and your Comforts
eclipsed, yet he will revive and strong then your Graces, he will restore your
Comforts: Though he cast down, yet he is faithful, he will not cast off: though
he may suffer your bodies to be imprisoned, banished, tortured, burned, yet he
is faithful to keep them safe until the Resurrection, the great and general
Spring, when they shall be raised, and reunited to your souls, and reflourish
in a glorified manner to eternity: And here is great security concerning
temporal danger, temptation, Graces, Comforts, and all. To which I commend you,
and your All for Protection and Comfort.

4. This is to commit you to the greatest care and diligence. Diligence is as
necessary in those that will secure and protect others, as well as Mercy and
Faithfulness. Sleepy Guards and Watchmen, betray strong Castles and fortified
Garrisons, as well as unfaithful Guards. The men of Laish were a secure and
negligent People, and the men of Dan took their City, and destroyed them with
the edge of the Sword, Judge. 18. Whilst Abner and the Army slept, Abisha would
have slain Saul their King, if David would have permitted him, 1 Samuel 26.11,
12. How many famous and formidable Armies have been utterly routed, and
thousands of men slain by an handful of people through carelessness and
negligence? better is a weak defense with care and diligence, than a strong
fortified place with negligence. But Jesus Christ is very diligent and watchful
for the preservation of his Church and People; even as the diligent Keeper of a
Vineyard always watches, that none spoil his Vineyard, that wild beasts break
not in and spoil it, so God watches and defends his Church, I the Lord do
keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it; I will keep it night
and day, Isa. 27.3. He knows all the plots and contrivances of ungodly men,
against his Church; Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain
thing; and the Kings of the Earth take counsel together against the Lord and
his Anointed? Psalm. 2.1, 2. He knew all the devices of Senacherib against
Jerusalem; I know (says God) thy abode, thy coming in, thy going out, and thy
rage against me, Isa. 37.28. Many are the devices of wicked men against God's
Children, and they know them not; but God knows them, when they are in their
deep consultations, God's eye is upon them, he stands by and hears them: God
knows the confederacy of Syria and Ephraim against Judah and Jerusalem, to take
it, and set up a King for themselves, Isa. 7.5, 6. He knew the bloody design of
Herod against Christ, notwithstanding his pretense of worshipping him. He saw
the desperate Popish Gunpowder Plot here in England; God is very diligent to
know all the designs of his Churches enemies; He that keeps Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep, Psa. 121.3, 4. Though the enemies of the Church are
vigilent, politic, and strong, yet the Defender of the Church is more
vigilent, more politic, more strong, he opposes his Wisdom to their wisdom,
his Counsels to their counsels, his Power to their power, he out-wits them, and
out-powers them: He brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught, and makes
the devices of the People of none effect, Psalm. 33.10. He takes the wise in
their craftiness, he makes them to fall into the same Snare they have laid,
and into the same Pit they have dug for others, Psalm. 7.15, 16. He hangs
Haman on the same Gallows he had raised for Mordecai. And as he is diligent to
discover the plots of his Peoples enemies, so he is diligent to defend his
People, even as the Governor of a besieged Garrison, is diligent to look to
every place, and bring fresh aid, and new supply where there is most need; he
encourages them that are fainting, saves them that are in danger, his care and
diligence is a great security and comfort: So God is every where with his
People, diligent to save them, to refresh, to strengthen them. He is with his
Joseph's in Prison, with his Jobs on the Dunghill, with his Daniels in the
Lions-Den, with the three Children in the fiery Furnace: Are they imprisoned,
banished, sick, pesecured, in great dangers? God is careful to save them: The
eyes of the Lord run to and fro upon the whole Earth, to show himself Mighty on
the behalf of them that fear his Name, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. He is diligent to
preserve the souls, as well as the bodies of his People, from Satan's
temptations, the allurements of the world, and inward corruptions; and though
he suffers them to be tempted, yet he is with them, and will not suffer them to
be tempted above what they are able to bear: He is diligent to preserve the
Graces of his People, even as the Goldsmith is careful and diligent to keep and
save all the filings and dust of his Gold, because the least grain of it,
according to its proportion is precious; so the least of your Graces, though
weak and small in your account, is precious, and of great worth in the account
of God, and he will not suffer the least to decay; He will not break a bruised
reed, nor quench smoking flax. God's People are very precious in his esteem,
they are his Jewels, Mal. 3. as dear to him as the apple of his eye, Zeph. 2.
As a man when his house is on fire, is wonderful diligent to keep and save from
the flame, whatsoever is dear and precious to him, his Wife and Children, his
Silver and Gold, and his Jewels: So when the World, or a Nation is on a flame,
God is wonderfully careful to preserve his People, that are his Jewels, his
Spouse, his Children, they are dear to him. Are you afraid that the Furnace
will be heated too hot, that the Temptation will be too strong, or the burden
of Afflictions too great to bear? Let this be your comfort, he is your
Security; and will proportion afflictions to your strength, or give strength
proportionable to the burden: And if he give strength to bear a burden, it is
as if he laid no burden at all upon you: he will be careful that the Furnace be
not too hot, nor the Temptation too strong, nor the Burden too weighty; the
good Shepherd is wonderfully careful of every Sheep in his stock, and when the
Lambs cannot go he will carry them, he will not over-pace the Ewes with young,
but in his diligence and care will accommodate his journeys, his drivings, to
the weakest and tenderest in the flock. So Jesus Christ the great Shepherd of
his Church, will not only seed his Flock, but be careful, that neither Devils
nor wicked Men drive on Temptation, nor the storm of Persecution too furiously,
but according to the strength of the weakest: He shall feed his Flock like a
Shepherd. He shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his Bosom,
and gently lead those that are with young, Isa. 40.11. Jesus Christ is that
Eliakim, Isa. 22.21, 22, etc. upon whom all the affairs and concernments of the
Church in general, and all the concernments of every Soul in particular do
depend, whether they be concerning the soul or body, temporal, or eternal, or
all. And as he is faithful, so he is diligent to perform and keep all things
committed to his charge; such is his faithfulness and diligence that nothing
shall miscarry that is committed to him. And therefore, Be not distractively
careful what shall become of you, who shall teach you, and how you shall be
taught, but by Prayer and Supplication, Cast your care upon him, for He cares
for you, Phil. 4.6.

5thly. To commit you to God, is to commit you to Infinite Power to protect
you, to support you, and deliver you, What is Power without Love and
Compassion? and, What is Love and Tenderness without Faithfulness? What is
Faithfulness without Diligence? and what is Diligence and Care without Power?
Willingness to help without Ability? and, What is Ability without Love,
Compassion and Willingness? these are unsafe security; but when all these are
united together, they must needs make strong Security and Defense, and solid
grounds of Comfort -- Here then is an infinite Power.

1. To defend the Church, and every Child of God in the greatest dangers. God's
Church is that Aijeleh Sahar, the morning Stag, mentioned in the title and
inscription of Psalm. 22. As the Hunters early in the morning single out one
Stag, or Deer, from the whole herd to chase and pursue all the day, so all the
Devils in Hell, and all the wicked men of the world, single out the People of
God to chase and persecute with fury and rage, so long as they are in the
world: She is surrounded with great dangers; and She is secured with strong
Power. A man when he is besieged by a potent, politic and cruel enemy, in a
Castle whose foundations cannot be undermined, whose walls cannot be battered
down, nor scaled, whose gates cannot be broken, nor burnt, whose provision
inexhaustable, and all within faithful and trusty; he needs not fear the
thundrings of the Cannons, the roarings of great Granados, the glittering
Swords, nor bloody Flags of his Enemy: So though the gates of Hell, all the
policy and power of infernal furies are united against God's People, yet they
shall not prevail, there is more with than against them; our God, even this God
to whom I commend you, is security enough to defend them. He is compared to a
Rock, which all the Devils in Hell cannot undermine, 2 Samuel 22.2, 3, 4. Mat.
16.18. Compared to a Tower, whose walls can never be beaten down, Prove. 18.10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, and the Righteous fly thereunto and
are safe. Compared to a Shield that cannot be pierced, Psalm. 28.7. and 33.20.
To great Waters, that no Ship nor Boat with oars can pass, Isa. 33.21. Compared
to a Wall, not of stone, which may be battered down, or time waste and consume,
but to a Wall of Brass, Jer. 15.20. yea, a Wall of fire, Zech. 2.5. Other walls
may be approached unto, scaled, but a Wall of fire cannot be scaled, nor
touched, it terrifies the enemies at a distance. All these show God's infinite
Power to defend his People. He is a Munition of Rocks to defend his People,
that can neither be undermined, nor battered; so high, that they cannot be
scaled; he is such supplys of provision, that they cannot be famished forth.
Isa. 33.16. He shall dwell on high, and his place of defense shall be the
Munition of Rocks; his bread shall be given him, and his water shall be sure.
Well then, let this comfort you, that you are incircled with so great a Power
for protection.

2. Here is infinite Power to support your spirits under the greatest trials,
that they faint not. It is a wonder to consider the multitudes and mountains of
afflictions heaped on the People of God, and they not discouraged; when
liberty, riches, relations, and life lie at the stake, yet they faint not;
surely this must needs come from a Divine Power, which is glorified in man's
weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. Would you not wonder to see a Torch, a Candle to burn in
a mighty storm and tempestious wind? Would you not wonder to see a spark of
Fire to burn, and keep alive in the midst of a Sea? So it is a wonder that
these mighty storms of Persecution, and floods of Affliction that fall upon the
Godly, should not daunt and dis-spirit them. God proportions his Joy to the
Sufferings of his People, He can make them to account Prisons to be as Palaces,
and Dungeons as places of delight; Ropes and Iron-Chains, to be more to them
than Golden Ornaments. He will so support your spirit under sufferings, that
you shall glory in Tribulation for him; Romans 5.5. As the Sufferings of Christ
abound in you, so the Consolations of Christ shall abound to you, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5.

3. Here is infinite Power to deliver you from your greatest fears and
sufferings; He has done great things of old for his Church, and he is the same
God still, and will do great things for his Peoples deliverance. But of this by
and by.

6thly. To commit you to God, is to commit you to a Fountain of All Grace, for
supply and preservation of Grace.

1. Here is a fullness of the Grace of Gifes: All the eminent Gifts of God's
People have come from this Fountain, the gifts of Wisdom and of Knowledge, the
gift of Miracles, the gift of Prophecy, of discerning of Spirits, 1 Cor. 12.8,
9, 10, 11. When you are called before Courts, the learned Fathers, and the Sons
of the Church, to plead for, maintain and defend your Religion, he will give
you Wisdom, that your adversaries shall not be able to resist. He that
ordains his praise from the mouths of Babes, and opened the mouth of Balaams
Ass, will teach you what to say, with such Wisdom that your enemies cannot
gainsay. Luke 21.15. The learned Rabbis among the Jews were not able to resist
the Wisdom and the Spirit that was in Stephen, Acts 6.10. Apollos was a man
mighty in the Scriptures, and he mightily convinced the Jews, Acts 18.24, 28.
Do not therefore fear the weakness of your parts or learning, This God to whom
I commit, both can and will make you baffle your learned adversaries, as of
old, if he see it good. But if he deny you ability to speak for it, he will
give you an heart, will, courage and strength to suffer for the Truth.

2. Here is a fullness of the Gifts of Grace. Gifts without Grace may adorn us,
but never sanctify and save us. Grace is of indispensable necessity: no Grace
here, no Glory hereafter. Holiness is the Suburbs, Heaven is the City: and as
we pass through the Suburbs into the City, so through Grace we must pass into
Glory. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And
without Holiness no man can see the Lord. Now here is a full and free Fountain,
to furnish you that want. All the glorified Saints in Heaven were once by
nature as empty of Grace and Holiness, as any of you now are; and from this
Fountain they have been supplied: and God is the same still in the freeness,
fullness and willingness to communicate his Grace to every hungring and
thirsting soul. There is nothing wanting but a spiritual sense of your want of
it, your misery without it, and an earnest desire and endeavor after it. Such
are invited, Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that
hears, say, Come. And let him that is athirst, come. And whosoever will, let
him come, and take of the Water of Life. God does not only invite you, but
earnestly desire that you would come. The full breasts of the mother are in
pain until they be drawn by her babe. And these full breasts seem to be in pain
until you come; and therefore makes an open and general Proclamation, that
every one that comes should have a full and free supply. Here is a fullness of
veriety without price, Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that is athirst, come; come ye
to the Waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy
Wine and Milk without money and without price. Here is a Fountain full, open
and free to every thirsting soul: for the Poor as well as for the Rich; for the
Mean as well as for the Noble; for the Simple as well as for the Wise. It is
open and free to Parents and Children, to Masters and Servants. Here is a
fullness of variety and all kinds of Grace. He is the God of all Grace, 1 Pet.
5.10. Here is Grace to enlighten your understandings; Grace, to bow and make
obedient your stubborn wills; Grace, to soften your hard hearts, and make your
benumbed consciences tender; Grace, to untie your tongues, and make the dumb to
speak for God, and to God, in prayers and praises to him. Here is Grace for
every condition; for Liberty and Imprisonments; for Peace and Persecution; for
Sickness and Health: The fullness, suitableness, and freeness of this Fountain,
is not only security and comfort against your wants, but your weakness and
decays of Grace also. It may be many of you have, upon your serious
retirements and contemplations of your spiritual estate, such perplexing and
disponding thoughts as these; complaining, How shall my weak Graces be
preserved from perishing in the midst of so many and strong corruptions within
me! how can my weak Graces endure the terrible assaults and furious onsets of
Satan! how can they hold out in these long temptations! how can I, a poor weak
and bruised Reed, stand in tempestuous winds, when the tallest Cedars in God's
Labanon have been sadly rent and broken! how can this smoking flax but be
wholly extinguished, when so many bright flames have been quenched by the
floods of aff^^tions! It is impossible that a spark of fire should be kept
alive in the midst of a Sea. And how much more will it be thus with me, when
for ought I know, I may want the public Ordinances of God? from whence, as
from an Armory, I was supplied with Furniture and Armor against Temptations;
from whence, as from a rich furnished Shop, I was supplied with Sovereign
Cordials, to relieve and succor my weak and fainting Graces! Can the babe live
when the food is withheld, or such given as is unsuitable, not nutritive! How
shall I, a weak Babe in Christ, live, when I want the sincere Milk of God's
Word, or husks given me instead of the bread of my Father's house! True it is,
Sirs, that Grace in the midst of many and strong Corruptions within, and
Temptations without, is like a spark of fire in the midst of the Sea. And when
the means of spiritual life and growth are removed, life and growth must decay:
but what is impossible with men, is possible with God. He is a Fountain of
Grace to support and strengthen your weakness, as well as to supply your wants.
He that suffered the towering Cedars of his Labanon to be broken with mighty
winds, can keep thy bruised Reed from being broken: He that suffered the bright
flames of Love, and fervent Affection in others, in part and for a time to be
cooled, can keep thy smoking flax from being quenched: He that creates
something of nothing, that brings good out of evil, can and will preserve thy
weakest Graces in a Sea of corruptions he that preserves the weakest Babes in
Nature, will preserve his smallest Babes in Grace: Yea, here is that God that
will glorify his Power in your weakness, and after ye have suffered a while,
make you perfect, strengthen, stablish, and settle you, 1 Pet. 5.10. You nor
your Graces are not in your own keeping: they and you are kept by the mighty
Power of God to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.8. God is stronger than all, and no man,
nor any thing, shall pull you, nor your Graces, out of his hand, John 10.29,
30. This Grace will sustain you in all your distresses, and make the Twelling
Jordan and Red Sea of Affliction foordable, and carry you through. He will send
supplies in every siege; and make his Grace sufficient for us in all our
buffetings: He will proportion his dealings to your strength, or strengthen
your shoulders according to your burdens. Here is Grace to make the weak
strong, for strong corruptions, strong temptations, strong difficulties; not
only to encounter with them, but to conquer and subdue them. This Grace is
Armor of proof, Reproach-proof, Prison-proof, Tribulation-proof, Death-proof;
this will make you to rejoice in Tribulation, that you are accounted worthy to
suffer for the Name of JESUS* In a word, it is a Fountain of Grace, both for
supply and strength, to bear your charges till you come to Glory.

7thly. To commit you to God for Comfort and Security, is to commit you to him,
who stands in the fullness and sweetness of all Relations to his Church and
People. Relations are of the smallest Entity, but of the greatest Efficacy. The
bowels of love, tenderness and affection of an Husband, a Wife, of Parents and
Children, are of a great energy.

1. This is to commit you to the Captain of the Church. The Church is compared
to an Army with Banners, and Christ is the Captain General of that Army, John
5.13, 14, this Captain is wise and pollitick, to find out and disappoint the
cruel Stratagems and bloody Designs of his Churches Enemies, Psalm. 33. He
brings the Counsel of the Heathens to naught, and makes the Devices of the
People of none effect. He is prudent in managing all the Affairs and
Concernments of the Church, and orders them for his Peoples advantage; because
He is Wonderful in Counsel, and Excellent in working, Isa. 28.29. As the
Captain of his Church, He goes before them in all their dangers; He a bates the
Fury of the Adversary, he blunts the Sword; he will make way for his People to
follow him through the greatest difficulties: He stops the mouths of hungry
Lions; cools a Fiery-furnace; makes a Jordan and a red Sea, passable: He has
tasted of every cup; has taken away the Poison of it, and makes it medicinal
and sweet in the issue: hence called, The Leader and Commander of his People,
Isa. 55.4. As your Captain, he will succor you with new supplies of Strength
and Courage in all your combatings with Corruptions, Temptations, and Satan,
and restore you when you are near vanquished: his Grace is sufficient for you,
2 Cor. 12. As your Captain, he encourages you by his Word, Isa. 41.13, 14, 15.
Mat. 10.28. Luke 12.32. John 14.27. Rev. 2.10. by his Example, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.
by promise of Reward; that the Dunghill of your sufferings through perseverance
and uprightness, shall be turned into a Throne of Glory: Be thou faithful unto
the death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 3.10. To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I overcame, and
am sat down with my Father on his Throne, Rev. 3.21. As our Captain, he
conquers all our Eenemies, Sin, Satan, the World, and crowns us with Victory,
Romans 8.37. We are more than Conquerors through Christ that loved us. And hence
the Apostle triumphs; O Death, were is thy Sting! O Grave, where is thy
Victory! The sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law: but
thanks be to God that gives us the Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1
Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

2. He is the King of his Church, Psalm. 2.6. called the King of Saints, Rev.
15.3. stilled the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16. As King, he
will effectually call you, and all others that belong to the Election of Grace,
into a state of Salvation: Thy People shall be a willing People in the day of
thy Power, Psalm. 110.3. He will redeem you from the Thraldom of Sin, and Satan's
Vassalage, turning Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan, to the Power of
God, Acts 26.18. Kings are the Refuge of their distressed Subjects; like the
Tree in Nebuchadnezzars Vision, in whose branches the Birds builded their
nests, and under whose shadows the Beasts rested and secured themselves, Dan.
4.12. So God is the great Refuge of his Church, of his People; Thy Name is a
strong Tower, and the Righteous fly thereunto, and are safe, Prove. 18.10. If
you will be true Christians, you must expect to meet with stormy and windy
days within you, and by corruption, without you; by wicked men, and infernal
Spi^its expect to be persecuted, pursued with temptations, stung with sin, and
buffeted by Satan; but here is your Refuge, Isa. 32.2. A man shall be an hiding
place from the wind, and a covert from the storm, and the shadow of a great
Rock in a weary Land. This King of the the Church, is glorious in Power,
fearful in Praises, doing Wonders. He is the Sole Sovereign of the three
Kingdoms, Heaven, Earth and Hell, and governs all the Creatures therein, and
disposes their actions according to his will. He stills the raging Sea,
turning the storm into a calm, and limits the foaming and furious waves; so far
shall thou go, and no further. He binds up the four Angels at the River
Euphrates, and loses them at his pleasure, and limits their rage; i. e. He
binds up and loses and limits the Turkish Fury, for an hour, for a day, for a
month, for a year, which like mighty Seas break out, and bear down before it
mighty Nations and Kingdoms, drowning them in the Floods of hostile Invasions
and Miseries, Rev. 9.14, 15. This King binds up the Devil in the Chains of his
Power and Providence, that he cannot tempt you, touch an hair of your head, nor
a Swine of your herd, unless God give him leave; and if he give him leave, yet
he limits for duration of time and measure, so that your enemies shall neither
sooner, nor longer, nor more afflict you, than God gives them leave. This King
will subdue and conquer his Churches Enemies; He will break them with a Rod of
Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, Psalm. 2.9. He will strike
through Kings in the day of his wrath, Psalm. 110. they shall be before him as
Dust before the Wind, as Briars, Thorns, Stubble before the Fire, Isa. 27.4.
This King is wonderfully rich, and multiplies great Gifts and Privileges upon
his Church and People. He is a Sun and Shield; he will give Grace and Glory;
and no good thing will he withhold from you if ye live uprightly, Psalm. 84.11,
12. He will abundantly recompense all you works, losses, sufferings for him,
with an incorruptible Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.4. In a word, in the day of his
glorious Royalty, when he comes to judge the World, he will wipe off all the
soot and blackness of Reproach and Sufferings, and invest with an admirable
Glory, shining like the Sun in the Firmament.

3. Jesus Christ is his Churches Shepherd, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his Flock
like a Shepherd. And God promises that he will set one Shepherd over them, and
he shall feed them, even his servant David; i. e. Christ of the Seed of David,
Ezekiel. 34.23. And Christ assures us, that he is the good Shepherd, John 10.11,
14, 16. What a Shepherd is to his Sheep, the same is Christ to his Church; he
will provide Pasture for his People. He makes me, says David, to lie down in
green Pastures, and leads me beside the still Waters, Psalm. 23. These green
Pastures and still waters, are Gospel Ordinances, where his People feed and
drink: The variety of Ordinances, show the variety of feeding: the richness and
fullness of the Ordinances, show the plentifulness of feeding. Here is Milk for
Babes, Wine for the Faint, Water for the Scorched, strong Meat for strong
Christians, Isa. 55.1, 2. He has provided his Body and Blood to feast and feed
you to Life Eternal: He knows the number of his Sheep, and their particular
persons from other men, John 10.14. I am the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep.
The Foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows
them that are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. Though you be in Prisons, in Dungeons, in
Banishments, though the wool be scratcht off, and the skin tore by
Persecutions, yet he knows you, even you who are given him of the Father in his
eternal Election, John 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me. Such of
you as have his Image upon your souls, and his Fathers Name wrote upon your
foreheads, Rev. 14.1. such of you as have the sprinkling of his Blood, and are
washed white in the Lambs Blood, Rev. 7.14. Shepherds use to preserve their
Flock. David hazarded his Life to preserve the Flock from the roaring Lion and
revenous Bear, 1 Samuel 17.34. Shepherds watch night and day to preserve their
Flocks; as Jacob, Genesis 31.40. and the Shepherds to whom Christ's Birth was
preached, Luke 2.8. Jesus Christ is that careful Shepherd, who defends his from
them that would destroy them: the Devil was never yet able to get the least
Lamb of his Flock; Those that thou have given me, I have kept, and none is lost
but the Son of Perdition, John 17.12. and never shall the Devil be able to get
any of Christ's Sheep, John 10.29. my Father is greater than all, and none
shall be able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. This Shepherd will heal you
of all your spiritual Maladies and Diseases: He is the great Physician of
Souls; in the days of his flesh he healed all that came, or were brought to
him: He made the Blind to see, the Deaf to hear, the Lame to walk, the Dumb to
speak; He cleansed Lepers, raised the Dead, and cast out the Devils, Mat. 11.4,
5. And He is the same for the soul; no disease to great for him to cure: He
heals us of the Guilt of Sin, by Pardon and Justification. Thus He healed Noah
of his Drunkenness, Lot of his Incest, David of his Adultery and Murder,
Solomon of his Idolatry, Peter of his Denial, Mary Magdalen of her Whoredoms,
Paul of his Persecution: He heals us of the filth and dominion of Sin, by
Sanctification. The God of Peace sanctify you throughout in spirit, body and
soul. He enlivens and raises them that are dead, enlightens them that are
blind, softens them that are heard, cleanses the unclean, making a dunghill of
sin, (...) Temple of his Spirit; and the souls that are (...) stitu^ed
Adulteresses to Sin and Satan, a Spouse to himself: He is anointed to bind up
the broken in heart, to proclaim Liberty to the captives, to open the
Prison-doors to them that are bound. He gives Beauty for Ashes, and the Garment
of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness, Isa. 61.1, 2. This Shepherd will gather
his Sheep together; his Gentile Sheep scattered, and Jewish Sheep dispersed,
both these he will gather: The Gentiles, John 10.16. the Jews also. One end of
the Ministry is to gather in all the Elect into a state of Grace out of the
state of Nature: and one end of the Ministry and Discipline is to gather in all
that have strayed, or been scattered since their conversion: He will gather all
that have been scattered by Storms and Dogs, all that have been devoured, all
that have dyed in Prisons, Dungeons, Banishments, in loathsome and unknown
places; the Sea shall give up her dead, and the Grave give up her dead, and
shall separate them from the Goats, and lead and conduct them safely into the
Folds of Heaven and Glory.

4. This is to commit you to the Father of the Church, who has begotten his
People unto himself by the Immortal Seed of his Word, Joh. 1.11, 12, Jam. 1.18.
who loves, delights in, pitties, provides for and defends his People, even as a
Father loves, delights in, pitties, and provides for, and defends his Children.

5. This is to commit you to God, the Husband of his Church and People; who
has chosen them out of the mass of mankind, and espoused them unto himself,
Hos. 2.19, 20. and made one with them according to the ancient Law of Marriage,
And they two shall be one ^^esh, Ephesians. 5.30, 31. and dwells with his People in
every place and condition; Heb. 13. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee:
He partakes of our humane nature, and makes his People partakers of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. As your Husband, he sympathiseth with you in all your
sufferings, accounting your afflictions his, Isa. 63.9. As your Husband, he
derives upon him all your sins, Isa. 53.5. 2 Cor. 5. ult. The wife is not
suiable at Law, but the husband. Jesus Christ is the Husband of you that are
Believers, he answers and non-suits all Bills of Indictments put up against
you: There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. And
as he takes your sins upon himself, so he communicates to you the Riches and
Privileges, Purchases of his Grace and Sufferings here; The Glory that thou
have given me, I have given them, Joh. 17.22. The Kings Dunghter is all
glorious within, Psalm. 45. And he will communicate to you the Greatness of his
Glory and Blessedness hereafter, Joh. 17.22. Father, I will that they whom thou
have given me, be where I am, that they may behold the Glory thou have given
me. Here Christ does win and contract his People, by his Ambassadors; but at
the great Day of his glorious Royalty, when he shall be attended upon with a
glorious Retinue of blessed Angels, he will publicly solemnize the Marriage
betwixt himself and his People: Here they are in a Pilgrimage, then they shall
be brought into the Brides Chamber: here you have a Crown of Grace, then he
will put upon you a Crown of Glory. Now if you faithfully consider, that God to
whom I commit you, is the Fullness, Sweetness of all these Relations to you that
are his People, the most potent, politic, victorious Captain; the most
powerful, wife and rich King; the most diligent and skilful Shepherd; the
tenderest Father, and most loving Husband to his Church and People; it must
needs be ground of Security and Comfort, in this your left and desolate
condition.

Eighthly, This is to commit you to that God who works wondrous things for the
deliverance of his Church and People, Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O
Lord, amongst the gods? Who is like unto thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful
in Praises, doing Wonders!

1. He is wonderful in disappointing the great plots and desperate counsels of
his Churches enemies. He brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught, he
makes the devices of the People of none effect, Psalm. 33.10. Syria and Ephraim
had combined and plotted together, to take Jerusalem, and set up a King for
themselves, but God said, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass,
Isa. 7.4, 5, 6, 7. How wonderful was he in disappointing Hamans bloody design,
when the Order for the destruction of the Jews was procured, signed and sent by
Posts in the Provinces of the King, and the day appointed for slaughter drew
nigh, and the Jews a weak unarmed captivated People, had no Power to save
themselves, and few Friends in the Court; then the High-Court of Heaven appears
their Friend, and the Lord of Hosts their refuge, and saves them: But how? Not
by an Army, nor by an Angel, but by breaking the Kings sleep: and that the time
might not be tedious, the Books of their Chronicles must be read; and God so
ordered, that they read how Mordicai the Jew had saved the King from the
Treason of Bigthana and Teresh, two Chamberlains, which was the beginning of
their delivery, Esth. 6. How wonderful was the discovery of, and delivery from
the Powder Plot? how near was it to have effected the great design? how
unlikely to have been discovered and prevented, if God had not disappointed it?
He is wonderful in changing the very order and nature of the Creatures, that
Fire shall not burn you, nor hungry Lions devour, nor Waters drown you.

2. He is wonderful in working deliverance by small means, and the greater the
things done by small means, the greater is the Wonder. How did he overthrow
Zerah the Ethiopian, leading an Army of a thousand thousand, by an handful of
men? 2 Chr. 14.11. The formidable Army of the Amalakites, by Gideons three
hundred, Judge. 7. By Deborah and Barak, and Cyrus, weak instruments, he
delivered his People from great thraldom. He can arm the smallest creatures,
Frogs, Lice, the dust of the Earth, the ashes of a Furnace, with strength, to
plague his Churches enemies. He can make Israel a worm, and poor, weak,
contemptible People, to beat Mountains into dust, that is, destroy Nations and
Kingdoms, and Oppressors, that seem great, immovable and impregnable Mountains,
Isa. 41. Infinite Wisdom and Power knows no difference betwixt the smallest and
strongest instruments.

3. Wonderful in delivering his People without means: What he does by means, he
can do without means, he can create means, when there is none. When Hezekiah
complained, The Children are come to the birth, but there is no power to bring
forth. God sent an Angel, and in one night slew an hundred fourscore and four
thousand of the Syrian Army, 2 Kings 19.35. He smote Herod that he was devoured
with worms, Acts 12.23. and Julian the Apostate with an Arrow from Heaven. He
can smite his Churches enemies with divisions, and make them destroy each
other, as the Ammonites, Moabites and inhabitants of Mount-Seir, when they came
against Jerusalem, in the days of Jehosaphet, 2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23. And how
wonderful will God be, when he shall raise up his slain Witnesses, as men out
of the grave: And make new Heavens, and a new Earth, giving his Persecuted
Church, great Peace and Tranquillity!

4. He is wonderful in turning the devices of the Churches enemies upon
themselves, that catches them in the same Snare they have laid, and makes
them fall into the Ditch they dug for others; He returns their mischief upon
their own heads, and their violent dealings upon their own pates, Psalm. 7.15,
16. He hanged Haman on the same Gallows he reared for Mordecai. And cast
Daniels accusers into the Lions Den, all whose bones were broken in pieces
before they came to the bottom of the Den: when he brought Daniel forth having
no hurt upon him, Dan. 6.

I have done with the Doctrinal part of the first Branch for your Security and
Comfort, to wit, God.

A word or two for Application, and then to the second Branch.

If God be the best Security and Comfort a departing Minister can commit his
People unto; Be persuaded.

1. To get an interest in this God. It is of small or no advantage to hear that
God is such Security and Comfort to his People in their lowest conditions, and
sharpest afflictions, unless you have interest in him, in his Love to delight
in you, in his Mercy to pity you in all your miseries; in his Diligence and
Faithfulness to keep you; in his Power to save and defend you in dangers; in
the fullness of his Grace to supply your wants in him, as the fullness and
sweetness of all relations to you; your Captain, your King, your Shepherd, your
Father, your Husband. It is no relief nor comfort to a naked, hungry and
thirsty man, to hear there are fine Clothes, dainty Food, sweet and rich Wine
in such and such places; if he has no propriety in them, he may perish in his
want for all these. So though God is such Sovereign Security and Comfort to his
People, yet you may perish that have no interest in him. Propriety in God is
ground of your comfort and security: If you would have him to be your Captain,
you must be his Soldiers, to fight his Battles against Sin and Satan. If you
would have him to be your King, you must become his loyal Subjects to obey his
Laws. If you would have him to be your Shepherd, your Father, your Husband, you
must be his Sheep, not Goats; his Children, not Bastards; his Spouse, not
Adulteress: God must have a propriety by Grace in you, before you can have a
propriety of Security and Comfort in him.

2. Labor to improve your interest in God. An interest in God, known and
improved, is the best way and means to support and comfort the soul under
sufferings, Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I
hope in him. There is light in the Sun to direct us, virtue in Meat and Drink
to nourish us, in Clothes to warm us, in Physic to heal us, in Cordials to
strengthen us: but if we shut our eyes against the Sun, it is to us as if there
were no Sun at all; Meat and Drink nourish not unless we feed on them; Clothes
do not warm us unless we put them on: Physic does not cure us, unless we drink
it. So though there is enough in God for your security and comfort, yet unless
you improve your interest in God, you will have small comfort from him.
Therefore exercise your Faith much upon his Promises, his Attributes, upon his
Dealings with his Church of old, upon your own Experiences; and draw strength
and supplies of Grace from them. Be frequent in fervent Prayer to God, for your
selves, for the slain Ministry, your Minister in particular, and for these
Nations; Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love her. See
a suitableness and alsufficency in God for every condition you are in, and
improve it, and you cannot want comfort in that condition. Time will not permit
me to enlarge upon these, I hope the indispensable necssiety of the former
duty, and the incomparable benefit and advantage of this latter duty are
sufficent motives to stir you up to perform them. --

Now my Brethren, we usually see when the Father of a Family dies, he leaves
and commits the protection of his Widow and Fatherless, the management of their
affairs and concernments, to the prudence, and justice, to the love of his most
faithful and trusty friends. And we see when Paul was no more to be at Ephesus,
he commends them to God; and we read that Jesus Christ a little before his
death, made his last Will and Testament, and amongst other things, he solemnly
commended the tuition of his Seep to his Fathers care, entreating him by all
the dearness betwixt them, that he would preserve them from the Devil and all
his evil designs against them, John 17.11, 15. he had received them from the
Father upon his commendation, ver. 6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me,
and he had kept them safe while he was with them; Those that thou gave me I
have kept, and none of them lost, but the Son of Perdition, ver. 12. And being
now to go out of the world, entreats the Father that as he had kept them upon
his commendation, so he would upon his recommendation undertake the protection,
and tuition of them: I Pray not that thou should take them out of the world,
but that thou should keep them from the evil, ver. 15. and again, Holy
Father, keep through thine own Name, those thou have given me, that they may be
one as we are one, ver. 11. And now at my departure, according to these great
Patterns worthy of imitation, I commend you to God.

When without my seeking for, I had the unanimous Invitation and general
cheerful Reception of the whole Parish, I looked upon it as a demonstration
that God intended to entrust me with your souls. And according to that small
Talent the Lord has lent me, I have been willing and ready to spend and be
spent in the service of your souls, and by soundness of Doctrine,
unblamableness of Conversation to win you to Christ: and though I had no
wheaten bread, yet rather than your souls should starve; according to the
pattern of my great Lord and Master, I gave you barley bread, the nourishment
and strength of which I leave to your experiences. I did what I could while I
was with you, to keep you, to fore-warn and fore-arm you; and now having no
more time to be with you, I commend you and yours to the protection of the God
of Grace and Peace. Whatsoever there is in an infinite God, that may make for
your security and comfort, I commend you unto it; to his Mercy, to pity and
pardon all your sins; to his Righteousness, to plead for you; to his Power, to
defend you; to his Al-sufficiency, to supply you: to all the virtue of his Arm;
to all the affection of his Bowels; to all the depths of his Wisdom, and to
whatever else in an infinite God that can make for your defense, I commit you
to it. From Him I received you; with him, with his Love, his Mercy, his
Faithfulness, etc. I leave you -- To Him,

1. Because he is able to comfort you in all your sorrows; who can and will
shine upon you in the darkest nights, and turn them into a bright day. He is
the Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort; And as the Sufferings of Christ
abound in you, so your Consolation shall abound by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3, 5. he
will give you an assured and impregnable Peace within, when you have Troubles
and War without. This was Christ's Legacy for his People; Peace I leave with
you, my Peace I give unto you: not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let not
your heart be troubled, let it not be afraid, John 14.27. Your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you, John 16.22. This peace shall so
keep and defend your hearts, that all the beleaguering sufferings and
afflictions shall not take nor vanquish them. Phil. 4.7. And the Peace of God
which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts; (...), shall keep your
hearts as in a strong, well-fortified, impregnable Garrison.

2. To Him I commend you, who is able to support under your greatest burdens.
Satan that great Leviathan would always have more liberty to lay load upon
load upon your backs, he would load you with temptations and persecutions
without, he would have loads of corruptions and dissertions within, to be
heaped upon you; he desires to winnow you, and try your strength: he would
break you backs, dash your hopes, your comforts, your joy and peace, by
accumulated miseries. But this God can and will make his Grace sufficient for
you, and glorify his Power in your weakness, 2 Cor. 12. When you are weakest
in your selves, the Lord will show himself strongest to you and for you, and
make those burdens easy, which before appeared formidable and insupportable to
you. Romans 8.26. (...), God will take up one end of the staff, and the heaviest
part of the burden upon himself.

3. To him I commend you, who is able to establish you in the most shaking
times. Christians must not be as reeds, bow with every wind of Doctrine, nor
moved away with every storm of Persecution, but they must be like those two
brazen Pillars in Solomon's Temple, called Jachin and Boas, Stability and
Strength. You must be strong and steadfast in the purity of the Doctrine, in the
simplicity of the Worship of the Gospel of Christ. Now you are not able to
stand by your own strength against storms and winds, but God will stablish and
strengthen you, and make you like an house built upon the Rock, that all the
waves and floods of Persecution shall not be able to move you. The God of all
Grace after that you have suffered a while, will make you perfect, and
strengthen and settle you, 1 Pet. 5.10. You that are Christians indeed are
built upon such a foundation, Jesus Christ, as conveyes life, strength, and
stability to the superstructure. As broken bones, once knit, are the stronger;
as trees shaken by the winds take deeper root: So God by all shakings and
stormy winds will make you more stable and settled. It is your Security and my
Comfort, and stand not by your own strength, but by the Power of God.

4. To Him I commend you, because he is able to provide strong and suitable
supplies for you. Should I commit you to men, they would seek their own
profits, but never bestow their pains; they would feed upon you, but not feed
you; reap the fruit, but never watch, nor water, nor manure the Vineyard. But
this God is the great, the good and faithfyl Shepherd, who when he removes one
Instrument can raise another. When he takes away one Minister, he can provide
you another; that can send you an Elisha after Elijah; one to whom he has
given a double portion of his Spirit, 2 Kings 2.9. a man of greater parts,
learning and abilities, of greater experiences and skill in the great things of
Christ, in the great concernments of your souls; both a Boanarges and a
Barnabas.

5. To Him I commend you, who is able to bless the smallest means, and make
them equally profitable and beneficial as the best. Though in regard of men you
may doubt of the former, yet in God you may be confident of the latter. All
means are in God's hand. Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but it is God that
gives the increase. His blessing upon the smallest means makes them very
beneficial to you; when the want of this blessing makes the greatest and most
likely means insuccesful: his blessing upon the Pulse made Daniel and his
Companions look fresher and fairer than those that were fed at the Kings Table,
Dan. 12.3, 5. Barley loaves in Christ's hand, and with his blessing, is more
beneficial than Wheaten Bread in the hands of man only, John 6.9. This God by
his blessing can make up the want of outward means. That is the best Faith that
is got by the weakest means. You see poor children that are brought up with
hard food, brown bread and water, to look fatter, ruddier, to be stronger than
those who are fed with dainties and varieties. God's blessing upon the weakest
means makes fat and flourishing Christians, when the want of his blessing upon
the strongest means makes many lean Christians. He fed Elijah by the black
Ravens, 1 Kings 17.6.

6. I commend you to this God, that can preserve your Graces when outward means
fail. I told you he is a God of Wonders; what he does by means, he can do
without means: what he does mediately by Instruments, he can do it immediately
by Himself. Did not he sustain Moses without meat and drink forty days in the
Mount? Did not he sustain our blessed Savior forty days without food in the
Wilderness? Did not he provide for, and maintain the Israelites in the
Wilderness for the space of forty years, without plowing and sowing, by an
extraordinary providence, so that they wanted not until they are of the old
Corn of the Land of Canaan? Did not he preserve the Widow's Meal in the Barrel,
and her Cruse of Oil, that they wasted and failed not, until God sent rain upon
the earth, 1 King. 17.14, 15, 16. So if God bring upon you a Famine of the
Preaching of the Word, yet God can, and will preserve your Graces, they shall
not waste till God send supplies: Does God bring you into a wilderness, where
you have no Ordinances of God, God can and will provide supplies till your
Grace shall be turned into Glory. He enabled the Prophet to travel in the
strength of the Cake, forty nights and days, until he came to the Mount of
God, 1 King. 19. And is the hand of the Lord shortened that he cannot help? or
are the bowels of his mercy shut up, that he will not? or is he more careful of
the life of Nature, than of the Life of Grace? No! no! he is the same God
still, and he will enable you in the present strength of Grace if you want
Means, to travel on till you come to the blessed Mount of God.

7. To him I commend you, that can and will turn all to your good. He can
overshoot Men and Devils in their own bows; what they design for your hurt and
destruction, he can turn it to your great benefit; Even as the Apothecary kills
the destructive nature of poisonous Ingredients, and makes them medicinal; so
God pulls out the Sting and Poison of every suffering and affliction, and makes
them good. Romans 8. All things shall work together for good to them that are
called according to his purpose. Does he suffer you to be under many and diverse
Afflictions? he exercises you with diverse Rods and Trials, with Reproach,
Blasphemy, Sickness, Imprisonments, Poverty, Buffetings with Satan. God will
bring good out of all these. Several Diseases must have several Cures. And
several Ingredients make up one Remedy to cure a Malady. It may be you have
many Corruptions, and strong Corruptions, therefore you must have strong and
diverse kinds of Cure; and by all this variety, God aims at your good, to wean
and win you, to purge and kill sin in you, to prevent sin in the future. Every
twig of the Rod, though bitter at the present, will at last drop Honey into your
Souls; He will turn your water into Wine; your wanderings in the wilderness,
shall end in Canaan; all his Dispensations to his People come in Love and
Mercy; though Sickness, yet in Love and Mercy; though Poverty, yet in Love;
though Affliction, yet in Love. A Cross in Love, is better than a Comfort in
Wrath. Wicked men have a Curse in their best things, a Curse in their Honors,
a Curse in their Riches, a Curse in their Health. God's People have a Blessing
in their worse things; a Blessing in Poverty, a Blessing in Sufferings, a
Blessing in Affliction: and God's Love sweetens our sowrest Draughts, when his
Curse imbittereth and poysoneth the sweetest Enjoyments. This God will
sanctify all Providence to you: and sanctified Sickness is better than
unsanctified health. Sanctified Poverty is better than unsanctified riches.
Sanctified Afflictions are Blessings and Mercies, and better than unsanctified
prosperity.

I have done with the first part of the Remedy, your Security and Comfort in
your desolate condition. I now come to the second part of the Remedy; that is,
The Word of his Grace. Before I come to prove it, give me leave to show you,
why it is called Grace, or give you the Reasons of the title Grace, given to
the Word; The Word of his Grace: and it is so called;

1. Because it is a Gift of Grace. It was Gods free good Will, why it was
bestowed at all; and why one Age or Place of the World should receive it rather
than another; and why God should discover the Mystery that was kept secret
since the world began, to those who were sinners of the Gentiles, serving dumb
Idols, it is of Free Grace. We may say of all these, Even so Father, because it
seemed good in thy sight.

2. Because the subject matter of the Gospel is Grace; all benefits contained
in it, flow from Grace, whether they be blessings without us, or blessings
within us. Election is of Grace, and according to the good Pleasure of his
Will, Ephesians. 1.5. Our effectual Calling is according to Grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. and
our spiritual Birth, our Regeneration, is of God's Freewill, Jam. 1.18. Faith
is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Forgiveness of all our sins, is according to
the Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. Justification is freely by his Grace, Romans
3.24. And Life Eternal, is the Gift of God, Romans 6.23.

3. It is called The Word of Grace, because it is an instrument, to impart and
bestow these Blessings upon us; it is an Instrument, through God's Blessing, to
work in us the Life of Grace: Of his own Will he begat us by the Word of Truth,
Jam. 1.17. This enlightens our understandings, and turns us from darkness to
light, Acts 26.17, 18. This sanctifies us; Sanctify them through thy Truth;
thy Word is Truth, John 17.17. All the Gifts and Benefits of Free Grace, are
imparted to us by it: hence it is called, The Grace of God that brings
Salvation, Tit. 2.12. It does not only bring it to look upon, but by the power
of its Ordainer accompanying it, does make us partakers of it. -- Now this Word
of God's Grace, is great Comfort and Security for a departing Minister to
commend his People unto. This is the second part of the Remedy, I shall be
brief herein -- Now I commend you to this Word.

1. Because it is of indispensible Necessity. Happiness is the great principle
Nature has implanted in every creature; all its motions are in tendency to its
rest and tranquillity. Now the happiness and chiefest good of the rational
Creatures, is God, who is the Fountain and supreme End of all good: to enjoy
him, is an Heaven to his People here on Earth; and the Heaven of heavens to
Saints and Angels, to behold and enjoy his beatificial Vision: And though the
light of Nature, works of Creation and Providence, do manifest that there is a
God, his Goodness, Lordship and Sovereignty over all, as to leave men
inexcusable, Romans 1.19. yet are they not sufficient to give that Knowledge of
God and his Will, which is necessary to Salvation, 1 Cor. 1.21. and 2.13, 14.
How little does the Book of Nature teach us what an one God is, that there is a
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, three Persons, and but one God, every
of the three Persons, God; the Father God, the Son God, the holy Ghost God, yet
not three Gods, but one God! How little does it teach us how this God will be
worshipped! how little does it acquaint us with the excellent state of our
Creation, our miserable Apostasy! how God came to be displeased with man, and
how he must be reconciled, it tells us nothing; of our Redemption from Sin,
Satan, the Wrath of God, by the Incarnation, Death and Suffering of the Son of
God, it says nothing; of the Day of Judgment and Resurrection of our Bodies,
it tells us nothing; and though it may possibly acquaint us with an immortal
State, yet what that Happiness is, and what that Misery is, how we came to be
deprived naturally of that Happiness, and how it must be recovered, and who
they be that shall enjoy it, it says nothing; all which must be known before
they can be believed, Romans 10. and they must be believed before we can be
saved, John 3.16. And therefore it pleased the Lord, at sundry times, and by
diverse manners, to reveal himself, and declare his Will to his Church, Heb.
1.1. and afterward for the better preserving and propagating the Truth, and for
more sure establishment and comfort of the Church, against the corruptions of
the flesh, the malice of Satan and the World, that she be not drowned in
profaneness, dejected by persecution, blinded by ignorance, misled by errors,
poisoned by heresies, superstition and idolatry, it pleased God to commit the
same to writing, which makes the sacred Scriptures most necessary, those former
ways of God's revealing his will to his People being now ceased. The Sun is
not more necessary to enlighten, warm, and make fruitful this inferior* the
World, than the Word of God is for the World; better to want the Sun in the
Heavens, than the Word of God in the World.

2. I commend you to this Word, because it is a complete Word, it is perfect as
well as necessary: such is the perfection of this Word, that nothing is to be
added to it, nor diminished from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word
I command you, nor diminish from it: Yea, if an Angel from Heaven should preach
and reveal another word than this, he is accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. God threatens,
that if any man shall add to the things wrote in his Word, to add to him all
the Plagues wrote in the Book: And if any man shall take away from the Words of
the Prophecy, God will take away his part out of the Book of Life, Rev. 22.18,
19. all which Commands and Threatenings had not been given, if God's Word had
not been perfect: it is completely perfect for the information of our
understanding and will, in things to be believed, and for our direction in
things to be avoided: and practiced, 2 Timothy 3.17, 18. All Scripture is of
Divine Inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto every good Work. This teaches you all
things necessary to be known and believed in order to Salvation; that there is
a God, and what an one this God is, it teaches you; that there is a Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity; that there is three Persons, and but one God,
every one of the Persons God, the Father God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost-God,
yet not three God's, but one God. It teaches you what an one God is in his
Attributes, in his Works of Nature, and of Grace. This tells you what was our
Primitive Excellency and Happiness in Creation, our Deformity and Misery in our
Fall. This perfectly declares our Redemption from Sin, Satan, Gods Wrath, by
the Incarnation, Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, that as
Mediator and Redeemer, he is the Priest, Prophet and King of his Church; what
he has done, suffered and purchased for Us; Pardon and Justification, Peace
with God and Reconciliation, Adoption, Grace and Glory. It assures us of a Day
of Judgment, and Resurrection of all Persons from the Grave: Of the blessed
Estate of the Godly; of the Misery of the Ungodly; and the Eternity of both.
This directs you in things to be avoided; all Duties of your several Relations
to be practiced; Duties of your general and particular Calling: Duties of Piety
in the first Table; Duties of Righteouss, Charity and Temperance in the second
Table; as Husbands and Wives, as Children and Parents, as Masters and Servants,
according to your Relations of Consanguinity, Affinity, Friendship and
Neighborhood; and therefore we are commanded to lay the Word up in our hearts,
richly in all Wisdom, Col. 2.16. and to speak of it to our Children, when we
sit down in our houses; walk by the way, when we lie down, and when we rise up,
Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19. Yea Kings, and supreme Authorities of a Nation, must read in
this Book all their days, that they may fear God, and administer Justice and
Judgment to the People; that they may relieve the Oppressed; to be
Encouragements and Defenders of the Good, and Terrors to Evildoers.

3. I commend you to this Word, because of its daily Usefulness and
Profitableness; every day and in every condition it is useful and profitable
unto you, and very suitable.

1. It is a Light to enlighten and guide you. How useful and comfortable is
Light to man shut up in a dark Dungeon! How useful and beneficial is a Light to
a Traveller when the night is very dark, the Moon and Stars covered with
pitchie Clouds, the way very miry and dirty, dangerous by pits and precipices,
and easy to be mistaken! By nature your souls are like a dark Dungeon, having
no saving knowledge of God, of your selves, your sin and misery, nor of Christ
the Sovereign Remedy. But this Word is pure, enlighteneth the eyes, Psalm. 19.8.
This is the Chariot wherein the Sun of Righteousness rides, and by which he
will arise and shine in the Horizon of your Souls, and turn you from Darkness
to Light. This Light will guide you in all your ways and actions; a Light unto
your feet, and a Lanthorn unto your Paths, Psalm. 119.105. This Light will
discover Satan's Temptations, the Worlds Allurements, and direct you how to
avoid the precipices of Profaneness, the sinks of Sin; and how to walk in the
Way of Purity and Peace. This Light will direct and comfort you in the darkest
Night of Affliction.

2. It is a Touchstone to try Doctrines whether false or true. When you
suspect a piece of money, you will bring it to the touchstone to try it, that
you be not deceived, and take Brass for Gold, Guilt-Tin or Copper for pure
Silver; so you are to bring all Doctrines to the trial and touchstone of the
Word, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according
to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. And John advises us not
to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they be of God or no;
because there are many false Prophets gone out into the world, 1 John. 4.1.
Take heed of Doctrines that hold a strickness above what is written: as the
Popish doctrines of Self-whippings, voluntary Poverty, Vows of Continency. The
Apostle gives an Antidote against these, and many suchlike, Col. 2.18, to 23.
Reject doctrines that set up our own righteousness, whether of Morality or
Sanctification, in the room of Christ's Righteo^^ness, that place good works in
the Throne of Christ: doctrines contrary to Godliness, opening a door to
Libertinism, Profaneness, crying down the Morality of the Sabbath, and
Family Duties reject: for the Doctrine of the Gospel is a Doctrine according to
Godliness, Tit. 1.1. a Mystery according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. Doctrines
crying up the Traditions of men, placing Purity and Worshipping of God, and
Religion in them, but neglecting the Commandments of God; for such worshipping
of God, is a vain worship, Mark 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Doctrines crying
up Purity, to the ruin of Unity, reject: for the Gospel calls for Unity, as
well as for Purity, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. And Christ prayed for the Unity as
well as for the Purity of the Church, John 17.21, 22. Time will not permit me
to give you any more instances, but I commit you to this true infallible
Touchstone of God's Word; and see that you be like those noble Bereans,
searching the Scriptures daily, whether these things you hear be so, Acts 17.11.

3. This is a Weapon to defend you. When the Soldier is to fight with his
enemies, he arms himself, and takes his weapon in his hand. You, Sirs, are the
Lord's Soldiers, to fight his battles against Sin and Satan: you have
innumerable Enemies to encounter with, and overcome, before you can wear or
obtain a Crown of Glory. The Israelites must conquer and kill the Canaanites,
before they could possess the Land of Canaan. Heavens Way, and the Crown of
Glory, is beset with many Enemies; enemies within you, enemies without you; so
many sins, lusts, and corruptions, so many Enemies; so many Temptations, so
many Enemies; so many Devils, so many Enemies; and all these must be conquered
before we can be saved. Now the Weapon by which you must conquer them, is the
Word of God's Grace, the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. This is the Sword
whereby the Captain of our Salvation conquered our Grand Enemy, the Devil, in
all his attempts, Mat. 4. His Practice calls for our imitation; his Conquest is
our Encouragement: Are we tempted to Pride, this tells us, God resists the
Proud, and gives Grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6. Are we tempted to comtemn
Reproof? this tells us, Such as harden themselves, being often reproved, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29.1. Are we tempted to
Drunkenness, to Whoredom and Uncleanness? this tells us, None such enter into
the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. In a word, face and affront all Temptations
to Sin, with the Threatenings of God, and with his Judgments upon wicked men.
Does the World and Devil promise thee great Preferments and Riches, if thou will follow them? tell them, God does promise greater, better, and more durable
Riches and Dignities. Does he tempt thee to despair? tell him of the Fullness
and Freeness of God's Grace, the Fullness and Freeness of God's Promises, the
Greatness and Value of Christ Sufferings. And by a faithful and skilful
managing of this Weapon, you shall overcome. Resist the Devil, and he will fly
from you.

4. This Word is a spiritual Rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2. My Doctrine shall drop as the
Rain: my speech shall distill as the Dew, as the small rain upon the tender
herb, and as the showers upon the tender grass. What rain is to the E^r^^, and
fruires thereof, the same is this Word to the Godly Christian: when you are
enflamed with Corruption, pursued with Satan, scorched with the Frownings of
the Almighty, this as a pure Crystal Stream, will cool you, and refresh you:
As the Heart, the chasted Heart, painteth after the Waterbrooks, so does my soul
after God, after the Ordinances of God, Psalm. 42.1. This will soften your hard
hearts, Isa. 66.2. 2 Kings 22.11, 19. As rain, this will wash you clean, when
you are defiled: Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth, John
17.17. This Word, as rain, will make you fruitful, and recover your decaying,
withering Graces and Comforts, and make them fresh and flourishing, like Trees
planted by the Rivers side, Psalm. 1. Isa. 61.3.

5. This Word is a Comforter unto you. In all your Sorrows and Sufferings, this
Word affords suitable and seasonable Comfort to you: Are you with David in
great straits and exigencies, and your thoughts and debatings within you, like
a troubled Sea, you know not what to resolve on, which way to take? this will
then afford you comfort, Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts, thy
Comforts delight my soul, O God. And again, Thy Statutes have been my songs in
the House of my Pilgrimage, Psalm. 119.54. Are you filled with sorrow concerning
your sins? here are Promises assuring your Scarlet-dyed sins, shall become as
white as Snow, Isa. 1.18. Here is a Sea of Mercy that can swallow Mountains, as
well as mole-hills, Mich. 7.18, 19. Are you troubled about the wants of Grace?
here are gracious Invitations, for every one that will come, and take of the
Waters of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. Are you troubled about the weakness of
Grace? he has promised not to break the bruised reed, nor quench smoking
flax, Mat. 12.20. Are you troubled concerning Temptation? he has promised, his
Grace is sufficient for you; to lay no more on you than you are able to bear,
and glorify his Strength in your weakness, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 12. Are you
afraid you shall not persevere? this assures, you are kept by the Power of God
to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

6. It is a Word to revive and quicken you, in soul-deadning times, and in
soul-deadning sins. The Faith of God's People begins oftentimes to stagger,
when the proud are called happy, and they that work wickedness are set up, and
they that tempt God are delivered, Mal. 3.14, 15. This staggered Jeremiah;
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee
of thy Judgments. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are
all they happy that deal treacherously? Chap. 12.1. And David, when he saw the
ungodly prosper in the Earth, that they are not in trouble as other men, that
they are not plagued like other men, said, He had cleansed his heart in vain,
in vain had he washed his hands in Innocence, Psalm. 73.5, 12, 13. but when he
came into the Sanctuary of God, and consulted the Word of God, then he
understood their end, v. 27, 28. Read to this end and purpose, Psa. 37. and
consider it well, and it will revive you under these dispondencies of soul:
When Afflictions like waters upon fire, fall on you, and deaden your Graces and
Comforts, this Word will revive you and them: this is my comfort in my
affliction, Thy Word has quickened me. And again, Unless thy Law had been my
delight, I should have perished in my affliction, Psalm. 119.50, 92. And sin
committed will deaden your Comforts, your Graces. Great sins are like a great
blow upon the head, astonishes a man, lays him in a swond: so great sins lay
your Graces, Comforts in a swound; but this Word will revive you, be as Aqua
vitae to you. David's sins of Adultery and Murder laid him in a spiritual
swound, well nigh for the space of a year, if not all out a year or more; he
repented not of his sins in all this time; but when Nathan the Prophet came to
him with the Word of God, David then revived, 2 Samuel 12. And so for comfort
under sin.

7. This Word is an Antidote of Sovereign Efficacy to preserve you in the worst
of times. When a man lives in an Air, in a City, in a Town, in a Family that
are infected with the Plague, he will take a Cordial to fortify himself
against the Infection: Infection of an house with the Plague, is dreadful to
the Inhabitants; and to have the Plague Sore upon the body is a sad affliction:
but to be infected with the Plague in our souls is worse; that brings temporal,
this eternal death, unless cured or prevented. Now you live in an infected and
an infecting world; amongst corrupting and corrupted persons, and the danger is
great: but here is a word that will fortify you against evil examples,
promises, preferments, threatenings and sufferings, and keep you from sin; make
you good in bad times; healthy and strong in a bad air; I have hid thy Word in
my heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psalm. 119.11.

8. This Word will edify and build up in Grace. As we by a constant feeding
upon our food, of infants a foot long, we grow and increase to be men and women
of a full stature: So when we are babes in Christ, new born, this Word by a
daily feeding upon it by Faith, does nourish us, until we come to the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ: our Graces grow, and are increased and
strengthened according to our feeding upon it. Here is Milk for babes, Wine for
the faint; strong meat for them that are strong Christians. The builders of an
house cut their timber, and square their stones, and add timber to timber, and
stone to stone, until the house be built up: So, says the Apostle, this Word
is able to build you up, it cuts off the remaining knots of sin, and polisheth
you from the remainders of corruption, until you be made fit for the Temple of
God in the highest Heavens.

9. It will give you an Inheritance amongst them that are sanctified. It gives
not by way of merit and purchase; but it shows you not only the Kingdom of
Heaven, but points out the way, and directs you to it. It does not only show
and lead you that way, but fits you for Heaven. Unless we be fitted for Heaven,
we cannot come thither. The Lepers must not enter the Camp so long as the
Leprosy was upon them. And no unclean thing shall enter into Heaven, Rev. 21.
ult. The Temple of Solomon was all squared and fitted in the field, before it
was brought together to be built up: So you must be fitted in the field of
Grace, before you can be laid in the Temple of Glory. This Word then
sanctifies you, purges the corruptions, the sins of Nature; this Word
strengthens and increases your Graces: it makes you holy with Saints here,
and will make you happy with them hereafter: it brings Heaven and Glory into
your souls here, and will bring you into Heaven and Glory hereafter, and give a
possession of that Inheritance which was prepared for you before the foundation
of the World, purchased for you by the Blood of Jesus; an Inheritance far
better than all the Crowns and Kingdoms of the World; one corner of it is
better than a thousand Worlds, for firmness, purity, duration, certainty, and
situation; An Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in the Heavens for you, 1 Pet. 1.4. where you shall have the
best society; them that are sanctified, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, all the
Prophets, Apostles, and Children of God, both Minister and People, shall be
gathered as Wheat, and safely reconded in the Garners of Glory. There shall be
no Ishmael to deride and scoff our devotion; no Esau to pursue us; no Pharaoh
to oppress us; no Ahab to persecute us; no Doeg, maliciously and falsely to
accuse us; no Judas to betray us; no Devil to tempt us; no Sin to wound us: All
tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, and we shall enjoy Him, whom to enjoy
is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore. -- Now, my Brethren, to this
Word, that is of such indispensible necessity, such complete perfection, and of
daily use and advantage, as being abundantly filled with all suitable
Excellencies and Remedies for your souls in every condition, I commend you.
Here is Light to enlighten and guide you; a Touchstone to manifest Doctrines
what they are unto you. Here is a weapon to defend your selves and conquer your
enemies. Here is Rain to cool you, to soften you, to refresh you. Here is a
Cordial to comfort you, to revive and quicken you; an Antidote to preserve you.
Here is Liberty to free you, Fire to purge you, Food to nourish you; your Magna
Charta wherein your Laws, Privileges and Immunities are enrolled; a Treasury
of Comfort, a Testament full of Legacies; your Souls preservative from Sin, and
preparative to Glory.

I have done with the Doctrinal part, I come now to the Application. And though
I have spent my self, and happily exercised your patience to the full, and the
time far gone, yet give me leave a little more; have patience for your dying
Minister. God knows whether ever or never I shall trouble you thus again; the
pains is mine, I pray God the profit may be yours. If the Word of God's Grace
be such Security and Comfort to a left People. Be exhorted,

1. To attend upon the Public Preaching of the Word. This is the ordinary and
appointed means to get benefit for your souls. Those that came to Christ were
healed of their several infirmities and maladies. Would you have your spiritual
maladies healed, your natures sanctified, corruptions mortified, Grace
implainted, Grace increased, strengthened? Wait on the Word; for this is the
standing and appointed means. When Joseph and Mary sought for Christ, they
could not find him in the Company, nor amongst their Friends, nor in the City,
but in the Temple, Luke 2.43, 44, 45, 46. Think not to find God and Christ in
sinful company, in your houses, nor in your fields nor flocks, but in his
Ordinances; these are his Wine-Cellers and Banqueting-houses, wherein he will
feast your souls with spiritual dainties and varieties, Cant. 2.4.

2. Be frequent in reading it, labor to understand and believe it. The oftener
you read it, the more you shall understand it; the more you understand it, the
more you shall believe it; and the more you believe it, the more comfort and
benefit you shall reap by it. What advantage will all the excellencies be to
us, if we do not believe them? and how can we believe them unless we understand
them? and how can we understand them, unless we read it and hear it preached?
Therefore be constant in reading every day some part of God's Word, season your
souls with it in the morning, let it lock up your thoughts in the evening. Here
you have a prescribed remedy for every malady, a plaster for every sore: here
is comfort for every sorrow, and in all affliction; here is counsel in all your
straits: Deprive not your selves of the benefit, for want of reading, studying
the Word. You feed every day your bodies with your daily food, feed your souls
with this food.

3. Treasure up the Word in your hearts. Let the Word of Christ, says the
Apostle, dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, Col. 3.16. Where there is a
Malady, there the Remedy must be applied: Your Malady is within; So many sins,
so many diseases; so many sins, so many wounds. This will be Physic to cure
your diseases: A Plaster to heal your wounds. Blindness is the disease of the
understanding: Vanity the disease of the mind: Stuborness the disease of the
will: And the sin of each faculty of the soul, and member of the body, is the
disease and wound of that faculty and member. But this Word dwelling powerfully
in you, enlightens your understandings, fills your minds with heavenly
mindedness; makes your wills obedient, heals every faculty, and every member,
though it be in part. Physic does not cure us, Cordials do not comfort nor
strengthen us unless we drink them; Plasters do not heal us unless we apply
them; Food does not nourish us unless we eat and digest it: No more will the
Word of God be as Physic, as a Cordial, as a Plaster, as Food to purge sin,
to comfort us, to heal us, to nourish our Graces, unless it dwell within us.
How can a Soldier defend himself, and beat his enemies, when he is a naked
man, without his Weapons? you are naked, unarmed, if the Word dwell not in you.
Well than, Be well acquainted with God's Menaces against sin, and his Judgments
upon it: Be well acquainted with his Promises; that you have both in readiness
when occasion requires.

4. Walk according to it. Make it a light to your feet, and a lanthorn to your
paths, Psalm. 119.105. This is the way of peace, And as many as walk according
to this Rule, peace be upon them, and the whole Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. It is
the way of security, read Isa. 33.15, 16. It is the way of blessedness; Not the
hearers, but doers of the Word shall be blessed in the deed, Jam. 1.22, 23, 24,
25. I shall give you three or four instances.

First, In sanctification of the Sabbath. God has given us six days to do our
work in, and has taken himself but one in seven to be served in, and it is a
robbing of God not to keep his Day holy. The Christian Sabbath is a weekly
commemoration of Christ's arising from the dead, and accomplishing the great
work of our Redemption: and in thankfulness for so great a mercy, be sure you
keep holy, be strict in religious Duties, public and private: Make conscience
of performing duty, and make conscience of a right manner of performing duty:
when others play, sport, walk abroad, sleep or talk at home, read you the Word
or good Books, pray and sing praises to God. Such as are not careful to
sanctify God's Day, care not for God, nor Religion any day. Such as deny him
public Worship, will deny private Worship: Such as are careless in performing
public Duties, are careless in performing private Duties; and Cursed be they
that do the work of the Lord negligently, Mal. 1. ult.

Secondly, Be careful to govern your Families according to the Word. It was
Joshuahs resolution, That he and his house would serve the Lord, Chap. 24.15.
and David would suffer no wicked man in his house, Psalm. 10^. Be careful to
offer to God a morning and an evening Sacrifice, reading some portion of God's
Word: Be careful and constant to instruct your Families, your Children and
Servants in principles of Religion, in the fear of God; season them while they
are with you, that they may be preserved from infection when they are from you.
Endeavor that Husbands be holy, that your Wives be holy, that Children be holy,
that Servants be holy; that your Families be as little Churches of God: The
holiness of a Family is the glory, the safety, the riches of a Family.

Thirdly, Live in subjection to Supreme Power and Authority of the Nation. We
are branded for Rebels, Fomenters of divisions, laboring to fire the Nation
with civil Discord, and engage it in another War; but our Practice and our
Doctrine shall witness the contrary to the world. And therefore I charge you
before God's holy Angles, and God himself the great Judge of the world; that ye
be subject to the higher Powers. Be actively obedient so far as you may keep
peace and a good conscience within; and when you cannot obey actively, obey
passively. Fear not Joseph's Prison, nor Jeremiahs Dungeon, nor Daniels Lions
Den for a good conscience; Praying for all in Authority, that under them we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in ALL godliness and honesty. Labor I beseech
you, by your quiet and peaceable lives to vindicate the innocence of your
Ministers, and their Doctrine, from those black-mouthed blasphemies and
reproaches, envy and malice and ignorance has cast upon them: and doubtless
God in his due time will revenge this dishonor done to his Servants, whilst
they have studied nothing else, and nothing more than the gaining of souls in a
faithful discharge of their Ministry; when he shall manifest to the world, vel
Hostibus ipsis confitentibus, that these railing Rabshakahs, proud, aspiring,
and false accusing Hamans, malicious Doegs; that the Swearers, Drunkards,
Oppressors, Whoremongers, that the Sinners of a Nation, and such as would set
up Dagon by the Ark of God, or pull down the Ark, and set up Dagon in the room
of it, that these are the bane of Kings, the ruin of Crowns and Kingdoms: That
it is these men that turn our Calm into a Storm, our Peace into War, our Plenty
into Scarcity; these, even these are the Achans that trouble our Israel; these
are the Jonahs that raise these dreadful Storms that tear our Sails, break our
Main-masts, and ready to drive this goodly English Vessel and split her upon
the Rocks of Division: And demonstrate that the Godly are the Iron-Bulwarks,
the Brazen-Gates, the Chariots and Horsemen of a Nation; that neither Kings
nor Kingdoms prosper better, than when the Godly, and pure Religion prosper,
and are defended: For says the Wise man, Righteousness exalts a Nation, but
sin is a reproach to any People.

4. Walk according to this Word in your mutual negotiations with men. Oppress
not, cheat not, cozen not, lie not for advantage, be upright, just and honest
in your traffiquing in the world: account not gain to be godliness; but
godliness with contentment to be great gain. And while you negotiate the
concernments of the world with men, take heed you trade not with them for their
sins. Do all the good you can to others: and if you cannot do that good you
would, take heed you receive not from them that evil you should not receive. It
is no small part of pure Religion, for a man to keep himself unspotted from the
world, Jams 1.27. Take heed of the sins of the times and places you live in,
and of the sins of the persons you live and commerce with. Labor to be good in
bad times, like Noah in the old world, like Lot in Sodom, and good Obadiah in
Ahabs Court; That you may be blamless and harmless, the Sons of God without
rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation: among whom shine ye as
Lights in the world, Phil. 2.15.

Now I have done with what I intended, but not as I could have desired.
According to those weak abilities God has given me, I have showed you where
your Security and Comfort lies, in this my forced departure from you. When our
Savior was about to leave the world, he commends the tuition of his Disciples
to God the Father. When Paul left Ephesus, he commended the Ministers to God,
and the Word of his Grace. And now I am departing from you, I commend you to
the same: I leave and entrust you with the three Persons of the Sacred Trinity;
I commend you to God the Father, who I hope has chosen some of you to himself
before the foundation of the world; who has give you to Christ, and made you
accepted in his Beloved, to pardon you, to govern you, to provide for, and
afford you all things pertaining to life and godliness: I commend you to God
the Son, your Mediator, your Head, your Brother, your Husband, to deliver you
from all the evil you fear, and obtain for you all the good you desire: I
commend you to God the holy Ghost to direct and teach you, to furnish and adorn
you, to purify and cleanse you, to support and comfort you. Here is the
Omnisciency of God whereby he knows what ever you want and hurts you: Here is
infinite Wisdom to teach and guide you; here is infinite and unchangable Love,
to delight in you in your meanest and lowest conditions: here is infinite Mercy
to pity you in all your wants, weaknesses and sufferings: Here is infinite
Faithfulness and Diligence to save and secure every thing committed to you,
that nothing miscarry: Here is infinite Power to support you, to defend you, to
deliver you: here is an inexhaustible Fountain of Grace to relieve your wants
and weakness. Here is the fullness and sweetness of all relations: the Captain,
the Shepherd, the King, the Father, the Hushand of the Church; here is a
wonder-working God, wonderful in disappointing the Plots of his Churches
enemies; wonderful in delivering them by small means; wonderful in creating
means when there is none; wonderful in turning the Plots upon the Enemies head.
Here is infinite Alsufficiency to provide for you; that can send you an Elisha
after an Elijah; that can feed you with the ministry of a black Raven; that can
make your souls look fresher, fairer with Pulse, than those that feed on the
dainties of Kings Tables; that can enrich your souls with the Gold and Jewels,
with the Parts, Abilities, and Learning of the Egyptians: or, if he bring you
into a Wilderness, can and will provide supplies of Grace, to bear your charges
to Glory. These, and whatever else there is in an infinite God that may further
make for your security and comfort, I commend you to it, leave and entrust you
with Him, who is able to do for you abundantly more, above what I or you are
able to ask or think. I commend you also to the Word of his Grace, which is of
indispensible necessity; which is perfect in all suitable excellencies and
remedies for you, in all conditions and miseries, and of daily use to you: A
Light to guide you; a Touchstone to manifest Doctrines what they are unto you;
a Weapon to defend you; Rain to refresh and cool you; a Cordial to comfort,
quicken, revive you; an Antidote to preserve you; that is able to build you up
in Grace, and fit you for Glory. And as I entrust you with these, so it is your
great wisdom and prudence to improve these seasonable and suitably to your
condition. The improvement of small things is advantageous, when careless
neglect makes great things unprofitable. What profit has the Be of the Hive
in a Storm, if she fly not to it? What profit in dainty Food, rich Attire, and
Armor of proof, if we feed not on our Food, wear not the Attire, put not on
the Armor? What security and comfort can you have in God, and in the Word of
his Grace, if you do not improve them? Well then, as you would have security
and comfort, be frequent in fervent Prayer to God, that as he is the great
Shepherd of his Church, so he would provide for you an able Minister of the
New Testament, that may heal the diseased, strengthen the weak, reduce them
that are stragled, and feed you with that food that will nourish you, even Life
Eternal. It is very sad to be as Sheep without a Shepherd: pray for the supply
of desolate Congregations. Pray for your Minister, and all others cast out,
that God would comfort them, support them, provide for them, and defend them
from other sufferings, and restore them again to their particular
Congregations. And pray one for another, and for the Peace of Jerusalem. Live
and depend by Faith upon an invisible God in the midst of visible difficulties
and dangers, deriving supplies of comfort and strength of Grace from him.

Be frequent in reading the Word, and understand it; it is your Way, your
Light, your Weapon and your Food. When you go from Church, do not as too many
do, lay up their Bibles on shelves, in coffers, and never look on them more
until the next Lord's day, It is the Word of God written in your hearts, and
dwelling richly in you in all wisdom; not the word on your shelves, in your
coffers, that must guide you, defend you, and feed you. You are careful to lay
up your temporal food safely and cleanly; O cast not this precious food of your
souls at your heels, as you do the crusts you give your dogs: but begin and end
the day with reading, understanding, treasuring up some part of the Word, and
live according to it; sanctify God's Sabbaths according to it; govern your
Families according to it; and manage all your negotiations with men according
to it. And forget not those things I have lately at large pressed you to from
that place, Col. 2.6. Remember them, when you see me not, that as you have
received Christ, so walk in him: For hereby you will abundantly adorn your
Profession, bring credit to the Gospel, and honor to Jesus Christ; hereby you
shall silence and ashame false Accusers, rejoice the hearts of God's People,
promote your own Peace and Salvation, justify the Doctrine preached to you
from all aspersions, and be a Crown of Glory and rejoicing to your dying
Minister, both now and in the Day of Christ: Which that you may be directed and
enabled to do and be, I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, that is
able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance among them that are
sanctified.

SERMON XV.
2 Pet. 1.15. Moreover, I will endeavor, that ye may be able after my decease,
to have these things always in remembrance.
THe occasion of these words, and of the Epistle, is this -- The Apostle
knowing (by Revelation, as is probable) that he was ere long to dye, ver. 14.
Knowing that shortly I must put off this Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus
Christ has showed me; and fearing that many of those to whom he wrote, were
negligent enough in minding and perfecting the business of their souls
Salvation; he therefore labors before his departing, to put them afresh in
remembrance of their duty, ver. 12, 13. Wherefore I will not be negligent to
put you in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, etc. as if he had
said, I know indeed that you who are the called of God, know these things in
part already, which I am putting you in mind of; but there are some considerable
reasons why I would reinforce them again upon you; viz. (1.) From the nature of
the things themselves, they are of great concernment, even such as relate to
your Salvation, ver. 10.11. (2.) From the proximity or nearness of his Death,
ver. 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off the Tabernacle of this body. q. d.
I am a dying man, ere long I shall be taken from you; and therefore I would
leave this last Legacy with you; I would leave something with you, which you
might remember when I am dead and gone, in the words of the Text, Moreover, I
will endeavor, that ye may be able after my departure, to have these things in
remembrance.

In the Original they run after this manner -- I will endeavor that ye may
always have to make a remembrance of these things after my departure. Others
read it thus, I will therefore endeavor that ye may be able to have these
things in remembrance, etc. Therefore, that is, Seeing I am given to
understand, that I must within a few days be taken from amongst you
(translating the adversative Particle by an illative) therefore I shall leave
this Epistle amongst you as upon record, that may ever put you in mind of these
things when I am dead. Hence observe.

Observe. 1. That it is not unmeet for Ministers to inculcate and press the same
Truths upon their People. Our memories are brittle, affections are ready to
grow dull, and we fall into security in an insensible manner, which drowneth
the force of former Truths.

Obs. 2. It is the property of good Pastors to take care of their Flocks for
the future. Faithful Ministers should not only take care for their people,
whilst they are present with them, but after they are gone from them; they
being spiritual Fathers, should lay up for their Children. When Christ was to
leave his Disciples, he leaves some Legacies behind him; he tells them what
they might expect when he was gone from them; and how they should behave
themselves in a sinful and troublesome world, John 16.1, 33. When Paul was to
leave Ephesus, he sends for the Elders, and tells them how they should demean
themselves amongst the Flock over which God had made them Overseers. We see how
Paul was not only a good Shepherd himself, but he also provides suitable
Successors, at least to direct, encourage and quicken those that were to
succeed him, to the same diligence and faithfulness among the People as he
himself had expressed, Acts 20.28, 30, 31. When Moses was to be absent but forty
days from the charge that was committed to him, he takes care for the People,
by leaving Aaron and Hur behind him, that they might direct and govern them,
whilst he himself was in the Mount, Exodus 24.14. After these examples, I have
made it my study, and shall make it my business at this time, to communicate
some spiritual Gifts to you. And whereas he said, This is the third time I am
coming to you, Romans 1.11.; I fear I may say, this is the last time I am coming
unto you. I cannot say with Paul (ver. 14.) that our Lord Jesus has showed me,
I must shortly put off my Tabernacle (though that may be for ought I know) but
this I may say, that providence seems to point out unto me, that the time of my
departure from you in particular is at hand. Genesis 49.1. We read that Jacob
being to dye, calls his sons together, to give them some good instructions, and
to tell them of things to come after his death. Now, Brethren, there is a Law
extent which looks upon many of my Brethren (as well as my self) who were, and
are taking pains in the Lords Vineyard, as civilly dead; henceforth we shall
not be in a capacity to preach to you in public; many laborious Ministers
after this day are likely to be dead, even whilst they are alive, if not as
long as they live. And before I proceed, I would that you were freed from
mistakes; Do not think we lay by our public Work without cause: I would not
that any of you should say concerning us, as Pharaoh concerning the Children of
Israel, Ye are idle, ye are idle, and therefore ye take occasion where none is
given, to relinquish your People and your Service: it is not matter of will,
but Conscience; if it lay in our wills, God that knows all things, knows that
many hundreds of his Servants, would rather choose to work, than sit all their
days idle. But you are to understand, that such things are propounded to them,
as their Consciences cannot bear: we have studied, read, enquired and prayed
for direction and satisfaction, and after all, we see our Consciences would
check us and reproach us, if we should close with all that is proposed to us,
and would be imposed upon us: we may not in any case do any evil that good may
come. He does not require Ministers to take any indirect courses to do his
work. He can bring about his own Glory without their sin. He that does any
thing religious, moral or civil, must in the first place be groundedly
persuaded, that that which he does, will be acceptable to, or allowed of God.
Now as yet we for our own parts, do not see any reason to convince us that we
shall do that which is pleasing to God, in closing with every thing that is
propounded to those that will stay in their places. Particular reasons why we
cannot assent and declare a full consent, etc. I have not now time so much as
to mention. Having said this little to prevent prejudice, and to silence wonder
in you at this sudden Declaration of our prefixed leaving of you, give leave to
read the words once more, with a little variation, Moreover, I will endeavor,
that ye may be able after my [Departure] to have these things in remembrance.
The words of dying men use to be much regarded; seeing in some sense we preach
as dying persons, be entreated diligently to attend to dying words. I have
studied that ye may keep in remembrance what ye have already heard; and to that
end, of the things that have been spoken, and of the things that should have
been spoken, Heb. 8.1. (if time and opportunity had been continued) I shall
give you the sum. That which we would have you keep in remembrance after we are
gone, may be contained under two general Heads of Directions; viz. --

First, Duties relating to God and your own Souls.

Secondly, Duties relating to your selves and others.

The things that relate to God and ^^r Souls, are either such as relate,

1. To the Unconverted, and Converted, in general. Or, 2. To the Converted in
particular.
That which I have to say to you that are our Auditors in general, or as mixed,
being some of you unconverted, and some converted; some whose hearts the Lord
has touched; and some, upon whose hearts, the Spirit of God has not
effectually moved, shall be contained in these following Counsels.

COUNSEL I.
1. Labor in good earnest to be born again, John 3.3. study to be new
Creatures; strive for the Truth of Godliness. Most of you have a form and show
of Godliness; but O labor for the Truth and Power of it: get sanctified
Knowledge into your understandings, Obedience in your wills; get your
affections fixed upon divine and right Objects: never think it is well with your
souls, till you find your anger, sorrow and hatred principally set against sin;
your Love, Joy and Desires upon God, Christ, and communion with him; till you
find the bent of your souls toward the Ways of Holiness. Labor for tender
Consciences, such as will be afraid of committing the least known sin, or of
omitting the least known duty. Outward Reformation, is nothing without inward
Renovation. Regeneration makes men perform Duties as from a Spring and Fountain
of Goodness; without Regeneration, men act and move in Religion, just as Clocks
and Jacks, which never moves but when some external weight hangs on; consider,
without this, we shall never get to Heaven, John. 3.5. It is not thy promises
of being a new man, b^^ ^hy being a new creature; it is not thy being chained,
but thy being changed that will fit thee for communion with God. The brute
creatures are not fit to converse with men, Because they want a principle of
Reason, which should make them suitable companions: Unregenerate men are not fit
companions for God nor Saints in Heaven, Because they want a principle of
Holiness, which should make them take delight in the work of Heaven. To this
end,

2. Get acquainted with, and live under the sense of inherent, inbred
corruption: This is the foundation of experimental Christianity. Live under the
sense of that principle of evil we carry about us every day. When Paul was
thoroughly converted, he was primarily convinced of this, Romans 7.17, 18. when he
had a spiritual understanding of the Law, or of the Spirituality and internal
extent of it, he saw there was all manner of concupiscence in him, that is, an
inclination and vehement desire after those things that were forbidden; and an
unlawful desire after things lawful in themselves: he saw there was in him a
forwardness to all kind of sin. This sight kept him low in his own eyes, and
drove him out of a dependence upon his own righteousness, to depend upon the
Righteousness of Christ. And so this would maintain humility and lowliness in
our souls, and take away all opinion of our own goodness. Every man will boast
of the goodness of his heart; the reason is, because he does no see nor
consider that inherent secret pollution that is in his nature. Were we enough
sensible of the privation of original righteousness, and inclination to all
manner of wickedness, we would look upon our selves as the chiefest of sinners,
yea, as bad as the worst in the world. Is thy heart good that naturally prompts
thee to Atheisti^^^, blasphemous thoughts concearning God; that would lead thee
to Idolatry, to Carelessness in the use of God's Name, Titles, Word and Worship?
That heart which leads thee to irreligion, neglect of Prayer, Sabbaths, etc. Is
that heart to be boasted of that is full of Envy, Covetousness, Anger,
Revenge, unclean Imaginations and Desires? Why this, and all this is contained
in every of your hearts; be convinced of, and affected with it.

3. Often think of your actual transgressions; call to mind former sins, forget
not old iniquities. David, though a grown Saint, remembers, bewails and prays
for pardon of the sins of youth, Psalm. 25.7. Remember not the sins of my youth,
nor my transgressions. Job calls to mind the sins of younger years, Thou make
me to possess the iniquities of my youth, Job 17.26. And so for sins of riper
years, often think of them, reflect upon the sins of thoughts, of your words
and actions; call to mind the ignorance, the impenitance, the unbelief, the
unthankfulness, the wanderings and distractions of former Prayers: call to mind
how dull, sleepy, and unaffected you have been in the hearing of many a
precious Sermon. Compare your lives with the perfect Rule; see how they have
agreed or disagreed. Look your faces daily in the Glass of God's Word, and then
you shall see how many spots are upon them. This very thing would make and keep
us humble while we live, and show us the shortness of our own ways, and drive
us to Jesus Christ who has perfect Righteousness. The Swan is a proud bird,
but when she looks at her black feet, she mourns. The reason why most are so
self-conceited of their own goodness, is, because they look upon themselves in
present abstinence from sin, or in present good mood, and never look back upon
former sin^^^ In a word, Let your sins be ever before your eyes.

4. Beware of earthly-mindedness. Let it not be your only care to get the
things of this life. 1 John 2.15, 16. Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world. We are prone by Nature to mind Earth and nothing else.
But consider, that those that are earthly-minded are enemies to the Cross of
Christ, Phil. 3.18, 19. There are many of whom I tell you weeping, who are
enemies to the Cross of God, viz. those who mind earthly things. Such persons
frustrate Christ of the end of his dying. He died to purchase an heavenly
treasure for us; he arose and went to Heaven, that we should imitate him. If ye
then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, Col. 3.1. Earthly
persons undervalue the death of Christ, he died to purchase Heaven, they care
for Earth more than Heaven. Again, Earthly persons will have a sad end; Their
end is destruction, Phil. 3.19. Seeing such men put away Salvation from them,
whilst on Earth, at last they shall be put away from Salvation. Again; Things
below are neither a suitable nor a satisfying portion; Not suitable, your souls
being spiritual, these earthly; not satisfying, your souls having infinite
desires, whereas these are finite; your souls everlasting, these fading: 1 John
2.17. The World passes away. When we have got never so much, it may leave us,
we must leave it. Again; Earthly-mindedness is Idolatry. Col. 3.5. And
Covetousness which is Idolatry. That which men desire, love and delight in
most, even so much as to make it their portion, that is their God. Now we know
that no Idolater shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Be exhorted in the
words of Christ, John 6.17. Labor not (so much, or chiefly) for the meat that
perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life. Luke 10.41, 42. Be
not with Martha careful about many things, so as in the mean time to neglect
the [one thing] needful.

5. Be convinced that God is the best portion, and make him yours. You are
never in a safe condition till you can experimentally say, Who is there in
Heaven but God, and who is there on Earth I can desire besides God? Psalm.
73.25, 26. Labor to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 31.14. I said thou art my
God. And with Thomas, My Lord and my God. To this end, get an interest in
Christ, receive him by Faith. He that has the Son, has the Father also. God
promises it as a special privilege, to be the God of any person or People; I
will be their God, Jer. 31.33. When God is yours, Pardon of sin is yours; I
will remember your iniquities no more. He will accept and delight in your
persons. The Upright are his delight. He will take pleasure in all your
services. Cant. 2.14. Let me see thy face, and hear thy voice: for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely. Your Prayers, Praises, Alms, etc. shall
come up before God as Incense, Acts 10.4. Phil. 4.18. He will always be with
you, in every place, in every condition; When you are in your own, and when in
a strange Country; when you are in prosperity, when in adversity. Moreover, all
the Promises are yours. When God is yours, the Covenant is yours, of which the
Promises are so many branches. If you be troubled with the sense of sin, he can
pardon you; if assaulted with corruptions, he can strengthen you. If you be
sad, he will comfort you; if you be sick, he will be your Physician; if weak,
he can strengthen you. If darkness be upon your steps, he can cause the Light
to shine upon your paths. If you are in wants, he can supply you; his is the
Earth, and the Fullness thereof; if in Prisons, he will visit you, and cause you
to sing with Paul and Silas: He is an omnipresent Good, and an omniscient Good,
a willing and omnipotent and a sure good. Men may take away your Friends, or
you from them, but they cannot take away your God; your Estates, but not your
God; your liberty, but not your God; your lives, but not your God. God will be
a satisfying Good whilst you live, a comforting and supplying Good when you
dye, an Everlasting Good after Death. Above all things then, get a share and
interest in this God, for he is the best Good, none like him; and as the Wise
Man says of Wisdom, so let me say of God; Get God, get Christ, God is the
principal thing; therefore get him, and withal thy gettings, get an Interest in
Christ.

6. Get your hearts possessed with an awe and dread of Gods all-seeing Eye.
Walk with a constant fear of God upon your souls; Prove. 23.17. Be thou in the
fear of the Lord all day long; whatever you think, speak, or do, consider God
stands by, and sees and hears all; he knows what thou think and actest even
in thy bedchamber. This consideration wrought mightily upon David's spirit,
which made him express himself in this manner -- Whither shall I go from thy
Presence, whither shall I flee from thy Spirit; there is not a thought in thy
heart, nor a word in thy tongue, but lo he knows it altogether, Psalm. 139. Per
totum. Many would be the advantages of such a temper; it would keep us from
many a sin we run into: Prove. 16.6. By the fear of the Lord ^^en depart from
iniquity; yea, this is prescribed as a Remedy against all sin in general; Exodus
20.20. That his fear may be before your eyes, that ye sin not. The reason why
men do commit secret sins, is, Because they think no eyes sees them. When Satan
tempts thee, saying, Thou art alone, the door is locked, the windows shut; then
say, Oh but God sees me, the darkness and the Light are both alike to him. To
this end, beg of God, he would maintain in your soul, more of an actual sense
of his Presence; plead that Promise in which he says, I will put my fear in
them that they may not depart frrom me, Jer. 32.40. Unless God renew the fence
of his Holiness and Omnipresence, we shall gro^^ atheistical and very secure.

7. Serve God according to his Mind and Will, neither add nor diminish in God's
Worship; do what he bids us; all he bids us and no more; Deuteronomy. 12.32. What
thing soever I command you, observe to do it, add not to it nor diminish from
it: we may not close with added substantial parts of worship. Whatever power a
Church has about natural Circumstances, they have none about the substance of
worship, either to add or take away; by putting in, or putting out. To add new
Ordinances or parts of Worship, is a breach of the second Commandment. The
Pharisees ered on this hand, Mat. 15.19. teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men; they pressed Gods Commandments, as indifferent and men's
Traditions as necessary. God commanded to, Honor Father and Mother; they teach
contrary to this, ver. 4. this was a diminishing. They teach that the washing
of hands before meat, the cleansing of cups, etc. as necessary to Salvation;
this was to err by addition. See Rev. 22.18. To add in God's Worship, is to
make our selves wiser than God, and to accuse Christ of unfaithfulness in God's
House. Moses was a faithful Minister in God's House, much more was he who was
Mose's Master. Well, be s^re in all your worship, that it be according to the
Par^^^ showed in the Mount; viz. according to ^he ^^^script and Standard of the
Scriptures. (...) very dangerous to offer strange fi^^, such as God commands
not, Levit. 10.2. Give not God cause to say to any of us, Who has required
this at your hands.

8. Be spiritual and zealous in God's Service. Take not God's Name in vain,
either by vain praying, hearing, or reading. Bring your hearts to, and keep
them at prayer. I will pray with my spirit: Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I
lift up my soul. Prayer consists more in the elevation of the understanding and
desires, than in the lifting up of the eyes and hands: and so bring your hearts
to the preaching and hearing of the Word. Romans 1.9. Paul served God with his
spirit in preaching; and we should serve God with our spirits in hearing. When
Paul preached, Lydia's heart was opened, that she attended to the things spoken
by him, Acts 16.14. When God's Ambassadors deliver their Embassy, employ your
understandings to discern, your memories to retain, your wills to choose, your
affections to love and delight in, your consciences to apply what you hear. And
so sing Psalms with your heart, as well as with your voice; Col. 3.16. Singing
with Grace in your hearts to the Lord. God complains of those who bring their
bodies before him, but leave their hearts behind them, Isa. 29.13. They draw
near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is
removed far from me; this is a mocking of God. Therefore be fervent in spirit
when you serve the Lord; rest not in bare enjoymment of the Means, but get
Grace by the Means. Labor to enjoy the God of Ordinances in the Ordinances of
God. God is much displeased with eareless, heartless and superficial worship.
If we offer ignorant, heartless and distracted prayers, will he accept them?
Cursed be the Deceiver that has in his flock a Male, and voweth and
facrificeth to the Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. 1.13, 14. Well then, rest not in
a formal customary way of serving God; serve him out of Conscience, and give
him your heart in every duty.

9. Maintain an high esteem, and make great Conscience of the Lord's Day. Keep
the whole day holy, morning and evening. It Is not said, remember to keep part
of the Sabbath Day, But keep the Sabbath; viz. the whole Sabbath, holy,
sanctify it in private as well as in public; in your own houses as well as in
Gods House; in your Closets as well as in your Families; do not only keep a
Rest, but sanctify that Rest; How? By Meditation; meditate on the Sabbath, of
that Sabbatism that remains for the People of God, Heb. 4.9. Muse upon the Joys
of Heaven, which are pure, spiritual, constant and perpetual. Think of the
sweet Company you shall have, even Angels and Saints, besides God and Christ,
whose Presence makes Heaven. Dwell upon your Immunities and Freedom from Sin,
Temptations of Satan and the World; from troubles, as Sickness, Poverty,
Crosses, and every thing that makes your life uncomfortable. Imitate the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, by raising your hearts from Earth, and
ascending into Heaven by spiritual Comtemplations. Moreover, continue the day
by reading and singing of Psalms; attend upon God in public also: let not
private duties hinder you from public; neither strive to attend so much upon
public Ordinances as to abridge your selves of private and secret
Opportunities. I think those Christians do much wrong themselves, who spend all
the day in attending upon public prayers and hearing: I would not have you
strive to hear four or five Sermons a day, unless you can take so much time
besides, as is necessary to meditate of and apply what you hear; so order the
day, that secret Communion with God, may fit you for public; and public
Ordinances fit you again for private and secret converse with God. It is not
much eating, but eating moderately, and digesting what we eat, that increases
strength. Two or three Sermons seriously heard, and ruminated upon in secret,
do more good than ten Sermons heard, without meditation. Brethren, what shall
we think? do those sanctify a Sabbath to the Lord, who hear a Sermon and a few
prayers, and then go to the Alehouse? they who drink, sleep, sport, walk, or
work away the Sabbath? all these are forbidden, Isa. 58.13. Thou shall call the
Sabbath a delight, not finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own
words, nor doing thine own works. Again, Christ and his Disciples did not spend
this Day partly in religious Exercises, and partly in Recreations or Workings;
John 20.18. and Acts 20.7. we find there that Christ came amongst the Disciples
on the First day, and that Paul and the Christians used to spend this Day in
Prayer, preaching and receiving of Sacraments. Moreover, God will bless us
inwardly and outwardly, if we conscienciously observe it: Isa. 58.14. He will
curse us inwardly and outwardly, in soul and body, if we profane it. See Jer.
17.27. Well then, my Brethren, do not prefer a Holy Day before the Lord's Day.
Its sad to think that hundreds should more scruple to work on a Saints-day,
(which is of humane institution) than on the Sabbath (which is of God's.) Sirs,
you of this place have got (shall I say an undeserved name) of more than
ordinary piety, but I assure you, that if you fall to neglect and profane the
Sabbath (as some of our neighbors do) you shall lose your very Name. I should
be very sorry to hear when I am gone, that you should prove a
Sabbath-breaking-People.

10. Make great Conscience of Prayer, family and secret. Let your houses be
Houses of Prayer: Those families are called Heathenish Families, that call not
upon God; Psalm. 79.6. Power out thy Fury upon the Heathen, the Families that
call not on thy Name.

Let God have a morning and an evening Sacrifice from you. Under the Law God
called for the first Fruits, and there was a Feast of Ingathering, or of the
Last Fruits, when the whole harvest was gathered in. Oh let God have the first
and last of every day: How shall your Families be distinguished from your
Stables, if you do not sanctify them by Prayer? The Creatures which God has
given us for our use, they eat, drink, work and sleep; now if we call not upon
God daily, what difference would there be betwixt our houses and our stables?
And so enter into your Closets, Mat. 6.6. and pray unto your Father which sees
in secret. Have you no secret sin to bewail, no secret request to put up, no
particular Mercy to praise God for, which you would not have others to know of?
Is it not a rare Privilege that we may have liberty to prefer our private
Petitions to the King of Heaven every day? that we may confess our faults, beg
pardon, ease our heavy hearts, by laying them open before that God, who will
neither upbraid us for our weaknesses, wants, nor sins? Brethren, be constant,
spiritual and fervent in Prayer, and it will prove like Saul's Sword, and
Jonathans Bow, which never returned empty. Do not hearken to the excuses of
flesh and blood (which are many) but attend to God's Command, the Example of
Christ and his followers, which will oblige you in point of duty; and to the
Sweetness and Benefit of it, which may encourage and allure you.

11. Think much of, and live in preparation for death; walk now and then
amongst the Tombs; live every day as dying men. Get into such a Condition as
would fit us for Death every hour. Dye daily. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that you were so
wise as to consider your latter ^^d. Dying thoughts would not be a little
advantageous; they would keep from sin; What, sin this hour, when thou may
die next? they would keep us from doting upon the world; from pride of life:
Why art thou proud of hair and beauty, when both shall be turned into dust ere
long? Shall you and I idolize a colored piece of clay, who though now it
proudly and haughtily treads upon the Earth, within a few days shall it self
be trodden upon as mire and dirt? O get to be in the number of those servants,
whom Christ when he comes shall find so being and so doing! The Prophet said to
Hezekiah, Set thy house in order: I say to you, Set your souls in order against
the hour of dying. The want of this is of ill consequence: for hence it is that
men go on securely in sin, live as Atheists, without God, idolize the World,
and never look to the state of their souls.

12. Prepare for Judgment; make your Answer ready. Put the case beforehand to
your selves; say with thy self, I must ere long appear before the Tribunal of
God, what can I answer, what can I say for my self at that day? Who is it that
will be Advocate? or, have I an Advocate that will speak for me? how shall I
come off; shall I stand, or shall I fall? what will be my sentence? Brethren,
be like him who thought he heard this voice always sounding in his ears, Arise
ye Dead and come to Judgment. The Apostle Paul thought seriously of it, and
lived as one to be judged. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to give an account of the things done in the body,
whether they be good or evil.

13. Be often thinking of Eternal Death. Walk now and then upon the brinks of
Hell; get your hearts affected with the reality and greatness of Hells
torments. Meditate with thy self what Hell is; say with thy self, Can I endure
to lose the smiles of God? how shall I endure the frowns of an infinite
Majesty? If God's terrors have distracted his Friends on Earth, what will they
do with me if I go to Hell? Think what a torment it will be to be shut out of
the company of Saints; to see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Peter, Paul, and the rest
of the Disciples and Servants of God in all ages, in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
you your selves shut out; and what a vexation it will be, to be amongst none
but damned wretches? How can thou endure to hear the Saints singing praises
in Heaven, and thou thy self roaring in the infernal Pit? Often think of the
Worm of Conscience. How shall we endure to have Conscience always setting our
sins before our eyes? It Is a burden now to lie under the gallings of an
accusing Conscience; O consider, that Conscience will continually gnaw and fret
in Hell. It will be always telling thee of thy sins; the place where, the time
when, the persons with whom, and all the circumstances that aggravate thy sin.
Such a time, remember, thou wast overcharged with Drunkenness; such a time thou
blasphemedst the holy Name of God with Oaths and Curses; Such a time, in such a
chamber, with such a person thou wast wanton and impure; Remember, what means
of Grace thou have enjoyed, what and how many Sermons thou did or might
have heard; how many able Ministers lived and dyed in thy time; Remember (will
Conscience say) what Instruction, Reproof and Corrections thou had from thy
Parents, Tutors and Covernours; yea, remember, thou wast not far from the
Kingdom of Heaven, thou did fully expect to have gone thither, and now thou
must be tormented in this flame. Again, think what a misery it will be, to be
there where is no mercy; where there will be pain without ease, sorrow without
any joy, despair without any hope, eternity without end. O Eternity, Eternity,
Eternity! Often to think of eternal death is the way to escape it. If you would
not descend into Hell really, descend into it mentally. If you would not be in
Hell by possession, be much in it now by meditation. This would make us
jealous, and put us upon trying the state of our souls, lest it should
unexpectedly be our portion to be amongst the Devil and his Angels for ever.

14. Begin betime to be Religious. Put not off Holiness, Righteousness, and
Sobriety till old age. 1 Kings 18.12. It Is written in commendation of Obadiah,
that he feared the Lord from his youth. It Is King Josiah's honor, that while
he was yet young, he began to seek the Lord God of his fathers, 2 Chronicles. 34.2,
3. It Is Mnasons honor that he was an old Disciple, Acts 21.16. he began betime
and continued till old age. Timothy knew the Scriptures from his youth;
Consider, we know not whether old age will be granted us to be religious in; be
religious whilst ye may. The sooner we set upon Piety, the sooner we shall
honor God, and the better God will take it. He will remember the kindness of
religious youth. And by minding Religion soon, we may be secured from many sins
which others run into, and so be secured from the smart and torment of
Conscience which old sinners find at Conversion.

1. The longer we continue in sin and profaness, the more sorrow, contrition
and humiliation we are like to meet with if ever we be changed. Old Oaks must
be broken, they will not bend. Rough Trees must be hewn with Axes; so old
Sinners must find rough dealing at conversion. If you would come home to God
comfortably, come quickly and early; The sooner you begin, the more sweetness
you will find; All God's Ways afford Pleasantness, and in all his Paths there
is Peace.

2. Having delivered the Counsels that concern you all in general, let me now
direct my speech to the Regenerate in particular. To you whom the Word of God
has been the Power of God to Salvation, I would commed these things, that they
may be kept in remembrance.

II. COUNSEL.
1. Be very thankful for any good which God has wrought in you by the means of
Grace. God is taking away in some measure, the pure and powerful dispensation
of his Ordinances, and this is matter of sorrow; O but God has made them
advantageous to your souls already, and this is matter of praise, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3,
5. Give thanks to God, seeing the Gospel has come to you not in word only, but
in the power of the holy Ghost. You then that can experience a new Light in
your minds, Conviction in your conscience, a change in your wills, and holiness
in your affections, and union with Christ, give God the praise. It had been a
misery indeed, if God had taken us away from Ministers, or Ministers from us,
before we had got any good by them. Those amongst you that are ignorant,
hard-hearted, unbelieving sinners, have reason to be grieved at the very heart.
The Sun of the Gospel is eclipsing, and you are not yet enlightened by it: the
fire is putting out before your souls be warmed. It is a sad sign those are in
the number of the sons of perdition, from whom the clear Gospel is hid, 2 Cor.
4.3. If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. The Child unborn
cannot midwife it self into the world, when the Mother is dead; but there is
hopes that an Infant that is born may be nourished up even unto a perfect man.
Why Brethren, unconverted persons are unborn, and if Faithful Ministers and
Ordinances should be altogether taken from you, both Father and Mother dye, and
then, who shall make you partakers of the new Birth? But now you that are born
again, you will be able in some measure to feed your selves; the meat is before
you in the Scriptures, and the holy Ghost will help you to feed on it: If there
should not be a succession of Pastors amongst you, your condition may be sad,
but it is safe; if you should dye without the continuance of Ordinances, having
a part in the Resurrection from sin to a new Nature and holiness of life, the
second Death shall have no dominion over you. If you live longer, you have
former Experiences, former Truths, former Promises, old Store to live on; You
have the granary of Experiences and of the Scriptures to maintain you in
spiritual Life, if there should come a Famine of public Ordinances. God has
not dealt with every soul as with yours. Two or three of you have lived under
the same Ministry, have sit and heard together in the same Seats, yea, [one] of
you is [taken] the [other] is [left.] Say then with a thankful heart, as
Christ, Why have thou revealed thy self to me and not to others? Even so Father
because it seems good in thy sight, Mat. 11.25.

2. Walk humbly before God in a sense of your insufficency to good, and proness
to evil, Mic. 6.8. walk humbly with thy God. Never walk securely, ever be
jealous of your deceitful hearts. Take heed of falling into sin, though at
present you stand. Ever live under the sense of that truth, that the heart is
deceitful above all things, and madly wicked. What Master that knows the
deceitfulness of a Servant, would trust him too far? and so, who that has had
frequent experience of the falsness of his heart, would put too much confidence
in it for the future? Ever keep low thoughts of your selves: live continually
in dependence upon God for strength to perform duties, to subdue corruptions,
resist temptations, and to bear afflictions. Paul prayed thrice i. e. often,
when he had a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him.

3. Beware of every sin; have and express godly sorrow for it; break off every
iniquity by repentance. Beware especially of, and keep your selves from your
iniquities, Psalm. 18.23. Cut off your right hand, and pluck out your
right-eye-sins, Mat. 5.29. God hates it, Jer. 44.4. it grieves him: They
rebelled and vexed his Spirit, it will grieve you also: 1 Pet. 2.11. and wars
against the soul, i. e. against the Peace and Tranquilty of your minds: every
sin contracts guilt, and guilt creats trouble. It Is impossible a Christian
should walk comfortably whilst he shows any liking to any sin. Sin does
especially prejudice us as to Prayer, both before, in, and after Prayer, it
shuts our eyes that we dare not lift them up to Heaven; O my God, I blush, and
am ashamed to look up, Ezra 9.6. It stops our mouths that we cannot speak, and
manacles our hands, and contracts our hearts that we cannot lift them up to
God. If we would lift up hearts and hands in Prayer without doubting, we must
lift up holy hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. Sin makes a Christian act like an enemy toward
God, and to think God is justly turned to be his enemy; and who can with any
heart ask any favor from an enemy? If we would draw near to God in full
assurance of Faith, we must come with an heart sprinkled from a guilty and
defiled conscience, and our lives washed with pure water, Heb. 10.22. Again,
the least sin smiled upon, puts us back in our Christian course, it weakens
Faith, takes away our Courage, disheartens us from doing our very duty. How
can thou reprove another with courage (says conscience) when thou thy self
know thou stand in need of reproof? well than, exercise daily repentance
for daily failings; sue out a pardon every day, and get one Seal more added to
your Pardon daily; you have as much need to pray for daily forgiveness as for
daily bread.

4. Grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. Make progress in holiness; take heed of
decaying, beware lest God's Ministers lose the things they have wrought upon
and amongst you, 2 Ep. John, ver. 8. Increase your knowledge, Follow on to know
the Lord; let your repentings for sin be kindled; go from one degree of Faith
to another; let your love to God abound more and more. The more Grace you have,
the more you will glorify God, the fitter you will be to do him service, the
more able to bear affliction; a little Grace is not enough to bear great
Trials, and the more Grace the fitter for Glory, yea and very probably the more
Glory, To this end continue in the use of those means that uphold and increase
Grace; Ex eisdem nutrimus ex quibus constamus. Feed upon the Milk of God's
Word, and the Blood of Christ, that you may grow thereby, I commend you to the
Word of God's Grace, Acts 20.32.

5. Make conscience of all your thoughts and words Do not entertain vain and
unprofitable meditations; especially beware of Ungodly, Athiestical, Envious,
Repining, Quarelsom, Impure thoughts; God sees them and is angry at them, The
Lord knows the thoughts of man, when they are vanity, Psalm. 94.11. He will call
us to an account for them; in the Day of Reckoning he will Judge the secrets of
men, Romans 2.17. and then every private and close thing, shall be brought to
light, whether it be good or wether it be evil, Eccl. 12. ult. Entertain holy
and profitable conceptions. Carry something every day in your minds that is
worth thinking of, when you are at leisure, and out of employment* Let some
Experience, Promise, Threatening, or some Obscure place of Scripture which has
been explained to you, or some profitable part of Scripture-Story be treasured
up in your minds, that so you may not be at a loss how to employ your thoughts,
when you have any vacant hours: Sin many times enters in by the thoughts:
beware therefore of, and silence sinful conceptions and imaginations lest they
produce sinful actions. And so, make conscience of your words, beware of idle,
frothy, wanton expressions, for of every such we must give account. Let not
your communication be such as that it should corrupt the manners of those you
converse with, David was careful of his words, Psalm. 39.1. I will take heed to
my ways that I sin not with my tongue. I conclude this with that in Ephesians.
4.31. and 5.4. Let all Bitterness, and Anger, Wrath, Clamor, and Evilspeaking
be put away from among you, as becomes Saints; and Filthyness, and Foolish
talking, and Scurrilous jestings, which are not convenient.

6. Be, and continue to be, good in evil times. In times of profaneness be you
holy: by how much others are worse, by so much be you the better. It Is Noah's
commendation, that he was upright in [his] generation, Genesis 6.9. now the
generation in which he lived was very wicked. Lot was pure in an impure Sodom.
Say, as Joshua, Chap. 24.15. Choose you whom you will serve, but I and my house
will serve the Lord: So let us say, let others profane Sabbaths, we will
sanctify them; let others despise Prayer, we will call upon God as long as we
live. Be not stumbled because you see the way of holiness every where spoken
against: Fire burns the hotest in winter nights; let your zeal for God's Honor
appear when others are Lukewarm and Cold. Do not think the worst of holiness
because contemned by wicked men; they are fools, and are not competent judges.
Who thinks the worse of himself because a fool laughs at him. Gold is gold
still, though thrown into the dirt by a madman: so Religion is Precious and
Honorable still, though madmen throw dirt upon it.

7. Let your life be a walking with God. Manifest Holiness and Piety in every
turn of your lives. Be holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. (...),
in every turn, manifest Holiness in every calling, in every condition, in
prosperity, in adversity, in every relation; when you are single, before you
change your condition, and whilst you are in a married state. A Christian may
show much of Piety in all these circumstances. Be holy, not only at sometimes,
but always.

8. Live the Life of Faith. Gal. 2.19. the Life of Faith is an excellent Life;
it gives God the glory of all his Attributes, of his Wisdom, Goodness,
Faithfulness, Power, etc. It Is a comfortable life. Believing, we have joy
unspeakable and full of glory. It keeps the soul from sinking under wants and
troubles. Faith (as I may so say) holds life and soul together. If you live not
the life of Faith, ye cannot live; see how much there is of unbelief, so much
there is of death, yea, unbelief is sometimes a promoter of temporal death;
That which the Apostle says of worldly sorrow, that it works death, even
natural death; the same I may say of unbelief, that it does in it self hasten
death; for whilst infidelity and distrust prevails, sadness, discontent,
vexation, repining, and murmuring, and fear prevails; and all these are enemies
even to the body of a Christian. Moreover, if we live by sense, we shall lose
much of our spiritual life; your Graces and your Comforts will dye, your Love,
Hope, Joy, and Delight in God will decay, yea, all Religion will decrease and
grow faint; Faith is the life of all Graces and Duties. Sense and Reason is
many times at its wits ends, we know not what to do, (but Faith is never at a
loss) But our eyes are toward thee, there is Faith; in the former expression
was the language of Sense. Faith realizeth seeming impossibilities, and
presentiates things afar of, Heb. 11.1. Act Faith for every thing wanting for
your selves, or for the Church. Do you want pardon of sin? is conscience
burdened with the guilt of your corruptions? act Faith upon such Promises as
these, Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow;
though they be like Crimson, they shall be as Wool, and in Hos. 14.4. Do you
want Righteousness to make you amiable in God's Eyes? live upon that Promise in
Jer. 23.6. He shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness: and that in 1 Cor.
1.30. Do you want purging Grace, would you feign be washed from the filth and
pollution of your lusts? Plead such a Promise as that in Ezekiel. 36.25. I will
sprinkle you with clean water that ye may be clean; from all your filthiness
will I cleanse you. Do you desire persevering Grace? and are you fearful of
falling away? urge that place in Jude 24. Now unto him that is able to keep you
from falling, etc. and John 10.28, 29. I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish: my Father is greater than all, and none shall pluck them
out of my hands. Live by Faith for Counsel, when you are in the dark, and
cannot see your way clear; Isa. 42.16. I will make darkness light before them,
and crooked things straight. For provision, when in straits; for security and
preservation in a time of danger, from Isa. 33.16. His place of defense shall
be the Munition of Rocks: Bread shall be given him; his Waters shall be sure.
And so for the Church. Live by Faith for the restoring of a faithful Ministry,
from Jer. 3.15. I will give them Pastors after my own heart, which shall feed
them with knowledge and understanding. For the restoring of an instituted
Worship, Mal. 1.11. In every place Incense shall be brought, and a pure
offering. Mal. 3.3. I will purify the sons of Levi, and they shall offer to
the Lord a pure Offering in righteousness. Believe for the returning of God to
his Church and People, after his seeming departure and forgetting them; Isa.
49.14, 15, 16. Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee; thy walls are
continually before me.

9. Expect and prepare for Troubles. A Christian's way to Heaven is not always
strewed with Roles. Piety has heen persecuted from the beginning of the world.
Wicked Cain killed righteous Abel, because Abel's deeds were righteous. Ishmael
persecuted Isaac, even in Abraham's family. Christ left this Lesson to his
Disciples when he left the world, John 16.2. These things have I told you
beforehand, that ye should not be offended: They shall excommunicate you from
the Synagogues. Yea, the time comes when he that kills you, shall think he does
God service. If you resolve to follow Christ, you must resolve to bear his
Cross after him, as Simon did. Forgo the love of friends, rather than the love
of God. 2 Timothy 3.12. Christ does not always call His do die for him, but he
expects they should be willing and prepared to do so, if he require it. See
Luke 14.26, 27. Whosoever leaves not father and mother, cannot be my Disciple.
Leaves not, that is, in affection and disposition, and when the time comes, in
execution and reality. Every Christian must be an habitual Martyr, though all
are not so actually. To this end lay up suffering Graces; as Faith, Love,
Patience, etc. get your hearts warmed with a sense of Christ's love to you, in
doing and suffering so much for us; let your love be so vehement, that many
waters may not be able to quench it; and then sit loose to every creature: A
man will with ease part with that to which he is dead already.

10. Prove all things. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Take not upon trust, do not, jurare in
verba Doctoris, believe any Doctrine merely because such an one delivers it as
is cried up in the world for somebody. Be like the Bereans, who searched the
Scriptures daily, to see whether the things they heard were so or no. Whoever
shall preach to you, if he brings any Doctrine, or adds any new Article of
Faith, try them. Every Christian has a Judgment of discretion left him,
whereby he may try, whether that which is pressed upon him, either for belief
or practice, be according to the Analogy of Faith. We must not rest in a blind
implicit faith; it is for Romanists to believe as the Church believes; and what
it is the Church believes, they understand not. Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to
the Testimony; if they speak not according to that, it is because there is no
light in them. And so if they preach any new Worship, bring it to the
Touchstone; see if it be not without Warrant from the Scriptures; try whether
it be not gilded Superstition, or will worship, under the cloak of Decency and
Order. If any scruple arise in your minds, and you not able to satisfy your
selves, consult with able Christians, or some able and faithful Guide. Seek
knowledge at the Priests lips, even in private as well as public. All is not
Gold that looks like it. See what the great Doctor of his Church says, Matthew.
23.7, 9. Call no man Rabbi; that is, do not tie your Faith to his Dictates; do
not believe because he says it. Many dubious and controverted things are
creeping, even at this time, into the Church, therefore ^^y them. Satisfy your
minds and judgments, before you proceed to practice. Be sure that what you do
shall have God's approbation. Worship God from Judgment, not from Presidents.

11. Be frequent and diligent in reading and meditation. For ought I know, this
may be one of the greatest helps we may have. 1 Timothy 4.13. Take that advice of
Paul to Timothy, Till I come, give attendance to Reading: So, till God's
Ministers be returned to you again, give attendance to Reading. When you cannot
have Scriptures read and preached in God's House, then make a Church of your
own house. Phil. 2. Paul commends himself to Philemon, and the Church in his
house; this is a high Commendation of him, that he had Domesticam Ecclesiam, a
household Church. As Calvin in loc. In Mal. 4.4. we meet with this
Exhortation, Remember the Law of Moses my Scrvant, which I commanded to all
Israel, with the Statutes and Judgments. Doubtless they had been commanded
frequently before this time to remember the Commandments of God; therefore
there is a peculiar reason why the Prophet repeats it, and concludes his
Prophecy as it were, with this Exhortation; the reason is this; Malachi was the
last of the Prophets, after him the Jews were not to have any more Prophesying,
till the coming of the Messiah; he knew how prone they were to follow the
dictates of their own hearts, and to walk in their own inventions, to swerve
from God's Institution (as how soon did Israel fall to Idolatry, when their
Prophet Moses was absent from them but forty days, Exodus 32.1, 2, 3.) he
therefore advises them in this interim to attend to the Law of God delivered
by Moses, and the Writings of the Prophets, which were as Commentaries upon
that Law, that they would continue to read, and meditate, and act according to
that Law, till the great Prophet should come. Brethren, I cannot say, that we
that are about to be silent, are the last Ministers you shall hear (no, I
suppose you may have others succeed us, whose Apprehensions and Judgments
concerning the things in controversy, may be different from ours, and may
suffer them to condescend to, and close with more, for the continuance of their
Opportunities, than others can) Now if God does provide you a Successor, if he
be one that speaks according to the Law, and prophesies according to the
Analogy of Faith, I would not advise you to separation from public Ordinances;
no, when they may be had in God's Way, when the preaching of the Word is sound,
and the Substantials of the Ordinances observed, and may be enjoyed without
sinful Appendixes, though you should take pains to fetch them, or go some
considerable way to enjoy them, they are to be prefered before private
exercises. But this I say, if it should be your hard lot, after our departure
from you, to be deprived of public Ordinances at home, and to be out of a
capacity to enjoy them abroad, then I say, you may freely and comfortably close
with the advice propounded. In this forementioned case, let the Bible preach
to us, when Ministers cannot: when we cannot hear living Prophets, let dead
Prophets preach to us; I mean this, see what good you can get out of the
wholesome Discourses of God's departed Prophets. Many Ministers preach by their
surviving Works, when they themselves are in their Graves; by their works,
though they be dead, do yet speak. Let the Bible be your rule, always refer to
that, in things to be believed, and in things to be practiced. Scholars use to
study their Rules well, and then they cannot do amiss.

12. Endeavor to walk in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost. This was Christ's
advice to his Disciples when he was about to leave them, John 14.1. Let not
your hearts be troubled. In the world ye shall have Tribulation, but be of good
Comfort. As you should be humble in Prosperity, so quiet and cheerful in
Adversity; Carry an even frame in each state; Let your Moderation be known unto
all men, even in bearing Afflictions. Be not overmuch cast down with any
trouble; Let the Enemy see that you have been with God, by the Gladness of your
Countenance. You Will discredit Religion by too much drooping. Let not others say,
You serve a hard Master. God that knows all things, knows what condition is
best for you, and how to deal with you. Rejoice in the Lord always. Though
Adversity and the Wicked may intermeddle with your outward comforts, and take
them away, yet let them see you have inward Joys, with which they cannot
intermeddle, nor take away.

13. Esteem and approve Time as a precious Commodity. Husband Opportunities for
Soul-Advantage. When you have spare hours, improve them in Reading, Meditation
and Prayer. Redeem Time from sleep, your callings and recreations, in order to
Heaven. Men usually work, sleep, and recreate more than necessity calls for,
and then cry out, they have no time for holy Exercises. Oh what would damned
spirits give for two or three of those hours which we throw away! Oh how would
they spend them! would they sleep, play, or work them away? Nay, how would they
Pray, Read, and Repent more in one hour, than we do in many! Brethren, the time
is short, your work is much, you have God to honor, your Relations to watch
over, your own Evidences to make clear; O then redeem precious Time, do not
throw it away, Ephesians. 5.16.

15. Contend earnestly for the Faith, Jude 3. Maintain fundamental Truths; I do
not mean that you should fall a wrangling with every one you meet. The Apostle
indeed takes notice of some men that place their Religion in fightings of
Words, in conflicting with the Air, in janglings and disputings about things
they understand not, 1 Timothy 1.5, 6. Some place their Religion in being of this
and that Opinion; and indeed they are mere Opinionists. Our meaning is this,
When the Enemies of the Church, labor to root up the necessary and very
foundation Truths of Christianity, that we should stick to them. As Paul, he
did earnestly contend for the Doctrine of Christ, being the Messiah, against
the Jews. He maintained the Doctrine of the Resurrection against the Saduces:
The Doctrine of Justification by Christ's Righteousness, against the Teachers
of the Law. He does strongly and vehemently maintain Divine Worship against the
idolatrous worship of the Athenians. And so should we contend opportunely and
wisely with tongues and lives. Contend against Justification by Works, against
Idolatry; rather than God's Honor should be given to dumb Idols, give your
honor to the Dust. Consider, fundamental, yea, every Truth, has been
confirmed by no less than Miracles, preserved in a miraculous way, and sealed
in the Blood both of Christ, and of Martyrs. Never then sell the Truth, but buy
it.

16. Get longing Desires after the Enjoyment of God in Heaven. Let your hearts
be often sending sighs thither. Long till you be at home. Groan earnestly till
mortality be clothed with Immortality, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. Say as he, When shall I
come and appear before God? Long till you be in Heaven, that so you may have
constant Communion with God's Angels and Saints, that ye may be wholly freed
from sin, and made perfect in Holiness. Let your Conversation be in Heawhilst
you are on Earth. To this end, get more acquaintance with Heaven; Study till
you be convinced that it is, and what it is. Understand what that Happiness is
that Saints enjoy there. When you have got minds informed, and hearts affected
with it, often muse and meditate of it. This heavenly Conversation is very
sweet; it will comfort us when we are never so sad. Well, may the soul say, Now
I am full of sin, O but then no sin; I am now sold under sin, O but then I
shall be free; Now I dishonor God, but then I shall honor him altogether; Now
I am in continual fear of falling into sin, but then I shall be past all
danger; Now I am in continual sorrow, but then all tears shall be wiped away;
Now I am kept in bondage through fear of death, but then there shall be living,
and no more Death, and so no more fears of it.

Moreover, this would teach us to understand the World. When we do
experimentally taste Heavens Joys, we shall despise Earths Pleasures; when we
seriously think of that Friendship and Communion we shall have with Friends in
Heaven, even God, Christ, Angels and Saints, it will wean us from Friends on
Earth, and make us more willing to leave them. And when we think of Heavens
Honor, we shall undervalue the honors, and scorn the contempt we meet with in
this world. Get now and then upon the top of Pisgah, and solace your selves
with a view of the Heavenly Canaan.

Having now given you an account of those main Duties and Counsels, that relate
more immediately to God and your souls, I shall briefly give you the sum of
those Counsels I have to leave you, about things that relate more nearly to you
and others, with whom you converse and have to do. The first is this;

1. Discharge domestical Duties. Study and perform the Duties that every
Relation calls for. Act as Christian Parents and Christian Masters toward your
Children and Servants; bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord;
call on them to re^d the Scriptures frequently, that even of Children they be
acquainted with that which will make them wise to Salvation; keep them to a
form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. hold them to the Principles of Religion,
Catechisms are called, A Form of sound words, because they keep the Judgment
and Affections sound: they help to discern betwixt Truth and Error; fit and
prepare for hearing of the Word preached, and for the receiving of the Lord's
Supper. For want of this, we may observe notorious ignorance in grown youth,
and old men also. For want of this, how many that are Fathers in years, are
mere Children in understanding! Again, pray with and for your Children and
Servants, and set them to pray by themselves; for this end, give them time
convenient; do not so much forward them in your service, as to hinder them from
serving God: your Servants have God to acknowledge, honor and serve, as well
as you; they have sins to be pardoned, corruptions to be subdued, Graces to
beg, wants to be supplied, and souls to be saved as well as you; and will you
make them throw their souls overboard to secure your goods? And so study to
carry as Christians in every other Relation. Carry as Christian Husbands and
Christian Wives are directed and ought to do, that the Gospel of Christ be not
blamed upon your account. And so you that are Children and Servants, as you
expect your Parents and Masters should discharge their duties toward you, so
it is expected you should conscienciously discharge duties toward them: See
your duty, in Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and practice it.

2. Live in Love. This was Christ's Command to his Disciples when he left them,
John 13.34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another.
By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. Hate
not any of your Brethren in your heart. Hatred makes us, like the Devil,
Murderers. The wicked love one another entirely; and shall not Christians much
more? The great Exhortation of John the Divine was, even when he was so old, as
he could scarce say any thing else; Little Children, love one another; little
Children love one another.

3. Esteem and maintain Peace among one another, as a precious Jewel. Beware of
Animosities and Heartburnings, of Jealousies and Jarrings one with another.
Many evils follow this one of strife; Jam. 3.16. Where Envying and Strife is,
there is every evil work. It Is the nature of Christianity to be meek and
peaceable ( ver. 17.) Strifes are a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. Now the works
of the flesh are manifest, Hatred, Variance, Strife. Now its the property and
duty of true Christians, to put off the works of the flesh. To this end, avoid
the occasions of Strife and Contentions. Put up Injuries, hearken not to
Tale-bearers; The Talebearer separateth very Friends, Prove. 26.20. But when
there is no Talebearer, the Strife cease.

Moreover, deny your selves sometimes of that which may be your right, that so
you maintain brotherly Love. Ever suspect your own Judgment; Man is usually
partial in his own cause. Never think thy self so much in the right, but that
thou may sometimes over-shoot thy self, and be in the wrong; Be not wise in
thy own conceit. Consider, as long as there is Jars and Contentions amongst
Brethren and Neighbors, they are not in a capacity of doing good to, or
receiving good from one another. Contentions fill that mind full of Prejudice,
and then neither Instruction, Advice, Reproof, or any courtesy will be well
accepted; but will be in danger of rejection with abundance of contempt. As
long as men are prejudiced against one another, they will not believe that any
good thing done by the other, proceeds from a good principle, or has a good
end. In a word, I conclude this, in the words of the Apostle, As much as is
possible, live peaceably with all men.

4. Study to unite, 1 Cor. 1.10. Bring your minds to meet in one point. Bring
them to the Center of God's Word: The wider we go from God's Word, which is the
Center of Unity, the further we go from one another. It cannot be expected
while the world stands, that Christians should agree in every punctilio; but
labor to meet in the main, meet in the root. The branches of a Tree grow
several ways, and are at a great distance from one another, but they all agree
in this, that they came from the same root. So Christians may in some things
seem to be a great distance from each other: O labor to meet in the Root;
agree in Substantials; study the things that make for peace, whereby ye may
edify one another.

5. Exhort one another, Heb. 3.17. Instruct, warn, strengthen, comfort one
another; take that advice, 1 These. 5.11. Comfort your selves together, and
edify one another; do not straggle one from another, run together against a
storm; be assured it is not safe for Christians to be alone: two are better
than one; if they be together, they shall have heat.

6. Be righteous in all your dealings with each other. Defraud not one another.
Mich. 6.8. Deal justly; lie not one to another, but speak the Truth. 1 Cor.
6.9. The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. In buying and
selling, and all your civil contracts, do as you would others should do unto
you; set your self in the buyers stead, and see how you would have others act
toward you, and so do to them.

7. Be sensible of the loss, which you and others about you, sustain this day.
Our Church is parting with many Ministers that were willing, and in some
measure able to do God service: Their Iniquities I confess, may have a great
hand in putting them forth, and I hope they are in some measure sensible of the
Plague of their hearts: But see if your hands have not helped to lift them out;
have not you weakened their hands many a time? It may be you have made them
preach and pray weakly and feebly, by your coldness and deadness: It may be
your barrenness provokes God to take away his Vine-dressers; your leasiness
might cause these Candles to be taken away. Is not England weary of Ministers?
do not we count them troublers? Alas, we have raised winds to blow out these
Candles! And then, as you should be sensible of your sin, so of your loss. Why,
what do we lose this day? We lose Shepherds, and Sheep are likely to do poorly
without; we lose spiritual Fathers: My Father, My Father! And how do poor
Children cry at the loss of a Father! We lose some of the Pillars of the Church
and Nation. As David; I bear up the Pillars of it. And how can a House stand
without Pillars? they are our best defense. The Chariots of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof, Cant. 3.7. they defend souls against Sin and Satan, and
bodies from many Judgments. How can a Nation do without Watchmen! It Is well if
the taking away so many Prophets, be not as the pulling so many Lots out of
Sodom.

Object. But what needs all this? what a needless stir do you make? Though you
and others like you, be silenced, yet there are others to succeed you, your
Places will not be vacant. Do you think there are not as good as your selves to
stay behind? we do not see but you may very well be spared.

Answ. 1. Let it be as you have spoken. It is the hearty desire of our souls,
that better may succeed us; it would much elevate our souls if it might be so.

2. Suppose there may some holy and painful Laborers stay behind, its to be
thought it will be but some: the Harvest is great, and it is not reasonably to
be imagined that there should be suddenly raised a competent succession of able
experienced Pastors, to supply so many Congregations as are like to be left
destitute. It Is much to be feared that we shall have cause to sit down and weep
over many poor Towns and Parishes, being left as Sheep without Shepherds.

3. Are you sure that those that stay behind us shall continue long amongst
you? How do you know but that within some months or a few years, some
stumbling block or other may be laid in their way, over which they cannot
possibly go, if they will retain a good conscience?

4. However, this Dispensation of God is a wonderful affliction. It is not the
manner of God ordinarily to deal thus with his Ministers and People. God does
not use to light Candles and then to put them under bushels. I do not remember
that the like ever was heard or read of in England before, that so many
Ministers should have the doors shut upon them, in a time when the Protestant
Religion is professed and countenanced. In the former times when Prelacy was
Tyrannical, though here one, and there one had their mouths stopped, so that they
could not preach in their own places, yet they might preach in another.
Extraordinary Eclipses usually presage some extraordinary Events: The Lord
alone knows what the the effects of this Great Eclipse will be. And the rather,
this is to be looked upon as a great affliction, if we consider, that we cannot
tell when, or whether or no, there shall be a restoration of Pastors to their
People. How many poor People may cry out, as in Psalm. 74.9. We see not our
Prophets, neither is there any amongst us that knows how long. Well, do but
see Acts 20.37, 38. and think how many Paul's are saying to their People this
day, Ye may see our faces no more; and think how many weeping eyes and sad
hearts there are. Friends weep many times for a short parting: when People are
deprived of their Ministers, they part with their best Friends.

8ly. Pray for the Faithful Min^sters of God, both those that stay behind, and
especially for those that are constrained to depart. 1 These. 5.25. They have
prayed for us many a time; In every prayer of mine, making mention of you all:
They have shed many a tear, and sent up many a sigh: They have mourned for your
deadness and unteachableness. They do now especially need your prayers.

1. Pray that God would keep them steadfast. They are Leaders of the People,
Pray they may not cause them to err. They have many temptations to sin, they
may be in necessities, and that is a great temptation.

2. That they may have counsel from God. Both those that stay in, and those
that go out, may be in the dark, as to their own and the Churches affairs; Pray
therefore that God's Vrim may be with them both. Pray that God would discover
to both sorts of Ministers, wherein they are defective in any thing that might
or should be done, and wherein either of them have exceeded; that knowing their
error they may repent.

3. For provision. Though bread be taken from their mouths, pray God would
provide some Obadiahs that may feed them, though it be with bread and water. In
Deuteronomy. 10.9. we read, that because Levi had no inheritance amongst his
brethren, therefore the Lord promised to be his inheritance. The Lord knows
that many of Levi at this day have little or no inheritance amongst their
brethren, therefore pray that God himself would be their inheritance. They are
willing to leave House and Land for the sake of Christ, and that they may keep
a good and quiet conscience, O beg that God would not leave them. That seeing
they are desirous to honor God, that of him they may not be slighly esteemed.

4. For their return. That you may see their faces once more, Romans 1.10. That
they may have a prosperous journey to you again, if it be the Will of God. If
God delight in us, he can bring his Priests into his Temple again; he can bring
Ministers to their People, and People to their Ministers: O beg that God would
speed and hasten the time. Plead with God the honor of his Name, the necessity
of his Church, and the shortness of the lives of many of his Ministers. Many of
them are aged, and at the most their days are like to be few, and those that
are younger, know not how soon a period may be put to their lives, O beg that
they may not stand all their days idle. The door is shut, and bars are set, so
that they cannot enter into God's Vineyard as formerly; O beg that the Lord
would hasten the opening of the doors of the Temple for them, and that he would
break these bars assunder. What the resolution of God is in this particular,
you and I know not, however do you your duty, and perform this office of Love
to your Ministers, and then let both them and you sit still and acquiesce with
the same humble resolution that David had, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. If I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord he will bring me again, and show me his
habitation: but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; Lo, here I am, let
him do to me as seems good to him. So if God see it good for you and us, he
can and will restore us to his House again; but if he say, he has no delight
in us, behold here we are, let him do to us as seems good in his eyes. We do
acknowledge we are unworthy to be Priests any longer to him, and that God can
bring about his own glory though we were all really dead; and if God should lay
us aside all our life time, as vessels in which he has no pleasure, we desire
to submit.

And now, Brethren, not knowing when, or whether or no, you may see our faces
again in a public manner, I bid you farewell, Acts 20.32. Commending you to
God, and the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up. And with the
words of the Apostle, in Heb. 13.18, 19, 20. Pray for us, and the rather, that
we may be restored to you the sooner. And the God of Peace that brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, make you perfect in every good work to do
his Will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

SERMON XVI.
Zeph. 3.18. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn Assemblies,
who are of Thee, to whom the Reproach of it was a burden.
THe Prophet Zephaniah supposed by some [ Mayer ex Gualth. cap. 1. v. 1.] as
the Prophet Isaiah was, of a Family of some Note amongst the Jews (some Noble
were and are called) prophesied in those times that bordered upon the
Captivity, which was Isreal's second Egypt; and in regard that the body of the
People were in his time corrupt and senseless, he is a Son of Thunder unto them:
and in that there was in that corrupt body some sound members, a few names that
had not defiled their garments, he is a Son of Consolation to them. The body of
the People would not believe enough to humble them; nor the Faithful amongst
them take in so much as to cheer them. The Prophets of those times found it
little less difficult to prop up good men under their dejections, than to throw
down bad men castled in their own presumptions. The most were persuaded that
Captivity would never be; and the best had much ado to believe it would ever
end, as appears by Jeremiah's Purchase, Jer. 32.6, 7, -- 41, 42, 43, 44.

The Text is in the Promissory part of this Book. The Prophet ascends the Mount
of Blessing at the eighth verse of this last chapter, and thence he uttered
these words. Junius thinks that the waiting called for in that verse, is
patiently to bear their Captivity in Babylon, and cheerfully to expect their
Deliverance therefrom; and so, then all that follows, is to give them grounds
of hope, that it was but a temporary Captivity, not a final Divorse; they
should be in a state of Suspension (as Absalom) from God's presence for some
time, but not of Abdication, or Exhaeredation, sequestered, interdicted, not
ejected, disinherited. So much for the Book in which my Text is, and its
coherance with the words of its neighborhood.

In the Text there are two general parts; (viz.) First, An Implicit Prediction
of a doleful Calamity which should befall this People: And, secondly, An
Explicit Promise of a Rich Mercy to be bestowed upon them.

In the Prediction employed, there is a double Calamity intimated to be coming,
and that is, first, A Loss of their Spiritual Privileges, which was the
Advantage of the Jew, Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4, 5. By Solemn Assemblies are meant
their several Conventions at those set times which God had appointed them, viz.
on the weekly Sabbath, the new Moons, the stated Feasts and Fasts, which they
were bound to observe, Deuteronomy. 16. begin. For the Solemn Assembly, i. e. for the
lack, want of the Solemn Assembly. The phrase is a concise form of speech usual
in the Hebrew tongue, and is in this Text to be understood, as in Isa. 32.12.
They shall lament for the Teats, for the pleasant Fields, for the fruitful
Vine, i. e. for the spoil, loss, and want of them. Our Translators do
sometimes, where the words are no more in the Original than they are here,
supply, to show the sense of the expression: One while [lack] as in Genesis 18.28.
Will thou destroy all the City for [lack of] five? And another while [want] as
in Lament. 4.9. -- stricken through for [want] of the fruits of the field. And
so it would have done well if it had been supplied here. Furthermore, in that
it is here expressed indifinitely, The Solemn Assembly, it is to be understood
universally of All Assemblies: so that it was a total deprivation, they had not
one left.

Secondly, The Reproach under which their Assemblies lay, as under a burden, as
our Translators put into the margent: Which was an additional aggravation of
their Affliction, adding Gall to their Wormwood. Harm and Scorn are seldom
divided. The Church is seldom laid low, but it is spit upon as well as trod
upon. If Sampson be in the Philistines hands, he must be brought forth to make
them sport. And this is very irksome. Shame is the heaviest part of a cross;
Heb. 12.2. and 13.13. If God had only stripped them of their Glory, it might
have been easier born, than to have their Glory turned into Shame. If they had
only wanted good words from God, that sometimes they had heard, it might have
been born; but to hear evil words from men, yea, to hear the good ways of God
evil spoken of, this was intolerable. The Reproaches what they were, you will
hear anon. So much shall serve for the Prediction implied.

I proceed to the second general in the Text, (viz.) The Promise expressed. And
therein is considerable, 1. The Promise it self, I will gather, i. e. bring you
to your Land, and to your Assemblies again, to enjoy them in more peace, power,
and purity than formerly, as the precedent verses, and some other parallel
Scriptures (which will be touched on by and by) do show. 2. The persons to whom
this Promise belongs. [The Promise, as other parts of the Word, is to be
divided, not thrown about carelessly; it is childrens bread, and so not for
dogs.] Now the persons that are interested in this Promise are described, 1.
Generally such as are of the Church, -- who are of Thee: but because deceit
lies in Generals; the Church doors are far wider than Heaven gates: All are not
Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9.6. Therefore (2dly.) more particularly, They
are characterized by their carriage under the Calamities mentioned (viz.) Their
sad resentment of those Calamities; they were sad losses to them, they took
them to heart; they wept under their Loss, and groaned under the Reproach.

-- That are sorrowful for the Solemn Assembly, etc. I thought some years since
I had a call to speak to the latter part of this Text, and did so -- I wish I
could say, I have no cause now to call my thoughts to the first words of this
Text, upon which I do intend now to insist, and the Doctrine is this.

Doct. 1. The want of Solemn Assemblies is a Lamentation, and should be for a
Lamentation to all Church Members.

Ordinances should not be parted with with dry eyes. The Child surely is either
very sullen, or very sick, that cries not for the breast.

The Doctrinal part requires an Answer to two Questions, and then the way is
open for Application.

The first Question is, What it is to be sorrowful for the want of Solemn
Assemblies. And the second Question is, Why Church Members should be sorrowful
for their want of them.

Quest. 1. What it is to be sorrowful, etc.

I answer, It consists in two things. 1. It is inwardly to lay this to heart,
as a very great and a grievous want and loss. If even bad men will, like dogs,
howl under the want of Corn and Wine, Hos. 7.14. should not the Lord's Children
mourn under the want of Spiritual Bread, and their better Refreshings? If ever
we will have a spirit of heaviness, sure it must be when God brings a Judgment
upon us, so near to a Spiritual Judgment: Next to the withdrawment of Grace,
surely is the removal of the Means of Grace. Artaxerxes concluded that Nehemiah
had sorrow of heart, Nehem. 2.2. and indeed so he had. The heart must cry in
such a case as this, Lam. 2.18. We must be both serious and sincere. Here is no
room left for Crokadiles tears; We must not be such mourners as Ishmael, but
rather such as they in the verse foregoing. Jer. 41.5, 6. Our bowels, our
bowels should be troubled, we should be pained to the heart; as Christ was when
he beheld the Shepherdless People, Matt. 9.36. How often in the Book of
Lamentations does the Prophet touch upon this, as the Lamentation? It is (as I
may say) The Lamentation of that Book of Lamentations; it is the burden of that
doleful ditty, as you may observe in reading of it. Eli held up, till the
Taking of the Ark was mentioned, 1 Samuel 4.18. but when that is mentioned, his
heart dies within him; this put him into an ecstasy of grief, and overwhelms
him; every word that that Messenger brought made his heart strings no doubt to
crack, but mentioning the Ark, that broke his heart: It may be easily believed,
that his heart was broke with the Arks captivity, before his neck was by his
fall off his Seat.

2. It is outwardly to express this inward Grief, and that some such ways as
these. -- First, In keeping Fasts; especially making the days on which such a
sad Calamity befalls us, Fasting-dayes. As this People did, Zech. 7.3. compare
Jer. 52.12. The Fast of the fifth Month, was for the burning of the Temple,
which with their solemn Assemblies were all consumed and buried in its Ashes.
-- Secondly, In abandoning, or at least very much abating Joy in many other
things, continued to us during the continuance of this Cause of Sorrow.
Nehemiah (though a cheerful man) droops, and cannot be cheerful as formerly,
Nehem. 2.1, 2. he is heart-struck with the Churches condition, and has little
joy in his own preferment; a Prince's smile will not cheer him, whilst God
frowns on his People. Uriah will not enjoy honest and lawful delight, whilst
the Ark is hazarded, 2 Samuel 11.11. He that denies proffered delights, because
the Ark is but hazarded, how would he have disdained, if not abominated such a
Proffer, if the Ark had been captivated? The Wife of Phinehas sets not her
heart on the Tidings of a Male-child when the Ark is taken, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22.
There is little Joy in Children, when we suspect whether we shall leave them a
Gospel or no: We may write Ichabod upon the Children born in our houses in a
time when God seems to be breaking up house amongst us. Oh who can tell what a
want, the want of Christ's School of Ordinances is to poor Children! --
Thirdly, Mentioning not, or at least not accounting our own losses that do
accompany this (for such Calamities seldom come alone) comparable to, or worthy
to be named with this Loss. You may see the frame of this Prophets Spirit,
Psalm. 137. totum. They cannot joy, no; though in Babylon they were seated in a
fruitsoyl, by the waters side, but there they weep: And what is it for? it is
for Zion; no doubt but they had many a doleful thing to remember beside Zion
and her concernments; much Spoil and Cruelty: The Famine that would fill them
with many sad thoughts, and the Sword and its Executions would mind them of
grievous things; but it is Zion that makes their heart bleed. As this is their
chief Joy, so this is their chief Sorrow. They did not so much miss the
Comforts of their native Country, as Jerusalem, Oh that City of their
Solemnities, Oh Jerusalem they cannot forget! David in his Exile, wanted many
things besides the Courts of the Lord, but he speaks as if he wanted nothing
but them, nothing as them: He breathes not after Saul's court, but after God's
Court. Some upon the 84th Psalm, and the 4th verse, do leave out the supplement
[Even] that is in our Translation, and read it as an abrupt and pathetical
Exclamation; thus, Thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts! q. d. Oh for thine Altars (O
my God) when and where shall I be so happy, Thine Altars, thine Altars! The
Birds they have Nests where to lay their Young; they have what is agreeable to
their nature, need and refreshings; Oh why have I not where to lay my head! Oh
why am I kept from my Resting place! David in his Exile, seeing the Birds come
and go to their Nests, like a passionate Lover, he takes occasion thence to
bewail his sad lot. As sometimes Queen Elizabeth did in her Restraints, Speed,
in the Life of Qu. Mary.
upon the sight of the Milk-maid out of her Prison Windows, whose merry singing
over her Pail, put her into a pensive dump, preferring a poor liberty before
her Princely Captivity. So that the words are, an holy piece of Poetry,
expressing so zealous an Affection to the Ordinances, that turned every thing
it met with, either into Fuel, or Bellows. -- Fourthly, Lamenting after the
Lord, during the time of this Sequestration on us for our Delinquencies, until
the Lord take it off, and put us into possession of these dear Liberties, and
precious Privileges. One of the Daughters of godly Sorrow, is vehement desire.
As in the Creation, out of the Waters were formed the winged Fowls, 2 Cor.
7.11. And hence comes a sickness of heart until the Mercy desired be obtained.
No Mercy that is on this side Christ and Grace, more panted after. This is that
which David will seek after, Psalm. 27.4. this is that he thirsts for and longs
for, that he may see God's Power and Glory, as he had seen him in the
Sanctuary, Psalm. 63.1, 2. Oh that I may but behold those glorious Ordinances!
If it had not been for hopes of Restitution, his heart would have fallen into a
deadly swond, Psalm. 27.13. You find the People, 1 Samuel 7.2. lamenting after the
Lord. We should lie in Tears whilst the Church lies in its Ruins. It is Junius
his note upon the Text -- Pios, qui tanto studio conventus sacri
constringuntur, ut tantisper dum a Deo absunt sint in maerore and luctu -- The
Spirit of a good man under such a want, should be like that of Mephibosheth in
David's absence, 2 Samuel 19.24. Whilst David was driven out, he has no mind of
himself, nor of any thing he has: And when David is returned, he is so full of
that, that he cares not if he has nothing else. Surely brown bread and Gospel
is good fare; and a short allowance of Temporals will serve, if God will
restore and mend our spiritual Pastures, Isa. 30.20. And thus much of the first
Question. The second follows, which is;

2. Quest. -- Why should Church Members be sorrowful for the want of them?

Answ. The Text shall answer this Question, that so I may at once more fully
explain the Text, and confirm the Doctrine; and before I give the Reasons that
are couched in the Text, I shall only premise this, That I take it for granted,
that by Solemn Assemblies, are meant all the Appendices of them; and takes in
the want of the Word, Worship, Ministry and Ordinances; which things do make
them sacred, and in a peculiar manner solemn Assemblies. This premised, I come
to the first Reason.

Reas. 1. Because they are Solemn Assemblies; i. e. Holy Meetings for high and
great Ends. -- The Testification of our duty in our attendance upon, and
approaches to his Majesty; and the Communication of his Grace, Mercy and
Goodness, so that in losing them, we are prevented from doing that which is the
main end of our being, and are interrupted in the enjoying of that which is the
means of our present and future well-being. But because it is particulars that
do affect, singularia pungunt, I shall a little open this Loss in two
particulars -- First, In the want of Assemblies, we want the Public Worship.
-- And, Secondly, We want the things to be enjoyed in Public Worship, and to
be received in it. -- 1. In the want of the Solemn Assemblies, we want Public
Worship; there the People are ( Psalm. 102.21, 22.) gathered together to serve
the Lord. The service of God is reckoned among the Jews Privileges, Romans 9.4.
Public Worship is one of the Jewels in the Jews Cabinet. -- First, Public
Worship is that which God loves: and that God has wrought in all his People a
love to above Private Worship. -- He loves it; Psalm. 87.2. He loves the
dwellings of Jacob, but especially the Gates of Zion. He will meet his People
in secret; but he has made a more peculiar Promise to meet them in their
Meetings, Mat. 18.20. Exodus 29.42. Private Duties want not a blessing; but
Public Worship is honored by God to be the main Conveiance of Blessings.
Public Ordinances are the great Veins wherein the Blood of Christ runs, Psalm.
128.5. Psalm. 133.3. The Mount of Zion is the Mount of blessing. The Gleanings
of Ordinances are better than the Vintage of other Helps. There he commanded
the Blessing. 1. There is Conviction, 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. 2. There is Conversion,
Romans 10.14. Private Means want not their Encouragements; but God sets the most
seals to his Public Worship. Hearing is not the only way, but it is the most
ordinary way of Faith. God's chief Doles are at Wisdoms Gates. Psalm. 87.5. Of
Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born; I may say, new born there.
These are, as it were, the troughs (as once Jacob did) wherein God lays the
Rod of his Strength, and transforms hearts. -- 3. There is Consolation. The
Ordinances are the breasts of Consolation, Isa. 66.11. There in the
Banqueting House God stays his with Flagons, and comforts them with Apples; as
in Cant. 2.4, 5. There God puts the teat into the mouth, and stills the
Whimperings of his Children. The Comforts that are given in Assemblies, are
most satisfactory; as things done in open Court, are most Authentic. Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18. went away, and her countenance was no more sad. -- 4. There God
carries on his work begun. God feeds his People where he breeds them: gives
them Strength where he gave them Life, Psalm. 84.7. Growth where he gave them
truth of Grace. Psalm. 92.13. To talk of over-thriving Ordinances, is a mistake:
It Is decay, not thrift; it is death, not growth. We must be, and may learn in
Christ's School, till we be sent to the University of Heaven. -- Secondly, And
as God loves it, and has set his Broad-Seal to it, so God has wrought in his
People a Love to it. God's People cannot live without Secret Corners, nor
comfortably without Public Meetings: if they be cooped up at any time, they
are as a Child in the womb, struggling to get forth. Hezekiah was more loath to
leave Worship, than to leave the world: He mentions his ( Isa. 38.11.) loss of
Converses with Men, but not so emphatical as the other; as you may observe; I
shall not see the Lord, even the Lord: He redoubles the word [Lord] to express
his ardent Affections to God's Service, and to intimate his desire of life,
that he might go to Church again. Read ver. 22. of that Chapter. Now can we
part with such a Dorcas for good deeds, and such a Jonathan for pleasantness
without sorrow? Can we suffer such a Right Hand to be cut off? such a Right-eye
to be plucked out without grief? Shall such a Darling-Blessing dye unlamented?
Thirdly, As Public Worship is in the Heart of God, and in the hearts of his
People, so Public Worship is that which all need, be their personal Abilities,
be their private Helps what they will. (1.) All need it. Public Worship is a
public Good; and so a public general Loss; our persons, our families will
feel it; it will be soon every where in a little time. The Public Worship is
like Husbandry, of which it is said, The profit of the Earth is for all. The
King himself is served by the field, Eccles. 10.9. It Is well noted, That the
Ministry of the Word, or rather the Ministers of the Word, are set forth by
common Blessings, such as are Light, and Salt, and Harvest-men, Bread; so that
the removal of such away, is a common Mischief: it is as if no Sun, no Tillage,
no Laborers to reap down our Fields: It is like the bellies want in the
Apologue, no member can do its office. The Minister himself will want this
Mercy. The Light is profitable to him that carries it, as well as to others.
They may in saving their Hearers, save themselves, 1 Timothy 4.16.

But Oh how will all sorts of People want it! Solemn Assemblies are the great
Banks against Sin, the main Quickners to Duty. Ministers are both God's and
man's Remembrancers, Isa. 62.6. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. The want of them turns our
Palaces into Hell for Darkness and Profaneness, as Egypt was when it wanted
Light. Solemn Assemblies are the Directors of all sorts to their duties. How
soon shall we find this want in our Children, and in our Servants, nay in our
selves: We that have had so much a do to get or keep any life or sense, what
shall we do when we want those Rubbings, Chasings, Joggs, Wheels, Quicknings,
that we have had in the public Ordinances?

Read and apply to this present purpose, that speech which your dying, dead
Ministers may use to you, Deuteronomy. 31.27. Mutatis mutandis. For I know thy
Rebellion and thy Stiff-neck: Behold whilst I am yet alive with you this day,
ye have been rebellious against the Lord: and how much more after my death?
Nay, Furthermore, I say it is that which all need, be their personal Abilities
never so great, and be their private helps never so many. It is a choice
observation of a Man of God, Hildersham on John 4.
now with God, a Man mighty in the Scriptures, concerning David, that though he
was a Man of Excellent Gifts, a Prophet, a Penman of Scripture: You have his
Character and Portraiture, in 2 Samuel 23.1, 2. A man of incomparable Abilities,
vast Experiences, singular Integrity, A man after God's own heart; and yet this
man was a lover of the Habitation of God's House, Psalm. 268. Nay, besides these
his own treasures, he had w^ h him sometimes, if not always, an extraordinary
(...) to be his Chaplain, even God, 1 Samuel 22.5. (...) had likewise Abiathar a
Priest, to enquire of (...) him, 1 Samuel 23.9. Yet he longs after the
Or^^^^nces; bewails the want of Public Worship; and speaks as if he wanted
God, in many Psalms, as if he had nothing of God comparatively to what he
enjoyed there. Oh who like David! Great men that have much within themselves,
yet cannot quite keep off the Markets. Verily the best stored heart or house
will not live fully without these spiritual Markets. All private helps may say
to the public Ordinances, as Gideon to the men of Ephraim, Judge. 8.2. What
have I done in comparison of you? Lay all this together: strike ^^e^e
con^iderations on the heart, as Moses did the Ro^^ with his Rod; and conclude
the heart is a Rock indeed, if it yield no water after these strokes. Oh if any
thing should open springs of sorrow in the heart, i^ should be the stopping up
of such Wells. But I stay too long upon things. I proceed to the second
Particular, that shows how considerable the Loss of Solemn Assemblies are;
and that is,

Secondly, In wanting the Solemn Assemblies, we want the things to be enjoyed,
done, received in the Public Worship. Oh the Blessing that is in this cluster!
surely a cluster of Blessings; It is a Mercy that comes not alone, nor goes
away alone: We may say of these Mercies when they come, as she of Gad, Behold
(...) Troop! and when they go, On how much do they carry away! As to instance,
(1.) In the want of them, we want our dearest Enjoyments -- such as are; 1. The
gracious Presence and Visits of the God of Heaven; the Day of our Visitation
sets with them, Luke 19.42, 44. The Public Assemblies are God's Chambe^ of
Presence. Cain going from that quarter of the World where God had his Church,
is said to go from the Presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.14, 16. Is it nothing to be
without God in the World? Is it nothing to be deprived of the sight of his
Goings in the Sanctuary? Is it nothing to want his Walks amongst his
Candlesticks? Seems it a small thing to us to stand under Suspension? Did
Mary weep when she supposed they had taken away her Lord? John 20.13. and shall
not we when our Lord is clearly withdrawing himself? Will a departing God fetch
never a tear? Depart from me will make weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth;
and that thou may fear, since the Departures of a God do not affect thee. 2.
Open Vision, and the benefit of the Gifts of God's Ministers, whom God has
endued with Gifts to profit withal, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, for
the perfecting of the Saints. Solemn Assemblies are the Orbs wherein these
Stars shine, they are the Candle-sticks in which these Lights are set up. When
the Ark was taken, the Priests fell too. When we want our Signs, we want our
Prophets too. When no Solemn Assemblies, then are our Teachers driven into
Corners. Some have thought it more elegible to lose the Sun, than these Stars.
Is it a matter to be passed by without Regard, to see Lights put under Bushels;
to lose the Treasure that is in these Earthen-vessels; to lose so many faithful
Guides that were as Eyes to us in the Wilderness of this world? Oh to want
their Counsels, their Comforts, the Fruit of their Studies, Temptations,
Intelligence from Heaven. The beautiful feet of them that publish glad Tidings
turned from us, calls for sad hearts; when we cannot hear the joyful Sound; let
both God and man hear sorrowful sighs and groans. Read Acts 20.36, 37, 38.
People know little of the Reality of spiritual Relations, whose hearts are not
touched with the sense of spiritual breaches. Read and apply to this head, 1 Samuel 3.1. Psalm. 74.9. 3. The Communion of Saints, which is the nearest
resemblance of Heaven that is upon Earth. When Assemblies are gone, then the
Sheep are scattered. Oh how many times do God's People experience warmth by the
affections of others! What will the coals do, when they are pulled one from
another? Oh what is it to want those gladsome Calls! Let us go up to the House
of the Lord; come, let us go to the Mountain of the Lord's House. Oh to want
opportunities to unite our strength in prayer, to gather about God, and besiege
Heaven, and make a common cry, Father, pity; Father, help! Single Prayers are
heard, but bands of Prayers, vollies of Prayers, these have the honor to
prevail with Heaven. God shows his Condescentions to his People when they twist
their Prayers, and with one consent stir up themselves to take hold on him, and
hang upon him. Christians have great need one of another, as the members of the
body have of each other; and except there be an increase of influences from
him, that is instead of all, we shall be very poor and weak, and unfit for our
duties when we want the supply of the joints. God's Plants are quite different
from other plants; for God's Plants thrive best when they are the nearest
together. Oh this true good Fellowship! what a sad world is it when it is
broken up! Read Eccles. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. Heb. 10.24, 25. especially Psalm. 42.4.
In that Psalm. 42.4. you may see what our frame ought to be under this Loss;
When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, for I had gone with the
Multitude, I went with them to the House of God with the Voice of Joy and
Praise, with a Multitude that kept Holy Day.

4. A special and main help of the Sanctification of the Lord's Day. The
seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an holy Convocation, Lev. 23.3. the Sabbath
is the Meeting day for God's People, Meeting to Hear, to Pray, to Praise, to
receive the Supper; truly, if there be no holy Convocation, it will scarce be
an holy Rest; if no holy Assemblies, there will be many sinful Assemblies,
there will be Assembling by Troops in other houses: there will be routs of
Sporters [and surely it is no less dangerous to sport upon God's holy time,
than to play and sport with holy things] if no Assemblies: Let Assemblies go,
and God's holy Rest will be troubled and not sanctified; Sabbaths will not be
known, they will be forgotten: when People have no Sabbath-journeys to go, viz.
no Ark, no Tabernacle to go to, they will even have some weekday journey to go
on that Day. Highways on that Day will soon be occupied, when the Ways of
Zion mourn. And does not that loss call for tears, that makes way for the breach
of a Commandment, at which Religion in its Power and Peace will go out? Read
Jer. 17. from ver. 19. to the end.

(2.) In the want of Assemblies, we want our highest employments, we are taken
off from Angelical work, Nehem. 9.6. The Host of Heaven worshippeth thee. --
From work that is at once our Duty and our Honor, our Holiness and our
Happiness. They are truly called Privileges, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is the man
whom thou choosest, and causest to approach to thee. (1.) In these Solemn
Assemblies the standing Employment of Christians is most gratefully performed:
Such as are Prayer and Praise, and the like; for Prayer something has been
hinted, and for Praise, (like Music) it is most melodious when it consort.
Psalm. 107.32. Let th m Exalt him also in the Congregation of the People, and
Praise him in the Assembly of the Elders, Psalm. 111.1. I will Praise thee,
Lord, with my whole heart, in the Assembly of the Upright, and in the
Congregation. There is a sweet savor goes up to Heaven with Prayers and
Praises that come from Assemblies; as seems to be hinted in that expression, in
Amos. 5.21. I will not smell in your Solemn Assemblies. God is fallen out with
a People, when he cannot away with their calling of Assemblies; and the Solemn
Meeting is a grievance, as some read that Text, Isa. 1.13. -- (2.) In these
Solemn Assemblies the extraordinary employment of Christians is most
acceptable, such as is Fasting and Prayer, not to mention holy Feasting and
Thanksgiving. Prayers in Assemblies help at dead lifts, and in extraordinary
cases. Samuel will have Israel gathered to Mispah when he prays for them, 1 Samuel 7.5. Gather your selves together, etc. Zeph. 2.1. Sanctify a Fast, Call a
Solemn Assembly, Joel 2.14. Christ gives order to his Disciples to continue
together embodied, sending out their Supplications, Acts 1.4, 14. and you see
the Spirit came down upon them when assembled, Acts 2.1, 2. The Law was given
upon the day of the Assembly, Deuteronomy. 9.10. and 10.4. and 18.16. Peter was
thrown into a Meeting, though a private Meeting, Acts 12.11. God gives his
special Boons of Favor to his People in Assemblies. (3.) In these Solemn
Assemblies it is that men are set on work: The Gospel, like the rising Sun, it
calls up men to work; men cannot be at rest in their sloth where God has his
Laborers: Light if it be not powerful enough to direct, it will afflict; if it
do not awaken them, it will trouble their rest: The Witnesses are Tormenters,
where they are not Saviors: but now when the light is gone, then may the
People keep holy day, as some render that Text, Feriabitur Populus, Where no
Vision is, Prove. 29.18. Markets will be full of persons standing idle at all
hours, because there is none to hire them. Now should not this add weight to
such a cross as this, to make it break our hearts? Did the Silver-Smiths make
such a cry, when they thought ere long they should have no work? Acts 19.25,
26, 28. And ^^all the loss of Spiritual Employments be over looked?

(3.) In the want of Assemblies we are deprived of our most cheering
refreshments. This loss draws our Table, empties our Cup, burns up our
Pastures, stops our Wells, dries up our fresh Springs. There is a fatness in
God's House, There are Rivers of Pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. David calls the Altar
of God his exceeding joy, Psalm. 43.3, 4. It is in the House of Prayer that God
makes his People joyful, Isa. 56.7, 8. there God makes his People not only to
eat, but makes them feasts of fat things, Isa. 25.6. O what a Feast of fat
things is the Supper of the Lord, wherein we have opportunity to thrust our
hands into the Side of Christ, to feel what work sin has made there, and what
a warm Heart he has, and full of good will to sinners! O what a want of those
comfortable Innes (as I may call them) and refreshing baiting Places in Heavens
Road, that have been to us, as Bethel was to Jacob! All that is left, when our
Assemblies are gone, is uncomfortable: when Nebuzaradan burnt the Temple, he
left, but it was but the poor of the Land; so when God takes down his Tent
amongst us, there may be some Mercies left behind, but they are but poor
things; all that is in our houses is but lean, when we want the fatness of
God's House, all that we see is uncomfortable, when we cannot see our signs;
they are but shadows of Mercies, that remain when our signs are gone; fullness
of bread and scarcity of the Word has little satisfaction in it; for when the
Ordinances go, the satifying and sanctifying Mercies are gone: brown Bread and
Gospel is better fare, than Dainties and no Gospel. This want turns our Wine
into water, and our Bread into stones. What is a well-furnished house without
windows and light? what is a ceiled house if Gods House lie waste? what are
garners full of all manner of store, if we have not the treasure that is in
earthen vessels? Happy is that People whose God is the LORD, Psalm. 144.12, 13,
14. Now where God is a Peoples God, He will set his Sanctuary in the midst of
them, and his Tabernacle shall be with them, as in Ezekiel. 37.26, 27. We are as
it were without God, if without the Ordinances of God: -- Ordinances are as it
were the life of a Land; the Land of Canaan is in an especial manner in
Scripture called the Land of the living, (as some think) in regard of the
Ordinances. Moller on Psalm. 27.13. A Land dies when the Ordinances go, the soul
of a Kingdom is gone, the People live as it were among the Tombs; and should
not this make our houses, houses of mourning? What a cry in Egypt, when death
was in every house? Should not the Mourners go about the streets when the Life
of our lives is gone? should the Word of Life depart unlamented?

(4.) In the want of Assemblies we are deprived of our richest Ornaments: These
are our Crowns, Rev. 12.1. Lam. 5.16. The Crown is fallen from our head. We may
in this case say as Job, Chap. 19.9. Thou have stripped me of my glory, and
taken my Crown from off my head. The Ark is called the glory of Israel; and the
same thing is called Glory and Assembly, Isa. 4.5. Good Order (which is a
beautiful thing) will not long stay after God's Ordinances are gone; Church and
State (like those Twins) laugh and cry, live and dye together. Righteousness
(which exalts a Nation) is at the threshold, when Religion is out of doors:
Civil Assemblies will cease to be Thrones of Judgment, when Solemn Assemblies
cease to be Thrones of Glory: The custom of England has made the way to the
Bench by the Church; that they that are to give charges to men, may first
receive their charge from God. It was at Jerusalem, where the Temple was, that
the Thrones of Judgment were, Psalm. 122.5. It is the Grace of God bringing
Salvation, that teaches men Piety, Sobriety, and Righteousness: What can be
expected when that disappeares, but impiety, intemprance, and unrighteousness,
2 Tit. 11, 12. Now, cannot a Maid forget her Ornaments, and can we forget ours?
When God has made us naked, as the margent in your Bibles renders the word,
Prove. 29.18. should we not put on sackcloth?

And lastly I may add, We with them lose our strongest Muniments. The Ark was
strength, Psalm. 78.61. 1 Chronicles. 16.11. God is terrible out of his holy Places,
Psalm. 68.35. When our Ordinances are gone we are as Sampson with his locks cut,
even weak as others. The Christian Regiments that could join in Prayer, that
were a Church as well as a Band, they were called Thundering Regiments. How may
it be said of Assemblies, as of Zion in Psalm. 76.3. There brake he the Arrows
of the Bow, the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle. It was Moses hands that
beat the Amalakites. We may cry after the Solemn Assemblies when they are
going, as Elisha after Elijah, My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel,
and the Horsemen thereof. There is a Defense upon Assemblies, and with them
that goes. There are not a few places to be found that have soon tumbled into
their graves after the removal of their Ministers by death: as Hippo, and
Heidelberg, etc. Is the bough cutting on which we stand? is our Defense
departing from us, and shall not we mourn? Thus much of this Reason. Now cast
up all this together, and see whether the sum that stands at the foot should
not be written with tears.

Reas. 2. Because Reproach is the attendant of this Affliction. The Churches
Lamentation is some men's Jubilee: Israel is a derision to Moab, and they even
skip for joy, Jer. 48.26. Enemies at such time are either Rabshakahs or
Ishmaels. God's People are at such times much lashed with the scourge of
tongues. When David is forced to leave Jerusalem, then comes out Shimei with
his stones and curses, 2 Samuel 16.5. In such a time,

1. The Masters of Assemblies are reproached. (So are Ministers called, Eccles.
12.11.) They have shot many a keen Arrow of Reproof out of the Bow of
Ordinances, and now they shall find them shot back again in Reproaches. When
God's poor Servants are silenced, there are many mouths opened against them;
much trampling upon the dead Lion. Read Rev. 11.8, 9, 10. where you find the
dead Bodies of God's Witnesses are a sight that the world can never have enough
of; they look upon them with as much content, as she did upon John Baptists
head. Jeremiah makes it part of his Lamentation, The vengeance, lips, reproach
of adversaries; and that sitting down and rising up, he was their Music; not a
meal but his Head, as it were, was served up; he was their Table-talk, they
used their teeth in gnashing upon him as well as grinding their meat. Read
Lam. 3.60, 61, 62, 63. In most times the Ministry is as the dung-cart, but in
such times they are the filth and offscouring especially.

2. The Members of Assemblies. Despiteful minds make them a Derision. The Jews
when this calamity befell them, bore the shame of the Heathen, Ezekiel. 36.4, 5, 6.
Consider and behold our Reproach, Lam. 5.1. The holiness of God's Peoples lives
have bitten bad men many a time, and now they will pay them for it in talking
to the grief of them whom God has wounded.

3. The Exercises of the Assemblies. No Vessels will please Belshazzer to
carouse in, but the consecrated Vessels of God's Temple; no Jest in such a time
like that which jerks at Religion. Psalm. 137.3. The Babylonians would make
themselves merry with one of Zions Songs. It was grievous to have a Song
required; but such a Song! O this went to their hearts. It may be in such a
time the Actions of the Pulpit are brought upon the Stage; this is the Vinegar
and Gall which the Church has when it is upon the Cross.

4. The Time of Assemblies. Lam. 1.7. Her enemies saw her, and did mock at her
Sabbaths. They did deride their former observation of a Sabbath, and the
present cessation of it, but especially at their former religious observation
of it, as if it was lost time. Now, have we at any time sinned our selves into
such a condition as makes our enemies laugh, and shall not we weep?. Read
Psalm. 80.5, 6. Have we so far provoked God to withdraw from us, that enemies
have occasion given them to say, Where is our God? and should not tears be our
meat? should it not be as a sword in our bones? Read Psalm. 42.3 -- 10. Pray
consider, Is not Reproach a burden in it self? But further, this Reproach is
and has been most burdensome to God's People, and a mighty breaking to their
hearts. Read when you have leisure, Nehem. 1.4. and 4.4. Psalm. 69.19. and
89.50, 51. and 123.3, 4. you will find under this they have mourned, with this
their hearts have been broken; this they have born in their bosom, and with
this their souls have been exceedingly filled.

And surely there is great reason it should be so: for 1. the things that they
immediately reproach, are things dear to God, and such in which his Honor is
much bound up. God has three things that are especially dear to him; His
Truth, his People, and his Worship; and all these are under such Providence
grievously reproached. 2. The strokes that are immediately given them, do
ultimately reflect upon God, cast dirt upon him, Isa. 52.5. My Name is
continually every day blasphemed. The Blasphemies against the^, (Ezekiel. 35.12,
13.) Mountains of Israel are called Boastings against God, and words against
God. 3. These Arrows of Reproach will fall upon men's own head. They now grieve
God and his People, but hereafter finally and in the end they will be poor men's
shame and confusion: The burden that now lies upon God's Saints, shall rest on
the wicked in the end; God will reckon here with them; They shall bear their
shame, Ezekiel. 36.6, 7. God answered the reviling Letter from the King of Assyria
in the blood of his Army; but especially hereafter, Jude 15. He will convince
of hard speeches. He that will not miss an idle word, will surely call to
account for bitter Sarcasms, venomous Taunts, and Devil-like Rejoycings in the
Afflictions of God's Servants. And so I pass to the third Reason.

Reas. 3. Because this speaks thee to be a true Son of the Church, a living
real Member thereof. Thou may see a Christians face in these waters of
sorrow. There is a voice in tears; such tears, they speak to God, and they
speak to thee too. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the Solemn
Assembly, who are of thee -- i. e. says Junius on the Text [Hi sunt tui very,
O Ecclesia, and Germani partus.] This argues one an Israelite indeed: It is an
argument of a very profane heart, to sin away such Mercies, and then to slight
what we have done. As Esau is called Profane Esau, and in this he showed it,
that when he had sold his birthright, he eat and drink, and went his way, Genesis
25.34. To be left of Assemblies, and left under insensibleness of it, is
complete Misery. Can you be born of God, and not lament for these teats? Can
you be Babes of Grace, and not desire the sincere Milk? not cry for your
breasts? This Sorrow is that which tells you, you have got good by the
Ordinances whilst enjoyed. They that see no evil in the loss of them, got
little good by the enjoyment of them. Would we know what the Word did whilst we
had it? how do we carry under the want of it? Are we (as Rachel) weeping
because our Solemn Assemblies are not? The Godly among the Jews, are described
not only as Mourners in Zion, but Mourners for Zion, Isa. 61.3. Isa. 66.10.
Where is your Love to Ordinances if you mourn not? Does that woman love her
Husband that parts with him without a tear? Oh therefore, as even you would
approve your selves to have gotten Grace under the Means, mourn for the
withdrawment of the Mean^ of Grace: By this means, whilst any of us shall want
the visible tokens of God's Presence amongst us, we shall have an
unquestionable token of his Presence in us; We shall see some token for good
upon our hearts, whilst we cannot see our signs. This Sorrow is (as that of a
woman in travel) it has something of joy in it; It is the mark of a Child of
God.

Roas. 4. Fourth and last Reason is, Because God will gather such as are
sorrowful for the Solemn Assemblies. Which Promise has much in it; 1.
Preservation in dispersions. God sets his Mark not only on them that mourn for
the evil done in Sion, but them also that mourn for the evil done to Sion.
Brine preserves meat. God keeps his People in brinish, salt tears. There were
many that lived to see the Temple ruined, and repaired, as you see in Ezra.
3.11. but it appears by their tears and weeping, that they had their hearts
much upon the former Temple, and it upon their hearts; not as if all the
mourners were preserved, but many mourners were, and none but such have any
ground to expect it. 2. It notes Restoration after their Dispersions. 1. They
shall meet in their own place and places again: No matter how far removed,
though cast out to the uttermost part of Heaven, God will gather thence; Nehem.
1.9. He will bring them from the East, and gather them from the West; he will
say to the North, Give up, etc. Isa. 43.5, 6. No matter who lies in the way,
nor how strong they are that holds them, Jer. 31.10, 11. He that scatters
Israel, will gather, and ransom him from the hand of him that is mightier than
he. 2. They shall meet in their Solemn Assemblies again. I will gather and
bring to their Folds, Jer. 23.4. I will feed them upon the Mountains of Israel
in a good and fat Pasture, Ezekiel. 34.12, 13, 14. God will build Jerusalem, and
gather together the Outcasts of Israel, Psalm. 147.2. They shall take down
their Harps, and have a nail in God's holy place. 3. Nay, this Gathering
implies some Restitution for the losses of their Mercies. I will settle you
after your old Estate, and do better to you than at the beginning, Ezekiel. 36.11.
As (1.) There shall be more purity in Ordinances than formerly. They shall not
defile themselves any more with their Idols, nor detestable things, Ezekiel.
37.23. and 11.16, 17, 18. (2.) More Glory. Hag. 2.7, 9. I will fill this House
with Glory; The Glory of this latter House shall be greater than the former.
(3.) More Power and Efficacy. I will assemble her that halteth, and gather her
that is driven out, and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion from
henceforth even for ever, Mich. 4.6, 7. (4.) More Condescension and larger
Testimonies of his Acceptance. I will accept you with your sweet Savours, when
I bring you out from the People, and gather you out of the Countries wherein
you have been scattered, Ezekiel. 20.40, 41. Neither will I hide my face any more
from them, Ezekiel. 39.29. (5.) More Unity. I will gather them, and make them one
Nation, and they shall be no more two Nations, Ezekiel. 37.21, 22. And I will give
them one heart, as in Ezekiel. 11.19. I will gather them, and give them one heart,
and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their
Children after them, Jer. 32.37, 38, 39. (6.) More security. Be no more a prey
to Heathens, but dwell safely; as in Ezekiel. 34.27. Then will God undo all that
afflict them, Zephan. 3.19. God will raise up his Hedge of Protection much
higher. (7.) More Honor and Reputation. He will get them Praise and Fame in
every Land where put to shame; Will make them a Name and a Praise among all
people of the Earth, Zephan. 3.19, 20 For your shame you shall have double,
Isa. 61.7. Oh what Sheaves are here! what a rich Harvest for them that under
such Dispensations do sow in Tears! Psalm. 126.5, 6. What Wine will God brew his
People out of these Tears! Fill your Water-pots to the brim, they shall be
turned into Wine. I will but hint one distinction, which shall be as my Porch
to enter upon Application; and that is this -- The want of Solemn Assemblies is
either a total want, when God removes the Candle-stick: such through Mercy, our
want is not. Bread is something more scarce in some places, but (through Mercy)
it is not a Famine in all places; or (2.) a partial want, when God by death
natural or civil, puts out, or whelms many Candle-sticks under Bushels. And
this is the condition of diverse Assemblies in these three Nations. Now though
the first be naturally meant in the Text and Doctrine, and that which calls for
most tears, yet the latter may consequently be taken in, as that which, being
some degree of the former want, does call for some, yea, great sorrows.
Scarsity is sad, though Famine be most grievous.

APPLICATION.
Having thus far at some distance opened and confirmed this Truth, I shall come
a little nearer to you that are more especially concerned in it; and first I
shall tell you what errand it does not come upon; and then secondly, what
errand it does come upon to you.

First, The errand of this Truth (my dear People) is not to alarm you into
Sedition, or to gather you into any unlawful Assemblies, upon the account of
the loss of your Solemn Assemblies; of Conventicles (truly so called) i.e.
Meetings to plot Disturbance to the State. I would say, and have every one of
you to say, as Jacob, Genesis 49.6, 7. O my soul, enter not into their secret; and
to their Assembly mine honor be thou not united. If I may not be a Trumpet to
call you to the Assembly, I will not be a Trumpet of Rebellion to sound an
Alarm. If I may not call you to the Mountain of the Lord, I will not say, To
your Tents, O Israel. If I may not have Aarons Bells, I will not take Peter's
Sword. [The scars that the Sword has given Religion, are but too conspicuous]
If I may not warm you, and be as an heavenly Spark, I will not be an hellish
Incendiary. I had rather give no light, than appear in a flame, and be a
firebrand. As Paul says in another case, 2 Cor. 13.6. So I with changing one
word in the Text; I trust ye^ shall know we are not seditious. Though we cannot
do all that man requires, we dare not do what God forbids.

We have minded you in our Doctrine amongst you, to be subject to
Principalities and Powers; and we hope in our Practice never to teach you to
forget it. God admonished this People against all discontented and seditious
Practices during the Captivity. But let God alone to bring about his good
Thoughts. Read Jer. 29.7. And so do I you. Do not smite others with the
tongue, but smite on your own thigh. In your want of spiritual Bread, throw
stones at none but your selves: Be not as those Desperadoes, in Isa. 8.21. that
when they are hungry, fret themselves, and curse their King and their God. Do
not call for fire upon others heads, but for Springs of Water in your own
hearts. Oh that God, who has stopped the upper Springs, would open the nether
Springs. It is for our Rebellions that we dwell in a dry Land, Psalm. 68.6. Do
not smite with the hand. This Doctrine bids you shed tears, not blood; it bids
you not draw blood, but draw water, and pour it out before the Lord; Not make
places Acheldama's, but Bochim's. Humble your selves under the mighty Hand of
God in your Debasements. Do not rise against them whom the mighty Hand of God
has exalted, lest happily ye be found sighters against God. Plotting and
Fighting will not bring Mercies again, that a People have sinned away. God
needs none of our sins to advance his Sons Kingdom. When God has softened our
hearts by his sweet Grace, he can, and will, if he see it best, tender the
hearts of our Superiors to pity us, by his most powerful Providence. How did
these Mourners at last find an heart touched by a mighty Hand, that called them
out of their Graves, and made open Proclamation for their return! as you read 2 Chronicles. 36.22, 23.

Secondly, Neither is it any part of the business of this Doctrine, to embitter
you into Schism, and sepation from the Assemblies, that through Mercy, are yet
continued, which I for my part dare not but call, or at least some of them,
Solemn Assemblies, and Church Assemblies; though perchance in my eye, they may
want something of that Solemnity, Majesty, Purity and Power, which I and you
could desire they had. If you may not hear me, yet it is some mercy that you
and I may hear some others. I would not so mourn for what is not, as to forget
to bless God for what yet is. I hope there are yet them to be found, that
preach Christ of good will, and in the simplicity of their hearts continue in
their work; though many of God's willing Servants have not freedom so to do.
Take heed of extremes. It is the ordinary temptation in a time of Differences,
to think we cannot run too far from them we differ from; and so whilst we
decline one Rock, we split our selves upon another. Remember the old
Non-conformists, were equal enemies to Superstition and Separation. Maintain (I
beseech you) sober Principles, such as these are, that every defective Ministry
is not a false Ministry; That sinful Super-additions do not nullify Divine
Institutions; That Impurities do not make Ordinances Nullities, no more than
Leprosy does unman him that has it; That sinful defects in Ordinances do not
hinder the saving Effects of them; The seed may come up that is sown by a
leprous-hand; That there is a difference betwixt directing a Worship,
prescribing things simply evil, and manifestly Idoltrous, and directing about
Worship; things doubtfully good being enjoined, but the unquestionable
substance of Worship being maintained. This latter does not justify
separation. If Corruptions in Worship (I mean such) do unchurch a Church, it
will be hard to find when there was a true Church, or where one will be found.

That the Church of England was a true Church; a true reformed Church, though
not a full, completely reformed Church, is acknowledged by most sober Spirits.
A man of name, amongst the Brethren of the Congregational Persuasion, speaking
of the Church of England, and its first Reformation, has these words; As for
the great things of the Gospel, matters of Faith, or Doctrine, the Reformers
had so happy an hand therein, that there is to be found little, if any hay and
stubble therein. But in matters of Order, which concern Worship and Discipline,
let it be enquired into, whether they were so exact therein. Although this must
be said, that God did take care for all fundamental Ordinances of Worship. And
it is a bitter Error, and full of Cruelty, to say, That we have had no
Churches, no Ministers, no Sacraments but Antichristianal. So far Dr. T.
Goodwyn, Fast Sermon. before Parl. on Zech. 4.6, 7, 8.

Now methinks if it was a True Church, notwithstanding some supposed
Corruptions retained, it should be to still, notwithstanding those by some
reputed Corruptions returned: for if the Disease do not unman a man, his
Relapse into it after a recovery cannot. We have still that Doctrine professed;
we have still those fundamental Ordinances maintained. And methinks, where a
Church, as to the main, keeps the Form of found Words, and the Substantials of
that Worship which is Christ's, some adjudged defects in order cannot justify
Separation. I dare not dismember my self from that Church that holds the Head.
I think whilst Doctrine is for the main sound, Christ stays with a Church; and
it is good staying where he stays: I would follow him, and not lead him, or go
before the Lamb. That speech of the beloved Disciple, 2 John 9. may without
wrong be applied to a Church; He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has
both the Father and the Son. It may be some may think that these Times that are
gone over us, have left an obligation upon us in an orderly, peaceable way to
endeavor Reformation. I have no call here to debate that; but this I am sure
of, they have withal brought forth many sad warnings against separation in the
sad Apostacies, both in judgment and practice, which many of that generation of
men have been left unto. Therefore, 1. Maintain communion as far as you can. 2.
Crave indulgence where you cannot. -- 3. Mourn in secret over what in pulick
you cannot help; let that which upon good grounds you judge a corruption, have
that work upon you, which Peninnahs provocations had upon Hannah, make you weep
sore and pour out your hearts before God: if there be any smoke in God's
Temple, let it be smoke to your eyes. 4. Enlarge your care and pains in your
preparations: a right stomach makes good nourishment of an indifferent meal.
You may be warm (though in a colder air and room, than you have formerly been)
if you will but put on more clothes before you come. 5. Watch your hearts more
narrowly, and speak you things to your hearts more than ever you have done; you
will not so well know what to do with your hearts, if you do not increase own
your watch and pains. It is the wise man's speech, Eccl. 10.10. If the Iron be
blunt, and he does not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength.

Now, 3. I come to tell you what the errand of this my Doctrine is. And it is
an exhortation, first, to all upon whom at this day any measure or degree of
this affliction lies. And then, secondly, to some who have a larger share in
this affliction than others --

First, then; You that are losing, or have lost your Solemn Assemblies, know
that you have a loud call unto mourning. The Ways of Zion mourn after a
manner, Lam. 1.4. let us mourn after a Godly manner who are the Inhabitants of
Zion, because the channels of comfort that have releived our souls are gone, or
going far from us. Such dews should fall at, or after Sunsetting. Jeremiah puts
this into his Lamentation, that God had violently taken away his Tabemacle, as
of a garden, He has destroyed his places of Assembly, The Lord has caused the
solemn Feasts, and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, Lam. 2.6. Mercies use to
be most lovely when they have their backs upon us, and we best see the worth in
the want of our Mercies [Bona a tergo formosissima. Virtutem incolumen odimus,
sublatam exocculis quaerimus invidi] Give me leave to strike your Hearts, as
Moses the Rock, with a few quickening Questions.

Quest. 1. Did they mourn, and should not we? What were their Assemblies to
ours?

Answ. Surely the Spirituality, Power and Blessing of our Assemblies far exceed
theirs: Though the Jew was the elder Brother, it is the Ch^^^^an that has the
Fatted-Calfe, The double Portion, ^ow far do Ezekiels measures exceed Solomon's,
or Z^^ubbabels work; the Temple of the Christian Church ^^rely he aims at. We
may say of Gospel Ordin^^^es as Jacob of himself, Genesis 49.26. The blessings of
them have prevailed above the blessings of their Progenitors. Theirs were but
carnal ordinances comparatively, Heb. 9.10. and the least Christian Assembly,
(as Christ said of John the Baptist) is greater than they.

Quest. 2. Did they mourn that knew the set-time for the return of their
Mercies, and shall not we that are uncertain what God will do? Have we any to
tell us how long?

Answ. There are many but too bold in their calculations; its well if they be
any better than those in Jer. 27.16. that set a short period to the Captivity
of the Sanctuary-Vessels, but they lied and were good for nothing but to feed
presumption; it is said, The time was long and they lamented after the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.2. [Mercies, long ere they are attained, little improved when they are
compassed, it may well be (as one said of faithful Friends) uncertain when they
will return.]

Quest. 3. Is it likely they should return back any other way than by streams
of Tears sent after them?

Answ. Did not this Peoples Mercies come back swiming in their Tears? Read
Jer. 31.8, 9. and 50.4. They shall come with weeping, and they shall come
going, and weeping. There Tears of sorrow for their sins, and calamities,
helped them now to weep Tears of ingenuity; and so when the Tide is at highest,
they go forth toward their old enjoyments again: The higher the Waters of
sorrow do Rise, the nearer Mercy is to Landing. Psalm. 102.13, 14. The set time
is come. How does that appear? see ver. 14. for thy Servants take pleasure in
her stones, and favor the dust thereof. When God's People can most tenderly
weep over the Churches Ruins, R^pairation is near.

Quest. 4. Should they return and not find us in Tears for their absence, would
they not be joyless and comfortless Mercies? Can the Harvest be joyful to any
but them that have sown in Tears?

Answ. God calls the Mourners of This People to rejoice with her, Isa. 66.10.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her [but who?] all ye that love
her; and rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her. God tells this
People, Zech. 8.19. that their several Fasts shall be turned into joyful
Feasts: the Women that are called to the Travel, are bidden to the Up-sitting
and to the Feast; and indeed, proportionably to the sorrow at parting, will be
the joy at meeting again; the Tide will be according to the Ebb. The tidings
that Joseph was not, was so lamentable, that the news of Joseph's being alive
was abundantly more reviving. No Mercy comes to us with such advantage, as
that, of which we may say, as the Father of the Prodigal; This Ordinance was
dead and is alive, this Mercy was lost and is found. The City Shushans
perplexity, made their Good Day a great deal better.

Quest. 5. What are all our joys, that we seemed to have in them when we had
them, if we sorrow not at the loss of them? Surely they were but seeming joys!
Surely we did but seem to welcome the light! surely our joy was but that, or
the stony ground, or like that of John Baptists hearers. Can we take the loss
of things so, upon which our hearts really are? how should one measure the
truth and degree of our affections, but by the strength of our afflictions in
the removal of a thing? When I see a careless Soul or People under such a
bitter dispensation, methinks I have occasion to say to them as the Apostle to
the Galatians, chap. 4.15. Where is the blessedness you spoke of? you have
sometimes seemed as if you could have plucked out your eyes, and have given
them to your Ministers; and have you no Tears in your eyes, when they are
removing from you that have been as your eyes? Where is the blessedness you
spoke of?

Quest. 6. Are you fit for the improvement of them? if God should gather you,
before you have got a sense of the want of them? could it be in mercy? Mercy is
lost upon unhumbled hearts. Could we be thankful, could we be fruitful! The
returned Ark was a gladsome sight to the men of Bethshemesh, 2 Samuel 6.13, 19.
but they not knowing how to use it, it was almost as ill a neighbor to them as
to the Philistines: Probably they had the People after the Lord is not
mentioned till the next chapter, 1 Samuel 7.2. The Word to unhumbled hearts is as
the Seed to unbroken ground, it is thrown away and not sowed. Winter time soaks
and steeps the earth, and so makes it fruitful in Summer. Ground under water,
and much floated in Winter, is most rich many times: If ever our Winter be
past, they will make the best use of Summer that have bin under water. No feet
so fit to stand in Jerusalems Courts, as theirs that in their wanderings have
been putting Tears into God's Bottle; as David did, Psalm. 56.8. Tenderey'd Leah
was fruitful. Truly, tenderhearted blearey'd Christians are most like to be
fruitful. If ever God delight in us, and our poor Assemblies be married again,
if ever Hephzibah and Beulah be writ upon us, instead of Forsaken; as I may
allude to Isa. 62.4.

Quest. 7. Are there not many things that may shame us for (and O that they
might shame us out of) our senslesness upon this account? As first, Are there
not those that mourn for want of their Idolatries? Can we not find Women
weeping for Tammuz, Ezekiel. 8.14. Can we not read of Micah taking on for the
loss of his gods and his priest? Judge. 18.23, 24. and what, no Tears for our
present loss of Worship and God? Will not a Fathers seeming to bid some of our
places farewell, make us mourn? Do we not read of those that have committed
Fornication, and lived Deliciously with Babylon, that they shall lament and
bewail her? Rev. 18.9. and shall not we that have tasted of the fatness of
God's House bemoan our loss? 2 dly. Are there not those to be found that have
mourned for want of their wicked meetings? what a prison is many a Drunkards
house to him? what lowings of heart after them under any restraints? It is said
in Isa. 24.11. There is a cry for wine in the streets, all joy is darkened, the
mirth of the Land is gone, or as some translate, is gone into Captivity. Mirth
is gone with the liquor. And what, shall there be no cry for Ordinances that
have run the pure blood of the Grape? shall true good-fellowship have no more
mourners for the loss of it? 3 dly. Will not the want of trading fill many
mouths with complaints, and many houses with sorrow? Deborah mentions ( Judge.
5.6.) the not occupying the high ways as a sad calamity: It Is said of Babylon,
Rev. 18.11. The Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no
man buyeth their merchandise any more. Will not some places want their weekly
Market, in season preaching; and their extraordinary Fairs, out of season
preaching? Are not some great traders for Heaven in some places shutting down
their shop-windows, and should not this affect us? 4thly. Cannot any of us
bemoan men and things that are much missed; Physicians, Lawyers, wise
Neighbors, faithful Friends? O Sirs, what can be more missed than Ordinances?
what Physicians, Comforters and Counselors have they been to us? how many a
time had we been at a loss if not the Ordinances to go to! as David, Psalm.
73.16, 17. Ordinances are public Advantages. It is a bad Husband indeed that
is not missed, a bad Parent that is not missed, but how are good ones missed?
Verily they that miss their Ministers least, need them most. 5thly. Are we not
apt to over-sorrow, if we be crossed in our desires, or lose our desirable
things? shame thy heart with such instances, as Ahab; can he go to his house
heavy and displeased for want of a convenience, and I lose a thing so necessary
without regret? Can Amnon be sick for Tamar and pine away: And can I carry as
if I could be, and do well enough without the loves of Christ in his
Ordinances? So much for this first part of my Errand.

I now pass on to the second part of my Errand, and that is to those that have,
under this Loss, special and singular cause of mourning, etc.

1. Mourn you upon whom the Ordinances have been lost whilst they were amongst
you. The best should mourn; for who has improved under Ordinances as they
might? But how should they mourn that have been almost in all evil in the midst
of the Congregation and Assembly? Prove. 5.14. Oh if any of us be yet on this
side a Saving-change, as how many are! How sad is it to see the Womb of
Ordinances shut up! Oh to have the Bridge drawn up, the Portcullis let down,
and thou not got within, but left to the roaring Lions mercy, is a sad case! Oh
to have, for any thing you know, the Market done, and they that have sold Oil,
making their last calls to the Customers that have too long passed by, shutting
up shop, and thy Oil yet to buy! Oh for God to seem to say to a place, I have
done with you, they are joined to their lusts, let them alone! The night of the
Day of Salvation is to none so black and dark, as to them that have not known
the day of their Visitation. Christ weeps over such a People, Luke 19.41, 42.
How should such a People weep over themselves! The passing of Harvests, and the
ending of Summers, is of them most to be lamented, that have cause to say, we
are not saved, Jerem. 8.20. They have cause to use those words, in Jerem. 6.4.
Woe unto us, for the Day goes away, for the shadows of the Evening are
stretched out. Mourn you from whom the Word is going in word, before it is come
to you in power.

2dly. Mourn you that may in a more than ordinary manner look upon your selves
as the Forfeiters of such Mercies, that have thrust them away. Which of us can
say in this case, our hands are clean? Who is not accessory to the death of
God's Servants? But there are some that are the principal, and of whom it may
be said, This breach be upon you. Give out the lot, and you will find
especially to sorts of men taken (viz.) 1. Slighters of Ordinances; And 2. Such
as have been slighty in them. Therefore,

1. O you slighters of Ordinances! mourn; How careless were you to feed besides
the Shepherds tents? have ye not been as those that turn aside? have you not
chosen corners rather than Assemblies? have you not listened to any body that
has said, Lo here is Christ? Oh! have not many of you turned under pretense
of Corruptions of the Church, till you can see no Church at all in being? How
many little petty Congregations set up, and Reforming Assemblies withdrawn
from? Is it any wonder if so many Churches come to none? Is it any wonder if a
Land in which there was so great a forsaking, find a great forsaking in the
midst of the Land? Isa. 6.12. It Is high time to draw the Cloth, when the Table
wants Guests, and to break up School when the Scholars come not at it. It was
the manner of too many to forget the Assembling of themselves, Heb. 10.25. Too
many had lost the way to their Fathers House. [The Ministry that were your main
burdens, God is easing you of many of them] God is by this Dispensation (I
think) confuting that wild Generation that cried down the Ordinances; But Woe
worth them that put the Almighty upon such a way of Confutation, that may cost
many their souls, and has cost many their livelihood! But these men will not
hear me; the Lord speak to them. Read and apply to this head, 2 Chronicles. 29.6, 7,
8.

2. Oh you that have been slighty in them whilst frequenters of them! mourn. Oh
you that have not come to them as Solemnities with serious hearts! you that
have made some stir in your approaches to God in some Ordinances, as a
Sacrament, etc. but have not put on the wedding Garment for all Ordinances, O
mourn. We would not cloth our selves for them, and so we are stripped of them.
We mocked God when we should have served him, and so he will not be mocked; we
were but as a People, and therefore not so much as a People; we had but a Name
to live, and therefore we must not have so much as a Name; our hearts have been
elsewhere whilst in them, and no wonder if such a People know they had (Oh sad
that it may be said they had!) a Prophet among them, Ezekiel. 33.31, 33. how have
we lost our hearts in them! how little have we fought to see Jesus by them, and
to touch him in them! No wonder if an Ark go into Captivity, when the Ark of
God is looked at, and after, and not the God of the Ark. Oh how we have gloried
in our Privileges, and have looked after the Power of them! Oh our bare
hearings! Oh our barren receiving of Sacraments! Oh our seeming desires after
Church-Purity, and our little care of Heart-Purity! Oh our few outcries
against our corrupting of Ordinances, by the sinful mixtures of Distractions,
base ends! etc. Oh how much of man, how little of a Christian in our approaches
to God! How much was the Price of the Gospel fallen, even half in half, to what
it was some years ago! How little precious was Vision, even among them that did
not altogether slight it! A learned Man, who is of opinion, That the Witnesses
are not slain, says, That the Reformed Churches shall be punished by taking
away these Witnesses for a time, Mode, in Rev. 11.21.
because they received them not according to the Dignity of their Embassage.
See J^s Div. Minist. page 63.

3. Mourn you that have more than your selves to lose the Assemblies from.
Mourn you that are in a Family-condition. The more souls you have to want the
Assemblies, the greater is your loss. We are troubled at the death of a man
that has a great Charge. Oh what great Charges had many Ministers, now laid
aside! Adams Fall was so much more to be bemoaned, because he fell with all his
Children in his arms. Churches and Families have great Dependence one upon
another. Many Families, if good Families, make a Church, and a pure Church. And
the good Ordinances in a Church, help much to make Families Churches. It is a
great help to an honest Master or Parent, when he has the Pulpit with him, and
for him, and pressing the same things that he does. And it is a great help to a
Minister, when Masters and Parents keep that in the eyes and ears of their
Families all the week, that he delivers on the Lord's Day. None do so much
complain of the want of a School, as they that have Children; and the more of
them, the more is a School wanted. Mourn you that have numerous Families. Oh to
what Assemblies may they be united where these are wanting! Oh how may they be
leavened for want of this Bread! Oh how may they swoon at the top of streets,
asking Bread, and no man breaks it unto them! Oh what Tinctures may they have
received which will not easily out with Nitre, and much Soap! One years want of
the Word, may lose more than many years enjoyment will get; as in Watermen,
that lose more by the neglect of a few strokes with their Oars, than they will
get by many. If you have any pity for the souls of yours, it will be sad to
you to think that you have in some measure sinned away the Ordinances from your
selves and them. Let there be no worship, and Children will soon cease from
fearing the Lord, Josh. 22.15. Let there be false worship, and they will learn
to scoff by that time they have well learned to speak, 2 Kings 2.23, 24.

4. Mourn ye that are double losers in the loss of Assemblies. If any should be
in Sackcloth, the Witnesses should. O lament ye Priests, howl ye Ministers of
the Lord. It is said of Tyrus, that the chief Mourners for her fall, shall be
such as handle the Oar; The Mariners and Pilots shall wallow themselves in
Ashes, and cry bitterly, weep with bitterness of heart, and with a bitter
wailing, Ezekiel. 27.29. In Egypts fall likewise, you find the principal Mourners
are the Fishers; They shall mourn, and all that cast Angle into the Brooks, and
they that cast nets, shall lament, Isa. 19.8. Oh you under-rowers, you fishers
for men's souls! mourn under this Hand of God; who should mourn as the Children
of the Bride-chamber, and Friends of the Bridegroom, when the Bridegroom (Mat.
9.15.) is taken from them? You have not only lost your livelihoods, but the
life of your lives, your usefulness: [To be useless, is within a little to be
essenceless; there is but a stepped betwixt not being, and not being useful] you
have not only lost worship, but work, not means of geting good, but
opportunities of doing good; not only the Service of the Altar, but the
Supplies from the Altar. But to these I do not speak, if I did, I would hint
such things as these to them. As, 1. That surely it is not for nothing that we
are ever turned under the wheel, though the wheel has variety of motions. 2.
It may be some of our hearts upbraids us for our careless entrance into our
work, and our unfaithful management of it. 3. It may be some of us are
possessed with so dumb a Devil, that when we are off the stage, and have lost
our set and stated Pulpit-work, we shall do little in occasional work (viz.)
Preaching, Converse, and Conversation. 4. It may be some of us have cause of
fear, lest the Lord's forsaking of us should be joined with man's rejection. As
God took the Spirit from Saul when he was rejected: So we, it may be some of us
find, deadnings, witherings, decayings, ^orruption, secretly glad of this ease,
and not missing our works, nor lying at God's door so earnestly for work, as we
should do. 5. It may be some of us have much ado not to grow more in Pride,
than in Humility, under the Self-denial that we are called to exercise; and
find it no easy thing to be upon God's Errand, and not our own in our
sufferings. 6. It may be some of us have a numerous Family, our Quiver full of
Arrows, and but an handful of Meal in the Barrel, and find that preaching of
Faith is one thing, and living by it, another. Oh how hard to practice our own
Rules! 7. It may be some us have diverse of our Relations shipped in the same
bottom with us, and under the same wrack. But I must withdraw my hand. --
Hitherto God has helped me to deliver my Errand. If the Lord let in this truth
by the ear into your hearts, and you enquire of me, (1.) How shall we got this
Frame; And (2.) how shall we manage this Frame. I will lay up all in some few
Directions, some helping to it, and some guiding in it.

In the conclusion of this Discourse, I must (as the Apostle in some Epistles)
pack my matter close.

First, As to the means of getting this Frame, I shall only name a few. 1. Look
at God in this Providence; man seen in it will breed Wrath and Indignation; but
when God is seen in it, that will work Humiliation. God will judge men's
actions; let us judge our selves. There is nothing in this Sermon intended to
make you think hardly of men, but to make you give Glory to God. It Is sin that
has shut us out, and it is sencelesness of it that bolts and keeps us out: It
is certainly an act of Justice in God. Good Pleasure shin^s solely in the
giving of Ordinances, but Justice appears in their removal; It may well be
thought an unexempled Judgment, comes to chastise some unparalleled Sin.
Jeremiah in his Lamentation, saw both God as the Justiner, and Sin as the
Procurer of all their woe, Lam. 5.16. 2. Beg a look from God, that though he
has his back upon us, yet that he will look back upon us; that though we must
lie under these afflictions, yet they may he melting Afflictions. Peter,
stirred not at the Cocks crowing once and again, until Christ looked upon him,
then he wept. Our Calls are loud to Mourning, but it must be a Beam from the
Sun of Righteousness that will make our eyes run over. Complain to him of the
hardness of our hearts; Did I ever think my heart could have stood under such a
Blow as this; O I see it is not the weight of my Afflictions, but the working
of thine own Grace that will humble. I had thought I had had more love to
Ordinances than I see I have; that thy Concernments had lain nearer my heart
than I see they do!

3. Go about this Loss, cast up and compute what it comes to; mark well its
Aggravations; tell its Circumstances; dissect it, and you will find it big with
many sore Evils: It is a whip of many cords, wherewith we are whipped out of
the Temple. Scourge our hearts with the Considerations that offer themselves to
us when we sit down to think of it. These Mourners remembered Zion, they were
often handling the stones of Zion, calling Jerusalem to mind. Mercies or
Judgments in the bulk, and taken up in gross, do little affect us, till we take
them in pieces. Cordials are sweetest when kept upon the tongue; and Pills most
bitter when chewed. Think of the Nature of the Affliction, and think of the
Cause of it, and then of the Time in which it is fallen upon us, and then of
the Consequents and Concomitants of it, and then of that Degree of it; and each
of these will show you that this sad Providence, like Ezekiels Roll, is written
within and without, with Lamentation, and Mourninig, and Woe.

2. As to the manner how we should mourn, take it thus.

1. Be sure it be for the Solemn Assemblies. Not for our reproach, but their
reproach. It may be some of us are losers, as to our wordly interest, in the
loss of our Spiritual advantages; that may help to raise the waters, but take
heed it be not the Head and Spring, Zech. 7.3.5. There were some of the
Mourners and Weepers that God charge as doing it to themselves; Did ye mourn
unto me? Diana was the Crafts-mens cry, but Gain was a^ the bottom. Dear
respects to God, is as the Salt in these Springs; Self, is as Poison in them.

2. Be troubled, but take heed of perturbation. The dregs of carnal passion
will mud these waters. Passions are like Barm, that sets affections a working,
and makes them work over; but then they mud the sorrow much. Be as Jesus at (
John 11.33.) the occasion of Lazarus death, He was troubled, or he troubled
himself. Perturbation raises the soul, and stirs up that corruption which was
as sedement at the bottom of the Glass. Perturbation makes even a Moses speak
unadvisedly; it makes us as the Sea cast out mire and dirt; makes us chide with
any body, as the People with Moses at Marah, Exodus 15.23. In all the occasions
of sorrow that you may have, be sure you fall upon sin, be worthy of that
Place, but I am worthy of such a Minister. O it is a bad Sermon that is not
better than the frame of my heart has been sometimes, yea, many times under a
very warm Ministry.

3. Keep the Nether-Springs of sorrow open, whilst the Upper-Springs of
Ordinances, those heavenly Bottles, seem to be stopped, or, as a Fountain
sealed. Pangs of sorrow upon such occasions are common things, but it is as a
frame only that is evidencing. That sorrow that is but a days work is not the
sorrow God has chosen, Isa. 58.5. margent. My Tears, says David, have been my
meat, Psalm. 42.3. Think of your spiritual refreshments when you sit down to
meat, and make it appear, that we esteem the words of his mouth more than our
necessary food, Job 23.12. The word here in the Text notes habitual grieving.
-- If the departure of Ordinances be grievous, what is their long stay? Surely,
the loss of Ordinances is like the loss of a good Husband, or a good Wife,
least at first. It is not like that you should weep so much as you did at
first, but you may mourn more, you may have a deeper resentment of the loss,
you may increase your displicency against your selves. O grave your Assemblies
upon the palms of your hands, let their Walls be continually before you; take
in all remembrances that may renew your grief: Let your eye affect your hearts
when you see the stones of Sion poured out at the top of any streets; conclude
you are upon the losing hand in Grace, when you are losing your sense of this
loss. People cannot but be growing strange with God, when such losses grow
familiar with them.

4. Let our sorrow put us upon the lively exercise of Grace, and the more
diligent use of all private Helps that may in any measure compensate this loss.
-- 1. Set upon the too much neglected duties of personnal humiliations and
family humiliations. Our public losses call loud upon us for secret and
private duties. If ever the house of Levi weep apart, and their wives apart, it
should be at such a time. Zech. 12.12, 13, 14. When Israel wanted their Smiths,
they must then with more diligence use their Files, use all sharpning, whetting
ways. -- 2. Use all occasional Meetings better. When the Disciples ( Luke
24.17, etc.) were sad upon the loss of their Master, what profitable and
edifying discourses have they? Away now with impertinances, and steal a word or
two of God and Heaven in our occasional meetings, and turn our Civil converse
into Christian communion. -- 3. Catch at all opportunities of private
communion, and be not willing to let them go without a blessing. It is said of
the Followers of Christ, Acts 1.14. They continued in Prayer and Supplication.
Only, manage all ways of private communion not in opposition to, but in
subordination to the public, and likewise pray with the public Worship much
in your eye and heart. Daniel has his window in private devotions toward the
Temple opened; let us have our faces Sion-ward in all our private Supplication.
-- 4. Be warming the meat you have by meditation, and beg the Spirit as a
remembrancer, John 14.29. Chew the Cud now, love your Bibles, peruse other good
books, bewail the slenderness of your store, considering your mighty ways of
trading. In a word, in all private duties avoid that which we are apt to
condemn in public Worship, formality, dryness, saplesness: Look upon it as a
mighty engagement upon us, to watch against that in private and secret Worship,
which we think makes the public Worship less lovely in our eyes. Look upon
dullness and straitness now as a double sin, being against the Precept of God,
and against the Providence of God; we have many fewer hands then we had to help
on our work, and should ours be slothful? Our sails are many of them taken
down, we had need to ply our oars. -- 5. Sorrow into Humiliation, but not to
Dejection. David wept, but withal he reasons with his soul; Why art thou cast
down, O my soul? Psalm. 42.4, 5, 11. and 43.5. Sorrow not as those that are
without present stays, and future hopes.

1. As for present Stays. O mourning soul! is it nothing that there is no
change in the Covenant of Grace? though it may be thou think there is a
great alteration, as to the Means of Grace. Thy Teacher is where he was, though
some of thy Teachers be removed; It is he that taught thee by them, and he can
teach thee without them. Thou have before seen cause to magnify him, because
he did All by the Instruments, and now thou may see cause to omnify him,
that can be to thee instead of all Instruments. Christ Jesus is in Office, and
in exercise of his Office, as Prophet, when some Officers may be discharged.
John 5.17. Christ works; if some others may not, can you not find all that you
have lost in that one Title of Christ, The great Shepherd of the Sheep? Heb.
13.10. If you should be brought so low as to see no Temple, yet may you find a
Temple in the Lamb, Rev. 21.22. Some think that Promise of God to this mourning
People, Ezekiel. 11.16. That he would be to them as a little Sanctuary, is not
only a Promise of protection, but that he would from himself also make some
supply of Temple-Ordinances. I will be a little Temple to you: I will be
instead of your City-Walls, and your Temple-Priviledges.

2. As for future Hopes, there is room for an If I shall find favor in his
eyes, 2 Samuel 15.25. The Prophet Ezekiel dare not conclude against dry bones
living, Ezekiel. 37.3, 11, 12. The Text is a promise of gathering a mourning
People. If it be asked; May we apply such Promises? I Answer, Yes sure, we may,
with giving God that liberty he has reserved to himself, That he will either
give us the very thing, or that which is equivolent. The Promises are a common
stock. What Peter says of Scripture, [ There is no Scripture of private
interpretation] I may with a little change say of Scripture-Promises, they are
not of private application. Nay, if that be true, which some upon good grounds
affirm, That the Church then was typical, and the times that passed over her
then were typical of that state of the New Testament Church in its latter age;
then I say, these Promises are as much ours as theirs. Act Faith therefore on
this Promise, if God has pricked thy heart, and fear not to conclude, that
either God will find us a room in his House on Earth, or give us the Mansions
that Christ has prepared for us in Heaven. Either we shall be gathered thither
where we have enjoyed Ordinances, or into Heaven where we shall need none,
which is best of all. O let our scatterings unite us. O let us be sowing
Goodness, and scattering Religion wherever we come, [compare Acts 8.1, 4. with
chap. 11.19.] And pour out our hearts in those words, (with which the Jews
conclude both in writing and in reading the Lamentations of Jeremiah) in Lam.
5.21. wherewith I will conclude this mournful discourse, Turn thou us unto thee
(O Lord) and we shall be turned: Renew our days as of old. Amen.

SERMON XVII.
Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as
Wise, Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
THe Apostle having in the former part of this Chapter, given the Ephesians
warning to avoid that Looseness, Profaneness and Disorder in their lives and
conversations, which would exclude them out of the Kingdom of Heaven: In this
verse he comes by way of inference to direct them what course they should take.

In which words we have several things well worthy our consideration; As,

1. The Duty enjoined, and that with a note of earnestness; See that ye walk
circumspectly; q. d. have a care, (...) Accurate exactte.
be sure what ever ye do, that ye walk exactly: And this Duty he amplifies; 1.
Negatively, Not as Fools; And, 2. Positively, But as Wise.

2. Here is a special part of the Duty particularized; Redeeming the time.

3. Here is a reason of the Command, or a motive to the performance of the
Duty; Because the days are evil.

The words thus considered, are very pregnant, and will without much midwifery,
bring forth these very many useful and seasonable Observations.

Doctrine 1. That a truly Christian Conversation, is an exact Conversation.

Doct. 2. That a loose Life, is a Fools Life,

Doct. 3. That he is the wisest Man, that lives most exactly.

Doct. 4. That specially in evil Times, we have need of much spiritual Wisdom,
for the right ordering of our Conversations.

Doct. 5. That it is a special part of Christian Wisdom, to redeem Time.

Doct. 6. That the worse the Times are wherein we live, the more it concerns us
to redeem Time, and to live exactly and wisely.

Doct. 7. That to live loosely, and lose Time and Opportunities of good when
times are evil, is the veriest Folly in the world.

Here are rich Materials for a large Fabric, and I would gladly make the best
of them for your advantage; but I am confined (not self-confined as formerly,
but by a necessity imposed upon me) I say, I am confined to such narrow straits
of time, that though it be a Treasury of such precious Truths as deserves a
long and serious view, yet I shall be constrained to crowd much in a little
room, and to give you but an half-fight of these Jewels, and so put them up
again: but this I Will do, I will open the Cabinet, and show them to you as I
can, and so leave them with you, in hopes you will take a more full and
considerable view of them afterward. And so I shall begin with the first.

Doct. 1. That a right Christian Conversation, is a circumspect exact
Conversation; a strict and precise Conversation, wherein a man endeavors,
(...), to go to the top, and walk upon the very ridge of his Rule. As Paul, (
Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.) who labored not only to see at a distance, but to hit
the very Mark of Christianity. While he was a Jew, he was strict and precise in
that way; he was of the strictest Sect of Religion, Act 26.5. And so when he
was converted to Christianity, he did not throw off his strictness and
preciseness, but guided it by the Rule of Christianity; and exhorts the
Ephesians and all other Christians, in the words of the Text, to do the like.

I should not doubt easily to convince your judgments and understandings of
this Truth; but because strictness is a thing that is every, where spoken
against, the hardest task will be to persuade your wills and affections to
embrace this Truth. I shall endeavor both by this ensuing Demonstration.

1. Christians have a Rule to live by, and this Rule is the Word of God. This
is that Rule mentioned by the Apostle, Gal. 6.16. God has not left man like
brute beasts in a Forest. As soon as he made man in the world, he gave him a
Rule to walk and live by, Genesis 2.16, 17. And as an Emblem of this spiritual
Enclosure, he left not our first Parents to wander in the wide World, but
enclosed them in the Garden of Eden. The truth is, living by Rule, is the very
notion of Religion; and the differences of Religion consist in the diversity of
those Rules by which men live. The Heathen has his Idol Oracles, the Mohammedan
his Alkoran, the Jew his Ceremonial Law, and Christians the Gospel and whole
Word of God: So that herein only men are Christians, in that they make choice
of the Word of God in opposition to, and distinction from all other Rules, to
be the Rule of their lives and conversations: And whosoever living under the
Light of the Gospel, walks by no other rule than the Hearhens did, is a
Christian in title, but a Pagan in reality, Gal. 2.14, etc.

2. That life is most exact which is most suitable to the Rule. As that
building is most exact which is most regular; and in every work there is most
exactness where there is nearest conformity to the model; so, whatsoever be the
Rule of our conversations, that life is most exact which comes nearest to the
Rule. This is so plain a principle, that I need not spend more words about it.

3. It necessarily follows, That there is most of Christianity in that life
which comes nearest to the Rule of Christianity, and consequently most of
Christianity in that life which is most exact in conformity to the Word of God.
This is so plain a case, that I dare appeal to the Consciences even of the
worst of those, who call themselves Christians: For certainly there is not that
man living under the Light of the Gospel, that dare assert, that swearing,
cursing, lying, whoredom, drunkenness, fraud, hatred, pride, covetousness,
hypocrisy, etc. are agreeable to the Rule of Christianity, though thousands
live in the daily commission of these sins; whereby it is manifest in their
Consciences, that there is so much less of C^ristianity, as there is more of
these or any other irregularities in their lives. And thus far the Consciences
of the most debauched do frequently betray themselves, to their unspeakable
horror upon their death beds, Romans 2.15. Mat. 27.3, 4.

This may suffice for the demonstration of the truth of the Doctrine to the
Consciences of the most atheistical and obdurate sinners, and therefore I hope
much more to the enforcing of this Truth upon your affections. I proceed to
(...) ^cation.

Use 1. The Premises considered, will give us certain information who are the
best Christians; namely, those that live most exactly. This will cut off a
great controversy, and resolve a great doubt among the weaker sort of
Christians. They see the Professors of Religion and Pretenders to Christianity,
chopped into many Divisions, and Sects, and Factions, and these several parties,
every one pretending to be in the right way, and hating, reproaching, and
persecuting one another. And as this is a stumbling block and rock of offense
to many that are weak, so it is used by others as a cloak for their Atheism and
Licentiousness, and liberty of doing any thing, and being nothing, and casting
off all care of Religion, as if it were so uncertain a thing how God must be
worshipped, and what Religion to be of, that they think it the best way to cast
off all care, and observe no Rule for the religious ordering of their
conversations. Now I say, the serious observation of this Truth, will resolve
the doubts of those that are weak, and pull off the vizard of those, that under
whatsoever pretense, do give themselves over to a loose and irreligious life.
Observe therefore who they be that are most exact and circumspect, and order
their Conversations with the greatest strictness according to the Rule of God's
Word, and they, be sure, are the best Christians: but they who indulge
themselves in a course of life full of those sins, that are contrary to the
Word of God, and the Light of Nature, or cast off the undoubted Duties of God's
Worship and Service, they are so far from being the best, that they are not at
all good Christians. Jehu went high in his pretenses to zeal for God's Glory,
when he destroyed the Idols of Baal and all his Priests; yet by the Wickedness
and Idolatry of his Conversation, he discovered the ^^^^nness of his heart and
hypocrisy of his pretenses, 2 King. 10.16. and 29.31.

Use 2. Let us then be exhorted and persuaded to endeavor to walk exactly, and
to order our Conversations in the strictest way of conformity to the Word of
God. Brethren, I persuade my self, that there are few or none of you, but would
be thought to be good Christians, yea, of the number of the best; but if you
would not only be thought to be so, but do defire to be so indeed, then let it
appear by this, even the hearty and serious endeavor to walk circumspectly and
exactly; for otherwise you will make it to appear, that all your pretenses to
Religion are hypocritical and vain. For a man to be a Drunkard, a Swearer, a
Whoremonger, a Sabbath-breaker, a Scorne^ of Godliness; or if he be not guilty
of any of these gross sins, yet to be a worldling, a neglecter of secret and
family Duties, a despiser of Ordinances, a keeper of evil Company, or but a
barren Fig Tree in God's Vineyard, and yet pretend to Christianity, it is all
in vain, Jam. 1.26. But if this recommended circumspect and exact walking be in
reality, he thing you aim at, Then,

1. Be sure you acquaint your selves well with the Rule. I told you before,
that Exactness consists in walking by Rule; and you know that the Word of God
is the Rule of Christianity: therefore search the Scriptures, as Christ himself
advises, John 5.39. and imimate David in reading, hearing and meditating upon
the Word of God, whereby he became wiser than his Enemies, Psalm. 119.97, etc.
yea, then his very Teachers, and those that for their years might have known
better than he what to do.

This is that very Rule which the Apostle gives the Ephesians in this Chapter,
Ephesians. 5.10.17. where he bids them, Prove what is ^^cceptable to God, and to
get understanding in the Will of the Lord, as without which they could never be
so exact in their Conversations as they should: If you know your Masters will,
you may the better do it; therefore improve all opportunities of knowing and
understanding the Will and Word of God, that if you should ever want a faithful
Minister to teach you, or should ever fall under the conduct of a blind Guide,
that would lead you out of the way, Word of God, you may thereby be kept from
being ensnared and taken in the error of the wicked, Psalm. 119.11. and may know
how to order your conversations with that exactness, as becomes those who are
Christians in good earnest.

2. Having acquainted your selves with the Rule, beg of God Grace and Wisdom to
live according to that Rule. If you know not that you are nothing in your
selves, you know nothing in the Mystery of Godliness as you ought to know. If
you know any thing of your selves, you know that you are insufficient of your
selves to every good word and work, and that all your your sufficency is of
God: Every true Believer has experience of nothing more than of this, that
without the Grace of Christ communicated to him, he is a mere empty nothing:
But in Christ is all fullness of Grace, Grace without measure; not for himself
only, but also for all those that believe in him. Go therefore to God through
Christ, for the communications of Grace and Wisdom, as may suffice to enable
thee to walk by Line and Rule, even the Word of God, Which is able to make the
man of God perfect and wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.

3. You must often compare your selves with the Rule. An exact Carpenter will
hardly fit the least piece of Timber into hi^ building without the use of his
Rule and Square, and yet his building is but for a few years at furthest; and
shall not we much more (especially if we desire to be exact) make use of our
Rules who are building for Eternity? A Rule is not to look upon, but to use;
and God has not given us his Word to read only, but to apply also: Now this a
Christian does chiefly by meditation and self-examination. Be much therefore in
the exercise of these great Christian Duties. Worldings and Hypocrites mind
them not, practice them not. It shall be an argument of your sincerity and the
reality of your desires to walk exactly, if you practice these duties
frequently and faithfully. You have a Rule for your thoughts, showing you that
they must not be vain, Jer. 4.14. nor unclean, Job 31.1. nor blasphemous, Mat.
9.4. nor idolatrous, Acts 17.29. nor proud, Romans 12.3. nor unmerciful and
coveteous, Deuteronomy. 15.9. these and all other evil thoughts are to be forsaken,
Isa. 55.7. and your thoughts must be sober and humble, Romans 12.3. and exercised
about those things that are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good
report, Phil. 4.8. in a word, every thought must be brought into captivity to
the obedience of Christ. This you see is the Rule for your thoughts: You have a
Rule likewise for your words, Ephesians. 4.15. 1 Pet. 2.1. Jam. 2.12. Jam. 4.11. Mat.
5.37. Col. 3.8. Col. 4.6. the sum whereof is this, That putting aside all
filthy, false, vain, and evil communication, your speech be always with Grace,
seasoned with Salt. You have a Rule too for all your actions, whether Natural,
Civil, or Religious, comprised in that one verse, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether you eat
or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the Glory of God. Consider now,
either in the very act, while you are thinking, speaking or doing any thing, or
at least in your after reflections upon them, whether they have been according
to these Rules or not; and this is comparing your selves with the Rule, wherein
you shall find a wonderful advantage in order to circumspect and exact walking.

4. Converse with those that order their conversations with the aforementioned
exactness. It was Solomon's observation, Pro. 13.10. that, He that walks with
wise men shall be wise: And indeed it is very wonderful to observe, the strange
effects that are produced by converse and society, for the assimilating men's
minds and manners to each other, either in good or evil. Hereupon the Apostle
compares converse to Leaven, a little whereof, only by a kind of society, will
leaven the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.6. For this cause it was that God commanded the
Israelites to destroy all the old Idolatrous Inhabitants out of the Land of
Canaan, and strictly forbad all intermarriages with them, lest the Israelites
by converse and society with them, should learn any of their Heathenish and
Idolatrous manners. Is it not for the same cause also, that the Apostle forbids
the yoaking of Beleivers with unbelievers? 2 Cor. 6.14. Certainly our own
every-dayes experience and observation will tell us, that for the most part men
are such as they with whom they most frequently and familiarly converse; and
therefore we see that what Art soever any man desires to be skilled in, he will
endeavor as much as may be, to acquaint himself and converse with such as have
the best insight into that Art. Now let us make a spiritual improvement of this
observation, and we shall make no little advantage of it: God who in his
unmeasurable Wisdom knows best how to advance his own Ends, is not satisfied
with the single services of any, or all the single Persons in the world; and
has therefore ordained that his Worshippers shall worship him in Societies,
and Congregations: And why? Not because it is greater profit to him, Psalm.
16.2. Job 22.2, 3. Single persons can add nothing, no perfection to God, no,
nor the greatest Societies in the world, no more than single persons; but mark,
God has inseparably twisted his own Glory, and the Holiness and Salvation of
his Creatures together: So that he has ordained and appointed to his Creatures
the use of no means for advancing of his Glory, but such as tend no less to
advancing of their holiness and salvation: So that it is apparent from hence,
that the end of God's ordaining his Servants and Worshippers to associate
themselves together, is, that by their converse and mutual example, those
Sparks of Grace, which he has by his Spirit kindled in their hearts, might be
blown up into a Flame, and that dead hearts might be kindled by their company.
So we see that a little fire in many small sticks laid singly by themselves is
apt to go out; but if laid together, the fire increases and inflames also
those which had no fire upon them. I know, you that are Christians indeed, have
abundant experience of what I say. Many a time another ardency in prayer,
affectionateness in discourse, fervency in preaching, etc. has put life and
spirit into you, when you have been as dull as stocks, and as senseless as
stones, of your selves, and might so have continued, had it not been for that
help. Another holy Example, his heavenly Discourse, his sober Carriage, his
Watchfulness over his tongue, the Uprightness of his dealing, etc. has won you
to an holy Imitation and Emulation. Oh! therefore, if you have any desire to
order your conversations with that Exactness, which the Apostle here calls for,
neglect not the assembling and associating of your selves together, with such
as exercise themselves in the practice of this Duty: It is a choice means, and
so upon proof and trial you will find it to be.

Use 3. Let us now, in the third place, improve what has been spoken, by way
of caution, that you may take heed of being prejudiced against circumspect
walking, or exactness of life and conversation.

1. Have a care of your affections in the first place, that they be not drawn
away with the enticements of the flesh, nor over-swayed with the opinion or
reproaches of the world: Looseness and Profaneness commonly creep in at this
door: the Flesh desires its liberty, and thou art ashamed to cross the course
of the generality, and to outrun thy neighbors, and then to be reproached for
a Puritan, a Precisian, or the new-name of a Fanatic; and when thy affections
are thus hampered and entangled, then thy judgment must needs strike in to
maintain them.

2. Have a care therefore in the next place of thy judgment, that it be not
leavened with any vulgar Error, as if all Holiness were but Hypocrisy, and the
worst livers might repent when they are dying, and God would have mercy on one
as well as another, etc. By which uncouch notions, many poor creatures gull
themselves into everlasting Misery. Have a care especially, that you suffer not
your judgments to be overmuch swayed by the observations of some men's practice.
Perhaps you may ere long see many Professors, now pretending to Exactness, then
to put off their vizards, and to discover the falseness of their hearts by the
looseness of their lives: And I wish you may know no Teachers that shall preach
up Holiness and Exactness in the Pulpit, and pull it down by the evil example
of their own profane conversations, or oppose and persecute it in those that
seriously study and endeavor to put it in practice. By observation of these
things, many who will not take the pains to weigh them in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, are gulled into a belief, (2 Pet. 2.1, 2.) that either Religion is
but a cheat, or at least that it is not expected, whether by God or man, that
they should put in practice those things which are taught them out of the
Scriptures. Take heed of this, as a soul-destroying Prejudice.

Branch 2. The second Branch of this Use will afford matter of caution against
Discouragements. If you have begun to walk circumspectly, take heed of drawing
back your foot from walking in that way: Having begun in the Spirit, never
think you can be made perfect by the flesh, Gal. 3.3. What though the way be
rugged, and you meet wi^h Poverty, Disgrace, Prisons and Deaths therein? Christ
knew beforehand, as well as you, what it would cost you to be exact
Christians, and yet has so strictly required it, that if you set your hands to
the plow, and look back, he will deem you unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke
9.62. I must not enlarge upon every particular.

I shall conclude this point with one word of Consolation to such as are
Conformists to this Rule of the Apostle; That if they suffer for being
circumspect and exact in their Conversations, they really suffer as Christians;
and then, as the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 4.16. so say I, If any man suffer
as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this
behalf: Yea, let them rejoice and be exceeding glad; yea, let them count it all
joy. Indeed you cannot suffer in a better cause. If a man suffer for evil
doing, there is matter of shame and sorrow; if he suffer merely for an opinion,
there is many times cause of doubting, which may damp his comfort; but if a man
suffer for Righteousness sake, he has such an undoubted witness of the Truth,
and goodness of his Cause, that neither Men nor Devils can overthrow the
Evidence thereof, and thereby cause his Comforts to wither and fail him. I have
now finished the first point. The second is this.

Doct. 2. That a loose Life is a fools Life. This the Apostle does clearly
imply, when he says, Walk circumspectly, not as Fools.

By a Loose Life, we mean such a life as is not tied up and limited by the
bonds and bounds of Gods Word, and so may be bowed and bended to suit and
comply with all companies, times, occasions and principle^, whereby it stands
in direct opposition to that Circumspection, Exactness, or Preciseness which
the Apostle in the Text calls for.

That such a Loose Life is a Fools Life, will appear, if we consider how
irrational and brutish a life it is, neither answering nor attaining the end of
life, whereby it becomes void of all true Comfort, and will certainly end most
miserably. But for brevities sake, I must forbear to enlarge upon these things,
and that the rather, because the Folly of such a Loose Life will be
sufficiently demonstrated by the evidence of the next Proposition, which is
this;

Doct. 3. That he is the wisest man, who walks most circumspectly, and lives
most exactly. Passing by at present many other Scripture-Proofs, I shall here
record only three sayings to this purpose, of the wisest of mere men, Prove.
10.8. The wise in heart will receive Commandments; i. e. He that does not only
pretend to Wisdom, but has it rooted in his heart, will make it to appear by
this, that he will so receive God's Commands as to obey them, and live by them.
Prove. 23.19. Hear thou my Son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way.
This is a Precept for the attainment and exercise of true Wisdom, which is by
guiding his heart, and consequently his life in the way of God's Commandments.
Prove. 28.7. Who so keeps the Law, is a wise Son.

I know that there are many pretenders to Wisdom. Among the men of the world,
he ever accounts himself the wisest man, who is most ingenious to accomplish
such designs, as tend most to the satisfaction of those particular lusts
whereto he is addicted. So among the Covetous, he is accounted wisest, who can
heap up most wealth, Prove. 28.11. Among the Ambitious, he that ^^n clime to the
highest pitch of honor: Among the Voluptuous, he that can find out the
choicest ways of pleasing the senses. But these are but mere pretenders; for
in truth, this their way is their folly; and upon all their wisdom we may write
Solomon's Motto, Vanity of vanities, all is but vanity and vexation of spirit.
God has made foolish the wisdom of this world; yea, he will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor.
1.19, 20. Where then is wisdom to be found? and where is the place of
understanding? Job 28.12, 28. Behold, the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and
to depart from evil, is understanding, Prove. 15.21. He is the only man of
understanding, that walks uprightly, and knows how to order his Conversation
with Circumspection and Exactness. This in the general: but for further
demonstration of this Truth in the particulars.

Reason 1. He that walks most exactly, is the wisest man, because therein he
does best for himself. The wise Man says, Prove. 9.12. If thou be wise, thou
shall be wise for thy self. Truly whatsoever wisdom any man may seem to have,
yet if he be not wise for his own good, he is but, as we say, Penny wise, and
Pound foolish; and that no man can be wise for his own good, who gives himself
over to a loose, irregular and sinful life, is evident from this and several
other Texts of Scripture, Prove. 8.36. and 6.32. and 15.32. and 29.24. He that
sins against me, wrongeth his own soul. But he that walks exactly by the
Rule of God's Commands, is wise for his own good in all respects: He is wise
for his soul, wherein a man's own chiefest good does consist. Prove. 19.16. He
that k^epeth the Commandment, keeps his own soul. Yea, but may the wicked
think, if they are wisest for their souls, we are wisest for our bodies. Nay,
but the Godly are wisest for their bodies also: for while they live, they make
their bodies the Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. and they so provide,
that after death at the Resurrection, their bodies are raised incorruptible,
glorious, powerful, and spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. Phil. 3.21.
whereas the bodies of the ungodly, while they live, are but as a cage of
unclean birds, and after death, shall be raised to everlasting shame and
torment, Dan. 12.2. Furthermore, the Go^ly Man is wisest, both for this life,
and also for the life that is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. I might yet add many other
particulars, wherein it will appear, that a Godly Man is wisest for himself. He
keeps himself safest, Prove. 10.9. and 3.23, etc. He makes himself richest,
Psalm. 112.3. Prove. 3.16. and 8.18. and 22.4. He advance^h himself highest,
Prove. 3.16. and the other forecited places. He lives longest, Prove. 9.10, 11.

Now therefore my Brethren, if you have regard to your souls or bodies; to this
life, or that which is to come; to your safety, wealth, honor, or life, and
would act the parts of truly wise men in all respects, then see that you walk
circumspectly and exactly.

2. Again, as he that walks most exactly, appears to be the wisest man, in
doing that which i^ best for him self, so also in that he does best for his
Relations, his Family, his Friends, his Neighbors, his Country, his Posterity,
do all fare the better for his goodness. Potiphars house fared the better for
Joseph's sake, Genesis 39.2, 3. All Egypt for Jacobs sake, Genesis 45.5. David's
posterity for David's sake: And Sodom and Gomorrah should have fared the better
for ten righteous Persons sake, if they could have been found there, Genesis 18.32.

3. He that walks most exactly, is the wisest Man, because he does that which
is most pleasing to God. Certainly, if there be any wisdom in a Subjects
pleasing his Prince, a Son his Father, a Servant his Master, there is much more
wisdom in a Creatures pleasing his Creator.

I am necessitated to be very brief, but I know these things will not be
received by many without the opposition of several Objections, and therefore I
must needs save a little room for the answering of those Objections; if not to
the satisfaction and silencing of the carnal Objectors, yet for the
establishment of the minds of the weak.

Object. 1. But do not these persons that live so exactly, cut themselves short
by their preciseness, of much of that pleasure and profit which they might
otherwise receive? and what wisdom is there in that?

Answ. 1. It is true, that they do abridge themselves of much of that which the
men of the world call pleasure and profit; they dare not drink and game, and be
wanton, and cozen, and cheat, or devote themselves to the cares of the world as
others do.

2. But that which the world calls pleasure and profit, is not so to them. They
find no joy in those fleshly delights, which worldlings pretend do yield them
so much pleasure; and that profit which is got by unlawful means, they ever
account the greatest loss. Take Solomon for an instance hereof, Eccles. 2. from
the 1st. to the 12th ver. He gave himself (for experiment sake) to Mirth and
Wine; he made great Works, and built Houses, and planted Vineyards, and
Gardens, and Orchards; he made Pools, and got him Servants in abundance, and
Flocks and Herds of all sorts of Cattle; he gathered Silver and Gold, and other
precious Treasures; he gat Men-singers, and Women-singers, and all the Delights
of the Sons of Men, as Musical Instruments, and that of all sorts; and when he
had done, he looked back upon all, and writes this Motto upon them, Vanity of
vanities, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

3. Nay, thirdly, these persons of all the men in the world, do enjoy the only
true Pleasure and Profit; and that is the Pleasure and Profit which they have
in and by their living precisely and exactly. Godliness is their gain, Grace
their riches, the Service of God their pleasure, and the Favor of God their
honor and life. These are the things wherein alone they delight themselves,
and wherewith they are enriched to Eternity. As for the things of this life, if
their godliness bring them in but little, yet withal it makes that little to be
better to them, than the treasures of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16.

Object. 2. But do they not by their Preciseness, create to themselves a sad
and melancholy life? And what wisdom is there in that?

Answ. 1. Men are much mistaken in this censure. Because the Godly do not
mingle themselves with their carnal pleasures, therefore they look upon them
but as a lump of melancholy flesh. But his Joy is a kind of joy, which a
stranger intermeddles not withal. The men of the world understand it not, and
therefore they think there is no such thing. But,

2. If the Godly have sorrow at any time, it does not arise from their
preciseness, but because they are not so precise and exact as they should and
would be; but evermore the more circumspectly and exactly they walk, the more
full of Peace, Comfort and Joy they are.

3. A Godly man's sadness, is but in order to the attaining of a more true
Comfort and full Joy, by removing sin, which obstructs and hinders his comfort.
Though weeping endure for a night, yet Joy comes in the morning, and that so
much the more abundantly. Hence his sadness is a blessed sadness, because it
ends in everlasting joy; but the mirth of the wicked is a cursed mirth, because
it ends in everlasting horror, Psalm. 37.37, 38.

Obj. 3. But do they not make themselves the Scorn of the World by their
Preciseness? and what wisdom is there in that?

Answ. 1. It is not for want of Ignorance that the men of the world scorn at
their preciseness. Alas poor creatures! Did they but know how little hurt they
do them, and how much hurt they do themselves by that scorning; did they but
know how they provoke the great God, by scorning at his Servants and Service,
and how sad an account they shall give at the last day, and how much better it
would have been for them to have been precise themselves, they would never make
such a scorn of preciseness as they do. Had the very Children that mocked the
Prophet (2 Kin. 2.23, 24.) known of the Bear, durst they have done it? Had the
Jews foreseen the wrath of God breaking out against them without remedy, durst
they have mocked as they did? 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

2. But however, What wisdom were it for a man to undo himself for ever,
because others scorn at him for taking the right course to make himself happy
for ever? Should Job have forsaken his integrity, Job 21.3. or Christ left off
the work of Redemption, Mat. 27.29. or Paul his Preaching, Acts 17.32. or
Jeremiah his Prophesying, Jer. 20.7. or the Apostles their Ministry, Act. 2.13.
or the Martyrs their Constancy, Heb. 11.36. because they met with mockings,
scorns, and reproaches, what wisdom would there have been in that? How sad
would it have been for them and us? You cannot but know that a strict life in
the ways of God, is the way to eternal happiness; but the loose, broad way of
sin, is the way to Hell, Mat. 7.13, 14. and therefore if you will forsake the
narrow way, and walk in the broad way, and so undo your poor souls for ever,
because fools scorn at you, you will make your own folly appear to be the
greatest in the end.

3. Though the men of the world scorn them for their preciseness, yet they have
the c^mmendations both of God and all good men. Their praise is of God, Romans
2.29. and as for good men, all their delight is in them, as the only excellent
Ones upon Earth, Psalm. 16.3. And which is better, the praise of God, or the
praise of men; the praise of good men, or the praise of wicked men? judge ye.
Certainly those scorns are avoided at too dear a rate, which are avoided with
the loss of the favor both of God and all that are good.

Obj. 4. But they get themselves many enemies by their preciseness, and what
wisdom is in that?

Answ. 1. And who are those Enemies of theirs? None but the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh; And is the friendship of these so desirable a thing? or is it
not better lost than won? Would you have the Devil your friend? sure there will
be little gotten by that. Would you have the World for your friend? surely the
gain would not recompense the loss; for the friendship of the World is enmity
with God, Jam. 4.4. Would you have the flesh to be your friend? It will but
flatter you to your own destruction. Therefore the People of God do not at all
value the friendship of these false, counterfeit and destructive friends. But,

2. They have God for their Friend, Jam. 2.23. and good Angels, Luke 15.7, 10.
and all good men, Psalm. 16.3. Put case now, that God, Angels and Saints stood
on one side; and the Devil, World and Flesh stood on the other side, and you
were put to make your choice which three you would have for your friends, and
which three for your enemies, which would you choose? Answer this Question, and
the Objection is fully answered. But further,

3. Their friends are more, and a thousand times better and stronger than their
enemies. Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world, says the
Apostle, 1 John 4.4. And with this very consideration the Prophet Jeremy
encourages himself against all the spite and malice of his enemies, Jer. 20.10,
11. Fear not therefore, ye that walk strictly in the paths of Righteousness;
for though the enemies were a thousand times more and stronger than they are,
yet they shall not prevail against you to harm you, whilst you are followers of
that which is good, 1 Pet. 3.13. but in God's good time you shall be more than
Conquerors over them all through Christ that has loved you, Romans 8.37.

Obj. 5. But they expose themselves to many sufferings by their preciseness,
and what wisdom is there in that?

Answ. 1. If they do suffer, they are but therein made conformable to Christ,
Romans 8.17. and partakers of his sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.13. Christ himself has
led the way through manifold sufferings, and they do but follow their Lord and
Master. A good Soldier will live and die with a good Captain, and a good
Subject will sink and swim with a good Prince, nor will they account it any
discredit: and why should any Christian who has devoted himself to the service
of Christ, as his great Lord and Master, think much to follow the Captain of
their Salvation through difficulties and sufferings?

2. Their sufferings shall not be for their hurt, but their good; not their
loss, but their gain. If we suffer with Christ, it is that we may be glorified
with him, Romans 8.28. And then, by the Apostle's Arithmetic, we may well reckon
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
that glory, which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.17, 18. But,

3. The Lord will deliver them out of all their troubles. Psalm. 34.19. And this
God does many times in this life, by removing their enemies, or restraining
their wrath, or even making them at peace with them, Pro. 16.7. or however, God
will deliver them by translating them to a better life, and setting them
thereby out of the Gunshot of all their enemies, and so at once he wipes away
all tears from their eyes, and sorrow from their hearts for ever.

Obj. 6. But they many times shortten their own days by their preciseness, and
what wisdom is there in that?

Ans. 1. This Argument will not affright the men of the world from their
Worldliness, Ambition, and Flesh-pleasing; And shall it affright us from our
Religion, the care of our souls and the service of our God? Do not the Drunkard
and Glutton fill their bodies with many loathsome and mortal diseases, and a
dart strike through the Adulterers liver? Prove. 7.23. Do not Thieves end their
days at the Gallows, and those that clime to the top of Honor commonly
sacrifice their necks upon a Block? Is it not the peremptory Decree of the
GREAT KING, that Bloody men shall not live out half their days? And yet we see
that the ungodly will hearken to none of these warnings either from God or man.
O consider this with shame; Shall not we be as bold and venturous for God and
Christ, and our precious souls, as the men of the world are for their filthy
lusts and beastly pleasures? I shall here record an excellent speech to this
purpose, of that man of God, Mr. Whitaker, reported at his Funeral by his now
companion in Glory, Mr. Ash. As Mr. Whitaker was riding with with a friend of
his by Tyburn, he stopped his Horse, and uttered these words with great
affection, O what a shame is it that so many thousands should dye for the
satisfaction of their lusts, and so few be found willing to lay down their
lives for Christ! Why should not we in a good Cause, and upon a good Call, be
ready to be hanged for Jesus Christ? It is everlasting honor; and it is a
thousand times better to dye for Christ, to be hanged; to to be burnt for
Christ, than to dye in our beds.

2. If they do shorten their days, it is but a miserable momentary life which
they shorten, and they are but thereby taken away from the evil to come. And
then,

3. The shortning of this life does but the sooner bring them to a Life of
Glory in Heaven. Indeed if their condition were the same with the condition of
the ungodly; if they lost Heaven and Earth, the lives of their souls and bodies
together; If their death were an eternal death, and the end of their temporal
miseries the beginning of eternal torments, it were a very sad argument, but
the case is not so bad; Whatever they lose for Christ in this world, shall be
recompensed a thousandfold in the world to come with eternal Life. Now lay all
these things together, and consider that this strictness or preciseness is
commanded by God, and is most suitable to the Rules of Christianity: And do
thou profess thy self a Christan, a Disciple of Christ, a Servant of God, and
one that lives in hope of everlasting Life; and have thou not yet learned to
forsake all, deny thy self, take up thy cross and follow Christ? Certainly if
thou be a Christian indeed, and have received that Wisdom which is from above,
none of these things will move thee, neither will thou count thy life so dear
to thee, as for the saving it, to forsake the holy Commandment.

Having now vindicated this Truth from those Objections that might seem to
weaken it, I proceed to give a brief hint what use may be made of it.

Use 1. If they that live most exactly are the wisest men, then it is so far
from being a shame to live exactly, ( Psalm. 119.6.) that it tends much to the
justification and commendation of those that so order their conversations: And
certainly, the world is much mistaken in their censure and judgment concerning
them. They think it strange that all do not run to the same excess of riot with
them, (1 Pet. 4.4.) and speak evil of them, as fools and mad men, because they
willingly forgo the pleasures and advantages of this present life for things
future and invisible: but the end will make it sufficiently to appear, who are
the fools, and who are the wise men. Therefore,

2. Be exhorted and persuaded to exercise this piece of wisdom. Wisdom it is,
and that of the best sort, for it is Divine and Heavenly Wisdom. So the Apostle
tells us, Jam. 3.17. That Wisdom which is pure and full of good fruits comes
from above, it is saving Wisdom. In 2 Timothy 3.15. the Apostle tells us, that the
Scriptures are able to make a man wise to Salvation, in as much as they were
given by God to make men pefect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works:
Labor then for this Scripture-Wisdom, and search for it as for hid treasures;
it alone shall abide, and the good fruits thereof remain with thee to Eternity,
when all other wisdom in the world shall perish, and by its fall shall ruin
the owners and professors thereof.

I have now finished the third Observation. I must use much more brevity in
those which remain, and so I pass to the fourth, which is this;

Doct. 4. That then especially in evil times we have much need of spiritual
wisdom for the circumspect and exact ordering of our conversations. Thus the
Apostles Argument runs, Walk circumspectly, and redeem time, because the days
are evil.

This is a duty at all times, but especially in evil times it is both a Duty
and an Advantage.

That we may understand what is meant by evil times or Days, we must know that
there are two sorts of evil.

First, The evil of sin, whereof Devils and men are the only authors.

Secondly, The evil of punishment or misery; in this sense it is used, in Jer.
17.17, 18. Amos 6.3. and though sin be the meritorious cause of this evil, and
Devils and Men, yea, and good Angels also are made use as instruments of it,
yet God takes it upon himself, as the Author thereof, Amos 3.6. Thus the Times
or Days are evil.

First, When they are sinful Times, such times as our Savior foretold, Mat.
24.11, 12. When false prophets should arise and deceive many: When iniquity
should abound, and the love of many should wax cold

Secondly, The Days are evil, when they are full of trouble and misery.

These evil Days of both sorts, are either,

1. Common, by reason of that sin and misery, which are incident to every man's
life, ( Eccles. 12.1.) in respect whereof Jacob told Pharaoh that the days of
his life had been few and evil, Gen 47.9.

2. Or special, When both sin and trouble do abound in more than ordinary
measure.

Again, these evil Days are either,

1. General, When both sin and misery do more than ordinarily abound in the
World, or in a Kingdom.

2. Or particular, When a man's own particular life has been extraordinarily
full of sin and trouble.

The Apostle in the Text does principally respect the special and general
sinfulness and troublesomness of the times: but in what kind soever the days
are evil the evilness of them is an argument for circumspect walking, and exact
ordering of our conversations. For, if the Times be sinful;

1. In sinful Times there is much liberty, and encouragement to sin. The
Multitude run to sin, the stream goes that way, and it is an easy thing to go
along with the stream; but it is certain, that the stream will carry a man to
perdition: So that if we would not perish in sinful times, we must strive
against the stream by circumspect walking. These are those perilous Times,
from the authors whereof the Apostle warns Timothy to turn away, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.

2. In Sinful Times there are many temptations and enticements to sin; in which
respect the Apostle calls such days evil days, and therefore advises, at
such times especially, to put on the whole Armor of God, that we may be able
to stand, and keep our selves unspotted from the pollutions of the world,
Ephesians. 6.13.

If the Times be evil, in respect of the trouble and misery that attends them.
Then,

1. In Times of Trouble and Misery a man has most need to get and keep peace
of conscience. Oh! it is a sad thing for a man to be lost, as much with storms
of guilt within, as with waves of trouble without. But there is no getting or
keeping true peace of conscience without circumspect and exact walking. The
fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace, Jam. 3.18.

2. In Troublesome Times a man had most need to get and keep the love and
favor of God, and thereby an interest in the Promises of this life; or, if
those be forfeited, yet to be sure of an interest in the Promises of the Life
to come: But this cannot be done without circumspect walking, for it is only,
Godliness that has the promises of the life that now is, and that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Use. How preposterous and foolish a course is it then for any man to think to
secure himself from the evil of the times, by complying with the times; to
comply with the evil of sin, to avoid the evil of trouble? This is to make a
covenant with Hell, and to be at an agreement with Death, But when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through the Land, God shall disanull their
Covenant, and break their Agreement, Isa. 28.15, 18, 19. This there carnal
wisdom shall be destroyed; the iniquity of their heels shall compass them
about, and they shall be taken in the snare of Vengance.

so much of this fourth Observation, the next is this;

Doct. 5. That it is a special part of Christian Wisdom to redeem Time. to know
and discern time and Opportunities does very much conduce to this redeeming of
Time: but this the Wise man makes the property of a wise man's heart, Eccles.
8.5.

Redeeming of Time, implies some kind of recovering that time which is already
lost, a diligent improvement of that which is present to the best advantage,
and a getting before hand with time, by making sure of Eternity.

I would have told you how to redeem Time in three particulars.

1. The loss and former misspending of precious time must be heartily bewailed
and repented of.

2. Those lusts and affections by which time has (...)

The Conclusion.
My Brethren, I have now finished my Text and my Work together; for so it has
pleased God in his wise Providence, to order affairs, that I may not be any
longer amongst you in that capacity in which I have been. I dare not murmur nor
repine: I desire with the holy Psalmist, to be dumb and not open my mouth,
because the Lord has done it. Neither men, nor any other creatures can do any
thing, but what God is ^^^^sed to permit them to do. I profess seriously from
my soul, that could I have kept a good Conscience, and my station among you
also, I do not know what good this World could afford, that could have
prevailed so far upon my affections, as to have drawn me away from you. In that
little time that the Lord has been pleased to give me an abode among you, I
have had very great comfort and contentment in my relation to you. I desire to
bless God from my heart, who has made you teachable and tractable, willing to
be instructed and informed; for that is my rejoicing above all other things,
which will be my rejoicing in the great Day of the Lord Jesus. Though I forget
not your Love to me as your Minister, expressed in common Courtesies and
Civilities, yet this is not a place and time to make mention of them: But your
diligent attendance on God's Word and Ordinances in public, your willing
submission to private Instruction and Reproof, the flocking of many of you to
Repetion, the cheerful coming of the younger sort to Catechizing, and the
progress they have made thereby in the knowledge of God and Christ, and the way
to Life; these things, and whatsoever good it may have pleased God to have
wrought in you by my poor labors among you, have been the comfort of my heart,
and the remembrance of them will be my joy, when I have other sad thoughts
enough to press, if not oppress my spirits after this day. Well, my Glass is
run, my time is short, and I have but a few more words to speak to you: I am
now, for ought I know, preaching my last Sermon, and my face, which you have
often seen in this Pulpit, you are never, never like to see here any more. I
would fain speak one word that might stick by you longer than ordinary, as the
last words of a dying Friend are wont to do. A dying man, especially a dying
Father, has commonly some word of advice to give to his Friends and Children
about him, and something to request of them before he leaves the world. God
has made me in the room of a spiritual Father to you, and now I am as a dying
Friend that must never speak in public to you again: I have a word of advice
to give you, and something to entreat of you; and this Advice and Request I
shall leave with you as my last Legacy.

1. My first Word of Advice shall be the same which the Apostle has here given
us in the Text, That you would with all seriousness, endeavor to walk
circumspectly, and to live exactly, according to the Rule of Gods Word, in
performing all holy Duties that God has required, and in avoiding all sins
that God has forbi^den. This Advice is for your own good, and yo^ cannot
reject it, without rejecting the Command of God himself; and therefore I do the
more earnestly press it upon you. You know not what Temptations and Trials you
may come to meet withal, and therefore get it fast fixed and rooted in your
hearts and consciences, that you ought to live exactly and strictly. Perhaps
the time may come when you may neglect Duties, and no body put you in mind of
them; when you may sin freely, and none check or reprove you for it; when you
may swear and curse, and blaspheme the Name of God, and be drunk and profane
the Sabbath, and have no body to tell you of your sins, or to warn you of the
danger of them: nay, perhaps you may be encouraged to these sins, or persuaded
to them, or led to them by the evil example of those who should draw you from
them; and you may be hated and reproached for Fanatics and Puritans, and I
know not what, if you make any scruple of running into all excess of riot. God
forbid that this should ever come to pass; but if it should, and you not have a
principle of Circumspection and Exactness within your own breasts and
consciences to restrain you, my heart trembles to think what a sad condition
you would be in, and in how great danger you would be, of being led away with
the error of the wicked, to the utter and everlasting undoing of your poor
Souls.

Well, God write this Memento upon every one of your hearts and Consciences. I
beseech you, my Brethren, for Christ's sake, and for your own poor Souls sake,
that you will not slight or forget this Advice. Oh remember, remember I beseech
you, that it is but a little, a very little while, before you and I, and all
the world shall meet together, and stand naked before the Judgment Seat of
Jesus Christ, to give an account of this very thing, and to answer to this very
question, Whether we have lived circumspectly and exactly or no? Oh how sad a
thing would it be, if I should meet any of you there, who having neglected this
Advice, and gone on in your sinful ways, and lived loosely, and dyed
impenitently! if I should meet you (I say) trembling with guilt before the face
of Jesus Christ, and should be necessitated to confess and say, Lord, these
very men and women I did advise, warn, persuade, entreat, beseech with all
seriousness and earnestness, that they would break off their sins by
repentance, and spend the rest of their days in walking circumspectly, and
living exactly, and told them in thy Name, the danger of a loose, careless,
profane and worldly life; let them now speak, let their own consciences say if
I did not, and yet they would not hear, they would not obey. Oh, Sirs, how
would you be able to look Jesus Christ in the face? Nay, how would you be able
to look me in the face at that day? I beseech you think of this seriously
before hand, before it be too late. I profess to you, your souls are so dear to
me that I would not for a thousand worlds, be your accuser before the Judgment
Seat of Jesus Christ: but yet if you will not be advised, your blood shall be
upon your own heads, and I shall be free.

I shall now conclude this Particular with that one word of the Apostle, 2 Pet.
3.11, 14. Seeing then that the Heavens, and Elements, and Earth, and all the
Works that are therein, shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to
be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? Wherefore (beloved) seeing that ye
look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of Christ in peace,
without spot, and blameless.

2. The second Word of Advice that I have to leave with you, I shall likewise
take out of my Text; and that is, That you would carefully redeem precious Time
for God and your own poor souls. A common understanding might easily suggest
reason enough to follow this Advice. Do but consider how little a time we have
yet to live in this World, how much time we have already spent in vain, how
sure an account we must give for our time as well as other talents: remember,
that Eternity depends upon this moment; we owe God all our time, and we cannot
lay it out better than for our poor souls: Especially consider this grand
Argument of the Apostle in the Text, that the days are evil. If it be bad
Weather, and an unseasonable Harvest, and all the Corn upon the ground be like
to be spoiled, the Husbandman will be sure to raise the price of his good old
Corn. Do but use the same Spiritual good husbandry for your souls. You may
perhaps think that you have many years to live in the world still; that is very
uncertain: Oh, but however, consider, that opportunities of doing and receiving
good are few, and like to be fewer still; and by how much the more rare they
are, shall they not be the more precious with you? God in mercy prevent our
fears and jealousies, but it is too suspicious that a good Sermon may be rare,
a good Exhortation or Reproof may be rare, a good Minister may be rare, an
opportunity of Christian Friends praying together may be rare. Therefore redeem
time while you may, lay hold upon every opportunity of good, and labor to know
in this your day the things that belong to your eternal peace, before they be
hid from your eyes. When Death comes, and Judgment comes, it will then be too
late, and therefore in vain to cry out for a little more time, for one more
good Sermon, for liberty of praying once more to God for Grace and Mercy.

I should have enlarged my Advice in some particulars, of strict walking and
improving precious time. Pray hard; set up that great duty of Christianity in
your Families. Keep Wickedness not only out of your hearts and houses, but out
of the Town too, to the utmost of your power. Remember the Sabbath day to keep
it holy: What help you want in public, make up by your holy diligence in
private. Read the Scriptures and other good Books much. You that have learned
your Catechism, do not forget it. Parents and Masters, have a care of your
Children and Servants. Husbands and Wives, watch over one another, provoke one
another to that which is good. Neighbors, exhort and admonish one another;
pray with and for one another, and go before one another in an holy Example.
But I have not time to ennumerate all.

I have now given you my Advice, and I pray God that you may follow it in
truth; and now I come in the last place to make my last public Request unto
you.

I bless God, I covet no man's Silver nor Gold; my Conscience bears me witness
that I have not sought yours, but you; and now at last, all that I shall beg of
you, is your prayers for me, and that I hope none of you will deny me. I have
taken some pains among you; I have often prayed for you, and by the Grace of
God shall never cease praying for you, that the Lord would keep you from evil,
and furnish you with his Grace, and afterward bring you to Glory. All the
recompense that I ask of you, is, That you would not forget me at the Throne of
Grace, but let me have a share in your prayers. In many respects I do earnestly
and heartily beg your prayers, but I must not now mention them all: One is
this, That God would be pleased to pardon my great Unfaithfulness and
Unprofitableness among you. I beseech you, Brethren, do not think that I am now
complementing with you. Something I have done, and God forbid that I should not
have some ground to hope that God has blessed my poor Labors to the doing of
some good amongst you, and perhaps my weak Labors have been acceptable, yea
and I bless God for that acceptance they have found with you; yet truly, Sirs,
God knows, and mine own Conscience tells me, that I have come much short, very
much short of that which was my duty to have done, which if not pardoned in the
Blood of Christ, I should never be able to answer before God, in the day of my
Accounts; and therefore I heartily beg your prayers on this behalf.

Another thing for which I beg your prayers to God for me, is, That it would
please the Lord not to lay me aside as a broken vessel and an unprofitable
creature upon the face of the Earth, but that yet, in what capacity soever the
Lord sees good, I may do him some service before I go hence and be no more
seen. I have but a little inch of time to live in this world, and my great
desire is, that while I do live, I may be useful; for otherwise life will be
but a sin, or a burden.

I beseech you pray also, that I may be delivered from, or strengthened under
temptations. I am a poor weak creature, and cannot stand, but by the Grace and
Strength of God, and I know not what condition the Lord has allotted for me:
Only this I have learned from the Word of God, that they that will live godly
in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Pray therefore that what
sufferings foever the Lord shall at any time call me to, I may be enabled by
his Grace and Strength so to behave my self under them, as that even by
suffering I may glorify his Name, and bear witness to the Truth, and practice
what I have preached, and give a good example to others, and credit the Gospel,
and that Profession which I have made thereof.

My Brethren, methinks I have much yet to say, and I know not where to break
off, yet I must come to a conclusion. Leave my Work in public I must, and
leave you I must, or else I must break with God and my own Conscience. This is
my great grief, but yet it is my greatest grief of all, that I must leave any
unconverted sinners amongst you. I profess to you seriously, that, if I know my
own heart, I could with cheerfulness and joy forsake not only my Living and
Livelihood, but even my Life also, so that I could but see every Drunkard, and
Swearer, and Curser, and Sabbath-breaker, and Worldling, and Profane person
among you, converted to a life of Faith and Holiness.

I dare not (not only for fear of man, but chiefly out of conscience) I dare
not open my lips to utter one word to encourage you to Faction or Schism, or
any unquietness, but with the Apostle I exhort you, to follow the things that
make for Peace, and to wait upon God for the mending of what is amiss; But this
I must tell you withal, that if you do not follow after the things that make
for Holiness also, you shall never see the Face of God to your comfort.
Therefore follow after Holiness; Follow not that which is evil, but that which
is good, 3 John 11.

In the midst of all my other griefs and troubles, I shall have no greater joy,
than to see or hear that any of you walk in the Truth.

I have preached the Word of Truth to you, according to that understanding in
the Scriptures which God has given me. I beseech you remember what I have
spoken to you in the Name of God and Christ, and look to your selves, that we
lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward.
Let me use the following words of the Apostle to you, 2 John 8, 9, 10, 11.
Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not
God: he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the
Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him, God speed. For he that bids him, God
speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

I must conclude, though unwillingly: my Farewelwords to you, shall be the same
with the Apostle's last Farewell to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.32. And now,
Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

