ENGLAND'S most Dreadful Calamity BY THE LATE FLOODS: Being a most Lamentable
Account of the Great Damages sustained by the Fearful INUNDATIONS; CAUSED BY
The Unparalleled RAIN Which fell on the 24th of April, 1682.

And the Late Rains which have lately happened.

Containing the several Houses, Barns, Cattle, Outhouses, Stacks of Hay and
Corn, being carried away: Together with the number of Persons Drowned, and of
some Thousands of Acres of Ground laid under Water.

Giving a Relation of the particular Damage sustained in the City of London,
and the Suburbs thereof; at Br^nford, Camberwell, Dulwich, Dep^ford, on the
River of Thames, Godmanchester, Ripton, and many Towns near St. Ive's suffering
much, many Houses under water, and some people being drowned, a Coach and Six
Horses coming from York with 6 passengers, were all drowned; with many of the
Northern Carriers, some losing their whole Teams, and their Wagons being
over-turn'd and driven away in the stream, many others losing all their Cattle,
being drowned, as Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, etc. As likewise, at Boston in
Lincoln-sh^re, Dale in Sussex, and other places in England and Scotland; The
like Dreadful Calamity not having been known upon the like Occasion.

Together with several Godly Exhortations to prevent such judgments for the
future, by a Timely Repentance.

Printed for P. Brooksby, in Wost-Smithfield. 1682.

England's most Dreadful Calamity By the Late FLOODS,
ACcording to the Old Proverb, Water and Fire are two good Servants, but bad
Masters; For when either of them get the upper-hand, they show no mercy, but
with Impetuous Rage, destroy all before them, being by nature two of the
furiousest and irresistible Elements that operate in the Creation: But above
all, the Deluges or raging Floods that have been caused in this Island by the
former Rain, I think none is more to be noted then what has lately happened,
the Relation of the Damages and exceeding Loss sustained by it, being the
subject of this Sheet.

But to begin; On the 24th of April, this present year 1682. about 7 in the
Evening it began to Rain (as indeed it has for the greatest part of this
Spring, as every one can testify) by little and little increasing, till at
last it fell with such unwonted fury, that several people were beaten down with
its Impetuosity; for instead of usual drops, it seemed as if it had been poured
out of Buckets, or as a water-spout (which Mariners tell of) long hovering in
the air, and whirled about with Winds, far lower then the Cloud, at last falls,
and if by chance, as often it does, light on the Deck of a Ship, unless it be
strong built, it seldom misses to sink the same.

This Rain had not continued above an hour, but the Streets of the City of
London swam with Water so high, that in many places Boats might have Rowed; nor
was that all, for several Warehouses and Cellers that lay low, received some
three some four foot deep in Water, (by reason the Kennels were not able to
vent it) to the great damage of the Merchandise contained therein, which at the
least value could not amount to less then 2000 pounds.

At Hockley in the Hole, in the Parish of St. James's Clerken-Well, it came
down upon the Inhabitants like a Sea, driving away all that opposed it;
insomuch that it passed quite through several Houses, carrying away good part of
them, and causing the Goods in near 20 others to swim about; It took away part
of a Brewhouse, and made the Fats to swim as if they had been in some great
River, so that many people were forced in that dreadful Calamity, to get to the
tops of their Houses, and there continued till the Waters were abated.

In Field-Lane it did no less spoil amongst the slaughter-houses, forcing open
the doors, and carrying away several Hogs, and spoiling several Sheep and other
Cattle that were ready dressed, several of the Hogs being the next day found in
Fleet-Ditch, and in the River of Thames, where they had been carried by the
violence of the Stream.

In Fleet-Ditch, although at Ebbing water, it filled the Ditch so full, that
most, if not all the Cellers, were filled with with water, breaking the Halsers
of 5 or 6 Lighters, laden with Coals, and driving them down the Stream, where
one of them running cross, and stopping at Fleet-Bridge, the which stopping the
rest, three were sunk and broak in pieces, the rest being much battered, and at
least 50 Chaldron of Coals cast away.

Two persons coming that night from Craydon, having been at the
Quarter Sessions holden there, and turning down Wash-Lane, which leads from
Bristol Caus-way to Camberwell, the fearful Torrent meeting them, by descending
down a Hill, threw up their Horses heels, forced one of them through the Hedge,
together with his horse, where both perished in the water, whilst the other by
good luck getting hold of a Tree, hung there for some hours, and so saved
himself, though, as we hear, his horse was likewise drowned: the man that
perished was the Master of the King's Head at Camberwell.

At Dulwich-Wells the Waters came down the Hill in such a Torrent, that it
over-turned many of the Huts set up there.

At Debtford the Rivers over-flowed, so that the Meadows were two or three
Yards standing water, where perished several Cattle, as likewise a Youth coming
from Lusham, was drowned.

A Boat coming from Wolwich to Greenwich, was so filled with Water on a sudden
with the excessive Rain, that e're they could put to shore, the Boat sunk, and
the Water-man hardly escaped; about a hundred Sculls and Skiffs that were
fastened in diverse places sunk likewise; as being filled brim-full with the
Rain.

At Branford the same night, the Waters came down in such abundance, that in
the hither Town it drove down a great many Stables and Outhouses, demolishing,
defacing, and carrying away part of six or seven dwelling houses, so that the
Inhabitants to save their Lives, were forced to crawl on the tops of their
Neighbors houses, by getting out at the Garret Windows, and those that had
none, forced their way through the Roof; such shifts will people make to avoid
eminent danger; a great number of Cattle and Poultry being found dead the next
morning, some swiming in the River, and others lest by the Water upon dry Land;
so that in Hay, Corn, and other things, the damage could not be judged less
worth then 600 pounds.

Near to Dale in Sussex, the Sea at that time broke in and laid a hundred
Acres of Land under water, drowning and carrying away many Cattle; as likewise
breaking several small Vessels, who by the force of the Sea, enraged by such
violent Rain, drew their Anchors, and were forced upon the Sands; six people we
hear of likewise drowned there, three of which were a drowned in a little house
standing by the Sea side, which was carried away by the Flood.

At Boston in Lincolnshire, the Rivers likewise over-flowed, and drowned a
great part of the low Grounds, destroying six or seven Daries that were placed
in them, and drowned several persons, together with Cattle, and setting the
Reeks of Hay, and Corn afloat; the Fens, a low Ground in that County, were
likewise over-flow'd.

The River Trent likewise over-flowed on the 25th of April, by reason of the
exceeding Land-Flood that poured out into it, and by the Effusion of Waters,
laid the Meadows in a Sea, the which being abated, a great number of goodly
Fish were found upon the dry Land, some dead, some flouncing in the Osiers; yet
it did great damage by washing away the Corn; as likewise over-turning a Mill
that stood upon the bank of the River, wherein the Miller being at work, was
drowned, and some Cattle carried away.

The Inhabitants of many parts of the Bishopric of Durham, give us a doleful
Relation of the great spoil the Floods have made amongst them, and how that at
present a great deal of their Corn lies under water, and the Rain continues so
Incessant, that the like (for the Season of the year) has not been known.

In the Town of Northampton, great damage has been sustained by the late
immoderate Rains, many Barns of Corn being spoiled, a great deal likewise
carrryed away that was ready dressed upon the Floor.

The River Isis at Oxford overflowing, laid most of the Level under Water,
which continued so for the space of three days; and likewise by the Rain which
was there accompanied with Thunder and Lightning, much damage was sustained in
the City.

Nor do all the Accounts from Scotland of the dire Effects of that terrible
Night (for it seems it was Universal) differ from what we receive nearer home,
it having done excessive damage in many parts of that Kingdom, as Leith,
Glascow, St. Johnstons, and other places adjacent; nay, as far as we can yet
hear, it had its dreadful Effects in most neighboring Kingdoms, to the great
terror and amazement of such as were eyewitnesses to the Calamity, it
occasioned.

But what can we expect less, then that God should send his Judgments abroad,
when as Rebellious Man perseveres in his obstinate Rebellion against him? For
certain it is, that the great Creator, who made what ever had beginning, can,
when it pleases him, use any part of his Creation to punish his Enemies; as we
may Read in Joshua, when He showered down Hailstones to destroy the Wicked
Canaanites; And in Egypts Evil day, to Curb the Pride of Rebellious Pharaoh, he
sent Hail mingled with Fire, accompanied with such prodigious Thunder and
Lightning, that the like before was never known; when God likewise was
displeased with the Sons of Men, and that as he was pleased to express himself,
it grieved him at his very heart that he had made them, he did but command it
and all the Elements conspired to overflow the Globe of the Earth, the Clouds
sucked up the Sea, and poured it down in Streams; or as Moses has it, The
Windows of Heaven were open, which were no other, then that the Clouds were
crushed by strong Winds, the Earth likewise obeying her Creators voice, opened
every watery part, when Rivers gushes, and Springs redole their force, the
Fountains of the great deep was likewise broken, it would know no bounds: Nor
have we wanted instances of the like nature in our age, as the late fearful
Inundations of Holland, and other places, but above all, this present Relation
for excessive Rain, has not been known in many Ages; so that some conjecture,
had it held for 48 hours with the same violence, it would have Lanced under
Water, most of the Northern parts of England.

Godmanchester, Ripton, and many Towns near St. Ive's suffering much, many
Houses under water, and some people being drowned; a Coach and six Horses
coming from York with six Passengers, were all drowned; with many of the
Northern Carriers, some losing their whole Teams, and their Wagons being
over-turn'd and driven away in the stream; many others losing all, their Cattle
being drowned, as Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, etc.

FINIS.

