The ENGLISH-MAN's Allegiance: OR, Our Indispensable Duty by Nature, by Oaths,
and by Law, to our Lawful King.
Ante leves ergo pascentur in aethere Cervi;
Et freta destituent nudos in littore Pisces;
Quam nostro Illius labatur pectore Vultus.
Virg. BEing as fully sensible, as any Man breathing, how much we OWE to the
late Pious, and Disinterested Undertaking of the Matchless Prince of Orange,
now our declared True and Lawful Sovereign: And being also as entirely
convinced, as the best of my Fellow Subjects, of his Wonderful PRUDENCE ever
since, which renders him (we must confess) Worthy of the Crown, were his TITLE
questionable, as having put the whole Nation in the present happy State; nay,
fixed (besides our Liberties and Religion) the Monarchy it self, on a most firm
and a durable Foundation. I say being fully sensible, and entirely convinced of
all This; and finding besides, by the sober, cool, and well-tempered Votes of
our Loyal and most Legal Parliament, (I mean those of the House of Commons)
That all Persons, (whether Men or Women) above the Age of Sixteen, are to take
the Oaths of Allegiance, or be Imprisoned without Bail or Mainprize, I thought
it an incumbent Duty (being a known Patriot, and yet walk ever Incognito) to
cast in my Mite; that is, in other terms, to do something; and what
(considering some Circumstances) can I do more (for if I could I would do it
without fail) than advise Loyalty to others, as well as practice it my self?
Therefore, in this small Treatise, I shall show to the World, even to all that
have their Eyes (as the usual Phrase is) upon our World, That as following a
River is a most certain way for a young Virtuoso to find out the Sea, so the
breaking Allegiance is the ready, and Infallible Road to the Devil. Now, seeing
what I am to Discuss is a very difficult and nice Point, (and who in manners
and good breeding can call that Easy, which has many hard and wilful
Antagonists) I intend to handle it in exact form, and like a Grave School-man,
or perchance a Schoolboy, and so must tell my Reader as well what I am not, as
what I am.

First, Negative: I am not a Quaker, for I can swear, and have both sworn
Allegiance, and am also very fully resolved to keep it, as firmly believing,
that whoever makes a Vow, I will require it at his hands, says the Lord.
Secondly, I am no Commonwealths-man, and therefore had far rather hear the
Dutch (whose Wit and Language I strangely fancy,) call an English-man-of-War
the Constant Prater, than our own people style an English-Grown-man the
Constans Speaker: Nor do I by any means admire a Duke of Venice, unless it be
in the Morea, or some other p^rt of Turkey. Thirdly, Affirmative, I am; and
three or thrice bring generally most men (as well as Poets) to the point: Nay,
it distinguishes a Christian from an Infidel, and makes even Dogs (according to
Plutarch) to Syllogize, and find out a Hare without smelling; and truly I love
three Things, or three Persons with all my heart, as I guess my Reader will
(tho I am about Oaths) presently Believe without an Oath. I say, Thirdly,
Affirmatively, I am one Born and Bred in the Church of England, that extremely
loved Plumb-Broth when Porredge was out of Fashion; that Eat many a Mince-Pye
in Defiance of the Directory; and that still daily says, We have Erred and
strayed like lost Sheep. Besides, I am of the long Robe, especially when I put
on a Nightgown, and ready therefore (secundum Artem) to give i^ under my hand,
that Abdicating is a far less English Law-Term, than Dispensing. In my Family
(for want of a Chaplain) I say Grace my self, and then heartily pray (according
to the Ancient Rubricks and Canons) for both Their Majesty's and the Prince;
that is (in the words at length) for King, Queen, and Prince of -- Denmark; and
doubtless, this last p^tition is most decent and just, for if we consider that
Hero in himself, he is certainly a Great Man, but when we Reflect upon the
present Courtesy of England (by which Men precede their Wives) he is a kind of
an Heir apparent. Now had this been Law in other places, Jack in the Old Tale
of Rushy Coat (who ran away with the Kings Daughter) would have been the True
King, and she in her own Kingdom only Hoyty Toyty, and Nominal; but all
Legislators are not of the same opinion as the Hebrew Proverb has it.

So much then for the Porch or Preliminaries; now for the Main Body of the
Fabric, and thence to the Penetralia, and innermost Recesses of the very
Oracle. For to speak the plain Truth (after Puns and Witticisms of that Nature)
I love plain dealing, and therefore was from Youth (tho it may seem, at first
dash, a Bull) much inclined to Riddles, and to Dote on Enigma's and
Hieroglyphics, which still makes me think Sphinx the greatest She-Philosopher
among the Ancients; and yet I acknowledge I shall never willingly follow her
Example, should any Ingenious and Egiptiacally-Abstruse Meaning of mine be
found out. But certainly, no way of Speaking, and of Writing also, can be more
proper for our Refined Age and Nation, since we have so many rare men, so many
Oedipus's (nay, greater than he) among us; Sparks that to serve a Turn, can
Kill a Father, without rubbing an Eye; and would Lie too with their Mother, out
of a mere Experiment or Joke. JOCASTA (Mr. Bays) JOCASTA! Pray remember that
happy jest, and particularly, what a Bob (in your own way) I have given to
Tottenham-Court; or as some now write it, Totteridge, alias Tottering-Court,
and then confess I have outdone you a whole Bar and a half.

But to the business; and first for Definitions, Axioms, or common received
Opinions.

A Promissary Oath, or Vow (Terms here Synonimous) is not only a Declaration,
That as sure as God is, or has a Being, I will make good my Word, but also a
sincere Supplication and Wish, That he would (if I fail in it) both eternally
deprive me of his blessed sight, and throw me headlong into Hell.

All Oaths lawfully enjoined, are ever to be taken in the sense and meaning of
the Imposer; seeing otherwise, a Cardinal might possibly (without breach of
Principles) take the Oath of Supremacy; which possibility Enervating the whole
Drift and Intent of the Oath, renders the Action a sin in it self, for who
without sin can take Gods Name in Vain? To wit, considerately use it to no
purpose?

These Oaths are ever to be Imposed by Lawful Authority; that is to say, by
those that have Right to do it, for else they oblige no more, than if a Filoux,
a Highway-Man, or any other Atheistical Russian should (by Invading, or setting
upon us on the Road, or any place else) force us to swear. Nay, the bare
compliance in taking such an Oath (tho upon Compulsion) may chance to be a sin
to be repented of with many Tears; especially, if we have already taken the
contrary by lawful order. But the insisting upon such a Contradictory Oath, or
intending to make it good, is a Double Crime; so that continuing thus to the
end, is final Impenitence, and consequently equal to the sin against the Holy
Ghost.

The Supreme Lawful Authority of England is our Lawful King; all other Lawful
Authority in the Kingdom being but subordinate, and Act by his Commission. Nay,
our very Laws are not only called his, but (as Laws) solely made by Him; for
tho the matter be Considered, and the words put in order by the Wisdom of a
Parliament, yet all is but a Lump, a Dead Letter, till his Fiat gives it Life.
And as the Scripture calls Kings Gods, by reason of their high and necessary
Attributes, so nothing can better Quadrate with that Allegorical Title, than
the common and usual Rhetoric of our most Ancient Lawyers, when they treat of
the Majesty, Power, and Right of our Kings.

Our Lawful King, (and to him our Obedience in only Due) sits always on a Hill,
and is as Conspicuons as the Pyramids of Modin, the Tombs of the Maccabees,
which might be seen even by all that sailed on the Sea. The Inscription on his
Throne is in such legible Characters, that he that runs may read it: Nor can
any Native of England, or Scotland, possibly mistake his Royal and Sacred
Person, unless the Remainder of those ten Tribes, who could (in Defiance of Law
and Lawmakers) ser up a Calf in Dan and Bethel, and yet own themselves still
in the Right.

Our Obedience to our Lawful King is not only positively, and explicitly
enjoined by the Word of God, who equals Rebellion to the Highect Crime; but we
are obliged to it by the very Law of Nature, which Dictating Self-preservation,
tell us, that Government is the only Medium to it; and consequently, that even
Tyranny in the Abstract, is far better than Anarchy and Confusion. Yet seeing
the Depravity and Corruption of Mankind is great, and that without refreshing
Artifices, our very memory grows torpid, if not wholly lost; Good Men in all
Ages thought it necessary to impose Oaths, and Enact Laws also to preserve
Obedience.

In a Well-meaning man (by the sacredness of the action, and by the grievous
penalty that follows the Breach) Swearing, or a just Oath, makes his Conscience
strangely mindful of the thing, tho a known Duty before; nay, we see sometimes
great Effects of it even in private Oaths between man and man, for by this
means a Profligate Rogue shall sometimes (V. G.) pay a Debt which he never
perchance intended to do, a Drunkard to continue for a while sober; and it may
be, a Common Whore as long Continent: So that Lawful Governors finding this
and the like by Experience, have (on emergent occasions;) sworn their Subjects
in general, as well as Ministerial Officers in particular; even to those very
things (as I said) which they all knew they were obliged to before, both by
Nature and Religion

Obedience being the first Postulat in Government, and indispensably due to it,
our principal Laws have therefore Exacted it from us, to our Lawful King, under
the highest Punishments, and call even the lifting up of a Finger against his
Sacred Person, not only Treason, but (fully to awaken and terrify us) give it
the most horrid and sacrilegious Name of Killing him; nay, our Law (like the
Precepts of the Gospel) descends even to thoughts; and (to silence all
Criticisms and Excuses in unquiet Breasts) it declares not only that the Crown
takes away all former Blemishes and Faults, but that the King can do no Wrong.
Now to show us that this is indisputably so, no subject from the beginning of
Monarchy among us (which is far Antienter than our very Records) was ever yet
Indicted for Rebelling, or Maliciously doing the King Harm, that (the Fact
being proved) did escape Conviction, let his Pretense, Reason or Plea be what
it would. Even Bethel and Cornish knew this full well, and that 'twas past all
Art to bring the most Picked and Garbled Jury to the Impudence of doing
otherwise; so that Ignoramus to save a Noble Peer, was forced to Damn and
disbelieve three Discoverers in Oats's Plot, even three Saviors of the Nation,
with seven more of the second Rate, Men once of mighty Fame and Valor, for the
whole Gang (tho they and others had made Cha. II. long before, blacker every
way than his hair) were yet sufficiently assured that this (if true) lessened
not his Royal Authority, and that all Defenses of that Nature, were too weak to
stop the Fury of the Law, that Uncontrollable Bear, if once Unmuzzl'd and let
loose. All which demonstrates what we owe to our Lawful Sovereign, and that his
Person being out of the reach of Man, can cry peccavi to none but God.

This being then the sum of our written, as well as often inculcated
Constitutions, the present Repetition cannot but be infinitely serviceable to
the Mighty WILLIAM, whose Surname is Just, and whose Title is so much beyond
Controversy, that even meddling would (if possible) lessen and dishonor it; I
say, this cannot but be extremely serviceable to him, especially when I show
the Indispensability of the Oath of Allegiance, which we have, or shall take at
any time to our Lawful Prince, and how the Breach of it will most certainly
draw upon Transgressors all the Plagues and Judgments that the highest Perjury
can deserve.

The Indispensability of the said Oath appears (even at the first sight) by the
intent and purpose of it; For 'twas purposely framed, and designed (by our
Lawful Governors) to oblige all, that took it, to a strict remembrance, and
performance too of their natural duty, in case our Lawful King were in any
danger or misfortune; and this they hoped it might chance to accomplish, by
alarming not only good Men, and so cause them to have their Eyes and Hands in
readiness, but by obviating also all sly Insinuations and Fancies, as if
Allegiance were an indifferent thing, and at the pleasure of a Subject; for an
Oath (the end of strife) makes indifferency become an obligation. Now to give
my Reader a full and true Idea of the Breach of a Lawful promissary Oath, and
what a vile baseness it is in a Subject, as well as a foul sin, I shall here
lay down a very remarkable Example, and (as I believe) very pertinent also to
the present business.

Henry the first (drawing toward his end) called his Great Lords and prime
Subjects together, and then told them that his Son being Dead, and Maw (his
sole Heir) being therefore to be their Queen, he desired (for his own
satisfaction, as well as for preventing all scruples about Women) that they
would own, and swear Allegiance to Her. This being deemed very far from
unreasonable, they did it not only once but thrice also; yet after his Death,
one Stephen ( seizing the Crown) was declared the true and Lawful Monarch. But
that the whole matter may be yet more plain and Easy, 'twill not perchance be
inconvenient (before I go on further) to let the Reader fully understand, who
and what the said Stephen was.

He was (it seems) Nephew to the former King, and (if we credit some
Historians) a kind of Son in Law also. He had a Feud in France, and upon that
account was called Earl, or Prince of Bologne, a little Inconsiderable thing in
an out- Province of that Kingdom, which (as to its Yearly value) was even
Inferior to Sheffield, and several other Manors in our Nation. Nay (if I
mistake not) He had been for some time Commander in chief of the Armies of the
Earls of Flanders; who were then the most considerable of any in the whole Low
Countries. This Stephen (who well knew (it seems how to forswear and break an
Oath for advantage) having now (as I said) Usurped the Throne, and many
Enormities being found (to be sure) in the preceding Reign, no body more pertly
asserts His Right, than the Paultry Bishop of Salisbury; one (as all our
Writers have it) that was wholly obscure of himself, and beholden altogether to
Fortune and good hitts; one false and Treacherous by Nature, and (which made it
beyond Cure) that thought it Wit to be so; one that had formerly received much
Countenance and Favor from the late King; and one also that (more than once)
swore the forementioned Oath, which again particularly obliged him to a true
and steady Allegiance to his Prince and Lawful Successor; and yet now ran
counter to it, as well by distinctions and insinuating discourses, as by the
shameful and overt Act.

Yet not to make the Devil uglier than he is (tho it be the new mode to Blacken
even Angels of Light) This precious Divine (notwithstanding his several Idle
Sophisms) had more sense than to bolt out the least Argument in favor of a
Conquest: And to speak truth, how was it possible for a Man (that had any
regard to himself) to pretend to so silly a thing, seeing Stephen had never
fought for the Crown; nor ever directly, or indirectly stood upon any Right of
Force; but took and received the Government upon the sole conscientious
invitation and Agreement of our Great Men. Besides since petty Principalities
or Royalties (the former Gifts of Emperors and Kings to deserving Men) are
Estates that may be bought by any mean Banker (and we know it is frequently done
to this very day in Germany and elsewhere) therefore the Civil Law, or Law of
Nations look upon these Toparchs (tho Absolute enough among their Vassals) with
another sort of Eye, and place them in another Class than they do those, who
are truly styled Sovereign Princes; so that if these should chance Sculkingly
to Invade the other, they might (if taken) be Legally prosecuted and punished
as Pilferers, and the like. Lastly, Stephen being (as I said before) a Servant
and Subject (for a General that receives Wages is as much so as any common
Soldier) had he by War and Battle brought England under his Power, yet this
Acquist must have been (as all Civilians tell us, his Masters not his own.

But perchance I excuse our worthy Bishop too much; for 'twas not (it may be)
truth that hindered him from insisting on the ridiculous Title of Conquest, but
common Prudence; as reasonably apprehending, that a Doctrine, that takes away
all Freedom and Property from every Englishman; might well deserve some
remarkable censure in Parliament; and Parliaments in former days were (by
fitts) as hot as those that lately ruined poor Sibthorp, and Manwaring, for a
Tenet not half so foolish, not half so dangerous, nor half so scandalous as
this. For, were this truly so, every Gallant that gets (in a Factious time) the
Crown, and perchance Monsieur Blood among the rest (especially if some Men want
an argument) will presently forsooth claim the almighty Title. And let me again
tell my Reader, that not only all we possess, belongs really to a Conqueror,
but (should he pass an Act or two in favor of the Subject) who knows the
Equitable Plea of having been deceived in his Grant, may not come into his
thoughts; and then ( -- Arma Tenenti etc.) the; Lord have mercy upon us all.
Cursed therefore be the wretch, that dares call any Man Conqueror of England.
But still a great Patriot a Man of God is exempted, and far out of the reach of
this wish, tho in his Arcadia, or Pastoral, he stands highly upon a Conquest;
for every one that can Read his A B C knows, that, besides his usual Tropes and
Figures, he has a pretty way of his own, and therefore only means, I Will engage
that the Victory of the most potent William was over our Hearts, and not our
Lands and Purses.

To proceed. If then the Advancing of Stephen were a horrid Perjury; and truly
the Remarks of Baker are not (I see) always impertinent; for he tells us, That
many as well of these Bishops, as the other Lords, came afterward (for this
grand Villainy) to an ill End, or at least to many Calamities before their End.
I say if this were a horrid Perjury, how black and unexcusable must the Breach
Now be, when our Religion is so pure; when the Oath is so Declaratory against
any Evasion or double Meaning; when the Statute Law (a Law not so well known to
our Ancestors) has in express Terms taken away all pretenses for Rebellion; and
lastly, when We have so often, and upon so many accounts, openly in the
presence of God and Man disowned all power in Pope or Devil, of hurting, as
well the Rights, as the Person of our Lawful Sovereign?

Now seeing there is neither If nor And in this Oath; and seeing the Oath it
self was purposely made (as I said) to Remember us of, and to stir, and keep us
up to our Duty in times of Troubles and Affliction, (for Kings want no Body's
Duty but then) it cannot be but pleasant (and the Arguments also are much to be
heeded) to hear a man (upon the Successes of a Rebellion, or the like) gravely
to Ph^losophize, and positively to Assert, That we are absolved from our Oath.
Nor is it less agreeable when we ask the Reason Why, to have this excellent one
palm'd upon us, because (forsooth) the King cannot Protect us; to which I
answer, Then we ought to Protect him. For I am sure this was the Imposers
meaning at the giving of the Oath; as hoping thereby to prevent the being
deserted his subjects.

Tho the Devil be God's Ape, and therefore some Usurpers have some times
imposed their Oaths also, yet Ours here in England have seldom or never done it
in general. For we read not of any thus required by the aforesaid Stephen, by
Hen. 4, or by Rich. 3. nay honest Cromwell (like Gallio) cared for none of
those things. And certainly they were all in the Right, and far Wiser than to
think that those whom their former Oaths could not keep true to their
respective Lawful Kings, would be obliged now to Them by any tie of that
nature. They know too, that it makes (out of pity as well as justice) the
Refusers much more esteemed and considerable; and that this too often awakens
their own Party, and brings upon many a concern for their former weakness and
miscarriage. Nor were they even then ignorant that Compulsion and Dragooning
(when a Conscience is doubtful and squeamish) causes often numbers not only to
complain, but be stubborn, who would otherwise have been Tepid, and perchance
at last on their side. Besides, Oaths swallowed with an ill will, rise
generally in the Stomach; and if such Persons happen to be but a little
disgusted, they turn (not seldom) the greatest Enemies imaginable.

No Maxim also seemed more ridiculous and false to our said Usurpers than this;
That men ought not to have the ordinary protection of a Government, who refuse
the ordinary assurance of living quietly under the Government. For since an
Oath was no tie, but brought (as I showed) great inconvemences often with it;
and that depopulation must then necessarily follow (as we now see in Savoy,
etc.) when the demands of one Great Party are opposite to the Profession and
Tenets of the other; therefore they (like wise men) depended, in relation to
safety, on vigilance and care, and not on the slight and weak Reed of Swearing.
Upon this account therefore They had Forces on foot; upon this account They
often disarmed the suspected; and sometimes also Imprisoned them; especially if
extraordinary Accidents happened. Thus Men may give common Protection to
Travelers or Strangers, tho their Country be no friend; Thus Prisoners of War,
and Servants in our Plantations may be beneficial, and yet Hate the Government;
Thus the Turks deal with Christians, and thus do all that Get the upper-hand,
that are not Lunatics or Mad.

Now tho there be no such Coxcombs under the copes of Heaven, that will Assert
or Fancy, that a Child can be worth hanging, as to his Book, who may go to
School, and leave it when he pleases; yet we have in England most egregious
Fools and Knaves, that padder much to have the Nation strictly obedient (as
they pretend) to the incomparable William and Mary; and at the same time tell
us, We are not indispensably Bound to our Lawful Princes. I could ask these
Gentlemen, whether there ever was a Rebellion? and they will, I am sure, answer
Yes; and particularly call every Rising so, that Touches their Humor or
Interest. I could ask them also whether they can show me here, or in any other
part of the World, a Rebellion without a Lamentable Cry, and that had not at
hand a Bead-Roll of Oppressions and Injustice; and then (supposing all this)
let me desire them to come (for all their Learning) to one reasonable
Distinguo? But since my Paper will not permit such Excursions, and much less
sulfer me to Examine their respective Arguments about Oaths and Obedience (
Arguments far casier answered than repeated) I shall therefore only present
them now with a Suppose or two; which (tho it be Bis coctum Crambe; heated
Cabbage, or, in our Mother tongue, the same thing over again) will yet,
newdrest, and applied, make what They have, can, or shall say, fall on their
own weak Heads, and Grind all into Sand and Dust, even lighter (if possible)
than Themselves.

Suppose then William and Mary being (as no body can certainly deny) our
undoubtedly Lawful King and Queen, that one of Harrison's or Lilbourn's Royal
Progeny were for setting up again the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and effectually
to accomplish it, did endeavor to be his Viceroy till He came. And by the way
(tho in reality The Chariots and Horsemen of Israel are again making ready) I
cannot but bring in this well-known Instance, to make the whole the more
Ridiculous, and consequently the more clear; for Tros Tyriusque mibi --
Lancaster to me (as to Title) is Jack Straw, whilst Clarence has an Heir; nor
do I value York more than Watt Tyler, if he stands wholly upon his own Right,
as a Cadet, or Younger Brother. Let us now (to go on) suppose yet further, that
Their Majesty's (to obviate the infamous Design of this hopeful Deliverer) do
appeal (in respect of Right and Possession) to the known Laws of the Land; that
they also show us, that the Statute of Edw. 3. makes every man a Traitor, that
Assists, let his pretense be Religion, Liberty, Property, or what he pleases;
and in short, that (to make the subjects in general more careful, or at least
more mindful) they Swear all, in plain and ample words, to be true and faithful
to them, and to their Lawful Heirs, viz. to their Children, and Childrens
Children born in Wedlock, the Sons preceding Daughters, and the Elder, the
Younger of either Sex, according to the custom of the Kingdom. All this being
then supposed; would it not curdle one's Blood in his Veins, and make one's
Hair stand like Bristles, to hear but a Hum or a Hah, as to our Duty and
Allegiance to Their Majesty's? What would an old Heathen think of an Englishman
that (after all these particulars) could not only cheerfully swear Allegiance
to the Enthusiast, but would publicly maintain, that what he swears is lawful
and just: I say would not a Distinction (in this case) turn a Man into a
Statue? and would not any Pagan wish, for the speed of an Arrow, lest the
Island should sink before he could get out of it. Nay, what Turk or Jew is
there (tho he had seen all the Miracles of Christ) that would not cry Nolo
Baptizari, if a Christian should pretend to Faith or Troth after so Monstrous a
Breach.

If it be asked, what must be then done, when the Winds are high, when this
storm Rages, and both Fields and Vineyards fall within the sphere of the
impetuous Hurricane? I Answer, remember still your first Love; for if a Spark,
a Cavalier, Swears Cum Paris Oenone etc. -- His new Ligue with Helen will
certainly ruin Him and His. I answer again, remember the intrinsic value of a
sacred promise, even that which all the terrors of Afric could never make a
Regulus to forget. In fine, I answer, and positively I say it, remember (tho
Antiochus Reigns,) that Swines-flesh is not to be Eaten. But now if through
Interest, Rashness, or Fear, a Man should succumb, and swallow the cursed
thing, he is not yet lost, if in the first place He asks God forgiveness, (for
that will certainly atone and recontile Him to the King in Heaven, as well as
to our King on Earth) and then of he immediately reflects, how much Scylla's
Oath to betray her Father Nisus and his Kingdom did oblige her to the Contract;
how much we are bound to kill a Neighbor if passion or the like should make us
swear the Performance; and again whether we ought to discover the private
Avenues of a Friends House, because a Miscreants Pistol made us solemnly engage
to do it. Thoughts here in the Affirmative, are Pelion upon Ossa, sin on sin;
so that a wilful pers^v^rance is the very Fact (as I have formerly said) which
will never be forgiven in this World, nor in the World to come. By all which
it is evident that, as Contradictories can never be both true; so there can be
but one Lawful King in England, which makes all others but mere troublesome
Scare-Crows and Impostors.

But since I am fallen upon the word Impostor; I must not (tho much pressed in
time) pass by, without mentioning the grand One; I mean little Mahomet, or Him.
whom not a few, as well Protestants as Papists, call and deem the True Prince
of Wales. Now, that the World may see, that men (when they please) can be far
more wilful than Mules, and deafer also than an enchanted Adder; I will here
give my Reader a smack or taste of some of the wise Arguments, with which the
Musselmen or Tories defend the Paradox; and then I Will show in six words (for
Truth hates Meanders and Ambages) how the Loyal can (like Hercules himself)
tear open young Cacus's Den, and so with one Pull expose the mighty Thief in
all his Shapes and Colors.

First, Those odd Jacobites ask in what Region or Age was such a
Hocus-Pocus-Trick ever yet played? Nay (omitting the Authors of Cassandra,
Grand Cyrus, and men in that Class of Fancy) they demand whether Bays durst
for shame venture on a Plot founded on this Impossible Supposition; That a
Great Queen living publicly, and after her usual manner in a thronged, prying
and suspicious Court, was not only to carry a fictitious Great Belly Nine
Months undiscovered, but was also with the like success to be brought to Bed in
a Chamber crowded with Persons of both Sexes, and many of them utter Enemies to
Her and Hers.

Secondly, That tho this might pass muster at the Antipodes, or in Terra
Incognita, yet how could it be effected in England, when there would be (in
spite of Fate) Great Men and Women that must be Spectators and Actors too in
the Play, not only of different Interests and Factions, but that hated both
Papists and Popery, as much as Calvin and Luther ever did; and Persons also, to
whom the Discovery would infallibly have been much more Advantageous, than the
Concealment.

Thirdly, Was it possible for King James (of whose Morality most Men had a good
Opinion) not only to put by (and with such hazard too) both his Daughters,
which had received such Constant marks of his Tenderness, but to Disinherit (by
a Supposititious Brat) any Son that he might chance to have by this Queen, who
was still Young, or by a New One if she died; nor could his constant Hunting,
or other manly Exercises but assure every body of his still remaining Vigor.

Fourthly, They ask whether the Practic part were not yet (if possible) more
Impossible than what has been already hinted. For (say they) there must have
been at least three or four Women procured, of the utmost Fidelity, and all
with Child, and of the same Reckoning; who (when they came near their Time,
must be also taken from their Friends and Acquaintance (which could not but
occasion strange talk and disorder) to be put in secret places near the Court;
for one or two (besides Accidents) might bring forth Daughters, and if they
were all to be Delivered in their respective Dwellings, the Cheat would not be
concealed two hours.

Fifthly, after all these unexpressible Difficulties, New ones (they say) (...)
greater must follow. For upon the first Woman's being in Labor, the Queen must
presently be so too, wherever she were; and if that Child happened to be a
Female, the whole Seen must be re-acted, i. e. deferred till the next Woman
cried out. Now when fortune should bring a Boy, it must be carried with all its
Afterbirth, etc. (through a Court, which would have in it for certain many
Curious Eyes, do what they could) into the Queens Bed, either before she were
laid, or after; If before, then the Query is, whether a Child (were he not in
that strange impossible pickle) could lie under the Clothes, for three or four
hours, and neither be stifled, nor cry. If the famous Warming-Pan were brought
in afterward, then the Chamber must be necessarily (as it was) full of Men and
Women: And how could they place the Creature (a thing to be done with wonderful
gentleness and care) in a Bed, if not in the presence of Men, yet in the open
view and sight of, God knows how many Ladies and Women, that encompassed the
Queen; and still the Child (notwithstanding Her Majesty's many turnings and
seeming throes) was neither to be smothered nor to cry.

Sixthly, they say, let all this also pass, and let my Lady Sunderland her self
be mistaken, that swore. She forwarded the Birth with her hand; but how can a
Child after so long a stay, come out of the Bed reeking like one newly Born, as
so many Protestant Doctors themselves swore? Nay, they deposed that the Blood
came from the very Navel-string when they cut it, which they gave the Child for
a Medicine against Convulsions.

Lastly: Well then (cry they) for once we'll suppose the present Loyal people
of England turned Papists; that is to say, Persons that will maintain any
Impossibility if Religion and Interest commands it; as also that the Countesses
of Peterborow, Sunderland, Roscommon, Lady Bellasis, and other great Protestant
Peeresses, and of the Bedchamber, will Dispense with an Oath, though the
Dispensing Power be now Null and Void by Law. We will suppose too, (continue
they) that my Lady Wentworth, Mrs. Bromley, Dawson, with the rest of the
Dressers once known to be most Zealous against Popery, will now rather forswear
themselves, than that Popery should not be secured: Add besides to this, that a
crowd of Protestant Doctors, Apothecaries, Surgeons, and other necessary
people, are to go to the Devil for Company; But how came it ( roar they out
higher than Stentor and Moreland) that the Princess of Denmark whom the Cheat
so much concerned both as to Religion and Interest) could neither perceive it
all along with her own Eyes, nor with those of her Faithful Ladies? If she did,
the Difficulty (they say) is harder; for 'twas impossible that she would be
silent and mealy-mouthed, that had the Courage and Piety (in Defense of
Religion and Property) to forsake her Fathers house, and to Head an Army
against his Wicked Counselors, as we all know. But further (proceed they in
the like tone) Is it not beyond Comprehension, if things had been but
suspicious, and much more if really so, that William and Mary (who hazarded
their All for the Gospel and Common Justice) should upon the Child's Birth send
Monsieur Zulestein as their Ambassador, to Congratulate with the King and
Queen; to Visit and Complement him as Prince of Wales; and which is yet
stranger, to Insert him in the Collect of the Royal Family, and consequently
Pray for Him thus in their own public Chappel^.

Now as an assuredly completing blast (which blows away every Corn of Doubt)
They stretch their voice and cry; Tho all these unaccountable Blots were
overseen formerly, why did both King William and the Parliament join in a
manner with these Clancys and Fourbs by their present silence, which makes the
Cheat (if it had been one) not only victorious, but invincible. Nay a
Parliament also that had all the Reason in the World to take the Business in
hand, both for our future Quiet, and for the confounding of all King James's
Party; since the fiercest of them, would (upon this proof) have granted, that
nothing could be said against him that was false.

Thus reason these extravagant Men. But now let us hear, how all is answered
(as I said) in six words by these Loyal, Wise and Conscientious men, that have
contributed so much to our Deliverance, and helped to put us in our present
happy and flourishing condition.

Was not a Prince of Wales (answer they) for the Advantage of the Papists? are
they not a restless Party? and is there any thing they will not do or venture
for the advancement of their Religion? all men know what Dispensations they
have; and howindefatigable they are in propagating their Cheats? and how subtly
they always endeavored to amuse and confound poor Protestants. Tho piety of
the King and Queen is apparent, who wave the blackening of a Father, as such
secret actions must do, when public to the World; and what is more ridiculous,
and below a Parliament, than in time of great business, to debate, and then
vote it is day at Noon. Rex and Regina beati.

Quid agitur in Anglia? consulitur de Religione, non de Partu.

FINIS.

