Englands Triumphs FOR THE Prince of WALES: OR, A short Description of the
Fireworks, Machines, etc. Which were represented on the Thames before
Whitehall, to the King, and Queen, Nobility and Gentry, Foreign Ministers, and
many thousands of Spectators, on Tuesday-night, July 17. 1688.
With Allowance, July the 18th. 1688.

THe happy Birth of the Prince of Wales, having long since filled every corner
of the Three Kingdoms with Joy and Gladness, and e're this reached the Ears of
all Europe; The Kings Majesty to Commemorate the same and the Queens Majesty's
Up-fitting, in his Princely Generosity, Commanded the most Accomplishtly
Ingenious Sir Martin Beckman, His Ingeneer at the Tower, forthwith for to
prepare such Machines and Fireworks, as might be suitable to so great an
Occasion, and to prepare them for His and the Queens Royal view on the Thames
before His Palace of Whitehall.

In Obedience thereto Sir Martin prepared large Vessels, called Lighters, which
being close covered or Scaffolded, thereon erected as many different Figures.

First, Betwixt two square Pyramids in an Iron Chain hung in the Center a Sun
in its Glory; below that, in a direct Line an Imperial Crown; and under that,
J. M. R. in a Cipher adorned; the Pyramids wreathed with Fireworks from the
bottom to the top, and at the Main-top Pennants with the Arms of England, on
each side the Pyramids diverse other sorts of Fireworks.

Second, A Bacchus bigger than the Life (with all parts full of Holes stopped
with Fireworks) astride on a large Tun covered as the two Pyramids with
Tun-plates, and also many sorts of Fireworks on every quarter.

Third, The figure of a Woman (bigger than the Life) representing Plenty and
Peace, adorned with all the usual Ensigns of Plenty and Peace, wrought all in
Fireworks, wreaths Gornucopia's, etc.

Fou^th, A Woman much bigger than the Life, a Coronet on her Head, adorned with
the proper Emblems of Firmness, or Stability of Empire, and on every quarter of
the Stage Fireworks of different kinds.

Fifth and Sixth, Were planted full of Morter-pieces of different sizes for
throwing of Bombs, Carcasses etc. Whose Shells were made of Canvis and lasht
about with Cords, and so contrived to break when falling, to prevent the least
mischief where they fell.

Seventh and Eight, Planted with small Chambers and other small Pieces erect,
and very thick one by another.

9th. 0 11 and 12th. Were furnished with Sky-Rockets and many other Curiosities
for springing up a vast height in the Air in diverse Figures, and done with that
extraordinary Art* as showed the greatness of the Designer, each having private
receptacles for Fireworks to supply as the others burnt off.

The 13, 14 and 15. Were also furnished with other Combustible Compositions for
furnishing the whole as occasion offered.

About 40 great pieces of Piles were drove in at a competent distance one from
another, and whole pieces of Firr Timber fastened from Pile to Pile made a Line
Round them, and kept all Boats coming in to avoid confusion and accidents which
attend such mighty confluences of People.

Thus every thing being prepared, and the Men posted in their proper stations,
the several Water Pageants were placed in a Line before White Hall, those with
the Pyramids and Figures in the Center.

About Nine at Night the Engineers began, and first fired the Sun, the Imperial
Crown, the Cipher of the King and Queens Names, and the Letters which Composed
the several Mottos, with other ornamental things about the Figures and
Pyramids; all which was composed of Iron Work with Wire, which when on Fire was
curious, and seemed as flaming Iron for a long time glowing, the Sun in the
like manner appeared as glorious as at noonday, and the Crown as a body of
Fire so formed, which while the numerous Spectators with admiration beheld*
they were surprised with Fireworks in the Water betwixt the King and the
Lighters, and thousands of Rockets flying up in the Air a prodigious height,
beginning and ending in different Figures, and such continued Firings like
great Guns, as it in some measure, for Fire, Smoke, and Noise, represented a
Sea Fight. Thus were their Majesty's, etc. for more than an hour diverted even
to astonishment as well as delight, which was concluded with the continued
Shouts and Huzzas of the People, and the great Guns at the Tower; of all which
no doubt a large Account will be given to the World.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for P. L. And Reprinted at Edinburgh by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, 1688.


