THE English Midwife ENLARGED, Containing Directions to Midwives; Wherein is
laid down whatever is most requisite for the safe Practicing her Art. ALSO
Instructions for Women in their Conceiving, Bearing and Nursing of Children.
With two new Treatises, one of the Cure of Diseases and Symptoms happening to
Women before and after Childbirth. And another of the Diseases, etc. of little
Children, and the conditions necessary to be considered in the choice of their
Nurses and Milk. The whole fitted for the meanest Capacities. Illustrated with
near 40 Copper-Cuts.

London, Printed for Thomas Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Three Flower-de-luces
in Little Britain, 1682.

To all English Midwives.
YOU are here presented with an Amendment and Supplement, of what was very
necessary and yet wanting in this Book formerly: so that now you will find it
to be wholly completed for your purpose, in every respect; it being altogether
grounded upon many years Experience, and Observation in the Practice of
deliveries; most others being written by those that never practiced the Art;
and some fathered upon Persons that were no more concerned in them, then the
Pope of Rome; such as Sir Theodore de Mayern, Dr. Chamberlen, and others; by
the Publishers of the Complete Midwives Practice; so that I may justly say of
this Book; as the Learned Sir Richard Baker says of his Chronicle, that if all
other were not to be found this alone were sufficient, with your diligence; For
I Will assure you, I have not concealed one secret, belonging to your Art from
you; neither would I have you withold your knowledge from others; neither
have I imposed upon you any thing that has not endured the Test of confirmed
experience; and in like manner I would not have you, upon any account
whatsoever, to try any new experiment, either upon Rich or Poor; either
inwardly or outwardly; thus much for the Book. Now as for what concerns your
selves; I would have you by all means to have a respect to two things above
all, your Consciences and Credits; and principally to the first; and to that
end, for all the Treasure in the World, to give no Medicine to cause a Woman to
miscarry of her Child; but prudently send such kind of People to the Learned
Physician to deal with: and that you may prosper in your Practice, discharge
your duty as well to the Poor as Rich. Have a great care whom you lay in your
Houses, for fear of encouraging naughty Women; Lastly I would advise you not to
be dismayed if every thing in your practice fall not out just at the very
instance of your expectation, you performing your part; but expect the event
with patience; for fear disorders the Senses, and Persons that keep their wits
together without suffering them to be scattered thereby, are capable of
Counselling in the most weighty Affairs. And now I shall no longer detain you
in the Porch, but desire you will forthwith be pleased to walk into the Palace;
where I question not but you will find wherewith to satisfy your Curiosity in
what concerns the premises; and so wishing you all the Prosperity imaginable;
I bid you Adieu.

THE Contents of the Sections.
SEct. 1. Of the True generation of the Parts, and Increase of the Infant in
the Womb, according to the days and times, till the time of the Birth. p. 1
Sect. 2. Of the signs of Conception, and whether the Child thrive in the Womb.
p. 11 Sect. 3. Of the Nutriment of the Child in the Womb, and by what
nourishment it is preserved, and when it grows up to be an Infant. p. 16
Sect. 2. How the Infant does in the Womb the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, and
eighth month; and of the due time and form of the Birth; and causes of pain in
Childbirth. p. 20 Sect. 5. Rules for Childbearing Women, and how to prevent
Abortion. p. 28 Sect. 6. A Dialogue between the Midwife, and the Doctor,
concerning Midwives, and the delivery of Women in Childbirth. p. 33 Sect. 7.
Of the several natural situations of the Infant in the Mothers Womb, according
to the different times of Childbearing. p. 39 Sect. 8. Of difficult Births,
whether they proceed from Causes external or internal. p. 42 Sect. 9. Of the
Fashions, and Figures of the Birth, and how Children are born and may be born.
p. 50 Sect. 10. Figure the first; Of unnatural Births. p. 52 Sect. 11. Figure
the Second. p. 58 Sect. 12. Figure the Third. p. 62 Sect. 13. Figure the
Fourth. p. 64 Sect. 14. Figure the Fifth. p. 66 Sect. 15. Figure the Sixth. p.
68 Sect. 16. Figure the Seventh. p. 74 Sect. 17. Figure the Eighth. p. 78 Sect.
18. Figure the Ninth. p. 81 Sect. 19. Figure the Tenth. p. 83 Sect. 20. Figure
the Eleventh. p. 85 Sect. 21. Figure the Twelfth. p. 87 Sect. 22. Of a Birth
wherein the Infant presents the Belly. p. 89 Sect. 23. How to help a Woman in
her Labor, when the Child's Head thrusts the Neck of the the Womb forth before
it. p. 92 Sect. 24. How to deliver a Woman when the Child presents the side of
the Head, to the birth, or its Face. p. 95 Sect. 25. How to deliver a Woman
when the Child's Head is born, and the Womb closes about its Neck. p. 99 Sect.
26. When the Navil-string comes first. p. 102 Sect. 27. Wherein the Burden
either first offers it self or comes first quite forth. p. 107 Sect. 28. Figure
the Thirteenth. p. 112 Sect. 29. Figure the Fourteenth. p. 115 Sect. 30. Figure
the Fifteenth. p. 117 Sect. 31. Figure the Sixteenth. p. 123 Sect. 32. Of
delivering of a Woman of a dead Child. p. 129 Sect. 33. Of the extracting of a
mola and false Conception. p. 136 Sect. 34. Of the Secundine, or After-burden,
and the best and safest way to draw it forth. p. 151
PART. II. Of Diseases happening to Big-Belly'd Women before Childbirth.
SEct. 1. Of Barrenness and the several kinds thereof. p. 177 Sect. 2. Of
Superfaetation. p. 195 Sect. 3. Of Vomitings of Women with Child. p. 201 Sect.
4. Of the pains of the Back, Loins, Reins and Hips. p. 206 Sect. 5. Of the
pains of the Breasts. p. 209 Sect. 6. Of involuntary voiding, and stopping of
Urine. p. 211 Sect. 7. Of a Cough and difficult breathing. p. 214 Sect. 8. Of
the swelling and pains of the Thighs and Legs. p. 218 Sect. 9. Of the
Hemorrhoids. p. 221 Sect. 10. Of the several Flaxes happening to Women with
Child. p. 224 Sect. 11. Of Fluddings. p. 229 Sect. 12. Of the Weight of the
Womb, etc. p. 233 Sect. 13. Of the Dropsy of the Womb, etc. p. 235 Sect. 14.
Of Abortion and its causes. p. 238
PART. III. Of Diseases and Symptoms happening to Women after Childbirth.
SEct. 1. Of Remedies for the Breasts and lower parts of the Belly of Women
newly delivered, and how to drive back the Milk. p. 241 Sect. 2. Of Fludding
after Childbirth. p. 244 Sect. 3. Of the bearing down and falling out of the
Womb and Fundament of a Woman newly laid. p. 247 Sect. 4. Of the bruises and
rents of the outward parts of the Womb, caused by Labors. p. 252 Sect. 5. Of
the After-pains. p. 254 Sect. 6. Of the Lochia, whence they come, if good or
bad, their stopping, and what ensues. p. 255 Sect. 7. Of the Inflammation etc.
of the Womb. p. 258 Sect. 8. Of the Inflammation and Apostemation of the
Breasts. p. 259 Sect. 9. Of the curdling of the Milk in the Breasts. p. 262
Sect. 10. Of Choping etc. and loss of the Nipples. p. 265
PART. IV. Of the Diseases and Symptoms happening to little Children: and of
the choice of a Nurse.
SEct. 1. What manner of Woman a Nurse ought to be; and whether the Mother be
the best Nurse? p. 269 Sect. 2. Of the Diseases and Symptoms which happen to
Children, and first of their Diseases in general. p. 291 Sect. 3. Of Fevers,
Meazels, and Smallpox, in little Children. p. 293 Sect. 4. Of the milky scab,
Achores, Scald-Head and Lice. p. 295 Sect. 5. Of the watery swelling of the
Head. p. 298 Sect. 6. Of Fright in the Sleeps, and Watchings. p. 299 Sect. 7.
Of the Falling Sickness and Convulsion. p. 301 Sect. 8. Of pain in the Ears,
Moisture, Ulcers and Worms. p. 302 Sect. 9. Of the Thrush, bladders of the
Gums, and Inflammation of the Tonsils. p. 303 Sect. 10. Of the breeding of
Teeth. p. 304 Sect. 11. Of a Catarrh, Cough and difficult breathing. p. 305
Sect. 12. Of the Hiccup and Vomiting. p. 307 Sect. 13. Of the pains and puffing
of the Belly. p. 309 Sect. 14. Of the Flux of the Belly. p. 311 Sect. 15. Of
Costiveness. p. 312 Sect. 16. Of Worms. p. 313 Sect. 17. Of the Rupture. p. 314
Sect. 18. Of Bunching out, and inflammation of the Navil. p. 315 Sect. 19. Of
the falling out of the Fundament. p. 316 Sect. 20. Of difficulty and stopping
of Urine. p. 317 Sect. 21. Of not holding Urine. p. 318 Sect. 22. Of Leanness
and Bewitching. p. 319
SECT. I. Of the True generation of it Parts, and Increase of the Infant in the
Womb, according to the days and times, till the time of the Birth.
WHen the Womb (whose property it is naturally to receive seed for generation,
as a Loadstone attracts iron, or Jeat straws or feathers) has received the
seed, and by its virtue has shut it up for generation; Presently, from the
first day until the sixth or seventh, there grow and arise very many and very
small fibers or hairs, beginning with a hot motion; by which vital heat the
Liver, with its chiefest organs are generated, as this following Figure may the
more illustrate.

depiction of the womb in the first few days after conception The small Fibers.


For the vital spirits, giving down seed toward conception, forms and
distinguishes the chiest members by the tenth day, being let in by certain
veins of the secundine, to which the matrix is fixed, and by which the blood is
imported, and of which the navil is generated. And at the very same time three
small spots (not unlike to curds of milk) arise, where the liver, the heart, and
the brain have their places; and then presently a vein directed by the navil,
attracts the thicker blood confused with the seed, and maks it fit for
nourishment: from whence also arises a vein with two forks, which is generated
according to the form of this figure depiction of the womb and developing
embryo at about 10 days after conception

In the one of which branches there is a collection of blood, of which first
the liver is generated. From whence it easily appears, the liver is a congealed
and concrete blood: and also it may be manifest, how many and various veins it
has prepared and fitted, for the attractive and expulsive virtue. But in the
other branch are generated those webs o^ veins, with the dilatation of other
veins, as o^ the stomach, spleen, and intestines, in the lower part of the
belly. And from hence immediately all veins are collected together, as so many
branches into one trunk, in the upper web of the liver toward the hollow vein^
and this trunk by and by sends down branche^ to make the midriff, and directs
not a few branches to the lower parts, even to the very thighs: and then the
heart, with its arteries extended into seed from the navil, i^ generated by a
vital virtue, and is directe^ toward the spine of the back, as is demonstrated
in this figure, 3.

depiction of the womb and developing embryo at more than 10 days after
conception

But those do attract the hottest and more subtle blood, of which the heart is
generated, incased in a membrane, naturally fleshy and thick, necessary upon
the account of so ^ot a member. But the hollow vein extend^ng it self, and
penetrating the inward con^avity of the right side in the heart, etc. de^ives
thence blood for the nourishment of the ^eart. From the same branch also of
this his vein, and in the same part another vein arises, called, by some, the
immovable, or quiet vein; because, according to the account of the pulsation
of other veins it beats not at all, but lies quiet; ordained for this end, that
it should let go the purest blood to the Lungs, being vested with a double
tunicle like an Artery, from whence it is called the Arterial vein. But in the
left concavity of the heart there are two Arteries, that is to say, the Venal
Artery, and the Great Artery, which carries a great pulse with it, and
diffuseth the vital Spirits by the blood of the heart into all the Arteries of
the Body. For, as the hollow vein is the original of all veins, by which the
Body does attract its whole nourishment of blood; so, from the Aorta (or great
Artery) all pulsatile veins are derived, diffusing the vital Spirits through
the whole Body. For the heart is the fountain and original of vital heat,
without which no creature or member can thrive.

Under the abovesaid Artery in the left concavity of the heart, another vein
arises called the Venal Artery: And, although that be really a pulsatile
vein, and does direct the vital Spirits, yet, according to the manner of all
pulsatile veins that have blood, it has but one coat, and therefore made for
that end, that it should derive the cold air from the Lungs to refresh the
heart, as also to attemper its overmuch heat.

And veins issuing out from both the cavities of the heart, are inserted into
the Lungs, of which they are formed; for the vein that proceeds from the right
cavity of the heart produces the most subtle blood, which, by small fibers,
dispersed here and there, is changed into the fleshy substance of the lungs.
But from the great vein of the Liver, ( viz. the Vena Cava, or hollow vein) the
whole breast is generated, and so successively the Arms and Thighs.

depiction of the womb and developing embryo at more than 10 days after
conception, showing the development of the brain

Within the time aforesaid also is generated the highest and chiefest part of
this noble structure, the Brain; in the third Region of this mass; for the
whole mass of seed is filled with the animal Spirits, that contracts a great
part of the genital moisture, and concludes it in a certain cavity wherein the
brain may be formed: but, as to the out-fide, it is inveloped with a certain
covering, which being dried with heat, is brought into a boney substance, and
becomes a scull, as appears by this precedent figure.

But the brain is so formed, that it may conceive, retain, and change the
natures of all the vital Spirits, from whence also proceed the beginnings of
all Reason, and of the Senses: For, as veins have their original from the
Liver, and as arteries have their rise from the heart; so also nerves being of
a softer and milder natural existence, arise from the brain, and are not hollow
as the veins are, but solid; for they are the first and chiefest instruments of
all the senses, by which the motions of all the senses, by reason of the vital
spirit, are justly made.

After the nerves, from the brain also, is formed the pith of the backbone,
not of an unlike nature from the brain, so that it scarce can be called marrow
because it has no likeness to marrow, either by sight, or in substance; for
the marrow is a kind of superfluous aliment, arising from the blood of the
members, appointed to moisten and make the bones of the body grow; but the
brain and pith of the back have their original from the seed, not deputed for
the nourishment and growth of the other members, but that by themselves they
might make private parts of the body, for the use and motion of the Senses,
that from thence all the other nerves may take their rise. For, from the pith
of the back many nerves arise, from which the body has sense and motion, as
may appear by the difference betwixt the vital and animal faculties, as has
been before hinted.

Moreover, here it is to be observed, that from the seed it self gristles,
bones, coats of the veins of the Liver, and of the arteries of the heart, the
brain with the Nerves, and again the tunicles, and as well other pannicles or
membranes as those that wrap up the infant, are generated; but from the proper
blood of the infant is the flesh it self engendered, and all those parts that
are of a fleshy substance; as the Heart, the Liver, and Lungs: And then at
length all these grow together by the menstruous blood, attracted by the small
veins of the Navil, which are observed to be directed with their orifices into
the Womb. All which are distinctly made by the eighteenth day of the first
month, from the very conception, at which time it may be called seed, but
afterward it becomes to be, and is called a child; which the Ancients have
comprehended in these two verses, Six days in milk, thrice three the seed's in
blood;
Twice six makes flesh, thrice six makes members good.


depiction of the womb and developing embryo at about 18 days after conception
The lesser figure denotes the Nerves derived from the Back and dispersed
through the whole.
The explanation of the larger figure see in the following page.

FF Shows a young one of 18 days (though some hold it but 14 days in which
all the members may be discerned apart,) GG The four Umbilical Vessels meeting
in one. HH How the Umbilical Vessels become thick by degrees, that that doubt
amongst some may be resolved, whether they spring from the Womb, or no. III
Shows how the Umbilical veins and arteries are spread throughout the Chorion
by infinite branches. KKK Shows the membrane called Amnios, in which sweat
and urine are gathered together, in which the Infant swimmeth, and sits as safe
as in a Bath.




SECT. II. Of the signs of Conception, and whether the Child thrive in the Womb.
DR. Good Mrs. Eutrapelia, vouchsafe me your observations about Conceptions,
and let me understand what are the signs of Conception in general; and what
signs distinguish the Sexes?

Mid. Although, Sir, it is hard to know whether a woman has conceived yea or
no, yet it may be conjectured by many experienced Arguments; as, for instance,

First, it is thought a credible sign of Conception, if a woman either the
tenth day after coition, or sooner, perceive not, by reason of any humors, any
of her terms, be they whites, or reds. And, though the stopping of those be
accounted for a sign, yet that fails often, because it may be as well before
conception as after. But, waving this, let us find out other marks and
prognostics of a true conception, gathered from the state and condition of the
woman her self, being seriously examined from head to foot.

Secondly; pains and giddiness in the head, and a mist over the sight, if they
meet together, these portend conception.

Thirdly, the apples of the Eyes are lessened, the Eyes swell, and become
swarthy; the veins of the Eyes grow red, and are full with blood; the Eyes
sink, the Eyelids are remiss; diverse colors are seen in the Eyes, and are
observed in a looking-glass; the veins betwixt the Eyes and the Nose are swollen
with blood, and are seen clearer; the veins under the Tongue are somewhat
greenish.

Fourthly, the chest is warm, and the back cold.

Fifthly, the Veins and Arteries are swollen, and the pulse easier; the veins in
the breast are first black, then either yellow or blew.

Sixthly, The breasts grow big, and hard with pain; the nipple grows red; if
she drinks that which is cold, she feels cold in her breast.

Seventhly, there is a great loathing of meat and drink, and destruction of the
natural appetite, with longings after various meats, with an absurd appetite, a
continual vomiting, and weakness of stomach, sower belching, loathing of wine,
an inordinate pulsation of the heart, sudden joy, and after that, as sudden
grief; pains about the navil, heaviness about the loins, swelling toward the
bottom of the belly; inward pricking in the body; chilness of the outward
parts, after coition; retention of the seed seven days after copulation; about
the beginning of conception a shooting pain about the back and belly. The
courses are stopped; for those veins from which they flow carry the blood
(through certain holes that are at the end of them) for the nourishment of the
infant by the navil; and part of it is conveyed upwards into the breasts, and
there is prepared for milk.

Eighthly, the thighs swell with pain, but the body is weaker, and the face pale.

Ninthly; the belly is costive, by reason of the compressure of the intestines.
The urine is white, with a cold swimming at the top, wherein are to be seen
many atoms, like those observable in the beams of the sun: but, when in the
first Month many of these sink to to the bottom, the vessel in which it is,
being shaken, it seems to be drawn out like to wool. In the later months the
urine is redrish, or yellow, it becomes blackish, with a red cloud at the top.
I will here-with relate to you two experiments, by which it may be known
whether or no a woman has conceived. And the first is this; Stop up a woman's
urine three days in an urinal, at the end of which strain it (or, rather drop
it through fine linen,) and if she has conceived, you shall see little
creatures like to lice; if these be red, it is a token of a male; but if white,
they say portend a female. If a woman's urine be put in a brass Basin, and stand
there one night; if you put into it a bright needle, if she has conceived,
that needle will be bespeckled with red spots; but if otherwise, it will be
rusty all over.

The Signs whereby most pretend to know, whether Male or Female be conceived,
being altogether Falacious and Ridiculous, I have wholly omitted.

Dr. Since you have given such signs of Conception, let me know by what signs
you apprehend the Infant to be well, and thrive in the Womb, or not.

Mid. I shall, Sir. And first, if it be well, the breasts will be hard; but if
otherwise, they will be flaccid, and a waterish humor will flow out of them
(like to milk) of its own accord.

Secondly, if the courses flow too often out of the Womb in the time of
childbearing, it is an argument of an unhealthy Child, And, moreover, the
fattest Women commonly bring forth the weakest Infants.

Thirdly, if a woman bring Twins, the one a Male, the other a Female, there is
great danger of the Female, because they are nourished by a different aliment
in the Womb: but if they be both Females, there is the less danger.

Fourthly, if the Child be gotten in the time of the monthly terms, they are
mixed with untoward humors; from whence it is experienced that many leprous
Infants are begotten.

Fifthly, if there be superfaetation, the last conception seldom lives. Now,
superfaetation is, when a Woman having once conceived, conceives again after a
certain time, which sometimes happens.

Sixthly, if a Dropsy overtake the bigbellied Woman, and that her Nose, Ears,
and Lips look red; it is a sign of a dead Child.

Seventhly, if the infant come forth after the ninth month, it is oftentimes
very weak.

Eighthly, if a virgin conceive before her first flowers, it proves lusty and
perfect child.

Dr. So much for Conception. Tell me now somewhat of the nourishing of the
Child in the Womb, etc.

SECT. III. Of the Nutriment of the Child in the Womb, and by what nourishment
it is preserved, and when it grows up to be an Infant.
Whilst the young one is in the womb, it is nourished by blood attracted by
the navil; by which it is, that women after they have conceived have their
terms stopped; for then the infant begins to crave, and attracts much blood. For
the blood, presently after-conception, is discerned by a threefold difference.
The first and purest part of it the young one attracts for nourishment. The
second, less pure and thin, the wombforceth upwards by certain veins to the
breasts, where it becomes milk, by which the infant is nourished so soon as it
is born. The third, and more impure part of the blood, remains in the womb, and
flows out with the secundine, both in the birth, and after the birth: Hence
it is that Hippocates says; there is much affinity betwixt the flowers and the
milk, since the one happens to be made out of the other. And Galen also, by
reason of this thing, elegantly advises, that the infant has more from the
mother than from the father; for this reason, because the seeds are first
increased by the menstruous blood, and then by these the Infant is presently
nourished in the Womb; and again, being newly born, it is nourished with milk:
And, as roots have more nourishment from the earth than the plant from whence
they came: so also Infants receive more from the Mother than from the Father.
And hence he says that it comes to pass, that so much more is attributed to
the Mother, by how much more She contributeth more toward generation.

But the Infant being now formed, and perfected in the Womb, in the first month
the young one sends forth Urine by the passages of the Navil; but that Conduit
being shut in representation an infant-like embryo in the womb at about 45 days
after conception the last month, it vents it by the Privities; (of which more
when we come to treat of the Secundine (or after burden, with its coats.)
Whilst the Infant is in the Womb, it avoids nothing at the Fundament, because
hitherto it has sucked in nothing by the mouth. After the 45th day, as
Hippocrates tells us, it receives life, and together with that a Soul
(according to the opinion of many) divinely infused, for that then it begins to
be sensible, and from that time it may no more be called a young one, but an
Infant, according to the precedent Figure. And, though at this time it may have
sense, yet it wants motion, being as yet very tender; but of the time of the
motion, Hippocrates gives this account, viz. If you account the days double
from the time of Conception, you will find them quicken; and the time of
quickening being tripled, makes up the day of the birth. As for example,

If the Infant be formed in 45 days, it will stir in 90 days, which is the
middle time that it lies hid in the Womb; for in the ninth month it will come
forth, and make haste to the birth; although Females are oftentimes born in the
tenth Month. And so much for the formation, increase, and perfection of the
Infant, according to the account of days and times.

SECT. IV. How the Infant does in the Womb the fifth, the sixth, the seventh,
and eighth month; and of the due time and form of the Birth; and causes of pain
in Childbirth.
AFter the third and fourth month the Infant uses a more plentiful
nourishment, by which it grows more and more until the time of Birth shall
come: Therefore it is to be understood, that when it is born in the sixth
month, it cannot, in nature, live; because, though it be formed distinctly, yet
it is not arrived to its just perfection. But if it be born in the seventh
month, it may easily live, because then it is sufficiently perfect. And,
whereas it is a common opinion those born in the eighth month can rarely live;
but such as are born in the seventh are often times living, because on the
seventh month the Infant is ever moving toward the Birth, at which time, if it
be strong enough, it comes to the Birth, but if not, it remains in the Womb
till it grows stronger, (viz.) the other two Months. After the motion at
seven Months end if it be not born, it removes it self into some other place of
the Womb, and is so weakened by that motion, that should it come to the birth in
the following eighth Month, it cannot live by reason of that motion.

This seems very probable to many, but if they that practice deliveries make a
rational reflection thereon, they shall find that it is the Matrix alone
assisted with the compression of the Muscles of the lower belly and Midriff,
which cause the expulsion of the Child; being stirred up by its weight, and not
able to be farther extended to contain it: and not the Infant for want of
nourishment is not able to stay any longer there, and so uses its pretended
endeavors to come forth; and to that purpose kicking strongly it, breaks the
Membranes with its Feet which contain the waters, insomuch as when the Child is
naturally Born the skins are always torn before the Head; which pressing and
thrusting each through the waters before it, causes them to burst out with
force. Hippocrates admits the 10 month, and beginning of the 11. And here, I do
acknowledge for truth that the ordinary term of going with Child is 9 months;
but I cannot consent that Children born in the 7 month do oftener live than
those born in the 8, but on the contrary, I believe the nearer they approach to
the term of 9 months the stronger they are, and therefore rather live then
those born in the 7th, which is wholly contrary to the other opinion which they
have from Hippocrates; and in Egypt and Spain and other places Children born in
the 8th month live. But they should have considered there may be some
difference about Hippocrates's Months, viz. whether they were Solar or Lunar, a
Solar consisting of 30 or 31 days throughout the year, and a Lunar of 27 days
and some odd Hours and odd Minutes.

And then again the Women might be mistaken in their reckoning. And do we not
know not only in the same Country and Field but also on the same Vine, grapes
sometimes six weeks ripe before their ordinary Season; and others not till a
month after? which happens according to the Territories, different influence of
the Sun, and as the Vine is ordered. So do we see Women brought to bed six
weeks and 2 months before, and sometimes as long after their ordinary term; if
it be not that the Womb not being capable of an extension beyond a certain
degree, cannot bear its burden, but a little while after the account is out;
although there have been Women as Hippocrates acknowledges who have gone 10 or
11 whole Months with Child, which is so much the rarer, by how much it exceeds
its limits.

These things happen also to Women according to the different dispositions,
either of their whole body, or Womb alone, as well as according to their rule
of living, and more or less exercise they use, and may also happen on the
Child's part, as if at 7 months it be so big that the Womb can no longer contain
it, nor stretch it self more without bursting, it is then provoked by the pain
which this violent extention causes to discharge it self of it; and so in the
8th month if there be the same reason, and some weeks sooner or later according
to many other circumstances; as also by an outward occasion, as a violent
shaking of the whole body, blow, fall, leap, etc. hasting the pains; and that
which makes these Children live a longer or shorter time, is according as they
are at that time more strong and perfect, and the Woman nearer her time which
is at the end of the 9th month.

There have been many Women that have believed they were brought to bed at the
7th and 8th Month; and others that they went 10 or 11 whole Months; which may
sometimes be when notwithstanding they are effectively delivered at the due
time: that which deceives them usually is their believing themselves with Child
from the retention of their Courses, having had them the 2 first Months, yea
and sometimes longer, and others misreckon when their Courses are stopped 2
Months before they conceive: And a Woman, though well regulated, cannot exactly
know by the suppression singly the certain time of her being with Child; as for
example, if she lie with her Husband upon the coming down of her Courses, and
she conceive upon it, then she may make her account from their suppression,
which may be very near the truth; but if she conceive immediately after she
has had them, which happens oftnest, and that during the Month she Copulates
with her Husband, at the end of which time her Courses not coming down, she may
very well reckon her self with Child, yet for all this she cannot know by this
sign which Night she conceived on, and so for 3 weeks or a Month, more or less,
she may be mistaken in the time.

Here note there has often been great contests amongst Physicians, whether a
Child born the 11th or 12th Month, after its pretended Fathers death, can be
legitimately born, and so admitted to inherit, or be disinherited, as a
supposed Child; but this having been debated by the Romans as well as us, and
being parties for and against, I shall leave it undecided, and shall not add
any thing more concerning this point to what I have said before.

And now the Midwife is to take care, that she be timely prepared for the
reception of any birth, with all her necessary conveniences and instruments, as
with a fit stool, a sharp knife, astringent powder, a sponge, swathes, etc.
warm oil of Lillies, with which she may aptly anoint both the Womb of the Woman
and her own hands, but of that more hereafter.

And now in the next place let us make enquiry for the fittest and best
Midwife, for this great work, and now I remember my self there was a good Woman
called Mrs. Eutrapelia with me last night, for my advice and counsel in a very
difficult concern, whom I found by that little discourse I had with her to be a
very rational and understanding and expert woman in her art, and one that was
not self conceited of her self, like many of her Sisters, that think they know
all, and believe it is below them to ask any advice of the learned Physician or
Chyrurgion, when indeed they are oftenest the most ignorant; for it is the
Physician and Chyrurgion that they must be obliged to for the chief part of
their Art, and in France it is the Chyrurgions employ to help Women in
Childbirth, an^ she promised to be with me very early the morning to give me
account how it fare^ with her Patient, and of the success of m^ directions, and
hark I believe it is she knocking at the door at this instant.

Here note by the by, that it is romantic* to say, that the Males are generated
in the right side of the Matrix, but Females in the left, out of the left
Testicle; for the righ^ side, by reason of the Liver, is hotter, bu^ the left
cooker; for when there are Twins* sometime they are of the same Sex, but
principally the abundant heat of Seed is the caus^ of the generation of Males.

depiction of the baby in the womb, and the surrounding anatomy, near to the
time of birth This figure shows the Womb Anatomized and how the Infant lies
in it.
The parts are described in the following page.

CC Denotes the Kidneys of each side. DD The emulgent Veins on the righ^ side.
EE The emulgent Arteries on the righ^ side. F The trunck of the hollow vein. HH
The emulgent Arteries on the left side. LL The Spermatick Veins on the right
side. K The Spermatick Artery on the right side. M The Spermatick Veins on the
left side.
aa The Ureters cut off. oo The Feminine Testicles. PP The broad ligament like
Batts wings. qq The trunck of the great Artery. BB Vessels like Vine-branches.
Y The shaft of the Womb. R The bottom of the Womb where the Infant lies.




SECT. V. Rules for Childbearing Women, and how to prevent Abortion.
MId. According to your promise, I beseech you, Doctor, lay me down some Rules
to be observed by Childbearing Women.

Dr. Good Midwife, I shall, and that very necessary ones too, that she may know
how to go on safely through (by Gods blessing) to the last hour, or by
neglecting them, may make her delivery the harder: and I shall reduce them
under ten heads.

First, let her be cheerful; for this does exhilarate the Infant, and stirs up
all the faculties, and confirms it in its parts and Members.

Secondly, let her avoid all violent motion, and ahstain from all hard labors,
not rising up too hastily, not leaping, running, dancing, riding; not lacing
her self too straight, or carrying too heavy a burden; but surely moderate
sleep and rest, is very fit for her. And all this especially toward the latter
end of her reckoning; for though it be allowed them by most Authors to
facilitate the Birth, yet if we well consider the point we shall without doubt
find it to be the cause of miscarryings, and hard labors, and death of many
Women and Children. For you must know that the Birth of a Child ought to be
left to the work of Nature well regulated, and not to provoke it, by shaking
and jolting, as in a Coach, or by a trotting Horse, and to dislodge it before
its full time, which happening though it be but 7 or 8 days sooner proves
sometimes as prejudicial to the Infant, as we see it sometimes to Grapes which
we find 4 or 5 days before they are full ripe, to be yet almost half verjuice;
But to explain this more clearly, consider the Infant is naturally seated in
the Womb, with Head uppermost and the Feet downwards, with its Face toward the
Mothers belly, just till it has attained the 8th Month; at which time and
sometimes sooner, and sometimes later, its head being very great and heavy, it
turns over its Head downward and its heels upward; which is the sole and true
posture in which it ought to come into the World. Now just when the Child is
about to turn according to custom into its intended posture, instead of giving
her self rest, she fall a jumping, walking, running up and down stairs, and
exercising her self more then ordinary, which very often causes it to turn
cross, and not right, as it ought to be; and sometimes the Womb is depressed to
low, and engaged in such sort toward the last Month, in cavity of the flanks
by those joltings, that there is no liberty left the Infant to turn it self
naturally; wherefore it is constrained to come in its first posture, to wit by
the Feet, or some other worser: moreover it would be very convenient that the
Woman should abstain from having to do with a Man carnally, during the 2 last
months of her reckoning, forasmuch as the body is thereby much moved, and the
belly pressed in the action, which likewise causes the Child to take a wrong
posture. Now I believe that those that will seriously reflect and confider of
these things, will be ready to quit this their old error, which has certainly
caused the death of many Women and Children, and much pain to diverse others.

Thirdly, let her beware of sharp and cold winds, of excessive heat, anger,
troubles of the mind, affrights and terrors, overmuch venery, and of
intemperancy of eating and drinking.

Fourthly let her diet be frugal, and moderate, abstaining from gross meats,
hard of digestion; let her eat Eggs, Chickens, Landfowl, birds of the
Mountains, etc. variety of broths, grewels, panadoes, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Kid,
Rabbets; she may use in her meats Nutmeg and Cinnamon; she may drink wine
moderately.

Fifthly, in the first four Months let her open no vein, use no cupping or
scarrifications, fontanells, nor use any pills, or other Physic, without the
advice of a prudent Physician; for in these Months the ligaments of the Child
are very tender, soft, and feeble; and therefore the easier destroyed, and the
nourishment kept from it.

Sixthly, if it shall happen that the Woman be too costive (by which many
miscarry) let her boil Spinach, and Lettuce, in Veal broth well buttered, with
salt, or wine; which, if they will not move the belly, let her use
suppositories, with honey and salt, or of Castile-soap: and if these common
things will not do, let her advise with an expert Physician.

Seventhly, if it happen that she conceive with grievous symptoms, and after
conception is troubled with faintings, let her take this Cordial following.
Take of Sorrel-water, and red-Rose-water, of each one ounce; of Cinamon-water
one ounce; of Manus Christi pearled, half an ounce, or as much Diamargariton:
this may be taken as need requires.

Eighthly, if she fear that she may come (before her time) as in the seventh
Month, or some other unseasonable time, and feels throws, as of Childbearing,
let her sit over a fume of Frankincense; for that contributes no small strength
both to the Womb, and to the Infant also.

Ninthly, if she nauseate her meat, she may use a plaster of Mastich to her
Stomach, and take this following Cordial every morning, fasting, to strengthen
her Stomach.

Take Syrup of Pomegranates one ounce and half; of Mosch and Ambergreece, of
each two grains; of Lignum Aloes finely powdered, one scruple; of Cinnamon half
a scruple; the water of Sorrel three ounces; let these be mingled, and drank
off blood-warm.

Lastly, if, whilst she go with Child, she perceive her terms, let her eat
milk, made boil with red-hot steel, and in that let Plantain and Comfrey be
boiled. But, in all these cases, let her advise with learned Physicians, which
will direct her with medicines from time to time.

I shall hereafter treat of some distempers incident to Childbed; and leave
you some choice Remedies in the following Sections; and then wind up all.

SECT. VI. A Dialogue between the Midwife, and the Doctor, concerning Midwifes
and the delivery of Women in Childbirth.
MId. A good morning to you good Mr. Dr. Sir I am come according to my promise,
to give you an account of the event of the directions you was pleased to give
me last Night concerning Mrs. Styles, the which indeed Sir have succeeded
marveilous prosperously, and she now thinks her self in Paradise to what she
was before, and has sent you Sir a small gratuity according to her ability, in
acknowledgment of the great benefit she has received by your Counsel. And for
my own part Sir I so well approve of your last Nights discourse, that I must
humbly entreat you, that you would be pleased to afford me your Instructions in
the safe performance of my Art.

Dr. Very willingly good Mrs. and truly your name bespeaks you a fit Woman for
your Employ, as being a well bred Woman; therefore I shall in the first place
take occasion to tell you what kind of person a Midwife ought to be, and that
in the subsequent description.

The best Midwife is she that is ingenious, knowing letters, and having a good
memory, is studious, neat and cleanly over the whole body, healthful, strong,
and laborious, and well instructed in Women's conditions: not soon angry, nor
turbulent, or hasty, unsober, unchaste; but pleasant, quiet, prudent; not
covetous, but like the Hebrew Midwives, such as fear God, that God may deal
with them, and that people may multiply and increase after their hands, and
that the Lord may build them Houses.

By this description I tell you only how the best Midwife must be qualified;
now let me hear somewhat of your skill, that I may the better judge thereof.
First, then let me know how Women are delivered?

Mid. Women are variously delivered, some on their bed, that is to say,
o'rethwart the hardest bed, with their Faces upward, with their Feet closed,
doubled, and covered. But if she be not so tired out that of necessity she must
be delivered on the bed, remove her to the stool: now the stool must be strong,
and cut with a hole, in the shape of the moon, as high as a Barbers chair, that
the depiction of the baby in the womb before and after turning to the natural
position for birth A Natural Birth.
Midwife sitting upon a lower stool, may the better bring the Infant from the
upper parts; the Woman's face being still from her. Then let her attend with her
finger dipped in warm oil of sweet Almonds, or Lillies, moved about the orifice
of the Womb, that the secundine (called the afterburden) may the easier fall
out. Then let those that are about her (which need not be above three at a
time, that is to say, on each side one; and one at her back) persuade her not
to cry out, but to keep in her breath what she may, that the spirits may
descend, and be exposed downwards, to depress the Midriff, especially when her
throws are upon her. If the secundine be not broken after a long while, it may
be broken, carefully, with the nail of the finger, and thrusting the finger in
by degrees. But oftentimes the orifice opens naturally, by reason of the
humors that flow out by it. But always this caution must be observed by the
Midwife, that the Infant fall not suddenly out, lest that endanger too sudden a
shaking both of the head and shoulders. But the humors flowing, and the orifice
so open, the Midwife may take hold of it, and moving it to and fro, bring it to
the birth (according to the natural posture described before in the fourth
Section) which must be done at such a time when the orifice of the Womb opens
it self, and not otherwise; lest with hastiness the flux of blood (which always
attends the birth) be too immoderate, and so the Womb it self come forth. When
the Infant begins to come forth, let the Midwife take and receive it in a cloth
in her hands, and let it come down together with the Secundine. After the Child
has rested a while, the Navil must be cut four inches in length, with a sharp
penknife, being sufficiently tied with a strong double silk in two places, and
cut betwixt the knots, to prevent as well a flux of blood in the Infant as in
the Mother. After it is cut off, dry up the coagulated blood, with some
astringent powder, as Thuraloes at the Apothecaries.

As to the washing of the Child, and swathing, I need not give you any account,
I suppose you take it for granted, that most women understand that. I only here
show you the shape of the stool I use, which, I hope, you will not disapprove
of, though few Midwives have them, or use them.

Dr. I like, Mrs. the use of your stool, as being most useful, and especially
by reason of the skirt of cloth that usually ought to be about it, to keep away
the air, which gives me occasion to give you one necessary Admonition by the
way. That all Midwives take heed that they expose not their Women, that
depiction of the midwife's stool B. the Back of the Stool oooo. the feet aa.
rests for the hands rr. the ring in shape like the Moon cccc. the Cloth round
the ring to keep out the Air etc:


are in labor, to the cold Air, but rather that they cover the Privities with
the secundine also whilst it is yet hot, or else with warm clothes presently
after the birth. For, believe me, (neither is it only my opinion, but also the
opinion of the most Learned Doctors) that there is nothing worse to
childbearing Women than the cold air, because that entering into the Womb, the
Womb it self is distended, waxes cold, and swells, and its orifices are
shut; through which passes the menstruous matter; and then arise grievous
symptoms, and often times death it self. But as to the suppression of them, and
their cure, we shall speak more hereafter.

This precedent Figure is the form of a Child lying in the Womb (according as
cut in Tho. Bartholinus, in Page 197.) naked, and out of all its coats both
proper and common. The description of it appears by the explanation of these
letters in it, viz. depiction of the baby in the womb in a natural position for
birth AA Shows the parts of the Chorion dissected, and removed from their
proper place. B a Portion of the Membrane Amnios. CC The Membrane of the Womb
dissected. DD The placenta Vteri, or hepar uterinum, being a fleshy substance
full of many Vessels, by which the Infant receives its nourishment. E The
varication of the Vessels which makes up the Navil string. FF The Navil string
by which the Vmbilick vessels are carried from the placenta to the Navil. GG
The Infant, as it lies perfect in the Womb near the time of Travel. H How the
umbilical vessels are inserted into the Navil of the Infant.




SECT. VII. Of the several natural situations of the Infant in the Mothers
Womb, according to the different times of Childbearing.
WHen the Woman is young with Child, the little creature called the Embryo is
always of a round Figure, a little longish, having the backbone moderately
turned inwards, the thighs folded and a little raised, to which the legs are so
joined, that the heels touch the buttocks; the arms are bending and the hands
placed upon the knees, toward which the head is inclining forwards, so that
the chin touches the breast; In this posture it resembles one sitting to void
his excrements, and stooping down his head to see what comes from him. Its back
bone is at that time placed toward the Mothers, the head uppermost, the face
forward, and the feet downward; and proportionably to its growth, it extends
its members by little and little; which were exactly folded in the first Month;
This posture it usually keeps till the 7th or 8th month, at which time the head
being grown big is carried downwards by its weight, toward the inward orifice
of the Womb, tumbling as it were over its head, so that then the Feet are
uppermost, and the Face toward the Mothers great gut; when the posture happens
otherwise, it is unnatural; (and both Male and Female lie thus;) because the
Child's face coming upwards will be extremely bruised, and its Nose wholly
flatted, because of the bones hardness in the passage.

Note further, when the Child has changed its first Situation being not yet
accustomed to this last, it stirs and torments it self so much sometimes, that
the woman, by reason of the pain she feels, is apt to believe she is in labor,
and if this circumstance be well considered, you will find it to be that first
pretended endeavor, which Authors imagine the Child makes to be born the 7th
month; and not being able to accomplish it, it stays till the 9th etc. But this
is a great mistake, for if the Child turns it self so with the head downwards,
or rather is turned, it is but by a natural disposition of the weight of the
upper parts of the body; and if it stir much at that time and soon after, it is
not from a desire to be born, but from the inconvenience it receives from this
new posture, to which it was not before accustomed: and it begins to turn thus
sometimes from the 7th month, rarely before, but by accident; often about the
8th and sometimes the 9th only, and at other times also it does not turn at
all, as we may easily perceive in those that come in their first Situation,
that is with their Feet foremost.

When there are many Children they ought to come in the same Figure if it be a
natural Birth, as when there is but one; but usually by their different motions
they incommode one another, that for the most part one presents wrong in time
of labor; yea and before, which is the cause that one comes often with the
head, the other with the feet, or some worse posture, and sometimes both come
wrong. However the Infant may be settled in the Mothers belly, or in whatever
fashion it represents it self at the birth, if it be not according to the
posture before said, it is always against nature.

SECT. VIII. Of difficult births, whether they proceed from Causes external or
internal.
DIfficult births from external causes may be either, first, from excessive
heat, dissolving the strength of the women; or secondly, excessive cold,
condensing the womb; or thirdly, from sweet things, often applied to the
nostrils of the woman, that by smelling to sweet things she may recover her
strength and faintings; for sweet smells do attract the womb upwards, and so
render the birth more difficult.

Difficult birth from internal causes may be either, first, from the woman;
secondly, from the womb; thirdly, from the infant; fourthly from the membranes
of the womb. 1. From the woman, as when she is too angry, too fearful, or too
modest; or if she be in age above 40 years, from whence the muscles of the womb
may be concluded to be dry, and so the less extenfible; or when she is so thick
and fat, that the passages be narrow: Or, 2. From the womb it self, as, when it
is so small, and nature so weak and feeble that it cannot expel the birth: Or,
if there be any inflammation; or unnatural affect in the privities, be it the
stone, or piles, or extraordinary costiveness; all which may so compress the
womb with their weight, that it cannot expel the birth. 3. Is from the infant
it self, as if it be of an unusual bigness, of a great head, or a monstrous
birth, hydropical, full of wind, dead in the womb, or lying there in a posture
beyond nature; as when it comes overthwart, with the feet forward, and not the
head, or if the thigh before the head. 4. From the membranes of the womb, as
when they are so forcibly broken by the child in the womb that the moisture
flows thence, leaving the infant behind, that when the child should come
forth, that moisture fails, and so the membranes being dryer, makes the
birth the more difficult; or when it is firm and solid that it is broken with
much difficulty, and so makes the labor the harder.

And here we cannot but take notice how those Authors, who have not the perfect
knowledge of the parts of a Woman's body, attained to by Anatomy, do admire and
cannot as they say, conceive how it is possible that an Infant so big can pass,
in time of labor, through an opening of the Womb so small; some of them being
of opinion that the Woman's share-bone is separated at that time, to enlarge the
passage; without which it would be impossible for the Infant to have room
enough to be born; and therefore Women that are a little antiquated suffer in
their first labors more than others, because their sharebone cannot so easily
be separated, which often kills their Children in their passage: others again
are of opinion that it is the flank-bone, which is disjointed from the
hoop-bone for the same purpose; and say both the one and the other of them,
viz. That these bones thus separated at the hour of labor, are thereto so
disposed by degrees, a little before, by the fly my humors which flow forth
from about the Womb, and then mollify the grisles and cords which at other
times join them firmly together. But both these opinions are as different from
truth as reason; for Anatomy convinces us clearly that the Womb by no means
touches these places; whereby to moisten and soften them by its humors; as
likewise that these bones are so joined by the gristle that it is very
difficult to separate them with a knife, especially the flank-bone from the
hoop-bone, and almost impossible in some elderly Women without great violence;
although Ambrose Parry, a most famous Surgeon in his time at Paris, (quoting
many witnesses to the thing) gives us an History of a Woman in whom (having
been hanged 14 days after she was delivered in Childbirth,) he found (as he
says) the share bone separated in the middle the breadth of half a finger, and
the flanck-bones themselves disjointed from the hoop-bone. But we will not in
this matter accuse him of an imposture as having too much respect, and a better
opinion of so worthy a person, and believing him to be too sincere as to commit
such a crime; but do indeed believe the good man might be mistaken in this
separation; for we cannot probably conceive that being so at the time of her
labor it would remain so a fortnight after, the breadth of half a finger; for
then they would have been forced to carry this Woman to execution; (for they
are executed at Paris within the City or Suburbs,) because she would not have
been able to have supported her self, or climb the ladder of the Gibbet; and
keep her self on her Legs according to the custom of other Malefactors;
because the body is only supported by the stability of these bones; wherefore
we must believe, as most probable, that such a disjunction and separation was
caused either from the falling of this Woman's body from the high Gibbet to the
ground after execution; or from some blow on that place from some hard thing.
And if we thoroughly examine the different Figure and Structure of these bones
between a Man's and a Woman's Sceleton, we shall find a larger empty space and
distance between these bones much more considerable in women then in men; and
that to this purpose the least women have the bones of the hip more distant the
one from the other, than the biggest man; and they have also the crupper-bone
more outward, and the sharebone flatter, which makes the passage from this
capacity larger, and more able to give issue to the child at the time of
labor: moreover they have besides this the flank bones much more turned
outward, that the womb being filled may have more room to stretch it self out
on the sides, and more at ease supported by such a disposition; as you will see
explained in the figure.

A shows the Man's bones. B the Woman's; for to know the difference that the
Woman's is more capacious then the Man's, for C and C, D and D, E and E are at a
larger distance one from another, in a Woman than in a Man. And besides that
Women have the rump bone marked F. more turned outward than Men, which gives
way to the head to pass through the large passage between the 2 Hip-bones,
marked E and E, without great difficulty; and without any necessity for the
separation of the share-bone.

The bladder and great gut being emptyed of the excrements they contein hinder,
in no wise but that the womb, made membranous or skinny for that purpose, can
stretch forth it self as it does to let the infaut pass in labor, by this
great empty space sufficient for it whithout any necessity that these
bone-should be disjointed or separated; for if it should so fall out indeed
women could not sustain themselves on their legs; as many of them do
immediately after that they are brought to bed; because they are instead of a
support to them, as is already expressed, and of a middle joincture to all the
other, as well of the upper as the lower parts of the body. Which the learned
and judicious and experienced Surgeon Mr. Francis Moriceau very well noted,
when he laid so many Women in the Hostel de dieu in Paris; for when Women that
are there to be brought to bed begin to be in labor, they go into a little room
called the stove, where all are delivered upon a little low bed made expressly,
where they place them before the fire, afterward as soon as they are delivered
they conduct them to their bed, which sometimes is a good way off from this
little chamber, whither they walk very well, which they could never do were
their share-bone, or their flanck-bone separated the one from the other.
Besides we often see young Women that have concealed their labor, put
themselves (the better to hide their faults,) immediately to their ordinary
business as if they had ailed nothing: neither could this ingenious Chyrurgion,
in all women that ever he delivered, ever perceive this pretended disjunction,
though he put his hand on the share bone when the child was in passage; but he
says that indeed he has found the hip-bone which is joined with a loose
Joint, to the lower extremity of the hoop-bone to bend outward during labor:
in which part the women feel sometimes much pain because the coming forth of
the child offers it a great violence, and because its head at that time does
much press the great gut against it.

Moreover having often seen and dissected women, being dead a few days after
their delivery, it has been found a very difficult matter to separate these
bones with a strong sharp Penknife; where could not be found any the least
appearance of any forgoing separation: and if those advanced in years have more
pain with their first children than the younger women, it does not proceed from
the difficulty of the separation of these bones (which never is, from the
reason aforesaid) but because the membranes of their womb are dry, and hard;
and particularly its internal orifice, cannot therefore so easily be stretched
open as young women's, which in them is much moister.

SECT. IX. Of the Fashions, and Figures of the birth, and how Children are born
or may be born.
THE postures of the infant in the womb are generally four: First, they offer
to come with their heads forward (which is the natural birth.) Secondly, with
the feet forwards. Thirdly, overthwart. Fourthly, doubled; to all which the
Midwives care and skill is required, but especially in the three later. But
many other postures have been observed, in practice; for that child that comes
with his head forward, sometimes has his head right, as to the orifice of the
matrix, but the rest of the body crooked, and sometimes overthwart: and
sometimes the infant pitcheth his head, either in the former part from the
orifice, or backward, or comes crooked; and sometimes also it is whithout any
tie, as to the bottom of the matrix, and sometimes with it; sometimes also it
puts forth one hand, or both, so as that they are twisted above the head:
sometimes it comes forward, with its feet asunder, and those fixed in the
parts of the womb; sometimes the feet being doubled, it endeavors to come
forth with the knees forward; sometimes it is so doubled, that it shows forth
its little buttocks like one that is sitting; or contrarily may be so doubled,
that you may find the soles of the feet joined to the head in the orifice of
the matrix; but those that lie o'rethwart, sometimes lie on one side, and
sometimes with the face upwards, and sometimes downwards: But if there be twins,
then that which presents it self fairrest, must be laid hold on, and the
other put back. As to all which, the next following Sections will not only
furnish you with figures, but with directions. Hitherto having described the
Midwife and her office, together with the site of the infant in the womb, as
natural; together with difficult births in general, and their causes. It is
reasonable, (good Mrs. Eutrapelia) that we discourse of unnatural births,
because those bring the greatest danger with them, both to the mother and
infant.

SECT. X. Figure the first. Of unnatural Births.
DR. Courteous Mrs. Eutrapelia, If you perceive a child come with its feet
forwards, and the hands drawn downwards to the thighs, according to the next
ensuing form, How will you deliver the woman?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the feet, with the arms pointing downwards

Mid. In this, I will take care to be furnished with Oils, and convenient
liniments, and only to help the coming forth of the infant, by anointing and
cherishing it, lest it go back again, but that it may come forth the same way
as it began. But first of all I shall take care, that both arms of the infant
so stretched downwards, be so secured by me, that the infant may not have power
to draw them back again, but that I may compel it to come forth, after the very
same manner: But if the infant breaking forth after this manner, and by reason
of its bigness as well as his arms drawn down, be so straightened by the
narrowness of the matrix, that of it self it cannot wholly come to the birth;
then the womb of the woman is to be anointed with oil of Lillies, or sweet
Almonds, or hogs grease, and some sneezing Powder, blowed up he nose, to help
the sending forth of the birth; and the womb gently to be compressed with both
hands, that it tend not upwards, but downwards, as it ought, until it come
forth entirely.

Here most Authors advise to change the Figure and place the head so that it
may present it self first to the birth; which is very difficult and almost
altogether impossible to be performed; if we desire to avoid the dangers that
by such violent endeavors both the Mother and the Child must inevitably be put
into; and I wish they would have shown us any way how it might be safely acted;
that we might have followed their examples wherefore it is better to draw it
forth by the feet, then to venture a worse accident by turning it.

Now to perform this the Midwife must have her Nails well pared and no rings on
her fingers, but her hands well anointed with Oil or fresh Butter; then the
woman being seated to the best advantage let her gently put her hand into the
entry of the Womb, which if it be not wide enough let her open it a little and
little by degrees, with her fingers by spreading them one from the other after
they are entered together, so continuing to do till it be sufficiently enlarged,
then finding the Child's feet let her draw it forth in this posture following;
but if there shall but one foot present it self, then she shall consider
whether it be the right or the left, and in what fashion it comes; for thief
reflections will be a means to inform her, on what side the other may be, which
as soon as she knows let her seek for it, and then gently draw it forth
together with the first; and then also let her be very careful and well assured
that this 2d be not the foot of another Child; for if it should chance to prove
so, she may sooner split both Mother and Children then draw them forth: the
which she may easily prevent it by sliding her hand up the first leg and thigh
to the twist, she find both thighs joined together, and depending from one and
the same body; and which is likewise without doubt the best means to find the
other foot, when it comes but with one.

Being then secured of both the Child's feet, she may draw them forth, and
holding them together, she may bring them by little and little in this manner,
by taking hold of the Legs and Thighs aftewards, as soon as she can come at
them and drawing them so till the hips be come forth: in the mean time let her
observe to wrap the parts in a single napkin, to the intent that her hands
being already greasy slip or slide nor from the Infants body, which is very
slippery, because of the slimy humors which are all over it; and hinder her
from taking fast hold of it; which being done she may on both sides, with her
hand, bring away the arms, being careful that the Belly and Face be downwards;
lest being upwards the Head be stopped by the chin over the share-bone; so that
if it be not so she must turn it to that posture; which is easily done if by
taking hold of the body, when the breast and arms are forth, she shall draw it
with turning it in proportion, on that side it most inclines to, till it be as
it should be, that is with the Face downwards, and having brought it to the
shoulders, let her lose no time, (desiring the Women at the same instant to
bear down) that so in drawing, the head at that very moment may take its places
and not be stopped in its passage.

There are indeed some Children that have their Head so big, that when the
whole body is born, yet that stops in the passage, notwithstanding all the care
that can be used to prevent it; in this case the Midwife must not only
endeavor to draw forth the Child by the shoulders, least she sometimes
separates the body from the Head, but she must disingage it by little and
little, from the bones in the passage, with the fingers of each hand, sliding
on each side oppofite the one to the other, sometimes above and sometimes under
until the work be ended; endeavoring to dispatch it as soon as possible, least
the Child be cloaked or stifled; as it will certainly be if it remain long in
that posture; which being artificially and well effected; she may soon after
fetch away the afterbirth.

SECT. XI. Figure the Second.
DR. But, tell me, I pray, Mrs. Eutrapelia; What if an infant come with the
feet forward, and the hands lifted above the head, and not drawn downwards to
the thighs, (as in the follwing figure) what course will you take with most
safety.

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the feet, with the arms pointing upwards

Mid. Sir, I am not at all to receive it so lying, except the Infant be very
small and little, and the Womb so extensive, and open, that it may be hoped a
safe delivery, both to the Woman and to the Child; neither must I receive it
before the Womb and the Infant be diligently anointed. But it were much better
to thrust back the Infant into the Womb, and to turn it to the right form,
which may be done after this manner. Let the woman lie on her back upon a bed,
with her buttocks raised higher, and her head lower; which done, I must swathe
her belly upward gently, that I may drive back the Infant again into the Womb,
by which means it may give an occasion of coming in another form; but above
all, I must take care to turn the face of the Infant toward the back of the
Mother, and then I must lift up the buttocks and things of the Infant toward
the Navil of the Mother, that it may hasten toward a lawful birth: and there
cannot be a safer experiment in this case, (as I conceive) which is also most
useful in such births as come unnaturally.

Dr. Those Authors indeed Mrs. that have written of labors and never practiced
them as many Physicians and Chirurgions have done, do order all by the same
precept often repeated, that is to reduce all unnatural and wrong births to a
natural and right posture; which is to turn it that it may come with the Head
first; but as I have said before, if they themselves had ever had the least
experience, they would have known that it is very often impossible, at least,
if they shall attempt to do it by the excess of violence, that must necessarily
be offered to effect it; it will go near to hazard the destruction both of
Mother and Child, in the operation. A fiat in this case ^s soon said, but not
so easily executed as pronounced; and for my part I am of a clear contrary
opinion to theirs, and such as are ^kilful in the art, will certainly acquiesce
with me in this, that is, that whenever the ^nfant comes wrong in what
posture soever from the shoulders to the feet, it is the best and safest way
and soonest performed to draw ^t forth by the Feet; diligently searching for
them as is before directed if they do not pre^ent themselves, rather then to
make an at^empt to put it into a natural posture, and ^lace the head foremost;
for the great endea^ors often necessary to be used in turning the ^nfant in the
Womb, (which is a little more ^ifficult business then to turn a pancake in a
^rying-Pan;) do so weaken both Mother and Child, that there remains not
afterward ^trength enough to commit the operation to ^ork of Nature; and
usually the Woman ^ath no more throws nor pains fit for labor, after she has
been so wrought upon; for which cause it must needs be very tedious and
^ifficult; as also the Infant, which is already ^ery weak, will certainly
perish in the pas^age, without being able to be born.

SECT. XII. Figure the Third.
DR. Now I pray you Mrs. tell me, If the Infant happen to come forth but with
one foot, and the arms let down to the sides, but the other foot turned
backwards; How will you help?

Mid. In this case worthy Sir what has been said before, concerning the first
Figure, being punctually observed, there will no difficulty at all remain in
the operation; only always remembering, when there is occasion, to refresh the
Woman in labor with such Medicinal means as may be proper for her in he
condition.

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of one foot, with the other foot pointing backwards, and the arms
pointing downwards

SECT. XIII. Figure the Fourth.
DR. If an Infant comes with the Shoulder first, or lie across on its back, or
with its buttocks, with the hands and feet up; how will you help it?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the shoulder, back, or buttocks

Mid. The most difficult of these three sorts of figures and situations, in
which Infants sometimes come, is that of the shoulders, because it is farthest
from the Infant's feet; and the Midwife must find them, to draw it forth; the
next is the back, and the breech for the same reason causes it least trouble;
not only because the feet are nearer, but also because by this figure, the
Infant's head and neck is not so locked as in the other postures.

Now to remedy this birth of the shoulders some advise that it should be put
back, to make way for the Infants head, that thereby it may be reduced to a
natural birth, but it is much better, for the reasons before alleged, to
endavour to bring it by the Feet; the which dexterously to effect, the Midwife
must thrust the shoulder back a little with her hand, that so she may have more
liberty to introduce it into the Womb, and sliding it then along the Child's
body either by the belly or side, as she shall find it easiest, she shall fetch
the feet; and turning it bring them to the passage, and so she shall deliver
that Woman as is before directed.

If it be the back that presents to the birth, it is likewise impossible it
should be born in in that posture, what pains soever the Mother endures; and
besides the child having the body folded inwards, and almost double, its breast
and belly are so pressed together, that i^ usually wants very little to be
choked or stifled; to avoid the which dangerous inconvenience, the Midwife
must quickly slide up he^ hand along the back toward the inferio^ parts, until
she meets with the feet, to the intent she bring it forth the same way as if i^
came footling.

But when the Child comes with the Breech forward, if it be small, and the
Mother big, having the passages very large, it may sometimes, with a little
help, be born so; for although it comes double, yet its Thighs being folded
toward its belly, which is soft and gives way, it passes without much trouble.

Now as soon as the Midwife finds the Child to come with the Buttocks foremost
she must not suffer it to engage lower in the passage; for it will not come
after that manner, unless it be very small; and the passage very large as we
have said; This being then in good time perceived, the Midwife must, if she can
thrust back the breech, and sliding up her hand along the thigh to the legs and
feet of the Child, she must bring them gently, one after another, forh of the
Womb, by folding, stretching, wagging, and drawing them gently toward the
side; being careful not to wind them too much, or cause a distocation, and then
let her draw forth the rest of the body, as if it came with the feet foremost.

I said, Sir that the Midwife, perceiving the Child to come with its breech
foremost, ought to put it back, if she can, for sometimes it will be so far
advanced, in the passage, that she may sooner destroy both Mother and Child
then reduce it to the posture aforesaid, it being once so strongly engaged;
when this happens she cannot by any means hinder it from coming in this
posture, in which its belly is so pressed, that it often voids its ordure by
its Fundament: however she may much help this birth, by sliding up one or 2
fingers of each hand on each side of the buttocks, for to introduce them into
the groins; and having crooked them inward, she must draw the breech just out
to the thighs, and then by drawing it, and wagging it from side to side, she
will disingage them from the passage; as also the feet and legs one after the
other; being very careful of putting any part out of joint; and then she may
draw forth the rest, as before is taught when it come with its feet foremost.

SECT. XIV. Figure the Fifth.
DR. Tell me, Mrs, Eutrapelia, what if the Infant happen to hasten to the birth
with his arms and legs distorted and crooked, according to this figure; How
then will you help?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the legs bent at the knees, with the arms pointing downwards
bent at the elbows

Mid. As things so stand, Sir, I must not endeavor the birth of the child, but
must bring her from the stool to the bed, where I must press back the womb as
before-said, or must desire her to roll her self about, till the Infant is
turned to a more commodious posture: And if this course prevail not, I must
endeavor to join both feet together, and, if possible, must bring down the
hands so to the sides, that I may direct it to the birth. But the safest and
best way in my weak judgment Sr. must needs be that which you have taught me
in the foregoing births.

SECT. XV. Figure the Sixth.
DR. Tell me, Midwife what if the Infant fall down with both the knees bent,
and the hands hanging down to the thighs; How will you go to work?

Mid. Here, Sr. when an Infant (not being turned, toward the latter months, as
it ought, to come with its head foromost) presents its self with the knees to
the birth, having its legs folded toward its buttocks, one may easily be
deceivad touching one of them, because of their hardness and roundness, and
take it for its head; especially when being seated a little high, it can be
reached but with the end of a singer only, but if it be touched and handled a
little better, the Infant being fallen a little lower it will be easily
distinquished.

As Soon therefore Sr. as such birth is perceieved, I must not suffer it to
advance further in such a posture, but having placed the woman, must gently put
back the child's knees to the intent that I may have the more liberty to unfold
the legs one after another, the which dexterously to effect, I must put one o^
two of my fingers under the child's hams d^recting them by little and little
all along b^hind the leg until I meet with the foot an^ drawing always a
little obliquely, for t^ come the easier to the end of it, that so having
disengaged one, I may do the same to the other, proceeding after the same
manner a^ with the first, after which having brough^ them together, I must
finish the work, a^ when a child comes with its feet foremost* and hands
downwards to the things.

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the knees, with the arms pointing downwards

SECT. XVI. Figure the Seventh.
DR. But, Mrs. Eutrapelia, what if the Infant come out hastily with one hand,
and the other hand down toward the side, and the feet stretched out straight
into the womb, according to this figure; How will you receive it.

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of one hand, with the other hand pointing sidewards

Mid. May it please you, Sir, I am not at all to receive it so, nor to suffer
it to proceed farther toward the birth; but must bring her to the bed, where
her head must lie lower than her buttocks; then I must swathe her belly gently,
that the Infant may fall back again into the womb: but if it fall not back of
its own accord, I must put in my hand, and press back the shoulders, and must
reduce the the arm that hanged out to the side, that it may be disposed of to a
natural from in the Womb, and so may come forth easily.

Dr. Very well Mrs. Eutrapelia, this is your way; but now give me leave I pray
you to give you my method in this case; when an Infant therefore presents only
one or both hands to the birth, or an arm sometimes out to the Elbow, and many
times to the shoulder, it is of the worst and most dangerous postures a child
can come in, as well for its self as its mother; by reason of the violence the
midwife is forced to use both to the one and the other, in searching for the
feet, which are very far off, by which I would always, in these cases, have it
turned and drawn forth; the which to do will often make the midwife sweat in
the midst of winter, because of the difficulty in this labor more then all the
rest, though some other of them are indeed more dangerous for the Infant, as
when it presents the belly, and the Navil string comes forth, but it is not so
painful for the Midwife, because the feet of the Infant, being near the
passage, are not so hard to be found, as when it comes with a hand forward, for
then they are high, and at the very bottom sometimes of the womb; where the
midwife must seek them to turn it and draw it forth as I shall now direct.

When therefore it presents with one hand only, or a whole arm first it must by
no means be pulled forth by that part, for it will be sooner separated and rent
from the body then so brought forth; by reason a child is plucked obliquely and
a cross-way; wherefore having placed the woman as is requisite, the midwife
must put back the Infants hand or arm, into the womb again: some Midwives dip
in cold water, or wash it with a wet cloth, saying that the Infant will
presently draw it in, if it be living; but it is usually so pressed and engaged
in the passage, that this bad posture, that it has not liberty enough to draw
back its hands so easily, being once come forth; wherefore the midwife must
guide them back with her own, which she must afterward slide into the womb,
under the child's breast and belly so far till she finds the feet, which she
must gently pull toward her, to turn it and draw it forth by them as before I
directed; always remembering to act with as little violence as may be, which is
much more easy, sure and safe then to busy ones self in putting it to a natural
situation.

As soon therefore as she has turned the child to the feet, if she has hold
but of one, she must search for the other, that so she may bring it to the
first, when holding them both she must govern herself afterward in bringing
the child into the World, as we directed you before when the child comes with
its feet foremost.

But if the Arm be far advanced almost to the shoulder, and so big and sweld as
it will be if it be along while forth, that it cannot at all, or with out great
difficulty be put back, then she herself, or a Surgeon being immediately
sent for, if the child be certainly dead, must twist the arm twice or thrice
about, till it be wholly separated from the body, which it will easily be by
reason of its tenderness, and that just in the joint of the shoulder with the
shoulder blade; but be sure the child be dead; elce what an horrible spectacle
will it be to bring, as some have done, a poor child yet living into the World
after the arm has been cut off?

SECT. XVII. Figure the Eighth.
DR. But, Mrs, Suppose the Infant come forth with both hands stretched forth
above the head, and the feet straight stretched into the Womb, which is here
figured and is much more dangerous than the former?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of both hands together

Mid. It Is true, Sir, this posture is much more dangerous than the former; but
I shall take all the care I can to bring back again this birth into the womb
wholly. And first of all, I shall anoint my hands, and the womb of the woman,
with oils for this purpose, (for this requires no small labor) then, if
possible, with my other hand shall drive it back so by the shoulders, that it
may wholly fall back into the womb: And again, lest the Infant should return to
the same form of birth, I must put in my hands, and bring down the arms of the
Infant to the sides, and by that means bring it to the form of a natural birth.
If this course take not, I must bring the woman to bed, where, after she has
lain quiet a while, I must proceed after the same manner as I have before
delivered: and if this also be to no purpose, and that it neither be changed to
another form, she must be brought to the stool; and the womb, by the help of
the women that are assistants, must be depressed on both sides, and downwards:
And (my hands being anointed as beforesaid, together with the Womb, and both
the arms as they come) I must do what I can to join them together, and so
receive it as it comes forth. And in this birth, there is the less danger, if
that I or any other Midwife do our duties with all possible diligence, and in
case the Infant be not too weak.

Dr. Very well Mrs. your way, but I take mine which I mentioned in the former
Section to be the safer of the two, but you may use which you think best.

SECT. XVIII. Figure the Ninth.
DR. But I pray you, Mrs. Eutrap. How will you deliver a woman of a child that
falls down with its buttocks forwards, and the hands spread over the head,
according to this figure.

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the buttocks

Mid. Here, Sir, I must anoint my hands as abovesaid, and putting it up, must
lift up the fundament of the child, and turn the head to the Birth. But, in
this case I must not make too much haste, lest it fall into a worser form;
neither is it possible that a child should be so born, without great loss to
the Mother and Infant; therefore, if it cannot be turned with the hand, she
must be brought to the bed, where, if she be very weak, she may be refreshed
with convenient meats and cordials, and then often proceeded with as is said
before, until the Infant shall come to a more commodious form of birth.

Dr. Your observations and apprehensions of danger in this operation are very
good; so that when the next opportunity presents you will find my former
directions to be best and safest.

SECT. XIX. Figure the Tenth.
DR. But sometimes (Mrs.) it happens that it offers it self with its shoulders
forwards, and the head turned backwards, but the feet and hands lifted up, as
in the ensuing figure; How will you help here?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the shoulders

Mid. In this case, Sir; I must in the first place move backward the shoulders
of the Infant, that it may first appear with the head forward; and this may
easily be done, because the shoulders being but a little up, the head of it
self will fall down to the orifice of the womb, as being nearest to it. But if
there must be any other way attempted, she must be brought back to the bed, and
then so stirred and rouled, and used according to those directions formerly
hinted.

SECT. XX. Figure the Eleventh.
DR. Mrs, I fear I trouble you with many Questions; be pleased to satisfy me
in this, and four or five more, and I shall forbear. What then if the Infant
incline to the birth with the hands and feet together, as if it stood upon all
four, with the back upward into the womb; (as in this figure) What, I say, will
you do?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of both hands and feet together

Mid. Here, Sir, I must take care, lest some danger happen from this difficult
and unshapely figure; therefore I must do thus. I must so move the feet of the
Infant, that I may handle the head, and do what I can to direct that first to
the birth: I must also move up the arms, lest of their own accord they fall
down to the sides of the womb. And if this way succeed not, she must be brought
back to the bed, and the same means used for the turning of the Infant as has
been formerly described.

SECT. XXI. Figure the Twelfth.
DR. Sometimes, Mrs. it falls out, that (contrary to the former shape) the
Infant falls down upon its breast, with the hands and feet cast backward into
the Womb, as in this figure; what will you do in such a condition?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the chest

Mid. Truly, this case is the most dangerous of all hitherto proposed. First,
therefore, I must carefully anoint both my hands, and also the womb of the
woman; which done, I must feel for the arms of the Infant, and lay hold of them
so, till I can lay hold of the head also, and with all care hold it so fast,
that I may direct the head first to the birth; next I must dispose of them to
the sieds; for this done, the birth will come forth the sooner, and with less
danger; but if this succeed not, it will be safest to bring the woman to the
bed, and to proceed as formerly showed; that, if perhaps, by this kind of
delay, the Infant may accommodate it self to a more fit posture for the birth.

SECT. XXII. Of a birth wherein the Infant presents the belly.
DR. In the next place Mrs. Midwife, let me hear from you how you will help a
woman in labor of a child when it presents its belly first?

Mid. That you shall Sr. very willingly to the utmost of my skill.

And here Sr. I must note that the backbone may easily be bent and turned
forwards alittle, but by no means backwards without excessive violence.
Wherefore the worst and most dangerous figure that a child can offer to the
birth, is the belly, or the breast, for then its body is constreined to bend
backwards, and what ever throws or endeavors a woman makes to bring it forth
it will never be accomplished; for she will sooner perish with her child then
ever advance it in this posture into the passage, wherefore it is in great
danger if not timely succourd; and in case it should escape, which would be
very strange, it would be weak in the back along time after its birth: but that
which augments the danger much more is that for the most part the Navil-string
comes forth when the Child comes with the belly; Therefore as soon as it is
discovered to be so, the Midwife must use the sole remedy of drawing it forth
by the feet, as speedily as may be, in this following manner.

Having placed the woman I must gently slide up my flat hand, being well
anointed for the easier entrance, toward the middle of the child's breast, which
I must thrust back to turn it, this situation being already half turned, the
feet being as near to the passage as the head, when it represents the middle of
the belly; then I must slip up my hand under the belly till I find the feet,
which I must bring to the passage, to draw it forth in the same manner, as if
it came with the feet foremost; being very careful to keep the Face downwards
which must always be observed before the head can be drawn forth, for the
reasons before given which must never be forgotten.

And here likewise is to be noted that the Midwife must always prooceed after
one and the same manner in the deliveries when a Child comes with the breast,
or belly.

But on the other hand I would have it remarked, that when at any time an
Infant comes with its side, it is impossible to be delivered as the two former;
but yet it is not so much tormented, nor is its situation so cruel; for it may
remain in it a longer time without dying, than in the two former, wherein it is
much more as it were upon the rack than in this, in which posture the body may
be bended forwards, and not backwards, as in the other; but the Navil string
does not come forth so easily, as when it comes with the belly first. And in
this as in the other 2 births, the Midwife will find it the safest way to draw
it forth by the feet; by pushing back a little the Infants body with her hand,
the better to introduce it, which she may slide along its thighs till she find
the legs and feet by which she must turn it, and afterward draw it forth, as I
said even now: nor ought she to amuse her self, in any of these 3 births, to
place its head right, that it may come naturally, because it is in great danger
of dying in these unnatural positions, if not drawn forth with speed, which can
never be effected unless it be by finding the feet, as I have directed.

SECT. XXIII. How to help a Woman in her Labor, when the Child's head thrusts
the neck of the Womb forth before it.
DR. Now Mrs. Eutrapelia, I have another question to ask you, and that is this;
suppose you were called to deliver a Woman in labor where you find the Child's
head to thrust forth the neck of the Womb before it, how would you go to work
in such a case, and what art would you use to deliver the Child with safety?

Mid. Why surely Sir, if we only have respect to the Figure the Child comes in
in this labor, we may call it a natural one; but if we shall, on the other
hand, consider either the disposition of the Womb, which is in danger of coming
quite forth of the passage, or the manner of drawing forth of the Infant, we
shall find it to be not so altogether: for its head thrusting it forceably
before it may easily cause a falling out of the Womb, if the Woman be not
skilfully succored in time, here may be seen the neck of the Womb bear forth
before in great wrinkles according as the Child advances.

Now Women troubled with their bearing down of their Womb before they conceive,
and those whose Womb is very moist, are much subject to this accident, because
of the looseness of the strings.

The same method must not be observed here, as in the natural birth; for in
this case the Woman must neither walk nor stand upright; but she must keep her
bed with her body equally at least situated, and not raised a little as is
requisite in a natural labor. She must by no means use strong or sharp
clysters, lest they procure too great throws, neither must her Womb be
moistened, because it is already too much loosened; but she must be aided at the
moment each pain takes her, when the Child begins to advance its head, and
consequently the neck of the Womb, and let the Midwife keep her hands on each
side of its head, to thrust back by resisting the Woman's pains, the Womb only
giving way in the mean time for the Child to advance, doing the like at every
throw; continuing therein till the Woman of her self has forced the Child
quite into the World, for we must by no means draw it by the head, as in a
natural labor, for fear of causing the Womb to fall out at the same time, to
which it is then very apt.

Now if notwithstanding the Infant having the head born, and yet stops there,
so long as to endanger its suffocation, then the Midwife must call a second
person to her assistance, to draw it gently forth by the head, whilst she keeps
back the Womb with both her hands, to prevent its following the Infants body so
drawn forth. After the Woman is thus delivered, and her. Afterbirth fetched
away gently; and not shaking or drawing it away too rudely, then let the Womb
be placed up in its natural situation if it bears down.

SECT. XXIV. How to deliver a Woman when the Child presents the side of the
Head, to the birth, or its Face.
DR. Good Mrs. Eutrapelia, I do very well approve of this your answer to my
last quere; now in the next place I would know of you how you would bring a
Woman to bed when the Child shall present it self with the side of its Head
first, or its Face.

Mid. When the child Sir presents it self in this posture, as with the side of
the head though it seems a natural labor, because the head comes first, yet
it is very dangerous both to child and mother, for the child shall sooner break
its neck than ever be born in this fashion, and by how much the mothers pains
continue to bear it which is impossible unless the head be first right placed,
the more the passages are stopped up.

Therefore as soon as it is known the woman must be laid with all speed, lest
the child advancing farther in this vicious posture, it prove more difficult to
thrust it back; which must be done when we would place the head right in the
passage as it truly and naturally should be.

Now to effect this I must place the woman that her hips be a little higher
than her head and shoulders, causing her to lean a little upon the opposite
side to the child's ill posture; then I must slide up my hand being well
anointed with oil, by the side of the child's head, for to bring it right
gently with my fingers between the head and the womb: but if the head be so
engaged that it cannot be easily done that way, I must then put my hand up to
its shoulders, that so by thrusting them back in the womb, sometimes on the one
side, and sometimes on the other; as I see occasion, so shall I give it a
natural and convenient position.

And here it were to be wished that the midwife could put back the Infant by
the shoulders with both her hands in this manner; but the head does take up so
much room that she has much ado to introduce one only with which she must do
her operation, with the half of the fingers ends of the other hand put up as
far as necessary, afterward let her excite and procure the child's birth, as
directed before.

Then sometimes the child comes with its face first, having its head turned
back; in which posture it is very difficult it should be born; and if it long
remain so, the face will be so black and blew, and swelled that at first sight
it will appear monstrous, which comes as well by the compression of it in that
place as by the Midwives fingers handling it too rudely, when she endeavored to
place it in a better posture.

There was a certain Woman whose Child came with its Face so black and misshapen
as soon as it was born, as is usual in such cases, that it looked like a black
Moor; as soon as the Mother saw it, she said she always feared her Child would
be so monstrous, because when she was young with Child of it she fixed her looks
very much upon a black moor; wherefore she wished or at least wise cared not
though it dyed, rather than she said she should behold a Child so monstrously
disfigured, as it then appeared; but she soon changed her mind when she was
made sensible, that this blackness was occasioned only by reason that it came
into the World with its face forwards, and that assuredly in three or four days
it would wear away; as accordingly it happened; having often anointed it with
oil of sweet Almonds, as she was ordered; and when the Child came to be about a
12 month old, you could have scarcely seen a fairer. Now to deliver this birth
the Midwife must observe the same manner, as in that when the Child comes with
the side of the head* being careful to work gently to avoid bruising the Face.

But here note that if it should chance tha^ the Child's hand or hands should
come with either of these births, which for the mos^ part happens, rather than
any other part, i^ will hinder the birth by reason it takes up part of the
passage, and for the most part cause the head to lean on one side.

To remedy this as soon as it is preceived that one hand presents together with
the head, it must be prevented from coming down more, or engaging farther in
the passage* wherefore the Midwife having placed the Woman on the bed, with her
head a little lower than her hips, must in the next place, put and guide back
the Child's head with her own, as much as may be; or both hands i^ they came
both down for to give way to the Child's head, which done she must proceed a^
before.

SECT. XXV. How to deliver a Woman when the Child's Head is born, and the Womb
closes about its Neck.
DR. Very well Mrs. Eutrapelia, you have now given us a farther account of your
very good judgment in your Art, in your dextrous and ingenious way of bringing
a Woman to bed in the last posture. But now I would desire you to let me know
how you will deliver a Woman of her Child, when its head is born, but yet the
Womb closes about its Neck.

Mid. Truly Sir to deliver this Woman is not so easy abusiness as may be
imagined, by reason that a small delay herein may cause the strangling of the
Child.

And here you must observe that the Child comes naturally with the Head first,
because by its bigness and hardness the passage might be the better made and
opened, for the other parts of the body; the which usually pass afterward
without pain; but yet notwithstanding sometimes the Head is so small and the
shoulders so large, that without a very great difficulty they cannot pass,
which makes the Child remain often in the passage after the head is born. And
this accident may likewise happen sometimes for not having been careful to lose
no time in drawing forth the Child by the head, to the end the shoulders might,
at the same instant, follow in the same place the head possessed.

Now when I meet with this Figure, I must by all possible means seek speedily
to deliver the poor Child out of this prison, or rather snare, or collar in
which it is caught, for fear as I said before, it come by delay to be
strangled: to prevent which I must endeavor to cause the shoulders immediately
to follow by gently drawing its Head, sometimes by the sides of it, and
sometimes with one hand under the chin, and the other behind its head, and so
doing by turns, on the one side and the other, to facilitate the operation the
better, being very careful and circumspect that the Navil-string be not
entangled about its Neck; as also not to draw it forth with too much violence,
for fear least it may happen, as I once saw, the Head to be pulled from the
Shoulders. But if the Shoulders come not with gentle pulling, then I must slide
up my fingers on both sides under the Armpits, with which turning them
inwards, I may by little and little, draw forth the Soulders; but if when they
are in the passage and totally disengaged, if I cannot get the rest forth by
still keeping my fingers under the Armpits, I may be very confident there is
some other hindrance, and that it is certainly monstrous in some part of its
body; or that, as it for the most part happens in this case, it is hydropical
in the belly; for which cause it is impossible it should be born, before the
belly be pierced to evacuate the waters; and then it will easily be
accomplished; but this being the expert Physician or Chirurgion's parts to
perform, I shall leave it wholly to them.

SECT. XXVI. When the Navil-string comes first.
DR. Now Mrs. Eutrapelia, I would know of you how you behave your self when you
have a labor presented to you wherein the Child's Navil-string comes first?

Mid. Here Sir you must note, That an Infant does not always present with the
belly when the navil-string comes first; for though it presents naturally as to
the Figure of its body, that is with its Head first, yet sometimes the
Navil-string falls down and comes before it; for which cause the Child is in
much danger of death, especially if the labor be not very quick, because the
blood that ought to pass and repass, through those Vessels which compose it,
for to nourish and keep the Child alive, whilst it continues in the Womb, being
coagulated hinders the circulation which ought to be there made, which happens
as well by the contusion, as the cold those Vessels receive, being much pressed
in the passage when it comes together with the Head, or any other part; as also
because the blood does there coagulate as is said, by reason of the cold which
it takes by the coming forth of the Navil-string.

But though this accident may cause the Infants sudden death, it is not so much
for lack of nourishment; without which it may pass a whole day or more, there
being blood enough in its body for that purpose: but because the blood can be
no longer enlivened and renewed by circulation, as it has continual need;
which being obstructed always causes the creatures sudden death, sooner or
later according as it is more or less obstructed.

I know it may be objected that though the circulation be so hindered and
intercepted by the coming forth of the string it need not therefore cause such
a sudden death to the Child, because the blood may notwithstanding circulate in
all the other parts of the body: To which I answer that in respect to the
Infant it is either absolutely necessary that the blood, for want of
respiration, should be elaborated or prepared, in the thick part of the burden
called the placenta, and therefore must be a free communication, or for want of
it that the Infant must immediately breathe at the mouth, as well to be
refreshed, as to drive out the fuliginous or sooty Vapors by expiration, which
not being possible whilst in the Womb, it must unavoidably be choked, and dye
in a very short time, if it wants both together.

Wherefore in this case the Woman must, without any delay, be delivered, the
which if nature does not speedily perform, the Child must be drawn forth by its
feet.

Women that have great waters and along string to the burden, are very subject
to this mischief; for the waters coming forth in great abundance at the
breaking of the skins, or membranes, do often at that instant, draw the string
which swims in the midst, forth along with them; and much the easier if the
Infants head be not advanced very forward into the passage, for to hinder the
coming forth of it in this manner.

As Soon as it is perceived you must immediately endeavor to put it back, to
prevent the cooling of it, behind the Child's head, least it be bruised, as we
have already noted, whereby the blood may coagulate there keeping it in that
place where it was thrust back, until the head being fully come forth into the
passage may hinder the coming down of it again; which may be effected by
holding it up with the fingers of one hand, on that side it comes down, until
the head be advanced as aforesaid; or in case the hand be taken away to put a
piece of fine soft rag between the side of the head and the Womb, to stop up
the way it came down by, always leaving an end of the rag without the body to
draw it forth by at pleasure.

But sometimes notwithstanding all these cautions and the putting of it back,
it will for all that come forth every pain; and then without any more delays at
all the Midwife must bring the Child forth by the Feet, which she must make a
diligent search and enquiry after, although the Infant comes with the head
foremost; for there is but this only means left remaining to save the Child's
life, which it would certainly lose by the least delay in such a case.

Wherefore having placed the Woman conveniently, let her gently put back the
Head which offers, provided it be not engaged too low amongst the bones of the
passage, and that it may be done without too great violence to the Woman; for
in that case it will be better to let the Child run the hazard of dying, than
to destroy the Mother; for Tertullian, as my learned Mr. Riolanus very well
observes, upon a like Subject, says That it is a necessary cruelty, to kill
the Child in such a case, rather then to save it from the danger it is in of
dying, and so certainly cause the Mothers death; and then let her slide up her
hand, being well anointed, under the breast and belly to search for the Feet,
by which she must draw it forth according as has been formerly discoursed; the
which being performed let her immediately take care, of the Infant, which is
ever in this case very feeble.

SECT. XXVII. Wherein the Burden either first offers it self or comes first
quite forth.
DR. Very well, and excellently have you given us demonstrations of your skill
and knowledge hitherto, good Mrs. Eutrapelia, now pray will you inform me how
you act your part in a Labor wherein the burden either first offers, or else
comes first quite forth.

Mid. That I shall Sir to the best of my Talent and therefore first of all Sir
I must note that the coming forth of the Navil-string before the Infant,
whereof we discoursed in our foregoing Section, is oftentimes the cause of its
death, for the reason there alleged; but the coming forth of the burden
first, is yet much more dangerous; for that besides that the Children are then
commonly Stil-born, if they be not assisted in the very instant, the Mother
likewise is in great peril of her life also, because of her great floodings,
which usually happen, when it is loosened from the Womb before its due time; by
reason that it leaves all the orifices of the Vessels, to which it did cleave,
open, whence incessantly flows blood until the Child be born; by reason that
the Womb, as long as any thing continues there, does every moment strongly
endeavor to expel it, by which means it continually voids and expresses the
blood of the Vessels, which are always open (as we have already explained)
when the burden is so separated; as long as the Womb remains extended and
cannot be closed, until it has voided all that it did contain, and comes, by
the contraction of its Membranous substance, to stop them by pressing them
together; wherefore if the Midwife ought to be vigilent and diligent to succor
an Infant when the Navil-string comes first, how much more ought she to be so
when burden comes forth first, and wherein the least delay is ever the cause
of the Infants sudden death, if the Woman be not speedily delivered? because
the Infant cannot then remain long in the Womb without being choked or
stifled, being it stands in need at that time of breathing at the mouth, (as we
explained the foregoing discourse,) the blood being no longer enlivened by the
preparation made in the burden, the use and function of which then ceasing,
from that very instant that it is separated from the Vessels of the Womb, to
which it was joined; for which reason there immediately follows a great
fludding which is so dangerous for the Mother, that without speedy help, she
quickly loses her life by this unlucky accident.

Now when the Burden is not wholly come forth but lies in the passage, some
advise to put it back before the Child be fetched; but I am not of their
opinion; for when it comes into the passage before the Infant; it is at that
time totally divided from the Womb, at the bottom whereof it ought to be
commonly situated and fastened, until the Child be born: but because as soon as
it is wholly loosened, as it always is when it comes first, it becomes a body
altogether unnatural; therefore it is never to be thrust back, but contrariwise
be fetched away, and at that very moment after bring the Child away by the
Feet, although it came naturally with the Head first: for what reason can there
be to put it back, since it is of no use to the Infant, from the moment it is
separated from the Womb, as cannot be denied? And such a proceeding is so far
from being useful, that this burden would much hinder the Midwife from being
able to turn the Child, as she ought, in bringing it forth by the Feet.

Wherefore when it presents it self in the passage, which may soon be perceived
if the Midwife find every where a soft substance, without the least resistance
of any solid part to the touch; and finding likewise the string fastened to the
middle of it, and the Woman fludding extremely as is ordinary at such times;
then in lieu of thrusting it back, the burden must be brought away, that so
there may be the more liberty and room to draw forth the Child, according as
has been before directed.

The Burden then being quite loosened from the womb, and coming first in the
passage must not be thrust back again into it, much less must it be put back
when it is quite come forth of the body. The midwife must only take care not to
cut the string till the child be born, not out of hopes of any benefit from it
to the Infant during the delivery, but that so much time may not be lost before
the Infant be fetch away, which is then ever in great danger, as also the
flooding may be the sooner stopped, which happens. for the most part as soon as
the woman is delivered, for which reasons it will be dispatched with all
possible speed.

Sometimes notwithstanding this dangerous accident the child may be born alive,
if timely succored, but it is then so weak that it is hard to discover at
first, whether it be alive or dead.

When it so happens some midwies do ordinarily, before they separate the
burden, put it into a Skillet of hot wine, and imagine, with no small
superstition, that in case it it comes to it self, the vapors of the warm wine
was the cause of it, being conveyed by means of the string into the Infants
belly, and so giving vigor; but it is more credible that being almost stifled
for want of breathing as it needed it, it begins now, by means of it, to
recover from that fainting: but nevertheless there may be no hurt in continuing
the old custom, since it can do no perjudice, and may satisfy fine occupied
Spirits, provided necessaries be not neglected, in being blindly carried away
with this conceit.

SECT. XXVIII. Figure the Thirteenth.
DR. There being the same reason in twins as in a single birth, except that the
single birth is natural, and the twins not so, certainly the same method must
be observed (Mrs.) Tell me then, if there be two or more, and and all come fair
with their heads toward the birth; What is to be done?

depiction of twin babies in the womb in the natural position for birth:
presentation of the head

Mid. Here, Sir, I must observe that which lies readiest and fittest in the
Womb, and first receive that, and not to let the other go till the first is
born, lest it turn into another shape by sliding back again into the Womb; but
the one being born, I must presently lay hold on the other. Now, this birth
will be easier, and without danger, because the first birth has made the way
for the second so plain, that it may come forth without any difficulty at all.
But in this birth I must take care that I bring forth the after-burden timely
enough, lest that the Womb, being freed from her Infants, presently fall down,
and so keep in the after-burden with great danger.

SECT. XXIX. Figure the Fourteenth.
DR. But, Mrs. What if there be Twins, and they both come unnaturally with
their Feet forward, as in this Figure; what course will you take?

depiction of twin babies in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of the feet

Mid. This birth, Sir, is dangerous enough and yet it is to be mended by the
prudence of a discreet Midwife. Wherefore, I must anoint the womb of the woman,
that the passages may be the easier for the Infant; which being done, I must
take care to lay hold of the arms of one of them, and bringing them down to the
sides, secure them so, that I may lightly promote the head to the birth; and
the first being born, I must presently proceed with the other after the same
manner: but if I can lay hold of neither of their arms, so that there is no
good hopes of a happy birth, I must have recourse to the former method; if at
least the Infants may come into the World by that pains and conversion which is
wrought upon the bed.

SECT. XXX. Figure the Fifteenth.
DR. I come now to my last unnatural birth of Twins. If then there be Twins,
(these forms being compound as of a natural and unnatural birth) the one
comeing down with the Feet, what is to be done in this case?

depiction of twin babies in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
presentation of one head and one foot together

Mid. Where Infants offer themselves after this manner; I must first bring
forth that which presents it self with a natural form, and must move up the
other which is with the Feet forward, and if possible, cause it so to return
into the Womb, that that form also may be disposed of to a natural birth; but
if it cannot be turned to be in a better posture, I must lay hold presently on
the hands, and encourage it to the birth. But it were safer that this should be
brought to a natural form; to which end I must diligently endeavor it, by
anointing, directing, moving it, tumbling and rouling the Woman, lest perhaps
the Womb be hurt by the form of such an unnatural birth, and the privities
swell with wind, from whence the birth cannot come forth without danger, or be
hindered too long: All which danger may with provident care be avoided, or at
the least very much corrected and amended.

Dr. So far concerning your way and method of Labors wherein several Children
in different postures present themselves together; but now good Mrs.
Eutrapelia, I would have you to hear a little what I have to offer you
concerning these deliveries; and first of all be pleased to consider seriously
with me, that if all those unnatural Figures and Situations which we have
hitherto described, that a single Child may come in do cause those many
difficulties, and dangers mentioned, certainly the Labor wherein several come
together in those bad Situations must be much more painful, not only to the
Mother and Children, but also to the Midwife, for they are then so pressing
that for the most part they trouble and hinder one another; moreover the Womb
is so filled with them that the Midwife can scarce introduce her hand without
much violence, which she must do if they are to be turned or thrust back to the
end that she may give them a better position then that wherein they present.

Where note then, that when a Woman has 2 Children they do not ordinarily both
present to the birth together, but one is oftentimes more forward then the
other, which is the cause why but one is felt, and that it is sometimes not
discovered that the Woman will have Twins, till going to fetch the afterbirth,
the first being born, the 2 d is then perceived.

When there are Twins Mrs. Eutrapelia one must not think that Nature is orderly
in causing one to be born before the other, the first or last, according as it
may be most convenient, that is to say when the one is strong and the other
weak, that the strongest comes first; as also when one is dead and the other
living, that the living one drives forth the dead one: for I can assure you
there is no certain or infallible rule in these cases; of which I can give you
an example; there were once 2 women delivered within a week of one another, and
both of Twins, the one of each being dead and the other living, the living
Child of the first Woman was born before the dead one, and the dead one the 2d
was expelled before the living one. And the same thing we see happens very
often in respect of strong and weak Children; for that which is nearest the
birth whether alive or dead, strong or weak, is always the first born, or must
be brought into the World the first, if it cannot come of it self; otherwise
the difficulty of the Labor would yet be augmented as well in length of time to
the Mother, as the violence done to the first Child, in putting it back, for to
fetch the 2d first.

Now the Midwife must always remember to have a care in all natural births, to
examine diligently whether there be no more Children in the Womb after the
first is delivered, which she may easily know by the continuance of the pains
after the Child is born, and the bigness of the Mothers belly; besides this she
may be very sure of it, if she shall put her hand up the entry of the Womb, and
shall there find another water a gathering, and a Child in it presenting to the
passage; and if this shall be so, the Midwife is not to fetch away the
afterbirth till the Woman be delivered of all her Children, if she chance to
have never so many, because Twins never have but one burden, to which there
are fastened as many strings and distinct Membranes as there are Children, and
if one should go to draw it forth as soon as the Birth is born, the rest would
be in danger of their lives, because that part is very necessary to them
whilst they are in the Womb, and besides more then that it endangers a
flooding. Wherefore the first string must be cut, being first tied with three
or four double, and the other end must be fastened, with a string to the Woman's
thigh; not so much for fear that the string should enter again into the Womb,
as to prevent the inconvenience it may cause to the Woman by hanging between
her thighs; afterward this Child being removed, the Midwife must take care to
deliver her of the rest, observing all the same circumstances as were belonging
to the first, the which being done it will be then convenient and necessary to
fetch away the Afterbirth; as we shall discourse the manner how by and by.

SECT. XXXI. Figure the Sixteenth.
DR. Courteous Mrs. Eutrapelia, I have hitherto troubled you with many
Questions, that I might not only be sure of your abilities, but also give
testimony of your sufficiency, if need require. I have now only one Question
more, and then I have done, as to these postures and fashions: And this, though
the last, surely is a miraculous posture. What if the Infant be so involved in
the womb (the head and the neck being of such a length) that it is so bent
back, that the face lies betwixt the buttocks, the right hand to the left
region of the reins, but the left hand to the knee of the same side; the right
leg being across the left, in form of the letter X, and both legs bent up
toward the breast?

depiction of the baby in the womb in an unnatural position for birth:
deformed, doubled over and twisted

Mid. Worthy Dr. This case is the hardest of any that hitherto you have
propounded to me; and though it may never fall out to be so in one amongnst
5000, yet (because, in your description of the best Midwife, you tell me that a
Midwife must have a good memory) I remember a learned Doctor, not long since
acquainted me with such a posture, which he told he had from the hands of an
expert Surgeon and Physician, whose wife also was an expert Midwife; and the
course the Midwifed took in such a case, he told me was this, which must serve
also for my answer, because I think there cannot be a better. After the woman
had been eight days in labor, and given over by all Midwives as desperate,
being in a violent Fever., with no throws, but very weak, and (by reason of hot
medicines given to expel the birth, and strong wines given to support the
spirits) those humors, that usually accompany the Infant had so flown out, that
the genitals were so dry and closed, that they would scarce admit the probation
of two fingers. This method was used: First, instead of wine, she gave her good
store of Almond-milk; and because her belly was very costive, she gave her
Clysters; and to keep up her spirits she gave her Cordials, (of which in their
order.) She laid plasters to her hands wrists, and anointed the whole region
of the belly, hips, loins, the rump-bone, and privities with Oils to appease
her pain and with softning Unguents; and then she made a triangular bagg
stuffed with emollient and relaxing herbs, boiled in water, according to this
description, (and of which more hereafter.)

depiction of a triangular bag to be filled with emollient and relaxing herbs
and applied to the genital area to ease childbirth The description of the Bagg.


It was of such a bigness, as that it might cover the lower part of the bel^
and the privities, and with tapes fitted to the corners was applied hot, and
continued on some hours; after which, though her hand were well anointed, she
could scarce thrust in the top of her finger into the orifice of the womb, the
womb was so closed, and the Infant so depressed toward the share-bone, by
reason of the precedent throws and pangs. But at length, when with much labor
and industry the genitals were somewhat dilated, that she could get in her
fingers farther, she found the loins and the right hand of the child first
offer it self to the birth: that therefore she might correct this monstrous and
so inverted posture of the Infant so doubled and twisted, and either persuade
the head or the feet to come forward, she used the best of her skill, but to
little purpose, the genitals were so narrow and straight. But yet not giving
off her endeavors, she did deliver her within eight hours after she came to
her assistance; but the child was dead.

Dr. Mrs. You give a very good account of an expert Midwives practice, which
you may follow with safety, expecting the success from Heaven; but it is no
wonder the child should be still-born, (as you phrase it;) for being so turned
and doubled, the child must of necessity be strangled in the womb.

Having t^s run through births, as well natural as unnatural, I shall give you
the reason (and that in my own opinion) why these births are of so various and
different postures in the womb, observing not always the same posture: and
it is because the Infant swiming in water, and moving it self, sometimes this
way sometimes that way or moy'd by its mother as you have heard before, is bent
and tumbled several ways; insomuch, that sometimes it is strangely entangled
with its own navil-cord, which I am confident you have seen in your own
experience oftentimes, and shall now in the next place desire you to let me
know which way you use to go to work, when a dead Child is to be delivered from
its Mother and she alive.

SECT. XXXII. Of delivering of a Woman of a dead Child.
MId. Sir I shall most willingly consent to your demand, as far as I shall be
able, in this always so long and dangerous a Labor; which is because for the
most part it comes wrong; or though it comes right with the Head, yet the
Woman's pains are so weak and slow in these cases that she cannot bring it
forth, and sometimes she has none at all, forasmuch as nature, half overthrown
by the death of the Child, which cannot help it self, labors so little, that
many times it cannot finish the business it has begun, but must yield, without
the help of art, of which at such a time it has great need: However before
ever I may settle to your work, I Will endeavor to stir up the Woman's pains with
strong and sharp clysters, to bring on her throws, and to bear down and bring
forth the Child; and if these means prevail not she must then be delivered by
the help of art.

Now if there be any case wherein a Midwife ought to make the greatest
reflection and use most precaution in her Art it is this, that is to know
whether the Infant in the Womb be living or dead; for there have been many
deplorable examples of Childrens being drawn forth alive, after they have been
thought to have been dead, with both Arms or some other limb lopt off, and
others miserably killed by the use of crotchets which might have been born
alive if they had not been mistaken: wherefore before the Midwife resolves on
the manner of laying the Woman, to avoid the like misfortune, and the disgrace
of being author of such a pitiful spectacle let her do her utmost endeavor not
to be so deceived and to be wholly satisfied whether the Child be alive or
dead; always remembering in this case that timidity is more pardonable then
temerity, that is, it is better to be deceived in treating a dead Infant, as if
in case it were a live, then a living one as if it were dead.

Now besides what has been said before concerning knowing whether the Child be
alive or not; you must not always put your whole confidence, in the first
place, in the Woman's telling you that the Child is certainly alive because it
stirs, and though to be the better assured the Midwife may lay her hand on the
Mothers belly, for there have been Women sometimes delivered whose Children had
been dead about 4 days, as might be easily judged by their corruption, who
notwithstanding have affirmed, though untruly, that they felt them stir but a
little before they were delivered; and others again whose Children were alive,
and yet their Mothers never perceived them to stir in three or 4 days before,
as they confessed:

Now if the Midwife cannot be assured by the Child's motion that it is alive,
she may as soon as the waters are broke, gently put up her hand into the Womb,
to feel for the breaking of the Navil-string, the which she will find to be
stronger, the nearer she feels it to the Infants belly; or if she meets with in
hand she may feel the pulse; but their pulses, you must know are not so strong
as their Navil-strings, therefore the best to be known by it; if then also by
putting her finger into the Child's mouth she perceive it to stir its Tongue, as
if it would suck; and on the contrary, if no such signs, and the Mother feel a
great weight, and great pains in her belly, and it be not supported but tumbles
always on the side she lays her self; if she faints and have Convulsion Fits,
if the Navil-string or secondine has been a good while in the World, and if
the Midwife by putting her hand into the Womb, finds the Child cold, and
feeling she finds that very soft, chiefly toward the crown where likewise the
bones are open, and riding one upon the other at the clefts, or Sutares,
because the brain shrinks, which corrupts more in 2 day^ in the Womb, than it
does in 4 after it i^ born, which is caused by the heat and moistness of the
place, the 2 principals of corruption; and if there comes a dark and stinking
putrid matter from the Womb; all these signs together, or most of them
demonstrat^ to the ingenious Midwife that the Child i^ assuredly dead; the
which when she is certain of, she must do her endeavor to fetch i^ away as soon
as possibly she can, and having placed the Woman conveniently, if the Child
offers its head first, she must gently pu^ it back, until she has liberty to
introdu^ her hand wholly into the Womb, and sliding it all along under the
belly to find the Feet* let her draw it forth by them, being ver^ careful to
keep the head from being lock'^ in the passage, and that it be not separate^
from the body, which may easily happen when the Child being very rotten and
putrifi'd, she does not observe the circumstance^ that we spoke of before, that
is, in drawing forth the Child, to keep its breast and face always downwards;
And if notwithstanding all these precautions, the head, because of the great
putrefaction, should be separated and left behind in the Womb; it must be left
to be drawn forth by the expert Physician or Chyrurgion. The same also is to be
said when the Head is so far advanced coming first, and engaged among the bones
of the passage, that it cannot be put back, then being very sure by all the
signs together or most of the chief of them, that the Child is dead certainly,
it is better to let the Surgeon draw it so forth, it being a round slippery
part, with crotchets, then torment the Woman to put it back. Now if the dead
Child (whereof above all there must be good assurance,) comes with its arms up
to it shoulders so extremely swelled that the Woman must suffer too much
violence to have it put back, it is best then, as was said before, to take it
off at the shoulder joint, by twisting it 3 or 4 times about; then afterward
the Midwife will have more room to put up her hand into the Womb, the arm being
so separated and no longer possessing the Womb, and so fetch away the Child by
the Feet.

For indeed although it be certain that the Child be quite dead in the Womb,
and other circumstances that will demonstrate that there is need of a Physician
or Surgeons Art, yet he must not therefore presently use his crotchets; because
they are never to be used but when hands are not sufficient, and that there is
no other remedy to prevent the Woman's danger, or to bring away the Child any
other way: for very often, though all has been done that art directs, some
persons present that understand not these things will believe that the Child
was killed with the crotches although it had been dead 3 days before, and
without other reasonings and better understanding of the matter for his
recompense, in saving the life of the Mother, requite him, with an accusation
of which he is altogether innocent, and in case the Mother should afterward
dye, by misfortune, lay her death also to his charge, and instead of praise and
thanks treat him like a Butcher, or Hangman; to which diverse Midwifes are
commonly very ready to contribute, and are the first that make the poor Women,
that have need of the Men, afraid of them. Insomuch that they are afraid of
being blamed by them for having themselves been the cause, (as some of them
often are) of the death of Infants, and many ill accidents which often befall
the poor Women, for not causing them to be helped in due time, and from the
very instant that they perceive the difficulty of the labor to pass their
understandings. I speak this by way of caution on both sides.

Now therefore for the Physician or Surgeon to avoid these calumnies, let
him never use his crotchets, but very rarely when there is no other way; as
also to endeavor his utmost, as much as the case will permit, to bring the
Child whole into the World although it be dead, and not by bits and
peice-meals, to give the ignorant not any pretense of blame; I say as much as
the case will permit, that is, with respect to the Woman under his hands; for
to save her he had better sometimes to bring forth the Child with Instruments,
then to kill her, by tormenting her with excessive violence to bring it forth
whole: for in a word, he must and ought to do, in his conscience, what his Art
commands, without taking heed to what may be spoken afterward: and every
Physician or Surgeon that has a well regulated conscience, will always have
a greater regard to his duty, then his reputation, in such a case; in
performing of which let him expect his reward from God.

SECT. XXXII. Of the extracting of a mola and false conception.
DR. We have hitherto Mrs. Eutrapelia discoursed of births natural and
unnatural; there is somewhat more, not like these, but often with them, and
without them, which Physicians call a Mola, but you call it a false Conception:
I pray, Mrs. therefore, what is that Mola, or false Conception?

Mid. A Mola, Sir is a hard, inform tumorfull of pores, (like so many ugly
eyes) scarce to be cut by a knife, of a stony substance to touch, and round,
appearing sometimes at the entrance of the Womb, sometimes over the whole Womb,
and is thought (by very Learned Doctors) to be begotten by the woman her self
without the help of a man, (though some affirm it cannot be without the seed of
the man.) and therefore inanimate, because not generated by two; without the
help of a man (I say) by the force of her own seed, mixing it self with much
menstruous blood, retained in the Womb, which by immoderate heat is changes
into the shape of flesh, and that altogether unnatural, as is the stone in the
bladder, and in the fingers of gouty persons, etc.

Dr. Well, Mrs, since it is so (tell me, I pray, wherein it differs from a true
Conception?

Mid. It may, Sir, be like a true Conception in three respects, yet differ in
six. As first, It Is true that a false conception stops the monthly terms as
does the true.

Secondly, The belly also does swell, and the breasts grow big.

Thirdly, There is an alteration both in the color and appetite; but yet they
differ in these six following ways; as,

First, A false conception has no ordinary nor periodical motion, neither does
it stir from side to side, except it be pressed.

Secondly, In a false conception the belly is harder, and the feet are much
more swelled.

Thirdly, The woman is more heavy and unweeldy, and not so nimble as with a
true conception.

Fourthly, The breasts swell not so much as in a true conception.

Fifthly, The whole body grows soft, and consumes away in a false conception.

Sixthly, a false conception may be moved in three months, but the Child
stirs not till after three months, or usually in the fourth month: And
again, the birth of an Infant never exceeds the eleventh month, whereas a false
conception may continue for fourteen years, or as long as they live.

Moreover, there may be a Tympany caused by air included in the Womb. Or else
there may be a Dropsy, by reason of the many humors contained in the Womb,
both which may give a false supposition of being with Child; but these also are
easily distinguished from a false conception. A Tympany may be moved from place
to place, but not the other: A Tympany will sound, if lightly stricken, but not
the other: and a Dropsy, caused by those many humors as aforesaid, will show
some marks, being depressed with the fingers, whereas a Mola is hard, and
yields not to the pulsation or depression of the fingers. And lastly, in both
these most commonly the Thighs swell, but in a false conception or Mola the
Thighs wither, and are lesser.

Dr. Thus far have you extremely ingeniously, Mrs. Eutrapelia expressed your self
concerning a Mola; and now you have done, I pray you give me leave to lay you
down my sentiments concerning both a Mola, and a false conception and the
safest and best way to draw them forth of the Womb with safety.

First of all then Mrs. you must know that there are several sorts of great
bellies belonging to Women, as has been said before; there are your natural
big bellies which contain a living Child, and those may be called true ones,
and others unnatural, or against nature, in which, in lieu of a Child, is
engendered nothing but strange matters, as wind mixed with waters, which may be
called dropsies of the Womb, and false conceptions, and Moles or Membranes full
of blood and corrupted seed; for which reason they are called false great
bellies.

Now you must know that among the signs of a true great belly, one is the
stirring of the Child in the Womb; but here you are to observe that it is very
fit we should be always careful not to be deceived, by what we feel to stir in
the Womb; inasmuch as the Infant of it self, is endued with 2 sorts of motions
in its Mothers Womb, that is to say, a total motion, and a partial motion; the
total motion is when it removes the whole body, and that is when it moves only
but one part at a time, as the Head, Arms, or Legs, all the rest of its body
lying unmoved; now the Womb blown up in fits of the Mother, yea and some moles
have, by accident, a kind of total motion, but never a partial one; for that
motion of a mole is rather a falling down then otherwise, to wit, a motion by
which heavy things do use to fall downwards: for a Woman who has a mole of any
considerable bigness, whatsoever side she turns her self to, her belly will
fall the very self same way immediately, even like unto an heavy bowl.

Then again you may remember that another sign of a great belly, was the
stopping of the courses, and withal a little qualmishness, which is not always
true, and women who daily use copulation are very often subject to be deceived
hereby thinking that then they are with child, whenas indeed false conception
shall cause you almost the same accidents as true ones, the which cannot easily
be distinguished but by its consequences.

For this false great belly is often caused by wind, which blows up and
stretches out the womb, like a bladder, the which women often discharge with
as much noise as if it came from the fundament; and sometimes it is nothing but
water which is gathered there in such abundance, as some women have been known
to void a pail-ful without any child, though they verily believed they had been
with child; Now your moles always proceed from some false conceptions which
continuing in the womb grow there by the blood that flows to them and by the
accumulation of which they are by little and little increased: and if the womb
chance to expel it before 2 months, it may be called a false conception; and
some of them are only but as it were the seed involved in a membrane, the
others are alittle more solid and fleshy; resembling, in some sort, the Gizard
of a foul, and are greater or less according to the time they remain in the
womb, and also according to the quantity of blood with which they are always
soaked: and women expel these false conceptions sooner or later according as
they cleave to the womb, the which makes them almost always to flood in great
quantity at those times, but for your moles they often continue in the womb
after the ordinary time of labor; some women having had them a whole year, yea
many years, as happened to a certain Peuterors wife, of whom the great
Surgeon Ambrose Parry makes makes mention in his book of generation, who had
a mole 17 years, and at last dyed of it; for if they keep it so long they go in
danger of their lives; for their long or short continuance is according as they
are more or less adhering to the inward parts of the womb, and are there
entertained and nourished by the blood that flows thither.

And here I pray you note that it is of great importance to distinquish well
betwixt a true and a false great belly; for the faults committed by a mistake
are always very considerable: forasmuch as in a true great belly the child
ought to continue in the womb till nature endeavors to expel it by a natural
labor, but contrarily the false great belly dictates to us to procure the
expulsion of what it conteins as soon as may be, wherefore we ought to be very
careful. And if there be any occasions wherein the Physicians and Chirurgions
and Midwives ought to be more prudent and to make more reflections upon their
prognostics for an affair of so great an importance as this is, it is in this
which concerns their judgments as to conceptions and women's being with child;
to the intent that they may avoid the great accidents and misfortunes, which
they may cause which are too precipitate in it without a certain knowledge. Now
the faults which are and may be committed at such a time through too much fear,
are in some sort excusable and to be pardoned, but not those caused by rashness
which are incomparably greater.

And now to return to my discourse of moles, I take a mole to be nothing elce
but a fleshy substance, without bones, or joints, or distinction of members;
without form or figure, regulated and determined; engendered against nature in
the womb, after copulation, out of the corrupted seed both of the man and the
woman; notwithstanding there are some sometimes which have some lineamens of a
rought form.

And here I take it to be very certain that a woman never engenders a mole
without the use of copulation, both seeds being required to it, as well as for
a true generation, though it may be otherways imagined, as you said, by very
learned Drs. for truly though there may be some women, who though never having
carnally had to do with any man, yet do naturally cast forth some strange
bodies, after a flooding, which in a appearance seems to be flesh; yet
notwithstanding if you shall take more diligent and special notice thereof, you
will find it to prove to be but some clods of blood coagulated, either without
consistance or fleshy texture, or any ways membranous, as are your moles and
false conceptions; and that stony hardness was caused through its long stay in
the womb being there baked as in an hot oven.

Now as to the manner of the engendring of moles I take it to be ordinarily
this, that it is when either the man's or the woman's seed or both together are
weak or corrupted, the womb not laboring for a true conception, but by the help
of the spirits with which the seed ought to be replenished; but so much the
easier as that small quantity found in it is extinguished, and as it were
choked, and drowned by an abundance of the gross and corrupted menstruous
blood, which sometimes flows thither, soon after conception, and gives not
leisure to nature to perfect, what she has, with great pains, begun; and so
troubling its work, bringing thither confusion and disorder, there is made of
the seeds and blood; a mere Chaos, called a Mole, not usually engendered but in
the Womb of a Woman, and never or very rarely found in that of other animals,
by reason that they have no menstruous blood as a woman that divine creature
has.

A mole, moreover you are to note, has no burden, nor navil-string fastened to
it, as a child's always has, for as much as the mole it self sticks close to
the womb, by which means it receives nourishment from its vessels, it is also
likewise usually clothed with a kind of skin, in which is formed a piece of
flesh confusedly interlaced with many Vessels; it is of a bigness and
consistence more or less according to the abundance of blood it receives, and
according to its disposition, and also according to the temperature of the
Womb, and the time it remains there. For the most part there is but one, yet
sometimes there are more, whereof some cleave very strongly to the Womb, others
very slightly: if women miscarry of them before the 2d Month, as I said before,
they are called false Conceptions; and when they keep them longer, and that
this strange body begins to grow bigger, then they are called Moles: and here
you must know that your false Conceptions are more Membranous, and sometimes
full of corrupted Seed, but your Moles are altogether fleshy; they cleave to
the Womb almost always, and are sustained by the blood, with which it is always
furnished, just as plants are by the moisture of the Earth. Sometimes there is
a Child together with a Mole, from which it is sometimes divided and sometimes
cleaving to its body, which puts it in great danger of being Monstrous or
mishaken, because of the Compression which this strange body causes to the
little Infant, as yet being but very tender.

Thus having at large given you my Opinion concerning Moles and false
Conceptions, their causes signs and differences; there remains now nothing more
concerning this matter, to be demonstrated, but the manner how they ought to be
drawn forth of the Womb.

And now seeing that these things contained in the Womb, are wholly unnatural,
their expulsion must be procured as soon as possible may be, the which is very
difficult to be performed, when these strange Bodies cleave so fast to the
Womb, and especially the Mole; therefore to avoid the abundance of accidents
and inconveniences, as near as may be, that these unnatural things will
produce, they must be endeavored to be expelled as soon as may be; and for the
Mola you must, before you come to the Manual Operation, try if by any means you
can to cause the Woman to expel it of her self; to the which purpose you are to
administer to her strong and sharp clysters, to stir up throws, for to open the
Womb to give way to it; moistning also and loosening the Womb, with softening
Ointments, Oils and Grease, not omitting bleeding in the foot, if there be
occasion: Now the Mole will certainly be excluded by these means, provided it
be but of an indifferent bigness, or that it cleave but very little or not at
all to the Womb; but if it shall stick strongly to the bottom of the Womb* or
that it be very big, the Womam will hardly be rid of it without the help of a
Physician, Chyrurgions or Midwifes hand; i^ which case after that you have
placed the Woman conveniently, as if you were to fetc^ a dead Child, then slide
up your hand into the Womb, and therewith draw forth the Mole; but if it be so
big that it cannot be brought forth whole, then it is wholly the man's work; who
for this purpose use your crotchet or knife, but this is very rare, because it
is of a tender soft substance, much more pliable then a Child's; but if you
find it be only joined to the Womb, and close fastened, you must separate it
gently with your fingers ends, your Nails being paired, by putting them by
little and little, between the Mole and the Womb, beginning on that side where
it does not stick so fast to the Womb, and so pursuing it until it be quite
loosened; being mighty careful, if you find it grow to too fast, of rending or
bursting the proper substance of the Womb, and proceeding as hereafter I shall
speak of for the extraction of a Burden staying behind in the Womb when the
string is broken off.

For these same Moles never have any string fastened to them, nor any burden
from whence they should receive their nourishment, but they do of themselves
immediately draw their nourishment from the Vessels of the Womb, to which they
are almost allways joined and sticking in some place: and as for the substance
of their flesh, it is also much more hard then that of the burden; and
sometimes Schyrrhous, which is the cause why it is difficult to be separated
from the Womb.

As to a false Conception, although it be much less then a Mole yet it often
puts a woman in hazard of her Life, by reason of great fluddings, which very
often happens, when the Womb would discharge it self of it, and endeavors to
expel it, the which seldom cease till it be come away, because it does
continually endeavor to exclude it, whereby the blood is excited to flow away,
and in a manner squeesed out of the open Vessels.

Now the safest and best way and remedy for a Woman in this case is to fetch
away the false Conception, as soon as may be, because the Womb can very hardly
avoid it of its own nature without artificial help; for it being very small,
the Woman's impulse in bearing downwards cannot be so effectual when the Womb is
but little distended by so small a body, as when it contains a considerable
bulk in it, for then it is the more strongly compressed with the throws. Many
times it is very difficult to fetch away these false Conceptions because the
Womb does not open and dilate it self, ordinarily, beyond the proportion of
what it contains, and that being but very little so is its opening; which is
the reason why the Midwife is sometimes so far from introducing her whole hand,
that she can scarce get in a few Fingers, with which she will be obliged to
finish the Operation, as well as she may or can, by proceeding in the following
manner, when she has introduced them.

Having then very well anointed her hand, she must slide up the neck of the
Womb into the inward Orifice, the which she will find sometimes to be but very
little dilated, and then very gently put in one of her Fingers, the which she
must presently turn and bend on every side, until that she has made way for a
second, and afterward for a 3d or more if it may be done without violence; but
many times she has enough to get in but 2, between which she must take hold of
the false Conception (as Crabs do with their claws, when they fasten upon any
thing) and then she must gently draw it forth, as also the clodded blood which
she there shall find; and then afterward undoubtledly the fludding will cease,
if no part of the Conception be left behind: but if the inward Orifice cannot
be more dilated then to admit of one Finger, and that the fludding is so
violent as to endanger the Woman's life; then is matter and manner to be wholly
committed to care and artful industry of the skilful Physician or Surgeon.

Mid. Now Sir, having discoursed so learnedly of these things, let us in the
next place if you please, discourse of the Afterbith.

SECT. XXXIV. Of the Secundine, or Afterburden, and the best and safest way to
draw it forth.
DR. Come then, Mrs. if you please, tell me what the Secundine is.

Mid. The Secundine is that in which the Infant lies in the Womb, and may be
called a second house, or covering, made by the Womb for a receptacle of the
Infant; and it has with it three membranes; but how Physicians name them, I
know not.

Dr. I will inform you then, if you please, with their names and uses; and
describe them to you in these two figures following, which are explained by
letters also, as may appear.

depiction of the secundine or afterbirth The Explanation of the first Figures
BBB Signifies that part of the Secundine called the Chorion, which is the prop
of all the Vessels of the young one. CCC Denotes the branches of the Umbilical
Veins and Arteries dispersed through the Chorion. EEE The Membrane called
Amnios, and is the thinnest of all the Membranes, and is white, soft, and
shining, with few (and those very small) Veins and Arteries dispersed among the
folds; and this is the very next coat to the Infant, and is the receptacle for
sweat and Urine; that Membrane called Allantois not to be found in men, though
an Vrachus may be found. DD Denotes all the Vessels meeting about the Navil, by
which the Infant is nourished.




depiction of the newly born baby before the navel string, or umbilical cord,
is cut Chorion

Amnios

P. Q Denotes the Membrane called Amnios, and is the first that involveth the
Infant. RRRR The Liver, or cake of the womb, or after-burden, by which the
Infant receives nourishment, and this is fastened to the Womb. SS The inward and
outward Veins. m. m. m. The Umbilical vein, with its branches dispersed into
the after-burden, by which the Child is nourished, and upon which it lies, as
upon a pillow, though in the Amnios it swimeth as in a bath. VV How all the
Vessels meet about the Navil. b.b.b Denotes the Infant newly born, annexed to
the secundine, the Navil-string not cut.




Dr. You see, Mrs. these Figures, with their uses and explanation; I shall now
discourse more particularly of the membranes themselves. The after-burden,
commonly called the secundine, is so named, either because it is as it were a
second place, mansion, and receptacle of the Infant from the Womb; or else,
because this Membrane is called the afterbirth, or second birth, as coming
forth after the Infant, which, if it stay behind, brings great mischief, as
shall be spoken to at the latter end of this Treatise and Section.

The first membrane is called Amnios, and this membrane covers the Infant from
the head to foot; insomuch, that part of it sticks to the head of the Infant
when it is born, which they call a helmet, though not always, being left behind
with the secundine in difficult labors: this is so called from its softness
and thinness; others resemble it to white Paper, or a shirt, and is the
thinnest of all, in which is found great plenty of humors, caused of urine and
sweat, in which the Infant swimeth as in a bath, and lies so easy and secure,
lest it should fall foul against those neighboring parts that are harder; and
besides that, when the membrane is broken in the birth, this water breaking
out, may make the passages by the neck of the Womb more plain and slippery for
the Infant; and this membrane also is every where included within the second,
which is called Chorion, because it wraps the Infant like a ring; and this
immediately compasses the former, to which it is joined as it were in a round
figure, like to a cake, whose inward and hollow part it covers and involves,
and does extend it self to its dimensions, and can scarce be separated from it,
but does firmly knit and bear up the vessels of the afterburden, which
immediately sticks to the womb by a certain fleshy mass that is formed, being
round, and of somewhat a ruddy color, not compassing the whole infant, by
reason of innumerous springs of veins and atteries by which the blood is
interwoven, as if it were poured in, and by which the infant is nourished. This
toward the infant is smooth, but that part which is toward that fleshy round
mass, is rougher.

This round fleshy substance is called the liver of the womb, or the cake of
the womb; which, having such a substance as the liver has, no wonder if it
should make and prepare blood for the nourishment of the infant. On that side
toward the womb it is rough, and unequal, like clefts in a baked cake; and
being cut in this part, it shows an infinite company of hairs, which, if you
trace, they will bring you to the orifice of the veins themselves. And,
although there be twins, or more, yet there is but one cake; for into one cake
so many navil strings are inserted (in diverse places) as there are young ones;
though it may differ as to the bigness, according to the body and condition of
the infant, yet the ground is still the same in the diameter. This serves as a
support of the umbilical vessels, like a pillar; it is also called the
secundine. The third is called Allantoides; it is a coat betwixt the Chorion and
Amnios; it is very thin, weak, and narrow; it covers but half the young one:
this is properly like a swathe or girdle; and some say it is the receptacle of
urine; but it being not to be found in mankind (there may be an Vrachus found
instead of it) I say no more of it.

Dr. These are the opinions of Physicians, good Mrs. Eutrapelia that have
written of these things; now if you please I will tell you heartily and freely
what my opinion is concerning these things.

As soon as the 2 seeds have been confusedly mixed and retained by conception,
the Womb immediately after, by means of its heat, separates this Chaos, to make
out thereof the delineation and formation of all the parts, and begins to work
upon these Seeds, which though to the sight they may appear of a like nature
and uniforme, notwithstanding in effect they contain many dissimilar parts in
them, which it separates and distinguishes one from another, enclosing the
noblest, and on the outside the most glutinous, of which first are formed the
Membranes, to hinder the Spirits, wherewith the frothy Seeds abound, from being
at that time dissipated, and afterward to serve to contain the Infant and the
waters therein, in the midst whereof it swims that they may not stream away.

Now as the Membranes of the Infant are the first part formed, so are they with
the waters, the first that present themselves to the passage in time of labor,
before the Infants head.

Concerning these Membranes and the descriptions most Authors have made of
them, I find them to be so dark therein that methinks it is an hard matter to
conceive them, as they are, by the explication they make of them: for in the
first place they do not agree in the number of them, some accounting 3, as well
for a Child as a Beast, to wit the Chorion the Amnios and the Alantoides;
Others accounting but 2, because there is no Alantoides in an humane fetus.

But if this matter shall be strictly examined, as has been often done, there
will never be found any more then 2, the which being so closely joined the one
to the other, they may be said to be but a double one, the which indeed may be
divided and separated into 2, and this I will explain, to you and others, on
such a manner, as may be best understood by such as are ignorant of this
matter; For there are many who think with Galen that these Membranes are
separate and distant, the one from the other, and that the one surrounds only
the Infant, and the other receives the waters, the which are partly engendered
from sweat, and partly from the Urine, as they imagine; and believe farther
that these waters themselves are separated the one from the other, by these
Membranes: the which is quite contrary, for they are joined so close the one to
the other, that they compose as it were but the same body and invelloper, the
which serves as we have said, to contain the Infant with the waters, which are
all of a nature, and shut up in the Membranes, as I shall make appear in
speaking of their original; but it matters not as to the truth after what
manner this be explained, provided it may be understood as it is.

The outward part then of this Membrane or double covering, or involver, call
it what you please, or if it be esteemed 2, the first Membrane presented
without, is called Chorion from the Greek word Chorein, which signifies to
contain, because it immediately environs the other, which is called Amnios,
that is a little lamb, because it is to small and thin. Galen, in his 11th book
of the use of the parts, calls the Burden Chorion. But to render this more
intelligible we shall take this first Membrane for the Chorion, the which may
again be separated into 2; though effectively it be but one. This Chorion is a
little rough and unequal throughout the whole outside of it, in which many
small captillary Vessels may be observed running quite round, as also many
little strings by which it cleaves to every side of the Womb: but it is a
little more smooth within, where it joins every where, and unites with the
Amnios, in such a manner, as it appears, as we said, but as one and the same
Membrane. This Chorion covers the placenta and cleaves close to the fore part
of it, which respects the Infant, by means of the interlacing of an infinity of
Vessels, and it is also principally fastened to the Womb by the whole
circumference of the placenta, in which part this Membrane is a little thicker.

Then the Amnios, which is the 2d Membrane is 3 times thinner then the Chorion,
and is within very smooth, but not just so much where it is joined to the
Chorion, This Membrane is so thin that it is quite transparent, and has no
Vessels in it, the which makes it so thin, as cannot be imagined without seeing.
This Amnios does no ways touch the placenta, though it covers it, but it only
lines all the inner part of the Chorion, which is between, and from which it
may be wholly separated if it be done with care.

The better to conceive this as it is, and after what manner these Membranes
are in the Womb, consider the composition of a football; imagining the leather
which covers it to be the Womb of a pregnant Woman, and the bladder blown up
with wind, within the football, to be this double Membrane of the Chorion and
Amnois, in which are contained together the Child and the waters; and even as
the outside of this bladder touches every where, because it is blown up, the
leather of the football; so in like manner the Membranes of the fetus are
joined on all sides to the Womb; except where the burden cleaves to it, in
which place it passes above it.

As to the 3d or rather pretended Membrane which Authors call Alantoides, and
say it is like, a sausage or girdle which surrounds and clothes the Infant from
the sword-like gristle to just below the flanks only; it is very certain there
never was any such thing in any of those Animals whose dams have but one young
at a time, no more then Women, as Sheep, Cows, Mares, Asses, nor any other for
ought could ever be learned from many curious enquiries.

Sometimes Infants, at their birth, bring forth these Membranes upon their
head, and then it is said they will be fortunate: which is a mere kind of
superstition, because it happens from the strength of their substance, so that
they cannot break by the impulse of the waters, or the Women's throws in Labor,
or because the passages being very large, and the Infant very little, it
passes easily without any violence: and in this respect they may be said to be
fortunate, in being born so easily, and the mother also for being so speedily
delivered: For in difficult Labors Children are never born with such caps,
because being tormented and pressed in the passage, these Membranes are broken
and remain still there.

Within the Infants Membranes, thus disposed as I have said, are the Waters
contained, in the midst whereof it swims, and is seated; the original of which
seems very uncertain, if we regard the different opinions of Authors upon this
subject, some will have them to be the Urine emptied out of the Bladder by the
Vrachus, because they cannot find the true and easy way for it, and because
their color and savor much resembles the Urine contained in the Bladder. But
it is very certain that it cannot be so as they aver; because the Vrachus is not
perforated in the fetus, and it comes not forth of the Navil; for the place
where it is fastened, is always very like a small Lute-string, through which it
is most certain nothing can pass though never so subtle.

There are others also that will have these waters to be the Urine; but they
are of an opinion that it passes through the Yard whose passage is always
open, and not by the Vrachus which is never hollow.

Now for my part as it appears to me, with more reason, and as indeed it is,
these waters are only generated out of vaporous humidities, which sweat out and
exhale continually out of the Infants body, and meeting these Membranes through
which they cannot pass, because they are too thick and close, are turned into
water, which is thus by little and little collected, as well during the first
months of Conception, the Child not yet quick, as all the remaining part of the
time, after it is quick; for vapors pass forth and exhale out of all porous
bodies that are hot and moist, as is that of an Embrio; and the reason is very
weak by which they maintain these waters to proceed from the Urine, because
they are salt as the urine is; For sweat, tears, and other humors which distill
and sweat out of the body are as well salt as the Urine; of which the Infant
whilst it is in the Womb, cannot have much, no more then dung in the Guts;
because it receives no nourishment at the mouth at that time, and that all its
superfluous humors may easily pass away by transpiration, through the substance
of all the parts of its body, which is very tender; wherefore I cannot conceive
any necessity to oblige them more to empty the Urine, which is in a small
quantity in the Bladder, then the excrements which are in the Guts, which is
not then done in any manner, but only after the Child is born. Bartholinus and
others would have the Infant however to empty its Urine through its Yard, and
that these waters proceed from thence; but there is a greater probability it
should be vented by transpiration; for before it is yet fully shaped and quick,
there is notwithstanding found a proportionable quantity of these waters to the
bigness of its body: which makes it appear that it is then neither the Urine
rendered by the Vrachus nor Yard, as all the World imagine; and that which
proves it more plainly is the example of some Children born with their Yards
imperforated, who notwithstanding have these waters, whilst in the Womb,

And here it must be observed that when there is more then one Child, they are
never in the same Membrane, unless their bodies are joined together, which is
rare and monstrous, but each have their Membranes and waters, apart.

Now these waters thus collected within these Membranes have diverse very
considerable uses; First, They serve the Infant to move more easily, as it were
by swiming from one side to the other, and that it may not hurt the Womb by its
frequent motions in striking dry against it, which would cause great pain, and
often excite to Abortion; and they serve also very much to facilitate its
passage in the birth making the way very slippery, and by that means the
orifice of the Womb being moistened is better widened and yielding when they
break, just when the Child is ready to follow, or a little before: for else
remaining dry it is born with greater difficulty and the Mother also more
tormented by it.

And now Mrs. Eutrap. having thus sufficiently as I hope, explained the
Membranes of the fetus, and the waters contained in them. I think it may not be
amiss to say something, in order of inquiring after the parts by which it is
nourished whilst in the Womb: and and here Mrs. Eutrap. since, as was said in
the beginning that it is only nourished by its Mothers blood; and that I am of
opinion that big-bellied Women have none that is fair or good; provident nature
has formed the placenta to serve it for a Magazine, that it may always have
sufficient, and be there again elaborated and perfected, to render it more
convenient for its nourishment; for without doubt so gross a blood as the
Mothers cannot possibly be converted into its substance, if it were not first
purified in the placenta, which is afterward sent to it by means of the
umbelical veins and brought back, as we shall show hereafter, by the Arteries,
which are the conduits of which the Navil-string is composed. We say then that
the placenta is nothing but a spungy and fleshy mass somewhat like the
substance of the spleen, woven and interlaced with an infinite number of Veins
and Arteries, which compose the greatest part of the body, made to receive the
Mothers blood appointed for the Infants nourishment.

This mass is so called, because it resembles a cake, also it may be called the
delivery, because being come forth after the Child is born the Woman is quite
delivered of her burden, it is also called the after-burthen, because it is as
a 2d Labor, of which the Woman is not discharged till after the Child be born:
some give it the name of liver of the Womb, because they say it serves as a
liver, to prepare the blood appointed for the Infants nourishment, and
Laurentius calls it the sweet bread of the Womb, and appoints it the same use,
as that of the lower belly, to wit for a rest and support to the Vessels of the
Navil which disperseth an infinite number of branches throughout all its
substance.

Now this placenta is made of the menstruous blood of the Mother, which flows
into the Womb, by the accumulation of which it is formed; its shape is flat and
round, about the bigness of a Trencher, and 2 fingers breadth thick about the
middle, where the umbilical Vessels are fastened, but is thinner toward the
edges. It is covered with the Chorion and Amnios on the side next the Infant,
and on the other side it is joined and fastened to the bottom on the inside of
the Womb; It is strongest fastened to the Womb (with its circumference) by the
Chorion, which cleaves so close to it by the interlacings of an infinity of
Vessels, which appear very large in its surface, that it cannot be separated
from it without tearing its substance.

Though there be 2 or 3 Children in the Womb begot in the same act, they have
usually but one common after-burthen, which has as many Navil-strings as
Children, which are notwithstanding separated from one another by their several
Membranes, in each being the Children and waters: but if they be superfetations
there will be as many burdens as Children; and as superfetations happen but
rarely, so there are few Women that have their burdens separated when they are
delivered of several Children.

We scarce find any Creature but a Woman that has an Afterburthen, like this
described, and discharges it as useless as soon as the Child is born; for most
other Animals cast forth nothing after their young, except the waters only and
some slimes with the skins which surround them, and in lieu of this fleshy
mass, those which, as a Woman, have but one at a time, have only some
cotyledones, or many spungy kernels joined inwardly to the proper substance of
their Womb, which terminates all the branches of the umbelical Vessels of their
Young; which Kernels as I have often observed in cutting up Sheep, when they
were not with young, are not bigger then hemp seed; but when they were with
young, they swelled as big as one thumb, one bigger, and one lesser; and then
they resembled the Figure of a round mushrome, on the outside, not yet spread
after it is cut from its stalk; and to each of these kernels, are fastened the
branches of the umbilical Vessels: however those that have more then one at a
time, as Bitches, Rabbits, etc. have no kernels; instead of which each young
has in its celule a kind of particular placenta, which the dam eats as soon as
she voids it, after she has knawn off the umbilical Vessels that hold it. But
these thing being fitter for Physicians and Chyrurgions to be contemplated on,
I shall proceed no farther to discourse thereon; and shall only desire you to
note, that those Vessels appointed for the nouriture of the fetus are bigger
then they are in Men, because of their hollowness, and as soon as the Child is
born, dry up, and that part of them which is without the belly falls off, and
is separated close to the Navil 5 or 6 days after; for which reason they lose
their first use, and begin after to degenerate into suspending ligaments, to
wit, the vein into that of the liver, and the 2 Arteries serve to extend and
sustain the bladder, by the side, where they are joined to it; the bottom of
which is yet suspended by the Vrachus, which comes not through the Navil, as
has been said, but remains so pendent all the rest of its life: and now Mrs. I
come to know how you use to fetch away the after-burthen, with the string and
when it is broken.

Mid. That I shall freely do Sir, withal my heart; and therefore Sir you must
note that the afterbirth being a useless thing to the Woman when the Child is
born, she must immediately after be freed of that also; wherefore as soon as
the Child is born, before I do so much as tie or cut the Navil-string, lest the
Womb close, I must without time looseing ease the Woman of this fleshy mass; To
perform which having taken the string, I must wind it once or twice about one
or 2 of her fingers of her left hand joined together, the better to hold it,
with which she may then draw it moderately, and with her right hand she may
only take a single hold of it about the left, near the Privities, drawing
likewise with that very gently, resting the while the fore finger of the same
hand stretched forth along the string toward the entry of the sheath of the
Womb, as may be seen in the annexed Figure, always observing, for the more
facility, to draw it from the side where the burden cleaves least, for in so
doing the rest will separate the better; as we see a card which is glewed to
any thing is better separated from the place where it begins to part then where
it is close joined. But above all things care must be had that it be not drawn
forth with two much violence, lest breaking the string near the burden, I be
obliged to put up my whole hand into the Womb, to deliver the Woman; or that
the Womb, to which it is very strongly fastened sometimes be not drawn forth
with it; or a very great flooding be caused: wherefore for these reasons it
shall be gently shaken and drawn forth by little and little, and to facilitate
the better its expulsion, the Woman may the whilst blow strongly into her hands
shut, as one does into the mouth of a bottle, to know if it be broke; or put
her finger into her Throat, as if she would cause vomiting, or strive as if she
were going to stool; bearing always down and holding her breath as she did to
bring forth her Child; and if after all this I meet with difficulty, you may,
if need be, after you know on which side it is seated, desire an experienced
Nurse keeper to press the belly lightly with her flat hand, directing it gently
downwards by way of chaffing, not too boistrously.

But if all this be in vain then I must direct my hand into the Womb; to
separate it, as you shall hear anon.

Then I must consider if there be all, and take care that the least part remain
not, not so much as the skirts, or any clods of blood; and this is the way to
deliver a woman of her afterbirth; but sometimes the Midwife by endeavoring
it breaks the string by pulling too strongly, or because it is very weak; or
else so putrified when the Child is dead that the least pull breaks it off
close to the burden, the which by that means is left behind in the Womb, or
because it cleaves to strongly, or the Woman is weak, and cannot expel it,
being much tired by a long Labor, or because it was speedily drawn forth after
Labor, the Womb closes so as it leaves it no passage, and cannot without much
difficulty be dilated to fetch it away, because it remains dry after the
natural slime and humidities are past: and seeing that if it remain behind it is
capable of destroying the Woman, we must see to get it away as before, and if
the Navil-string happen to break near the burden, I must immediately introduce
my hand into the Womb before it close, being anointed with oil or fresh butter,
to separate it from the Womb gently and draw it forth with the clods of blood
that remain. When the Navil string is not broken, it will easily conduct the
hand, but when it is we have no longer this guide; wherefore I must be then very
careful that I be not deceived in taking one part for another; as I once saw a
Midwife pull the Womb near the inward orifice in lieu of the burden.

As Soon then as I have introduced my hand into the Womb toward its bottom, I
shall find the burden which I shall know by a great number of little
inequalities, which are always made there, by the roots of the umbilical
Vessels, on the side where they terminate, which makes it to be easily
distinguished from the Womb; if it yet cleave to it, notwithstanding it is then
a little wrinkled and uneven; because its Membranes which were very much
enlarged contract themselves immediately after the Child and its waters which
kept them extended are excluded, and they that are expert can easily judge of
it.

Now if I find the burden wholly loosened from the Womb, it will be easy to
draw it forth, when I have got it into my hands, but if it cleaves, finding the
side to which it sticks least, I must begin there to separate it gently, by
putting some of my Fingers betwixt it and the Womb; continuing by little and
little to do so, till it be quite loose, and then draw it forth very carefully;
observing the whilst, if it cannot be otherwise, rather to leave some part
thereof behind, than to scrape or scratch the least part of the Womb, for fear
of a flooding, inflammation, or Gangrene, which cause death; being also careful
not to draw it forth, till it be wholly or the most part of it separated, for
fear of drawing forth the Womb with it, and to preserve it as whole as these
cautions will permit, because of showing it to the company, that they may know
I have performed my office well.

But if the Midwife shall not find the Womb open enough to direct her hand
immediately into it, let her presently anoint the Woman's Privities with hogs
grease then by little and little put up her hand, and let the Woman contribute
as before; but if for all this she cannot void the Afterbirth, to avoid a
greater mischief I must leave it to nature, assisting her with remedies which
suppurate: wherefore injections into the womb are proper, made of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, and Linseed, in which is to be mixed a
good quantity of Oil of Lillies or fresh butter; and to hasten the work give
her a strong Clyster, that so by the Motions to go to stool, it may cause it to
be voided, as it has arrived to many that have rendered it in the Bed-pan; and
sometimes when they have least expected it.

At the same time, to prevent a Fever or many other accidents which usually
happen, she may be let blood in the Arm or Foot, according as it shall be
convenient; and strengthened, that the cadaverous vapors coming from the
putrefaction of the burden ascend not to the heart and noble parts, which must
be done by good cordials often used, not such as are made of Treacle and
Methridate, etc. for which no reason can be given, but their specific, or
rather imaginary Faculties, and are fitter to cause vomiting, then comfort the
heart: But with true Cordials which are such as yield good nourishment, and at
the same time comfort the stomach, without offending it, as those drugs do
which are only good for those that sell them.

Wherefore I must order her good broths and gellies; and to drink Orengade or
Limonade, or to put some Syrup of Lemons in her refreshing Liquors; or if she
be free from a Fever a little wine and water mixed; which is the best and most
natural of all Cordials. Besides other remedies must be provided, according to
the accidents that happen by reason of the staying behind of the burden;
always remembering to bring it away as soon as possible, for as long as it stays
in the Womb the woman feels great pains continually, almost like them before
her Child was born; and until the whole be voided, the pains will still be
repeated although in vain, unless the matter be well disposed before; but the
lesser the piece is of the retained burden, the more difficult it is many times
to be expelled; because the impulse, the woman can make by helping her throws,
are not so great, when the matter contained in the Womb is small, as when it is
of a considerable bigness; for then it is more strongly thrust and compressed;
which is the reason why a woman miscarries with greater difficulty then when
brought to bed at her full time.

And here you must know there are diverse Midwifes, who having broken the
Navil-string as before said, leave their work imperfect; and commit the rest to
nature's work; but very often the poor woman dies, because of the great
mischiefs which usually happen before the suppuration of the burden so
retained: The which to avoid when they meet with the like case, I would advise
them to fetch it away, as I have directed: or if they find themselves incapable
to do it, because the hand must be put up into the Womb, which is more properly
the work of a Physician or Chyrurgion, expert in those cases; then let them
immediately send for one, that so he may be able, before the Womb closes to
introduce his hand, for the longer it is deferred the more difficult will the
work be.

Dr. Hitherto very well Mrs. Eutrap. have you expressed your knowledge and
experience in your Art even from the first generation and formation of the
Child in the Womb to the bringing of it safely forth into the world; But yet
good Mrs. Eutrapelia, there are diverse Women that will many times be asking you
your advice concerning other distempers that usually attend them, both before
Childbirth, as Barreness etc. and also after they are delivered of their Child,
both inward and outward, because their modesty prompts them, rather to come to
you than to the Physician or Chyrurgion; therefore I would have you to let me
know how far your skill and knowledge extends as to these matters; because that
if you should at any time be mistaken in your measures in the cure of any of
those diseases, I shall freely and heartily assist you with the best of my
directions to set all right and straight, as they say, and in good order.

Mid. Honored Sir, I am so extremely obliged to you, for this kind offer that
I know not which way to express my acknowledgment, and I shall most readily
answer your request, and therefore shall first begin with a discourse of
Barrenness.

PART. II.
SECT. I. Of Barrenness and the several kinds thereof.
MId. BArrenness is, 1. Natural, 2. Unnatural, 3. Accidental.

Natural is when the instrument of Generation being perfect in both Sexes, no
unlawful or unskilful means used to cause it, yet the Woman remains naturally
Barren, neither Age or Diseases, or natural defect hindering, yet she Conceives
not.

The reason of this may be 1. When both Sexes are of a Complexion; 2. Want of
Love, a 3d may be the letting Virgins blood in the Arm, before their Courses come
down; or other ill administration of internal and external remedies. 4. A loss
of carnal Copulation; when Sexes come to the School of Venus, either not at
all, or so coldly, that as good never a whit, as nere the better; and this is
from a cold Distemper, and is cured by such things as heat and nourish.

2. Unnatural, that is diabolical, to prevent which Authors have left several
ways, as to carry the Herb St. John's wort about them, which is called a driver
away of Devils, or a Plaster thereof applied to the Reins, with many others.

3. Accidental, which comes by some casual infirmity upon the body of either
Sex at a time, the which being taken away the effect cease: it is sometimes
from the Man, but most commonly from the Woman; for Man's instruments of
Generation being perfect, and he in health, I know no accidental cause in him;
And the chief cause in Women lies in her Womb; as the stopping of the flowers,
or overflowing; the Flux of the Womb, its falling down, inflammation, windiness,
heat and dryness; in all which I shall be brief, because if there be
difficulty, you are to have recourse to the learned Physician.

1. Then the Terms stop, 1. Naturally, 2. Unnaturally; they stop naturally in
some about the 50th year, in some before, rarely till 55. the unnatural cause
is, 1. much exercise, 2. in fat Women the Veins are narrow and blood turns to
fat, 3. by long sickness, 4. when they have the piles in lieu of their Terms,
5. a hot or cold distemper of the Womb, 6. care, fear, grief, etc. I shall
speak here only of the 5th for causes of the last being taken away the effect
ceases; and the rest the ingenious Midwife will remedy. Now seeing these
stoppings come usually from default of the Womb, the best way to help it is by
strengthening the Womb, first then you shall prepare your way; if there be
occasion let blood in the the foot, if she be not full of humors, if she be, then
in the Arm first, which I have most commonly known to do alone: then if need be
give her a draught of White Wind wherein an handful of Centaury or stinking
Arach has been boiled; and if there be a pain in the head add an handful of
Verven; or some Parcely roots, Fennel, or Lowage, etc. not forgetting in
fullness of humors to purge with half a dram of Extractum Rudii, and as much
Pil. Mastichinae mixed, made into 12 Pills, whereof take 3 at Night going to
bed, or after her first sleep.

2. The Terms overflow, 1. when they continue longer then their usual time,
which is 2 or 3 days, in Women that use no exercise 4 or 5 days, 2. when they
come oftener then once a month, the cause is 1. a Rupture of some Vessel, 2.
immoderate purgation, 3. some corroding humor, 4. hard Labor in Childbed, or
unkind handing the Womb: if the Vessels be broken, blood gusheth out in heaps,
and if from some knawing humor, they are few but very painful; the rest are
easily known. Let them abstain from exercise; then 1. anoint the reins with Oil
of Roses, Myrtles or Quinces; then boil the roots of Tormentil, Cinquefoil,
Yarrow, Knot-grass, Comfrey, dead Nettles, Solomon's Seal, Purslan,
Shepherds-purse, red Roses, acorn Cups, bark of Oak Trees, some of these, in
her ordinary drink; or the juices of what can be had taken alone, and this
above all, take Comfrey leaves or roots and Clowns alheal, of each an handful;
bruise and boil them well in Ale, and drink of it now and then, this will do
though the Vessels were open.

3. Flux of the Womb, is a continual droping from that part of the body; if it
be red like putrified blood it comes from that humor; if white and pale, it is
from Phlegm. if yellow, it is from Choler; if pure blood; as if a vein were
opened either a knawing of the Womb, or tearing in delivery is feared. The cure
differs as the cause, if pure blood flow, let blood in the arm, then use the
Medicine last mentioned, of Comfrey roots and Woundworth; if phlegm be the
cause, use Cinnamon in all meats and drinks, and Methridate and Treacle for
Antidotes, a little every Morning; take a scruple of Pills of Amber going to
Bed for diverse Nights; if from Choler, purge with syrup of Violets, and Cassia
Fistularis of each an ounce; after take powder of Ivory and Missleto of the
oak, of each one scruple, mixed with half an ounce of conserve of Roses; every
Morning for a Week; if from putrified blood having first let blood in the Foot,
then strengthen the Womb, as before: always forbearing violent motions and
passions, and sharp and salt meats; and provokers of Urine: for dead Nettles
there are three sorts, white, red, and yellow, the flowers of that color, the
white help the white, the red, the red, the yellow the yellow flux.

4. The Womb fallen out is cured; if it be swelled by bathing it with a
decoction of Mallows, Linseed and Fennigreek boiled in water, 2 or 3 times; and
when it is got up let her keep her Legs close, or else tie them with a swath;
apply stinking things to the Womb, as Assa Foetida, oil of Amber, her own Hair
burnt; and let her smell of Civet, etc. the rest is before and after.

5. The Womb is inflamed by many causes, a blow, stopping of the Terms,
Abortion, Ulceration, Immoderate Lechery, overmuch walking; cold. For cure,
strengthen the Womb first; then first clarify Whey and boil Plantain leaves or
roots in it; and drink it, then inject the juice of Plantain into the Womb with
a Syringe; if in Winter, when you cannot get the juice make a strong decoction
of the leaves and roots in water; if the body be costive use a Clyster: and
here note that in all Inflammations blood-letting is the chiefest remedy, first
in the Arm, then if need in the Foot; if it be near the Neck of the Womb, make a
pessary of wool and anoint it with unguent. album, or populeon, or mixed.

6. The Womb is sometimes troubled with wind, which is cured as the fits of the
Mother: and moistness of the Womb is cured as a flux of phlegm.

7. Heat and dryness of the Womb is incident to Women of a Choleric
complexion, is cured by cool and moistning herbs, of which stinking Arach is
chief, neither are Plantan and Mallows much behind; milk is good for such to
drink, first purging with an ounce of Cassia Fistula new drawn going to bed,
and follow your business the next day.

Dr. Thus far good, Mrs. Eutrap. but now hear me a little concerning this
matter.

All rational men know, that the generation of mankind, as also of other
irrational Animals, is the most perfect, excellent and exquisite work of God's
Vicegerent Nature; the which is most excellently, and elegantly demonstrated,
and set forth by Aristotle, that great Secretary of Nature, in his second Book
which he has written of the Generation of living Creatures; for whereas it is
impossible, by the decree of Nature, that any humane Creature should live
always, or have an immortal Being in this World; much less should we imagine
that should be granted to Bruits and other Souls of an inferior rank;
therefore, for the continuance and propagation of each sort, it has otherwise
ordained, that during the continuance of this World, there should be likewise
maintained a successive generation of both Sexes, by the Action of procreation;
and from hence, after him, Galen the greatest Luminary of Physic next
Hippocrates, says, that it comes to pass that Creatures are furnished with
Instruments of Generation, proper for the quality of their Sex; and are
consequently endued with natural Instincts prompting them to the use thereof:
Therefore we shall at this time discourse of this wonderful operation of
Nature; and endeavor, as far forth as our Talent will afford us, to seek out
the causes that may hinder, and from thence prescribe means to remove them, and
so consequently assist and further her in so miraculous a concern: and this
partly upon our Dame nature's account, whose Servants only we are; and in the
next place for the sakes of those Ladies, Gentlewomen and others, who are often
disconsolate and dejected, upon their being accounted barren.

Now then you must note that as conception has some alliance with every part
of the Body, as being undoubtedly concerned therein, so the same Conception may
be quite abolished, diminished, or deprived as it happens in all other actions
and motions of the body; so that if Conception be quite abolished in a Woman,
in such sort that she can never be able to conceive; this affection is then
called Barrenness; or such a Woman may be called a barren Woman, which you
please. But if she Conceive sometimes, though seldom, here the Conceptive
faculties may be said to be diminished; or weakened by some cause or other; and
to this kind of diminished Conception may be referred untimely births, called
Abortion; And lastly a depraved Conception is when in the Womb is contained
some unnatural Conception, such as Monsters and Mola's, etc. The causes and
remedies of all which it has and shall be our duty to lay open to the Females
Sex, according to the best of our skill and knowledge: first to the end we may
further the propagation of humane kind, and secondly, that we make if possibly
remove the reproaches laid upon Barrenness, which has been in all ages, and
continues to this day and will do to end of the World; and than which there can
hardly happen a greater defamation to the Female Sex. Insomuch as some like
Rachel have cried out to their Husbands for Children; or else their Lives will
lie on it, rather than endure the reproach of Barrenness, and some Women have
preferred their maids to their Husbands, so that their Child might be reputed
theirs, to take away the blemish of Barrenness; But you shall find but few
Women of their minds now a days: so then we shall in the first place speak of
the causes of this so odious and distateful a Disease, and then of their
removing; for you know it is an old saying and true, take away the cause and the
effect will consequently cease.

Now the chief method of finding out all causes which do or may bring damage,
to the faculties of the body, is no other then the knowledge of the means
whereby these faculties perform their Actions, in the time of health and
soundness of body. And whereas to the producing of any natural Conception there
is a necessity of distinction of both Sexes and a conjunction and carnal
Copulation of the Man and Woman, without which no Generation can be effected.
As for that story of a certain Maids conceiving with Child by standing in a
Bath, where some Man's seed had been cast, the Womb drawing it to it, as the
Lodestone does Iron, or Jet straw, it was either a miracle in Nature, or she
so gave out to save her bacon; and so no ways belongs to our purpose, and
having before declared the manner in other Sect. Therefore we shall here lay
down the manifest causes of Barrenness from either Sex, so that neither may be
unjustly blamed where they happen; for since the Women have, in this case a
great interest, and damage too if the fault be in the Man; because they may
often help their Husbands defect, and in so doing pleasure themselves, we shall
not therefore omit to treat of the causes thereof which may happen to men; and
moreover there being a necessity that both Sexes be furnished with fit and
proper Instruments for the work of Generation, as the man with a Yard, etc. and
a Woman with a Womb, etc. Then even reason will tell you, that if there chance
to be any defect or dissaffection in nature in any of the Members, of either
Sex, belonging to this work of Generation, the fruitfulness or Conception must
necessarily be hindered, impaired, or quite and clear abolished.

To begin then first with what belongs to the Man's side; one cause of
Barrenness laid down by many Authors is the overmuch length of the Yard; by
reason whereof the Seed is too much cooled in the passage before it can be
injected home into the Womb. But though this be a somewhat probable and
plausable reason; yet I am of opinion that it is but weak and will not hold
water with those of greater reason; (for all Souls are not endued with a like
proportion of reason;) for the Seed passing through the pipe of the Yard is
kept hot enough, the generative Spirits at that time often flocking to the Yard
to assist it in so great a work; and the like being performed on the Woman's
part, I cannot see how it can be any ways possible it should take cold in its
journey; but on the contrary side it may be rationally imagined that the long
Yard is most fit and commodious for Conception, by sending Seed to the inmost
and furthermost parts of the Womb, and so most likely to be there retained, its
due time.

And now others on the contrary side will have the short Yard the cause of
rendering Men unfruitful; and these I think have more reason on their side,
because it cannot so well inject the Seed into the Womb, as you heard before;
But indeed neither can this be a firm reason, for unfruitfulness in Man; since
it is confirmed by experience that such an one has begot Children likewise. But
a greater reason of unfruitfulness in the man may be some vitiousness or defect
in his Yard; as if it be crooked, or if any of its Ligaments be writhed, or
broken or bruised; whereby the passages through which the seed should flow be
corrupt, stopped or vitiated; or some Disease or imperfection be either in the
proper or Neighbor parts thereof.

Another cause of Barrenness by defect of the Yard, is a too much weakness and
tenderness thereof, it being not strongly enough erected to inject the Seed
into the Womb.

Then another cause in Men may be some vice in the Stones, as if they be
oppressed with any Inflammation, or swelling, or wound, or ulcer.

Also the Man may be Barren from his want of Seed, or if it be naught; as in
the Running of the Reins or Venereal Disease, Glutony or Drunkenness, etc. and
then too frequent Carnal Copulation, is a cause of Barrenness, because it
attracteth the Seedy moisture from the Stones before it is sufficiently
prepared; and concocted, as all other members of the body, by institution of
nature, use to draw their accustomed juice to themselves, so now if any one by
daily Copulation draws out all the moisture of his Seed, then do the Stones
draw the moist humors from the upper Veins to themselves, and so having but a
little blood in them they are forced, of necessity to cast it out raw; and thus
the stones being deprived of the moisture of their veins, draw the same from
the upper veins, and the upper veins from all the parts of the body, for their
proper nutriment, to the great damage of the body, robbing the same of the
vital Spirits.

It is therefore no wonder if those that use immoderate Copulation are very
weak in their bodies, seeing the whole body is thereby deprived of its best and
purest blood and vital Spirits; insomuch as those that have been too much
addicted to that pleasure, have killed themselves in the Act; can it then be a
wonder that such Seed is not fit for Generation?

And having now shown the causes of Barrenness in Men, we shall now discourse
of those in Women; Now the causes of Barrenness in Women proceed either from
the Age, or evil temper of the Womb, and its vicious conformation, and parts
depending on it, or the indisposition of the whole habit of the body; The evil
form of the womb renders Women barren, according to the great Hippocrates, the
Prince of all Physicians, as if the mouth or neck of the Womb be turned
backwards toward the great Gut, or a side out of its place, contrary from the
Privities; if it appear too big, or if it be fallen down before the Privities;
to which may be added when it is so narrow that it cannot admit the Yard to
enter, and when it is wholly, or in part closed by some inward or outward skin,
which is very rare, if at all; or by a swelling collosity, or cicatrice, etc.

But then it is not sufficient that the Man's Yard enter the Neck, which is the
Antichamber to the Womb, for if in the act of Copulation, he knock at the door
which is the inward orifice, and it be not opened, all is to no purpose; and
this may likewise be hindered from opening, by some callosity proceeding from
abundance of ill humors, which usually flow from the Matrix, or from some
swelling which may happen to it, or also by some part which may so press it,
that it cannot open to receive the Seed as the cawl does in fat Women;
according to Hippocrates, who says they cannot conceive till they grow lean.

But the most frequent reason why this orifice opens not in this Act, to
receive the seed, is the insensibility of some Women, who take no pleasure in
the Venereal Act; but when they have an appetite, the Womb being covetuous of
the Seed opens it self to receive it.

The same Hippocrates seems to have noted all the signs and causes of
Barrenness from the evil temper of the Womb, when he says in his 62 th
Aphorism, book 5. that all such Women whose Womb is cold and close, cannot
conceive, nor they who have it too moist, because the Seed is extinguished in
it; and likewise such who have it too dry and hot, because for want of aliment
the seed corrupts; but such as are of a moderate temper are fruitful. Of all
which in my opinion the most common is the cortinual moisture of the Womb fed
by an abundance of the whites with which many are much inconvenienced, the
humors of the whole dody being accustomed to stear their course this way, which
can very hardly be turned away when inveterate, and the Womb being imbued with
these vicious moistures, becomes inwardly so unctious and slippery, that the
seed though glutinous, cannot cleave to it; nor be retained within it, and
that is the cause it slips away immediately, or shortly after it is received.

Barrenness may also proceed from the whole habit, as when a Woman is too old,
or too young; for the Seed of the young is not prolific, neither have they
menstruous blood, both which are requisite to fruitfulness, and that of the
aged is in small quantity and too cold, who likewise want menstruous blood;
then, an universal distemper, though of convenient years, renders them Barren,
as when they are Hectic, Dropsical, Sickly, etc. and especially so much the
more as the whole parts are fallen from their temper and natural constitution.
There are however many Women, which seem Barren for a long time, by reason of
some of the aforementioned reasons, yea till 35 or 40 years old, and sometimes
longer who yet at last conceive being cured of the distempers which hindered
them, and having changed their temperament by their Age.

Now some of these Barrennesses may be cured by removing their causes, and
procuring the dispositions needful to fertility; yea of those proceeding from
an universal intemperament by reducing their body, by a convenient regiment, to
a good order, according to their respective dispositions. Wherefore if one have
the Neck of the Womb narrow, and not from some of the causes abovesaid, she
ought to be joined to a Man whose Yard is proportionable; and if that will not
do, which happens very seldom, she must relax it, and open it with softning
oils, and ointments; If it be compressed by any humor it must be resolved and
suppurated, according to its nature and situation, having always a care to
prevent the corruption of these parts which are very subject to it, being hot
and moist; because the Womb serves, as a sink by which all the bad humors of
the body are purged; so that you must take great care that these swellings turn
not to a Cancer.

When the Neck is not clear by reason of any scar, after a rent, caused by some
violence, or hard labor, or after an Ulcer which caused the two sides to be
agglutinated, whether inwardly or outwardly it must be separated, which being
the Chirurgeon's work, I here omit it.

If the inward orifice of the Womb be displaced, it may be in some sort
remedied by making the Woman observe a convenient posture in the act of
Generation; and if the whites or other impurities of the Womb, cause
Barrenness, they must be helped by evacuations, purgations, and a regular diet,
concerning which the learned Physician is to be consulted.

Mid. Thus far Sir, having heard your account of the signs and causes of
Fertility and Sterility; I having heard learned men discourse of Superfetation;
I would humbly entreat you Sir that you would please to let me hear your
opinion about that matter.

Dr. That you shall willingly good Mrs. Eutrapelia, and therefore I shall begin
first to tell you what it is.

SECT. II. Of Superfaetation.
Dr. SVperfaetation according to the description of Hippocrates, is a repeated
conception, that is when a Woman being already with Child, conceives again the
2 d time, now there is a great dispute about this; for we see daily Bitches,
Sows and Rabits, have diverse young but with one Copulation, which may make us
judge the same of a Woman; some will have this to be by Superfetation, but
there are signs by which we may know the difference, whether both Children were
begot at once, or one after the other. That which makes many believe there can
be no such thing as superfetation, is because as soon as a Woman has
conceived, her Womb closes firmly so that the Man's seed, absolutely necessary
to conception, finding no place nor entry, cannot be received, nor contained in
it, so as to cause this 2d conception. To this may be added, That a bearing
Woman discharges her seed, which is as necessary as a Man's, by a Vessel which
terminates on the side of the outward part of the inward Orifice; which seed by
this means is shed into the Neck of the Womb, and not into the bottom; as it
ought, for this purpose. However it may be said in answer, to these objections,
which are very strong; that though the Womb be closed, etc. yet this general
rule may have some exception; so that it may be sometimes opened to let pass
some slimy excrements which by their stay offend it; or chiefly when a Woman is
animated with an earnest desire of Copulation, in the heat of which action she
sometimes discharges by the passage that terminates in the bottom of the Womb,
which being opened by the impetuous endeavor of the seed, more then ordinarily
overheated, and this Orifice being at the same time a little opened, if the
Man's seed be darted into it at the same moment, it is thought a Woman may then
conceive again. This may be confirmed by a story of a Servant related by Pliny,
who having the same day copulated with two several Persons, brought forth two
Children, the one resembling her Master, the other his Proctor: and also by a
story of another Woman, who had two Children, one like her Husband and the
other like her Galant; but this different resemblance does not always prove
superfetation, because sometimes different imaginations may cause the like
effect.

The 2d Conception is effectively as sure, as we find the decision thereof
uncertain; nor must we imagine that always when a Woman brings forth two
Children, or more at once, there is a superfetation; because they are always
almost begot in the same Act, by the abundance of both Seeds received into the
Womb; neither must we believe that it may be at all times of a Woman's being
with Child; for it cannot be either the first or second day of Conception;
because if the last Seed be received into the Womb, it would make confusion
with the first, which is not yet enwrapt with this little skin, that might
otherwise separate it, nor is formed perfectly till the sixth or seventh day;
as Hippocrates saw in a Woman, who about that time expelled this geniture:
Besides the Matrix opening it self again could not hinder the first Seed from
slipping out; being not as yet invellopt with this little skin, which could
preserve it. This may make one not to believe Pliny's story; that it happened
for his reasons, to wit, that she used Copulation with two several Persons the
same day; for the last would certainly have caused this confusion of Seeds, and
also have destroyed the work begun: But I rather believe that this
superfetation may happen from the 6th day of Conception, till the 30th or 40th
at most; because then the Seeds are covered with Skins, and that which is
contained in the Womb, is not of a considerable bigness: but after this time it
is impossible, or yet at least very difficult, because the Womb being extended
more and more by the growth of the Child can hardly receive new Seed and as
hardly retain it; but casts it forth by reason of its fullness; and it is a true
Maxim, intus existens prohibet alienum.

Now when a Woman brings forth one or more Children at a Birth, begotten at
once which usually are called Twins, (and differs from superfetation) it is
known by their being almost of an equal thickness and bigness, and having but
one only and common afterbirth; not separated the one from the other, but by
their Skins, which wrap each a part with their waters, and not both in the same
waters and skin; as some have believed; but if there be several Children and a
superfetation, they will also be separated by their Skins, but not have a
common burden, but each a part; neither will they be of an equal bigness, for
that which is the superfetation is always lesser and weaker, then that which
was first engendered; who because of its force and vigor draws to it self the
greatest and best part of the nourishment; just as we find in fair and great
fruit, that have often near them very little ones; which happens because those
that are first knotted and fastened to the Tree, take away all their nourishment
from their Neighbors, which did but blossom when the first had acquired ground
and bigness: and sometimes Twins are not of an equal bigness, which happens as
the one or other has more strength to draw to it in greater abundance the best
part of the common nourishment.

Now I am not willing to say that there is never any superfetation; but I say
that it happens very rarely; for of an hundred Women that have Twins, ninety
have but one burden common to both, which is a very certain sign they had no
superfetation, and much more certain then the observations taken from the
greatness, or strength of the Child, which is but conjectural.

And thus have I given you Mrs. my full sentiments concerning this so much
disputed and intricate matter: Now I pray you proceed to the other distempers
accompanying Women before Childbirth.

Mid. That I shall Sir, and the next shall be concerning their vomitings.

SECT. III. Of Vomitings of Women with Child.
Mid. VOmitting with suppression of the Terms, are for the most part the first
accident, and the means by which they perceive they have conceived. It Is not
always caused from ill humors in the stomach, because of the stopping of the
courses; for these corrupted humors cause rather a depraved appetite then this
vomiting, which happens immediately after Conception, and comes by succession;
but these first vomitings proceed from the Sympathy between the stomach and the
Womb, because of the likeness of their substance, and by means of the Nerves
inserted in the upper Orifice of the Stomach, which have communication, by
continuity, with those that pass to the Womb, being portions of the 6th pair of
those of the brain. Now the Womb, being a very sensible part beginning to grow
bigger, feels some pain, which being communicated by this continuity of Nerves
to the upper Orifice of the Stomach, causes these loathings and vomitings. And
to prove that it is thus, and not by the pretended ill humors, it appears in
that many Women begin to vomit from the first day of their being with Child,
who were in perfect health before they conceived, which the suppression of the
Courses could not cause.

Now loathing, or nauseousness, is a desire to vomit, and a motion by which the
stomach is drawn toward its upper orifice, without casting up any thing; and
vomiting is a more violent motion, by which is cast forth of the mouth
whatsoever is contained in it.

At first vomiting is but a single symptom, not to be feared, but continuing
long it weakens the Stomach very much; and hindering digestion corrupts the food
in lieu of concocting it; whence succeed ill humors which require purging.
These vomitings commonly continue till the 3d or 4th month of being with Child;
which is the time the Child appears manifestly to be quick; then they begin to
cease, and Women recover the appetite they had lost; because the Infant in
growing has need of more nourishment: and so consumes those humors which flew
to the Stomach; and besides the Womb is then accustomed to its extension; these
continue in some till they are delivered, which often endangers miscarriages;
and the rather, the nearer they are to their full time; and others are
tormented more toward the end of their reckoning, then at first; because then
the Stomach cannot be widened enough easily to contain the food, being pressed
by the bigness of the Womb: such a vomiting to Women whose Children lie high
seldom ceases before they are delivered.

Be not troubled at vomitings, in the beginning, if they be gentle, without
straining, for they are beneficial, but if they continue longer then the 3d or
4th month, they are to be remedied; because for want of nourishment the Mother
and Child will both grow weak; and the continued subversion of the Stomach
causing great motion of the belly, will force the Child before its time.

Now to hinder this vomiting from afflicting the Woman long, for it is very hard
to stop it quite, let her use good diet, but little at a time, that she may
keep it without pain, and not be forced to vomit it; and to strengthen it let
her eat it with juice of Oranges or Lemons, Verjuice or rose vinegar, or eat
after Meals a little Marmelade of Quinces; and she must forbear fat meat and
sauces, for they soften the Skins of the Stomach, which are weak and loose by
vomitings, and also sweet sauces.

But if for all this that it continues, although the Woman be above half gone;
it is a clear sign there are cleave corrupt humors to the inward sides of the
Stomach, which must be purged by stool; to effect which, give half a dram of
Rhubard, a dram or two at most of Sena, infuss'd in posset-Ale, to which
streined add an ounce of Syrup of Succory: which dissolves the humors, and in
voiding them comforts the parts: or you may give her Cassia and Tamarinds;
always adding a little Rhubarb, or syrup of Succory compound: If once be not
enough, repeat it, some few days respite between; If it continues for all this,
you must rest here, lest some worse thing happen, for she is then in great
danger of miscarrying; and if the Hiccoup takes them from too much emptiness,
by vomiting and purging, it is very bad, as Hippocrates Prince and oracle of
Physic teaches us.

As for great Cupping-glasses which some advice to be applied to the Stomach to
keep it in its place; I believe it is a chip in Potage; because the Stomach is
loose, and no way cleaving to this upper part of the Belly. But since these
vomitings cool and weaken it, I should advise them to wear a piece of Scarlet
or Flannel, or Lamb-skin, which would help digestion.

SECT. IV. Of the pains of the Back, Loins, Reins and Hips.
ALL these Accidents are but the effects of the widening of the Womb, and the
compression it makes on the Neighboring parts by its weight. These are greater
the first time she is with Child, for afterward the Womb only receives the
same dimensions it had before; and the cords which hold it in its natural
place, as well round as large, suffer a greater stress, being much drawn and
straightened by the bigness and weight of the Womb; to wit the large ones those
of the Back and Loins, which answer to the Reins, because these two strings are
strongly fast'ned toward these parts; and the round ones cause those of the
Groins, Share and Thighs where they end. These are sometimes so much stretched
by this weight and higness of the Womb that they are torn, chiefly if the Woman
chance to have a false step, which causes very great pains, and other worse
accidents; as it happened to a certain Woman, being six months gone of her
first Child, who felt the like after she had stumbled, and perceived at the
same time something crack toward her Reins and Loins, which was one of the
large cords, made a noise by the sudden jolt she received; at the same instant
she felt extreme pains in her Reins and Loins, and all one side of her belly,
which caused her immediately to vomit, very often with much violence, and the
next day was taken with a great continued Fever, which lasted seven or eight
days, without being able to sleep or rest one hour, all that time she vomited
all she took, with a strong and frequent Hiccoup, and great pains, which seemed
as if they would hasten her Labor, which I was very apprehensive of, as also of
her death: but by the help of God, causing her immediately to be put to Bed,
where she rested 12 whole days, she was thrice let blood in her Arm on several
days, and took a grain of Laudanum at twice in the yelk of an Egg, a little to
ease her violent pains, by giving her rest; taking also from time to time good
strengthening Cordials; so that all these Symptoms, which at first seemed
desperate, ceased by little and little, and she went out her full time, and
then was happily delivered of a Son, which lived 15 months, notwithstanding all
those mischievours accidents befell her, which were enough to have killed half a
dozen others; but God sometimes is pleased to work Miracles by nature, assisted
with remedies fit for the purpose, as well as by his Grace. And also the Womb
causes the pains of the Hips by its weight, in bearing too much upon them. And
assure your selves there is nothing will ease all these pains better then to
rest in Bed, and bleed in the Arm, if there be any great extension, or breaking
of any cord of the Womb, as was in this case; and when the Womb bears too much
upon the Hips, if she cannot keep her Bed, she must support her Belly with a
broad swaith.

SECT. V. Of the pains of the Breasts.
AS soon as a Woman conceives, her monthly blood wanting ordinary evatuation,
and she daily breeding blood, there is a necessity, she consuming but little
whilst first with Child, that the Vessels being too full, should discharge
part, as it does, upon the parts disposed to receive it, such as the kernelly
parts, especially the Breasts, which suck up a great quantity of it, which
swelling them causes this pain which she feels, and happens also to those whose
Terms are only stopped.

To ease her we ought, in the beginning, to leave it to Nature, the chief
Physician, and she must only have a care she receive no blows thereon, nor be
straight laced; but after the third or fourth month the blood being still sent
to the Breasts in great store, it is much better to evacuate it by bleeding in
the Arm, then to turn it back upon some other part by repercussive or binding
Medicines, because it cannot flow to any part where it can do less hurt than
these; and to shun the accident o^ which Hippocrates speaks in his 40th
Aphorism, of the 5th book; If Blood be carried in too great abundance to the
Breasts, it shows the Woman is in danger of being Frantic; because of the
transport which may be mad^ thence of the brain; whcih is voided by moderate
bleeding in the Arm, and a regular cooling diet, moderately nourishing.

SECT. VI. Of involuntary voiding, and stoping of Urine.
THE seat of the Bladder which is just upon the Womb, is sufficient to instruct
us, why Women with Child, are sometimes troubled with difficulty of Urine; and
why often they cannot hold their water; which is caused 2 ways, 1. because the
Womb by its bigness and weight presses the bladder, so that it is hindered from
its ordinary extension, and so incapable of containing a reasonable quantity of
Urine; which is the cause the bigger she grows, and the nearer her time, the
oftener she is compelled to make water, 2. if the weighty burden of the Womb
does very much press the bottom of the bladder, it forces the Woman to make
water every moment, but if the neck of it be pressed it is filled full with
Urine, being not able to expel it, because the Sphincter Muscle, in this
compression, cannot be opened to let it out, which causes great pain. Sometimes
by its sharpness, stirs up the bladder often by pricking it, to discharge it
self; and sometimes by its heat it makes an inflammation in the neck of the
bladder, which causes its stopping: and if it be from a stone in the bladder
it is more in supportable and dangerous to a Woman with Child then one that is
not; because the Womb, by its swelling causes the stone perpetually to press
against the bladder, and the pains are violenter, if it be greater, or of an
unequal or sharp shape.

It Is of great moment to hinder these violent endeavors to make water, and to
remedy them, if possible, in all indispositions, because by long continuance of
forcing downwards to make water, the Womb is loosened and bears down, and is
sometimes forced to discharge its self of its burden before its time: which we
must endeavor to hinder, having respect to its different causes; as when it
comes from the weight of the Womb, pressing the bladder, as for the most part;
now she may remedy it, if with both her hands when she would make water, she
lift up the bottom of her belly; or wear a large swath or keep her bed.

If it be sharpness of Urine that makes an inflammation in the neck oth' bladder,
appease it by a cooling diet, forbearing strong drinks, using emulsions made of
the 4 cold seeds, or whey with syrup of Violets; use not purging because its
heat augments the inflammation; these are proper to cleanse the Urinary
passages, without either prejuding Mother or Child, taken Morning and Evening.
If all this prevail not let her blood a little in the Arm; and bath the outward
entry of the neck of the bladder with a decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Pellitory and Violets, with a little Linfeed; and inject some of the same into
the bladder, to which you may add Honey of Violets, or luke warm Milk:
abstaining from all diuretics, for fear they provoke Abortion. And when all
fails she must send for a Physician or Chyrurgeon to make use of his Catheter;
And also if it arise from the stone in the neck of the bladder, they may thrust
it back with it; but if small draw it forth; for a great one cannot be drawn
forth before she be delivered; being better to leave her so then endanger her
life or the Child's.

SECT. VII. Of a Cough and difficult breathing.
THey whose Infants lie low, are more troubled with difficulty of Urine, then
they whose lie higher, who are free from that and the like distemper, but are
more subject to a Cough and difficult breathing.

If a Cough be violent, to vomiting, it is one of the chiefest things which
cause Abortion; because it is an essay whereby the Lungs endeavor to cast forth
of the Breast that which offends them by a compression of all its Muscles,
which pressing all the enclosed air inwards, wherewith the Lungs are much
stretched, thrusts also downwards by the same means, the midriff, and
consequently all the parts of the lower belly, but particularly the Womb, which
continuing long and violent, often causes Abortion.

Sometimes it proceeds from sharp rheums, which distill from the brain upon the
Artery and Lungs; and sometimes from such blood, which flows toward the
Breast; upon stopping the Terms; also from too cold air breathing which stirs
up the parts to motion; but being begun by these causes it is often augmented by
the compression the Womb makes upon the Midriff, which cannot have its liberty
in those that bear their Children high; because by its great extension it bears
up almost all the parts of the lower belly, toward the Breast, and chiefly the
Stomach and Liver, forcing them against the Midriff.

You must remedy this by keeping good diet somewhat cooling, if from sharp
humors, avoiding all Salt and Spice meats, Oranges, Lemons, Vinegar, etc. but
she may use juice of Liquorice, Sugar Candy, syrup of Violets, or Mulberries,
which she may mix with a Ptysan made with Jujubs, Sebestens, French Barley, and
a little Liquorice; and it may not be amiss to divert and draw down these
humors by a gentle Clyster. If these prevail not, and there appears signs of
fullness of blood, bleed her in the Arm, at what time soever of going with
Child; and though it be not usually practiced when they are young with Child,
yet here it must; for a continual Cough is much more dangerous then a moderate
bleeding. If it come of cold keep in a close Room with a napkin doubled about
her Neck, or a Lamb-Skin; and going to bed take 3 or 4 spoonfuls of this syrup
of burnt wine following, which is very Pectoral and causes good digestion.

Take half a pint of French wine, 2 drams of Cinnamon bruised, half a dozen
cloves, 4 ounces of white Sugar or Sugar Candy; put them together in a
Porrenger, and boil them upon a Chaffing dish of Coals, burn it, and then boil
it to the consistence of a Syrup.

You must not from whatever cause it proceeds, that she must go loose in her
clothes; and because sleep is proper to stay fluxions, it may be procured by
the Physician: using no strong stupefactives of opium, which are dangerous, if
there be not very great necessity; as in the patient mentioned in the Section
of the pain of Back, Loins, Reins and Hips.

Some Women carry their first Child chiefly so high, because the cords which
support the Womb are not stretched, that they think them to be in their
Breasts, which causes a difficult breathing, as soon as they have eaten a
little, walked or gone up the stairs; so that they fear they shall be choked;
which comes from the Wombs being enlarged and pressing the Stomach and the
Liver, which forces the Midriff upward, leaving it no room to be moved:
sometimes their Lungs are so full of blood, driven thither from all parts that
it hardly leaves passage for the air; if so they will breath more easily as
soon as a little blood is taken from the Arm; but if it comes from a
compression made by the womb against the Midriff, the best remedy is to wear
her clothes loose, and eat little and often; eating no windy meats as pease,
and avoiding all grief and fear, because they drive the blood to the Heart and
Lungs in too great quantity, so that she having her Breast already stuffed, and
hardly breathing, will be in danger of being choked; for the abundance of
blood filling the Ventricles of the Heart above measure and at once, hinders
its motion, without which she cannot live.

SECT. VIII. Of the swelling and pains of the Thighs and Legs.
MAny think, which is in part true, that the Woman having more blood then the
Infant needs to nourish it, nature by virtue of the expulsive faculty of the
upper parts which are always strongest, drives the superfluity upon the lower,
as the Legs, etc. as most feeble and apt to receive it; and so are caused their
swelling and pain and sometimes red spots, from the swelling of the Veins,
along the inside, which extremely hinders her going: but the doctrine of the
circulation of the blood, invented by our Countryman the immortal Dr. Harvey,
the English Hippocrates, will teach us better how this comes, then that we need
have have recourse to this expulsive faculty; but because it is fitter for
Physicians and Chyrurgeons that are learned in Anatomy then Midwifes, being
they may help them without such curious knowledge; I shall omit it, and if you
would be satisfied, see what the learned and expert French Surgeon Moricean,
has written on this Subject, it is put into English by Dr. Chamberlain.

Now to remedy these let her only use a palliative cure, in swathing the parts
with a rowler 3 or 4 fingers broad; beginning at the bottom, and she should
most keep her bed, if she can; and if there be signs of abundance of blood in
other parts she may bleed without danger.

Some Women's Legs swell only from weakness, and are so Phlegmatic that when you
press them with your finger the print remains; because they want Natural heat
sufficient to concoct all the nourishment sent to them, and expel its
superfluities, which remaining makes them so Hydropical. To resolve these
swellings, make a Lee made with the ashes of Vines, or other wood ashes, and
Melilote, Camomil, and Lavender boild in it; if that do not foment them with
this. Take Rosemary, Bays, Time, Merjoram, Sage and Lavender, of each a
handful, Province Roses half a handful, Pomgranat flowers and Alum, each an
ounce, boil them in 3 pints of strong red wine, to the wasting of a 3d part and
use it. But these swellings commonly cease when she brought to Bed, because she
purges the superfluity of her whole habit, by her Lochia.

SECT. IX. Of the Hemorrhoids.
THese are swellings and painful Inflammations caused by a flux of humors upon
the extremities of the Hemorrhoid veins and Arteries, caused by a bundance of
blood cast upon these parts because the body is not purged as before; and
sometimes by endeavors they have to go to stool when costive; If they be small
and without pain, either inward or outward, it is easy to prevent their farther
growth, by remedies which hinder and turn the flux from those parts, but the
great ones are cured by first easing the pain; so that if she have other signs
of fullness in the rest of her body she may safely be once let blood in the Arm,
and if great necessity twice, if she be costive let her take a Clyster, of
Violets, Mallows, Marshmallows, and honey of Violets, with some fresh Butter or
Oil of Almonds; adding no sharp thing, especially in inward Piles; after let
her keep a moderate and cooling diet, and rest in her Bed, if she may, till the
flux be past; in that while anointing them with strokings from the Cow, and
foment them with the decoction of her Clyster, adding some Linseed: your Oil of
sweet Almonds, Oil of Poppies, and Oil of water Lillies well beaten together
with the yelk of an Egg, in a leaden mortar, are very good to ease pain; and if
that Inflammation be great anoint a little with Vnguentum refrigerens Galeni,
or anguentum album, and populeon equally mixed.

After all this if the swelling abates not, apply Leeches, or if soft, or any
kind of inundation use a Lancet; but Leeches are properer for hard Piles,
because they pain not so much. Women are not here eased by Piles as Men are,
because it is contrary to nature, for this evacuation ought always to be made by
the Womb; if not with Child; but if she be, it may in some measure, if full of
blood, supply the natural; if they bleed moderately, and without pain she may
be eased, but if they flow too much there is danger of both Mother and Child
being weakened; to avoid which make binding fomentations with the decoction of
Pomgranate flowers, and Vines, and Province Roses, made in Smiths water and a
little Alum; or this pultis made of Bole-Armenac, Dragons-blood, and sealed
earth, with the white of an Egg: and to turn the blood by bleeding in the Arm,
and Cupping-Glasses to the Reins, etc. as you may consult the Physician.

SECT. X. Of the several Fluxes happening to Women with Child.
SHE is Subject to three sorts of Fluxes, the Flux of the Belly, of the Terms
and Fludings.

Of the Belly are three kinds, the first Lienteria, when the Stomach and Guts
not digesting the nourishments received let it pass away raw. 2. Diarrhea, when
they simply discharge the humors and excrements which they contain. The 3d and
worst is a Dysenteria, when with the humors and excrements she voids blood,
with violent pains, caused by an ulceration of the Guts.

Any of these if they continue long put her in great danger of Aborting; if the
first, the Stomach letting the food pass before it be turned into juice,
whereof blood is made to nourish Mother and Child, they must both be weakened;
if the 2d it will cause the same accident; because of voiding the Spirits with
the humors; but most danger's in the last, because she has then great pains and
Gripes in the Guts from their Ulcer; which excites them continually, by constant
prickings, to discharge themselves of the sharp humors which causes a violent
motion of the Womb, being pla^ed upon the right gut, and to the Child, and, by
the compression the Muscles of the belly make on all sides, as also those that
are made by them of the Midriff, which force themselves downwards in the
endeavors she makes with pain so often to go to stool, the Child is constrained
to come before its time, and the oft'ner by how much the prickings are greater:
for according to Hippocrates; Aphorism 27 book 7. If a tenasm happen to one
with Child, it makes her Miscarry. Now this tenasm is a great passion of the
right Gut, which forces it to make those violent endeavors to discharge it
self without being able to avoid any thing but Choleric humors mixed with
blood, by which it is perpetually pricked.

This Flux happens to her commonly from a weak digestion of the Stomach,
because of her bad diet, which her strange appetite causes her often to long
for, by the constant use whereof at last being weakened it suffers the food to
pass without digestion, or if it stay longer it is turned into a corrupt juice,
which descending into the Guts iritates them by its sharpness to discharge
themselves as soon as they can.

To proceed safely in the cure of these Fluxes, their nature must be
considered, that the cause that maintains them may be removed. If it be a
Lienteria following Vomitings, as is usual, which have so weakn'd the Stomach,
and loosn'd its Skins, that having no longer strength to vomit up the food, it
suffers it to pass downward without digestion; then she must refrain all
irregular appetites, and eat food of good digestion and little at a time, she
may drink a little deep Claret wine, in which Iron has been quenched, if she
have not a strong Fever, for in a small one wine is to be preferred, because
her Fever is but symptomatick, from the weakness of her Stomach, and will
vanish as soon as it is fortified; which may be promoted if she take before and
after meals, some of that burnt wine spoke of before for the Cough, or a little
good Hippocras, or right Canary, or eat a little Marmalade of quinces before
meals; and wear a Lamb-skin upon the pit of her Stomach; be sure to give no
purge, for this is only caused by weakness.

If it be a Diarrhea simply voiding such excrements as are in the Guts, and
some superfluous humors, which nature has sent to be expelled, and it be
gentle and continue not long, she will feel no damage by it, and so it is good
to leave it to nature without interrupting it in the beginning; but if it
continue above 4 or 5 days it is a sign there are ill humors cleaven to the
inside of the Guts, and ought to be expelled by some light purge after which it
will certainly cease.

But if for all fit purges, it changes into a Dysentery, she is then in danger
of miscarrying; which must be prevented if possible; therefore having purged
the ill humor, and hindering, that no more be engendered, by Chicken or Veal
broths, etc. with cooling herbs, pap with the yelk of an Egg well boild, let
her quench Iron or Steel in her drink which must be small beer or water, with a
little strong, or wine, if she be not Feverish, for then half a spoonful of
syrup of Quinces, or Pomgranates is better; and she may eat a little Marmalade
of Quince, or other strengtheners, if she was purged before; and because there
is always great gripes, they must be appeased, by Clysters made of the broth of
a Calves or Sheeps head well boild, with 2 ounces of oil of Violets; or good
Milk and the yelk of an Egg; after the use of these as long as is judged
necessary, which she must keep as long as she can; you must proceed to clensers
made with Mallows and Marshmallows with honey of Roses, and then binding ones,
in which must be neither oil nor honey, beginning first with gentlest made of
Rose Water, with Lettice and Plantain water, then to stronger, of the roots and
leaves of Plantain, tapsus barbatus, horse-tail, province Roses, rind of
Pomgranates in Smiths water, adding of sealed earth and Dragons blood of each 2
drams; you may also foment the Fundament.

Of the monthly blood before, and if it be from to much blood 'twil do her a
kindness.

SECT. XI. Of Fluddings.
THe Courses come at accustomed times, without pain, distilling by little and
little from the Wombs Neck, during pregnancy and then wholly cease; but these
come with pain, from the Wombs bottom, and almost on a sudden in great
abundance, and continue without intermission, except some clods, formed there,
seem sometimes to lessen the accident, by stopping for a small time the place
whence they flow; but it soon returns with greater violence, and after follows
death to the Mother and Child, if not prevented by delivering the Woman.

If the Fludding happen when young with Child it is usually because of some
false Conception, or Mole, of which the Womb endeavors to discharge it self,
by which it opens some of the Vessels in its bottom, whence the blood ceases
not to flow, till it has cast out the strange bodies it contained, and the
subtiller the blood is the more it flows; but when this happens to one truly
Conceived, at whatever time, it proceeds likewise from the opening of the
Vessels of the Womb's fund, caused by some blow, slip, etc. and chiefly because
the secundine, separating in part if not wholly from the inside of the Wombs
bottom, to which it ought to stick, to receive the Mothers blood, for the
Child's nouriture, leaves open all the Orifices of the Vessels where it joined,
and so follows a great flux of blood, which never ceases till she be brought a
Bed; yet I do not intend it should be done as soon as perceived, for some small
fluddings have been stopped by lying quietly in Bed, bleeding in the Arm and the
use of Remedies mentioned in the menstruous Flux; and it may be but an ordinary
monthly Flux; and then it is good leaving the Labor to nature, provided she has
strength, and accompanied with no other ill accident; but when she falls into
Convulsions and Faintings, it is absolutely necessary she be delivered, whether
she be at her count or no, pains or throws or no, for there is no other way to
save both their Lives.

You must not always expect pains and throws to force and forward Labor, in
these dangerous accidents, for though they come at the beginning, they usually
cease as soon as it comes to Faintings and Convulsions; neither must it be put
off till the Womb be opened enough, for this Flux moistens, and the weakness
loosens it, so that it may then be as easily widen'd as if there had been
abundance of strong throws. Wherefore let the Midwife introduce her Fingers
anointed with Oil or Butter, 2 or 3 at a time, and all by degrees, and at last
her whole Hand, and if she find the waters not broke, break them, and then
whatever part of the Child presents, though the head (provided it be not in the
Birth) let her search for the Feet, and draw it forth by them; observing the
circumstances in delivery of a Child with the Feet first, because there is
better hold; so that if the Feet lie not ready seek for them, which is easier
done at that time then another; because the Fluddings make the Womb slippery:
then fetch the after-burthen, which in these cases cleaves but little, being
careful not to leave so much as a clod in the Womb, lest it continue the Fludding.

In this case many Women and Children have perished for want of this operation,
and many escaped death by being timely succor'd. Guilemeau a Famous French
Surgeon mentions 6 or 7 Histories to confirm this; and Moriceau by his
experience avers it, and in the case of his own Sister too long here to relate.

You are always here to give good strengthening broths, gellies and a little
good Wine, and smell to rose Vinegar; and to prevent the blood Fludding in
great quantity, open a vein in the Arm, or bind her Arm with fillets above her
Elbow, and lay clothes upon her Reins wet in water and Vinegar: but if this
proceeds from the parting of the after-burden, she must be delivered as soon as
may be, though she were but 3 or 4 months gone, because all must be brough^
away whether false Conception, Mole, or Child.

SECT. XII. Of the Weight of the Womb, etc.
THis is often caused by the stretching of the large Cords of the Womb, and
this will cause an hinderance of Copulation, and a numness in her Hips,
sleepiness in her Thighs, and difficulty of Urine and going to stool; chiefly
toward her latter reckonings, because it presses down the Bladder and great
Gut, being seated between both. But she may be easier cured of this bearing
down after she is laid, than before; for then the Cords will be easier
strengthened, and she may then use pessaries which she cannot so well with
Child.

The help for this from any cause is to keep her Bed, or swaith her; and if she
have difficulty in urining, help her self by lifting up her belly with both
hands; but if humors cause this, let her keep a drying diet; as Rost-meat, etc.
and refrain Copulation; straight lacing; and above all when in Labor, take care
that neither by throws, nor birth of the Child, nor violent drawing the
burden, that she get not a falling out of the Womb, instead of a bearing down
or weight, which is soon done, if the method taught in the birth of a Child,
when its Head thrusts the Neck of the Womb forth before it, be not well
observed.

SECT. XIII. Of the Dropsy of the Womb, etc.
THese waters are either bred in the Womb, or brought thither from some other
parts, as in the Dropsy of the belly it passes by tra^sudation through the
porous substance of the Skins of the Womb; and these have deceived the Midwifes
as well as patients, who having along time hoped and been made to hope for a
Child, at length find nothing but waters; whereof some have voided a pailful,
of which are many relations by Physicians and Surgeons; These are bred in the
Womb when it is too cold or weakened by a violent Labor before, or from
suppression of filthy humors. When these are sent to the Womb from other parts
they are never wrapped in a particular skin, but retained only by its exact
closure, and flow away as soon as it begins to open; but when bred in the Womb,
which is for the most part after Copulation, if the seed be too cold, waterish,
or corrupt, they are then sometimes contained within the Skin, which hinder the
patients from a speedy discharge of them. She going with it almost as long as
with a Child; and this is it persuades them they are with Child.

But it is easy to avoid being deceived, if you take notice of the Signs of a
true Conception; for in a Dropsy her breasts are fallen, have no Milk, nor
finds her self quicken at the usual time, but a bubling of moved waters; a
greater weight in her Belly, and more equal, the Womb, Hips, Thighs and Legs
swell, and worse Color in her Face; and as it may come alone, so it may
accompany a true Conception, the waters being contained in the Womb without the
Child's Skin. Some have voided 3 or 4 quarts above 2 months before they were
brought to Bed, and then they are contained in the Womb without the Skins, or
else the Child would be forced to be born presently after they are voided.

The best Remedy is to wait patiently the time of delivery, observing a dry
diet; but if it is only contained in the Womb, use diuretics, and endeavor to
procure her Courses, and to destroy by purges the cause of the Generation of
such superfluities: of which the Womb is so full sometimes that it discharges
some on the outward parts and chiefly the nearest; as the Lips of the
Privities, which are so swelled that they are quite blown up, and in some are
so big, that they cannot close their Thighs, and hinders walking; now because
this may be inconvenient to her during Labor, it will be requisite to remedy it
before, which must be done by a Lancet, all along the Lips, then applying
compresses dipped in astringent wine; Leeches though less painful are not so
proper, because their small Orifices close again as soon as removed, but the
other may be made as big or little as one will, and kept open by ointment as
long as is fit.

SECT. XIV. Of Abortion and its causes.
WHen a Woman Sir in the beginning casts forth what she had retained by
Conception, it is an Effiuxion of the Seed; if a false Conception, it is an
Expulsion, but when the infant's formed and begins to live, if it come before
time ordained by Nature it is an Abortion; and we say in general that every
sharp Disease easily causes it; in particular all the accidents before
mentioned: as also a great noise, as Cannon, of Thunder claps, watching,
fasting, stinks, etc. if she Miscarries without any of these accidents.
Hippocrates says, any Woman indifferently corpulent miscarrying the 2d or 3d
month without manifest cause, it is because the inward closers of the Womb's
Vessels are full of viscous filth, whereby they cant retain the weight of the
fetus, which is loosned from it; to this are Phlegmatic Women Subject, and who
have the whites much which make the Womb slippery, and loose.

Likewise the passions of the mind, cause great hurt, chiefly Choler, but above
all sudden fear; There are other causes which may be said to proceed from the
Infant, as when its monstrous, or has an unnatural Situation.

If we find one or more of the said accidents, and she has a great heaviness
in her belly, falling like a ball on that side she turns, and there comes
stinking humors from her, it is a sign she will miscarry of a dead Child; Now
she is in more danger of her Life when she miscarries then at full time; and in
danger of miscarrying always, if she miscarry at first; because of the violent
motion caused by frequent Copulation; but they may preserve their fruit when
their love is a little moderated. We have taught before to prevent each
accident. Who are subject to Abortion, must rest or keep in Bed, refrein
Copulation, (...) soon as she thinks she is with Child, avoiding diuretics and
openers; and be loose dressed, wear low-heel'd Shoos with broad Soals. Her rest
must be 5 or 6 or 9 or 15 days, during which time may be applied to her belly
compresses steeped in Aromatic and Astringent Wine. Some Midwifes giving
Crimson silk minced small in the yelk of an Egg, or Scarlet grains, and
Treddles of several Eggs put into a yelk, is superstitious, as if entering the
Stomach it were able to fortify the Womb, and Child and keep it there.

PART. III. Of Diseases and Symptoms happening to Women after Childbirth.
SECT. I. Of Remedies for the Breasts and lower parts of the Belly of Women
newly delivered, and how to draw back the Milk.
Mid. AS soon Sir as the Woman is delivered, and burden come away, I see that
a fludding follow not its loosening, if not, apply presently a soft closure 5
or 6 double to the Womb, that done carry her to Bed, removing all foul Linen,
a little raising her Head and Body, putting down her Legs and Thighs with a
small pillow if she will, under her hands, lying on her back. Then the best
thing under the Sun to give her is a good broth, and so leave her to sleep;
waking apply this pultis over the bottom of her Belly and Privities, take 2
ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds, 2 or 3 new laid Eggs, stir them together in a
pipkin over hot Embers, when it is thick apply it indifferently warm, taking
away the closures and clods of blood; renew this if need be after 5 or 6 hours,
then make a decoction of Barley, Linseed and Chervil, or Marshmallows and
Violet leaves, adding an ounce of honey of Roses to a pint; and foment the
bearing place Lukewarm 3 or 4 times a day, for the first 5 or 6 days: some use
only milk; and others Barley water. After 10 or 12 days fortify the parts with
a decoction of Province Roses, Plantan leaves and roots, and Smith's water. The
2d day use loose swaths with a large square bolster, over the Belly, till the
8th day, taking it off; in the mean time, often to anoint her Belly, if it be
sore, with Oil of sweet Almonds, and St. John's wort mixed; then begin to swaith
her streighter.

If she will not be a Nurse, apply remedies to the Breasts to drive back the
Milk; if she will Nurse them, keep her warm with soft clothes; and if you fear
too much blood carrying to them, anoint them with Oil of Roses and a little
Vinegar beat together, and lay on fine Linen dipped in it; let her not suck the
Child the same day she is delivered, but stay 6 or 7 days.

In driving back the Milk some remedies hinder flowing of humors to the
Breasts, others scatter, and, in part, dissolve the Milk therein. Of the first
sort are the last ointment, or unguentum populeon and unguentum album, equally
mixed, spread upon Linen, and applied. Of the 2d is a Pultis made of Linseed,
Fenugreek, Beans, and Vetches powdered, boiled with the decoction of Chervil,
or Sage, with Honey and Saffron: some apply Honey only; others rub the Breasts
with Honey, and lay on a red Cabbage leaf, a little dried, the stalks taken
away; having great care she take not cold; and above all, procure ample voiding
of the clensings, by keeping the belly open, by Clysters provoking them; then
the Milk will soon vanish.

SECT. II. Of Fludding after Childbirth.
OF that preceding Labor before: this blood now flows more abundantly, by how
much it is hotter, or moved by a long and hard Labor, and the Woman's full of
blood; and besides what is said, note, sometimes this blood continuing to flow,
and remaining in the bottom oth' Womb becomes clotted, which causes a new Flud,
and continues by Fits, and in the intervals there comes away some wheyishness of
the imprisoned blood, which dissolves, and makes some ignorant People think the
Flux is stopped, tho it continue flowing within, wherein it stops only by the
clotted blood, when which comes away it begins a fresh. This is a more
dangerous accident then any can happen to one newly laid, which dispatches her
so soon, if in great quantity* that there is often scarce time to remedy it, so
that you are immediately to apply remedies, both to stop, and turn back from
the places whence it flows; to which end if it be a false Conception, piece of
the burden, or clotted blood, use all diligence to fetch them away, or cause
them to be speedily expelled; but if it flows and nothing remain, bleed her
in the Arm, not so much to empty the fullness, as to turn the course; lay her body
equally flat, not raised, and keep quiet without turning from side to side: nor
must the upper part of her Belly be swathed or bolstered; keep her Chamber a
little cool, and not too warm in Bed: All forbid Clysters lest they say, humors
be called down; but the contrary has been experimentally found, that great
fluddings have been stopped by pretty strong clensing ones.

But if for all this the Flud continues, then to the last Remedy, which is to
lay her upon fresh Straw, with a single cloth upon it and no Quilt, applying
cloths wet in Vinegar and water along her Loins, and if in the Winter a little
warm; give every half hour a little strong broth, with a few spoonfuls of
Gelly, and between whiles the yelk of a new laid Egg; give her not too much
food at a time; drinking red Wine with a little water wherein Iron has been
quenched; If all this prevail not she will be in danger of her life.

SECT. III. Of the bearing down and falling out of the Womb and Fundament of a
Woman newly laid.
ANd here I shall make 2 sorts of Bearing down, and 2 sorts of falling forth;
which differ but in degree, for the first is when the Womb only bears down and
comes not forth, the 2d when it comes out of the Body.

The first sort of bearing down, is when the full body of the Womb falls into
the Neck, in such manner as putting up a Finger you may feel the Orifice very
near; the 2d when the Womb being yet lower, one can clearly perceive this
Orifice quite without.

The falling out is twofold too; in one the Womb comes quite forth, but is not
turned inside out, nor can its inside be seen, only its orifice; which appears
at the end of a great fleshy Mass, which makes the body of the Womb; and this
is called a falling forth of the Womb; the other is called a perversion or
turning inside out, most dangerous; for you may perceive all even and without
any Orifice; and thus it seems to be only a great piece of bloody flesh, almost
like a Man's Cod, which hangs between her Thighs; and that which is wonderful,
in this case, is, the Womb, the infants house, goes forth at the Gate, which is
the inner Orifice.

A loosening or breaking of the Cords causes the bearing down, which comes from
hard Labor: who have many whites are subject to it, and heavy Children,
Coughing, Sneezings, a fall, going in a Coach or Horseback, great lifts,
burdens, lifting the Arms too high, and putting them over their head;
looseness, great pains and needings, all which shake and thrust the Womb
downwards, when with Child, and the cords being loosened or broken cannot keep
it up, so that a bearing down does easily follow the Birth of a Child; but the
most ordinary cause is violent travel when a Child comes wrong, and cannot be
born so, or has too big an head, or the inner Orifice not enough opened, for
the Womb is violently forced down, and yet the Child cannot advance into the
passage, because the cords are so rent or loosened; or when the Secondine
sticking close to the bottom is pulled away on a sudden, or too violently, and
much sooner if putting up the hand, as when the String's broke, one pulls the
body of the Womb instead of the Afterbirth; but your directions will prevent
this.

She feels a great weight at the bottom of her Belly, extreme pain in the Reins
and Loins; and a bloodish moisture passes through this Mass of Flesh hanging
between her Legs. A loosening may happen to all Women, a falling out but
seldom, a perfect perversion never but upon or immediately after a delivery;
because the inner Orifice is then almost as wide as its bottom; but not at
other times; when closed there is no possibility of its turning inside out; how
to remedy it, I have told you.

If she be young and disease new, easily expect a cure, for a loosening or
falling out, but if she old, and of a long standing, it is so much the more
incurable.

Here do two things. 1. reduce the Womb to its place. 2. strengthen it and keep
it there; for the first, if it be quite out or turned, first make her render
Urine, and give a Clyster, if necessary to empty the Guts; then lay her on her
back, her Hips raised a little higher than her Head, foment all with a little
wine and water lukewarm, and with a soft rag put it up, wagging it little and
little from side to side; and if this be too painful anoint it with Oil of
sweet Almonds, wiping off the Oil as much as may be after.

As to the keeping it in its place, and strengthening it after; let her keep in
Bed on her back, her Hips a little raised, Legs something crossed, Thighs
joined; but the best is to put a pessary up the neck of the Womb; the Figures
of which you may see; some of the Figure of an Egg, of the length and bigness
of the Womb's neck; but these are Subject to fall out, and so are not so
convenient as those made of a piece of Cork; they are to be of a thick circular
figure, like a small wreath, and pierced in the middle with a pretty big hole;
they must be covered with white wax, and pretty large, pull them out with a
Finger to clear them; they may be made some round, others somewhat square, or
trianguler, the corners must be blunted or rounded.

While the Lochia flow use nothing else to strengthen, and above all swath not
her belly, but only for a stay; for many Midwifes by a strong compression force
it more down: use a Bed-pan, and ly along, if possible, when she goes to stool;
keeping her hand all the while on the bottom of her Belly; but having cleansed
well, then use astringent injections, and respect must be had to the whole
habit of body to dry up the humors by a course of Physic, and she must keep
her Bed for 5 or 6 weeks.

Sometimes by the great throws she endures in Labor the fundament falls out;
now if the Child be very forward in the passage, 'twill be enough to hinder it if
possible before it happens, persuading her not to help her throws so much; but
if it be down, she must stay till the Child be born; for it will be difficult
before without bruising the Gut, then reduce it as the Womb; giving no
Clysters, for straining will cause it.

SECT. IV. Of the bruises and rents of the outward parts of the Womb, caused by
Labors.
THese happen from the bigness of the Child's head, which makes her cry in her
first-Labor, that the Midwife scratches those parts when it is the head makes a
separation of the parts, and bruises and sometimes rents them; of which they are
not insensible after Labors. These must not be neglected least they turn to
malignant Ulcers; then as soon as she is laid, if there be only simple bruises,
apply the Pultis before directed, to those parts to ease pain, very warm for 5
or 6 hours, then lay some few rags dipped in Oil of St. John's wort, on each
side, and renewing them twice or thrice a day, foment with Barley water and
Honey of Roses, and when she makes water defend them with fine rags.

If the bruises be great, and inflamed, and an Impostume follows, it must be
opened and cured by the Chyrurgeon; as also when by an unlucky accident the
Privity and Fundament is rent in one; which when cured she will be obliged, if
she happen to be with Child, to prevent the like, to anoint the parts with
softening Oils and Ointments, and forbear helping her throws too strongly at
once; but usually when these parts have been once rent, it is very difficult to
prevent the like, because the scar streightens the parts. Lastly if by
neglecting such a rent, the Lips be cicatriz'd and the cure be desired; it is
the Chyrurgeons business.

SECT. V. Of the After-pains.
IF these come from wind in the Bowels, it runs from side to side, and sometimes
toward the Womb; to prevent this some give of Oil of sweet Almonds, and syrup
of Maidenhair, each 2 ounces, immediately after Childbirth; and to those that
loath Oil I prefer warm broth, or caudle, and give a Clyster, and repeat it as
need is; if it cease not thus it is maintained by some other cause.

If from some strange body in the Womb, see to cast it out. If her clensings be
suddenly stopped, give Clysters to draw down; use hot foments to the bearing
place; bleed in the Foot, and if full, in the Arm first: Rest alone, will fortify
and unite the stretching or breaking o'th Womb's cords; but never forget in all
pains to mind the Lochia.

SECT. VI. Of the Lochia, whence they come, if good or bad, their stopping, and
what ensues.
THere flows waterish humors from the Womb as soon as the Child is born,
besides those before, when the Skins break which are often bloody, because
mostly blood's mixed with them, but immediately after the burden is loosened
there flows pure blood, but after the 1st day there comes waterish humors, when
the Vessels close; then they become thickish by heat, more or less as they come
in greater or lesser quantity, and the length of time they stay there, and then
they resemble troubled milk, which makes People believe it is Breast milk.

Now I believe the cause of their change of color, consistance, and diminution
of their quantity, to be no other then that in ^he suppuration of a great
wound; as soon ^s it is made it bleeds fresh, and much but after it yields only
bloodish humors, then a white matter; so you must imagine there is a kind of
wound made by loosening the burden from the Womb, and what comes from it is the
Lochia: so that they are not what has stayed in and about the Womb, during all
the time of Childbearing; for that is the Secundine; neither is their any
certain rule for their quantity and continuance, being according to the Season,
Country, Age, Temper more or less, hot, or moist, the habit more or less full,
and Vessels remaining long or short time open: but it is finished commonly in 15
or 20 days; but after a mischance the less the fetus is, and the less time she
is gone with Child, the less are the Lochia.

If they be fresh but the 3 or 4 first days they are good, else it is a pure
bloody flux, which will be very dangerous; if of no ill scent, without
sharpness, so we know the Womb's without inflammation or corruption, and if
they flow in so great quantity as to cause Faintings or Convulsions she is in
danger of death, or very much weakened, grows lean, and pale, Legs and Thighs
swell, and becomes Dropsical.

The diseases ensue upon their stopping are almost innumerable, so that to
bring them down let her avoid all troubles of Spirit, lie quiet, with her Head
and Breast a little raised; if Feverish use only broths with a little gelly,
above all shun cold drink; give Clysters, and foment her lower parts rub her
Thighs and Legs downwards, and bath them too, and apply large Cupping-Glasses,
to the uppermost part of the inside of her Thighs; bleed in the Arm first; if
very full of humors, for in the Foot would draw too much to the Womb.

SECT. VII. Of the Inflammation etc. of the Womb.
THis is very dangerous, and the death of most; caused from the Lochia stopped,
or bruise; by two hard swathes, falling out o'th Womb, etc. an Impostume or
Cancer follows a bruise, if not death; wherefore temper the heat and humors
(first extracting or causing the expulsion of strange things remaining in the
Womb; using not the least violence) with Veal or Pullet broth, with Lettice,
Purselan, Succory, Sorrel; abstain from Wine, keep quiet in Bed, with anodine
Clysters, and bleed in the Arm, not in the Foot; reiterate it, because it is very
pressing, till the greatest part of fullness be a little evacuated, an
inflammation diminished, then in the Foot if need; injecting in the Womb Barley
water with Oil of Violets, or milk. An Apostume, Schyrrhus or Cancer is the
Physicians or Chyrurgions work.

SECT. VIII. Of the Inflammation and Apostemation of the Breasts.
THe Breasts being made of a spungy substance, easily receive in too great
abundance, the humors flowing to them from all parts by blood; being over-heat
by throws and pains in travel, and so are soon inflamed; being then painfully
stretched; to which helps the suppression of the Lochia, and a fullness of the
whole Body; or it may happen from having been too straight laced, some blow, or
bruise by lying upon them, or for not giveing the Child milk.

Now convenient remedies are speedily to be applied lest dangerous symptoms
follow; wherefore the certainst means to hinder the Flux of so great quantity
of blood to the Breasts, is to procure a large evacuation of the Lochia; the
habit of the body is to be emptied by bleeding in the the Arm; after in the Foot;
chasing into the breasts Oil of Roses and Vinegar beat together, laying upon
them unguentum refrigerens Galeni, or unguentum album, and a 3d part of
populeon mixed, or a pultis of the setlings in a Cutler's Grinstone-trough, Oil
of Roses and a little Vinegar mixed together. If the pain continue great, take
the crumbs of white bread and milk with Oil of Roses and the yelks of raw Eggs,
upon all these may compresses be laid dipped in Vinegar and water, or plantain
water.

When you have emptied the greatest part of the humors, and the height of the
Inflammation is past, then draw the milk; or else, unless it be turned to
matter, pure Honey laid to them resolves milk; or a Cabbage leaf anointed
therewith being first a little withered and the hard stalks and veins taken
away; lace not too straight, nor apply course clothes. A whole red Cabbage
boiled in River water to a pap, and well bruised in a wooden or Marble Mortar,
and pulp'd through a Sieve, adding Oil of Comomil, is a very good pultis.

Let her diet be cool, not very nourishing, keep her body open, lying on her
Back in Bed, all the while; stir her Arms as little as may be, and after the
14th or 15th day of her delivery, being sufficiently cleansed, and inflammation
abated, and no longer Feverish, purge her once or twice; and if for all these
the swelling goes not down, but she feels great beating and pain, a hardness
more in one place then another, of a livid color and soft in the middle it is
certain 'twill apostemate: then apply ripening Medicines, as a pultis of
Mallows, Marshmallows with their roots, Lilly roots and Linseed bruised,
boiled to pap, and pulp'd through a sieve, then add a good quantity of Hogs
Grease or Basilicon, laying a little cloth thick spread with Basilicon upon the
place where it is likely soonest to break, and the pultis all over it, renewing
it 12 hours after, continuing till it be full ripe; then if it open not of it
self, it must be opened by a Lancet or Incision knife, which being the
Chirurgeon's work, he is to do it.

SECT. IX. Of the curdling of the Milk in the Breasts.
BEcause her Body was much moved dureing Labor; in the beginning of Childbed
her Milk is not well purified, and is mixed with many other humors, which, if 01
they are then sent to the Breasts in too great quantity, cause an Inflammation,
but when the Child has sucked 15 or 20, or more days, then only the Milk,
without other mixture contained there; which sometimes curdles, and the Breasts
become hard and rugged, without any redness, and the separation of all the
kernels filled with curdled Milk may easily be perceived; she finds a great
pain, and cannot milk them; with a shivering, chiefly about the middle of her
Back, like Ice; which is usually followed by a Fever of 24 hours long, and
sometimes less; if it do not turn into an Inflammation of the Breasts, which it
will undoubtedly do, if it be not em^ied, scater'd and dissolved.

This clodding comes mostly because the Breasts are not fully drawn; either for
that she has too much Milk; or the Child is too weak to such all, or because
she does not desire to be a Nurse: for the Milk staying in the Breasts loses
its sweetness, and by sowring curdles. This may also happen from taking cold,
or not covering her Breasts.

The readiest and surest remedy, from what cause soever, is speedily to draw
the Breasts, till they be emptied, and if the Child cannot, because she is hard
milched, let a Woman, till it comes freely, and then the Child will; and that
she may not after breed more Milk then the Child can draw, let her diet breed
but little nourishment, and keep her body always open. But when she neither can
nor will be Nurse, then her Breasts must not be drawn; for drawing more humors,
the Disease will return, if not again emptied. Wherefore it is necessary to
prevent comeing of any more Milk, and to scatter that which is there; by
empting the fullness of the body by bleeding in the Arm and Foot; and strong
Clysters, and purging if needful; and to resolve the curdled Milk, apply a
pultis of pure Honey; or of powder of Linseed, Fenugreek, Beans and Vetches,
boild in a decoction of Sage, Smallage, Fennel, Milk, adding Oil of Camomil;
anointing with the Oil first.

SECT. X. Of Choping etc. and loss of the Nipples.
WOmen are subject the first time to have their Niples chopped, which is
unsufferable, and the more if hard milch'd, as the first time, when the Milk
has not yet made way through the small holes of the Niples, which are not yet
thoroughly opened, and then the Child takes more pains to suck; and sometimes
these chops do so increase by the Child's sucking, that the Niple's taken quite
off the Breast, and there rests an Ulcer very hard to be cured. This may happen
from the Child's being so dry and hungry that it has not patience to suck
softly, but finding the Milk not speedily to follow as they desire, bite and
pinch the Niple so hard that it becomes raw, and at last take it quite away.
This happens also when Infants have hot mouths, or thrushes, or the pox soonest.

These must not be neglected, as well because of the great pain, as to avoid
their growing worse and worse. Therefore as soon as they begin forbear giving
suck, keeping back her milk for a small time; and if but one Niple be sore, she
may suckle with the other; Applying Alum or Limewater, or only bath them with
Plantain water, putting soft rags dipped in any of them or a ceruse plaster, or
Diapompholigos, or a little starch powdered; but chiefly take care that nothing
be applied to distate the Child; wherefore many use only Honey of Roses.
Softening remedies are fit to preserve from chops, but when they are already
made, dryers are best, and to prevent her from hurts in these parts, and that
the rags may not stick to them, put upon them a little Wax, or wooden caps, or
leaden ones, they being more drying, like these in the Figure; having several
small holes on their tops, as well to give issue to the matter, as that the
Milk may pass away.

If the Nipples are wholly sucked off, then dry the Milk up; and if the Child
have the pox, put it to another who must use preservatives against it: but if
they be only small, simple Ulcers in the Mouth without any Malignity, wash them
only with Barley water with a little juice of Citrons or Lemons; and let the
Nurse use a cooling diet, and bleed and purge if necessary.

The Child can take no hold when the Nipples are quite gone, and the small
holes are closed up; but if she shall desire to give suck, let Woman by degrees
make her new Nipples (after the Ulcer's perfectly healed) and unstop the root
of the old ones: or using an Instrument of Glass, as in the Figure, she may
suck them her self 5 or 6 times a day; and to preserve them, and shape them,
thus drawn out, from sinking into the Breasts again, let her put a small cap
upon them as before, and so by degrees she may give suck again.

Dr. Thus far good Mrs. Eutrapelia, have you expressed your self very knowingly
in your Art, as to what we have hitherto treated of concerning Women; there now
remains something that I would be satisfied of how far your skill consists in,
and that is concerning the Diseases of little Children; because you coming
often to visit the Mother, if any thing be a miss about her Infant, it is a
common custom to desire the advice of the Midwife in such cases, rather then
run presently to the Physician or Surgeon. But first let me hear your
opinion about the choice of a Nurse.

Mid. Sir as I have been very happy to have satisfied you to the best of my
knowledge in what concerns Women, before, in, and after their Lying in
Childbed; so likewise shall I answer your request as to what concerns little
Children and the Distempers and Symptoms happening to them, and first of the
nature and qualities of the Nurse; and if the Mother be the fittest Nurse?

PART. IV. Of the Diseases and Symptoms happening to little Children: and of
the choice of a Nurse.
SECT. I. What manner of Woman a Nurse ought to be; and whether the Mother be
the best Nurse.
Mid. FIrst of all Sir there is, and has been always diverse opinions
concerning Nurses, whether the Mother be fittest for that office, or a
stranger? as for what my thoughts are concerning the matter, with submission to
your better judgment in this and all other cases, I shall fully disclose them
to you.

Now Sir some are for the Mothers sucking her own Child, and will bring you
Scripture for it too; for say they did not Sarah Nurse Isaac? therefore every
Woman ought to Nurse her own Child; but this is but a weak Argument; for, from
Scripture, to retort their Argument on them, David was a King and a Prophet,
therefore every man must be a King, and every King a Prophet: others again give
you profound reasons; as they imagine; as that the Mothers milk is most
convenient for the Child, because it partakes of her nature; But I would ask
these People, whether every Choleric Woman has Choleric Children; or every
Phlegmatic Woman Phlegmatic Children? and so of the rest: Another reason is,
because the Woman they say cannot love her Child, unless she give it suck her
own self. But if she do not for all that, in my opinion she is very inhumane
and unnatural.

Others again are of a quite contrary opinion, and thwart all this; for first
say these, the Child draws its conditions from its Nurse, to prove which they
quote several examples; as Alcibiades being an Athenian, was so strong and
valiant because he sucked a Spartan Woman: but Cornelius Tacitus says the
Germans were such strong bon'd men, because they sucked their own Mothers; then
why had not Alciliades been so if he had sucked his? But all Authors generally
describing of what complexion and condition a Nurse ought to be, if every Woman
then must Nurse her own Child, any complexion must then of necessity serve the
turn.

Since the choice of a Nurse is of so great a concernment; (as upon which, the
future being of the infant consists) surely this, then requires many serious
considerations, For, though she may have milk enough; yet perhaps not good
enough; or the woman either sluttish, or unhandy, or careless in the swathing
and the dressing of the Child; by which many children (like new vessels, which
will keep the savor of that liquor they are first seasoned withal) are
sluttish or slovenly so long as they live; or else (being abused at Nurse, are
Crooked and Ricketty; full of botches, nasty and nauseous to their own Parents.
And many, through their intemperancy, by drinking, to increase their milk, and
perhaps make it bad enough, sleep so securely and profoundly, that they overlay
their Nurseries in the night, and the Children are dead by their sides in the
morning. Therefore let nurses sleep so often, that they may hear the least cry
of the infant. Let the Nurse then, be of middle stature, and good complexion;
active, not fat, (and of a sanguine complexion, if possible) and not in
poverty; not under twenty years of Age, not above forty, but rather of twenty
five, or thirty. Let not her nipples be great, least it make the child of a
wide mouth, because it cannot suck without the contraction of the lips together
and lest by forcing the Tongue into too narrow a compass, it hinders the
swallowing of the milk.

Next, if the nipple be too small, the child is apt to let it slip out of the
mouth, and cannot handsomely hold it, so that the infant being frustrated of
suck, and yet still exercising suckling, hurts the cheek, and attracts some
kind of humors thither, which oftentimes become unnatural Tumors; and
oftentimes the cheeks of the infant seem as if they were moved out of their
places. Thirdly, by the consent of all, the Nurse must have a large breast
(though some think that not so material, because there is more milk collected
together in great breasts than ought; and being there, is corrupted, to the
prejudice of the Nurse. Wherefore, lest the milk should continue there too
long, it is best to have a young lusty child to suck it away; or else to use it
some other way; as by the use of young whelps; whom I have seen dye with
sucking Women's milk; surely the reason must be, because the milk was of another
nature; or else, because curdled and corrupted or milked out some other way;
especially, when the Nurse perceives her self prejudiced by it. But it is ever
best, that she abound, rather than want Milk; and then in this case it is best
they be big, though all Nurses need not have big breasts; for there may be as
much Milk, if not more, in a lesser breast, than in a great one.

The next enquiry will be into the manners and behavior of a Nurse.

The best Nurse then is, she that is mild, chaste, sober, courteous, cheerful,
lively, neat, cleanly, and handy; because bad conditions, as well as good, are
sucked in with the milk, and so radicated, that it is a hard matter to pull out
the bad conditions, and leave the good behind, but that there will be a
remainder of the bad conditions, perhaps so long as they live: wherefore, let
not the Nurse be of an angry, malepert, and saucy disposition, shameless,
scolding, or quarrelsome; not gluttonous, but so careful of her Nursery, that
she neither eat or drink that which may be hurtful to the Infant: That she do
nothing to anger her self, to grieve, or sad her self; for such passions will
presently distribute themselves, to the prejudice of the Infant; than which
there is nothing of more efficacy to destroy the goodness of the Milk.

Neither is it sufficient that they abstain from the use of their husbands; but
when they have wanton thoughts, and lascivious minds, wholly upon Luxury and
Venery, they cast off all care of the Nurseries, and dreaming at night of that
which their minds run on in the day, and by other filthy pollutions they infect
the milk. So also, by the use of their Husbands the Courses are stirred up, by
which both the plenty and goodness of milk is derived another way; and so the
Child robbed of its nutriment; or else the Nurse conceives with Child, and so
the Infant becomes diseased and Ricketty, by sucking curdy and unwholesome
milk, and is worse for it during life.

Therefore let all those things be avoided, that either do, or are supposed to
provoke lust; as, junkets made with spices; also Onions, Leeks, Garlic, and
all salt meats are to be avoided: Persly and Smallage, some say, have a
peculiar malice to the increase of milk: besides that, it does increase lust,
and is an enemy to the growth of Infants.

Again, that Nurse were best, that has lately been brought to bed of a Boy if
to Nurse a Boy, the milk of such a Nurse being better tempered. For the milk of
a Male Child will make a Female Nursery more spritely, and a man like Virago;
and the milk of a girl will make a boy the more effeminate.

As to the milk, let it be a mean, betwixt thick and thin; which you may
perceive, by dropping it upon the Thumb-Nails; for if it be too thin, it will
run off the sooner; but if thicker, it will stay the longer: let it be sweet,
and pleasant, both to the smell and taste; not offending the palate with
rancidness, sourness, sharpness, or saltness; or the nostrils with any strange
quality. Let it be candid to the sight, in it self equal in each particles, not
infested with brown, yellow, green, blue, or any other evil color; or, as
sometimes, with various colors and substance; as, with lines, and streaks upon
it: but let that milk be most praiseworthy, that makes as much curd as whey;
which may be tried by this Experiment, viz.

Put some of this milk into a glass, and pu^ in some Myrrh, or Rennet; which
being stirred together, will curd, and then may the contents be separated: the
trial is, that i^ there be most whey, then is the milk thinne^ in its
substance; but if most of curd, it is thicker: yet all these may be corrected
and amended; for that which is too thick may be mended by an extenuating diet,
and the phlegmatic matter may be avoided by a vomit of Oxymel, and Exercise
before meat* the better to consume and attenuate the thickness of it.

The thinness of Milk is amended by contrary food, such as does incrassate it:
as Fromenty of Wheat, and Rice; Hogsfeet, Calves-feet, Trotters, and sweet Wine
unless somewhat else be in the way to hinder it. Sometimes it happens that the
Milk is more tart than it ought to be: wherefore then, all diligence must be
had to feed upon such meats as are of the best juice, till that acrimony at
least be attempered.

Sometimes there is little or no milk in the breasts; as after some sickness,
or notable distemper, now turned into a bad habit, or any other of what kind
soever, that possesses those parts, or is the cause: but that shall not be our
business to consider of now.

Now, if these be not the causes, let the Nurse use supping meats, as Broths,
Possets, etc. and eat plentifully, and use rubbings to her Breasts and Duggs,
exercising her hands and her Arms by domestic Employments; or instead thereof,
let her dance the Child, by which the aliment may be recalled into those parts.

Sometimes cupping-glasses to the Breasts, with a fomentation of emollient
herbs boiled in water, and applied warm, either with sponges, or
wollen-clothes; after which, chafe them with oil of Lillies. The seeds of
Fennel, and the roots of Parsnips boiled in Barley-water, and buttered. The
broth of Hens, or Capons, with Cinnamon and Mace.

Or Poch'd-eggs, with the seeds of Annis, and Dill; and all things else that
are hot in the first and second degree, are good. Earth Worms, (not dunghill
ones,) six or seven of them dried, and powdered, and drank in Barley-water
sugared, for a fortnight together.

All these may be of good use in the defect of Milk. As to the inconveniency
(if there be any) in too much Milk. If the Milk abound too much, which
sometimes is (though seldom) blamable; Then use the decoction of
Myrtleberries, and red Roses, and with clothes dipped in it, lay them on the
Breasts. Or else clothes imbibed in Vinegar, wherein Cummin-seeds bruised have
been infused with Myrrh and Camphire.

By reason of the thickness of the Milk, all those excrements that the Child
should send forth, are intercepted; as by Stool, by Urine, etc. The passages
for transpiration are stuffed up, so that the progress of the aliment being
stopped, of necessity the Milk must be vomited up; after which will follow much
phlegmatic matter, a sure argument of crudities.

Sometimes there will arise botches about the Body; much matter, and snot, and
quittor will come out of the Nose, and corner^ of the Eyes, and Eyelids; and
the appetit^ will be lost.

Contrarily, from the thinner and sharpe^ sort of Milk, the Belly is looser
than i^ ought, being troubled with pinches an^ gripes in the belly of the
infant.

Also, very angry pustules and whelks will arise about the body, like the small
Pox; and the body grows weak by little and little, the Infant not caring for
food; for the strength of the appetite will be more remiss, by reason of the
sharpness of that which the Infant desires; so that it is not much sensible of
that aliment which it has; and that aliment of which it is sensible is naught,
and vicious.

Now, as from the over-bundance of Milk, the Infant oftentimes, when it sucks,
is overwhelmed, being so puffed up, and the belly distended, as if it would
break; until by much pissing, or breaking wind, it is slacker. So where there
is too much scarcity of milk, there the Infant being altogether destitute of
its nourishment, will pine away; and all the parts of the body being starved,
in those years when it most wants nourishment, by reason of vehemence of the
innate heat, and that habit of body (that the least blast will puff down) which
requires much, and constant aliment.

By all which, Women ought to be the more provident, lest all these mischiefs
happen, (especially, not to make choice of such a Nurse, whose poverty must
needs starve her self, and her Nursery; and if they should so happen, to amend
them, as has been said before) e're they grow incurable, and require the help
of another Artist that may cure it.

Or, if the fault in the milk cannot be cured and amended in the Nurse, (which
she has contracted,) Then you have no more to do, but presently to look for
another Nurse, that has none of these inconveniences; that so the Infant may
have suck enough, which is all it requires; for want of which, you may hear sad
crying, and weeping. And this may be discovered by their dreams, as by the
often motion of the lips in the cradle, as if they were sucking when they are a
sleep.

Neither is it strange, that the Infant should be sensible of, and Participate
of whatsoever food (as meat, drink, and Physic,) that the Nurse takes: which
makes Physicians purge the Nurse, to cure the Child: if a woman take any
purging Physic, she purges her Child also. So, Galen reports that of Goats,
feeding in Asia, where Scammony grow, did communicate a purging faculty to
their milk. And so the milk of Asses, generally accounted best in Consumptions,
is counted better, if the Ass be fed with such herbs, as Maidenhair, etc. And
again, when young Goats suck Sheeps-milk, the rough hair shall lose its
coursness, and become like a fleece of wool: and so contrarily, when Lambs are
brought up by Goats, their wool grows the more hairy.

If then the qualities of the milk pass into those that suck them, (as without
doubt they do) it is easy to gather, that other impurities follow thither
also, neither is it improbable. Surely then, we ought to take no less care of
the Nurse than of the Child; as in her diet, exercise, physic, etc. since,
whatsoever conduces to the benefit of the Nurse, tends to the good and welfare
of the Infant.

I have been the larger upon this Sir of Nurses, and Milk, because tender
Infants can neither make choice of their Nurses themselves; nor discover, or
plead for their wants: Their own Mothers, surely, (if they are able) both by
duty, and nature, being the most fit to Nurse their own Children; which the
greatest Ladies may do, with the greatest conveniences; by reason of their
plenty of all things; besides, their attendance of servants, who can bring
their Nurseries to them at all hours, be it by night or day, and take it from
them again, not to disturb their rest: which also, they may tend at their own
pleasures.

The longest time that a Child need be suckled, is till it have teeth to chew
with. I shall leave only one caution for Nurses, and and so wind up: and it is
this: Let Nurses ever milk out some Milk e're they suckle the Child; and after
it is suckled, that they rock it not too much presently after, lest violent
rocking disturb the meat in the stomach; or the other parts draw away the Milk
in the stomach, as yet unconcocted.

Dr. Thus far have you done very well good Mrs. Eutrapelia, as in all other
things so as to what concerns the Choice and office of Nurses; and now if you
please you shall hear a few of my observations about the same matter, which it
may be, may not be unwelcome to you.

Then you must know that I have taken notice of 2 sorts of Nurses, which I have
observed in the World; The one sort is such as are of an ill humor or blood;
the which settle in their Milk, being the place at that time where they
discharge themselves.

Now you must note that these sort of Women are in a better condition when they
are Nurses then when they are not; for when they are not Nurses, they are
subject to pains in their Arms sometimes, and sometimes in their Shoulders, and
sometimes in their Legs or Thighs; or elce they are subject to waterish Eyes,
or swelling in their Eyes or Nose.

Now the Infants which suck these Nurses, if they be fat, it is not good but
soft fat, and they are dull and sottish; and coming to breed Teeth they are
very sickly and commonly dye, by reason of the reum pushing out of too many
Teeth at once; and if they escape this they are more troubled with bad juices
in their Infancy, then their Parents in their old age; and if the reum be salt
the Milk is of a blackish and bluish color; but if it be of Choler, it is yet
the more dangerous and venomous to the Children.

There is another sort of Nurses, and they are such as who after they have
layen in, about some 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 months, are taken with their purgations;
a thing which never happens to good Nurses; and when this does happen they are
more dangerous then the former, and the Child must presently be taken away, for
they are more apt to conceive then to Nurse; and if they do continue Nurses
they do but ruin the Children; for there dies a third part of the Children,
for want of taking care in this particular, which yet seem fat and in good
case; for this is the cause of great colic, and windiness in Infants which kills
them in a moment; for the least Fever that takes them carries them away.

And now to come home to the purpose, let me tell you the first and principal
of all the qualities in a good Nurse, is that she be the Child's own Mother, as
well because of the mutual sympathy of their tempers, as that having much more
love for it, she will be much more careful then an hired Nurse, who commonly
loves her Nurse Child but with a feined love; so that the Mother, though she be
not the best Nurse, should always be preferred before another.

But because there are diverse that either will not, or cannot suckle their own
Children, there is then an Obligation to provide another Nurse; which should be
chosen for the Child's good, as near as may be. For even as we see trees, of
the same kind, and growing in the same, yet being afterward transplanted to
another Soil, do produce fruits of a different taste, by reason of the
nourishment they draw from thence; even so it fares with the health of
Children; and their manners sometimes depend on the nourishment they receive at
the beginning; for as the health of the body answers to the humors that all the
parts are nourished with, which humors always retain the nature of the food
whereof they are engendered; and as for the manners they commonly follow the
temperament, which likewise proceeds from the nature of the humors, and the
humors from the food; from whence may be drawn this consequence, that as the
Nurse is, so will the Child be both in body and mind by means of the
nourishment it draws from her.

This may plainly appear in Animals that suck a strange dam; for they always
purchase something of the nature of the Creature they suck; being accordingly
either of a mild or fierce nature, of a strong or weak body; as may be seen in
young Lions which will become tame by sucking a domestic Animal, as a Cow, Ass,
or Goat, and on the other side a Dog will become more furious if it sucks a
Wolf.

Now the necessary conditions requisite in a good Nurse, are usually taken from
her Age, the time and manner of her Labor, the Constitution of all the parts of
her Body, and particularly of her Breasts, the nature of her Milk, and lastly
from her manners.

As concerning her Age, the most convenient is from 25 to 35 years of Age; Then
as to the time and manner of her Labor, it must be at least a month or 6 weeks
after that, and not above 5 or 6 months; she must not have miscarried, and she
must have layn in of a 2d or third Child, that she may know the better how to
perform her Office.

As to the healthful constitution of her body, it is the principal thing, on
which almost all the rest depend, for she ought to come of Parents that never
had the stone in the Reins or Bladder, or Gout, King's Evil, Falling Sickness,
or any other hereditary distemper; that she have no Scab, or Itch, and that she
be strong, neither too tall, nor too low; not too fat, nor too lean, and above
all she must not be with Child; let her be of a Sanguine Complexion, which is
known by her Vermilion color, not altogether so red, but inclining to white; of
a firm, fast flesh; not subject to the Whites, for that is a sign of a bad
habit; not red hair'd, nor marked with red spots; but black hair'd, or of a
Chestnut brown; neat in her Clothes, of a sprightly Eye, and a smiling
countenance, sound and white Teeth, for if they be rotten her breath may smell;
having a good voice to please and rejoice the Child, and a clear and free
pronuntiation that the Child learn, not an ill accent from her, as usually red
hair'd have, and sometimes those that are very black hair'd with white Skins;
for their Milk is hot, sharp and stinking, and also of an ill Taste.

Her Breasts ought to be pretty big to receive and concoct a sufficient
quantity of milk; being sound and free from scars, proceeding from former
Impostumes; being indifferent firm and fleshy, that their natural heat may be
the stronger; she must be broad breasted that her Milk may have the more room
to be prepared and digested in, and because it is a sign of a great deal of
vital heat.

As to her Nipples they must be well shaped as you observed, not too big, nor
too hard, nor gristly, nor sunk in too deep; but they must be a little raised,
and of a moderate bigness and firmness, with many little holes, that she may be
soft milch'd, to the end the Child may not take too much pains to draw the milk
by sucking them and pressing them with its Mouth.

All these good qualities being found in a Nurse, respecting all the parts of
her. Body, there needs be no fear but her Milk will be good; The which may be
known first by its quantity, the which ought to be sufficient for the Child's
nourishment, and not too much, lest it not being all drawn forth, it curd^e and
inflame the Breast, by its too long stay there; however it is better to have
too much then too little, for she may give the overplus to another Child: it
must not be too waterish, nor to thick; but of a middle consistence; the which
may be easily judged, if she milking some into her hand, and turning it a
little on one side, it immediately turns off; but if it remains fixed, it is a
mark it is too thick and clammy; and this if she have but little of, it will
stick upon the Child's tongue, palate, and throat, and so cause as it were a
white Cancer, which is more and more heated by reason of their forceable
sucking in vain, and they are hereby hindered from sucking: These Nurses will
after this Milk a drop or two out of their Breasts, and cry look ye the Child
cares not for sucking.

There is no greater abuse in any thing then in Nurses, for let them make what
pretense they will, it is nothing but necessity makes them be such: and
therefore Mothers ought to have a great care, and to make it their business to
surprise the Nurse at her own House, that if there be any miscarriage they may
find it out.

As to the color of her Milk the whitest is the best, and the less white it
is, so much the worse; it must be of a sweet and pleasant smell, which is a
sign of a good temper; as may be seen in red hair'd Women, whose Milk has a
sour bad scent; and to be complete in every quality it must be of a good taste,
that is sweet and sugared; without any sharpness or saltness, or other strong
taste.

Lastly to come to the principal and best conditions of a Nurse, which consists
in her good manners, I say that she ought to be careful to cleanse the Child as
soon as there is occasion; she ought to be prudent, not Choleric nor
quarrelsome, as well because it may make bad impressions on the Child, as
because it heats her Milk; let her not be Melancholy, but merry and cheerful,
smiling often to divert it.

She must be sober, not given to Wine or other strong Liquors, and yet less to
the excess of Venus; but she may moderately use the first, and not wholly
abstain from the 2d, if her nature require it; so it be with her Husband: which
liberty is freely given then by the great Physician Jubertus in the 7th chap.
of the 5th book of his Popular Errors* being founded upon the Experience of al^
poor Women, who bring up their Children very well, notwithstanding they lie
every Night with their Husbands; and from his own, alleging that his Wife had
Nursed his Children all very well, although he lay with her every Night, and
carressed her, as he said, like a good and faithful Husband; but she must
forbear, at least an hour or two after, to give the Child suck.

In fine if a Nurse has all, or most of these Conditions, as well respecting
her Person a^ manners, and that she maintains this condition by a diet sit for
the Child's temper, an^ not contrary to her own, there is then great reason to
believe she is very sit to make a very good Nurse of, and to bring up the So^
of a Prince in perfect health.

And now good Mrs. Midwife, proceed to show your skill concerning the diseases
of little Children.

SECT. II. Of the Diseases and Symptoms which happen to Children, and first of
their Diseases in general.
Mid. SIr withal my heart, I shall gladly unfold to you the very depth of my
skill and knowledge in this affair, and would humbly entreat you that you would
be pleased to correct me, if I shall, at any time, offer to utter any thing
that may not be according to the rules of art, and the practice of learned
Physicians; for truly Sir, we Midwifes must needs acknowledge our selves to
have received most of our skill and knowledge from the writings, conferences
and directions of learned Physicians; Now then Sir, I have read that
Hippocrates divides Childrens diseases according to their ages. When he, like
an Oracle, lays down, that in newborn Children there are Ulcers in the Mouth;
Vomitings, Coughs, Watchings, Fears, Inflammation of the Navil, moistness of
the Ears: at breeding of their Teeth their Gums itch and they fall into Fevers
and Convulsions, and a looseness of the belly when they breed their Eye Teeth.
When they grow older their Tonsils are inflamed; the joints of the Neck are
sprained inwardly, their breath's short; they have the stone and round Worms,
Warts, standing Yards, Strangury, King's Evil, and other swellings; then besides
these here mentioned, by the divine Hippocrates, they have other Diseases at
other times; as that they are generally infected with the Smallpox, and
Meazels, none or few escaping; Tongue tied, Chafing, etc. concerning which I
shall now in particular give you my method of cure; beginning first with
Fevers, Smallpox, and Meazels, as the most general.

SECT. III. Of Fevers, Meazels, and Smallpox, in little Children.
CHildren are subject to all sorts of Fevers, but chiefly that of corrupt
Milk, which is commonly from Choler; 1st. therefore give cooling and moistening
things to the Nurse, as Lettice, Endive, Succory, etc. and Emulsions of
Barley-water with the four cold seeds, Barley cream, then purge her gently with
Manna, Cassia Fistularis, Lenitive Electuary; etc. then give altering remedies
to the Infant, as Syrup of Violets, Lemons, Citrons, etc. dissolved in Endive
or Cichory, or Borage, or Bugloss water; 4 ounces of water to one of Syrup; to
which you may add a little white Rose water to make it the more pallatable. If
the Fever proceed from breeding Teeth, abate the pain, of which hereafter, and
give alterers as abovesaid.

In the Smallpox and Meazels you have nothing to do but to observe Natures
motions in the driving them forth, and to assist her if, you see her any ways
weak or obstructed, by giving the Child a little Claret with Syrup of Clove
Gilly-flowers, and a little Treacle water; but be sure have a care that you
increase not the Fever; Cochenele, and Bezoar and Saffron are excellent
likewise.

SECT. IV. Of the milky scab, Achores, Scald-Head and Lice.
THe milky Scab is at first sucking, the Achores after; the Achores are not
white, but the other are; and possess the whole body, the Achores only Head and
Face; but are cured a like. They are commonly thought to be healthful when they
run; because they prevent Convulsions, etc. and they often cure of themselves
in time; but if the matter be very sharp they pierce the Skull. Dry these up
not rashly, so they disfigure not the Face, or endanger the Eyes; but first try
to drive them forth with such things as you were told in the Small Pox: let the
Nurse forbear sharp salt things, prepare her Body with Borrage, Succory,
Endive, Bugloss, Fumetory, Polypody and Dock roots, and then purge her with
Sena, Polypody, Epithymum, etc. If you fear it will turn to a scald Head,
foment it with a decoction of Mallows, Barley, Celandine, Wormwood,
Marshmallows boild in Boys urine and Barley water, and then anoint with Oil of
Roses, and Lytharge of Gold: and if the Scull come to be bare, dress it with
Honey of Roses and Brandy; and after with Powder of round birth-wort, and
Balsome of Peru, Turpentine and Tobacco water.

If you have occasion to use stronger Medicines for a scald Head, take sulphur
2 drams Mustard seed half a dram, Stavesacre, bryony roots, each 1 dram;
Vinegar 1 ounce, Turpentine half an ounce, with as much Bears Grease as will
make it into an Ointment: or beat Watercresses with Hogs Grease. When the Scab
is fallen off pull the hair out by the roots, with instruments or Medicines;
commonly they use a pitched cap, and pull it violently to bring away the Hair:
or take Starch or Wheat Flour 2 ounces, Rosin half an ounce, boil them in
water to the consistence of a pultis, lay it upon the several Scalds, let it
stick some days, then pluck it off violently.

For Lice, to prevent them, let them not eat food of ill juice as Figs, etc.
let her Head be often combed and washed, and purge the Nurse or Child; then
give things to draw the humor out as you have been taught, and then consume the
superfluous moisture; as with this, take Elacampana 2 ounces, Briony roots half
an ounce, Beets, herb Mercury, Soap-wort, each an handful, Nitre half an ounce,
Lupines 2 drams; boil them for a Lotion, then anoint them with this following,
take powder of Stavesacre 3 drams, Lupines half an ounce, Agaric 2 drams, quick
Sulphur; a dram and half, Ox gaul half an ounce, with oil of Wormwood as much
as will suffice to make it into an Ointment.

SECT. V. Of the watery swelling of the Head.
WE speak here of the water without the Scul; for which take 30 snails with
their shells, Marjoram, Mugwort each an handful, with oil of Chamomil make a
pultis; and snuff up this water often: take Nutmegs, Cloves, Cubebs, each a
scruple Calamus Aromaticus, Frankincense bark each half a dram, Majoram water 3
ounces; If in 20 days this does not the cure, then you must consult with the
able Surgeon for the opening it.

SECT. VI. Of Frights in the Sleep, and Watching.
YOu must see to cure this presently, for it is the forerunner of the
Falling Sickness: give good Milk, and not too much to overcharge the Stomach;
let not the Child sleep presently after food, but carry it about, and Jog it to
the bottom of the Stomach, give it 2 or 3 spoonfuls of oil of Sweet Almonds or
Honey of Roses. If it come from a Fever, Teeth or Worms, they are treated of a
part.

As for the Child's watching you must take notice, that a new born one sleeps
more then it wakes; because its brain is very moist and it slept in the Womb.
If you cannot make it sleep by singing or rocking, etc. it is a Disease, and if
not cured will produce Catarrhs, Convulsions, Fevers, etc.

If it proceed from bad Milk, that must be amended; if from a Fever or pain,
remove them, and give sleeping Medicines to the Nurse, if that will not do, you
may venture a little Lettice or Purcelan water.

SECT. VII. Of the Falling Sickness and Convulsion.
THe first is either by consent from parts below, when the Milk corrupts in the
Stomach; or from its ill quality from the Nurses bad diet; or from Worms or
Vapors; or from the brain first, when humors are bred there that cause it; or
from Toothach, or sudden fright.

To prevent it give the Child as soon as it is born, oil of Sweet Almonds,
Sugar Candy, and Anniseeds powdered. The Florentines apply a Caustic to the
hinder part of the Head; the best part of the cure is the Nurses diet. If from
corrupt Milk provoke vomit by holding down the Tongue, and pour some Oil of
sweet Almonds down the Throat. The same means may be used in Convulsions, only
anointing the spine of the back with Oil of Chamomil, St. John's wort, Worms,
Goose-grease, Foxes Oil, etc.

SECT. VIII. Of pain in the Ears, Moisture, Ulcers and Worms.
THe first is allayed by using warm Milk to them, or Oil of Violets, or the
decoction of Poppies: for the moisture take Honey of Roses, and Aqua Mellis,
and drop them into the Ears; for Worms they are killed by washing the Ears with
white Wine, wherein Wormwood has been boiled, or drop in Hemp Oil with a
little Wine.

SECT. IX. Of the Thrush, bladders of the Gums, and Inflammation of the Tonsils.
FOr the first, wash the Mouth with Plantain water, and Syrup of Mulberries,
with a little Sal Prunella; the Bladders are cured by taking the powder of
Lentils husked and laid upon them. If the Tonsils of Infants chance to be
inflamed, give them Honey of Roses, Myrtles, Pomegranates, and Diamoron
inwardly, and oil of sweet Almonds, Camomil and St. John's wort outwardly.

SECT. X. Of the breeding of Teeth.
HEre the pain is great, and many time kills the Child; it happens about the
7th Month; they breed first the fore Teeth, then the Eye-Teeth, and last of all
the grinders, it is known by the Child's often putting its Fingers to its Mouth,
by holding the Nipple faster then before; and the Gum is white where the Tooth
begins to come. If the Teeth are long a breeding it causes Fevers and
Convulsions, of which many dye. Their hard breeding is from thickness and
hardness of the Gums, therefore soften and loosen them by rubing them with your
Fingers dipped in Honey and Butter; or with the mucilage of Quinces made with
Mallow water; If the Gums be inflamed add the juice of Houseleek and cream; and
let the Nurse keep a temperate diet.

SECT. XI. Of a Catarrh, Cough and difficult breathing.
THese proceed from much Milk that burdens the Stomach, and many vapors from
thence filling the Brain, and if the brain be full of excrements they are
dissolved, either by inward heat or outward cold; and so distill upon the Nose,
Jaws, or Lungs, which causes a Cough, or short breathing; moreover much food
makes crudities in the first passages; and Phlegmatic humors are bred by the
Liver of crudity and thick humors whence unconcocted blood is sent by the
Arterial Veins into the Lungs, and pressing the pipes of the Lungs causes
difficult Breathing.

First, let the Nurse keep a good diet, and fill not the Child's Stomach too
full with Milk or other diet; and let the Nurse forbear all hot, sharp, salt,
sour things, and such as fill the Head with Vapors; and give her a pectoral
decoction such as this; take Figs and Jujubes, each 10, Sebestens 30, Raisins
stoned 10 drams, Liquorice 2 drams, Maiden hair and Violets each an ounce and
half, boil them in 3 pints of water, till the 3d part be boiled away, let her
take 6 or 8 ounces of this every morning, keep the belly open with Syrup of
Roses, Cassia or a Clyster, or hold down the Tongue to provoke vomiting, give
syrup of Jujubes, Maiden hair, if the matter be thick, give syrup of Hysop or
Horehound; or an emulsion of oil of sweet Almonds and Pinenuts, made with
Scabions water; or make a Lohoc of diarios, Diatragacanth. frigid, penids and
syrup of jujubes. If it be hot give Emulsions of the 4 great cold Seeds, made
with Barley-water and Almonds.

SECT. XII. Of the Hiccup and Vomiting.
THey come from corruption of the food in the Stomach, or over fullness of milk
or cold Air; these hurt the expulsive faculty, which stirs it self up to expel
what offends it. If from fullness of Milk the belly swells, and there follows
Vomiting; if from corruption of Milk it may be the Nurse has bad Milk, the
Child cries and is in pain, and the excrements smell of stinking Milk. If from
corruption, put a feather dipped in oil to cause Vomiting, then strengthen the
Stomach with syrup of Mints, Quinces, or Betony, etc.

Vomiting is from too much or bad Milk, or from a moist Stomach, for as dryness
retains, so moistness loosens. If from much Milk they are better after
vomiting; if from corruption of milk, what is vomited is yellow, green, etc. and
stinks; worms are known by their signs, they that vomit from their birth are
the lustiest, for the Stomach not being used to meat, and taking too much Milk
breeds crudities, or corrupts the Milk, and it is better to vomit these up; but
if it last long, it causes a washing; If from too much Milk give it less; if
corrupted amend it; as before, and cleanse the Child with Honey of Roses and
then strengthen the Stomach, as before; and if the humor be sharp and hot, give
syrup of Pomegranates, Currants, Coral. Apply Emplastrum crusta panis, or the
stomach cerat to the Stomach.

SECT. XIII. Of the pains and puffing of the Belly.
PAins are often with a Flux, from corrupt Milk, which breeds wind and sharp
humors; which gnaws the inward parts, so do Worms. The Child cries continually,
refuses the Breast, tosses too and fro: if from wind, it breaks wind, and is
gone; if from humors it is constant, from tough Phlegm, the Belly's bound and
dung slimy; from sharp humors there is sign of them, if the pain last long
Convulsions, or Falling Sickness follow; If from crude humors and wind, give
first a Clyster, of Chicken, Mutton or Veal broth, 3 or 4 ounces, adding Honey
of Roses one ounce, with the yelk of an Egg, or give it some Oil of sweet
Almonds, with Sugarcandy, and a few Anniseeds powdered, a scuple or so, which
purges new born Babes from green choler, and stinking Phlegm: if given with
Sugar pap, it allays the pains of the Belly. Anoint the Belly with Oil of Dil;
and foment it with a decoction of Camomil flowers, Dil tops, and Bays, twice a
day; If pain be from corrupt sharp Milk, give Honey of Roses, or syrup of
Succory with Rubarb; or a Clyster of the decoction of bran with Honey or syrup
of Roses, and anoint as before.

The puffing comes from too much sucking and not concocting, which is cured by
a thinner diet that crudities may be concocted; and purging with Honey of Roses.

SECT. XIV. Of the Flux of the Belly.
IF from breeding of Teeth see the signs, if from outward cold there are signs
of no other causes; if from crude humors there is wind, belching and phlegmatic
excrements, but if they be yellow, green, etc. it is from a hot and sharp humor.
If it last long stop it; if black excrements be voided with a Fever it is bad.

The Child needs not cure so much as the Nurse; mend the Milk, or change the
Nurse, and let her not eat green fruit, and things of hard concoction. If it
suck not take away the causes with Honey of Roses; then if the cause be hot
give syrup of Quinces, dried Roses, Myrtles, with a little fine Bole-Armonack,
Sanguis Draconis or terra sigillata; If the cause be cold, and excrements
white, give syrup of Mastick and Mints.

SECT. XV. Of Costiveness.
IT is from a cold and dry distemper, in some from the Birth; or from slimy
Phlegm, that wraps the dung which sticks in the Guts; this is from bad Milk when
the Nurse eats gross food, slimy and binding, or drinks little; or from an hot
distemper of the Liver or Kidneys that dryes the excrements, or if Choler stirs
not up the expulsive faculty, then the dung is white and the body yellow.
Children are more healthful with a loose Belly; it is cured by observing
contraries, as all other Diseases are; from slimy Phlegm, give Honey of Roses;
correct the distemper of the Liver, etc. with syrup of Violets, and cooling
Emulsions, as before. In want of Choler the decoction of Grass roots, Fennel.
Sparagus, Maidenhair. In all which you may give sometimes Clysters and
Suppositories.

SECT. XVI. Of Worms.
THey are known by a stinking Breath, troublesome sleep, gnashing of Teeth,
bawling, dry Cough, Vomiting, Hiccups, great thirst, swelled Belly, or bound,
or too loose; when the Belly is empty and they want food there is a cold sweat
over the Face, and an high color with sudden paleness, sometimes a Fever and
Convulsion which cease presently.

First, It Is best to prevent them by eating meats of good juice, with Oranges
and Lemons, etc. and avoiding sweet clammy meats Flesh and Fruits; If there be
Worms kill them with powder of Corraline, Wormseed, Hearts horn, or infuse 8 or
10 grains of Mercurius dulcis all Night in Grass, Borage, or Bugloss water,
pouring them from the Mercury, and give the Child the water. The waters with
the juices are very good. Some apply a Plaster of Aloes to the Navil. There is
no better thing under the Sun, then to infuse a dram or 2 of Sena in water, and
put some of the juices to it when it is strained. Use varieties that the Worms
may not be to familiar with one.

SECT. XVII. Of the Rupture.
IF this be from a Gut keep the Belly open, keep the Child from crying,
avoiding motion, lay it upon its back, thrust it up gently, then apply an
Emplaster of ad Herniam, or Casaris. If from water anoint with oil of Elder,
Bays, Rue, etc. or apply a pultis of powder of Beans, Linseed, Fenugreek,
Camomil flowers, with these Oils.

SECT. XVIII. Of Bunching out, and Inflammation of the Navil.
IF the Midwife left too much of it that it bunches out, it is more troublesome
then dangerous, if the rim of the Belly be loose, it starts not much out, and
is not bigger by crying; and wind stretches it out; then use a pultis of
Cummin, Bay Berries, Lupines powdered with red Wine, then use an Astringent
Plaster as in Ruptures and roll it. If the rim be broken, first put in the
Gut, then bind it close after you have applied an astringent Plaster, and
given Medicines as against Ruptures.

The Inflammation is from pain when it is not well tied, which draws blood to
it: There Is redness, hardness, heat and beating; if it turn to an Impostume and
breaks, the Guts come forth and the Child usually dies, if not presently hope
by a skilful Chyrurgeon: First abate the Inflammation with Vnguentum album, and
Populeon, etc. and repel the blood with a dram of Frankincense, Acacia, and
Fleabean seed of each half a dram, made into a pultis with some white of an Egg.

SECT. XIX. Of the falling out of the Fundament.
WHen the Muscle that shuts it is loose then it comes forth; if it come from
moisture it is hard to be cured, especially if there be a looseness, for then
Medicines cannot lie on. If with streining if it be swelled, foment it with a
decoction of Mallow, and Marshmallows; or anoint with oil of Lillies; then
keep it in with astringents, as take red Roses, Pomegranate pills, and flowers,
Cypress Nuts each half an ounce, Sumach, Frankincense, Mastick, each 2 drams,
boiled in red Wine, foment it with sponge; then sprinkle on this powder, red
Roses and Pomegranates flowers, each half a dram, Frankincense, Mastick, each a
dram laid upon a clout and kept to the Fundament.

SECT. XX. Of difficulty and stopping of Urine.
It Is caused from thick humors, and the Stone that stops the Bladder: its
voided by drops, and is thick; then let a Surgeon try with a Catheter if there
be a Stone, and if it be not presently cured it turns to one; and all natural
evacuation in Children being stopped is dangerous. Evacuate the humors with Honey
of Roses, Cassia, white Wine and water; or take the blood of an Hare, dried to
powder 1 ounce, Saxifrage roots powdered 6 drams; give from a scruple to half a
dram in white Wine, or Saxifrage water.

SECT. XXI. Of not holding Urine.
THis comes from a cold and moist distemper, which weakens the Muscle that
should close the orifice of the Bladder, and when much water pricks it, it
suffers it to come forth; sometimes a stone hurts it that it cannot do its
duty. First, then alter the distemper, dry and consume the Phlegm, let the Nurse
have a Diet with Sage, Hysop, Marjoram, etc. ^et not the Child drink much.

SECT. XXII. Of Leanness and Betwitching.
IF from little or bad Milk, remedy it; or from Worms, or Worms in the Skin,
which is known by putting the Child into a Bath and rubbing it with Honey and
Bread, and then you will see they will put forth their heads like Ash colored
and black hairs, in the Back, Arms or Legs, and all Musculous parts and stick
in the Skin; and they breed of slimy Matter shut up in the Capillar veins;
which turns to Worms from transpiration hindered. If you find no other outward
or inward cause you may suspect a venomous vapor, or Witchcraft.

If for want of Milk change your Nurse; or if she have any disease, or be
contrary to the constitution of the Child. If from worms in the Skin, when you
see their heads appear by rubbing and as before kill them with a Rasor or Crust
of Bread. If from an occult quality or Witchcraft it is hard to be cured because
we know not the nature of the malignity. There are many superstitious things
carried about against Witchcraft, some having Amber and Coral about the Child's
neck. If it be from a dry distemper of the whole body; there is no better
remedy then bathing often in a decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Brankustine, Sheeps-head, etc. anointing after with Oil of sweet Almonds: and
if it be hot and dry add Lettice, Endive, Violets, Poppy-heads, and Onions and
after with Oil of Roses and Violets.

FINIS.
depictions of two caps and a glass suction instrument for treating damaged
nipples P.265



depictions of various pessaries P.247



depiction of a birth in which the baby presents the side of the head first
P.95



depiction of a birth in which the baby presents the face first P.95



depiction of a birth in which the cervix uteri, or neck of the womb, closes
around the baby's neck P.99



depiction of the pelvic bones of both men and women P.46




