English Loyalty Vindicated by the French Divines; OR, A DECLARATION AND
SUBSCRIPTION Of Threescore DOCTORS of SORBONNE, FOR THE Oath of Allegiance, As
it was Originally delivered by them in LATIN.

Faithfully done in English, By W. H.

Tributum Caesaris est, non negatur.

Ambr. Ep. 32. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Thompson next to the Cross-Keys in
Fetter-Lane, MDCLXXXI.

TO THE READER.
It Is the Duty of all good Subjects to give sincere and undeniable Proofs of
Loyalty to their Prince; And because the Oath of Allegiance is generally
offered to Roman Catholics, as the Legal Test of their Fidelity, (in which
they all profess to agree as to the substance, though some hard words in it, and
other circumstances not in the least material to their Allegiance, as some
affirm, have caused dissputes;, and raised Scruples in tender or weak
Conciences) several Gentlemen and Persons of Quality, of their persuasion, have
made it their business these late years, to clear those small Doubts, that
whilst the Substance of the Oath is embraced by all, none should startle at the
shadow, since they almost unanimously, at least very few excepted, who are
sufsiciently known to the World, acknowledge the Imperial Crown of England
independent of any Deposing Power whatsoever.

Their misfortune in being dispersed and driven into Foreign Countries, almost
ever since the beginning of these Troublesome times, has given them at last a
fair opportunity to accmplish abroad, what they were before endeavoring to
effect at home; And because there were Difficulties grounded, (as many did
suppose,) chiefly upon Religion, which made them boggle at the taking of the
Oath; The whole matter, with all the particulars, was proposed to the Doctors
of Sorbonne at Paris, a Body of as able and learned Divines, as any is of the
Roman Persuasion: and those whom Rome it self, upon Debates of the greatest
moment, has often consulted and advised with. Many of these Pious and Learned
Doctors have examined the Oath very carefully, have weighed every word, and
considered every circumstance; And as they themselves declare, Perpensis
omnibus difficultatibus praecipue illis, quae a summorum Pontificum Brevibus
adversus hoc Juramentum datis, and ab haereseos nota Paragrapho, quarto
petuntur, Having weighed all the difficulties, particularly those that arise
from the Popes Breifs given against this Oath; and from the word Heretical in
the fourth Paragraph, after a long and mature Deliberation, have given under
their Hands this following Determination and Declaration, upon the Oath in
Latin as 'twas worded when first sent to Rome in Paul the fifths time. Which,
with a faithful Translation has been thought very Convenient to be Published
here in England, that Men of clearer understanding, and of deeper sense then
the common sort of People; and whose Judgment is wholly carried by the
strength of reason, may be sensible that the Roman Catholics, (though never in
so great a distress) will be always ready, with all submission and cheerfulness
to give Caesar his due, which cannot be denied him, but by a breach of the Law
of Jesus Christ; who with the same breath Commanded Obedience to God in Heaven,
and to Caesar his Vicegerent upon Farth. By which Decree of the Divine Wisdom,
the Primitive Christians thought the Emperors and Kings so well settled in
their Thrones, that great Athanasius, the Pillar of Catholic Faith against the
Arians, Writing to Constantius the first Heterodox Emperor, and a dreadful
Enemy to Gods Church, acknowledges: That no Power in the World, (without
opposiing Gods positive Command,) can so much as cas^ a spiteful look upon his
Crown. Tibi Deus Imperium commisit -- qui tuum Imperium malignis oculis carpit
contradicit Ordinationi Divinae. God, says he, Has Committed the Empire unto
You, he that but looks awry upon your Empire, opposes Gods Ordination. And St.
Augustine commending the obedieuce the Christians constantly paid to Julian the
Apostate, Successor to Constantius; Speaks thus of them, upon the Psalm. 124.
Propter Dominum aeternum subditi erant Domino temporali, quia necessitate
subditi erant, non solum propter iram evadendam, sed etiam propter
conscientiam, propter dilectionem, and quia jussit Dominus. They obeyed the
Temporal Lord for the Eternal Lords Sake, because they were by necessity his
Subjects, not only to avoid anger but for Conscience sake, out of Love, and
because God Commanded it.

Certainly in that Golden age of Christianty there was no such thing as
deposing Emperors and Kings, or dispensing with their Subjects Allegiance upon
the score of Heresy or Apostasy, or upon any other pretense whatsoever. And
many hundred years after Pope Gregory the II. declared in a Letter to the
Emperor Leo Isauricus, accounted a dangerous Heretic by the Sea of Rome, that
he had not the power so much as to look into his Majesty's Palace; and to
dispose of any of his Regalities, Pontisex introspiciendi in Palatio potestatem
non habet, ac dignitates Regias deferendi. Where was the pretended deposing
power in those days?

This publication will be therefore very necessary also for the satisfaction of
several honest and wellmeaning Catholics, who having been hitherto troubled
with doubts, for want, it may be, of a right information concerning the Oath,
may be glad to have so firm and so good a ground to settle their wavering and
scrupulous Conscience upon.

These were the motives which induced me to make this public, and as my
endeavors in all this business have been clear from all Interest, and my
intentions sincere, without any other prospect but of the common good, I hope
in this I may have obliged many, without incurring the displeasure of any one,
who is a lover of truth, and a faithful Subject to his Majesty.

W. H.

QUAERITUR An Salva Fide and tura Conscientia A Catholicis Anglis Praestari
possit subsequens Juramentum.
EGo A.B. vere and sincere agnosco, profiteor, testificor, and declaro in
conscientia mea, coram Deo and mundo, quod supremus Dominus noster Rex Carolus
est Legitimus and verus hujus Regni Rex, and omnium aliorum Majestatis suae
Dominiorum, and terrarum.

Et quod Papa, nec per-seipsum, nec per (...) autoritatem Ecclesiae vel sedis
Romanae, aut per-^lla alia media cum quibuscunque aliis aliquam potestatem, vel
autorittem habeat Regem deponendi, vel de aliquious Majestati suae Regnis aut
Dominiis disponendi, vel alicui Principi extraneo ad ipsum damnificandum, aut
terras suas inuadendum autoritatem concedendi, vel ullos subditorum suorum ab
eorum suae Majestati Subjectione and obedientia exonerand^* aut ullis eorum
licentiam vel facultatem dandi, ut arma contra ipsum gerant, tumultus excitent,
aut aliquam violentiam aut damnum Majestatis suae Regiae Personae, Statui vel
regimini, aut aliquibus Majestatis suae Subditis intra sua Dominia offerant*

Item Juro ex cord, quod non obstante ulla declaratione, vel sententia
Excommunicationis vel deprivationis facta, vel concessa aut facienda vel
concedenda per Papam vel Successores vel per quamcunque autoritatem derivatam,
aut derivari praeten sam abille seu a sua sede contra dictum Regem, Haeredes
aut Successores suos, vel quaounque absolutione dictorum subditorum ab eorum
obedientia, fidelitatem and veram obedientiam suae Majestati, Haeredibus, and
Successoribus suis praestabo, ipsum que, and ipsos totis meis viribus contra
omnes Conspirationes and attentata quaecunque, quae contra Personam illius vel
illorum eorumque Coronam and dignitatem ratione vel color alicujus ejusmodi
sententiae vel Declarationis vel alias facta fuerint defendam, omnemque operam
impendam, ut Majestati suae, haeredibus, and Succesloribus suis revelem and
manifestas faciam omnes Proditiones and Proditorias Conspirationes, quae contra
illum aut aliquos illorum attentari cognoscam, vel audiam.

Praeterea Juro, quod ex cord abhorreo, detestor and abjuro tanquam impiam and
haere^^cam hanc Doctrinam and damnabilem positionem, quod Principies per Papam
Excommunicati vel deprivati possunt per suos subditos vel alios quoscunque
deponi, aut occidi.

Et vlterius credo and in Conscientia mea resolvor quod nec Papa, nec ulla alia
Persona quaecunque potestatem habeat me ab hoc Juramento, aut aliqua ejus
part, absoluendi: Quod Juramentum agnosco recta and plena autoritate esse
legitime mihi ministratum, omnibus Indulgentiis ac Dispensationibus in
contrarium renuncio, haecque omnia plane and sincere agnosco and juro, iuxta
haec expressa verba a me prolara, and juxta planum and communem sensum and
intellectum eorum verborum, absque vlla aequivocatione aut mentali evasione,
aut secreta reservatione quacunque hancque recognitionem and agnitionem facio
cordialiter voluntary, and vere in vera fide Christiani viri. Sic me Deus
adjuvet.

NOs infra scripti Ecclesiae and Academiae Parisiensis Cancellarius, Doctor
socius Sorbonicus, testamur omnibus quorum interest vel interesse potest,
attento nos animo vidisse, and perlegisse juramentum supra transcriptum,
nihilque in eo reperiisse quod sit verbo Dei, aut Catholicae and Apostolicae
fidei contrarium, proindeque-censemus illud salva eadem fide and tuta
Conscientia a Catholicis Anglis emitti posse, imo and eos ex Religione teneri
illud idem, ut fideles decet Subditos, omni ratione adimplere and exequi. In
Cujus rei fidem Subscripsimus and praesentem Subscriptionem Sigillo nostro
muniri fecimus.

Datum Parisiis in aedibus Beatae Mariae die nona Augusti, Anno Dom. 1681.
COQUELIN.
Ex mandato praefati Dom. Cancellarii.

ROGER.



NOs infra scripti sacrae facultatis Parisiensis Theologi censemus Iusiurandum,
ut in obversa pagina conceptum est, salua fide, and tuta Conscientia a
Catholicis Anglis jurari posse: Si modo in propositione, quae est de
depositione and caede Principum, and quae damnatur ut Haeretica, Deponi and
Occidi conjunctim accipiantur, imo and si divisim, ita ut tamen propositio
materialiter (id est verbo Dei contraria) finiatur, quatenus deponi posse
Principes effert, formaliter vero etiam, quatenus and occidi posse

Superaddit, Deliberatum, datumque Parisiis die decima sexta. Augusti Anno Dom.
1680. Alex. Vaillant, Pastor Sti. Christophori. Chassebras, Archipresbyter
Paris. and Pastor Stae. Mariae Mag. Gerbais, Collegii Rhemensis Primarius.
Mezure, Pastor Sti. Pauli. Le Caron, Pastor Sti. Petri. Rouland. N. Petitpied,
Pastor Sti. Marcelli. Le Feure, Professor Regius in Theologia. Navarre. A.
Faure, Vicarius generalis Ecclesiae Rhemensis. Fran. Lovis. Le Feure. Ph. Le
Feron, Archdiaconus Ecclesiae Santonensis. Ph. du Bois, Primarius Collegii de
Faen. Biord. Thire. Varet. Robine, Eremita Augustinianus. Andre. Mouteau. Des
Moulins. De Lescolle. Bigres. De Riviere. Camyn. C. Blovin. Petitpied. J. de
Beaumont. De Bienual. J. de Guigneul. Le Charpentier, Can. Regul. L. Empereur,
Canonicus Reg. Hicot. De la Grange, Canon. Reg. Denis. F. de Bourges, Can. Reg.
Du Four. J. C. Braquet. Bourdon Can. Reg. Blampignon, Pastor Sti. Mederici. J.
Marie. L. Deuyon, d Heroual Nau. Basset. Baudinet, Carmelita. Le Pescheur. F.
J. Germain Carmelita. A. P. Deuyon Can. Reg. M. Humbelot. De la Mare. Le
Tourneur. Courcier Theologus, Eccl. Paris. De Mousseau. Senator Curiae Paris.
T. H. Malet Carmelita. De Fita, Pastor S. S. Cosmae and Dam. Berthault, Coll.
Stae. Barb. Primarius. Boesset. Le Feron.

Eidem Deliberationi Subscripti nulla adhibita limitatione.

Le Marais, Pastor Claustri B. V.



SUpradicta Declaratio cum Subscriptionibus Doctorum infra eam descriptorum,
Concordat cum originali ejusdem Declarationis, prout mihi constitit ex
collatione a me facta cum dicto originali die decima tertia Octobris Anno 1681.
In cujus rei fidem Subscripti Parisiis

Tassin Actuarius facultaris sacrae Theologiae Parisiensis.

The Question is, Whether the English Catholics may with safety of Faith and
Conscience, take this following OATH.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles
the Second is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other His
Majesty's Dominions and Countries, and that the Pope neither of himself nor by
any authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any
other, has any Power or Authority to Depose the King, or to Dispose of any of
His Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to
Invade or Annoy Him, or His Countries, or to discharge any of His Subjects of
their Allegiance and Obedience to His Majesty, or to give License or leave to
any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to
His Majesty's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majesty's
Subjects, within His Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration or
Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made or
granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any authority derived, or
pretended to or derived, from him, or his See, against the said King, His Heirs
or Successors; or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience. I
will be at faith and true allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
and Him and Them will defend to the uttermost of my Powe, against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous
Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against Him, or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully
ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation or
mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this
recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true
faith of a Christian.

So help me God.

The Resolution and Declaration of the Chancellor of the University of Paris,
upon the Question.
WE underwritten, Chancellor of the Church and University of Paris, do testify
to all, who are, or may be concerned, That we have seen, and have seriously
perused the Oath above transcribed, and that we have found nothing in it
contrary to the word of God, or to the Catholic and Apostolic Faith; And
therefore we judge that it may be taken by the English Catholics with a safe
Faith and a good Conscience; Nay, and that they are bound by the Principles of
Religion, as it becomes faithful Subjects, to fulfill it, and practice it in all
points. In witness whereof We have here Subscribed, and have ordered this
present Subscription to be Sealed with our Seal.

Given at Paris in the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the 9 th. of August,
in the year of our Lord, 1681. COQUELIN.
By the command of the aforesaid Lord Chancello^.

ROGER,



The Declaration and Subscription of the other Doctors, with their Titles and
Qualities.
WE underwritten Divines of the Sacred Faculty of Paris, do judge the Oath, as
it is conceived in the other Page, may with safety of Faith and Conscience be
taken by the English Catholics, so that the words, Deposed and Murdered ( in
the proposition, which is of the deposition and Murder of Princes, and which is
Condemned as Heretical,) be taken jointly; Nay also, though separately; so
notwithstanding that the Heretical proposition, for as much as it asserts, That
Princes may be Deposed, be taken materially (that is contrary to the word of
God) and formally also, for as much as it adds, That they may be Murdered.

Alex. Vaillant, Pastor of St. Christophers. Chassebras, Archpriest of Paris,
and Pastor of St. Mary Magdaline. Gerbais, Principal of the College of Reims.
Mezure, Pastor of St. Paul. Le Caron, Pastor of St. Peter's. Rouland N.
Petitpied, Pastor of St. Marcellus. Le Feure, Professor Royal in Divinity.
Navarre. A. Faure, Vicar- general of the Church of Reims. Fran. Lovis. Le
Feure. Ph. Le Feron, Archdeacon of the Church of Sens. Ph. du Bois, Principal
of the College of the Thresurors. Biord. Thire. Varet. Robine, Augustine
Ermite. Andre. Mouteau. Des Moulins. De Lescolle. Bigres De Riviere. Camyn. C.
Blovin. Petitpied. De Bienual. J. de Beaumont. J. de Guigneul. Le Charpentier,
Can. Regular of St. Augustine. L. Empereur, Can. Regular. Hicot. De la Grange,
Can. Regular. Denis. F. de Bourges, Can. Regular. Du Four. J. C. Braquet.
Bourdon Can. Regular. Blampignon, Pastor of St. Mederick. J. Marie. L. Deuyon,
D'Heroval Nau. Basset. Baudinet, Carmelit Friar. Le Pescheur. F. J. Germain
Car. Friar. A. P. Deuyon D'Heroval Can. Regular. M. Humbelot. De la Mare. Le
Tourneur. Courcier Theologal, of the Church of Paris. De Mousseau, Counselor
of the Parliament of Paris. T. H. Malet Carmelit Friar. De Fita, Pastor of S.
S. Cosma and Damianus. Berthault, Principal of the College of St. Barbara.
Boesset. Le Feron.

I have Subscribed to the same Declaration without any restriction.

Le Marais, Pastor of the Cloister of our Blessed Virgin.



THe aforesaid Declaration, with the Subscriptions of the Doctors mentioned
under it, does agree with the Original of the same Declaration, as it did
appear to me, by the comparing it to the said Original, the 13th, of October,
in the year 1681. In Witness whereof, I have subscribed this at Paris.

Tassin, Register of the Sacred Facultyof Divinity of Paris.

FINIS.

