AN English Herbal: OR, A Discovery of the Physical Virtues of all Herbs in
this Kingdom, what Planet governs each Herb, and how to gather them in their
Planetary Hours.

CONTAINING Some Hundreds of Medicines Made of ENGLISH HERBS, Whereby any
Person may keep his Body in health, or cure himself when sick, for a small
Charge, with such Herbs and Roots as naturally grow in ENGLAND.

Collected for a General Good.

Sold by A. C. at the Ring in Little-Britain.

Reader,
YOU have herein an Account of the Herbs growing in England, and the Planet
that rules 'em, that you may know how to gather 'em in their prime. The Planets
are the Sun Sunday, the Moon Monday, Mars Tuesday, Mercury Wednesday, Jupiter
Thursday, Venus Friday, Saturn Saturday. Observe that every Planet governs the
first Hour after Sunrise upon his Day, and the next Planet to him takes the
next Hour successively in his order; so be it any Day, every 7th Hour comes to
each Planet successively; for instance, If the Day be Friday, then the first
Hour after Sunrise is Venus's, the next Saturn's, and so on till it comes to
Venus again. If you gather Herbs in their planetary Hour, some say you may do
great matters, otherwise not; but be sure in gathering your Herbs you gather
the most juicy, so dry 'em in the Sun, which some say is much better than
Shade, and keep 'em in Paper Bags.

Mr. Cole lays no stress on Planetary Hours further than that the Sun and Moon
have influence over 'em, the first fer Heat, the other for Moisture, but that the
Full Moon is a good time to gather Herbs whence the Juice is to be taken. Those
you gather for Winter Use, do it before they run to Seed. Flowers gather in
their prime; dry and lay up Seeds full ripe; Roots keep near the Fire, or they
will rot: Barks newly gathered are best. Other Authors say it is best to gather
Herbs when they are full of Juice, on a clear Day, when the Dew is gone off
'em. Flowers gather when full blown, Seeds when they begin to dry, Fruit quite
ripe, Roots before they begin to spring, and dry 'em carefully either in Sun or
Shade, it matters not.

NB. Our English Herbs make as wholesome Tea's as foreign, sweetened with Sugar
or Syrup; and you may make 'em with Syrups or Berries of what Color and Taste
you please.

Notable Things; AN English HERBAL.
ALehoof, Ground Ivy, Gill, or Coltsfoot, grows in Hedges and in shaded Lanes;
it is an Herb of Venus, and cures the Diseases she causes by Simpathy, and the
Diseases of Mars by Antipathy. Sodden in Swines-grease, it is a good Ointment
for all Aches; it is excellent in Tea: It Is also good for all inward Bruises,
Wounds, Ulcers, etc. boiled either by itself or other Wound-herbs; it eases
all griping Pains or Wind in Spleen, Stomach, or Sides; it cures the Jaundice,
expels Venom, Poison, and Plague: It Is good against the Gout, and provokes
Urine: Being put in Ale, it clears it in a Night's time, and cleanses the
Blood. The Juice dropped into the Ears, helps Noise and Deafness.

Agrimony, an Herb of Jupiter, grows on Banks by Hedges or other Fences. It is
moderately dry and binding, temperate as to heat, cleanses the Liver and Lungs,
helps the Jaundice, and is profitable for the Bowels, healing inward Bruises,
Wounds, and Putrifactions. Boiled in Wine and drank, it is good for biting of
mad Dogs, stinging of Serpents, etc. It cures and clears filthy muddy Urine,
helps Coughs, stops a Bloody Flux; made into a Salve, it cures Cancers, old
Sores and corroding Ulcers; draws forth Splinters, Thorns, and Iron got into
the Flesh: It strengthens disjointed Limbs. The Juice dropped into the Ears, is
good against Imposthumes; a Tea made of it, is good for sore Throats: It Is a
great Strengthner of the Liver and whole Body, purifying the Blood, used either
in Ointment, Decoction, Diet-drink, or as you please. There Is also a
Water-Agrimony has the same Virtue. Being burnt, the Smoke drives away Gnats,
Wasps, Flies, and other Insects. A Draught of the Tea is good against Agues,
taken before the Fit comes.

Acorns, see Oak.

Adders-tongue grows in Meadows and moist places, and is governed by the Moon
in Cancer, but dry in the third degree: It Is good for green Wounds whether
drank by Decoction or boiled in Oil. It makes an excellent green Balsam, like
that of St. John's Wort.

Alkanet, an Herb of Venus, is good for old Ulcers, Inflammations, St. Anthony's
Fire, etc. If you make a Vinegar of it, as you do of Roses, it cures Leprosy
and Morphew: Apply it to the Womb, it drives out the dead Child; it helps
Bruises, is excellent to bring out the Smallpox and Measles; it is also good in
green Wounds; a Decoction with Hydromel drank, helps the yellow Jaundice.

Ague-tree (Sasafras-wood) a Decoction in Water drank, helps a Dropsy, cures
Agues, expels Wind, creates an Appetite, helps the French Disease; being laid
in a Bed, it drives away Bugs: It sweetens the Breath, and helps Coughs, Colds,
etc. It grows in the West Indies.

Allheal grows in Gardens; it is an Herb of Mars, being choleric, hot, and
biting. It helps the Gout, Cramp, Convulsions, kills Worms, provokes Urine, and
helps all Joint-aches; it is good to cure Griefs of the Head, Lethargy,
Falling Sickness, Vertigo, Wind-Cholick, Obstructions of the Spleen, Liver, and
Stone in Kidneys or Bladder: It provokes the Terms, and purges gently.

Amara Dulcis grows mostly in shady and moist places: It removes Witchcraft
from Man and Beast, by wearing it about the Neck; apply the Berries bruised to
Felons, stamped with rusty Bacon, cures 'em. It is under Mercury. If both Wood
and Leaves be boiled together in Whitewine, and drank in a Morning, opens
Obstructions, helping Dropsy and Jaundice.

Aloes mixed with Rosewater, and anointing, kills Crablice; it is purgative, and
one chief Ingredient in Pills; one or two Pills of washed Aloes may be used by
such as are costive, dimn-sighted, heavy-hearted, or otherwise indisposed.
Roseate Aloe-Pills are gentle Purgers, very good against yellow Jaundice. There
are 4 sorts, distinguished by their purity or fineness; Aloes Cabalina is the
blackest, Aloes Hepatica are Liver-colour'd and finer, Aloes Cicatrina are of a
Citron-colour, or from the Tree Cicatoria; Aloes Lucida are the brightest and
best, purging gently.

The Scotch Pill (I suppose) is thus made:

Make a strong Decoction, a handful of Rue in a pint of Water, in which
dissolve a pound of Aloes; when well dissolved, pour off all the liquid,
leaving the gummy Sediment behind; then evaporate over a gentle Fire, in a
clean Pipkin, the watery consistence till it comes to the thickness of a Syrup;
mix in this an ounce of Myrrh finely powdered, and a dram of Saffron (or two)
in powder, holding the Saffron before the Fire a little: As it cools make it
into small Pills with Powder of Liquorice, and take 1, 2, or 3 at any time, an
hour after Dinner or at Night.

Alexanders grow usually in Gardens; it is an Herb of Jupiter, therefore healthy
and friendly to those that use it; hot in the 3d degree. It opens Obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen, provokes the Courses, brings away the Afterbirth,
provokes Urine, helps Strangury, is good against Poison and biting of Serpents,
and excellent in Broth for cold Stomachs.

Ald^r-tree grows an moist Counties and Places; it is a Bush of Venus, and under
Cancer. The Bark, Buds, Leaf, and Flowers are cooling, drying, and binding,
easing Pain, excellent for all Inflammations, Scaldings, Burnings, and
Swellings, either in Ointmrnt or Pultice. If the Leaves are laid to gaul'd Feet
in walking, they are very refreshing: They gather all the Fleas in your Room
together, if a handful fresh is laid there, so throw 'em suddenly away.

Anemonys grow in Gardens, and are under the dominion of Mars. They cure
Leprosy by bathing it with a Decoction of the Leaves, and provoke the Terms
much: The Root chewed brings away many watery Humors; it is good in an Ointment
against malignant Ulcers; likewise against Lethargy, the Juice snuffed up,
mightily purges the Head.

Amaranthus, it is under Saturn, and grows in Gardens. The Flowers dried and
powdered, stop the Terms, if drank in Wine and Honey boiled together; it
mightily cures lustful Passion. The Herb boiled in Wine, and the Fundament
fomented, helps the Piles and stops their bleeding. The dried Herb laid among
Clothes prevents Worms and Moths. The Seed is an excellent Bait for Fish.

Arach, it grows on Dunghils. This stinking Herb is governed by the Moon, and
is a sure Remedy in Fits of the Mother, being smelt to; it is cold in the first,
and moist in the second degree; it loosens the Belly, and vomits also; a
Decoction drank cools St. Anthony's Fire, and is good for Matrix Infirmities.

Angelica grows in Gardens, it is governed by the Sun in Leo, and best if
gathered in August, when the Moon is in a good Aspect in his House, and when
the Sun is angular: This the Astrologers say, and farther, That both this, and
all other Herbs, if rightly observed, will perform Wonders. It resists Poison
and all Infection, corroborating the Heart, Blood, and Spirits, whether in
Water distilled, Decoction, or the Stalks candy'd: It moves the Terms, brings
away the Afterbirth, helps Fluxes, and is a Cordial Herb.

Archangel or Dead-Nettle, the red and white grow in most places: It Is an Herb
of Venus, hot and dry in the 2d degree, and good against all Obstructions of
the Spleen decocted in Wine: Apply also the Herb outwardly, the Flowers of the
white stop the Whites in Women, and those of the red the other. It makes the
Heart cheerful, removes Melancholy, cures Agues, stops bleeding, dissolves hard
Tumors and Swellings, even the King's Evil, and eases Gout-pains. Bruised with
some Vinegar and Salt, and mixed with Hogsgrease, it is good against Bruises,
Ulcers, Burns, etc.

Arsmart grows chiefly in watery places that are dry in Summer; one sort is
mild, the other biting; the mild is under Saturn, the hot is governed by Mars.
It consumes cold Swellings, is very good against Ulcers and congealed Blood in
Man or Beast; being held to it, it cures the Toothache. The hot sort strewn in
your Chamber, kills Fleas; the Juice of the cold put to any Cattles Sores, will
drive away Flies; hot Arsmart put under a Horse's Saddle, makes him travel the
better.

Asarabacca grows in Gardens, and is under Mars, no Friend to Nature, being hot
and dry in the 3d degree: Boiled or infused in hot Wine all Night, it works by
Urine, Stool, Vomit, etc. purges Choler and Phlegm, is good against the Dropsy,
and forces down the Terms: It Is better infused than boiled. The Roots have the
same Virtues, but not safe for weak Bodies. The Decoction is good to bath the
Head, strengthen the Memory, and comfort the Brain when it is afflicted with
Cold. Beware how you use this.

Asparagus grows chiefly in Gardens, and is under Jupiter; it is friendly to
Man, and hot and moist by Nature. The young Branches boiled in fresh Broth,
make the Belly soluble; boiled in Whitewine, they purge by Urine, curing the
Strangury: Decocted, it clears the Sight; held in the Mouth, it cures the
Toothache; it stirs up Venery. A Bath made of it, takes away Pain from any part
of the Body; and the young Tops boiled in Milk tastes like Pease-pottage.

Ash-tree is governed by the Sun, the Leafs, Keys, Tops and Bark are very hot,
biting, and opening, a certain Cure for the Dropsy and stoppage of Urine in the
Reins or Bladder: Decocted in Whitewine and drank, it cures the Jaundice,
Leprosy, Scabs, or Scald, if therewith they are bathed.

Avens is under Jupiter, hot in the 2d degree: It is very good for Stoppings of
the Breast or Stomach, Pains or Stitches in the Side or Pleuretick Parts; it
dissolves bruised or congealed Blood, and helps Bloodspitting; it strengthens
the Brain and Stomach. The Decoction drank, cures Burstenness and Ruptures; it
prevents Infection, helps Digestion, opens Obstructions of Spleen and Liver.

B
Balm makes good Pottage of excellent Nutriment, grows in Gardens, and is under
the government of Jupiter and Cancer, hot and dry; it is so friendly and
flagrant that it strengthens Nature in all its Faculties. Take the Decoction in
Wine or Syrup, or the Water distilled is an excellent Cordial, it cheers the
Heart and Spirits, comforts the Brain, drives away Care and Melancholy, cures
the Toothache, the Bloody Flux, Vapors arising from Spleen; and for all cold
Stomachs it is an excellent Remedy. Sage and Balm makes a good Tea, so does Balm
and Sweet Marjoram, or Sage and Mint: Elderberries boiled with Tea, or Syrup of
Elder, or Brambleberries, or Rasberries, colors Tea, and is very wholesome.

Barberries grows in Gardens, is a Shrub under Mars, and purges by Urine much,
freeing the Body of Choler and yellow Jaundice. If you boil the inner Bark in
Sherry, and drink every Morning a quarter of a Pint, it is very good against
Agues, all choleric Effects, Tettars, Ringworms, Itch, etc. The Berries,
conserved or otherwise, alays Thirst, is good in Fevers, creates an Appetite,
and strengthens the attractive Faculty. The Leaves taste like Sorrel; it is good
(either Syrup or Berries) in Sage Tea.

Barley grows in Fields, and is governed by Saturn. It is not good for
Melancholy People, being more cooling than Wheat, but is more cleansing.
Barley-Water is good in Fevers, and for hot Stomachs, for Agues, and for
costive People: It is excellent in Poultices, if you boil it with some Vinegar.
Barley-Flour, some Figs mash'd, and a little Honey added, made into a Poultice,
dissolves hard Imposthumes, Swellings, and Inflammations, applied hot; it is
also proper to add Camomile Flowers, if there be I ain, with Fenugreek-seed and
Linseed powdered, which will take away Pains and Swellings from any part of the
Body. When it is malted, it is then hot and nourishing, as you find by the good
Liquor drawn from it in brewing.

Basile grows in Gardens, and is under the Government of Mars. It is hot and
moist, and very tender; it is reckoned dangerous to be taken inwardly. Mizaldus
says, that often smelling to it breeds a Serpent in the Head; there is an
Antipathy betwixt it and Rue: It is of a hot and fiery quality, and if it is
rotted in Horse-dung, it will breed Serpents. It is sovereign against the
biting of any venomous Beast, or Serpent's Sting, by drawing the Poison out.
Dr. Peachey says, it is an Ingredient of three compound Waters, viz.
Gilbert-water, Briony-water, and Celestial-water.

Bay Tree grows in Gardens, is under the Sun, and the Celestial Sign Leo. It
is hot and dry in the third degree; it is wonderful in Virtue, and very
refreshing in its fragrant Smell: The Leaves of it powerfully resist
Drunkenness, and all evil effects of the Brain, as Vertigo's, Swimmings, all
windings of the Stomach, and is good against Gripes and Cholick, and kills
Worms. Either the Berries, Leaves, or Bark, are very sure and effectual good to
prevent Infections, and resists Pestilence or Plague, also all evil Influences
and Witchcraft. It cures Numbness, Convulsions, Cramps, Palsies, and Lameness,
made into Ointments, Oils, or Baths, etc. laid among Clothes preserves them
from Moths, and gives a wholesome Smell.

Beans grow in Gardens and Fields, and are under Venus. They are Cold, Dry,
very Windy and Binding: The Flowers and Pods distilled, yield a Sovereign Water
to smooth and beautify the Face from Spots, Wrinkles, and other Deformities.
Field Beans are excellent in Poultices, to assuage Swellings, Inflammations of
Women's Breasts, or about Wounds; for any part swelled, make a Poultice of
Bean-flour with Wine and Vinegar, and Oil of Camomile; it is good for the Cods
swollen, Bruises, Pains, or Wounds of the Sinews, Sciatica, or Gout. Beans
often eat, causes Noises troublesome to the Brain: Bean-flour and Fenugreek,
mixed with Honey, cures Fellons, Bruises, Boyls, etc.

Beans, French, grows in Gardens, and belongs to Dame Venus. Being dried and
beaten to Powder, a dram drank in Whitewine, strengthens the Kidneys, prevents
the Stone, loosens the Belly, provokes Urine, and increases Seed and Lust. They
are good to eat when boiled.

Beets, White and Red; the White is governed by Jupiter, the Red by Saturn. The
Red Beet boiled and eaten with Butter and Vinegar, is a pleasant Food, helps
Digestion, and is opening; pickled, they are cooling Sauce. The White Beet does
more loosen the Belly, and provoke Urine; the Juice of the Leaves opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, helps Burnings and Swimmings of the Head:
The boiled Herb is good to lay upon Chilblains, Blisters, Cankers, Blains, and
prevents Hair falling off, and Baldness. Red Beets stops the Bloody Flux,
Women's Courses, and cures the yellow Jaundice; the Juice put into the Nostrils,
purges the Head, and cures the Toothache.

Ladies Bedstraw grows in Meadows and Pastures, is an Herb of Venus, being in
Nature hot and dry: It is very powerful upon the Parts of Generation, to
strengthen them. A Decoction of the Flower or Herb, drank, dissolves the Stone,
provokes Urine, stops Bleeding inwardly, and heals Wounds inwardly; being
made into an Ointment, it heals Scalds and Burns: The Decoction or Ointment is
good to bathe or anoint swelled sore Feet of Travelers; the Ointment cures the
Itch, is good for the Joints, Sinews, and Arteries, and cures Pains and Colds.

Blackberry-bush, or Bramble-bush, belongs to Venus, and grows in Fields: The
Fruit is good against Ulcers, sore Mouth and Throat, Quinzy, etc. it heals
Wounds, if washed with the Decoction; it is often used in Mouth-water, made with
other Herbs, a little Vinegar, Honey, and Allom added. The Berries are good for
Fluxes, Lasks, Sores, Spitting of Blood, and helps all Sores of the Privities
or Fundament; if you wash with a Decoction, the Berries are, for a sore Throat,
near as good as Mulberries.

One-Blade grows in Woods, shady and moist Places, and is under the Sun. The
Powder of the Root, or the Root boiled in Wine, or made into Tea, is very
Cordial; if given in Wine, and sweat upon, it is good against the Pox or
Plague. It is a good Wound-herb, old or new.

Blites grow in Gardens, and other Places; there are several sorts: They are
under Dame Venus, and are of a cold and dry quality, greatly binding in Lasks
and Fluxes. Red Blites stop Women's Terms: The White stops the Whites; and
remember this, that all Red Flowers are good to stay the too great Fluxes, or
Women's Terms.

Blewhottle grows in Cornfieldsd, by Nature cold, dry, and binding, and are
governed by Saturn. They are successfully given in Powder in Plantane-water, or
Comfry-water, for Bruises by a Fall, or spitting of Blood; if taken in Wine,
it is good against Poison, stings of Serpents, bad Air, Plague or Pestilential
Fevers. Green Wounds are speedily cured by its Juice; also Ulcers, fore Eyes,
Imposthumes in the Ears, or sore Mouth.

Borage, Bugloss, Langue de Beuf, they grow in Gardens and Highways, and are
much of the same Nature. All three are under Jupiter, by Nature they are hot
and moist: They strengthen Nature against Pestilent Fevers, resist Poison, and
are very Cordial. The Seed and Leaves boiled in Posset Drink, increase Milk in
Women's Breasts, is good against Melancholy, and purifies the Blood; it is also
good against Fevers, as has been often experienced. Borage, or Borage and Sage
makes good Tea, and with Syrups and Berries you may colors Teas.

Brank Ursine grows in Gardens, and is governed by the Moon: Boiled and given
in a Glyster, it loosens the Belly; the Decoction drank, is good against a Flux
of the Blood; applied to the King's Evil it is good, and a speedy Remedy against
Ruptures, and Burnings inwardly or outwardly applied; it helps the Gout, Cramp,
and Consumption.

Briony grows on Banks, and under Hedges; it is under Mars, hot and dry by
Nature; great Care is to be taken in using it, but if well corrected, it
powerfully purges Phlegm and watery Humors, is good in Dropsys, provokes Urine,
opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cleanses the Reins, prevents
Suffocation or Fits, cleanses the Womb, expels the dead Child and Afterbirth,
and brings down the Courses: It Is likewise good for Shortness of Breath and
Coughs. If an Electuary be made of the Roots with Honey, first being bruised,
and applied, 'twill draw forth splinter'd Bones.

Brooklime grows in shallow watery places, and is hot and dry; it is governed by
Mars. The common Use of it is in Spring Pottage and Diet-drinks, to cleanse the
Blood anp tout the Scurvy: It Is likewise good against the Stone, cures
Inflammations, and moves the Terms.

Broom grows in Fields and on Heaths, is governed by Mars, hot and dry in the
third degree; it is very bitter: If boiled in Wine, and drank, it is a sure
Remedy for the Dropsy, Gout, and Jaundice. It cleanses the Reins, Spleen, and
Bladder of Gravel and Stone, and prevents its generating. The young Tops made
into an Ointment with Hog's Grease, cures Sc^atica and other Pains; decocted or
boiled, it cures the black Jaundice, Ague-fits, Toothache, Stitches, Wind, and
kills Lice.

Buckthorn (Plantane) grows in sandy and many other Places, is an Herb of
Saturn, being cold, dry, and very binding. It Is excellent against the biting of
mad Dogs or Serpents, if applied to the Place bitten. The Roots boiled in
Whitewine, opens Obstructions, provokes Venery, expels Gravel, stops the Nose
bleeding, Lask of the Belly, and Bloody Flux. The Herb boiled in Posset Drink,
cures the Defluxion of hot Humors in the Eyes, and all sore Eyes.

Betony (Water) grows in Ditches and on Banks, is under Jupiter in Cancer, hot
and dry in the second degree; for Wounds it is a good Herb, and may be very
effectual for old Ulcers, Bruises, and Wounds, the Juice boiled in Honey, wet
your Tents and Lint therewith, and apply it. The Water distilled is good for
Sunburned Hands or Face.

Betony (Wood) grows in Woods and shady Places, this is also under Jupiter.
This, as the Elder, has so many Virtues, that a Book has been written on
them. It fortifies the Heart and Liver, prevents Epidemical Diseases, helps
Digestion, increases Appetite, cures the Falling Sickness, Jaundice, Palsy,
and Witchcraft. If you take the Root, Flowers, or Herb in Broth or Decoction,
Conserve or Syrup, Electuary or Powder, all work the same Cure: It cures the
Dropsy, Scurvy, Gout, Frenzy, short Breath, Worms, Stone, Obstructions,
Toothache, biting of venomous Beasts, Boyls, Fistula's, Distempers in the
Bladder or Reins, helps Women in Travail; the Fume of the Decoction taken in at
the Ears, eases them.

Beech-tree grows among Oaks, is under Saturn, and is cold, dry, and binding.
Beech-tree-leaves are good applied to hot Swellings to disperse them, and there
is often found in Old Beeches, a Water that cools hot Swellings, and disperses
them, and cures Tettars, Itch, Scabs and Scurfs in Men or Beasts, washed with
it. The Nuts or Masts are nourishing to Beasts that eat it, and an Oil is now
made of the Mast to eat with Sallads, little inferior to ^^^^^d-Oyl.

Bilberries grow on Heaths, there are two (...), Black and Red; they are under
Jupiter: The B^^^k are good in Feverish Agues, they cool the Stomach, Blood,
and Liver, and are a little binding; they strengthen the Stomach, stay Vomiting
and Loathing; the Red are most binding: They stop Fluxes and the Terms; their
Juice, made into a Syrup, is good against the Diseases beforementioned; it is
also good against spitting of Blood, old Coughs, Agues, or Ulcers in the Lungs.
They make a pleasant and wholesome Tea with Sage.

Boifoyl, or Twayblade, is found in Copses and Woods; another sort of it grows
in wet Grounds and Marshes: It Is governed by Saturn, and is dry and cold. In
all Wounds it is very binding and consolidating, for Ruptures it is admirable
both outwardly and inwardly applied.

Birch-tree grows in Woods, is under Venus, and by Nature hot and dry. If you
drink the d^still'd Water of the Leaves, or the Water that comes out of the
Tree when it is pierced, it breaks the Stone in the Reins and Bladder: If the
Water is ^^still'd, it serves for a Wash that beautifies the Face. It Is a good
Water for a sore Throat or Mouth; a Coal of the green Wood beaten to Powder,
and applied, stops bleeding speedily.

Birds-foot grows on Heaths and barren Ground, is under Saturn, and of a
drying, binding, healing quality: It helps a Rupture, outwardly or inwardly
applied; the Stone it also breaks.

Bishops-weed grows wild in most Places, and is under Venus; this Herb is hot
and dry in the third degree: It Is in taste sweet and bitter, and is very
opening. It Is excellent in Consumptions, expels Wind, provokes the Courses, and
breaks the Stone; taken in Wine, it hinders the poisonous effects of any
Poison; being decocted and drank, it cures a red Face, and makes it pale, if
applied outwardly. It also takes away Bruises or Deformities of the Skin,
making it pale and fair.

Bistort (Snakeweed) grows in moist Woods, but mostly in Gardens, there is two
sorts, it is under Saturn, cold and dry. This Herb is a great Antido^e against
Poison; the Root powdered drives out the Smallpox, Plague, Measles, or any
Malignity: The Root decocted does the same, and helps spitting of Blood, inward
Bleedings, and all Fluxes in Women or Men; is good against Vomiting and
Loathing, Ruptures, Bruises, or Bursten: It cures the Jaundice and eases Pains.
The distilled Water, or Decoction, is good to wash the bites of mad Dogs, or
other venomous Beasts; being drank, it cure^h Abortion. A dram of the Root
taken in some of the Water, for some time, cures the running of the Reins;
injected into the Womb, heals Ulcers; it stops Defluxions applied to any part.

Buckshorn (Sanguinaria) grows in barren sandy Ground; it is an Herb under
Saturn, being one sort of Plantane: Its Virtues are much the same, being cold,
dry, and binding. It stops bleeding wherever applied, and destroys Warts.

Bugle is a sort of Comfry that grows in Woods, is governed by Venus, and
temperately hot, it is a good Wound-herb, applied outwardly or inwardly: It
cures Ulcers, Fistula's, and Gangrenes, by Ointment, Decoction, Water, Powder,
or Syrup. It cures the Nightmare, strange Fears or Sights in the Night.

Burnet grows in Gardens, and also wild; it is an Herb of the Sun, an excellent
Herb to keep the Body in Health, for as the Sun preserves Life in all, so his
Herbs are most cordial to all. Boiled in Wine it preserves the Brain and Heart
from all Infection, Pestilence, nay, it enlivens the Spirits, though it be but
put into a Glass and looked on, it cures Melancholy; it cures a Dysentery or
sux of the Blood, Diar^^^^a, Vomiting or Loathing. It Is admirable in its
Virtues used any way.

Butter-bur grows in moist Ground, Marshes, and by the Waterside; it is under
the Sun, hot and dry in the third degree. It Is most cordial to the Heart and
Spirits, and very bitter; the Roots are good against the Plague and Smallpox,
when infected, sweating out the Malignant Matter, boiled in Wine or
Posset Drink. Also the Powder of it, drank in Wine, is good against Suffocation
or want of Breath; it provokes Urine and the Courses, and kills all sorts of
Worms in Old or Young. The Powder of the Root dries up all Sores that will not
yield to other Medicines, and takes away Blemishes and Spots.

Burdock is a stinking Bur that grows by the sides of Ditches any where; it is
under Venus, and cold in the first degree. It Is so attracting that the Seed or
Leaves draw the Matrix upward or downward; if you apply the Leaves to the top
of the Head, it draws it upward, if to the soles of the Feet, it draws it
downward; if you would stay it in its due place, bind a Leaf to the Navel: It Is
good for old Sores and Ulcers. The Root is excellent for the Stone, Lask, or
Consumption, either preserved or otherwise. The Seeds are used to break the
Stone, and for other Uses, as beforesaid.

C
Cabbages and Colworts grow in Gardens; they are Plants of the Moon, cold and
dry, and if you eat 'em with Vinegar you can scarce be drunk; those that be
drunk by eating it, may soon be sober. They prevent Surfeits, taken before
Meat. Colwor^s boiled cures swelled Legs, Gout-pains, etc. bathed therewith:
The Broth also helps the Bitings of Serpents, or if taken in Wine. They are
but windy Victuals, and somewhat offensive to the Eyes. The Sea-Colwort
cleanses and digesteth more than the common sort; apply them to Sores or
Inflammations, they cure 'em. A Decoction of Sea-Colworts opens and purges more
strongly than Garden-Colworts.

Camomile grows in Gardens, and is governed by the Sun; it is hot and dry in the
2d degree. It Is a great Cordial, gives Ease and causes Sweat if the Flowers
and green Tea boiled in Water or Wine and drank; it sweats strongly, eases Pain
at the S^omach, and cures Agues; it is good in Glysters, Poultices, and
Ointment; bathing with it is good against the Stone, and brings down the
Courses. In any sort of Ague, boil a handful in a pint of Ale till half be
consumed, then strain and drink it before the Fit comes, and sweat; do so three
times, and it cures. Oil of Camomile put in a Vial, and some Worms put in
killed, and bait your Hook with them, the Fish will bite eagerly. Lemery, p. 15.

Calamint, or Mountain-Mint, grows on high Grounds, is an Herb of Mercury,
hot in the third degree, dry in the second. If the Brain is afflicted from a
cold Cause, it is excellent good, for it strengthens the Memory, enlivens the
Mind, and (a Decoction being drank) quickens the Senses; it provokes Urine and
the Courses, is good for shortness of Breath, Cholick, Convulsions, Cramps, and
wonderfully stays Vomiting, but hinders Conception; being boiled in Wine, and
drank, it opens Obsiructions of the Spleen and Liver, and cures a Leprosy.

Calthrop's (Water) it is a Water-Herb, though seldom used; there is two sorts, and
they are under the government of the Moon, cold in the 2d degree. They are good
against the Stone, Gravel, King's Evil, all Inflammations and Swellings, resist
Poison of venomous Beasts. It Is used by Decoction, drank or in Poultice
outwardly.

Campions (wild) grow by Hedge-sides; there are many sorts of it, and they are
under Saturn, but of a cold quality. Taken in Decoctions, it stops Bleeding
inwardly or outwardly applied, it resists Poisons, the Plague, breaks the Stone
and Gravel, cures Fistula's, Cancers, Ulcers, Impos^humes, etc.

Carduus Benedictus (Blessed Thistla) grows in Gardens, is under Mars and the
Sign Aries; it is an excellent Remedy for the Pleurisy, Jaundice, Pains in the
Side, purges the Blood, by drinking the Decoction or distilled Water; it helps
Tettars, red Faces, French Pox, Plague, Ringworms, etc. by sweating often with
it; it provokes Urine, cures Agues, and strengthens the Memory.

Carrots (wild) grow in Fields, and it is to be observed that all wild Herbs are
more effectual than Garden Herbs in Physic. Mercury governs this, and it is hot
and openings. The Root eaten, or Decoction, breaks the Stone, provokes Urine,
expels Wind, and the Courses, is good against the Dropsy, boiled in Whitewine,
it helps Conception. The Seed is more physical than the Root.

Caraway usually grows in Gardens, it is under Mercury, ho^ in the 3d degree;
the Seed is hot, biting, expels Wind, provokes Urine and the Terms, helps
Digestion, remedies the Cholick and a cold Stomach.

Celandine grows in Gardens, by Hedges and old Walls, is govern d by the Sun
and Leo, hot. Made into an Ointment, it is excellent for fore Eyes: The Herb
decocted, or otherw^se taken-inwardly, cures the Jaundice, Ob^truct ons of the
Liver, Gall, Dropsy, Pestilence, Tettars, Ulcers, Worms of all sorts, Fits of
the Mother, beautifies the Face. Gather it in its proper Hour, and it is
effectual.

Celandine (Figwort) grows near the Water, or in Shades, is under Mars, and is
hot and dry. It Is reported to be an effectual Remedy for the King's Evil or hard
Swellings about the Throat, being made into a Poultice or Decoction of Herbs
and Roots. Made into an Oil or Ointment, it cures the Piles or Hemorrhoids; Or
if the Root be wore next the Skin, it cures the abovementioned Ailments, though
it touch not the place.

Cellary, see Sallary.

Centaury grows chiefly in Pastures; all the sorts are under the Sun, hot and
dry in the 3d degree. This Herb decocted, purges the Blood, expels Wind and all
choleric and gross Humors, is good in Glysters: In Gruel it creates and
Appetite, helps Sciatica, Gout, Dropsy, Green Sickness, Spleen, it kills Worms,
and helps Cholick-pains.

Charlock, the Seed of these wild Turnips are hot and dry, as Mustard Seed,
warming the Stomach.

Chervil grows in Gardens, is under Jupiter, hot and moist. A Decoction, or the
Juice drank, dissolves congealed Blood: Or the distilled Water breaks the Stone,
provokes Urine, expels Gravel, brings down the Courses, helps the Pleurisy,
and (if candy'd) is good against Infection. In Pottage eat with Bread, Butter,
and Salt, it is good Food, warms the Stomach, and preserves the Lungs.

Chi^kweed (Mouse-ear) grows in wet Ground and about Hedges; it is under the
Moon, cold and moist, very cooling to a hot Liver. Outwardly applied, it cures
Swellings and Imposthumes, Palsy, Scabs, Itch, red Face, red Eyes, Ulcers,
Hemorrhoids, made into Ointment or Poultice, or by bathing.

Cherry-tree grows in Orchards, and is under Venus. Cherries-are all cooling,
but the black are most medicinal, and in Convulsions most prevailing: They
create a good Stomach; the Gum dissolved in Wine is excellent to break the
Stone, cure an old Cough and Hoarsness, clear the Sight, and cause a healthful
Complexion.

Cherries (Winter-) grow in Gardens, are under Venus, and excellent in Physic;
the Berries are hot and opening, so powerfully cause Urine, break the Stone,
expel Gravel out of the Bladder and Reins, and help Blood-pissing. The Berries
may be dried and powdered, and drank with Whitewine and Sugar or warm
Posset Drink. The Apothecaries mix them with other Ingredients for the same
Distempers, and call it Troches Alkekingy.

Chesnut-tree is under Jupiter, hot in Nature; the Fruit is very nourishing,
creates good Blood and Seed if eat moderately, but bind too much Lask or
Diarrhoea, the Dysentery, as also the Courses.

Chick-pease grow in Fields and Gardens, are under Venus, cold and dry: By a
cleansing quality they break the Stone in the Kidneys; they increase Seed and
Milk, provoke Urine and the Courses. The wild sort is reckoned most powerful of
the two.

Cinquefoil grows by He^ge-sides and ways, is under Jupiter, hot and mo^st.
Give a scruple in Whitewine, and it seldom misses of curing any Ague in three
times taking it before the Fit. The Decoction cures Fevers, Cancers,
Pe^^^^ence, sore Throats, yellow Jaundice, Quinzays, Gout, Scabs, Itch,
Bleeding, Bruises, and Burstenness. Boil the Root in Milk, it stops all Fluxes
of the Belly, Reds or Whites.

Chives is a sort of Leek that grows in Gardens; they are under Mars, hot in
the 3d degree, dry in the 4th: They are bad for the Head, making Sleep uneasy,
and weaken the Sight; yet have this good Quality, they open the Breast and
Stomach, freeing their stoppage, and provoke Urine if you drink some of the
Juice in Whitewine hot.

Cl^ry is a Garden-Herb, under the Moon, it is hot and dry; the Seed powdered
and blown into the Eye, clears it from filth; a Decoction of it provokes Lust
and the Courses; the Root powdered makes excellent Sn^ff; the Leaves fried with
Eggs helps Digestion and strengthens the Back.

Cleavers or Clivers (Goosegrass) grows in Ditches, it is under the Moon, and
cold by Nature: Boiled in Watergruel in Spring, it cleanses the Blood; the Seed
and Juice are good against the stinging of Adders; drank in Wine, it preserves
from Poison and growing too fat, and cures yellow Jaundice, if you drink the
Decoction. Made into an Ointment, it heals Ulcers; the bruised Leafs stop
bleeding of any Wound; the Juice takes away Pain in the Head, being dropped into
the Ear; boiled with Hog's Grease, it heals Swelling and Kernels in the
Throat, being anointed with it.

Clowns Woundwort grows in Highways, and is under Saturn, very healing in all
green Wounds; the Juice, Decoction, or Syrup taken in wardly, heals the
Bloody Flux, Cancer, Ruptures, spitting or pissing of Blood, especially if some
Comfry be added.

Cockshead grows under Hedges, and in Fields, it is under Venus; it is very
good to apply to hard Swellings, Nodes, Knots, Kernels, etc. either in a
Poultice or the bruised Leaves; it cures the Strangury, and makes Cows give
much Milk.

Columbines grow in Gardens, they are under Venus, and by Nature cold, dry, and
binding, and are often used as Gargarisms for sore Throats or Mouths. The Seed
taken in Wine causes quick Delivery to Women in labor.

Coltsfoot grows in dry Ground, also in moist low Ground; it is an Herb of
Venus, and is often made into a Syrup: The Leafs dried and smoked with
Tobacco, is good against a Cough, Wheasing, Shortness of Breath, Agues,
Consumptions, and Suffocations. If outwardly applied, it cures Piles, choleric
Pustules and Privities enflamed.

Comfry grows in Fields and by Water-sides; it is under Saturn, cold and dry by
Nature: It Is good against spitting of blood or bloody Urine; it helps
powerfully all internal Wounds, Hurts, Bruises, Ulcers, etc. if you drink it
boiled in Wine; it is also excellent to cure all outward Wounds; it strengthens
the Back, decocted in Broth or Milk; it cures Fluxes white or red, Running of
the Reins, etc. A distilled Water or Decoction of the Root will join Flesh in a
Pot, though cut near asunder. It cools all Inflammations, inwardly or outwardly
applied; it is good boiled to eat alone, or with Meat or Bacon, when it is young.

Costmary, or Ale-cost, grows in Gardens; it is under Jupiter, being by Nature
hot and moist: It is a balsamic Herb for all green Wounds or Ulcers, if made
into a Salve; the Seed kills Worms; a Decoction drank is good against
Consumptions, crude Humors of the Stomach, Head ach, etc. strengthens a weak
Liver, cures a daily Ague, opens Obstructions, strengthens the Womb, dissolves
the Mother, hinders Putrefaction in all parts of the Body.

Coralwort, in many places it is thought to be a kind of Crowfoot; it is under
the Moon. It cures Gravel and Stone, stops Fluxes, eases Pain in the Belly and
Sides, provokes Urine, is excellent for Wounds in the Breast or Lungs; if you
drink a dram of the Root powdered in Wine every Morning, it being of a drying
quality, soon heals any Wound, or hinders a flux of Humors.

Corn, when young, about a hand high, clip it and tie it in fagots or bunches,
so boil it, and it makes good Sallad to cat.

Cudweed grows in gravelly barren Ground, it is an Herb of Venus, temperately
cool and dry, very binding, good in all fluxes of the Belly, taken in
Decoction, it is excellent for Ruptures, Quinzay, Ulcers, Whites and Reds, and
Running of the Reins; being boiled to strong Ley, it kills Nits and Lice,
preserves Garments from Moths, and destroys Moles.

Cowslips grow in Fields and Gardens, and are under Venus: They are good for
the Head and Face outwardly, to take away Spots and Wrinkles; taken inwardly,
they cure Vertigo, Palsy, Megrim, Convulsions, and Falling Sickness. The
Flowers strengthen the Brain and Nerves.

Crabs-claws, or Water-Sengreen; it grows in marsh Ground, and is under Venus.
It greatly strengthens the Reins, is good in all Inflammations, Swellings, St.
Anthony's Fire, etc. made into an Ointment, it cures them effectually: The
Powder of the Herb taken inwardly, is a powerful Remedy for Ulcers or Bruises
in the Reins or Kidneys; also it is good to stop the Courses.

Cresses-Bank (Nasturtium) grows by the Wayside, is under Mars, and is of a
biting quality like Mustard Seed; it is good in the yellow Jaundice, Sciatica,
etc. if made into an Electuary: It is also good against Rh^^^s and
Distillations from the Head upon the Lungs, which cause a Cough; for any
Inflammation, in a Po^ltice, it is a certain Cure. Cresses in Pottage, eat with
Bread, Butter, and Salt, is cleansing Food, good against Fumes and Vapors.

Cresses Sciaticae grow by old Walls and Way-sides, is a Plant of Saturn; it is
effectual in curing the Sciatica or Hip-gout, being made into a Sal e or
Poultice and anointing well with it after a Sweat in Bed; also Hands or Feet.
It likewise cures the Leprosy or Scurf.

Cresses (Water-) grow always in watery places, are under the Moon, and of a
sharp biting taste, excellent against the Scurvy, purge the Blood, bring down
the Terms, break the Stone, cure Pimples, Ulcers, and Lethargy, taken in Gruel,
etc.

Croswort grows in moist Ground and Meadows, it is under Saturn. Inwardly or
outwardly taken, it is good for Wounds; decocted in Whitewine, it opens
Obstructions of the Stomach and Bowels, brings away Phlegm, etc. Ruptures it
also cures.

Crowfoot grows in Gardens, it is under Mars, of a hot Nature, not fit to be
taken inwardly: The Leafs bruised, and applied with a little Salt to any Part,
will raise a Blister; it is proper to apply to the Wrists or Nape of the Neck in
Fevers or sore Eyes; mixed with Mustard, it is effectual for a Plague, Botch, or
Carbuncle.

Cuckowpint grows by Hedge-sides, is under Mars, and of a biting fiery quality;
some are spotted on the Leafs, and they are hottest. Against all Infections of
the Plague it is very effectual; it is an Antidote dote against Poison, if you
take some of the Juice or Powder in Wine or Vinegar. It cures Difficulty of
Breathing, Phlegm, and Cough, provokes the Terms, brings away Afterbirth, cures
Ulcers of the Throat, Jaws, Piles, Gout, falling-down of the Fundament,
likewise for Spots, Freckles, and Skin-deformities it makes search.

Cucumbers grow in Gardens, are under the Moon, cold and moist, good for hot
Stomachs, hot Livers, hot Rheums of the Eyes, Inflammations of the Kidneys and
Reins; they provoke Urine, cleanse Ulcers in the Bladder, cure Morphew,
Freckles, red Face, and Sun-burn.

D
Dandelion grows in Meadows and Pastures, it is under Jupiter, hot and dry; it is
cleansing, opening, good for all Obstructions of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen,
and all Diseases thence arising, as Hypochondriack Melancholy and Flatus; it
both cleanses the Urinary P^ssages and heals 'em; by taking the Decoction of
Roots and Leafs in Whitewine, the Cachexia or Consumption is cured; it
procures Rest, prevents infectious Air, and is safe to eat, or in the Spring
for Diet-drink.

Dittany of Crete, it has the Virtue of Peonyroyal, it most effectually draws
out Thorns; the smell of it drives away venomous Creatures, and kills 'em if
they touch it; the Juice applied to Wounds, or Bites of venomous Creatures, is
a present Remedy, if at the same time it is taken inwardly.

Darnel grows among Corn, and is under Saturn It is of a dry binding quality,
and stops eating Ulcers and Sores, Cancers, Leprosy, Ringworms, etc. it
dissolveth Knots or hard Tumors, if applied as a Poultice, or if you bruise it
with a little Vinegar and Salt; it helps the Sciatica, and stops a Lask, if the
Seed be boiled in red Wine and drank, likewise all Fluxes.

Dill grows in Gardens and wild, is under Mercury. It quickens the Wit and
Memory; if boiled, and the Decoction drank, it eases the Cholick, all Pains
and Windiness, the Mother, Chincough, and raw Humors, provokes the Terms, and
procures Rest.

Docks grow every where, are cold and dry in quality, and are under Jupiter.
The red Dock is good for the Liver, strengthens it, and purifies the Blood; but
the yellow is best for Choler. Sorrel is the coldest. The Seeds are good to
stay Fluxes, Diarrhoea's spitting of Blood, loathing of Food, and are the best
dryers of Itch, Scabs, Tertars, or Ringworms, being made into an Ointment or
Decoction. All Docks have this quality, that boil them with Meat, and it will
soon be boiled enough.

Devils-bit grows in Fields and Meadows, is governed by Venus. It cures
Fevers, pestilential Poisons, and Bitings of venomous Beasts; dissolves
congealed Blood through a Bruise or Fall: Decocted and drank, it cures Tumors,
Throat-swellings, drives away Fumes and Vapors of the Mother, kills Worms,
and is a very good Wound-herb.

Dodders of Thyme. Dodders are all Bindweeds on other Herbs, but that upon
Thyme is the true one, which purges Melancholy, and opens Obstructions of the
Liver, Gall, Sple^n, Hypochondriac Disury.

Dog-grass grows in Gardens, is under Jupiter, and is a great opener for the
Reins and Liver; it stays Lask and Vomiting, if boiled in Whitewine: Drink
the Decoction, for it is very opening, remedying all Diseases that proceed from
Stoppage.

Dogs-bane grows in Syria, and kills whatsoever eats it; the Leaf (...) Bread
and given to Dogs, kills 'em.

Doves-foot grows in Pasture, Garden, etc. it is under Mars, and admirable for
the Cholick, and all Cholick-pains; it is good against the Stone and Gravel in
the Kidneys: The Decoction in Whitewine is extraordinary for an inward Wound,
Gout, Ulcer, Fistula, or Rupture, and outwardly applied is good for any Pain in
the Joints.

Ducks-meat grows on the top of the Water, it is of a cold quality, and governed
by the Moon; it is good against the Gout, all Inflammations, and St. Anthony's
Fire, either of it self, or in a Poultice with Barleymeal. The Water distilled
is good for a Fever, Headache, Swelling of the Cods, and Redness of the Eyes.

Down-thistle (is prickly) grows in Ditches and Banks, it is under Mars, and is
good against Cramps and Consumptions, being of a hot quality; it is also good
against Rickets in Children.

Dragons grow in Gardens, of the color of a Snake, it is under Mars, and so
biting, that it is best to distill it in what Liquor is best for your Use. It
cleanses the Stomach, and inward parts, so it does the external parts of
Morphew, Freckles, Sun-burn, Wounds internal or external, as Cankers, Ulcers,
Polypus, Pin and Web, and clears the Sight; it is also good against Infections,
Plague, Poison, and venomous Beasts. It Is reported that no Serpent will bite
him that carries this Herb about him: With the Juice rub your Hands, then put
them into the Water, and the Tish will come to your Hand, that you may take
them. Lemery, p. 85.

Dropwort grows in Meadows and dry Ground, it is under Venus, and is powerful
upon the Secrets; it opens the Passages of Urine, cures the Strangury,
Obstructions of the Reins, breaks the S^one, Wind, and gives Breath, if the
Herb be decocted in Whitewine, or the Powder of the Root be taken with Honey,
or any convenient Syrup. It Is also good for all Diseases of the Breast and
Lungs, cuts Phlegm, cures a Cough, and all Defects of the Urine.

E
Elder-tree grows in Hedges, and is under Venus: This Shrub is of great Ver^ue
(in the Spring) to purge the Blood, mixed with other Spring-herbs. A Book of 1
s. or 1 s. 6 d. has been written only about the Virtues of this Shrub; it is
good against all Inflammations, external or internal, in Ointment: The inward
Bark cures all Burnings and Inflammations; the distilled Water of the Berries
and young Tops cures all Surfeits and Fevers. The Berries boiled with Sage
makes a pleasant Tea like Claret.

Elder (Dwarf) grows wild in Hedges, etc. it is under Venus, and a very good
Purge for the Dropsy; the Berries or inward Bark of the Root boiled in
Whitewine, and drank, works strongly by Stool and Urine. The Juice of the
Berries boiled with Honey, and dropped into the Ears, cures them of Pain; a
distilled Water of the Leaves and Berries takes away all Sun-burn, Morphew, or
Deformities of the Skin: It cleanses Blood-shot Eyes, cures the Gour by
purging, and the Stone and Cholick.

Elm-tree grows in woods or Fields, it is under Saturn, of a cold and dry
quality; the Bark and Leaves bruised and laid on Green Wounds, heals 'em: being
mixed with Vinegar, it cu^es Leprosy and Scurf; a Decoction of the Leaves and
Bark is good in Ruptures and Fractures, by applying to it wet Cloths; applied
hot with Cloths to Tumors, dissolves 'em; it cleanses the Skin of all filth,
gives Ease to the Gout, and is good for all Scalds or Burns.

Endive grows in Gardens, and is under Jupiter; the Galenists use it in cooling
Juleps against Fevers, Agues, Passions of the Heart, Sharpness of Urine,
Excoriations, Tumors, and Pestilential Sores; it is excellent for all
Inflammations of the Eyes, and dimness of Sight; applied outwardly it allays the
Pain of the Gout.

Elecampane grows in shady moist Places, it is under Mercury, very h^^ and
opening, and good for windy and cold S^omachs. The Roots preserved cure
Wheezing, Cough, opens the Spleen, cures Stitches, provokes the Terms, and
helps Concoction; the Root in powder, taken with sugar, does the same: It
prevents Infection, resists Poison, and is good for sore Eyes, loose Tooth,
kills Worms, cures the Scab or Itch, being made into an Ointment, and takes
away all Deformities of the Skin.

Eyebright grows in Meadows, is under Leo, and ruled by the Sun; it is
excellent to strengthen the Brain, by drinking the Decoction in Wine or Broth,
or distilled Water: Dropping some of it into the Eyes for several days
together, helps all Diseases of the Eyes, or dimness of Sight; it helps a
weak Brain and watery Eyes, taken any manner of way. Some boil it in clean
Water, and strain it, keep it in a Glass, and wash the Eyes with it, is good
for sore Eyes.

F
Fern grows on Heaths, and is under Mercury; the Roots boiled in Whitewine
kills all sorts of Worms, and opens Obstructions of the Spleen: The Leaves and
Roots purges the Belly of Choler and Water, but troubles the Stomach,
therefore dangerous for Women with Child. The Leaves and Roots boiled in Oil
makes a good Ointment to heal all Wounds. and to dry up malignant Ulcers; the
Smoke of Fern burnt, drives away Serpents, Knats, Flies, or any venomous Beast.
It Is observed to cause Barrenness in Women.

Fern (Water) is under Saturn, of the same nature, but more powerful; they
provoke Urine much.

Featherfew grows mostly in Gardens, etc. it is under Venus: Boiled in Whitewine
it strengthens the Womb; and frees from Birth and Afterbirth; it is good for
all Distempers of the Mother, and brings down the Courses speedily. A hot
Poultice applied to the Belly, takes away all griping Pains; it is an effectual
Remedy against Opium, if the Decoction is drank. It flowers in June and July.

Fennel grows in Gardens, and is under Mercury: It breaks Wind, the Stone and
Gravel, and provokes Urine; it increases and amends the faults of Milk, cures
the Hickup, loathing of Meat, resists poisonous things, and is good for
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, etc. It cures the Gout, yellow Jaundice,
provokes the Terms, and makes lean: The distilled Water is good for sore Eyes.
It Is excellent to boil and eat with Fish.

Fennel (Hog-) grows about Houses where Cattle frequent, and is under Mercury:
To cure the Lethargy, put the Juice into the Nose; and used with Oil and
Vinegar, it is good for the Megrim, Vertigo, Falling Sickness, Headache, Palsy,
Sciatica, Cramp, Cough and Lameness. The Decoction, drank in Wine, is good for
a Cough, Cholick-pains, and shortness of Breath; it purges gently, gives Ease
to Women that travail in Childbed, and eases Pains in the Womb, Bladder and
Reins. The Juice, mixed with Wine, eases the Toothache, cures all green Wounds,
and cleanses Ulcers, drying them up.

Figwort grows in Meadows and shady Woods, it is under Venus in Taurus, and
excellent for all Diseases in the Neck and Throat, as the King's Evil and
Squinanzy. The Herb decocted and drank in Whitewine, and the bruised Herb
applied outwardly, cures Wens, Knots, Piles, and Kernels; dries Ulcers that are
foul, and takes away Leprosies, Spots, Redness, and all Deformities.

Fig Tree grows in Gardens, and is under Jupiter; the Juice of the Leaves and
Branches are moist and hot. The Decoction cures the Head of Scurf and Leprosy,
clears the Face of Morphew, and the Body of Scabs and Ulcers: The Juice kills
Warts, and the Decoction cures the Bloody Flux, Chilblains, Deafness, and the
Toothache, dropped into the Ears, and the biting of mad Dogs or Serpents: The
Fruit is balsamic and opening, if eaten. The Decoction cleanses the Breast,
Lungs, Womb, Belly, and Sores, and cures shortness of Breath, Hoarseness,
Coughs, Dropsies, and Consumptions.

Flag (Water-) or Flower-de-luce, grows in watery Ditches; it is under the Moon,
and is very dry and cooling: The distilled Water of the Flower, Root, and Herb,
cures watery Eyes, and Blemishes of the Eyes. It Is a good Fomentation for all
Inflammations, Ulcers, Cankers, sore Mouths, and Breasts: It cures the Noli me
Tangere, and Ulcers in the Privities, by Ointment or otherwise.

Flaxweed (Toad-) grows in Meadows, Way-sides, Paths, and Banks; it is under
Mars, hot and dry: It cleanses the Reins, provokes Urine, prevents the Dropsy
in cold phlegmatic Persons; it opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
cures the yellow Jaundice, expels Poison, drives forth the dead Child and
Afterbirth, provokes the Courses, cures Inflammations of the Eyes, and Pimples
of the Face. The distilled Water cures Fistula's, Cankers, Leprosies, Itch,
Scabs, or any Spots of Deformity.

Flea^ane, there is two sorts, one grows in Gardens, the other in Fields near
the Sea; it is under Saturn, cold and dry. The Seed powdered and taken with
Conserve of Roses, stops the Bloody Flux, and corroding Humors; it also stops
the too great Violence of over-strong purging Physic, and choleric
Defluxions; the Mucilage of the Seed made with Rose Water, allays Thirst in
Fevers, cures the Gout, Headache, Megrims, Hoarseness, Agues, Sciarica, sore
Nipples, Breasts, Worms, inflamed pained Ears and Ulcers.

Flixweed grows in Fields and Way-sides, it is under Saturn, cold and dry; it is
admirable to stay Fluxes, Diarrhoea's, and Dysenteries; it stops the Terms in
Women, and joins broken Bones: Being decocted in Wine and drank, kills Worms,
heals internal Ulcers, Bruises and Wounds. Paracelsus commends it for uniting
broken Bones; it is good to make either Plaster, Ointment, or Syrup.

Flower-de-Luce grows in Gardens, and is under the Moon. A Decoction drank
with Honey or Sugar cleanses the Stomach of gross or thick Phlegm, cures the
Dropsy, Jaundice, Agues, Cholick, opens Obstructions of Liver and Spleen,
breaks the Stone, helps Convulsions, Cramps, stoppage of Urine, provokes the
Terms, cures a Cough, Headache, causes Sleep, and cures the Piles, if fomented
with it; it is a good Gargle for the Mouth, fastens loose Teeth, cures the Gout,
Ulcer, Fistula, Cancer, and Noise in the Ears, covers naked Bones with Flesh
again.

Fluellin grows in Cornfieldsd and other places, and is governed by the Moon.
It helps Fluxes, stops the Terms, heals Ulcers, cures Wounds and Cancers, is
good for watery Eyes, knits broken Bones, and cures Wounds outward or inward,
taken in Decoction or distilled.

Foxglove grows on dry sandy Ground, and under Hedges, is governed by Venus,
and is good to cure green Wounds by applying a bruised Leaf to it: The Juice
put into old Sores, speedily cures; it cleanses and heals all foul Ulcers,
opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, if boiled in Whitewine and drank.
It cures the King's Evil, scabby Heads, etc. an Ointment being made of the
Juice, none excelling. The Decoction has cured several of the Falling Sickness.

Fumitory grows in Cornfieldsd, is under Saturn, and cures all Saturnative
Distempers, being boiled in Whitewine or Whey, by it self or with Polipodium.
It is very cooling and opening for the Liver, Spleen, Reins, and Bladder,
purging the Blood and Stomach of melancholy Humor. It cures saltish choleric
Distempers that breed Scabs, Tettars, Leprosy, Itch, and Ring-worms, and
sometimes soul Ulcers. It operates by Urine, if you take the Powder of the dry
Herb, or make Tea of it. The Decoction cures Jaundice, Fevers, Plague, sore
Throat, Pimples, etc.

Furz or Gosbush grows on barren Heaths, and is under Mars. It opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen: The yellow Flower boiled in Whitewine or
Sherry cures the Jaundice, provokes Urine, cleanses the Kidneys from Stone or
Gravel and its cause.

G
Garlic grows in Gardens and Cornfieldsd, and is under Mars. It Is hot and dry
in the 3d degree, very opening to the short-breathed, good against Poison and
Infection, provokes the Terms, kills Worms, cures Lethargy, Phlegm, Vapors,
Dropsy, Cramp, Falling Sickness, etc. It Is very bad for the Brain, but
excellent against the Bite of a mad Dog, the Decoction drank 40 Days in
Whitewine, and a Clove or two bruised and laid to the place; but as soon as bit,
wash it well with Salt and Water, Vinegar, or your own Water, or Spirit of
Wine. Mr. Cole says, That Garlic, Onions, Leeks, and Lettice (nay, I believe
Cucumber too) if used in too great a quantity, are poisonous, but moderately,
are as wholesome as any.

Gentian, or Felwort, or Baldmony, (there is two sorts) under the dominion of
Mars, they both strengthen Nature against Poison and Plague, and cure biting of
mad Dogs. The Powder drank in Whitewine hinders Fainting and Swooning; taken in
Powder or Decoction, it restores a lost Appetite, opens Obstructions of the
Liver. The Herb infused in a Glass of Wine, refreshes Travelers that are cold
in their Joints through bad Lodging. It helps all inward Pain, Cramp, Bruises by
Falls, S^itch, etc. It Is not proper to give to Women with Child for diverse
Reasons: It provokes Urine, breaks the Stone, frees the Body from Ulcers,
King-Evil, Ague, and Worms. The Decoction is to be used inwardly and outwardly.
It cures also Bots in Cattle, and a venomed Udder, by washing with the
Decoction

Gillyflowers (Clove) grow in Gardens, are under Jupiter, and pretty temperate,
strengthening both the Heart and Brain, so consequently good. There are both a
Syrup and Conserve made of 'em, to be had at the Apothecaries, and taking a
little now and then strengthens much a Consumptive Person; it is good against
Fevers, and expels Poison.

Germander grows in Gardens, is under Mercury, and quickens the Apprehension
much: Taken in Decoction or Electuary, it cures Coughs, Obstructions in the
Spleen, cleanses the Reins, provokes the Terms, drives out a dead Child, cures
Agues, Poison, Ulcers, Falling Sickness, Headache, Melancholy, Palsy, Dullness
of Spirit, yellow Jaundice, Worms, and makes a good Complexion.

Gladwin (stinking) grows in high and low Ground, and sometimes in Gardens, or
by Wood-sides; it is under Saturn. The Flowers, Stalk, and Root decocted in Wine
purges Choler and Phlegm from Head and Stomach; the Juice of the Herb s^^ffed
up, causes Sneezing, so does the Powder: This Herb helps Gout, Convulsion,
Gripes, Fluxes, Strangury, provokes the Terms, opens Obstruction of Urine,
Spleen, etc. It heals Wounds, broken Bones, King's Evil, Itch, Scab, difficulty
of breathing, and cures all Skin-deformities.

Gill, see Alehoof.

Golden Rod grows in Woods and open places, is under Venus, and is excellent to
restore decayed Beauty, it is good against the Stone in the Kidneys, taken dry
or in Decoction, cures Bloody Flux; Terms and Ruptures it stops; it cures
Ulcers, sore Mouths, and fastens loose Teeth; it is also good for green Wounds
and old Sores, makes a good Gargle to wash the privy Parts or Throats of Men or
Women.

Goatsbeard (Tragapogon) boiled when young, makes a curious Dish to eat,
warming the Stomach, and restoring a lost Appetite.

Goutwort grows by Walls, Hedges, and in Gardens, is under Saturn, and is a
fovereign Remedy for all Gouts, inwardly or outwardly taken; nay, though it be
but carried about one, it prevents that painful Disease.

Gromell; there are diverse sorts in Gardens; it is under Venus, and is good
for Gravel, Stone, or Strangury, provoking Urine: The Seed is of the greatest
virtue; being bruised and put in Whitewine, Posset Drink, or Broth, and a dram
or two drank, it opens all Obstructions, and causes a speedy Delivery.

Gooseberry-bush grows in Gardens, is under Venus, the ripe Berries create an
Appetite, cool hot Stomachs, stay Longing, etc. a Decoction of the Leafs and
Fruit cool all Inflammations and St. Anthony's Fire. The Berries ripe cool the
Stomach, Liver, Reins, and sharp Urine.

Ground Ivy, see Alehoof.

Winter-Green, is a Herb that grows in Woods northward; it is under Saturn,
and is an excellent Herb for a Green Wound especially, healing it quickly by
only the green Leaf being bruised and applied. Made into an Ointment, it is very
good for Wounds. The Juice inwardly taken cures Ulcers in the Reins and Neck of
the Bladder, stops the Terms, stays all Fluxes and Loosnesses, and cures
Fistula's, etc.

Groundsel grows on Bank-sides and other places, is under Venus, and is
friendly in outward Applications. It causes Vomiting if inwardly taken, allays
Heat, Inflammations, Swellings, Imposthumes, etc. ripens Tumors, purges Choler,
cures the Jaundice, opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Reins; cures
Falling Sickness, Cholick, Sciatica, and provokes the Terms. It Is an excellent
^oultice-Herb for Women's sore Breasts or Privy Parts. A handful shred and put
in a Paper-bag pricked full of holes, about 4 inches square, and applied (being
first put into fine Sarsene^ or Linen, that it may not fall out) to the Pit of
the Stomach 2 or 3 hours before the Fit, cures Agues.

H
Hearts-ease grows in Gardens and Fields, on barren Grounds, and is under
Saturn, cold and slimy. This Herb decocted strongly, or the Herb and Flower
distilled, is a powerful Remedy for the French Pox, and such Antivenerians are
the best Cure for that Disease, much better than fluxing. The Herb is good
against Venery, and the Spirit of it is good for Convulsion-fits in Children,
Pleurisy, Falling Sickness, Scabs, Itch, Scurf, etc.

Hartichokes grow in Kitchen-gardens, are under Venus: They promote Venery, yet
are good Food, and Physic for those that are troubled with nightly Pollutions,
by stopping the Seminal Vessels; the Stalks or Roots boiled in Whitewine and
drank, cleanses the Reins wonderfully, brings away stinking Urine, and cures
the Running of the Reins.

Hart's-tongue is found in dry Ground among Trees and Bushes, is under Jupiter*
and strengthens the Liver much; it is fit to keep in Syrup ^lwaies by you. It is
good in Diet-drink against all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Reins, etc.
It cures Diarrhoea's, Dysenteries, and all immoderate Fluxes: The distilled
Water or Decoction is good against Hiccups, Belching, and Heart-passion, also
against biting of venomous Beasts, corrupted Gums, etc.

Haslenut grows in Hedges, is under Mercury; the Kernels pressed (like
Almonds) will yield a kind of Milk, which being mixed with Honey, cures an old
Cough, and Distillations from the Head. The Shells and Husks dried and
powdered, mixed with Claret, and drank, stops all Fluxes.

Hawkweed (Sowthistle) grows about Way-sides and Fields, is under Saturn, and
of a cooling quality; it takes away choleric Heat, and bilous Overflowings in
the Stomach; it cures Agues and Fevers, helps Digestion, if you drink the
Concoction in Whitewine: It cures Dropsy, Phlegm, Cholick, Obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, hinders nightly Pollution, cools the Reins, resists Poison
and stinging of Serpents; it is good for the Eyes, cures Burns, Ulcers,
Inflammations, St. Anthony's Fire, Heat, salt Phlegm, Convulsions, etc. it cures
Freekles and Morphew.

Horseradish, see Rad^shes.

Hawthorn-tree grows in Hedges, and is under Mars. The Husks are good Food for
Hogs, the Haws dried, powdered, and drank in Whitewine, are very good in the
Stone and Gravel in Reins or Bladder, and the Dropsy: The distilled Water of
the white Flowers stay Looseness or Flux of the Belly, and will draw out Thorns,
if you dip a Cloth therein, and lay to the place, or other things.

Hemlock grows in most waste places, and is under Saturn, cold and dry. It Is
very cooling, good in Inflammations, withstands Lethargy; bruised and applied to
the Privities, it cures a Priapism or involuntary erection of the Yard: It Is
very dangerous inwardly taken, but you may apply it outwardly to Tumors, St.
Anthony's Fire, etc. It gives ease to a Pin or Web in the Eye, if you mix some
of it with Bay Salt and apply it to the contrary Wrist 24 hours, and cures in
three times dressing: Also the Root roasted in Embers and applied to Hand or
Foot, cures them. And if by mistake you have eat a Root of this, your Remedy
is, to drink a draught of good Wine or Vinegar before it strike to your Heart.

Hemp grows in Fields, and is under Saturn. The Seed expels Wind; much used, it
drys up Nature; boiled in Milk, it cures a hot and dry Cough; it opens
Obstructions, cures the Jaundice, Gout, Inflammations, Worms, Lask, etc. and
makes Hens lay all Winter.

Henbane grows under Walls, in Ditches, Dunghills, etc. and is under Saturn.
It powerfully resists Heat, Inflammations in the Eyes or in any other part, used
either in Decoction, Seed, or Juice: It asswages Inflammations in Women's Breasts
or Men's Cods, and the Gout: Oil of the Seed helps Pain in the Ears or Deafness.
A Decoction of the Herb kills Lice, cures the Toothach, cools the Reins in the
French Pox, and heals Chilblains or kibed Heels. It is not to be taken
inwardly, being poisonous, but outwardly used by distilled Water, Juice,
Decoction, Plaster, Ointment, or Oil: Smoked in Tobacco, it cures the
Toothach. The Juice mixed with the Hares Blood. sewed in a Hare's Skin, and
buried, will draw all the Hares that way. Lemery's Curiosities, p. 83.

Hedge-Hyssop, they grow by Water-sides and in wet Ground, are under Mars, and
violent Purgers of Choler and Phlegm, unless well corrected, then they are good
against Dropsy, Gout, Sciatica, etc. Outwardly applied to the Navel, they kill
Worms, and are excellent good for Ulcers and old Sores.

Hellebore (black) grows in Gardens, wet Grounds and Woods, is under Saturn,
and by simpathy cures Melancholy; by purging it cures Madness and a Quartan
Ague, the Falling Sickness, black Jaundice and yellow, the Gout, Leprosy,
Convulsions, and provokes the Terms. The English sort is much milder than that
which is brought from abroad; the Farriers use it much. It is naturally of a
poisonous quality, therefore to be corrected; 20 grains inwardly taken is
sufficient for one time, but let that be corrected with half so much Cinnamon.
Some rowel Cattle by boring a hole in their Ear, and putting a bit of the Root
therein, which cures 'em in 24 hours if they are poisoned. The Root powdered
and made up with Honey and Wheat-flour, kills Rats and Mice. The white does the
same. White Hellebore and sweet Marjoram, of each a like quantity, powdered and
snuffed up the Nose, cures Pain in the Head, if it proceed from a cold Cause.
Use it with a Physician's Advice.

Herb-Robert grows by Way-sides in Banks, and is under Venus. It Is good to
break the Stone and Gravel, stops the Terms and Bleeding, heals all green
Wounds and Ulcers in the Privities or elsewhere.

Herb True-love grows in Woods and corners of Cornfieldsd, is under Saturn,
and expels Poison, prevents Plague and Infection, cures Fevers, Cholick,
Witchcraft, Wounds, Ulcers, Swelling of Cods, etc. by taking a dram of the Root
or Berry powdered every day in Wine or Posset Drink: It also caseth the
Cholick, and the Leaf cures green Wounds.

Hyssop grows in Gardens, is under Jupiter, but hot and dry in the 3d degree:
It is very opening, and good against a Cough, Wheasing, Short-breath, gross
Humors, Jaundice, Dropsy, etc. It opens Obstructions, is good for sore Throats,
Quinzay, Toothache, Noise in the Ears, and Falling Sickness. The Oil cures
Itching, kills Lice, and is excellent in a Consumption, taken either in
distilled Water, Decoction, Oil, or Powder.

Hops grow in low Grounds, mostly under Mars, are very opening, cleanse the
Blood, Spleen, Liver, and Reins from Stone or Gravel, and provoke Urine. A
Decoction helps Scab, Itch, Tettar, and other ails, provokes the Terms, cures
yellow Jaundice and bad Complexion. Beer is more opening than Ale, but as Ale
is sweet, it is consequently more nourishing and fattening. Young Hop-tops are
very good boiled.

Horehound grows in high Ground, is governed by Mercury, very opening: If
decocted when dry, or the Juice of the green Herb mixed with Honey, it is a
Remedy for Wheasing or Short-breath, or a Consumption through long Sickness; it
resists Poison, provokes the Terms, is good against Venom of Beasts, Jaundice,
Ulcers, etc. but excellent to strengthen the Liver, and in Distempers
asthmatical.

Horse-tail grows in wet Ground, is under Saturn, cold, dry, and binding. The
smooth is the best sort; it is very powerful in stopping of Blood, either inward
or outward, by drinking the Juice, Decoction, or distilled Water; it stops the
Lask or Flux, the Terms, pissing of Blood, internal Ulcers, Excoriation of the
Bladder, Stone, Wounds, Ruptures, Strangury, Cough, Inflammations, Pimples, red
Face, and all Breakings-out, Ulcers of the Privities of Man or Woman; it soon
conglutinateth the Lips of Green-wounds.

Hous^leek grows on Houses or Walls, is under Jupiter, cooling and full of
Juice, so good for Heats inward or outward, in Face, Eyes or elsewhere: You may
make a Posset and strain the Juice into it. Some say it preserves the House
from Fire. It cures Agues, being drank, all hot defluxions of sharp salt
Humors in the Bowels, and immoderate flux of the Terms: It allayeth
Inflammations, helps Scalds, Burns, Shingles, eating and fretting Ulcers,
helps Headache and heat of the Brain: In Deliriums for want of Sleep, being
applied to the Forehead and Temples, it is excellent: The Leaf bruised and laid
on the crown of the Head, stops Nose-bleeding; and if you rub any place s^^^ng
with Nettle or Be, it speedily cures it.

Hounds-tongue grows on Highway-sides and under Hedges, is governed by
Mercury, and is good for all Defluxions of Rheums on the Lungs or Stomach, Eyes
or Teeth: The Root is used in Pills; the Juice boiled in Hogs-lard is good to
anoint the Head and preserve the Hair from shedding; it cures shortness of
Breath, Scalds, Piles, Ulcers, Wounds, etc. it stops Humors from coming into
Sores. Mizaldus says, that put into your Shoes, no Dog will bark at you.

Holly-tree grows in Heaths and Gardens, and is under Saturn. The Berries are
chiefly physical, and expel Wind greatly, ten or twelve of 'em eat ripe: They
purge the Body from Phlegm or S^ime, being eat fresh gathered; but dried and
powdered, they bind, and stop all Fluxes. A Decoction of the Bark and Leaf is
good to cement broken Bones and Dislocations. Some say the Branches defend any
House from Witchcraft.

I
S. John's Wort grows in Meadows and Pastures, the Leafs are full of small
holes, and it is under the Sun and Leo. This is a most excellent Herb for
Wounds, if you boil it in Whitewine and drink it, or make an Oil or Ointment of
it, or a Bath or Lotion; it is very effectual in Bruises or Wounds, and
strengthens feeble Members, cures Blood-spitting, biting of Serpents, Stone,
Stoppage of Urine, Gout, Ague, Sciatica, Palsy, Falling Sickness, etc. By often
drinking the Seed in powder, it purges Choler, bruised or congealed Blood in
the Stomach, and Blood-vomiting.

Ivy grows on old Stone-walls, it is under Saturn: The Flower boiled in Claret,
stops the Bloody Flux; The Berries taken powdered cure the Jaundice, Spitting
of Blood, prevent Drunkenness, or any Plague, Infection, etc. Drink the Berry
powdered in Whitewine, it cures the Stone, opens Obstructions, provokes the
Terms and Urine, easing Headache, Spleen, Vapors, and Stitch, by heating the
Leaves in Wine, and applying them to your Side or Head. The Leaf boiled cures
Ulcers, Wounds, Burns, Scalds, sore Eyes, and is an excellent Remedy for a
Surfeit, if you take the Decoction in the same Liquor you surfeited of.

Juniper grows in Woods and Copses, is under the Sun, hot in the third, dry
in the first degree. It is an excellent Antidote against all Infections,
resisting the Plague and venomous Beasts, opens the Urinary Passage and
Stomach, curing shortness of Breath, Dropsy, Consumption, Convulsion, Pain in
the Belly and Side, Rupture, gives speedy Delivery, strengthens the Memory,
clears the Sight, comforts the Brain, cures Gout, Scurvy, Leprosy, Scab, Itch,
and Piles; all this, and more, it performs by taking the Berries powdered in
Wine. You may use the Decoction of the Berries for outward application.

K
Kidney-wort grows on Stone and Mud-walls, is under Venus and Libra, and is
good to cure Inflammation and preternatural Heat, to refresh a hot Liver or
languishing Stomach and Bowels, if you drink the Juice or distilled Water. The
Herb applied outwardly heals scorbutic Spots, red Faces, Pimples, and
Inflammations; it takes away Sciatica, Gout, Exulceration of Reins or Kidneys.
The Decoction is a good Bath for Stone-pain and other inward Evils, as swelled
God. Neck, or Throat, King's Evil, etc. either in Ointment or otherwise.

Knapweed grows in Meadows and Fields, in under Saturn, dry and cold. It Is
powerful in stopping Fluxes, bleeding at Nose or Mouth, stays defluxion of
sharp thin Humors on Stomach or Lungs, cures Bruises by Falls, the Phthisick,
Sores, Cankers, Fistula's, sore Throat, scabby Head, Quinzay; and this it does
by drinking the Herb boiled in Whitewine, and applying it to the place, either
by Decoction, Fomentation, or Ointment.

Knottgrass grows by Paths and Highways, is under Saturn, cold, dry, and
binding. It stops Fluxes of the Blood, the Juice being drank, cures
Inflammation, Gangrene, Aposthume, Fistula, Ulcer, Canker, Wounds, all Sores in
the Privities of Men or Women, the Stone and Gravel, Stoppage of Urine, and
Running of the Reins.

L
Ladies-Mantle is found by Wood-sides and in Pastures; it is an Herb of Venus,
allays Heat and Inflammation, stopping Fluxes, Vomiting, Reds and Whites in
Women or Maids, helps Ruptures, makes flagging Breasts round and plump, the
Decoction or distilled Water drank, and the Herb outwardly applied; it also
helps Conception, and prevents Miscarriage: It is one of the best of
Wound-herbs, if you wash 'em with the Decoction and drink it: It mightily
dries up ill Humors, stops a Flux, and cures old Sores.

Ladies-Thistle eat young makes an excellent Sallad that purges the Blood, if
boiled.

Lavender grows in Gardens, hot and dry in the 3d degree, and is under Mercury.
A most powerful Herb it is, influencing the Brain with Heat, strengthening the
Memory, curing Pains of the Head that proceed from a cold Cause, and all
Diseases that arise thence, all Convulsions, Apoplexies, Palsies, and
Falling Sickness; it fortifies the Stomach, freeth Liver and Spleen from
Obstructions, provokes the Courses, and cures beating of the Heart, taken
either outwardly or in Decoction. Lavender and Rosemary made into Tea, and 15
or 20 drops of Sal Volatile and Spirit of Har^shorn (each alike) put into half
a pint of this Tea, so drank Morning, Noon, and Night, thins and cleanses the
Blood; so does Oystershells powdered and drank in Old Hock.

Lavender-Cotton is a Garden-herb, and under Mercury; it is much of the nature
of other Lavender, resisting Poison and corrupt Humors, the biting of venomous
Beasts, cures Running of the Reins, Whites, etc. The Seed kills Worms in Belly
or Stomach. By bathing with this Herb you may cure Scab or Itch.

Ladies-smock grows near water-sides or moist places, are under the Moon, and
are much of the nature and efficacy of Watercresses, are good for the Stone and
Scurvy, cause good Digestion, and strengthen the Stomach.

Lettuce grows in Gardens, much used in Sallads, and is under the Moon, cold
and moist. It alays Heat and Choler of the Stomach, cools the Blood, Spirits
and Brain, quench Thirst, cure the Headache, increase Milk, abate Lust, etc. but
is hurtful for those whose Lungs are ulcerated, spit Blood, are short-winded or
very cold stomach'd.

Leeks in Pottage is nourishing Food, good against Obstructions of the Ureters,
Short-windedness, etc.

Lilly, there are three sorts, Lilly of the Valey, Water-Lilly, and
White-Lilly: The Lilly of the Valey is under Mercury, the other two are under
the Moon. Water Lillies cool Inflammations, heat of Agues, both outwardly and
inwardly used, help ailments of the Head; the Root and Seed stop fluxes of
Blood or Humors, either of the Womb or Wounds, stay Running of the Reins, and
hinder Venery: The Decoction being drank in Wine or Water, cures Freckles,
Morphew and Sunburn in the Face. The Distillation is likewise good for all the
Distempers above.

Lillies of the Valey strengthen the Memory, cure all Inflammations, Pin or Web
in the Eyes, also the Palsy, Apoplexy, Gout, and loss of Speech. The Leaf-dry'd
and snuffed up, cleanses the Head.

Lillies (White) resist Poison, cure Fevers, Infections, Pestilence, scald
Heads, Ulcers, Burns, and Scalds. It is good for all the beforementioned
Distempers, if used either in Decoction, Juice, distilled Water, or in Ointment.

Liquorice grows in Fields and Gardens, (the best grows in England) is under
Mercury, and is good against a consumptive Cough, boiled with other things or
by itself: It cures shortness of Breath, Pthsick, Hoarseness, and all Diseases
of the Breast, Lungs and Reins; it is good against the Stone and Gravel, heals
Ulcers, Strangury, and Heat of Urine. The Powder blown into the Eye, is good
for Pin, Web, or Distillation. Spanish Liquorice steeped in Water and drank
quenches Thirst, and the Powder put into a Glass of Water, makes it resemble
brown Ale.

Liverwort grows on the Ground flat, and among Water; it is under Jupiter and
Cancer, and is good for all Diseases of the Liver, cleansing and cooling it. It
cures the yellow Jaundice, is used in Diet-drink to cool the Reins, and help
the Running thereof; also female Diseases it wonderfully helps, and Tettars,
Itch, Ringworms, etc.

Loose-strife or Willow-herb grows by Water-sides, and in moist Ground, is
under the Moon, and is excellent for Wounds, stops Bleeding in any part, cures
the Bloody and all Fluxes, being drank by Decoction. It cures sore Mouths by
gargling, also Sores in Privities. In Fenny Countries they burn it, to kill
Vermin.

Love-age is a Garden-plant, and grows large, it is under the Sun in Taurus,
hot in the 3d, dry in the 2d degree. It Is a great opener and digester,
powerfully provokes the Terms and Urine. If you take half a dram of the Root
powdered in Whitewine, it heats a cold Stomach, helps Digestion, eases Gripes,
Cholick, and Wind, resists Poison, Infection, and the Plague, cures Agues,
Quinzay, sore Throats, if you gargle the Decoction; it also helps Pleurisy.
The Juice dropped into the Eye, helps the Sight and Redness: Spots or Freekles it
cures, if you wash with it.

Lungwort grows on Oak-trees, is under Jupiter, and cures a Cough, Shortness
of Breath, Wheasing. If boiled in Wine or Water, it cures Ulcers of Mouth,
Throat, and Privities of both Sexes.

M
Madder grows in Gardens and Fields ('it is used by Dyers) and is under Mars.
It is of an opening nature, leaving a strengthening quality behind. It opens
all Obstructions of Spleen, Gall, Liver, Reins, or Womb. It Is excellent to cure
yellow Jaundice or black, Palsy, Gout, Melancholy, etc. also Bruises inward
and outward, if you boil and drink it in Water or Wine: The Fume is good for
Women to sit over that want their Terms; it likewise clears the Skin of all
Spots or Morphew.

Maidenhair; there are two sorts, white and golden, and grow on Stone-walls,
both under Mercury, but temperate, and much used in pectoral Decoctions,
helping old Coughs, shortness of Breath, yellow Jaundice, provoke the Terms and
Urine, loosen the Belly, stay Fluxes and Bleeding, strengthen the Liver,
purify the Blood, and stop falling off the Hair, the Head being washed with
the Decoction.

Marshmallows grow in salt Marshes, the common grow in all Fields, are under
Venus, and open the Bowels and Reins; being boiled in Broth or otherwise, are
good in all Diseases of Urine, Reins, and Bladder, hot Agues, Gripes, Cholick,
Pleurisy, Excoriation, Phthisick, Falling Sickness; helps Women to easy
Travail, taken either in Juice, Syrup, Decoction or Ointment: It is good
against stinging of Bees or Wasps, Poison, Inflammation, Sores, St. Anthony's
Fire, Roughness of the Skin, and Baldness, if used in Decoction or Ointment.
It Is good against Cramp, King's Evil, Convulsions, Chincough, Sunburn, Bruises,
and all Pain and Aches. A Person I know troubled with the Cholick drinks it in
Watergruel every Morning, and finds it beneficial.

Maple-tree grows in Fields, and is under Jupiter. A Decoction of the Leaf
and Bark strengthens the Liver and Spleen, opening their Obstructions, purifies
the Blood, and cures sharp Pleuretick Pain in the Sides, and the Cholick.

Marjoram, both sorts grow in Gardens, are under Mercury. The Sweet is very
good for the Head, and to comfort the Brain; taken any way, it strengthens the
Stomach, opens Obstructions of Liver and Spleen. Both sorts cure the Dropsy,
Cholick, Jaundice, Scurvy, and all cold Afflictions, such as Convulsion, Palsy,
Deafness, if drank in Tea, distilled Water, or Juice; the Powder is good Snuff;
chewed, it draws Phlegm.

Marigolds grow in Gardens, are under the Sun, and the Flowers strengthen the
Heart, resist Plague, Fevers, Measles, Smallpox, Swellings, and Inflammations,
being much used, are good in Plasters, and so is the Water for all the Ails
afore-mentioned.

Maudlin grows in Gardens, it is under Jupiter, and strengthens the Liver,
resists Corruption, purifies the Blood, much the same with Costmary.

Masterwort grows in Gardens, is under Mars, hot and dry in the 3d degree. The
Root is good in cold ailments of the Stomach, preventing Rheums if boiled in
Whitewine, curing Phthisick, Fits of the Mother, Dropsy, Falling Sickness,
Green-wounds, Gout, Ulcers, putrified Sores, etc. causes Sweat, resists
Poison, provokes Urine and the Courses, and expels a dead Child.

Medlar-tree grows in Orchards, is under Saturn, cold, dry, and binding. When
the Fruit is rotten it strengthens the retentive Faculty, slays all Fluxes in
Men, Women, or Children; the Leaves boiled do the same. The Fruit eat by
breeding Women, stays their longing, and prevents Miscarriage. A Decoction of
the Fruit and Leaves are good for a Woman to sit over who is troubled with too
much flooding; also hot applied to the Stomach, it prevents Vomiting or
Loathing. The Stones powdered and drank in Whitewine, break and expel Stone and
Gravel.

Melilot grows in Fields, is under the Sun, and is useful in a Poultice, Oil,
Ointment, Plaster, Fomentation, etc. mollifying hard Tumors, Swellings, and
Inflammations: Applied outwardly to any grieved Part, it gives Ease: It hinders
eating Ulcers spreading. Its Flowers and Camomile are much of the same Nature,
and are used in Glysters to expel Wind: The Juice dropped in the Eye, takes away
Films, clearing the Eyesight. The Decoction drank, preserves from the Apoplexy,
and cures Palsy and Falling Sickness.

Mint grows in Gardens, and is under Venus, hot and dry in the 3d degree. It
strengthens the Stomach, stays Vomiting and Hiccup, resists-Poyson, is good in
Stone, Gravel, Spleen, etc. makes a sweet Breath, and expels Wind.

Misseltoe is under the Sun, hot and dry, of a very penetrating nature both
Leaf and Berry; the Turpentine of it is excellent to soften hard Tumors and
Imposthumes; and if either be hung about the Neck, it cures Witchcraft. The
Berries are good for Diseases of the Head, cause sneezing, and make Birdlime.

Moneywort grows in moist Ground, is under Venus, and is dry and binding, so
good to stay all Fluxes in Men or Women, Lask, bleeding at Nose, Ulcers, etc.
taken inwardly or outwardly.

Moonwort grows in dry Ground, where much Grass is; it is under the Moon, cold,
dry, and binding; the Decoction stops Fluxes of Blood, Terms, and Vomiting,
heals broken Bones, green Wounds, etc. Some say this Herb will open Locks,
unshoe Horses, with many suchlike Tricks.

Moss; there are several sorts, all under Saturn, of a dry binding quality.
Oak-moss is most binding, it stops Fluxes, Vomiting, Bleeding, and cures
Headache and Dropsy.

Motherwort grows in rich Ground and Gardens, is under Venus, and makes a
cheerful Countenance; there is none better to drive out Vapors and
Hypochondriack Melancholy; it settles the Womb after Labor, curing Trembling
and Swooning, if the Decoction be drank in Wine some time. A dram of the Powder
drank in Wine causes speedy Labor, provokes Urine and the Terms, cures Cramp,
cleanses the Stomach of Phlegm, and may be used in Syrup or Conserve. It
kills Worms.

Mouse-ear grows in Ditches and Banks, is under the Moon, and the Juice or
Decoction drank cures the Jaundice, Gripes, Stone, Phthisick, Dropsy,
Bloodyflux, Ruptures, Gout, Cankers, and any spreading Sore or Ulcer.

Mugwort grows in Fields and Highways, is under Venus, and is good for Women's
Obstructions, provokes Birth, and breaks the Stone, if they sit over the
Decoction. If taken in Wine or Syrup, it cures the King's Evil, Sciatica, Cramp,
and Weariness.

Mullein grows in Lanes and Highway-sides, is sharp, and whitish or
woolly-leaf'd, is under Saturn, and opens the Stomach, Womb and Reins much, yet
it stops Lask and Flux. A Decoction gargled heals the Toothach.

Mulberry-tree grows in Gardens or Orchards, and is under Mercury. The Fruit
is cooling and opening if ripe, the unripe binding, especially if dried and
powdered, it stays Lasks and Women's Courses, Bleeding, Sore Throat and Mouth,
Piles, and Toothach.

Mustard grows in Gardens and Cornfieldsd, hot and dry in the 3d degree, and
is under Mars. It Is excellent for cold Stomachs and cold Diseases, and as bad
for the hot and choleric; it resists Poison, and strengthens the Heart; it is
excellent for the Falling Sickness, Lethargy, Sneezing, and prevents an Ague,
Sciatica, stoppage of Urine, Toothach, Bruises, Morphew; by gargling it
preserves the Palate, Palsy of the Tongue: By steeping it in Ale and drinking
it, the Louzy-Evil and Dropsy are cured.

The Hedge-Mustard grows in Hedges, is under Mars, and is much of the same
Nature, but reckoned more powerful in Diseases of the Breast and Lungs.

Nailwort grows in gravelly places and Stone-walls, and is under Venus, being
used chiefly for Diseases of the Fingers and Nails, as Whitloes, Feloas,
Imposthumes, Wheals, etc.

Nepmint grows in Gardens, is under Venus; being hot, it provokes the Terms,
if drank in Wine or other things: The Juice drank in Wine is good for a Cold,
Bruise, Short-breath, Cramp, and Vertigo; it drys up Scabs if taken in
Decoction.

Nettles grow in most places, are under Mars, and the young Tops boiled in
Broth cleanse the Stomach, Blood, and Reins of gross phlegmatic Humors; they
are excellent for Wheasing, Short-breath, Pleurisy, stoppage of Urine, Gravel,
and Stone, provoke Terms, resist Poison of mad Dogs or Serpents. The Seed drank
in Wine cures Leprosy, Poison of Henbane, Nightshade, etc. Bleeding is stopped
by smelling to the Herb. A Decoction cures Ulcers, Itch, Scab, Sciatica, etc.
laying stinging-Nettles to Arm or pained places Morning and Night. It Is good
against Rheumatick Pains. The Seed put among a Horse's Food 'twill fatten him.

Nightshade grows under Walls, is under Saturn, and is excellent to cool
Inflammations of the Eyes, the Shingles, Ringworms, Gout, immoderate Fluxes,
etc. if made into an Oil, or if made into Ointment. It Is not to be taken
inwardly, because it is poisonous.

O
Oak-tree grows in Woods and Fields, is under Jupiter, dry and binding. The
Bark, Leafs, and Cups, either decocted, distilled, or powdered, stops Fluxes,
Blood-spitting, Vomiting, shedding Seed, and heals Ulcers. The Cups powdered
and taken in Wine, provoke Urine, break the Stone, heals Sores, etc. The Water
found in a hollow Oak is very good in Ulcers and spreading Sores.

Oats, being fried with Bay Salt and laid to the Side, cures Stitches and other
Pains. The Meal is often used in Poultices to cure Leprosy, Fistula in the
Fundament, Imposthumes, dissolve hard Tumors, and take from the Face Freckles
and Spots.

One-blade grows in shady places, is under the Sun, and is good against Plague
or Poison, also for Wounds. The Root taken in Wine and Vinegar, of each half a
dram, and sweating after it, defends the Heart, etc.

Onions grow in Gardens, are under Mars, hot and dry in the 3d degree, but very
attractive and drawing; being bruised and applied, they cure a Burn or Scald. A
large Onion being steeped in Whitewine all Night and drank, gives present Ease
in the Stone.

Orpine grows in Gardens, Fields, and Woods; is under the Moon, and good in
all Wounds, Excoriation of the Bowels, Fluxes, Inflammations, Ruptures, Scalds,
Burns, etc. the Decoction being drank, or made into Oil, Poultice, or Ointment.

P
Parsley grows in Gardens, is under Mercury, hot and opening; it strengthens
the Stomach, provokes Urine, opens all Obstructions of Liver and Spleen,
dissolves Stone and Gravel, resists Poison, cures Cholick, Jaundice, Dropsy,
Gripes, etc. by taking the Seed in Wine. There is a wild Parsley, which has
much the same Nature and Virtues.

Parsnip (Garden and Wild) is under Venus, and is a great nourisher, but windy,
and creates Seed, provokes Urine, cleanses the Reins, for which the wild is
best, expels Wind in the Bowels or Stomach, and provokes Urine. The Seed is
more efficacious than the Root.

Pellitory of Spain grows in Gardens, is under Mercury, and is one of the best
Purgers of the Brain that is: An ounce of the Juice taken in Muskadel an hour
before an Ague comes, drives it away assuredly at the second or third taking.
The Herb or Root chewed, or the Juice snufft, cures Pain in Gums or Teeth, and
hinders Distillation on the Lungs; it is good in a Lethargy, Falling Sickness,
Gout, Sciatica, etc.

Peach-tree grows in Gardens, is under Venus, and is of a cooling quality.
The Flower and Leaf made into a Syrup, is a very good Purge for Children and
such as have the Jaundice: The Flowers powdered and strewn on Wounds, stops
Bleeding; laid to the Belly, it kills Worms; the Kernels of Peach-stones eases
Cholick and Gripes.

Pear Tree grows in Orchards, is under Venus, and the Fruit loosens the Belly.
The four are cooling and binding, and if bruised and applied to a green Wound,
they cure it.

Pease are excellent Food, but windy. When about a hand high, clip the green
Stalks and boil 'em, they eat well, and in Milk they eat like Pease-pottage.

Pepperwort grows in Fields, is under Mars, and is good for a Gout in the
Joints, Sciatica, etc. The Juice drank in Whitewine procures speedy Delivery.

Periwinkle grows in Orchard and Woods, is under Venus, and causes Love if a
Man and Woman eat it together: If decocted in Wine and drank, it stops
Bloody Flux and Terms, for it is very binding.

S. Peter's Wort grows in Woods, is a Plant of the Sun, and of the Nature and
Virtue of S. John's Wort.

Pimpernel grows in Meadows, and among Corn, is under the Sun, and will draw
Thorns out of Flesh, and cleanse the place.

Pine (Ground-) grows in Fields, is under Mars, but rarely found in England.
The Decoction in Wine is good for the Strangury, it opens Obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen, or Courses, expels the dead Child and Afterbirth, cures the
Poison of venomous Beasts, Gout, Dropsy, Ulcers, and old Coughs, by Decoction,
Syrup, or distilled Water. It Is dangerous for Women with Child.

Plantane grows in Highways, is under Venus, and is cold and dry in the 2d
degree. It Is good to stay Fluxes, Blood-spitting, green Wounds, Consumption,
Phthisick, Ulcerated Lungs, Dropsy, Falling Sickness, Bites of mad Dogs, and
drink it. Drank in Tea several Mornings, it is good against the Plague.

Pellitory of the Wall grows by Fields and on Walls, is under Mercury, and if
decocted in Whitewine, it cures the Stone, and is good for an old Cough, and
shortness of Breath. The Juice provokes Urine, eases Pain in the Back and
Sides, heals Scab and Ulcer, and cures the Gout.

Peony-royal grows in Gardens, but under Venus, and is very hot. It cutteth
Phlegm, disperses gross Humors, warms a cold Stomach, opens Obstructions of
Reins and Liver, provokes the Terms, brings forth the dead Child and
Afterbirth, helps the Gout, keeps from fainting and vomiting; it cures Cramp,
Dropsy, Jaundice, Pain of the Head, if you drink the distilled Water or the
Decoction in Tea; wrap the fresh Leaf in a Cloth and lay in a Bed, it drives
away Fleas. A Tea made of it, sweetened with Honey, is excellent for the
Phthisick and a Cold.

Peony grows in Gardens, and is under the Sun. There are two sorts, male and
female; the male is proper for Men, the other for Women. The Root is very good
against Falling Sickness, Convulsions, Fits of the Mother, Nightmare, or
melancholy Dreams, if taken powdered in Sack, Whitewine, Blackcherry Water, or
a Syrup made of the Flowers.

Plumbs grow in Orchards, and are under Venus: There are several sorts, the
sour are cold, the sweet hot and loosening: To dry Rheums and heal Ulcers the
Leafs make a good Gargle for the Mouth.

Polipody of the Oak grows on stumps of the Tree, is under Saturn, but what
grows upon the Tree is best. It purges Melancholy, cures Quartan Agues,
Cholick, Spleen, Cough, Polipus, weakness of Lungs. The Root beat small, cures
Chaps in Finger or Toe.

Poplar-tree grows in moist Woods, is under Saturn, both sorts. The white
cures the Sciatica, if the Powder of the Bark be drank in Wine; and the Juice
of the Leaf dropped in the Eye, clears the Sight. The black is more cooling. A
Juice that drops from the hollow of this Tree cures Warts and Itch. The
Ointment called Populeon is good against Inflammations.

Poppy grows in Gardens and wild among Corn, is under the Moon, and is of a
cold nature, hindering hot Rheums from distilling on the Lungs, cause Sleep,
cures Hoarsness, Surfeit, Falling Sickness, and Pleurisy: Outwardly applied,
it cures Inflammations.

Purslain grows in Gardens, is an Herb of the Moon, and is very cooling in hot
Distempers to quench a Thirst: It stops all Fluxes, Vomiting, and Cough; it
cures Ulcers in the Privities, Redness of the Eyes, St. Authony's Fire, Burns
and Scalds, fastens Teeth, and cures both Gout and Cramp.

Primroses grow in Fields, are under the Moon, and inwardly or outwardly taken,
are good for Wounds.

Pri^et grows in Woods, is under the Moon, and is good to wash s^re Mouths and
Eyes, Inflammations, and any part afflicted with Heat.

Quince-tree grows in Orchards, is under Satur^, and of a binding quality; it
creates an Appetite, stays Fluxes and Vomiting; it cures Poison, Choler, and
Plague-sores, being eat, or in Syrup.

R
Radishes grow in Gardens, are under Mars, hot and dry in the 3d degree, but
are rather for Sauce than Nourishment; the Tops boiled young, eat like Spinach.
They provoke Urine, and the Rhine scraped and steeped in Whitewine, is good
against Gravel and Stone.

Radish (Horse-) grows in Gardens, and is under Mars. The Juice opens the
Stomach, is good against Worms, Scurvy, Gravel, Stone, and Gout, provokes the
Terms and Urine, and whets the Appetite.

Ragwort grows in Pastures, is under Venus, and is a great cleanser and
digester. The Decoction cures Ulcers and sore Mouths, if washed therewith: The
Juice is good for the same.

Rape, boiled and eat young with Bacon, is whol^some and pleasant Food.

Rattle-grass (two kinds, red and yellow) grows in Woods, is under the Moon,
and is good in Fistula's and Ulcers, is binding, and stays Courses, being
decocted in Red-wine. The yellow is good against a Cough; if injected into the
Eye, draws out Films.

Restharrow grows in plowed Land, is under Mars, and very opening; it helps
stoppage of Urine, the Stone and Gravel, also a Rupture. Boiled in Vinegar, it
cures Toothach, Ulcers, and opens Obstructions.

Rocket (Winter-) is under Mars, grows in Gardens, and is seldom eat alone, in
regard it fumeth into the Head, and causes Ach and Pain: It exciteth Lust,
helps Digestion, provokes Urine, cures Bites of venomous Beasts. Used
outwardly, it clears the Face. This and Lettuce together is good for the Heart,
Liver, and Brain.

Roses white, red, and damask; the red are under Jupiter, the damask under
Venus, and the while under the Moon. The Juice when fresh gathered purges
Choler; but the damask are most purging, and the white and red most cooling,
binding, and drying. Being dried, they are excellent Cordials, especially the
red, and are good for Headache, inflamed Eyes, Blood-spitting, Heat, the Terms
in Women, and Overflowings in Men: All which, and more, is effected by the
Decoction, Water, Conserve, or Syrup.

Rosa Solis or Sun-dew grows in moist places, is under the Sun, and is
excellent to prevent and cure Consumptions, therefore commonly distilled in
Spirit of Wine with other Ingredients. It helps shortness of Breath, Rheums,
Ulcers of the Lungs, Palpitation of the Heart, and cheers it.

Rosemary grows in Gardens, is under the Sun, and is excellent for cold Rheum
distilling from the Head, by drying it up and strengthening the Brain and
Stomach: it is prevalent against Passion, Falling Sickness, Toothach, weak
Memory, dimn Sight, stinking Breath, Plague, Jaundice, Deafness, Cold, Cough,
and Consumption; it matches any thing.

Rhuharb grows in Gardens, is under Mars, and not inferior to that of China.
There are three sorts, all wholesome in Physic, and very safely purge
Melancholy and Phlegm, leaving a binding quality, for that reason reckoned good
in a Flux; it purifies the Blood, cures Ulcers, Jaundice, Stoppage of Urine,
King's Evil, Dropsy, Gout, and Swelling in the Head.

Rue, both sorts grow in Gardens, are under the Sun, and are excellent against
the Plague, Poison, and Cholick, provoke Urine and Courses, cure Agues, abates
Venery, etc. Stamped and applied, it helps swelled Testicles, Pain of the
Stomach or Fars, Pimples, Ulcers of Head or Nose, and makes lean.

Rushes grow in Fields, are under Saturn, but cold, dry, and binding: They stay
Flux and Whites, cause Sleep, and ease Headache, but are so little valued for
Physic, that they are -- Not worth a Rush.

Rye in under Venus, is more physical than Wheat, and the Bread or Leaven of it
breaks Imposthumes, Swellings or Boils in any part of the Body.

S
Saffron grows in Fields, is under the Sun, and is one of the best Cordials in
the World. It resists all Infections, strengthens the Heart, is good against
Poison and bad Air, if a little be given in Wine, Milk, Ale, or Beer; much is
hurtful, because of its great heat: It helps breathing, quickens the Brain,
cures Consumption, Measles, Smallpox, and Jaundice. The Roots of all Crocus's
are of the nature of Hermodactyls, that is, the Roots of Saffron; it purges
Phlegm.

Satirian grows in Meadows, but there are diverse sorts, it is under Venus, hot
and moist: The Root s^ir^ up Lust; if they are put in Water, those that sink
are good, but those that swim bad. If bruised and laid to the King's Evil, it
helps.

Sage grows in Gardens, is under Jupiter, and resists the malignity of any
Food eaten with it, purifieth the Blood, drys up phlegmatic Humors, and is
good for the Liver. Decocted, it provokes Urine; it ^leanseth Ulcers and Sores,
helps Conception, hinders Miscarriage, prevents Blood-spitting, Headache,
Lethargy, Palsy, Hoarsness, Cough, Flux, and biting of venomous Creatures.
Wood-Sage is of the same virtue, but is chiefly use in Decoction for the French
Pox.

Sassafras, see Ague-tree.

Solomon's Seal grows in Woods and other places, it is good in all Wounds, old
Sores or Bruises, inward or outwardly taken; it helps Fluxes, Bleeding, Running
of the Reins, cures broken Bones or Dislocations in man or Beast, and
beautifies the Face.

Sea-holly grows about the Seacoast, is under Venus, and increases Seed much,
being of a hot and moist nature. The Root boiled in Whitewine opens
Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, and cures yellow Jaundice, Cholick, Dropsy,
French Pox, Stone, King's Evil, Agues, etc.

Samphire grows on Rocks, is under Jupiter, and expels Urine, Gravel, Stone,
and opens Obstructions of Liver and Spleen.

Sanicle grows in shady places, is under Venus, and is a good Wound-herb; it
cures Imposthumes, Ulcerous Sores, inward Bleeding, Running of the Reins,
Sores in the Privities, stops the Terms, Lask, and Fluxes.

Saracens Woundwort grows by Woods and wet Ground, is under Saturn, and
cures yellow Jaundice, Dropsy, Obstructions inward Wounds, Ulcers of the
Kidneys, old Sores, Agues, a sore Mouth, and Sores in the Privities.

Savine grows in Gardens, is under Mars, and kills Worms, provokes the Terms,
and destroys the Fruit of the Womb. If dried and powdered, and mixed with Honey,
it cures Fistula's, Plague-sores, Carbuncles, King's Evil, Ringworms, Tettars,
Cankers, and Venereal Sores.

Savory grows in Gardens, is under Mercury, and is good for Cholick and Iliack
Passion; it provokes the Terms and Urine, helps dimn Sight and Lethargy, Noise
in the Ears, Gout, Palsy, and venomous Bites, if taken by Decoction, or
otherwise.

Saxifrage (there is two sorts) grows in Meadows, is under the Moon, and very
hot, causing Urine: They cleanse the Reins of Gravel and Stone, Cough and
Phlegm, opening the Stomach; they resist Poison, cure Convulsions, Cramps, etc.
Being decocted in Ale or Wine, and that dropped into Wounds, cures them.

Scabious grows in Fields and Meadows, is under Mercury, (there are three
sorts) and a good Herb for Consumptions, helping Coughs, inward Ulcers,
Imposthumes, Pleurisy, Sores, Itch, Scabs of all sorts, Freckles, Wounds,
Stitch.

Scurvy Grass grows in Gardens, is under Jupiter, and cures the Scurvy and
gross Humors, opens Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, creates a good
Appetite, helps Digestion, is good for a sore Mouth, Spots, Ulcers, Deformities
of the Skin, makes a good Complexion, and an excellent Diet-drink.

Self-heal grows in Fields, is under Venus, and heals any Cut or Wound,
Ulcers, Bruises, sore Privities or Mouths, if you use the Juice to the Wound,
and drink the Decoction.

Sellary eat in Sallad warms the Stomach; boiled in Gruel, it helps a short
Breath.

Service-tree grows in Orchards, is under Saturn, and rotten-ripe it stops
Fluxes, bleeding at the Nose, Vomiting, or Wounds; but Medlars are more
powerful.

Shepherds-purse grows on Bank-sides, etc. is under Saturn, and of a cold,
dry, binding quality; It helps spitting of Blood, stops Fluxes of the Belly
and pissing of Blood, cures the Jaundice, Noise in the Ears, provokes the
Terms, and is excellent for any Wound in the Head.

Smallage grows in watery Grounds, is under Mercury, and is more opening and
hot than Parsley. It cures the Jaundice, provokes Urine and the Terms, helps
Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, cures Ulcers, Ague, sore Throat, Cankerworm,
and a stinking Breath, either Herb or Root. It makes a Pottage or Gruel that
cleanses the Blood, opens Obstructions, and eat twice a Day, it is an effectual
Remedy against a Consumption.

Sopewort grows in Fields, is under Venus, and if outwardly applied, it cures
all Wounds; inwardly, it provokes Urine and the Terms, cures the French Pox,
and expels Gravel and Stone.

Spinach boiled is excellent Sauce; and eaten with Meat, or alone, it is
laxative, breeds good Blood, opens Obstructions. This and Buds of Colworts, or
this and the tops of Mint and Balm, boiled and eat with Butter, Salt, and
Bread, is excellent Food; or eat with Endive and young Parsley.

Sorrel is under Venus, grows in Fields and Gardens, and is very cooling,
allaying Fevers and Inflammations, creates an Appetite, heals Ulcers, resists
Pestilence and Plague. Wood Sorrel is singular good in Fevers and Wounds, and
is more cordial than the other. It stays Bleeding, all Defluxions, etc. and the
Syrup is excellent.

Spurge, it is poisonous, being a violent Purger. Read Cole's Adam in Eden for
using it.

Strawberries grow in Fields and Gardens, are under Venus, but cooling, and
open choleric Stomachs, quench Thirst, provoke Urine, stay Vomiting. The Leaf
and Root is good in Whey or Water, they cool the Blood and Reins, cure the
Jaundice, Ulcers, sore Mouth, pimpled Faces, and inflamed Eyes.

Succory, or Chichory, grows in Gardens and Fields, boiled in Wine or Water,
it purges the Stomach of phlegmatic and choleric Humors, cures the yellow
Jaundice, Ague, Dropsy, Passion of the Heart, Inflammation, St. Anthony's Fire,
and opens Obstructions: The distilled Water is good for sore Eyes; the Leaf
bruised allays Inflammation and Swelling. The wild Succory is bitterest, and for
the Liver most effectual.

Stonecrop grows on Stone-walls, and is under Mars. It stops Bleeding applied
to any Part. Being taken inwardly by Decoction or Juice, it vomits and purges
strongly; it cures Knots and Nodes, Agues, Pestilential Fevers, and King's Evil.

Southernwood grows in Gardens, is under Mercury, and cures the Stone, Spleen,
Vapors, French Pox, Baldness, sore Privities, Wheals, Ulcers, inflamed Eyes,
red Faces, Ague, Poison, Ruptures, Sciatica, Convulsions; and by Decoction,
Short-breath and Asthma, beating it well, and mixing it with Sugarcandy, in
Cakes as big as a Half-crown, eating a few now and then.

Sowthistle, when young, is a good Sallad raw or boiled; it grows by Walls,
Bank-sides, etc. It Is an Herb of Venus, and is good to help Pains and to cool a
hot Stomach. The Milk squeezed out of the Sta^k is good against Short-breath
and Wheasing; if drank in Wine, it cures a stinking Breath, Gravel and S one.
It causes speedy Labor to Women, if 2 or 3 spoonfuls of the Juice be drank
with Oil and Wine.

Spignel grows in Gardens wild, is under Venus; the Roots are bad for the
Headache, if too much be taken, but provoke Urine and the Courses. It cutteth
Phlegm, helps Pain of the Stomach, and is good for Poison of venoumous Beasts.

Spleenwort grows upon the Ground about Stonewalls, and is under Saturn. The
Root and Herb being boiled, helps the Spleen, yellow Jaundice, Hiccup, and
Running of the Reins; but if used by Women, it hinders Conception. it cures
the Stone, and all Melancholy Diseases.

Starthistle grows common, is under Mars, and the Seed powdered and drank in
Wine break the Stone, help Plague, French Pox, and Strangury: It cures Agues,
and opens all Obstructions.

Staves-acre (cold in the 4th degree) powdered and mixed with fresh Butter or
Oil, kills Lice, Nits, and Itch. The Seed kills Bats, and held in the Mouth
it expels Rheum and helps the Toothach. It Is dangerous to take inwardly.

T
Tamarisk-tree grows in Gardens, is under Saturn, and cures Blood-spitting,
stops the Courses, is good against the Jaundice, Poison, Dropsy, Scabs, French
Pox, Ulcers, sore Eyes or Ears, by boiling the Branches in Wine or Vinegar, and
applying it.

Tansie grows in Gardens and elsewhere, is under Venus, but very opening; it
cleanses the Blood, Bladder, Womb, and helps all Diseases of the Reins, Cramp,
Stomach-worm, etc. either in Decoction or fried. The wild stops a Bloody Flux,
Lask, Terms, provokes Urine; the distilled Water takes away Deformity of the
Face, making the Skin white.

Taragon is excellent good eat with Lettuce raw or boiled, and is good for the
Heart, Liver, and weakness of the Brain.

Tobacco is under Mars, it is good for the Phlegmatic, and bad for the
Choleric to smoke: It brings away Phlegm by either smoking or chewing it: It
helps Pains in the Bowels, the Stone, stoppage of Urine, and Agues. Made into
an Ointment, it heals Wounds, Sores, Ulcers, Scab, Cankers, Imposthumes, and
kills Lice. I am told, that Sage mixed with it prevents its hurting the Eyes,
and some smoke Betony and Coltsfoot with it. Likewise put 10 or 12 drops of Oil
of Aniseeds into a Box of Tobacco, and smoke a Pipe now and then, cures a
Rheumatism. Dr. Vener prescribes to correct the fulsom Vapor, the Root of
Sasafras or Lign Aloes, for the one comforts the Brain and Sinews, the other the
Heart and Spirits, a grain of either in the midst of a Pipe full. Also to mix
with 8 or 10 Pipefuls one drop of Oil of Rosemary, is good for a cold moist
Brain. A certain Author makes it a Panacea for all Diseases, but Dr. Vener
says, Had he restrained it to Wounds, Scabs, Ulcers, etc. it had been well. A
little (either Leaf or cut) put into the Nostrils, purges the Head and Brain
well, and is excellent for that purpose: The Ashes cleanse the Gums, and the
Herb bruised and applied, help the King's Evil, and Bites of venomous Beasts.
It Is also good to smoke in time of Plague; but to prevent and cure that,
there is excellent Receipts in Hartman's Preservative against all Diseases, and
in a Book called A Thousand Notable Things, two Books worth minding.

Thistles grow common, are under Mars, and boiled in Wine they cure stinking
Urine, and help the bad Smell of the Armpits. The Cotton-thistle being large,
helps Cricks in the Neck, and is good to eat.

Teasell, or Fullers-Thistle, grows wild and in Gardens, is under Venus, and
cures Cankers, Fistula's, Warts, Worms in the Ear, and Face, etc. Chaps being
washed with the Decoction, cures 'em. Cloth-dressers use it much.

Treacle, Mustard, and Mithridate Herbs of Mars, grow by Hedges and
River-sides, which being used in Glysters help the Sciatica, purge upward and
downward, cause Abortion, resist Poison, therefore good in Mithridate and
Treacle, used in some Cases instead of Mustard.

Thorn (Black-) grows in Hedges, is under Saturn, cold, dry, and binding. The
Sloes make Garles for the Mouth, the Leaves stay Bleeding, Flux, and the
Courses. Sloes boiled, and the Juice squeezed from them and put in Cider,
gives it a color and rough taste like Claret, and may be as wholesome.

Thorow-wax (or Thorow-leaf) grows in Cornfields and Pastures, is under
Saturn, and is good for Wounds, Bruises, Ulcers, Ruptures, inward or outward,
the Decoction drank in Wine or Water, or the Powder taken inwardly, or the
Leafs bruised and applied.

Thyme grows in Gardens, is under Venus, and is a noble strengthener of the
Brain: Nor can a better Medicine be given Children for a Chincough: It Is good
to kill Worms, for short Breath, against Phlegm, and to provoke Urine or Terms:
It causes easy Delivery to Women in travail, cures Swellings, Sciatica, Gout,
and swelled Privities, if you eat the Herb, or drink the Decoction.

Mother of Thyme does the same, and strengthens both Head and Stomach, and
likewise helps Vomiting.

Tormentile grows in Woods and shady places, is under the Sun, and both Root
and Herb is excellent to stay Bleeding, Flux, and Terms; they allay Heat in
Fevers, Pestilence, Plague, and Smallpox. The Decoction drank in Wine, or
Powder of the Root, is good against Purples, Poison, etc. it opens Obstructions
of the Spleen, Liver, and Lungs, cures yellow Jaundice, Gout, Toothach,
Ruptures, scabby Heads, and helps Abortion. The Root boiled in three pints of
Water, with Loaf sugar in it, till it is reduced to a quart, and a pint of
Claret put to it, so drank, is good for the Piles inward or outward; so is
Yarrow-Tea sweetened with Loaf-sugar, and drank. Tormentile clears the Sight,
though almost blind. See A thousand Notable Things.

Turnsole grows in Gardens, and is under the Sun. Decocted in Water and
drank, it purges both Choler and Phlegm, breaks the Stone, opens the Urinary
Passage, cures Gouts, Warts Wens, etc. only by applying the Herb outwardly
bruised with Salt.

Turnips are good for Consumptions, and the Tops (when boiled young) are good
to eat.

Tutsan grows in woody Ground, is under Saturn, and is good against Venery,
purges Choleric Humors, cures the Gout, Ulcers, Wounds, Sciatica, etc. If
inwardly taken by drinking, or outwardly by bathing, washing, or Ointment, it
heals Wounds.

V
Valerian grows in Gardens, is under Mercury, and mightily provokes Urine.
The Decoction drank, helps Strangury, moves the Terms, cures Pain in the
Sides, helps Cough, Wind-Cholick, Pestilence, Pin or Web in the Eye, Headache,
Wounds, and draws out Thorns.

Vervain grows by Way-sides and Hedges: It bot^ strengthens the Womb and open
Obstructions, cur^^ venomous Bitings, Jaundice, Plague, and Agues; (...)
kills Worms, cures Dropsy, Gout, Cholick, and is good for phrentick People.
Drink it ^oil'd in Wine, (...) cures Gravel and Stone; it heals Ulcers, Wounds
and Fistula's, and strengthens the Brain and Optic Nerves, if anointed with
it. This, Agrimony, and Plantane, each an equal quantity, bruised and boiled in
Whitewine, and a good quantity drank in a Morning, (or bruised with Bay Salt
and applied) cures all Creatures bitten by mad Dogs, which if bit at Full-Moon,
fall mad at New; and if at New Mood, fall mad at Full.

Vines grow in Gardens, etc. are under Jupiter, and its Fruit cheers the Heart:
The Leaves boiled, make a good Mouth-water; the Ashes of the Branch burnt makes
Teeth white; the Juice or Tears drank, br^ak the Stone.

Violets grow in Gardens and wild, are under Venus, but very cooling and
harmless; they abate In^^^^^tions. The Syrup or Decoction of Root, Leaf, and
Flower purge the Blood, Reins, Bladder, Matrix; (...) Outwardly applied as a
Poultice, it helps Headache, abates Swellings and Imposthumes: Inwardly taken,
they open Obstructions of the Liver, cure Jaundice, hot Agues, and make a good
Gargle for Mouth and Throat.

W
Wall-flowers grow on Walls, are under the Moen, and are good in Gouts, Palsy,
Apoplexy, Pains in the Joints. The Flower decocted, infused, or made into a
Syrup, opens Obstructions of Liver or Spleen, provokes Terms, and brings away
Afterbirth.

Walnut-tree grows in Orchards and Fields, is a Plant of the Sun, and the
Fruit, Leaf, and Bark is and Antidote against Poison, but best before the Shell
begins to harden: They are naturally binding, but kill Worms, cure Inflammations
of the Throat, biting of venomous Beasts. If bruised with Onions, Salt, and
Honey, they cure Carbuncles, stop Fluxes, etc. A preserved Walnut is good
against Plague or Infection, if taken in a Morning fasting. The Oil of the of
Kernel cures Deafness, if put into the Ear.

Wart-Cichory, either eat in Sallads, or laid on the Wart, cures 'em to
admiration.

Would (Dyers-weed) grows in wet places, is under Mercury. Being decocted, it
cures Phlegm and gross Humors, dissolves hard Swellings, cures Bites from
venomous Beasts, kills Worms, and resists Infection.

Wheat growth in Fields, is under Venus, and if you press an Oil out, it cures
Tettars, Ringworms, Chapt Hands, Ulcers, etc. The Flower boiled in Vinegar and
made a Poultice of, cures the Rickets and Joint-Evil.

Willow-tree grows by Water-sides, is under the Moon, and the Seed, Bark, and
Leaves stay bleeding, spitting of Blood, and Bloody flux. The Decoction drank
in Wine, cures Cholick-pains, Vomiting, heat of Lust; and the Eyes being washed
therewith, cures dimn Sight.

Woad grows in Fields, etc. is under Saturn, and is cold, drying, and binding:
It stops Bleeding, and softens a hard Spleen, Inflammations or Ulcers in any
Part.

Wolfsbane being poisonous inwardly taken, forbear its Use.

Woodbind grows in Hedges, is under Mercury, and is good for the Lungs against
Asthmatical Diseases, very cleansing, and opening Obstructions, provokes Urine
and the Terms, causes speedy Delivery, provided you drink the Decoction of the
Flowers or Leaves. The Ointment cures Freckles, Palsy, Cramp, and Convulstons.

Wormwood grows in Fields and other places, is under Mars, and is hot and
dry: It purifieth the Blood, creates a Stomach, helps Digestion, Surfeits, and
yellow Jaundice; cures all biting of venomous Beasts, Poison of Mushrooms, and
kills Worms. The Use hereof preserves the Body in health; drank cold in Purl,
it does not hurt the Eyes, but is good for the Piles.

Y
Yew-tree grows in Churchyards, is venomous, and the Fume kills Mice. Some
say the Berries fatten Fowl. The Juice helps biting of Vipers; the Wood
rasp'd and drank, helps biting of mad Dogs: It Is counted Poison inwardly taken.

Yarrow grows in Pastures, is under Venus, and put up the Nose, it makes you
sneeze, your Nose to run, so consequently good against the Vertigo. An Ointment
of it is good in green Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's, etc. especially such as
abound with moisture: It cures Inflammations. The Decoction drank cures the
Bloody Flux; being chewed, it helps the Toothache, Running of the Reins, and
Whites in Women. It Is excellent for the Piles, drank in Tea sweetened with
Loaf-sugar, so is Tormentile.

Zedoary grows in Fields, etc. is under Mars, hot and dry in the 2d degree:
It expels Wind, good against Poison and Infection, it stays Vomiting, stops
Fluxes and Terms, kills Worms, and is used in Antidotes against the Plague. You
may take the Root powdered (half a dram) in Wine, Ale, Tea, Posset Drink, or as
you like best.

The Art of Herb-gathering.
GO into the Field, you will find growing by Walls and Hedge-sides frequently
Cinquefoil, Hounds-tongue, Flaxweed, Jack-by-th'-hedge, Knotgrass, Mugwort,
Shepherds-purse, Vervain, wild Tansie, wild Orage. In Closes you will find
Bedstraw, wild Carrots, Dandelion, Daisies, Earthnuts, Knapweed, Ragwort,
Scabious, Trefoil, Yarrow. Among Corn you will find Bluebottles, Cow-parsnip,
Corn-marigold, Fumitory, Bindweed, Mayweed, Pimpernel, Poppies, Restharrow,
Sowthistle. In Woods you find Agrimony, Milk-wort, Cistus, St. John's Wort,
Ladies-mantle, Moonwort, Mouse-ear, Tormentile, Satyrions, Sorrel, Wood-Betony,
Wood-Spurge, etc. In Meadows you will find Burnet-Coxcomb, Lousewort,
March-Marigolds, Moniworth, Meadsweet, Meadow-Rhubarb, etc. In Bogs you will find
Butterwort, Buckbeans, Cottongrass, Valerian, Horsemint, Horse-tail,
Peonygrass. On Banks of a River you will see the great Valerian, Sneeswort,
Comfry, Watercresses, Allheal, the great Dock, Waterhemp, Flower-de-Luce,
Willow-weed, Water-Betony, Cast your Eye toward the Water, therein you will find
Water-lilly, Frogbit, Water-Milfoil, Burweed, Calthrops, Water-Plantane,
Water-Parsly, Arrowhead, all sorts of Flag Bulrushes. And by Ditches you will
find Ducksmeat, Water-Crowfoot, Brooklime, Water-parsnip, Watercresses,
Water-Horehound, Horsemint, Water-Scorpiongrass. Near Town lift up your Eyes to
the Walls, and there you will see Maidenhair, Whitlowgrass, Wall-Bugloss,
Polipody, Wallflowers, Rocket, Pellitory. Then look toward House-tops, and
you will perceive Singreen or Housleek, Stonecrop, Herb-Robert.

And now you cannot but say I have named a great many Herbs, but then say you,
To what Purpose? Why, you must observe, Herbs in their proper Places have the
greatest Virtues, though perhaps they may be found in other Places too; and you
find, that though some may grown in diverse places, yet others are so confined
that they cannot be brought into a Garden: Some of those which grow in the
Water will not easily be persuaded to grow any where else; so it is with those
that delight in dry places.

To make Tea's or Gruels.
Look into your Herbal, you will find the Virtue of the Herbs you intend to make
Tea, for all Distempers.

You may make your Tea's or Gruels stronger or weaker, according to the
quantity of the Herb you put into your Liquor. Sage-Tea is good for the Head,
Memory, Eyes, and Palsy, and several other things. Read Evelyn on Sallads, p.
61. Rosemary-Tea is good for the Memory, Sight, Nerves, and Head.
Scurvygrass-Tea is good for the Scurvy. Sweet-Marjoram, Limon-Thyme,
Ground Ivy, Mint, Peonyroyal, Marigolds, Betony, with diverse others. See their
Virtues in this Hearbal.

Herbs Names from their Resemblance, etc.
Arrow-head, is an Herb like the Head of a barbed Arrow; Scurvygrass is called
Spoonwort, the Leaf represents the shape of a Spoon; Dandelion is like a Lyon's
Tooth; Plantain is called Rib-wort, because every Leaf has five Strings like
Ribs; Swordflag resembles a Sword; Crowfoot, the Foot of a Crow; Teazel or
Venus-bason, a Basin; Goatsbeard or Tragapogon, is like a Goat's Beard;
Twablade has two Leafs; Trefoil, three Leafs; Herb-Paris has four; Cinquefoil
has five; Heptaphillon, because 7 Leafs; Butterbur feels as if melted Butter
had been poured on it; Sundew has a Dew upon it in the hottest weather;
Saw-wort, its Leafs are nicked like a Saw; Butterbur, because Butter is wrapped
therein; Leadwort has Leafs the color of L^ad; Housleek, from growing on
Houses: Bugloss is like an Ox's Tongue: Some Leafs have Sand about 'em always,
as Mercury and Orage; the Leafs of all sorts of Scabious break with small
things like Hairs in the middle, and so you may know it from Knapweed, which is
like it: Pimpernel Leaves are spotted underneath; St. John's Wort and St.
Peters-wort, held to the Light, has holes like a Sieve; Leaves of Rhubarb,
Burdock, etc. are large and round; Docks are like Tobacco; Elecampane Leafs are
long, large, and few; Thyme, Rue, Asparagus, Sprigwell, Fennel, etc. have many
small Leafs; Leafs of Orpine, Aloes, and Housleek are thick and oily; Stonecrop
Leaves are long and round, like Rosemary; some Leafs are indented, as Radish,
Vervain, Dandelion; some less indented, as Maudlin, Alheal, Tansie, Sneeswort;
Arsmart rough and spotted; Comfrey and Teazel are rough Leafs; Bearsbreech and
Mandrake are smooth and glib: Burnet smells like a Cucumber; stinking Orage
like Old Ling; Crosswort smells like Honey; Willow-weed like coddled Apples;
Pasque-flower, Gentian or Felwort being squeezed and smelt to, will bite the
Nose; Coriander smells strong, so does Smallage, Rue, Hemlock, Henbane;
stinking Gladwin tastes like Roast-Beef; Pignuts taste like other Nuts;
Vine-Leafs taste like Sorrel, so does Barbary-bush; Rocket tastes like Milk
burnt-to; Cuckowpint has a biting taste, so has Spearwort, Aloes,
Lavender-cotton, and the lesser Centaury; Cresses, Garden-Ginger, and Terragon
have a biting taste, but pleasant; Seaweed, Scurvygrass, and Samphire taste
salt; Mirabolans and Fennelseed are sweet before ripe, but afterward taste
spicey; Tamarinds, Barberries, Crabs and Sloes have a pleasant sharp taste;
Euphorbium, Celandine, Sowthistle, Spinach, old Lettuce, Figs from the Tree,
are bitter. There is a Wormwood so like Lavender, that it can be known from it
only by the smell and taste.

Select Remedies against the Plague, and any Venom or Poison.
The King of Poland's Preservative against the Plague.
TAke of the best Vinegar six quarts, Juice of Celandine clarified nine pints,
Leaves and Roots of Avens, Roots of Elecampane, of each one ounce; Roots of
Angelica, Zedoary, Juniper Berries, of each two ounces; Sage one handful:
Digest this two days in a gentle heat, then strain it and keep it in Bottles
clean and stopped.

This is a powerful Remedy, both for preserving from and curing the Plague, and
other ^^^^gnant Fevers: It also clears the Sight to a wonder, by taking a
little Glass of it in the Morning fasting.

It Is recorded, That no Person who drank this in the great Plague in 1592, was
infected with it, but was preserved from it and all other Diseases.

Another great Preservative against the Plague.
Take Sage, Elder-leaves, Rubus Idens, Rue, Rosemary, Wood Sorrel, of each half
a handful; stamp 'em together in a Stone Mortar, then put 'em in a Stone
Pitcher or other suchlike Vessel, and pou^ upon them a pint of good Whitewine,
and a pint of Vinegar; let it infuse 24 hours, then strain it, and add to the
strained Liquor half a pint of Angelica-water; then dissolve in it Mithridate
and Venice-Treacle, of each one dram. Take of this Liquor one spoonful in the
Morning, another at Night, and you shall be preserved. If you fear you have
taken any Infection, take two or three spoonfuls of it, and go to Bed and sweat
if possible.

The great Preservative which Sir Kenelm Digby bid me prepare for his Family in
the great Plague at London in 1665, was thus:
Take a pound of the Leaves of Wood Sorrel, bruise 'em by themselves very well;
then take three pound of fine Sugar powdered, and mix these together, keeping
it sti^ring and beating for three hours; then get four ounces of Mithridate or
London-Treacle; pound 'em all together for half an hour longer, then put it up
in Gallipots, and tie it up close with a Bladder, Leather, or Paper.

In time of Infection take the quantity of a large Nutmeg every Morning
fasting: and if you have taken any Infection, or if you find your self struck
with any Disease at Heart, or Pain in the Stomach, take almost as much more,
and get to Bed and sweat for an hour. Of this I took my self, and went up and
down the City every day in the Plague-time, and yet through GOD's Blessing was
preserved, so was all that took it. But to preserve in time of Infection, Sir
Kenelm says it is good to eat some tops of Rue with Bread and Butter, and a
little very old strong Cheese, in a Morning, and drink a Glass of
Stomach-water, Claret, or Wine and Water after it.

An excellent Perfume for a House in time of Infection.
Take Talk, reduce it to powder, and mix it with Vinegar, so burn it in a
Fireshovel of Coals, and your House will (by GOD's Assistance) be preserved
from Infection.

Another Perfume.
Take Roots of Angelica dried and powdered, then mix the same with Vinegar, and
let it sleep therein three or four days, so drop it on a hot Brick every
Morning and Night.

In Holland, Germany, etc. in time of Infection they burn Juniper Berries in a
Chafingdish or a Fireshovel of Coals, and go into every Room with it. If the
Berries be bruised and mixed with Vinegar, so burnt, 'twill be more effectual.

The Lady Allen's Plague-water.
Take Rue, Agrimony, Wormwood, Celandine Sage, Balm, Mugwort, Dragons,
Pimpernel, Marigolds, Fetherfeu, Burnet, Sorrel, Scabious, Wood-betony, brown
Mayweed, Avens, Tormentile, Carduus Benedictus, of each one handful, Rosemary
two handfuls; Angelica and Burdocks each one handful: Shred all these together
very small, then steep 'em in the best Whitewine, as much as will cover the
Herbs; then slice in four ounces of Elecampane-root: Let all these steep three
Days and Nights, stirring them every 12 hours. Cover the Tub close when you
distill it; lay it not above an inch thick in the bottom. Save the first
Running by it self.

The London Plague-Water.
Take Roots of Angelica, Masterwort, Butterbur, Peony-roots, of each four
ounces; Vipergrass, Virginia Snakeroot, each one ounce; Leafs of Rue, Rosemary,
Balm, Carduus Benedictus, Scordium, Marigo^d with the Flowers, Dragon,
Goatsrue, Mint, of each two handfuls: Shred the Herbs, cut the Roots, and stamp
them a little, and infuse 'em for two days in six quarts of Nants Brandy; then
put thereto six quarts of fair Water, so distill it in an Alembeck, drawing
from it two gallons, which put up in Bottles, and hang two drams of Saffron in
it tied up in a Rag: Or make the Tincture of two drams of Saffron with the
first running, and mix that with the rest of your Water. To every quart of this
Water put two ounces of fine Sugar.

This is excellent against the Plague and all malignant Distempers, as
Smallpox, Measles, s^o^ted and purple Fevers, etc. The Dose is from one ^unce
to two, in Angelica or Sage-water, sweetened with S^rup of Clovegilliflowers,

Dr. Bruges's Antidote against the Plague.
Take Sage and Rue each one handful, shred and stamp 'em, then boil 'em in
three pints of Malms^y till a pint be consumed; then strain and set it over the
Fire again, putting into it a Pennyworth of long Pepper, Ginger half an ounce,
of Nutmegs and Cloves each two drams: Beat 'em all together, and let them boil
a walm or two; then put into it an ounce of Mithridate, half an ounce of
Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of hot Angelica water.

Take of this a spoonful at a time every Morning during the Contagion; and if
infected before, take two spoonfuls and sweat upon it. Under GOD, you may
depend upon this sovereign Antidote, for none that used it timely did ever find
it fail. It Is likewise good in the Smallpox, Measles, or any malignant Fever.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Experiment to draw forth a Swelling or Plague Sore.
Take a Cock-Chicken, pull the Rump bare, and hold it close to the Sore till
the Venom is drawn out, for then the Chicken will die; but you must apply a
fresh one till the Chicken lives, and that will not be till all the Venom is
out.

An approved Remedy for the Biting of mad Dogs, either in Man or Beast.
Take a handful of Rue, shred and stamp it, one diam of Treacle, and a spoonful
of the shavings or filings of Tin; put all these into a quart of Ale, and boil
it till half be consumed, then strain it, and give the Patient thereof two
spoonfuls at Morning and Night.

Another.
Take rusty Bacon, stamp it well with Betony and Agrimony, each alike quantity,
and apply to the Bite.

A most excellent Remedy for Bitings of mad Dogs, Vipers, Serpents, or Snakes,
experienced by a famous Surgeon.
Take of the lesser Consolida or Larkspur, Chervil, the white ends of Leeks,
the tops of Broom, of each two handfuls, a little new Cream off the Morning
Milk, and a good handful of Salt: Stamp them together in a Stone Mortar, and
with the Juice rub the Part grieved, which will be hard in the Flesh, and
sometimes black, then lay it on the Part as a Poultice and tie it fast on with
a Bandage; the Swelling in a short time will abate, and a Cure succeed. Sir
Kenelm Digby says, That the same Surgeon cured some with this Remedy when
other Chirurgions would have cut off an Arm or Leg bit by venomous Beasts; and
that, among the rest, he cured a Man in Sir Kenelm's presence, whose Arm was as
black as Ink, by being bitten by a Serpent.

Against Venom or Poison.
Take Seeds of Sage, bruise and boil them in Goats Milk, what quantity you
please, till it is wasted to a third part: Drink thereof three days, and you
will find it a sovereign and effectual Remedy.

For biting of a Serpent or venomons Creature.
Drink the Juice of Plantane, and stamp that and Celandine together, each like
quantity; temper them with Urine (the staler the better) and apply to the Sore;
'twill assuage the Swelling, and draw out the Venom. Also anoint the place with
the Oil of Shell-snails, being pricked with a Needle, and lay thereto a Snail
unprick'd.

FINIS.

