ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCES.
AMONGST some sayings of a Wise Man, one of his best was, that the Life of a
Life was a good Conscience: This may be good Counsel to our fellow subjects of
England, at this time, in this Apostate Age, whereas nothing, but a present
Finition is acceptable, upon no certainty; but great uncertainties, both of
death, sudden changes, and alterations. This address, and faithful advice, is
out of affection, and zeal, for the honor and happiness of the English Nation,
which is as near and dear to a true wel-wisher to his Country, as his nearest
relations; all sufferings to a clear English heart in redemption of it, would
be like a fair hot sun shining day, in the end of Harvest: For only excremental
creatures, proceed, and dissolve in the like nature: But man that is chiefly
born to serve God, his King, and Country (upon the principles of Virtue,
Justice, and true Religion, according to revealed knowledge) has a duty of
injunction laid upon him. The blot upon our Nation, must needs trouble all
English hearts: The deception under the Mask of Reliligion, which is now
thoroughly unmasked, ought, and must command much Repentance: The Design of
some of our Northern neighbors (with the conspiracy of some of our Country
men) to pull down, one Ecclesiastical Government (for their own interest)
before another was put into a method, for the settlement of Church Government,
has justly brought this confusion upon themselves in Scotland, and on us in
England; and do not we see, how God has worn our in their own actions, and
blasted many of the Plotters of our alterations in England; although in Justice
from Heaven we must look, upon our sins, the Nations sins, and the three
Kingdoms sins, to be the moving cause from God, so to punish us: For is there
any evil in the City, and God has not done it, Amos the 3. chap. and 6. ve.
that is the evil of punishment which we all justly deserve: Has not God
punished the Irish nation, now almost extirpated for that horrid Massacre,
Murder and Rebellion, in that Kingdom of Ireland, palliating their wickedness
under a counterfeit Commission and connivance from the last King, whose
innocence was most traitorously abused in it, as was confessed, by Sir Philemon
Oneal, before his execution, in presence of diverse worthy and noble persons now
living, who can testify it upon their voluntary or required Oaths: The Kings
Broad Seal being taken off from a Letters Patents for a grant of lands, and put
to a forged and counterfeit Commission: And concerning those papers taken out
of Mr. Secretary Windebants study, and put by the Parliaments order into the
custody of one Mr. Willingham, a Citizen of London, some years since dead, a
noble Lord, and a Citizen of London, sent his Majesty word, that if any of
those papers, concerning Ireland, or any other of them, might do his Majesty
prejudice, (some persons of the Parliament intending to lay a charge against
his Majesty about them) such a course was, and should be taken for their
conveyance away (if his Majesty would have it) that they should never see light
more: But the King sent that noble Lord word, and that Citizen (who acted the
business with Mr, Willingham) that he thanked them for their love and care of
him; but for any knowledge that he had, or had given order in, or for that
business or massacre of Ireland, he defied the Devil and all his Imps, or any
body else about it, but if any of his servants had done amiss, they must answer
for their own faults, and this will be testified upon Oath before God and Man.
And to confirm his Majesty's clearness in that business of Ireland, you see his
enemies could not lay the least imputation against his Majesty in it, although
they wanted neither Will nor Malice. For Scotland, how has God punished that
Nation, for the innocent blood and cruelties they have acted amongst
themselves, for their perjury and falseness, for the breach of their public
and national Faith, and agreement with the King, made solemnly in the
Parliament of Scotland 1641. after full satisfaction given by the King in that
Parliament, for that Church and kingdom, and by invading England again with an
Army, contrary to their former Faith and Agreement, upon the surruptions
making, wresting, and breaking their solemn League ad Covenant, construing part
of it to serve their own sense and ends, and not taking the whole scope, sense,
and Articles of it together, (in which Covenant the English Independents
outwitted them) they supposing upon the interest of that Covenant to have
overswayed the Parliament, made London their own in affection and interest, and
so to have obtained the power of all England, but with what success has God
yet blessed that Covenant, being illegally entered into, at the first, although
much, and not all, the contents thereof is good: The Covenant Makers, being the
Covenant Breakers, who declared a public promise to have the Kings approbation
and confirmation of it, which was deferred, until they had a Sword to enforce
and compel it, not a Christian like way to settle Religion, which otherwise
should be by a Synod of Reformed Divines, legally called: And for delivering
their King to the English Independents, when the Plot was visibly seen, for the
destruction of King and Parliament, upon the Compact and Agreement for
receiving 200000 pounds sterling, for their Army, when the King came to their
Army, then at Newark for a Sanctuary (a Blot in Marble) whereas if they had
kept the King, and not delivered him until they had treated with the King and
Parliament of England, and London, so much longed for, and desired, the King,
Parliament, and kingdoms had been settled upon the Bases of Justice, Truth and
Righteousness, with a firm and lasting Peace, and a Religious and Civil
Reformation, of all former errors, and although they had the public faith of
the Parliament of England, for a Treaty with his Majesty, and both Kingdoms
upon their delivering the King, yet they could not but well understand, by their
Commissioners, who had lived long in England, at the cost and charge of
England, that the Independent Faction, grew so strong in the English
Parliament, and Army, which were no friends, to the King, that it could not be
safe, for his Majesty, to be in that custody at Holmby, which was rather in the
power of the Army than Parliament (as it proved too sadly afterward) the Army
being molded, contrary to the first Judgment of Parliament; where as if the
King had been delivered, unto the protection of his subjects in London, there
was then a visible power, and foundation, to guard his Majesty, from the
design of Oliver Cromwell, whose design was well perceived by many at that
time. And when the Scots had divested themselves of the King, by delivering his
Majestey over: and Oliver Cromwell was acting that unparralleld death, which
could not but be well known, (to the grand Committee of Parliament, sitting then
in Scotland) by the advice of their Commissioners, being then in Westminster,
who lukewarmly declared against that horrid act: and so did the Committee of
Parliament in Scotland as Lukewarmly act, at that time in Sco^land, the Kings
best friends there, being excluded from sitting; but it is well known, what
passed between Argile and Cromwell, at my Lady Humes house in Edinburgh,
concerning the Kings death. And after the Kings horrid death, for breaking
their Treaty made at Breda (fully consented unto by this present King) before
they would suffer his Majesty, to land in Scotland, he then lying upon their
Coast, in great peril and danger of the English Parliament ships, (then near
his Majesty) whose deliverance, God prevented at Sea upon the coast, by a great
mist: and for Enforcing a Declaration, upon the now innocent King after his
landing, by the power of Argile, and the Church, to take the Guilt of that
kingdom upon his innocent self, and afterward, by jubjugating his Majesty,
under the pretended power of Church Government, and Cromwels Creatures: For
delivering up their Army, at Dunbar, (so much purged by the Church) by the
Treachery, and Correspondence of some few persons, when Cromwell could not have
stayed 6. Days longer in the country, and offered Scotland satisfaction, for
the damage, he head done to that kingdom, and would have left it, and returned
into England, with 3. or 4. Troops of horse: for delivering up there Forts, and
Castles upon Treachery, and for money. As Edinburgh castle, by Dundas old
Leisleyes Son in Law, and Sterling Castle upon conditions, to save their own
particular Goods, for delivering the Records of the kingdom: for their design
at the coming in of Duke Hamiltons Army in Anno 1648. not for a clear intent
to relieve England, and themselves from the present treason and slavery then
hathing by some compact persons of England and Scotland, but intending to have
the whole power, and domination of the whole English nation to themselves, as
it has been clearly seen since, and confessed by themselves, and God
prospered it accordingly: and in the Worcester business, noe English power,
nor Army must be raised, but under Commission, and power of the Scots, and has
not God, for their sins, and their only Acting the Scotch interest, inslaved
them wholly to the English, and made there Kingdom a Mercinary Province, or
Commonwealth, in subjection unto England, betrayed, and voluntarily submitted
unto, by Argile, and some of their country men, lately sitting, in the late
house of Commons in England, only for money, profit and their particular
advantage, Scotland is never to be trusted, for the interest of England,
unless the Exchequer of Edinburgh, were greater then the Exchequer of
Westminster; and yt Scotland were England, and England, Scotland, and is not
this a greater judgment from heaven, upon Scotland, but blame not the whole
nation, for many of their rulers have caused them to err, although the Commons,
at this time (who have been formerly, to much inslaved by their Lords, and
Landlords) are to much addicted to their lucre, and profit, wherein the English
have indulged them, with long Leases, and by laying the Chief Burdens upon
their Landlords, for the more quiet of that kingdom, but let Duke William
Hamiltons ingenious confession a little before his death, and his affection to
the King, then also expressed at Worcester to a noble English Lord, now living,
and the Marquess of Moniros, his and the Lord Nappiers Loyalty, and some other
Lords in custody in England, and others in Scotland upon their Parrol, have
that everlasting memory, which their blood and honors have purchased. And
England which is now, prevalent in power, but odious, by its Governors, both
at home and abroad, unless to such, who are involved in guilt, and profit with
them. If England repent not of its perjury, oppression, and injustice, to its
country men, brethren, and of all the innocent blood, it has spilt in
England: for its breach of faith, solemnly engaged, in and out of Parliament
before God, Men, and Angels, to the whole world (witness their declarations) and
for suffering a compact number of conspirators, cunningly to deceive the people
under pretense of Reformation in Religion, and the kingdoms abuses, who have
brought in, a far greater destruction of Religion, then before, and overthrown
all the liberties of the subject, inslaving them to an absolute illegal, and
arbitrary power, and to the bloody lust, and wills, of any persons whatsoever,
that may, or can hereafter, get, or obtain, any unlawful power, or Government
whatsoever: who have destroyed the ancient, safe, healthful, and fundamental
constitution of England by King, and Parliament, ad introduced varieties of
mock Parliaments, to color there wickedness, and to make monstrons Courts and
constitutions, only to serve their own lust, ambition, and Avarice, and for the
enslaving, and murdering of their fellow subjects, who with their Cap. General
Oliver Cromwell, the grand Protectorian brook of the personal Treaty, in the
Isle of Wight, with the last King, when his Majestey, had fully consented, unto
the parliaments propositions, and given full satisfaction for a firm, and
lasting peace in his three Kingdoms, and was to come to Westminster by
agreement, to confirm them in full Parliament. The Parliament having voted the
Kings concessions satisfactory, wherein his Majesty, had given the subjects,
more liberties, and freedoms in that treaty, and Consent, then all the Kings
since William the first, and afterward the said Cromwell with these
Conspirators, did expel most of the members, of the house of Commons, and
imprisoned, them in Hell, and two common Inns, in the strand, only leaving, such
other members, in the house as were his Conspirators and pentioners who sold,
their own Consciences, and the blood, lives, and liberties of the subject, by
setting up a slaughter house (their high court of justice, a mere extrajudicial
thing in law) on purpose to blood, and terrify the people, and to ingross, the
power, and wealth of the Kingdom to themselves, and the Committee men: what
wast sums of money and plate, they have given to themselves, it is partly in
print, but far more concealed: and can ye expect justice from them who make
themselves judge and party, whose iron hands, you have sufficiently felt: and
afterward openly committed that horrid, and Barbarous Act, a thing never
parralleld in the world, many or most of them, now convened, in this Fleeting
wood Parliament, being those monsters, with there journey man Lentall the old
Speaker (who corresponded, with the last King for his peace and assurance) that
have brought al these miseries upon the nation, and do now follow the same
dictates of blood, and innovations: and if ye suffer them to fit, you must
expect, nothing but blood, ruin of your estates, and destruction of the
kingdom, by all illegal, and arbitrary ways whatsoever, and to sell your
remaining monuments of the kingdom, churches, and noble houses, and put the
money in what Purses they please, and weaken the kingdom for a prey to a
foreign Nation: These will be like the 30. Tyrants of Athens, the Decemviri in
Rome, you have felt their hands enough already, and will feel them again, more
to purpose, if you let them sit, who will call for any man's life and estate at
their pleasures or displeasures, whose Pride and power is to treasure up
unrighteous Mammon against the Day of Wrath: Their right to sit is nothing but
force and violence (a Monster in nature) and a company of Thieves on the High
way, calling a Council in a Wood, and enlarging their unjust power by a
Confederacy, have as much right to sit in Council, as these unsatiable
Usurpers, and may give themselves the name of Parliament as well as these: but
all pious and truly affected to their country, hope these will prove a Fleeting
Parliament as Fleetwoods Mock Parliament: The pact persons of the Council of
War, with the old conspiring Members of the kingdoms miseries, being all
Conspiratots in this misery for the nation, against Truth and Justice. That
Parliament of which these were unruly and excremental Members, was absolutely
dissolved by three ways: the force and violence upon the House of Commons, by
expelling and imprisoning their Members, and then the utter expulsion and
extirpation of the rest by Cromwell and his Conspirators (many now sitting,
being part of them) which made that house sine Die^; and then the force and
violence upon the House of Lords, after adjournment to a Day, the meeting of
the Lords and their Speaker being prevented by the Soldiers guarding the House
(who writ upon it, This House is to be Let) made it also sine Die, a natural
dissolution: But the chief and main reason was the Kings death, a most absolute
dissolution, who called them by his Writ to consult with him, and where his
Soul now is, it is feared many of them will never come without great and
unfeigned Repentance. A Parliament is the great and free Council of the
kingdom, not called as this Juncto is, by the Speakers or other persons, giving
notice to one another for their meeting: but lawfully and freely called and
chosen, for the making and mending of Laws, for the subjects good, whereby they
may have protection and security, consisting of King, Lords and Commons,
whereunto the subject may have address for his Grievances and redress of the
same, fully confirmed by Act of Parliament, of King Lords and Commons, the
great security of the kingdom: And if the Judges and Ministers of the Laws do
not their Duties, they are loyable to legal judgments and sentences, according
to the dismerrit of their offenses. And England will never be happy without
these Parliaments in Freedom, but otherwise most miserable, as at this time
you feel by experience. And while that long Parliament called by the King in
Anno 1648. kept its integrety and sincerity, God blessed it, but when it was
cruel to its fellow Members, and unjustly intruded upon the King and kingdoms
Rights, after full satisfaction given by his Majesty, as the Bill passed for
taking away the Star Chamber Court, and other offensive Courts in the kingdom,
Bishops out of the Lords House, and after that passed a Bill for a Triannual
Parliament, and whatsoever else was for the kingdoms good, and offered the
Parliament after wards only to treat with the Synod of Divines himself, or else
for his Majesty to choose 20 Divines to sit amongst them, for the settlement of
the Discipline of the Church, as by his message of the 20. of May, which 20.
persons could not overvote 120. or more: But by the Guilt and Ambition of some
of the Parliament Members, when that Parliament made it self a Court to
tyrannize over its fellow subjects, their lives, liberties, and estates, and
accumulate the wealth and treasure of the kingdom to its self, and Pentioners
to ^vel and their ^ittee-men: God ^t low and con^ble in the eyes of ^ple and at
last, ^wn Members,
and its mercinary Members, to turn one another out of the House; and will ye
serve the scum and offile of that Parliament, that create themselves a name and
power without Law, Right, and Justice, whereby to murder your persons, consume
your estates, and give you nothing but changes and uncertainties for security
and settlement. O England, England, repent, repent of all thy Perjury and
breach of Faith with God and Man, of the breach of thy Allegiance thou have
sworn to thy lawful King, and his Heyors after him sworn unto, and declared to
the whole World, by the Members of that Parliament, and by these now sitting at
Westminster, and all the other several Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Protestations
and Declarations, in order thereunto for the honor and happiness of the King
and kingdom, That you will with your Estates and Lives, mutually preserve the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the kingdom, and
Preserve and Defend his Majesty's Person and Authority, that the World may bear
witness with your Consciences of your Loyalty, that you had no thoughts nor
intentions, to diminish his Majesty's just Power and Greatness. O England,
England, Repent, Repent of all the multiplication of Illegal Oaths and
Engagements thou have taken, and never take any Illegal Oath more, although it
seem never so religious; but such as are confirmed by King and Parliament, the
wholesome and only lawful constitution of the kingdom: you feel the event of
illegal oaths well enough. And London the great Metropolis of the kingdom, sell
not your estates, liberties, lives and consciences, as you do your wares and
goods: you have done too much already, and make not your selves abominable to
all succeeding generations: you could fight well enough to bring your selves
into slavery, but not to free your selves out of it the time was when you had
the prize in your hand and may yet, if ye will put on wisdom and courage to
redeem your honors, and your selves from slavery, and preserve the rights and
privileges of Parliaments, and restore the King upon the principles of honor
and justice, and for your own, and the kingdoms liberties and security: you
had those which stood in the gap for you, who thirsted to have hazarded their
lives for your redemption, and their King and Country: But you suffered your
selves to be cheated and betrayed into a Treaty, by two or three of your
Aldermen, and some others, Citizens and Ministers, who were Cromwels Factors,
and betrayed you, (as Judas did Christ, or like Synon who brought in the
Grecian horse into Troy) when the power of the whole Army was not one quarter
equivolent, to the power and strength of the City; whereas if you would have
defended your own and the Parliaments liberties, and maintained your
Declarations (which you so unworthily recalled, as the Parliament also did
theirs) most of the Army had come off to you, and this you were told by some of
your very faithful and good friends, and was there any appearance of blood, If
you had not accepted the message for acceptance of the treaty, by 6. of the
Clock at night one day when the Army was at Turnam Green, and by Brainford,
into which you were scarced by the long winded speech of Cromwels messenger;
the said messenger telling the Common Council, that if by 6, of the Clock that
night, Cromwell and his Officers of the Army, had not notice of your acceptanee
of the Treaty, the Army would be engaged in blood, with the City forces at the
Forts, and it was 9. or 10. of the clock at night, before the message was sent
from London, and the same long winded messenger returning again the next
morning, to the Common Council in London, from Cromwell, and his Accomplices who
were then at Syon house, told the Common Council, that the night before, as he
went to Syon house, that there was about half a troop of horse, in an Inn in
Knightbridge, and one Sentinel in the street, and at Turnam Creen about one
Regiment and half of Horse, the Troopers all lying a sleep, and their horses
feeding, tied to the Troopers legs, unless a Sentinel or two in the high way,
and that was about 10. or 11. of the clock at night, and what faith was to be
given to that messenger, who ye knew, was the Cabals Creature of Cromwels and
my Lord Says: If ye had sent Cromwell word, that if he shot his Guns against the
City you would Ring your Bells, as the Duke of Florence told Charles the 8. of
France when his Army was before Florence, and then the Kings Army durst not
meddle with the City by which courage and Resolution, the Duke preserved the
City and its liberties and so might ye have preserved London. Repent London,
and Redeem the innocent blood that has been spilt by your means, I say you
could fight well enough to inslave your selves, but not to Redeem your lost
honor, which formerly you have long enjoyed: And until England return to its
Loyalty, and its Just Principles, for King and Parliament, it will be like a man
in a fever, removing from one bed or Pallet to another, but never be at ease,
or rest, until the fever has left him. Why should these new Fleeting wood
Governors (so much hated) think to keep their intended Government, built upon
the Principles of Injustice, Avarice, and Ambition, expect more security, then
the former Protectorians, or other changes of Government have had, has not God
overthrown the former pretended Reformers, who sought their own Ambition, and
power, under pretense of the kingdoms Good, how many Changes and alterations
have ye had since the last Kings death: and can England without Repentance,
promise its self more security then former Empires, and other Kingdoms have
done, has it not been conquered by Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, and are
not Englands sins as great now, nay greater then formerly: Is there not a
General Apostasy of Magistrates, ministers, and people do not almost all serve
for lucre and Gain, and dawb with untempered mortar, and ministers who would be
accounted pious and Religious, Entitle God to their Dawbing sins, against
knowledge, only for wordly profit, and Pedantick honor: and may not England
without Repentance, suck the dregs of Gods wrath, and make England in
Conclusion, the most miserable of the 3. nations: let then that stand, take
heed least they fall: it is a kingdom, more envied then affected, unless for
its benefit; and if the pride, malice, fury and revenge, of Scotch, Irish, and
Forrainers, fall on it, (from which God keep it) it may be harraced, with iron
hands, and hearts, and your Children, friends, Neighbors and Country men, sold
into foreign plantations, and slavery with as little, or less mercy, or pity,
then ye have sent and sold your Neighbors, Country men, and brethren: Do not
ye see in these alterations, how God does visit the sins of the Parents upon
their Children. Therefore as a good Physician, and Chyrurgian, must know the
disease and wound, before he can cure it, so Pardon the zeal of this pen, not
intentionally to Corrode, but Heal, for without sense of sin, there can be no
true repentance: but let not us say like Caine, and Judas, our sins are greater
then God can forgive, for if we Repent, God will forgive, and if England return
to its loyalty, Just Government, or lawful obedience, it will be heartily
forgiven, and then, it will be firmly settled, upon a sure foundation, in its
just liberties that King and people, may enjoy both their Rights, and a full
oblivion of all that is past, firmly confirmed by the King in a free
Parliament, the great s^^c^rity of the kingdom all these late ways, being
absolutely Mutenous and Tumultuous: and are a very few persons considerable to
the good and happiness of a Nation (who seduce the Soldiers, and others that
would be good Subjects) who if they please, may secure and save themselves,
most of the Grand Actors of that horrid death, and murder, God having Reserved
their Judgments to himself: do not you now plainly preceive, that Cromwells
murdering the last King, and his fair and Religious pretenses, for the
Kingdoms Good, were only steps to get the Crown himself, and not finding in
his life time all things concurring for his atcheivement thereof: yet after his
death would have his Effigies, adorned with Trophies of the Regalia, the Crown,
Globe, and Scepter: and these few persons now, that contrive this new
Government are only to make themselves, Voces Plebi and Magistri Plebi, making
the Council of State, to bring forth their Monster: Their mock Parliament the
God fathers, the Army their actors: and the people their porters and
spectators, to receive the Blessing (from them) of Issachar, and themselves
enjoy the free Common wealth, of wealth, Ambition, luxury, power, and Revenge,
against whom they please: Do not ye see they begin, with Lentall their Speaker,
to make him as absolute Lord Chancellor, as ever any was before, and themselves
will follow in other places, being the Giving Parliament, one to another. And
whereas in Monarchy you have one head, to resort unto for Justice, and if his
ministers fail they are Punishable by law, and Parliament; but where you have
many to Resort unto, it will be like the old saying of the Deans and Chapters
come to them apart, they are all honest, but together they are very knaves, and
so will these be. Have ye got any thing by your often Changes, but loss of
your Blood and estates. O that England would vindicate its self from those
blots and just aspertions now upon it for its own honor, and happiness, and
terror of its no friends abroad, that it may have a firm and lasting peace
within its self, which it can never have, without its lawful King. Never was
England more happy in a King, then it will be in this Kings Restoration, whose
nature cannot be a Tyrant, who thirsts, to receive his subjects, into his
Gracious Favor, and heartily wishes the Good, and Prosperity of England in
general, and its Metropolis London, which now serves its Chargeable
Taskmasters for the Avarice and Ambition of a very few persons: your lawful
King is an Englishman born, and in heart and Affection the same (although
loving, and just to all his subjects) of whose Gracious disposition and
Princely parts, his Enemies must, and do Confess, and for his mercy, let him
Confess it, that the King pardoned in Scotland, who was sent out of England, to
murder his Majesty, as he voluntarily Confessed himself, after his
apprehension: and for his care of his Subjects, let his peaceable, and
unhurtfull march to Worcester with his Army, (by his Majesty's especial
Command) testify, wherein the kingdom, received not the least damage by it.
The kingdoms Terms, may be honorable, gracious, and secure, with the King, who
thirsts to come unto the Crown, by the interest, and love of his own people.
His Majesty also has two Royal Brothers to Confirm his subjects security: The
world cannot equalize such three Princes whose fame sounds loud abroad, and
do not think, but God which so miraculously preserved his Majesty in going to
Scotland, and afterward in Scotland, in so many dangers and Casualties, and
also when two were sent thither to murder him: and after the Defeat at
Worcester, God so miraculously delivered him, and sent his Majesty safe into
France, in which escape he showed more then Kingly Courage and Resolution, and
God which has delivered the Duke of York in so many hazards, and desperate
Charges, and Dangers, in the field, wherein his Highness, has performed to
Admiration, and the Duke of Gloucester who by especial providence of God was
sent out of England, young (not out of Cromwels affection to his Highness, but
fearing his Title to the Crown, and the peoples affection to the Royal Family)
who in the last assault before Dunkirck fought like a Prince, and never left
his Royal brother the Duke of York a swords length, and how they charged, again
and again, and what service they did there is well known, for there Everlasting
honors: and do not believe but that Almighty God, had reserved these three
great Princes, for some great work: they are bone of your bone, and Flesh of
your Flesh: and if England, will not be just to its self, in doing justice
where God requires it God may be Graciusly just, to their Lawful King, who
never offended England (but desires its good heartily and loves it) and
restore his Majesty upon the injustice of a perjured nation: doubt not but in a
general peace, there will be a consideration for him by other Princes (who may
be served, as he now is, by their own subjects) whose Justice and right it is
to be your K. have a care of the old Motto, se^ sapit ingratus. Therefore
England make it thy work alone, and have the honor and happiness of it thy
self without thy neighbors: The King is your father, your country is your
mother, and until father and mother be united, the family must be divided: And
as he is your natural and only lawful King, so no King under Heaven has a
clearer Title (most Kings not so clear) the Saxon, Norman, English, and Scotch
Race, solely and wholly centring in his Maj. And if the armies by sea and land
are sensible of their own honors, profit, and advantage and security, and the
kingdoms happiness, they will rather serve the King and kingdom then these
Fleeting masters, every day changing upon uncertainties, and upon this just
settlement of King and people: Their Arrears will be paid and satisfied, and
the Commanders and Soldiers employed for the honor and advantage of the
nation. And is it not more noble and beneficial for ye to be in a continual and
honorable imploiment, with the love of the kingdom, then upon these
uncertainties ye now are in, with the kingdoms curse: upon this just settlement
of King and people, the discipline of our religion will be settled the nearest
way agreeable to divine Scripture truth, withal respect to tender consciences:
your King, and his two royal brothers, are reformed Protestants (in which
reformed religion, with Gods grace, they refolve to live and die) for which
Rome is not their great friend: And upon this just settlement, oblivion of all
errors will be passed in free Parl, with full indemnity, the exceptions
included with your own judgments, Estates comprimized and secured by Parl, his
Maj. Court regulated, the Law rectified, the kingdoms abuses reformed, Trade
restored and enlarged, manufactures increased, Land improved, and a great part
of the kingdoms charge taken off, men's minds settled in peace and quietness, and
the people governed by law and love, penalties confirmed by Parliam, against
distinction of nick names, whereby the nation may be brought into an amiable
posture and condition: and a full and perfect Act of amnesty and oblivion
passed and confirmed by King and Parl. with invocation unto Heaven for its
observance; and noble Acts advanced, for just and honorable ends, for the
honor and advantage of the nation: Experience having improved your King, and
our English nation, by awaking them out of the drowsiness of a slothful and
luxurious Peace. This Comenting at home of King and people, will prevent all
foreign designs, and make us formidable and terrible abroad, and on the
contrary, by our divisions endanger us, for a prey to other nations: Therefore
(again) England, have the honor of it thy self without the help of thy
neighbors, who brought thee into confusion: And all ye loyal subjects of
England, and excluded Members of the long Parl. by Cromwell, that were for the
personal Treaty in the Isle of Wight, and all ye Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty,
Justices of Peace, Sheriffs of the several counties and shires, and all cities,
and towns corporate, all Magistrates and Members of the kingdom whatsoever, who
have all your rights from the Crown, your lawful King and his Heyors, and that
do enjoy your laws, liberties, francheses and freedoms, from the concessions of
King and free Parl, Rise up, as Thrasibulus did against the 30. Tyrants of
Athens, and as one man put your selves into a posture of defense, against any
power whatsoever that shall invade your Rights and Liberties and debar ye of
free Parl, which are your birthrights and inheritance, and then treat with
your King, from whom you may have honorable and safe conditions for the honor,
happiness, and safety of the nation, the children not bearing the sins of their
Parents, as in the Prophet Ezekel -- and make your selves famous over all the
world, to all posterity: And unto the opposers of this happiness and
settlement, throw into their hearts and faces with invocation up to Heaven, the
breach of all their Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Protestations and Declarations, for
the honor and happiness of the King, for the freedom and Privileges of
Parliament, and for the good and liberty of the subject (as Amutath the great
Turk, did against Vladislaus King of Hungary: The Time, and Covenant Breaker
when his Army was almost lost before his Invocation unto Heaven, and then gave
him a wonderful victory, over the Hungarians) that ye may be hereafter
governed by law and not by the lust of men, and be confident, God will bless ye
in it and will strike such a daunt, and terror into your Enemies hearts, that
oppose your just and righteous Cause, that 10. of ye, shall chase an hundredth,
and 100. of ye put 1000. to flight, but you must do it, with zeal, and
dexterity, for all the Kingdom, to Rise, as one Man, on one Day, and God bless
ye in it. Ye have men enough to head ye: The protection and enjoyment, of your
laws, lives, liberties and Estates, being all taken from ye. Therefore ye must
protect your selfs, as ye are bound, by the law of nature, that afterward ye
may have a free Parliament called, to settle, and confirm your laws, liberties
and Estates: and in your rising; use the people as Brethren, and country men,
not cruelly but kindly, and be sure, ye are not created by independent
treaties, nor long winded speeches, let them seem never so religious (you have
experience enough of that) until you have a free Parliament chosen, not only
to confirm your old Magna Carta, but to make a new Maxima Carta, Truth does
rest, and is quiet, when its just ends are granted, but falsehood never: where
is now Quintus Curtius, that stopped the Gulf of Rome, and Scevola that lost his
hand to save the city: remember Sisia the noble Bohemian that defended Prage
against the whole Imperial Army take but courage you have 9. parts of 10 of the
Kingdom for ye: therefore O English Blood, and hearts, redeem your Liberties,
and declare only for a free Parliament for the settlement of your laws,
liberties, and Estates, (a most just cause and most safely may be Acted, with a
good conscience) and God bless and prosper ye in it, that his infinite Majesty
may have the honor and glory and the whole nation, and your posterity after ye,
may have the benefit, and your selves of this age be engraven in everlasting
monuments, for the restorers, of your Kings and countries liberties, upon the
Principles of Truth justice, mercy and amnesty; for so prays every true
hearted English man.

Printed at London the 12. of June 1659.


