ENGLAND'S Second Warning-piece; OR OBSERVATIONS ON THE Barbarous Attempt to
Murder Justice ARNOLD April the 15th 1680.
CONTAINING 1. A True Relation of the Matter of Fact. 2. Some Remarks on the
Circumstances. 3. A true Copy of the pretended Speech of Evans the Popish
Priest, executed in Glamorganshire (as it was lately printed by the Papists) in
Revenge of whose Prosecution, this Assassination is presumed to have been
committed.


With a Comment on the Hypocritical Speech of that dying TRAITOR.

AFTER the horrid bloody Plot of the Papists, discovered even as by Miracle,
proved by various yet fully concurrent and satisfactory Evidence, confirmed by
undeniable Circumstances, as Godfrey's Murder, Coleman's Letters etc. declared
by his Majesty in repeated Proclamations, by several Parliaments, in reiterated
unanimous Votes, manifested by Legal Convictions of many of the Traitors,
Flight of diverse others, and subtle Evasions used by that Party to shufftle off
many more of the most considerable Conspirators from Justice, it could scarce
be imagined (especially Right and Power being most happily on the same side)
that these Cockatrices Eggs should not have been thoroughly crushed, when their
Nest was so plainly discovered; that their traitorous Malice should not have
been perfectly disarmed, these Foxes muzzel'd, as well as unkennel'd, these
Bulls of Bashan hamstrung; that their Religion (forgive me that in Custom I
apply that Sacred Name to such a Chaos of Superstition and Atheistical Villainy)
should not long e're this, have been abominated by every Protestant, every true
Englishman, every real Servant of God, every honest Subject to his King.

But so it unhappily has happened, after all these Discoveries, these
self-evident Demonstrations, such is the Craft and Diligence, the impudence and
Artifice of the Popish and Be-Jesuited Party, and such the Easiness,
Incredulity or Treachery of some that call themselves Protestants, that still
these cursed Machinations ('it is justly feared) go on, and thrive, and gather
Strength and Encouragement, they have out-brazen'd their apparent Guilt, turned
the dreadful Conspiracy into a matter of Ridicule and Merriment, when in vain
they had attempted to debauch, corrupt the Kings Evidence (as by diverse
Instances was irrefragably proved to the Satisfaction of all the World) they
next with Libels and Lampoons, with forged Stories, and impudent printed
Slanders, endeavored to represent them as Rogues, whom with all their Bribes
and their Baits, they could not make such, and to render them contemptible and
unworthy of Credit, and herein All the Drolls, and the Wits with wry-mouths,
the Bullies and the Hectors, the Tories and the Simpletons, in a word, all the
Riff-raff of the Town, the Burden of our Nation, and the Scandal of our Church
most readily have joined.

Especially (as their last Refuge) they have made it their Business to fling
the Odium upon other people, to embroil Protestants with mutual Fears,
Misunderstandings and Jealousies, and though even in this too, indulgent Heaven
has most signally in several Instances detected their Design, yet so far have
the Powers of Hell, and Charms of Jesuitical Imps prevailed, that not a few
weak inconsiderate, though otherwise perhaps well-meaning Protestants have been
inveigled into too good an Opinion of these Designers, and too hard Thoughts
and unjust Suspicions of their Innocent, Loyal, and peaceable Neighbors. This
mischievous work, has of late been chiefly carried on underground in Masks,
and borrowed Faces, of the many thousands about this City very lately known to
be most furious desperate Papists, there is now scarce one (forsooth) that will
own himself a Roman Catholic, No, No, Oaths, Sacraments, nay railing against
his Holiness, provided it be with a God-dam-me, and to carry on the Modish
Health; all shall be swallowed and permitted by large Dispensations, so as
still it may help forward the grand Cause, and neatly set Protestants together
by the Ears.

In the mean time, these new Disguised Sons of the Church of England (whose
Ruin in truth they principally design) palliate Popish Treasons and Murders,
and Create first, and then Exaggerate imaginary Fears and Dangers from
Protestant Dissenters; But tell us, you pragmatick Make-bates, you
Pope-and-Fanatick Villains, you Citt-and-Bumpkin Incendiaries, tell us, if you
can, that one Presbyterian, that one Nonconformist, who since his Majesty's
Glorious, Happy, and Gracious Restoration (except long since a wild
Small-coal-man, and a handful of Venner's mad crew, with whom all other
Nonconformists were so far from joining, that both then, and ever since, they
detested such Rebellious Frenzy) what one Dissenter, I say, besides,
throughout the whole Nation, in now Twenty years peaceable Government, has
acted or preached any thing Traiterous or Rebllious? If you know any such,
prosecute them; but till you are able to do that on better Evidence than your
Meal-tub Knights of the Post, or Squire Crack-fart's silly Pictures, and more
silly Pamphlets. Is it not plain to any that wears Common Sense about him, that
all this is nothing but Romish Dust and Smoke that they would blow into our
Eyes? so to set us a quarrelling blindfold amongst our selves, that you might
more conveniently knock out all our Brains? And then should the Sober Church of
England (to you the most odious, as being undoubtedly the most Glorious in the
Reformed World) have been voted as Fanatical and Heretical as any of those whom
you now so loudly declaim against.

The honest Reader will excuse this long (not impertinent) Preamble. Now to the
Matter.

At this deplorable Juncture, when the Plot lay half-buried in new-raised Dust,
when the King's Witnesses were publicly (though not allowedly) scorned and
libelled; when Godfrey's Tragedy was made Matter of Romance, when Gentlemen
most active to serve (nay to save) their King, their Religion, and the
Liberties and Properties of their Country, were represented as the most odious
and dangerous. In this Lethargy God has been pleased once again to awaken the
Nation, by Infatuating and Displaying these Sons of Belial in another of their
most nefarious Attempts: the true Relation whereof (according to our best
Information) follows.

JOHN ARNOLD Esquire, a Person (as it is said) of above fifteen hundred pounds
per Annum, and a very worthy Gentleman, being formerly, before the Discovery of
the present damnable Popish Plot, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the County of Monmouth, and being then active, according to his Oath and
Duty, to give information of, and prosecute growing Papists in that County. He
was (as it is said, by certain misrepresentations) put out of the Commission a
little before the Detection of that Conspiracy; whereupon coming to London, he
was desirous to understand his Offense that might occasion such his Removal:
and upon Enquiry was told, That Edward Coleman (then an Eminent Servant to some
of the Family of the Duke of York, and since justly hanged for Treason to
murder the King etc.) had offered something to his prejudice; ( Innocence is
always the Nurse of Resolution) therefore Mr. Arnold then repaired to the said
Mr. Coleman's Dwelling House, desiring to speak with his High-and-mighty-ship,
and know what he had to charge him with, offering to appear to answer for any
Misdemeanour before King and Council, or any lawful Judicature. But at that
time, that mighty Traitor, buoyed up with extraordinary Expectations, and full
of Damnable Business, was too Great (forsooth) to be spoken with, and all the
satisfaction he could get was, That he was not at leisure to answer such a
Fellow as he was. Which Insolence to a Gentleman of his worth, it may well be
thought, could not but move him to some Passion, and, amongst other Repartees,
he parted with these words, (fatally prophetic to Coleman) Sirrah, I shall
live to see you hanged.

This Accident being already related in Print, we took leave here to repeat it,
to show that this Gentleman has long lain under the evil Eye of the Papists;
whose Plot being soon after discovered, His Majesty was pleased again to put
Mr. Arnold into Commission, who vigorously discharged his Duty in several
remarkable Services, as the Discovery of the Jesuits College, Books, etc. at
Comb in Herefordshire, which he, by Order of the Council, caused to be burned;
the seizing and prosecuting that Notorious Rascal Father Lewis the Jesuit,
(that cheated a poor Maid of a considerable Sum of money to pray her Father's
Soul out of Purgatory.) By these and the like faithful Services, he had
contracted upon himself the further Malice of the Papists, who frequently
threatened to assassinate him; particularly one Evans a Jesuit, gave out that he
would Pistol him, but that bloody Ruffian-priest was prevented, by being hanged
soon after for Treason, at Cardiff in Glamorgan Shire. However, their
implacable Spleen still revived and grew more furious, only waiting an
Opportunity, which now they thought they had obtained; for some Difference
happening between Mr. Arnold and one Mr. Herbert another Justice of Peace, who
it is said had been an Encourager instead of a Suppresser of Papists, Mr. Arnold
for his ill Practices accused him to the King and Council, and so came to
London with several Witnesses to make good the Charge. The Matter being to be
heard at the Board on Friday the 16th. of this Instant April, the said Mr.
Arnold was overnight ( viz. Thursday the 15th.) with some Persons of Quality
at the Apollo (commonly called the Devil) Tavern near Temple Bar, but being
very mindful of his Business, about ten a Clock took an Opportunity to slip
from his Company, desiging to step to his Council, Mr. Phillips, at his House
in little Lincoln's Inn Fields, and so return to them. As he went forth he
called to his Servants (for he had two men that attended him) to follow him,
but he going out so hastily and privately without the Company's breaking up,
they did not hear not perceive him, but in their Stead, certain Bloody
Assassinates (who it is thought had long dogged him up and down, as their
Brethren did Justice Godfrey) followed him at the Heels (he thinking they had
been his own men) up Bell-yard to the end of Jackan-apos Lane, which supposing
to be a fit place for their barbarous Designs, they there fell upon him, being
three in number, one first with a Cudgel, striking him with all his Force
behind on the Calves of the Legs, which making him stagger, another at the
same Instant flung a Cloak over his Head, and so muffled him, that he might not
cry out, they then having thrown him down, made many Passes at his Body with
their Swords or Daggers, but not above seven took place on him, by reason of a
Quilted Wastcoat that he wore, made of stiff Whale-bone; so that the Murderers
perceiving their Weapons would not enter to kill him dead, said one to another,
Dam the Dog he wears Armor, let us cut his Throat, which accordingly they did
giving him several dismal Gashes on each side, but as Providence ordered it,
missed his Windpipe, they likewise stamped upon his Breast, and being afraid
upon the opening of a Door hard by, left him as they thought, quite dispatched,
one of them saying as he went from him, Dam me ye Dog, now pray for the Soul of
Captain Evans. This Evans was that Popish Priest we mentioned before, who went
by the Name of Captain, (and some say, had some time since a Commission) these
Assassinates were so eager to do the work, that it seems in the Dark they
wounded one another, for Mr. Arnold remembers one of them cried, God Dam me, ye
have wounded me in the Leg.

Mr. Arnold being left in this lamentable mangled Condition, and disintangled
from the Cloak, cried out Murder, and was soon taken up and carried home to
his Lodgings at the Post House in Fleet Street, where Chyrurgions being
presently provided, besides the Wounds in his Throat, he was found to have
received six more, viz. one in the Head, two in the Arm, two in the Breast, and
one on the side, as also his Breast lamentably bruised, no less dangerous than
any of them, but yet by the Mercy of God he is in an hopeful way to be
recovered, and survive a Living Monument of Popish bloody Baseness, and
treacherous Cruelty.

His Majesty in Council next Morning being informed hereof upon Oath, there was
immediately made and printed an Order of the Board, for Search and all Means to
be used to discover and apprehend the Assassinates and those that set them on,
and graciously promising 100 l. Reward to any that discover or take any one of
them, and the like Reward and Pardon to any of them that should discover the
Rest. At the same time, the Matter against Mr. Herbert being considered, though
Mr. Arnold was thus disabled to attend, yet by Witnesses such Misdemeanors
were made out, that Herbert was committed to Newgate.

Scene 1. From this dismal Scene, the second part of Godfrey's Tragedy, we may
observe the bloody Genius of Papists, their malicious revengeful Nature, and
withal their Insolence, that they dare thus attempt our Magistrates, and hope
thereby to affrighten them from their Duty. For that it was done by that Party
there is no room to doubt, as well because of their former Menaces, as
especially from the words they used about Evans; nay, indeed from their very
Principles, which allow Murder of Heretics, when it is for the Interest of
their Catholic Cause. And indeed how can we expect they should be merciful to
our Bodies, whose Souls they have already doomed to endless Torments, holding
it impossible that ever one of us shall be saved. Let me (says one of their
most famous Authors) be damned with Lucifer to Eternity, if ever any Protestant
see the Face of God, or enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nay, the Jesuits
publicly teach, That it is lawful to Assassinate any man (though a
Brother-Catholick) that shall but give one a Box of the Ear, or shall impair
ones Credit, etc. much more they may butcher an Heretic that endeavors to
prevent or punish their Treasons, or bring their Holy Fathers to Justice. This
is so far from being Criminal, that it is Meritorious.

Secondly, Again, we ought here with thankful hearts to take notice of the
signal Series of Gracious Providence, that ever since the first Discovery of
this Plot, whenever it has seemed to be almost stifled, and the Evidence most
discouraged by the power and policy of the Adversaries; then always has
infinite Wisdom brought something to light, or infatuated them into some horrid
Act, which plainly has confirmed the Testimony of the Witnesses, and the
Wickedness of this bloody Babylonish Faction.

Thirdly, But now, As to this Reverend Father Evans, to whose revengeful Manes
this Worthy Gentleman was to have been sacrificed; He was, it is well known,
upon a fair Trial, Condemned and Executed for Treason: And what a Meek,
Peaceable, Holy, Humble Blade he was, you may partly guess, by his taking upon
him to be of the Church-militant, with the Title of a Captain, living as a
Bully, and his Mouth perpetually overflowing with Oaths and Curses. But
especially you may measure his extraordinary Piety by his frequent threatenings
to Pistol this very Gentleman, as is fully proved upon Oath. Yet, after all
this, that you may see how innocent a Lamb this swaggering Bell-weather is
represented to have been at his Death, I shall take leave to print verbatim one
of their Lying, Seducing Papers, as it was (with multitudes of the like stamp)
printed for, or at least openly sold by Turner the Popish Bookseller in
Holborn, as follows.

Short Memorandums upon the Deaths of Mr. Philip Evans, and Mr. John Lloyd,
both Priests, who were Executed at Cardiff in Glamorganshire, the 22th. day of
July, 1679.
ABout Nine of the Clock in the Morning, the Undersheriff Mr. Charles Evans
came to the Cellar in the Goal, where the Gentlemen were kept, and immediately
a Smith was sent for to take off their Irons, which were so hard set on, that
the Smith was above an hour in taking off Mr. Evan 's alone, which, was not
done without great pain to him; notwithstanding which he never gave the least
sign of Impatience or trouble, but encouraged the Man to go on with his work,
without fear of hurting him: When they were brought out of the Cellar, they
desired to walk on Foot to the place of Execution, but were refused, and put
both upon one Cart; their Arms Pinnioned; all the way Reading in their Books.
When they Arrived at the place of Execution, they followed St. Andrews Example,
saying, Welcome good Cross, and falling upon their Knees, Kissed the Post of
the Gallows? and remained Praying there a good while: When they had done, they
asked which was to Die first, the Sheriff answered, Mr. Evans; He Bowing, spoke
these few Words.

I need not tell you why we are brought here to suffer; our Sentence of
Condemnation is a sufficient Witness, that it was not for a Plot, or any other
Crime, but for being Priests: consequently I do die for Religion and Conscience
sake: I shall not speak much of the goodness of my Cause, because I think it
will be heedless; but it is so good, that I would not give the happiness of
Dying for it, for all the Crowns of the World: Sure if a Man ever spakes truth,
it must be at the Hour of Death, therefore I hope no Body will doubt of what I
say; If I have or had any Enemies in the World, which I do not know that ever I
had any in my Life, I do heartily forgive them, for any thing done or said
against me; and if I have offended any Body I am heartily sorry for it, and ask
them forgiveness; I pray God Bless and Prosper the King: I beg the Prayers of
all, and in particular of the Catholics here present; That done, he Kneeled
down again with some Friends about him, and having said some Prayers, he took
his leave of them, and went up the Ladder; upon which he spoke again these
words, Sure this is the best Pulpit a Man can have to Preach in, therefore I
cannot forbear to tell you again, that I die for God and Religion sake, and I
think my self so happy, that if I had never so many Lives, I would willingly
give them all for so good a Cause; if I could Live, it would be but for a
little time, though I am but young, happy am I that can purchase with a short
pain an Everlasting Life; I do forgive all those that have had any hand in my
Death, Accusation or Condemnation: I ask again forgiveness of every body, I
give thanks to all those that have been kind to me, and to you Mr. Sheriff;
Adieu Mr. Lloyd, though for a little time, for we shall shortly meet again; pray
for me all, and I shall return it, when it pleases God that I shall enjoy the
Beatifical Vision, if any of you that see me die thus willingly for my
Religion, have any good thought upon it, I shall think my self happy; then he
made a stop and after a little while, said with a clear and cheerful voice, In
manus tuas, Domine, commendo Spiritum meum; And so giving the sign the
Executioner turned him over, and the Ladder being very short, it stirred with
him, then Mr. Richard Jones one of the Sheriffs Bailiffs took his Legs from it,
and turned them after his Body; all that were present can justify, that he
never looked better, nor more cheerful then he did then; All this will be
Testified (if need be) by Credible Persons as well Protestants as Catholics.

During the time of Mr. Evans's Execution, Mr. Lloyd stood by with us much
constancy and cheerfulness as any Man could have, and before he went up the
Ladder, he said these words following more distinctly and heartily then ever he
did in his Life, by the Report of those that have known him these many Years.
My Fellow-Sufferer has declared the Cause of our death, therefore I need not
repeat it; and besides I never was a good speaker in my Life; I shall only say,
that I die in the true Catholic and Apostolic Faith, according to these words
in the Creed, I Believe the Holy Catholic Church, and with those three
Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity: I forgive all those that have offended me;
and if I have offended any body I am heartily sorry for it, and ask them
forgiveness. I beg the Prayers of all, and in particular of the Catholics here
present, desiring them to bear their Crosses patiently, and to remember that
Passage of Holy Scripture, Happy are they that suffer Persecution for Justice,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Then he went up the Ladder, and there gave
thanks to all those that had been kind to him, and in particular to the
Sheriff, then he made a little stop; after which he said: Mr. Carne, you have
been always my Benefactor, pray for me now: Then he knocked his Breast three
times, and said in Latin; Lord have Mercy upon me a Sinner, and, Into thy
hands, Lord, I recommend my Spirit: So gave the sign and was turned over.

Some Notes for a Comment on the foregoing Piece of Popish Martyrology.
1. Observe, how Industrious this restless Traitorous Party is, to keep up
their Damnable Cause; Not one of their Villainous Priests shall pass the
Gallows, but he shall have a Speech Forged for him, filled with the best and
most Taking words that can be Invented, and this Printed to Proclaim him a
Saint as well as a Martyr: Though in truth he lived a Cheat and a Ruffian, and
died a Traitor and an Atheist. The Priest has done them Knight Service, what
Swarms of Pamphlets do they daily throw abroad, and who almost Endeavors
either to Suppress or Answer them, when their Compendium of the Trials came
abroad abusing the Kings Evidence in the Grossest manner imaginable, and
Endeavoring to Poison the People with a Disbelie^ of the Plot. Thereby most
insolently giving the Lie to his Sacred Majesty and the Wisdom of our
Parliaments, and Vilifying not only our Courts of Judicature, but also two
Reverend Fathers of our Church, where was then that Doughty Man of the
Dead-doing Quill with his Terrible Canon, He that boasts That wherever his
Genius tells him that his Pen may be any way useful to the Public, he can no
longer forbear; Was not here a fair Opportunity to Exercise his Talents, to
Chastize this Uncircumcised Philistian, sure here if ever his Pen might have
been useful to Public, yet for all this, though in part Provoked by a
Reflection in the Preface to the said Compendium, yet still, he stirred not a
Finger, who since has been Wretchedly Busy in Scribbling Dialogues and
Back-Stroke Complements against Presbyterians, and Dr. Oats; But alas! The
Gentleman was then perhaps at his Old Profession of the Merry Crowd, or the
Studying the Mystery of Monkey-making, which he has since so Laudably Practiced.

2. Note, That the subtle Contriver would fain Insinuate Tortures or Harsh
Usage, by that Foolish Lie. That the Smith was above an hour in taking off of
Evans 's Irons; As if it were unusual to keep Traitors for their safe Custody
in Fetters, but tell us pray how you use poor Protestants, when they have
caught them in their Barbarous Inquisition?

3. He kissed the Post of the Gallows. Is not the Gibbet, think you, sanctified
by this holy Martyr's Kiss? we shall have it stolen away shortly, and sent to
Rome to make Relics of.

4. The dying Father begins his Harangue with a Lie; That their Sentence of
Condemnation shows that they died for no other Crime, but for being Priests;
for they were Condemned for being Traitors; and that most justly, for being the
Kings natural born Subjects, they had gone beyond the Seas in defiance to his
Laws, and there sworn Allegiance to a Foreign Enemy; and again, in Contempt of
Law, were returned, and did daily justify, and by Preaching and Practice
maintain the Authority and Jurisdiction of such Foreign Usurpers within his
Majesty's Dominions, which is in effect an Invading of his Kingdoms and
Sovereignty, and Deposing and Overthrowing of his Crown and Dignity. And who
can doubt whether doing all this be Treason? yet still these Villains make an
Outcry that they die for their Religion.

5. The truth is, we may justly say, that not only Popish Priests, but every
Papist in England (that is the King's Natural born Subject) is a Traitor; for
owning himself to be of the Church of Rome, he must hold that the Pope has
right to some spiritual Jurisdiction within our Kings Dominions; which ^o
affirm, is to take away part of his Imperial Crown; and as it is against all
Truth, so by the Laws of this Realm it is Treason. Yet this is the Party which
boasts so much of their Loyalty, when in truth, they are every one of them in
their Principles Dogmatical Traitors; nor will they ever fail to put the same
into Act and Practice longer than only whilst they want strength or opportunity.

6. He hopes No body will doubt of what he says. But the Scripture tells us,
The Hope of the Hypocrite shall perish. We are too well acquainted with their
dying Lies, to believe them. We remember Father Ireland, who took it upon his
Death, that he was never in London between the 5th. of August, and the 14th. of
September. which is proved a notorious Lie, not only by Mr. Jennison and others,
but also under his own hand, in his Pocketbook since found.

7. He says, He does not know that ever he had any Enemies in his Life. Sure
this Father was the Phoenix of the Age! Not so much as one Enemy Man, and yet a
Captain! Surely, surely, he had learned to be an Enemy, if not to have one; for
undoubtedly his threatening treacherously to Pistol Mr. Arnold, was no sign of
Friendship.

8. Whereas he says, The Gallows is the best Pulpit that can be had to Preach
in: I readily agree with him, that it is for such Divines as himself. For what
his Divinity was, appears by the next words; He is for purchasing Everlasting
Life with an Halter, his own small pain he reckons a sufficient price for it,
and so never speaks a word of the merits or satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

9. When he desires the people to pray for him, he is very Givil in promising
to return the Complement and pray for them again, when he should have blundered
through Purgatory: This looks like an ambitious Rogues trick, to bespeak
beforehand the veneration and prayers of his filly tribe: that they may put him
in mind of his promise, and to the end he (forsooth) may pray again for them.

10. We do not hear one word of an Ave Maria here; What, had these Fellows
forgot their good Lady, that used to engrose almost all their Lip-Devotions?
what should the meaning that neither her help, nor any other Saints is invoked?
I Will tell you, we may justly believe this pretty small Speech was hatched here
by some idle Father in Town, and published only to amuse the world; and because
they thought it would go down better with Protestants, and move them more to
compassion and better esteem for Popery if they found no such vain Addresses in
it; therefore they were left out: for these subtle Sophisters contrive every
thing for the best advantage of their Cause.

Which yet notwithstanding all their Craft and Diligence, their private
Stratagems, and base Treacheries, and barbarous Cruelties, God most assuredly
will blast and confound all those that are Actors in, or Connivers at, and
Abettors of the traitorous Hellish Design of re-establishing Popery in these
Nations: And therefore let not Protestants despond, but unanimously and
cheerfully in their several stations, by all lawful ways oppose their
Machinations; nor let any Magistrate be afraid to do his Duty by putting the
Laws vigorously in execution against these pernicious Vermin; dread not their
treacherous Daggers, nor their suborned Witnesses, nor their potent Friends;
for without the special permission of your God, they shall never be able to
touch one hair of your Head; or suppose they shall be allowed to effect some
Bvtchery, can any man do more nobly than pro Aris and Foris, for his Religion
and his Country, and whenever these inhumane Ruffians thus draw their Daggers,
do they not always stab their own Cause in a vital part. Those Magistrates that
in this Critical Juncture shall gallantly appear to destroy this Hydra of
Popery, and to secure the Protestant Religion and the Government from
subversion, shall be blessed by Heaven, and applauded on Earth to succeeding
generations; but those that shall by Villainy or Cowardice go about to betray
the Life of their King, and our Religion and Properties into the hands of
Bloody Papists, divine Vengeance shall overtake them, and their Names shall be
clothed with everlasting Infamy, and the Curse of Slavery shall descend upon
their Posterity.

FINIS.

