Englands Vanity: OR THE Voice of God Against the Monstrous Sin of Pride, IN
Dress and Apparel: Wherein Naked Breasts and Shoulders, Antic and Fantastic
Garbs, Patches, and Painting, long Perriwigs, Towers, Bulls, Shades, Curlings,
and Crispings, with an Hundred more Fooleries of both Sexes, are condemned as
Notoriously Unlawful.

With pertinent Addresses to the Court, Nobility, Gentry, City, and Country.

Directed especially to the Professors in London.

By a Compassionate Conformist.

Zeph. 1. 8. I will punish the Princes, and the Kings Children, and such as are
Clothed with strange Apparel. Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for John Dunton, at the black Raven in the Poultry, 1683.

God's Voice against Pride; in Dress and Apparel.
To the Court.
THE design of this Treatise is not against in the least to Affront the Court;
for it seems to me, that our Savior has granted some kind of dispensation
to Princes, and their Retinue, (for the Honor of Kingdoms, and Governments) to
appear as Gloriously as themselves please, or can. And though St. Matthew
Epithets their Garments [(...),] soft, tender, and smooth, yet St. Luke has
lined them all with Tissue and Gold. They that are in Kings Courts [(...),
etc.] are Gloriously and Gorgeously Apparrelled, as becomes their place. It Is
not for a poor preacher in the Wilderness, who himself must be an Example of
the greatest Austerity and Temperance of Life, (that so he may recommend it to
others, and wean them from the Pomps and Vanities of this Evil World, it is not
for such a one) to flant it out in Purple and Silks (as Courteours use); No, a
piece of course Chamlet will serve his turn well enough, to preach Repentance
and Mortification in. He whose business it is to declaim against the dangers of
Luxury, and Pride, must not hang out the flags of it upon his own Body, let
Courteours do what they please, he must not; thus our Savior. And who is
ignorant that the Royal Robe is buttoned on the shoulders of Kings, by the
Divine hand, and the Richest Jewels hang by Authority, in the Ears of his Royal
Consort. And therefore I think the Emperiour Severus, answered his Name too
far, who when once two Unions of exceeding Greatness and Value, were presented
to his Empress by an Ambassador, he would not suffer her to wear them, but hung
them up at the ears of the Image of Venus, (as Lampridus tells us) least any
ill Example should proceed from Her, and have too great an influence on the
Ladies of the Court, and he thought them more proper for the Levity of so
worthy a Goddess as Venus, than the grave Majesty of the Wife of Severus.
However, our Queen Elizabeth, would never have done as that Emperor, Whose
very Picture every where shows us, how great an admirer She was of Jewels. It Is
fit indeed the Representative of him, who is Clothed with Light, as with a
Garment, and who are God's upon Earth, should (at least in their solemn
Appearances) dart out some Rays of Majesty, and Luster; like him they
personate. King Herod was not smitten from Heaven, for having on his back that
Glorious Robe, against which the Sunbeams striking, caused it to reflect so
Divine a Splendor, (as Josephus tells us) which occasioned that Blasphemous
Acclamation, from the Astonished People; but because He too greedily swallowed
down those vain Adulations, and was inebriated with the conceit of being voted
a Deity. Princes have their Garments, as well as their Ministers of State,
which are the appropriate and peculiar Treasure of Kings; and may the eye of
that Subject wax sore, that looks a squint on them, were they as gorgeous, as
ever were worn by the Lydian Cresus, who once vainly demanded of the wise
Solon, (a grave Philosopher) Whether ever he had seen a more Glorious sight
than himself, (being wonderful richly set out, and sitting in State on his
Throne)? yea Sir, quoth Solon, I have seen Woodcocks, Phesants and Peacocks,
and these were graced with a natural beauty, whereas yours is but a borrowed
Glory, which must vail to time, and shake hands ere it be long with Mortality.)
He that thinks the Wardrobe too fine, must traitorously fear the Exchecquer too
full. But never was discourse of this Nature, more unseasonably applicable to
our English-Court, when God has blessed us with a Prince, who has given the
greatest Example of Moderation and Gravity in Attire, of any that ever yet
swayed our British Scepter, when the richest Pearls cannot make Him, but
themselves proud in being Honored to be worn by the Sovereign of the Seas; but
who perhaps might necessarily enough be addressed, in the words of Seneca, to
Neroes Lady, Indue te delicate, non propter te, sed propter honorem Imperii.
(And indeed the glory of Empire needs the Emission of some Lusture to keep up
its Majesty and Dread.) William Rufus was of another Temper, who when his
Chamberlain brought him a pair of Hose of three shilings, (which then, might be
equal to ten now) very passionately threw them away, and would have a pair of a
Mark I marry, those were Hose sit for a Prince. So also there are Robes of
Distinction which are clasped on Subordinate Magistrates, both innocent and
Laudable in themselves, and are expressive of the Dignity and Office of such as
wear them. Thus we read that Severus allowed his Judges Gowns to sit in
public Judgment, and others to wear at home in their private houses. Our very
Quakers were never so impudent to affront the Scarlet of the Judge or Praetor.
And these indeed (Lampred in Alex. Sever. chap. 42.) are rather hung upon them,
than girt to them, and are as loose as the Golden Key that plays on the breast
of a Lord Chamberlain, or the Seal that is carried in the hand of a Lord
Chancellor, that is so far from making its impression on his heart, that he
knows it may be commanded away to another, and is perfectly at the pleasure of
his Prince. And it is observable how our Savior phrases that expression but now
mentioned, [(...)] They that that bear soft clothing, others wear it, fast
girt, and stiff laced (as our Ladies stays that penn her up as in a torturing
prison, to make her look slender and pretty); but these bear it, (as loose
Cloaks which are easily off and on: So the Famous Burleigh when at night coming
wea^y home from the Crowd, and business ^f Court, and pulling off his Gown, was
^sually heard to say to it, Lie there Lord Treasurer: and indeed when we
remember what Cares the Robe of State are ^^ed with, we shall have little
Reason to ^uspect those of much Pride, that bear them.

The same dispensation doubtless extends to each Order and Decree of the Royal
Household. It being not so Honorable for Princes (like him of the Air) to be
attended on by a Black Guard). When the Queen of the South took her tedious
journey, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, it is expressly said, The attendance of
his Ministers, and their Apparel, was so glorious, that it ravished away her
Spirit, (passa est Ecstasin says Junius) there was no more spirit in her. She
fell into a trance to view so a glittering a Court, where the great King, as
the Sun; the chief Ministers, as the Planets of the first magnitude, and each
inferior Officer, as the minor Stars (the very least had his shine) but
altogether were (as our Savior expresses it) Solomon in all his Glory.
Surrounded with all his Nobles and Counselors, and Attendants, each one in his
Sphere contributing to the glory of so great a Constellation. Indeed God
dressed up Solom^^ in the brightest Robes of Royalty with ful^ design to make
him the most illustrious Prince, that he might undress him again and make him
the most experienced Pr^^cher that all Princes to the worlds en^ might have the
Word of a King to asure them how much vanity attends the Courts of the most
Magnificent Potentates, and how little satisfaction, or Soul-Acquiescence
himself had found in all the Grandieurs of State.

How charitably therefore may we judge of Those, whom rather Reason and
Necessity of State, than any natural Inclination or Promise to the folly, does
exact from them a more gay and splendid Appearance and Dress. Courteours being
not always Proud, though sometimes Poor (the more is the Pity) and more
ignorantly envied, than cheerfully trusted by the jealous Citizen, who yet can
love it well enough, when himself has the profit, and they come to Buy; But
infinitely more, where he has it indeed, and they come to pay.

These therefore I shall leave to be as fine as they can, and do heartily wish,
that of any part of their Suits, the Pockets may be the most richly faced; lest
the Tailor trust them so long, that they are put to the trouble of begging a
Knighthood for him, in satisfaction of a full discharge. Only I beg leave to
be their Remembrancer of some excellent Advice, which once a great Prelate of
the Church delivored to the Household of King James in the Chapel of Theobalds,
and sure they cannot take it ill from one, who died an Archbishop, though I
confess no very good Subject.

As it is fitting you should be adorned for the Attendance of your Earthly, so
there are some Ornaments to be thought upon for the Service of your Heavenly
Master. Oh happy We, of all other Creatures, if we were near so mindful of the
one, as we are too solicitous of the other. But hearken ye that forget God,
this is no proportion at all to allow half a day for the tricking of the Body,
and grudge the poor half hour for the preparing of the Soul. Those that glitter
in soft Clothing, may be respected in Kings Houses; but without Faith,
Repentance and true Devotion, they are of no reckning in Gods House: And such
Correspondence there is between God and the King, that I could never yet read
of any, who neglected the Service of their Master in Heaven, did ever true
service to their Master on Earth; these two Worships therefore conjoined in the
Tables of the Law, let them not be disjoined in the Tables of our hearts: And
so shall God who has made us now Attendants on Princes here below, make us
hereafter Fellows and Companions with the Angels above. Dr. Williams. To which
I Heartily add my Amen. And do beseech the Present Gentlemen at Court to
meditate on so good an Instruction.

To the Nobility and Gentry.
With no less Observance and Respect do these Papers address themselves to you
(the Truly Honorable and Virtuous Nobles, and to you the Worshipful Gentry of
the Kingdom. Whose high Birth and Blood, whose Large Demesnes and Revenues do
justly give you as a Precedence by the Ordinance of Heaven above others in
Degrees of Honor and Worship, so certainly a Prerogative, and Privilege of
expressing them (by all the lawful, modest, and allowable Demonstrations) to
the World. The very Laws of Honor obliging you to a strict observance, not of
the Rules only, but very Complements of your Order, which can never be
performed (like those of the Church) without some external Ceremonies to set
off the Grace and Decency of them. The Gloryes of Birth and State (like those
of the Sun) being shrouded within the cloud of popular Ignorance, or more
private Cognizance, till the several Beams of their Light and Virtue, baffle
the Shadow, and triumphantly break out into universal Joy and Observation; but
then, do never fail to attract on themselves the most prostrtae Adoration and
Reverence.

See this in Religion. The very Luster of the Divine Image in the Soul, is
Grace in the Womb, only, very solitary and indiscernable by any prying eye,
while dweling in the dark Cell of the heart, [is Faith to self only, and before
God, as Romans 14. 22.] but the Darting out of those beams from that Covert, the
piercings of the Divine Nature through the dark Lanthorn of Flesh, and emitting
its Shine into the Life, by great and excellent Actions, this makes it Grace
unto others, and brings a Glory to God. Nor is it enongh for a Christian to
light his Candle and keep it under a Bushel, but his Light must [so] shine,
that all in the House may see it, and the great Author of it not lose his
praise. Mat. 5. 15, 16. And what are Good works but the Garments of Holiness,
which the true Christian clothes himself with every day (according to his
Ability) and which makes him beautiful to God and man? Yet (like the Luster on
Moses face) though they render him Lovely and Amiable in the eyes of others,
still they keep him humble in his own, and he is a Mirror to all but himself.

Since Nature has lost her eyes, and differs in Judgment from her Maker (for
He sees not as man sees (1 Samuel 16. 7.) Nor yet has attained the light of a
rectified Reason or Knowledge to pry into the value of interior Objects and
Worth. It will ever be gazing after what it can reach to without, and doting on
the Surface of superficial Vanity and Lies (Prove. 30. 8.) Thus Pride of Life,
as the firstborn Leah, has gotten the advantage of the Beauty of Holiness
(the incomparable Rachel) and starts before her into Jacobs Bed, while the
Kings Daughter (whose Glory is within) is thrust out to an enforced patience,
and made to wait for Admirers, who as hardly are persuaded to fall in Love with
what they cannot perceive so Adorable and Precious; and (like Joseph) tho they
will not expose her to dishonor, yet resolve to shift her off with a
Complement, till an Angel from Heaven clear up her excellency, and very happyly
make up the Match. Thus may you you find the Brutish herd Crying up a
glistering piece of dust to be God, while they vote the True One, in a plain
Coat, to the Cross.

It is your Visible Glory (Oh ye Great and Honorable of the Earth) that the
Idolatrous World (with the Persians) so superstitiously Worship and Adore; Take
heed therefore while ye paint out your bodies, as so many Idols, these purblind
votaries mistake you for Deities, who never saw any, more Illustrious and Gaudy
than your selves; And

(Alas,) It Is too low and Hystriorick a Design for Persons of your high Station
and Character to trick up your selves to the Acting so mean a Comedy, (Like
Nero fooling in the Theater) while none but sorry and mechanic eyes are fed
with the prospect of so great a Degeneracy from the more Noble Idea's of Virtue
and Glory.

This is a Game for base and Plebejan Spirits to pursue, whose only project is
for to cover some horrid Defects, like Caligula's wearing a Needlework Cloak,
embroidered with every Color, and all bestudded with Precious Stones, to
divert his Spectators from being affrighted with his crabbed and hideous Face.

Coaches, they say, were first invented by a Prince of gouty Legs, and ill
shapen Feet, from which the upper parts appear in all the Decorum of Majesty
and Perfection without the least Jealousy of any Natural failure below; but for
those who are born to tread on the Mountains of State, (As you) It Is fit your
Paces should be all so Honorable, and Exemplary, that you scorn to fear the
Discovery of a wry step to the watchful eyes that trace you.

And though the Spouses Feet are described to be Beautiful with Shoes, Cant. 7.
1. Yet that still, does but express the Majestic Gate of those holy Pilgrims
who are directly passing to an higher Glory, to which those Feet alone have
strength and Grace to climb and convey them. And py were it for your Honorable
Ladies, if their Embroidered Shoes would mind them of a better Preparation to
which they are exhorted to be Shod, ere their delicate Feet stumble on the dark
Mountanis.

And why should I doubt it? Since, sure, it is below the stately Cedars to pride
themselves in their own shaddows, whose kind branches spreading themselves by
so ravishing a dilatation, are ambitious to yield their charitable shelter to
succor the distressed, that fly for refuge to them, and not to be only
unprofitably gazed on.

The Vine (in the Parable) scorned the Promotion to an Empire over the Trees.
Since 'twas honor enough for it to yield its lushious Clusters to cheer the
hearts of men; and what are the thorny burdens of a Crown, to those that
overflow (like God himself) in all the streams of Universal good from their
Fullness and Greatness?

And the Simile is no Derogation to your Honors; Since God himself has Dubed
the Vine into Honor, and given it the Appellation of Noble (Jer. 2. 21.) which
I find no other Tree of the Forest so happy to enjoy; and the blessed Jesus,
calls himself one, by a Metaphor. (Joh. 15. 1.) Yet of all other, has the Vine
the least Wood, and the most ragged Rind, (will a man make a pin of it to hang
any Vessel on, Ezekiel. 15. 3.) while all its Virtue lies within; and that which
makes the least show affords the most good, is most Juicy and productive, to
acquaint us, That the most Liberal, and distributive Spirits care not to bear
so great a Port in the World, while they gratify themselves in pouring out all
the Communications of their Treasure and Bounty to others. And even God himself
appears only in the rich Effluxes of his Goodness. O ye Virtuous Nobles, give
no occasion to your Great Lord to take up that sad Complaint! How art thou
turned into the degenerate Plant of a Strange Vine unto me!

Nor may this Jealousy sink, you into any Dishonorable Meaness of Appearance
in Rind or Attire, since it would be as ridiculous for a wealthy Noble man to
draw on Course Cloth, as for the poorest of his Tenants to swagger up and down
in Scarlet; or for his Countess to be lapped up in Flannel (while Alive) as for
one of her Milkmaides to flant in about in Cloth of Gold. And surely the God
of Decency and Order, who has required all men to discharge the Political Debt
of Honor to whom Honor belongs, has as equally obliged those Honuorable
Personages to all immaginable care, and caution in the furnishing all the Rooms
of State, and railing in the Bed of Honor; Toguard and fence their Native
Immunityes from all the insolen tinvasions of too incroaching Usurpations,
which the affronting hand of impudence does (but too commonly) thrust in to
make upon them. God is so tender of the great Prerogative of his Worship, that
he professes, by no means will he part with that Glory to Another, nor his
Praise to Graven Images. And no Phantasmes of the highest Consideration
whatsoever, should tempt a truly Generous Spirit, to yield up the Sword of his
Knighthood, which himself is sworn so superstituously to maintain, That he were
happier to feel it bathed in the blood of his heart, than ignominously to
surrender it with the least tainture of Cowardice. As the Christian profession
is Commanded to abstain from all appearance of Evil, So will our wise and wary
Lord, very providently foresee, that no cloud of Envy interpose it self to
procure an Eclips of his Glory, nor that dignity wherein the providence of
Heaven has so happily fixed him. Nothing that may perhaps* suggest to the
observing eye, the least shadow of the ignoble guilt of a Law and degenerous
Spirit, under the profuse largesses of the Divine bounty. History tells us of
one Ardelio, who himself being of an huge, great, and Bulky Body, delighted in
every thing like himself that was great, would live in a great House, lie in a
great Bed, eat in great Platters, drink in great Bowls, ride upon a great
Horse, entertain none but great Servants, etc. however the story be true or
false, surely it is the most perfect beauty, when great Persons act
symmetrically to themselves, when greatness of fortune and generosity of soul
are happily concerned together; and add yet a perfection of felicity, to those
that are the lucky heirs of it. But that Gentleman, who from the little Devil
of a narrow and Avaricious soul, shall be tempted to shrink himself into the
despicable contempt of every bordering Clown, is ten times worse than that
Roman Prince, whose name and memory will ever strangely savor of the very
piss of the People.

But, I fancy, this to be a needless and unseasonable surmise, since we find so
few, under the guilt of (an unfashionable) frugality. The Ambition of our
Ladies being so very high and towering, as speaks them resolved to consecrate
this Age into a perfect Jubilee, and make every Eve to usher in an Holy Day of
pleasure and gayness; and I Am sure I wrong not some of them, if I say they
never knew a Working-day these twenty years, and have forgotten the old
Reverend Custom of their Grand-Mothers, whose Wedding Gowns, and Kirchiefs,
never saw Light, but on the solemn anniversaries of Christmas or Easter, while
those celebrate an Everlasting Christmas, and dress on Saturdayes for the Stage
with nicer preparations than the next morning, for the Church, and begin the
week with the same zeal to their vanity, as they ended it. And were this the
grief of great ones only, perhaps it might be less fatal and mischievous. But
as Memucan, once (aggravating the crime of the Persian Queen) said, This deed
of Vasthi's will come abroad (for ill Example) among all the Women, and every
Lady of Media and Persia will despise their Husbands. His. 1. 17, 18. So from
the ill Practice of those that are able, (who can go to the charge of being
Idle) Is this ruinating custom gone abroad even among others, that undo their
Husbands by following the Pattern. Why should not they do as Vastis? But
Matthew Paris, in the life of King John, tells us a Story of one Hubert, then
Archbishop of Canterbury, who, when the King had given his Courteours Rich
Liveries; he to imitate his Sovereign, would needs give his Servants the like,
which gave no small offense, to his Majesty. Sure it is too great an arrogance
to Ape the Lion, and the Cestern may not think to make so broad a stream, as
the Fountain. 'Twere happy for these minor Ladies, if their hearts were Lower,
and their Fortunes Higher: But happiest of all, if they would employ what they
have to the ends God has given it, and respect more the miseries of the poor,
and those below then to imitate the extravagancies of the Mighty and the Rich,
that are so far above them.

There are, who believe that superfluity is a necessary evil in a State, the
floating of Fashions affording a standing Maintenance to thousands, which
otherwise would be at a loss for a Livelihood, and that men maintain more by
their Pride then by their charity. And surely if Armenta be not turned into
Ornamenta, whole Herds and Flocks sold off to furnish Head and Locks, and the
very pastures in which they graze follow not to pay for one Jewel. If the
Ancient Mannours of the Family, have not exchanged their Lords, nor are
Commanded to do Homage to a Mechannick Master. If the Accounts of the Steward
in the City, do but keep even pace with the receipts of him in the Country, and
Terra firma be not boiled away into Luxurious Gellies, and whole Acres be not
swopped down for a mornings draught: If the Courts below can but answer Echo
to those above, I know no reason why ruder Pens should so loudly exclaim
against the Prodigalities of the Great Ones, when we little know or consider
what others of the same Sphere have Acted in Ages before us.

And (sure I am) those have greatly exceeded them, in that one engulphing
profuseness of Jewels. Turtullian tells us, in his time, of twenty three
thousand Crowns disbursed for one Rope of Pearl. Saltus and Insulas tenera
cervix fert. One tender Neck of a Lady bears the burden of whole Woods and
Islands. Sir Thomas Moor to a Gentlewoman (complaining of exceeding heat in her
weighty dress) What wonder (says he) for thou carryest upon thee Meadows,
Vineyards, Mills, Mansions, and Islands in the value of Jewels. But prodigious
was the Luxury of the Roman Paulina, (Caligula's widow) who ruined her Father
with setting her out in so pompous excess, That she moved about with no fewer
Jewels then what cost him a Million of Gold, as Pliny and others have given us
her story. It Is very observable, that the first Jewels we read of in Scripture,
should be found in the Closet of the best Lady in the World, (not but that sure
they were common before that time,) but we read of none till Sarahs Cabinet is
presented to Rebeccah, and envy it self will never repine at those Arms
wearing Bracelets, that kneaded Cakes for Angels. The Wife of so great a Lord
(as was Abraham) and the Lord of so good a Wife (as was Sarah) the one might
warrantably wear what the other had cheerfully purchased for her. And Oh that
our Ladies had but Sarahs Humility and good Houswifery with her Jewels, whose
Fingers are I fear, too fine to deal in Dough, and the very Angels shall fast
rather than they will Kneel to the Kneading-troughs! So great a Difference
between Sarah, and her Daughters. Who are so (says Peter) so long as they do
well, but no longer.

Yet still I plead for Persons of Honor to keep up the the glory of their
Station, and sure I am they might best do it by curious weaving of Works of
Mercy with those of State. Nay, sometimes for Noble Persons to gratify their
Fancies by unnecessary Enterprises, and seeming Acts of Prodigallity and
Vanity, is no great loss to the public. There goes a Proverb, if Rich men were
not fools, poor men might starve. I will not expound it so grossly, but rather
would call it an Honorable Benificence to poor Laborers, should our Noble
Lord distaste the form of his House (as too Antique and unfashionable) and
resolve to pull it down, as well to employ poor Artificers, as to please his
own fancy in building it new. So for a good Lady (that has money enough) to
take occasion to pick a quarrel with her Wardrobe, as too thredbare and
Immodish, not from any design of Pride, but a pious Principle of supplying her
self and the Mercer together, who might else sit a cold and shiver in his shop
for want of Custom, Cursing more her Covetousness, than others her Pride. Will
you call this a vain Excess to idle needless superfluity? No alas, it is a
very perfect Charity. And such a good Lady (with holy Job) does but put on
Righteousness as a Robe, and clothes her self with Compassion, as with a
Diadem. Nay, each Lace, and inch of Ribband about her (like the spouses Thread
of Scarlet) does but fasten her Grace the closer to her Heart. And her entire
Dress is nothing else but the Herald (in his Gaudy Coat) that Proclaims her
Goodness and Charity.

Nor would I wish a greater punishment on those, whose Malice and Envy cuts so
large slashes in the Vestments of the Rich, than to pay the shot of those many
Families, who sit down, and give God thanks for there honest Gain, accruing to
them from the Accoutrements of but one Honorable Lady, when but Attired in a
suitable Garb to her Honor. It Is easily apparent, that above twenty honest
Salesmen make their dinners every day from the allowable advantages of her
Dress, should you pass from the Silkman and Exchange, from the Millener and the
Goldsmith, to the inferior Furnitures of her body; and instance but in the
most contemptible and basest of all; may the Reader consider, that the least
Pin about her, passes throw two or three hands ere it is quallified for the
Honor to have a place in her Head, and I wish it stuck in the fingers of such
who bethink the sorry Maintenance of those poor Wretches that point; those
others that head; and again, those others that fit them up in due ranks and
numbers for sale.

It was (Possibly) from such considerations as these that great St. Austin in
one of his Epistles to Possidius, gives him this necessery charge, Tom. 2.
Epist 37. ad Possid. Nolo ut de Ornamentis Auri vel vestis preproperam habeas
in prohibendo sententiam. Be not rash in passing too hasty a Judgment against
the Ornaments of the Rich; And some perhaps will but smile at the Decree of an
ancient Council of the Church assembled at Gangra. That anathematizes those,
who shall be so rude and audacious to censure or control the Apparel of great
and superiovr Persons. (Qui cum Reverentia Birrhis usi fuerint) and the ground
of that Curse (says Balsamon) was this. Because such are clothed, not propter
molliciem, sed propter professionem, not from any Luxury, but distinction.

Be not jealous (Reader) that I have forgotten my design, or am become Prides
Advocate. It Is, every where seen that Platoe's rich Gown covers a more humble
mind, than the Cynicks Frieze. Pride is a disease that breads in course and
branney Spirits (the very Scrapings of dame Natures trough) and blisters ever
from the corruptest blood. It Is Humility is the Glory of the Great and the
Noble, their only unalterable Dress, that is ever in fashion amongst them. The
very Rubies they wear would wax pale at the draught of that Venom, and Pearls
themselves would blush for shame at the imputation of such a Foppery. What need
such to swell, that are so Great already, or to aspire to a sublime Height when
they are born on the Hills of Excellency, and break into life, like, that
Emperor Diadumenus with a Diadem of Honor on their forheads, and whom the
first light salutes into the World as happy, as Great.

Thus while (Right Honorable) I apologize for you, and pay but the Tribute
your Virtue and State calls for, from every humble Pen. I have plotted all
along to merit from you the Innocent Liberty of Insinuating (in the most
prostrate and submissive posture of Address) the following considerations for
good Noble minds to contemplate.

First, That as you are fixed by the Generous and only distinguishing bounty of
God (your great Maker and ours) in the highest Orb, and to a more abstructed
Degree of Happiness and State in the World, than were others; Licenced to bear
a greater Sway and Port; and to appear with all your pompous Trains, drawing,
that eyes of the Universe after you by your Gallantry and splendor of Life. So
that your Honors would ever Remember to give all this but its right Name, and
the same, which the Holy Ghost gives it [Acts 25. 23.] Where an whole Bench of
Great Ones (and one of them a King) with all their Attendants and Glory
appeared to dazzle the eyes of a poor Prisoner at the Bar (who yet by the Spirit
and Power of the God that spoke by him, made the best of them tremble as he
sat) calls all that Luster, But a mere Phantacy ((...),) A very Gleam and Vain
Show that appeared and vanished together, and not so much as the Shadow of the
truer Glory, which has weight indeed and is massy, exceedingly so, and eternal
too. And this the Royal Prophet, well experienced, when he left behind him that
very proper Lesson for Persons of your Noble Order to meditate on. Man in his
best estate is altogether Vanity.

Nor is it unworthy your profoundest thoughts to consider, what little
Courtship the God of Glory has used toward some, very eminent Personages of
the Earth, by the contemptible characters he has stamped upon them in the
sacred Records. The Great Antiochus who for his Magnificence was styled
Epiphanes, or the Illustrious, passes off the stage with the Ignominious
impress of a Vile Person. Dan. 11. 21. (such it seems, in Heavens Accounts
notwithstanding his worldly Greatness) Herod, gains no more from our Savior
than the suitable Title of a Fox (who so greedily sucked the Blood of the
Innocent Baptist): Those who push the Innocent with the horns of oppression,
are (very congenially) termed the Bulls of Bashan, Jehoiakim, Jer. 22. 28. an
ill Prince, is shaved into the despicable cut of Coniah, as one unworthy to
fill up the leaves of his sacred Book with the full sylables of his Name. But
above all, how remarkable is the crowding of at least forty Dukes of the
progeny of Esau (whom God hated) into one short Chapter, justling them
together, three or four into one line, seven or eight of them into two. Duke
Teman, Duke Omar, Duke Zepho, Duke Kenaz, etc. their whole story lost in the
air of an empty Title, their persons and hopes entered together in the dark
vault of eternal Oblivion, While yet above a dozen chapters are proved in the
deciphering out the Excellencies of but one younger Son of a Plain man that
dwelt in Tents, and give us the exact memories of his whole life and actions to
the Grave, Genesis chap. 37. to 50.

And the Almighty God make your Honors as Pious and Good, as that famous
Joseph, and your Noble Consorts infinitely more Virtuous than his impure and
unkind mistress. Who, as if his unnatural Brethren had not shown cruelty enough
to him, by stripping him of one Coat, and sending him into Exile, She must
conspire too, and tear from him another, dismissing him all cold into Prison,
(clad only in the vest of divine Favor, and his, own innocence) yet anon
breaking out into a resplendency, outshining the Nobles of the whole Court when
we find him wrapped in the Royal Ornaments and the finest Linen of Egypt. Nor
had I mentioned this, Had it not been the perfect Mirror of your Honors own
real story. Who must (as certainly) be divested from all your rich and gay
colored coats (that creates so great an Envy in the eyes of the world) though
the particular Cognizances of your great Fathers kindness) and your desolate
Bodies sent Captives into the dungeon of death. If therefore now ye shall
carefully buckle on the secure Coat Armor of faith, and purity, to fence your
glorious souls from the repeated attempts, this Egyptian strumpet, the World,
shall make upon your Chastities. Then shall ye undoubtedly most triumphantly
appear at the Resurrection of the Just. Clothed with the bright rays of your
Saviors Righteousness, and Shining as the Sun, for ever and ever.

But if (which God forbid) you shall suffer your Noble and more Sublimated
Spirits to melt away in the Riots and Luxury of a meritorious bewitching World,
and this Circe to charm you into the killing slumbers of security and death,
should you pass into an ungrateful and slighting neglect of him whose goodness
has so deeply obliged you, by the many rich demonstrations of his bounty and
kindness, then, though you should here exalt your selves as the Eagle, and
Build your Nests among the Stars; yet thence will God surely cast you down into
Contempt, and lay your Honor in the dust. Though the whole Creation* here be
rifled for the furniture of your Tables, though the Indian Rocks resign up
their sparkling Diamonds, to grace your Bosoms, though you celebrate an
uninterrupted Holy Day of Joy and Pleasure, though the whole series of Life,
yet will a saucy Disease very impudently intrude upon you, and unpin the very
foundations of all these Ravishing glories, and tumble you into rottenness and
the grave. The insolent Captain within, will torture your unwilling ears with
the dismal tidings of an approaching dissolution, and Death it self will hardly
be bribed to the civility of giving Respite, while you chaunt out Adrians dying
Notes. O Animula, blandula, vagula, quo nunc abibis! O my miserable darling
soul, into what shades art thou now passing? This (Right Honorable) is the
unavoidable Decree of Heaven, and all the powers of Created strength and
policy, will never prevail to revoke it.

Yet (while you live) it cannot but be some Regret to your Honors to see all
the Badges of your Honorable Order so impudently invaded by the persons of the
basest and most contemptible circumstances and condition. Each Ranter and
Ruffian painting up himself into the most perfect hypocrisy of your Sat, and
hardly any thing wanting, (save the Blew Ribbon and the George) to distinguish
them from being Knights of the most Honorable Garter, you would take them all to
be Lords, (as the Roman Senator appeared once to the Embassaduor to be no less
than an Assembly of Kings) but that they have lost their Mannours and Manners
together; Envy would suggest, as if the sparks of this Vanity had all proceeded
from your palaces, but alas; every hand has set the fire to his own Thatch,
that has scattered into this Universal conflagration. Pity a distracted Nation
that has borrowed your plumes to dress it self up to the Acting it is own
Tragedy. The whole frantic Herd running about with Gilded Horns, and platted
Manes, presenting themselves to the Angry Deity for Sacrifice. It Is high time
for you (ye Nobles) to put on your Sables, while this mad Mummery is thus every
where practiced, The whole Kingdom in masquerade* the distracted Mimmix of
your Grandieur. Each pitiful fellow check-by-joleing it with your Lordships,
and every Mechanics wife Apeing your highborn Ladies, their heaps of
Counterfeits not sweating for fear, or shame to vie with the Richest Carcanets.
Anciently Pearls were called Vshers, because they made way for such as wore
them; now every Exchange-Wench is ushered in by them into her stalls, and while
she calls to others to know what they Lack, while her self lacks nothing to
make her as fine as a Countess, and stands there, but to upbraid others wants.
It Is a custom they say, at the Creation of Knights of the Bath, for the Kings
Master-Cook to come forth, and present his great Knife to the New-made Knights,
admonishing them to be Faithful and Valiant, otherwise he threatens them, that
very Knife is prepared to cut off their Spurs. But here are such a multitude of
Knights, and Ladies of their own Creation, behaving themselves so unworthy of
that Dignity, that the under Scullions of the Kitching, would be tired
sufficiently with cutting off the combs of their Honor. And sure some
sharp-edged Instrument or other, must be whetted to do the Execution, some
severe Laws to crop off the Monsters head in time. Or it is to be feared, God
himself will take it into his own hands, and make but bloody work among them.

Thus having ended these necessary Caveats to take off any prejudice which
might arise in great and innocent minds, I shall now betake my self to those
whom the guilt and danger does more immediately concern.

To both City and Country.
GOd who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, has spoken in times past to
all Nations, Kingsdoms, and People, as well by the Still Small Voice, of his
Mercies, as by the direful thunder of his Judgments, has in this present Age,
spoken to this sinful Land, in such terrible and astonishing accents as might
well have prevailed to startle and awaken the most drousie and secure People in
the World that were not wholly expired in a mortal Lethargy, and given over to
the formidable judgment of an utter insencibility. It Is sign we are perfectly
dead flesh, that can suffer the many strokes of Divine vengeance to be repeated
on us so often without the least sense of reluctance or groan, the many stabbs
from the Sword of Justice into our very bowels, while we (like the late
protestant-Martyrs Body) are so Stark and Stiff, that no Tears or Blood bedew
the Weapon that pierces us, nothing alas issues from the wounds that are made
into us. Whence is it, and from what provocation (O ye unhappy Contrymen)
have we contracted this so perfect an obduration, (the most infallible presage
of our Ruin)? have you not seen the Visions of the Prophet, That incorrigible
People (Once so dear and near unto God, the very Apple of his Eye, and dearly
Beloved of his Soul) but a moment before their National Vis^tation and Ruin,
laugh in the Face of an afflicting God, and bearing up themselves bravely under
all the wounds of his Wrath, and too cunningly baffling all the various Methods
of his (unforcedly cruel) dispensations against them? O Lord thou have smitten
them, but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them, but they have refused
to receive correction, they have made their faces harder than a Rock, they have
refused to return? Let all men's Consciences witness, whether ever the frame of
Englands Spirit could have been pourtraied out to greater Life by another
Pencil.

One would prudently suppose, it should be too late for Sin and Hell to play
over again their old Games, (now in this Rubbish Age of the World) while we see
all the Earth almost to have been desolated into rubbish by their cruelty and
fallacies. All the Nations and Kingdoms that were once Glorious, to be thrown
down into Destruction and Ruinous Heaps. The four great Monarchies of the Earth
gobbled up by the Lions that support the Throne of God's Justice. The
fierceness of his Indignation burning up the Sanctuary of his Holiness, and
seizing on the Habitation of his Glory and Delight, and his very People made an
Hissing and a Reproach to the World. God for these five thousand years has
been scattering abroad the Arrows of his Rage, hunting out after the Proud to
humble them, and treading down the wicked in their place, Where they all lie
his Prisoners in the dust together, with their faces bound for destruction. And
yet we worms take no warning. Why, open thine Eyes Reader, and consider, how
many millions has Sin and Judgment sent into the dungeons of darkness, and
thou art dancing on the very brink of the same precepice, yet wilt not see it.
No, not though God has brought the Tragedies of Antiquity, and Acted them over
again at thine own door. Thou have sent the Flames of Sodom, burning up thine
own House, and the Pestilence of Egypt, raging in thine own Streets. The silent
murmurs of an Hundred Thousand Souls seeming to mutter out the frustrated end
of their being locked up in darkness, while there is so little profit in their
Blood to the Living, and the happiness is only to themselves, in being
delivered from plagues more infectious than those that destroyed them: And to
this day the Sword of God reaching to the very soul. The Flames of his Wrath
burning in the spirits of men, ready to devour each other, and enkindle the
whole Kingdom into Flame, while every one strives under the pretenses of
Religion, which (in truth) is almost abandoned by all, the Marrow and Fatness
of it quite sucked away, while we are passionately quarrelling for the bone.
And while those that profess, say, Here is Christ; and others say, Nay, but He
is there. The miserable profane conclude, he is no where. The very Life is
lost in the contentions for the Form, and the Substance is so far from being
embraced, that the very Shadows are hated and persecuted by most. So little
care taken for making up our Divisions, that new Methods are daily contrived to
widen them. And while we are weakening one another, the Enemy fortifyes himself
against us all. Oh beloved Contrymen! What shall we do to be saved? Is there
no Balm in Gilead? Nor means to retrieve us? shall we not at least go hand in
hand, and reconcile to prayers and tears? shall we not weep together for
deliverance, without upbraiding each others drops, as Hypocritical? Is not the
Blessing, a Common Salvation, which we all so passionately long for? do we hate
each other to that Degree, that some are contented to be miserable still, that
others may not be happy? Is this the spirit of Love? This the temper of the
Gospel-Charity? This the way to atone an incensed God? who because our Spirits
are burning in hatred, is still enkindling the Flames of his Vengeance, whose
ashes, because we will not lay them on our Heads, God (ere they are quenched)
lays them on our Habitations again, and blows them up into fresh Fires, and
upon our breasts too to increase the Coals there. Nay, so far are we from
thinking on Sackcloaths, or treaties with God for forbearance, so far from
bending the stiffknee, and lifting up the humble hand: That there is a danger
in the very motion to it, the very Exhortation to Repentance is maliciously
construed into Sedition, as a piece of Nonconformity, to the happiness and
prosperity of the Age. As if Conversion to God were not the ready way to
Establishment of peace. Come Reader, before we breath in the Air, and after we
shall have ceased breathing here, Will that maxim hold unanswerable in our
Bibles, There is no peace says my God to the wicked. God says so, and he will
make us all to know so! Has He said it, and will He not bring it to pass? Let
us lay down our pride, our insolence, our contempts of Judgments, our abuse of
names, our cursed animosities, our dreadful heart-burnings, and bring our
selves into a posture, fit for Humiliation, and return to God, then may there
be some hope indeed; but without this, God has said it, There is no peace. And
a Mercy of Mercies it is, that at such a time as this, the Tongues of our
Prophets do not cleave to the roof of their Mouths, nor are Dumb. And He assure
you, some of them have cried aloud, (Ezech.) and spared not, yea have lift up
their voice like a Trumpet, and have not feared very roundly to show the
provocations of the Age: And the words that They have spoken shall Judge us at
the last day. Instead of many, I will instance but in two (and those indeed
instar omnium) the very worthy and undaunted witnesses of God, against all the
cursed debaucheries, that with such brazen faced impudence, do spread and reign
every where in the midst of us. And first, Arise (thou Chariots of Israel, and
the Horsemen thereof) the Valiant and Magnanimous Bishop of Hereford, (who in
thy discourse to the Lords assembled in Parliament, February 4. (7 3/4) from
that above mentioned Text, There is no peace to the Wicked) have uttered these
Words.

Page 17. Many complaints I heard abroad in the World, but very little to the
purpose, not one of an hundred considers matters aright, much less lays to
heart the true cause of that whereof they complain. But shall I tell you the
true Causes of our misery. We have made a League, a most unfortunate evil
League; and we have made a War, a most dangerous destructive War; a League with
Satan, and a War with God: these are the radical causes of our destruction, and
unless rooted up, will be our confusion. Not long since we lamented a Plague
that destroyed many thousands; that ceased, but our Sin, the cause thereof,
that remained; therefore another calamity ^oon followed: Then we lamented a
great and dreadful Fire, which consumed our Capital City; that also ceased, but
Sin still remained. Then we lamented a dangerous War, when our Enemies sailed
up the River so near us, that it struck a Terror into the hearts of all: they
likewise are gone, Our Sin still remains. So we go on lamenting one Calamity
after another, and labor still with might and main to redress the present
grievance, but the neglect the cause, like men in a Fever pained here, and
pained there, we toss from side to side to find rest; we call for this and that
Drink to quench our thirst, but all in vain; the Fever of Lust still burns in
our Bowels, and till this be cured, no ease, no rest to be had. (Again Page
20.) The lusts of the Flesh are most horribly exorbitant in both the parts of
it, Voluptuousness of Diet, and Lasciviousness of body. The business of Diet
which formerly was the care and talk of Women to their Cooks, and Caterers, is
now become the study and discourse of men, even Gentry and Nobles, whose Brains
is sunck into their Guts, and so are become very skillful in the Belly-science;
for they have invented Rarities never heard of in former Ages, and are so early
ripe in this Art, that before they have studied Philosophy or Gramar, they are
Masters in the Art of Cookery. Nor are they less skilful in Drinks than Meats:
and it is a thing adds much to their Reputation, that there is not a sort of
Wine growing in any part of France, Germany, Spain, Italy, but they have the
particular name thereof more ready than their Creed or Paternoster, and will
entertain you with a score at least in one Meal. (And Page 22.) Thus having by
the lust of Voluptuousness, by curious and excessive Eating and Drinking,
procured the lust of Lasciviousness. They give themselves up to work all manner
of uncleanness with Greediness; Fornication, and Adultery, not only frequently
acted in private, but publicly owned. Men in the dark formerly sculk't into
lewd houses, and there had their revellings; but now men, Married men, in the
light, bring into their own houses most lewd Strumpets, feast and sport with
them in the face of the Sun; mean while their neglected, scorned, disconsolated
wives, are forced to retire to their secret Closets, that they may not be
spectators of those Abominations. And whoever does not approve, yea, and
practice such detestable wickedness, whosoever is not a Devil incarnate, is
reproached by these as a devilish Hypocrite: (O incomparable Bishop, never so
great a Truth spoken!) for they have totally quenched the light of the Spirit
in their nasty pudle of uncleaness, they have so feared their consciences with
burning Lust; they have so Metamorphosed themselves into Lascivious Goats, as
they have no more belief of God in them, than these natural Brute Beasts, and
so conclude. The rest of men have no more conscience or belief of God than
themselves, and that all their seeming pity is mere Hypocrisy, and cunning
design for some advantage. (Reader, thank God for so faithful a witness.) And
by such scornful reproaches on one hand, and enticeing allurements on the
other, they gain many Associates, who have not the courage to resist the one,
nor constancy to withstand the other; by which means Lewdness and Atheism are
strangely increased in Court, City, and Country. How far some Grandees of the
Nation have been a Countenance and encouragement to Inferiors, is so visible,
there needs no discourse to show it.

(Page 25.) We are grown so irreligiously civil in this Age, that it passes for
Incivility if any one offer to reprove, or so much as frown; nay, if you do not
show some complaisance, and smile at their lewd profane discourses. (Page 27.)
Come now you that would pass for Noble and good natured men, come you sweet
natured and tenderhearted women, consider well I pray you with me, what shall
we think of this our foul sinful and hateful behavior toward our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ. Let us lay aside our gorgeous Apparel, all our splended
Pomp and Vanity. And totally humble our selves inside and outside, all
Gallantry must be put off, Sackcloth put on; we must mortify our carnal
beastial Lust, and let our Eyes brake forth into fountains of tears, to wash
away the lothsom filth thereof, etc.

Now judge Reader, whether God has left himself without witnesses, shall not
these words Pass as good Evidence to the confusion of such as go on still in
their trespasses? But because every Truth is established in the mouth of two or
three, let us adjoyn another to him as Nobly Valiant for the Truth, and zealous
for the Glory of his God as himself. The Right Reverend Bishop of Salisbury,
who in this Apostatizing Age, wherein we have made so Universal a revolt from
God's Covenant, and all Goodness, has thus Valiantly born his Testimony
against the Villainies of the Kingdoms, in that Noble Sermon of his, from [2
Kings 6. ult.] This Evil is of the Lord, wherefore should I wait for the Lord
any Longer? etc. (preached also before the Lords in the same place, and but a
month before the former). -- Page 10. he raises this observation (viz) The most
wicked and most Distempered Sinners are forced sometimes to acknowledge the hand
of God in the dispensation of his Judgments. Tho

(Page 12) they devote themselves to profaneness and debauchery, enter
themselves in the Academy of Athism and irreligion, become very hard Studients
in the Schools of Ryoting and Drunkenness, of Chambering and Wantonness, of
Hectoring and Ranting: frequent the Brothels and the Stage: yet all this will
not serve their turns, when the hand of God is lifted up, though they will not
see, yet they shall see and be afraid, -- Page 25. -- Come then in the Name of
God, let us reason a while together: has this been the case of Joram, (of whom
we have been speaking)? and is it not the case of us? Plainly! was it only the
case of that King of Israel, and is it not the case of this Kingdom of England?
(Page 27) That a novel and upstart Commonwealth of a Nation (He means the
Dutch) lately feeble and poor, whyning and submissive, should Arrive at the
ungrateful boldness to provoke a powerful and mighty Kingdom, that they should
be permitted to disappoint and baffle their strongest preparations, and come to
such an height, as to endeavor to fix upon them Marks and Characters of
perpetual ignomy and dishonor.

That a spark should kindle in a corner, and should be permitted to destroy all
the stately Palaces, public Buildings, and Venerable Churches, in one of the
most considerable Cities in the World, besides Twelve Thousand private
Habitations; certainly this evil is from the Lord, that after we have seen the
end of the Lord, the vengeance of God so signally executed upon the Principle
Authors, Actors, and promoters (of his late Majesty's Death) (Page 29) matters
should be brought to that pass, that some should fear, and others hope, that
the Monarchy of England, and that Religion, and those Laws, and the very
persons which uphold it, should now be abandoned; and that the great Interest
of Religion and Government should be delivered up into the hands of the Irish
or English Papists, the Scotch or English Covenanters, or other Sectaries. Are
not all these things strange and wonderful in our Eyes? is not the hand of God
to be seen clearly in all this? -- Let us now see the National behavior, when
these Judgments have been so many, so grievous, so visible, have the
Inhabitants of the Land learned Righteousness? have they prevailed upon us to
break off our sins by Repentance, or to continue in them, and increase them
with a brisker and sturdier Resolution? Instead of being a Religious and
Praying people, are we not become an Atheistical and Blaspheaming people?
Instead of a sober and fasting people, are we not become a roitous and a
drunken people? Instead of being a chaste and modest, a meek and humble, a
gentle and composed people, are we not become a shameless and immodest, a
ranting and tearing, an hectoring and God-damning People? Instead of turning to
the Lord with all our hearts, with fasting, weeping, and mourning for our sins,
have not we turned from him with all our hearts; and with laughing, and with
scoffing, and with jeering at all Humiliation, Devotion and Religion? [Page
32.] My Commission reaches to those who have called me hither, and I hope they
will not be offended at me, (If they be, it is no great matter, sure I am God is
well enough pleased, and therefore, (Reverend man of God) let us hear it all
out.) I take therefore the boldness in the Name of God, and our King and
Country, to enquire of my self and those that brought me hither, Whether we
also have not fallen into the way of Joram? Whether we can wash our hands of
the Universal irreligion and debauchery which seems to have overspread the
Land? [Page 34] There is one thing I find my self obliged plainly, and clearly,
to lay before your Lordships, and it is this. --

That (as sure as there is a God in Heaven, a Lord that is higher than your
Lordships: As sure as Christ is now sitting at his right hand; As sure as holy
men of old, the Prophets and Apostles were inspired by the Holy Ghost) If we do
not speedily break out of this way of Joram: If we do not our utmost to redeem
and rescue the Kingdom from it, This our Iniquities will be our Ruin. That if
after so many loud Calls to Religion, and Virtue, we shall resolvedly go on in
the ways of Irreligion and Debauchery. Or, if we shall not do our utmost for
the Erraducation of them, We must expect a sure and swift destruction.
Wherefore return now o Shunamite! Return. Arise and bethink your selves, Men,
Brethren, and Fathers. Oh ye wise and honorable among the People, consult and
consider! What shall we do that the blood of of Jesus may speak better things
for us than the blood of the Righteous Royal Martyr? what shall we do to be
saved from Ruin and Destruction? wherefore let us trifle no more, let us sin no
more, let us fool no more, lest we fall and perish under the condemnation of
Joram.

Go your ways and Dye, lay down your Sacred heads with peace and comfort, (Oh
ye faithful and excellent Bishops!) in that ye have so fully discharged your
Consciences in standing up for God and his holy Religion, and done what you
could toward the setting some bounds, and giving check to the deluge of
prophanness that is broken in upon us. I will not dishonor these incomparable
Persons, by adding any more to strengthen the Testimony they have given against
that General Wickedness, my business calling me rather this time to Arraign a
particular Vice, that is the very Mother and Nurse of all the rest, and that is
Pride; yet will I adventure here to subjoyne one short observation of a Bishop
too, Whose words will evidence for him the Integrity of his heart toward God
in the late Age wherein he lived. The Learned Bishop Downeham in a Sermon at
the Spittle (called Abraham's Trial,) Thus complains.

In these times the Godly live among such a Generation of men, As that if a man
do but Labor to Keep a good Conscience in any measure, although he meddle not
with matters of State, or Discipline, or Ceremonies: As for example, if a
Minister diligently preach, or in his preaching seek to profit rather than
please (remembering the saying of the Apostle; If I seek to please men, I am not
the Servant of God, Gal. 1. 10.) Or if a Private Christian make Conscience of
Swearing, Sanctifing the Sabbath, frequenting Sermons, or abstain from the
Common corruption of the times, he shall straitwayes be condemned for a
Purtian, and consequently be less favored, than either a carnal Gospeller, or
a close Papist. I shall leave the application of this note to the Reader to
make it as he pleases. When Luther began to preach against the Popes pardons, a
friend of his counseled him thus; As good hold your tongue, the Custom is so
strong, you will do no good: Get you into your Study and Pray, Domine Miserere
Mei, and get you no anger. So methinks while I undertake a discourse against
Pride, and the fooleries of women especially, that are rivited into their
Nature, and have gotten sure hold in their hearts (besides the plea of
possession out of mind) I were as good hold my peace, for all will be to no
purpose. But Jacta est Alea. Let the Die run as it will, it is good to let them
see their folly however.

I have often wondered why the Learned Fathers, (Tertullian, St. Cyprian, St.
Jerome, St. Austin, These Especially, and some other) have bent their Pens so
vehemently against the Pride and Vanity of women's Attire, writing whole Tracts
and long discourses about them, when now it is so perfectly out of fashion to
deal upon these subjects, and our Pulpits so generally silent, as scarce a
Reproof can be heard in a year: Is it because this Sin is reformed, and our
Ladies now a days grown more Modest and Christian, and so not properly taxable
of the Vice? Ah no! I trow, our Enquire will find them ten times more guilty
than ever were those in the Fathers days; Or what? have we not so great a
Kindness and Zeal to the Women as they? and do we abate in care to their Souls?
I pray God we have not too great a Kindness to them, for which they will Curse
us another day. But when I hear St. Jerome so earnestly protesting to
Demetrias, that no Raiment, Ornament, or Habit whatsoever would be acceptable
to Christ, but what she made with her own hands, either for her own use, or to
give unto her Grandmother, or Mother; Exhorting her therefore that to eschew
Idleness (having performed her devotion) she shall take in hand her Flax and
Spindle, (as Dorcas) the better to pass the day away, and dress up her self in
the Cloth of her own Spinning (and yet this Demetrias, a Lady of Fortune and
Quality) I cannot but reflect on the idleness of our women, who would huff St.
Jerome (were he now alive) for the advice that should engage them to so
tiresome a work; the good Father must excuse them, these have something else to
do than to Spend those tedious hours in so dull an Employ. Yet I remember a
Note of Bishop Babington [upon Genesis 24. 13.] Where the Great Rebeccah came out
with her Pitcher upon her shoulder to draw water -- See (says he) the
simplicity and Plaineness of those days in the Education of their daughters; I
beseech you, where were those Golden, Silken, Pearled, Idle Dames that our
days yield, when Water-Pots, and Sheep-Hookes, were thought no hurter of
women's hands, by the very Parents themselves: Nay, Eliezer who was there
arrived to fetch her away to be Wife to the best Heir then in the World, was so
far from liking her the worse, that it was the only thing that recommended
her to his Choice, and the Woman that could be so courteous and humble to draw
water for himself and his Camels, would infallably make the best house wife for
Isaac: When now, poor Girls surprised in an unperfect dress, or a foul pair
of Gloves, are ready to sink down with fear and shame as if that were enough to
brake off the match, not considering how far they impose on the folly and
indiscretion of such Addressers, who should respect more the outward Niceties,
than the inward Virtues, and Court rather the Clothes than the Woman; when yet
there is not the least pin stuck into head or heart toward a preparation for a
better Husband who has told them beforehand that he will come when they little
think on it, and commanded them therefore to be always Ready, lest they be
surprised by Him too, and found in such a pickle as will make him abhor them
for ever. Indeed Tertullian has advized them to more wit, when he tells them,
that if they would dress them in the Silk of Sincerity, the Satin of Sanctity,
and the Purple of Modesty, God himself would not fail to be a Suitor to them.
Sir Thomas Moore once seeing a young Lady tricked up in the most excessive
Curiosity of Attire, (and I was surpised when I found that Cornelius a Lapide
in his Comment on Timothy, has gotten the story by the end) Mistress, says he,
unless God give you Hell for all this Pains and Labor of Dress; Verily He will
do you great Injury. But what said Old Plautus, A Woman and a Ship are never
sufficiently rigged up: therefore, said he, if any Man want work or business
for his money, Let him get him a Ship or a Wife. Yet Plutarch tells us, that
Phocian (the Athenian General) was Singularly happy in this, who when a great
Lady of Jonia came to Athens to pass a visit on her, and showed her all the
Rich Jewels, and Precious stones of her Cabinet; But says this Lady, All my
Riches, and Jewels, is my Husband Phocion. Indeed those Athenians were a
politic People, and cared very little that their women should bare away the
spoils of their Estate, who therefore had Officers on purpose who were to
order the Apparel for women, and to take care that no one might wear any thing
unbecoming her Place or Degree, and these were called Gyneconomi. A Committee
that sat on the Female affayrs, to keep them in due Moderation and Order. Very
much wanted in England. The like Power had the Ephori to correct the Spartan
Extravagancies, and I confess the Laws of Licurgus (for youth especially) were
so choice and remarkable, that the very reading of them would make us reflect
on our own impudencies, when (as my Author tells me) the very young men of the
City were reduced to so high a degree of Civility and Modesty, that passing
through the Streets on their Lawful Occasions, they would wrap themselves up in
their Cloaks, not stand prating to every one they met, nor Gaze up and down,
but kept their very eyes fixed upon the ground; by which means, in a while, the
masculine Sex excelled in all bashfulness and gravity, the very choicest
perfections of the Feminine. Their Voices were no more heard, than if they had
been Statues of Stone, neither were the young Damsels more chaste in their
Chambers, than were those young men as they walked in the Streets. And does not
this make thee blush, Reader, to consider, the Rudeness, the Incivility, the
Insolence, the the Wild and Immodest Gestures, and Deportment not of the Males
only in our City, but the Looseness, the Staring and Gaping, the Idle and
Dissolute Carriage of the very Virgins and Young Ladies who set themselves out
on purpose to be picked up, and Gazed on, and turn their back upon every
passenger, as it were to tell him they are freely at his service. Not to speak
now of the swarms of these execrable prostitutes (the Plagues of the Town)
that have every Night their several walks and appartments to ply in; you may
find them as Solomon says, not in the Corner of the Streets only, but thick
in the very midst of them, and turning the whole City into a Stews. It were
well if the like dispatch of some Ship-Loads of them were made to the Foreign
Plantations, as in the time of the Usurper there was. And these too, glittering
as so many Stars all over in the sparkles of St. Martins, the proper Lawful
Dress of their Trade by the Lacedemonian-Law, who allowed none of these
Gayities to any but Whores.

Nor can I but mention another most profitable Law of Licurgus, who ordained,
that the young men of Sparta should have frequent meetings in some public
place, where they should Eat and Drink together for a mutual increase of
acquaintance and love; but when assembled, their chiefest discourses were
ordained to be for the better contrivance and carrying on the prosperity and
welfare of the City, on purpose (says my Author) to avoid any idle or
impertinent prattle; and when all finished, in due Order and Civility to depart
each one to his proper home, and betimes too, without the Least Debauchery, by
Wine, lest any notice should be taken of any disorder, in their passage home
through the Streets (for Night was to be no mantle to vice, no more than the
day had been) so as they were under an Excellent Government, they should take
care to honor it by as honest a Carriage. What, Reader, does the Wilderness
bring forth better fruit than the Garden! We are every one striving for the
Honor of the Church and the Kingdoms. Let us at least take Example by these
Heathen, who surely were wiser in their Generation than we. Is debauchery and
sottishness become the true methods of Honor to so incomparable a Government
we lie under? and the roarings of our Taverns at midnight quite drowning the
Anthems of our Church? Alas, when shall we begin with a faithful sobriety (with
these Spartanes) to bring glory to the Crown and the Miter, whose Honor we so
passionately contend for, yet suffer its Jewels to swim away in our Spew, and
then only to dispute for a Decipline, when we have lost our senses in the
draughts of intemperance, and are not able to speak a plain word.

And further, they were so far from Pomp of Apparel, that no gain or increase
of Estate could tempt them to so vain a Superfluity; they consulted the
well-Ordering and Governing their Bodies, more than any Exterior magnificent
Clothing; and loved better to have Money in their Purses, than to lay it all out
on their Backs. When thou know Reader, what a World of Byas'es, appear like
Princes among us, yet carry all they have in the World about them, as He.
Long-Coats and a Drivelling-Cloth, is the proper Demonstrative Garb of a
Natural, and is not unbecoming for him, who dresses himself up in his whole
Estate, and has left not a penny to dine on, but is more ridiculous than
Jack-Pudding, who disguises himself to get some. There was once a Gallant in a
Velvet-Coat, and a Scarlet-Cloak over it, walking in Paul's, where finding
himself very hungry, and over-hearing some others discourse of a Feast the
Ironmongers held that day in their Hall, was glad of that News, and resolving
to intrude amongst them: No sooner appeared, then was courteously received and
promoted by the Stewards to the best Seat at the Table, (as one they thought,
who might formerly be of the Society* or at least descended from a Father that
was, and now had done them the Honor to Grace them with His Worshipful
Company) when Dinner was over, and he had laid well about him, and brisk'd up
his Spirits with Wine: The chiefest of the Company (with whom he Conversed)
were at length so bold to desire him to discover himself, and what Relation he
had to their Society: To whom he very merrily replied. O a very near affinity
to your Trade, for I my self am a Monger too. They pray him to explain what he
meant. By my troth Gentlemen, since you must know, I am a Whore-Monger, and
have wasted my Estate in my Vocation, so that wanting a Dinner, I supposed the
contiguity of our Callings might well entitle me to the Good Repast I I have
found among you, and so I bid you adieu. I am afraid it will endanger most of
the Societies in the City to provide for the mnltitudes of his Trade and
Finery, (that stand in as great need of a Dinner as he) who are Breathing
Vivifications of that notorious Truth. By means of an Whorish Woman, a Man is
brought to a piece of Bread.

Among the Heresies, (August. de Here Is.) that arose very early in the Church,
there started out a Sect, called [the Paterniani] possibly the Spawn of the
filthy Gnostics; whose opinion was, that the upper Parts of a man's Body were
made indeed by God, but the lower Parts from the Girdle, they held was made by
the Devil; and very fond they grew of their fancy, which they thought gave them
a Liberty to do with the Devils part what they pleased, so long as they
reserved the rest unto God. Who must excuse them if they employ that (wherein
he had no title) unto the service of the Devil and lust. It Is to be feared,
this Heresy insensibly has crept in among us, and gotten too general an hold;
and it were well, if it had not improved, and encroach'd beyond it is first
limits; but, sure it seems to battle here in it is own Ordure, and sport it
self as in it is own Element. While it presumes to invade the poor remains it
has left unto God, and hardly left him an Eye or a Lip for his service. The
Tongue (the Trumpet of his Honor) is now (as St. James said) set on fire of
Hell, and and belching out the Infernal Vapors, with Aetna, as furiously as
the Tail is reaking with the smoke and steames of impurity and filth. And
(which is most pitteous to behold) our very Ladies (so far, obeying the
Apostle) yield the more abundant Honor to the less Honorable parts (which
these Heretics say, were made by the Devil, while they are grown so
Universally careless of Gods, that (like a solitary Mansion) they desert it all
Naked and Unfurnished, and leave it all Bare to shift for it is self as it can,
and declare to all mankind how ready they are to surrender possession to the
Devil. It Is pity: Ladies should be Heretics too, out their Naked Necks and
Shoulders are undeniable Evidences of their Apostasy and Guilt: And acquaint us
how little they feared that dreadful Judgment denounced against the wanton
Dames of Syon (for the pride of their stretched-out Necks, and tinckling Feet)
that they hold it a Judgment, if that Judgment be not frequently repeated upon
them, while they are half underess'd already to it, and defy the worst that
God or man can do against them.

Of Naked Necks and Shoulders.
AN Impudenee abominated by the very Light of Nature. No sooner (says
Tertullian) did our first Parents perceive themselves Naked, but they sought
out for some Covering, though a poor one: And the very Arabian Women (says he)
will rise up in Judgment against this Generation [Quod non caput modo, sed
faciem quoque ita totam tegunt, ut uno oculo liberato, corteatas sunt dimidia
frui Luce, quam totam faciem prostituere] Who rather than they will prostitute
the honor of their Countenances to public danger (much less their Necks and
Shoulders) do furle them in their Mantles all over, and allow but a
peeping-hole for one Eye to guide them in the way. The Roman Sulpicius was so
far affronted to meet his wife in public without her Vail, that he devorced
her for that Impudence; so impossible did he think such a looseness could
consist with Virtue, and she that departed from the Grace of her Modesty, must
take leave of the Honor of his Bed too.

How have the the Primitive Fathers Thundered against this insufferable
shamelesness of bare Bodies, as if wholly irreconcilable to the reverence and
severity of the Christian Religion? Where is the Dispensation we have gotten
for it in these days? Can our Ladies show any? Lay down thy Pen, Tertullian,
and prescribe no more Rules for Women's behavior and bashfulness. Here are a
sort of things, called Christians of a new Form, that scorn thy Arguments to
the (unfashionable) practice and exercise of Virtue, tho thou have told them
plain enough, That the nakedness of their Breasts is Adultery, and that it is
possible such as go so, may be honest, but very few that see them believe it.
And thou Father Jerome, who once most justly did upbraid the loose Jovinian,
for entertaining an Army of these new fashioned Amazons. [Habet in castro
Amazonas viros ad Labadinem provocates, Mamma exerta and brachio Rado] Who with
their naked Breasts strutting out, and Arms tucked up to the very shoulders,
did in that posture, seem rather to challenge Combatants into the Fields of
Venus, than make any show of fighting under the Banner of a Crucified Savior.
Let that passion cease now (holy Father) for he has gotten all the World into
his Camp; Who will make thee know, Christianity can connive at those
Libertinisms, indulge against those Severities thy froward Spirit did ever
abound with. And why have thou railed against bare Necks, As the flames that
comsumed Youth, the Incentives of Lust, and the never failing Ensigns of an
Impudent Mind? What a storm will thou raise over thy sacred Head, and provoke
thy excellent Volumes to be doomed to the fire, their holy Leaves to be
sacrificed to the humor of Women's Pride? And what was thy Project
(incomparable Chrysostom) to enter those Lists with the Ladies of thine
Antioch, Who dared to sit down under the droppings of thy slowing Lips, and the
showers of thine Eloquence, with their naked Bodies, as if they designed to
debauch the Purity of thy holy Affections and Soul! Oh what a Storm did thy
fiery Zeal raise to set them in a trembling! What, do ye come hither into the
House of God as to a Play? Do you come into the Sanctuary of your Maker to make
your Conquests here? And here to satisfy your Sensuality? Do you approach
hither to attaque even God too? What, does all this People, this soft and
wanton delicacy, this affected nakedness become the estate and condition of
such who could have mercy for their Sins? Are these the Dispensations and
Postures of Mourners and Penitents? -- Surely the blood of their Hearts started
up into their Face and Necks, and all purpled their very shoulders, when the
astonishing Thunder fell upon them! But yet, why (Golden Father) wast thou so
un-Courtly and downright to tell those Naked Dames, that the very Devil sat
upon their very Shoulders, and Pearch'd himself upon the little Mounts of their
exposed Breasts, hopping as a Bird from one to the other, and greatly pleasing
himself with the Rays they had set out for him. Sure thine aim was to
affright them out of their sins. But alas, all this will not do, tho they might
well be scared out of their Wits, with the very thought of having a Devil in
their Bosoms. It were endless Reader, to gather up the Testimonies of Writers
both Ancient and Modern, whose Ardency and Zeal for the happiness of those,
(who, God knows, are all dead and cold to their own) seems alas, now very
perfectly quenched by the inundation of the Sin and Impudence, They so
passionatly Damned, that the whole Church through all the World seems totally
to despair of redress, or any tolerable Reformation, and betakes it self (with
Jeremy) to weep in secret for the Pride of those Franticks, leaving God (if he
will) to work Miracles upon their miserable Souls, since themselves can effect
no Good in the well and modest ordering their Bodies and Habits.

Yet to these Primitive Fathers, I shall add the sense of two or three of our
Modern Divines, and show my Reader how fully they accord with the former. How
many (says Reverend Downeham) do openly profess their inward uncleanness, by
laying open to the common view, their naked Breasts, as tho it were a Bill
affixed to the door posts, to signify to the passers by, that within that place
dwells an unclean Heart, and that whosoever will, may there buy Honesty and
Chastity at an easy rate. [On Hosea 2. 2.] And another on the same Text. Whores
use to discover their filthiness much in their Breasts, either in the Nakedness
of their Breasts, or in those Ornaments they hang about them. Reverend Mr.
Perkins has powered out a flood of Zeal, were it possible to drown this
madness. The end of Attire is to hide the shameful Nakedness of the body from
the sight of men; why then are Garments made of such a fashion as that the Neck
and Breasts may be left for a great part uncovered? But such Persons as these
do hereby express the Vanity and lightness of their Minds: What do they else
but even display and manifest unto Men and Angels their own shame and
ignominy? Nay, what do they else, but glory in that, which is by the just
judgment of God reproachful unto them? Let all those that fear God and are
humbled in consideration of their Sins, be otherwise affected -- Reader, scorn
not the Testimony of this holy Man from the plainess of his words. The name of
Mr. Perkins is contemptible to none but such as want his humble Spirit.

Come Ladies, what is your opinion of these Holy Fathers? Sure you cannot
reproach them as Sectaries or Phanaticks, who conspire to bring all the world
under their Girdle, as you think. You hear how boldly they have declared
against the very Sin you practice and plead for: Whose words believe you, will
stand the Test another day, theirs or yours? the Vice is the same now, as it
was in the Ages they lived in, and the danger from it the same. What ever
prejudice you may idly entertain (from the sad distraction of a divided
Church) against the present Witnesses and Ministers of God. Sure I am, you can
righteously harbor none against these Eminent Persons (the very Glory and
Flowers of Christianity) whose Piety and Memory all the Churches upon Earth
meritoriously Celebrate. Who dare to retrieve you from the sentence they have
passed against your folly? Consult any worthy Divine of your acquaintance in
the present Age, and see whether he do differ in Judgment from these: If I have
produced these few, He will offer you ten times as many to corroborate the
strength of the Evidence. Do but put the question home with earnest and hearty
desire to be resolved -- whether such a Guise or Fashion becomes the Gravity of
a Christian woman, that really hopes to be saved, and would glorify God in her
life to that end? I have so much confidence in the fidelity of any true servant
of Jesus, that in this he will faithfully discharge his duty to his Master, and
your Souls, and deliberately tell you, that not this cursed custom only, but a
great many more that abound in your sex, are perfectly inconsistent with the
very temper and Holiness of those Laws and Religion from which they derive the
means and hopes of a future Happiness. The truth is, their appears so Universal
a Degeneracy (in this Age) from the ancient foundation of piety and practice
that Adorned and Gilded the Generations of old: That if mighty Allowances from
the first Austerity, be not granted to our present weakness, there may be but
cold hopes for the best of Professors. And how far one may prudently venture an
Eternal Soul on the presumption that God will allow of those Licenses we give
our selves (which himself has no where revealed his pleasure to Tolerate, and
his best Servants declare that he never will), I must tell you, may make you
tremble to think on what ever other profession you make, which the greater it
is, the more honor should you give it by an evangelical humility and
self-denying Spirit, Adorning the Doctrine of God your Savior in all things.
And I direct this especially to the most retire and solemn reflections of your
rational Soul to consider of and apply: sure I am, we are so far from the
complexion of the primitive Christians, that neither our Faces, nor our
Breasts, nor our Hearts, nor our Habits, nor our Practices are the same. If the
Gospel call to the professing women, to Apparel themselves in conformity, to
the modesty and simplicity of those that trusted in God in time of old: if
those under the Law send out their Cries to you under the Gospel to be Civil
and Holy, to be Meek and Chaste; and you can Echo back again to them that you
are so, and professors under both are found clad but in the same Livory, this
will be your Glory indeed, and a Blessed Uniformity. But should you make the
Gospel to Vary in its Fashions, and to be as inconstant in its precepts, as you
are in your fidelity to them; this will look but very ill, and the God who
formerly would not abide his Spouse to be clad in a Linsey-Woolsey-Coat,
(Levit. 19. 19.) will very hardly be prevailed on to approve an Obedience of
more Natures and Colors than that. To speak plain, the Modern Apostacies may
not expect the reward of the first Faithfulness. Nor can the Attire and Spirit
of an Harlot look to pass with the same approbation as that of a Chaste and Pure
Virgin. Remember, it is the Wedding Garment of Fidelity and Love can alone
secure you from being expuls'd with shame and confusion from the Delicacies of
the Marriage Supper: the Har^otry Dress will have no Acceptance there. Do you
know this, Ladies, and will you adventure your Immortal Spi^its under so
formidable hazards; as (if duly considered) would make your very Souls shake
with far greater trembling, then do your quivering Shoulders under the
persecution of the blustering Winds? When the unfortunate Thamar so freely
^ass'd to the Bed of Amnon, she had let^^e Jealousy that her steps posted her
to the violent Gripes of a Ravisher, who was sick and uneasy until he had
perfectly ruined her; and when he had done it, had little ease too, nor Glory
from the Spoils of her Honor: And are not these cursed Vanities as so many
Ravishers, that fall foul on, and violate your Virgin affections from God,
while some of you ignorantly believe there is little ^anger in those fatal
haggs; and others of you consent heartily to them, and wipe off from Amnon the
guilt and dishonor of the Rape, till at last having marred you from ever
partaking of the felicities of the Celestial Nuptials, he first bolt you out
from his own embraces, and the shame confine you to a desolate Estate, with the
mournful Thamar, sitting sad and solitary, in some melancholy corner of her
Brother Absoloms House?

But happy were you, if in a provident foresight of so Tyrannous Cruelty, you
would presently do, what she did too late: Rend your Gaudy Coats, and put ashes
on your heads, and cry for revenge to Heaven against Pride, the Deflowrer of
your Souls: your undressing from vanity would be so profitable a Nakedness,
that were you to walk up and down in the Rags your Repentance had rent into
Tatters, the shame would be infinite Glory, if weighed with the confusion that
will one day surprise you for the guilt of your insufferable Impudence and
Folly.

When the Israelitish Dames gave Aaron their Jewels to make them a God with,
Holy writ (descanting on that Act) says, that thereby he had made them Naked
to their Shame. But was this Nakedness from the want of an Neck-Lace or an
Eare-Ring? Alas no, they had put off a God to put on a Beast, and turned their
Glory into the Similitude of a Calf that eats hay. And those who shall
undress from their Strength above, and strip off the Spirit of Glory, that
would rest upon them, to prank themselves up in the beauties of Created Luster,
and shine, shall find their Shoulders as Naked as yours, bare on purpose to
receive the lashes of Vengeance, which the Executioner, Justice, will lay on
with severity, and mercilesly multiply upon them.

But, Ladies, why is Mary Magdalen set out in the Gospel (the most notorious
Example of sin and Grace) but to let you know, that her new Lover (who had set
into Joint her broken Soul, and cag'd up her wandering affections in his own
Bosom) is as ready to Act miracles for you too, and discover to you the Charms
of a Savior, which a Legion of other Pretenders can never pretend to Court you
with. And though your Innocence suggest that you stand in less need of his
favor than She, yet if Scriptures convince you there are Adulteries of the
Breast, which you repeat every day, and others of the Eye and Heart which you
tempt your Admirers, to as frequent guilt of, I fear you will want little less
weight of Soap to wash away your Crimes with; and while they wear the Crimson
Dye, will require the very Heart Blood of a God to whiten you into Snow.

And so far as you rest unconvinc'd of their Danger, so long are you still
unhumbled for their Guilt, and by the same distance kept from the means of a
Recovery; so that while the groseness of her Lewdness, the festring of her
Sores, spurred her on to hasten after remedy and ease, your Dead Flesh (for want
of Anguish) insencibly betray's you to hugg your disease, that (as some
drilling consumptions) still flatters you on into hopes of life; when (God
knows) the staring out of your Shoulder-bones, tell all the World how near the
poor Skelleton hastens into Dust, and the Spirit within it unto Judgment.

Yet (ere you go) Contemplate on Her who so pitied her self, that Seven Devils
could not keep her from addressing a Savior, (and if you would cover your
Necks, you might be welcome too, for ought I know); but should you appear in
His presence in the lascivious garb you commonly present your selves abroad in,
His Glorious Purer Eyes (that cannot endure to behold Iniquity, and are as a
flame of Fire) would doubtless flash out wrath and death into your shameless
hearts, whose Vanity promps you to so profligate a dress, as would infinitely
incense even the meekest Spirit of Jesus, who yet was condiscending enough to
the meanest of your sex in the decorums of decency, and due prostration, of
humility, and a mortified sense of their wants. And though the poor
Syrephaenician was a little roughly handled at first, yet the Dog was not sent
away with Crumbs only, but carried home with her the whole Loaf of Mercy.

History tells us of Pope Benedict the Eleventh, the Son of a Peasant (and a
Catholic is my Author) his Mother being brought unto him, in a Rich and
Sumptuous Habit, with hopes of being more gratefully received, by the splendid
appearance she made before him; he turning away his Eyes, said, He could not
acknowledge that Woman for his Mother: but afterward returning in her Rustic
Attire, he then acknowledged her, and yielded her all the Rights of a good Son.
And surely He, who rejecting all the glittering Ladies of the Earth, Respected
the low Estate of a poor Handmaid, Consecrating her Virgin Womb, (the
dressing-House wherein he Swathed himself up into Humanity) first into a
Sanctuary for His Honor, for Nine whole Months together, and afterward
Blessed Her Breasts that gave him Suck, has thereby proclaimed to all the
World how far his Sacred Heart prefers the Humble Cells of a pure and Virtuous
Mind, before all the Tapsteries of State, and the painted Breasts of the
Flaunting Gallants, who, (as Father Chrysostom says) are rather the Lodges of
Devils, than a Savior.

Alas Ladies, His Holy Eyes have been feasted with the Glorious Prospects of
Triumphing Virgins, Courting the very Torturing Flames, to uncloath them into
Spirit and Immortallity, wherein they might enjoy their Dearest Lord, while
himself has kindly descended into the Fiery Chariot to them, to drive with
greater ease these welcome Guests into their Eternal Palaces. While alas you
are so far from the Ambition of being Clothed upon with that House which is
from Heaven, that you will not cloth your Earthly Tabernacle into that Decency
and Holy Form as might invite him to mark it up for an Habitation of his Spirit.

And if you will not Sacrifice a Lust to the Glory of his Cross, how would you
Sacrifice your Flesh to it? And if you will not throw off a vain and condemned
Custom by all the Holy Saints in the world, how would you put on the
Pitch'd-Coat of Martyrdom, which Nero clapped on the backs of the more faithful
Adorers of the Blessed Jesus, to make them burn the better in; That was [Tunica
molesta] the Troublesome Coat indeed unto them. When you cry out for the
liberty of your shoulders, because it makes for your ease, They were contented
to double their Torments, and valued not to be scalded as well by the pitch, as
the Flames?

With trembling and horror may you remember the Great Redeemer hanging Naked
upon the Cross, That very Nakedness rendering his Death doubly sorrowful and
shameful to him, while the rude Soldiers were unconcernedly sporting
themselves in dividing his Garments among them, and throwing Dice for his
seamless Vesture. And must you Ladies, needs Crucify him afresh, and put him
to a second shame? make him blush to see your Nakedness, and seem as little
concerned for his as your own; his shame and your own sin, but alike affecting
your insencible hearts. And if one end of his being Crucified Naked, was to
Redeem you to the Blessing of a decent Dress, from which the first Adam had
stripped you, why will you frustrate that part of the Redemption, and leave
your selves Naked in so great a part, since himself has purchased Vestures for
you, when his own was inhumanely rent from his Shoulders?

The pitiful plea of Custom for it, will drop as Adams Figg-leaves did, when
his great Maker Summoned him to give Account wherefore he had made himself
Naked and Miserable, since he had Created him so perfect and happy. And (sure I
am) those who prefer a Nakedness, (the shameful fruit of sin) before the
blessing of a modest clothing, (the purchase of a Saviors blood) will shortly
tremble as Adam, as well for the shame they choose to themselves, as the despite
they do to the Savior.

And had you that Scarf of Innocence, which graced the Breasts of your first
Mother, the Fathers might have spared their Zeal, and rather have envied your
Glory: but because she has bared your shoulders by her folly, and brought in
the curse of Nakedness upon you, 'twould be madness in you to hugg the curse,
by continuing that Nakedness still, when you know how contented she was, to
hide her, though but with a Beasts-Skin.

But Ladies, shall I send you to the Royal Exchange, where a greater than an
Angel, has kept open shop for these Sixteen Hundred years and more, and has
incomparably the best choice of every thing you can ask for. And because he
sells the best peny-worths, Himself condescends to call, What do ye lack, what
do ye buy; and advises you to buy of him. Lord, Have thou any Mantoes for
Ladies, made after thine own Fashion, which shall cover all their Naked
Shoulders, and Breasts, and Necks, and adorn them all over? Where are they?
Revel. 3. 18. Brings them forth. There they are, Ladies, and cheap too, at your
own Price, and will wear for ever; with this good property, That they
thoroughly prevent the Shame of your Nakedness from appearing: And if you
stoutly pass away, and take them not with you (if there be a God in Heaven)
you will pass Naked into Hell to all Eternity.

Of Painting and Black Patches:
THough the Face of the Creation has its variations of Prospect and Beauty, by
the alternate intermixtures of Land and Waters, of Woods and Fields, Meadows
and Pastures, God here mounting an Hill, and there sinking a Vale, and yonder
levelling a pleasant Plain; Designedly to render the whole more delectable,
ravishing and acceptable to the eyes of men; (could they see his Wonders in the
Land of the Living) that he might reap the more free and generous Tributes of
Thanksgiving, and Cheerful Celebration of his Goodness in the Works of Wonder.
Yet has he no where given us more admirable expressions of his Infinite Power
and Wisdom than in the little Fabric of man's Body, wherein he has contrived
to Sum up all the Perfections of the Greater, that lie here and there scattered
about. Nor is it possible for the heart of man with all its considerative
Powers to adore enough the Transcendencies of his Divine Hand, in the
Perfections that he bears about him. But amongst them all, omitting the curious
contexture of the whole Frame, raising it up into a stately structure to survey
only the Glories of the Face, and the admirable Graces that God has lodged in
each Feature of it, and then to remember how many Millions of them have passed
through his hands already, flourished out with a perfect diversity of
Appearance, every one discernably varying from all the rest in different
Feature and Meene, and yet every one excellently agreeing with all in the same
Identity of Aspect. All this variegated Work miraculously performed within the
compass of a Span, to let us see what a God can do when (as the wise Potter) he
turns his Wheel, and molds Nature into Infinite Ideas and Forms. And though
now and then grimness and crabedness find residence in some Faces, (Providence
foreseeing the necessity of Martial Countenances as well as Spirits; Which
History tells us the Romans ever did usually wear, or put on; That the slash of
their eyes as Lightning, might accompany the Thunder of their Arms, and both
together strike despair and death into their Enemies hearts. And one of their
Emperors was of so very frightful a Visage, that Speed a Countreyman of our
own tells us, it was as bad as High Treason to stand staring on him, which was
ever an affront to the terror of his Face) yet are these Rough and impolished
pieces but rare, and perhaps necessary too, to set off the Beauties of all the
rest. (The soiles of Nature have theirs Place and Office, (like a Fair Lady
keeping her Black) The Bantum courser Skins and Features, have not I fear,
Reader, raised in thee so praise-ful a Soul for the more Liberal Graces of
their Creator to the Nations of thy Climate, and thy self. Who might have cast
us all into the same Mold with them; If our eyes gazed on their deformity with
astonishment, why do not our hearts reflect on our own Frame with admiration of
the Makers Goodness, and our own unthankfulness. Some Historians would fain
have us owe the Blessings of the Gospel to that Providence which brought some
English Children into the Markets of Rome to be sold. Being carried before the
then Pope, who (examining them of their Country) was told they were Angels.
Yea Angels rather, quoth the good Father, and it were a pity such should go to
Hell. And those that were so happy to be born at Deira, must be delivered (de
ira Dei) from Gods wrath. And forthwith (say they) he dispatched the Messengers
of Salvation to us. Indeed we are happy in good faces, but very miserable in
ill hearts. Now if God has stuck this loveliness on the Male Cheek, what has he
done on Female? What Glories? What Transcendences of them? What adorable
Perfections of Art has he shown, in the drawing those Lineaments which are the
stupifaction of Angels and Men. Beauty, when attended on by Virtue, Create
Women very Angels on Earth; when corrupted by Vice, degenerates them into
Devils of Hell. Which has not triumphed in the Infinite Spoils of mean and
vulgar Affections only (that is their every days Tyranny and Sport)
unspirited almost the whole Creation; But such as have dragged after them very
Crowns and Scepters into absolute vassalage and Chains. The proudest Jewels of
the Diadem have humbly vaild to stick themselves in the more Imperial Bosom of
a Woman, the Sparkles of her eye have out dazzled all their shine. Solomon in
all his glory thought himself happy in being Knight of the most Honorable
Order of the Garter, and spun out the very Bowels of his Luxuriant Wit into
golden Threads to make Canopies for his Queens to sit under. Nay so strong the
Charms of these Sirens, that a Veil must shroud them up in the Sanctuary,
least (as some have thought) the very Angels (who hover there) should be
surprised by their Eyes, and they chance make their victories over then too.
And yet Reader, after all the Royalties which the Bountiful Heart and Hand of a
Creator has exceeded in, toward them; After all the Largesses, in so profuse
a Treasure, of his choicest Graces; All the Perfections of those rare Draughts
of his own Divine Hand upon them* These unhappy Daughters of Eve (who, as St.
Isidore thinks, was Clothed with Luster, as with a Garment, before she fell)
must dream of yet higher Perfections then what their wise Creator has stamped
upon them: The proud Ambition of these unsatisfied Creatures is not terminated
in the issues of his Wise and excellent Work; They must be making their Essays
too, and impudently correcting the Lines of their Maker. Thus you shall have
them consulting the Mirror, and making a narrow scrutiny into every point of
their Faces, to hunt after Imperfections, where none are apparent, and have a
mind to pick quarrels with the Complexion that God himself sees very Good. Here
is not enough of the Lilly, there not of the Rose, but here and there too much
of either. And every where is needed a new dash of their own Hand. Should an
eminent Limner (says a Father) who had done his utmost to show his skill in
the drawing a Figure with his most deliberate and exquisite hand, and brought
it to the Perfection himself desired, find some pitiful Ignorant besoyling his
Work, and mixing in his dawbing Colors with his own (Pictor sacre
excundesceret, (thinks the Father)*

Into what Choler and Passion would such an affront throw the brave Artist! And
is God less skilful than the Limner* The first we find at this Work was? Madam
Jezebel (not but that it had been an old practice (very early) among those
Daughters of Men, Genesis 6. 2.) But she bears away the honor of the first
Publication of this unsufferable Insolence, and is Chronicled the great Marrer
of her Makers Work.

She was a Lady well fitted with an Husband, to her Humor, That as Ahab, there
was none so bad. And he a Prince as equally suited with a Wife, for then
Jezabel, there could none be worse. What a Condition, Reader, was the poor
Church in that Reign, whose Priests were shrunk all into one Elijah, and whose
people so scared into Corners, that one Prophet knew not where to find any, and
was afraid, that himself survived the only Faithful One to God in all Israel,
and his life sought after too, by the most narrow inquisition? O Praise God for
the Liberties thou enjoyest from the Tyrannies of Idolatry. And pray for the
Prince that shelters thee from them.) For in those days all Israel went Whoring
with Jezebel, and painted their Countenances (with her) into the Hypocritical
Mummeries of Baalisme, till that one Prophet washed off the Paint from their
faces, with the very Blood of her 450 Chaplains, and a little restored them to
their right hew and Complexion again. Such an influence had a painting Queen to
sophisticate the very face and Profession of the true Religion, and dress it up
all into black patches with her self. Nay the very Scantling of God, the poor
7000 that were a little more courageous then the whole cringing Multitude, and
who had no Knees for Baal, were fain to daub too, and made little appearance
for God, they mufled their Faith in the dark Clouds of obscurity, and passed
their visits to Heaven with Nicodemus by night; While they bore a fair show to
Jezebel all the day.

What was this but Painting too? And though Ahab was fleet enough to run
himself out of Breath into ruin. Yet does his Wife put a Spur on his Heel,
and passes him, through the back door of Nabths Vineyard, a shorter cut into
Hell. While her self shortly after follows him thither, and gets her passage
quickened as fast as ever the Horses Heels could do it, whose Feet trampled out
her miserable Guts, and scorned any further Execution, but left the Carcass to
the Dogs. And it is observable, that those were somewhat squemish too, for her
Hands wherewith she used to daub on her Paint, so dreadfully stunck on it, that
the very Dogs loathes them and left them untouched -- This is that Jezebel.

Of whose wicked Trade and practice of Painting, The Fathers have not been
backward to inform us. Its first Parentage and Rise, others besides St. Cyprian
have derived from the very Devils in hell, Apostate-Angels; Docuerunt occulos
circumducto nigrore Fucare; genas mendacio ruboris inficere, etc. The very
Devils (says he) first taught the use of Coloring the Eyebrows, and clapping
on a false and lying Blush on the Cheeks, so also to change the very natural
Color of the Hair, and to adulterate the true and Naked Complexion of the
whole Head and Face, with those cursed Impostures; (and again) God has said,
Come let us make man after our own Image. And does any one dare to alter or
correct what he has made? They do but lay violent hands upon God, while they
strive to mend or reform what he has so well finished already. Do they not
know that the Natural is Gods, but the Artificial is the Devils? Do not thou
tremble; (says he in another place) to Consider, That at the Resurrection thy
Maker will not acknowledge thee as his own Creature? He will then say, This
Creature is none of my Framing. Where is my Image? No, no, Here is a new
Complexion clapped on the Skin. She has adulterated her very Hair too, and ^er
whole Face; The very figure of it is Corrupted [Vultus alienus est] It is quite
another Countenance. Can thou be so Impudent to look on God with those Eyes
which are so different from those himself made, and are now so marred by the
Devil? Get thee hence, thou wast but a follower of the Devil, thou have the
very Red and Glozing eyes of the Serpent in thine head; as thou have been thus
Corrupted by the Devil, so now get there into Hellfire with him. Thus that
excellent Father,

St. Jerome seconds him, Quod facit in faciae Christianae Purpurissum Cerussa,
etc. What makes the White or Red Varnish, and Paint in the Face of a Christian?
Whereof one sets a false dye and lying Tincture on her Cheeks and Lips, the
other an Hypocrital Fairness on her Neck and Breasts, and all this only to
inflame young and wanton Affections, to blow up the Sparks of Lust, and to show
what an whorish and impudent Heart dwells within those daubed Walls? How can
such an one weep for her Sins, when the very tears would wash away the Colors,
and discover the Cheat? The very falling down of them would make long Furrows
on her Face? The Painting the Face is the deforming of Gods Image and
Workmanship, and is most damnable, says another. But let those that are ugly
and deformed, rather endeavor to fix a Grace on their Persons, by the lovely
exercises of virtue, then think to repair themselves by the stinking Collusions
of Paint: (says another) If we are Commanded to endeavor not our own only,
but Neighbors Salvation [quomodo fucis licebit uti, qui sunt Gladii, Venena,
and ignes Juvenum aspectantium] with what conscience can men use Painting and
false Dye, which are as so many Swords, Poisons, and Flames to burn up the
Beholders, Says Peter Martyr. The French have a good Lituny, De trois chooses
Dieu nous guard, etc. From Beef without Mustard, a Servant which overvalues
himself, and from a Woman which Painteth, Good Lord deliver us*

To what purpose are those Garments so Pompous, Those Stuffs so Costly, Those
Guizes so sought after, Those Colors so Fantastic, so shameless, Those Curles
so extravagant, those Patches so abominable, unless it be to Cut the Throat of
Chastity, says another.

Lewis the Eleventh, King of France in his Melancholy Humor, strongly
fancied, That every thing stunk about him, all the odoriferous Perfumes, or
fragrant Savours his officers could get for him, did by no means drive away the
conceit, but still he smelt a filthy stink. And surely all the Perfumes of
Arabia, (the united Sweets of the whole Creation) Reader, were they gathered
into Bags, and hung under their Armholes, will never take away the rankness and
fulsomness of those unsavory Creatures, who stink alive, as they move about,
infecting the very Air, and bringing Plagues upon us, Nauseous Fumes into the
very Nostrils of God, and his Holy Angels. I could collect an University of
Writers that have all damned this impudent and graceless practice to the Pit of
Hell, but I hasten from the scent of them. For I begin already to feel the
power of Lewis his Imagination arising from my very Pen, and am afraid I have
mistaken the Complexion-pot for my Standish.

But hold! to what purpose is all this daubing and smearing the Face, that is
so pretty already? What do the Ladies mean by it? What is their end? Why, to
appear desirable, and to win the repute of a Celebrated Beauty. A glorious
Conquest! (yet not half so fine, as the aerie Lady Carnation that bears the
Name, which God himself has Painted in the Garden.) But is this all the Plot?
Can those Ruby Cheeks be satisfied with the Aerie* Bloomes of Report, and
Reputation? Wind is but a poor repast for an Hungry Stomach, sure there is
something more at the bottom. Yes, to win a Gallant; very well, and what then?
Will one content her? Will she leave daubing then? No, then she daubs to keep
him. But this is uncharitable, cannot an honest Lady Paint? Ask God himself,
Ezech. 29. 40. Thou washest thy self, and paintest thine eye, and deckest thy
self with ornaments, to what end? And sits upon a Bed (In a readiness
against the Lover come in) Will she now commit Whoredom, Verse 43. That is,
without doubt* They went in unto her, Verse 44. And there is the depth of the
Plot, and what a matter have you ferretted out? True indeed! no such matter of
wonder now adays, if we consult my Lord of Hereford, who plainly tells us, they
are so far from hiding the Plot, that these painted Jezebels enter into the
very Houses of the (Married) Gallants, Where their poor Wives are forced to
lock themselves up, and cry to God against them with bitter tears. So while the
whole Congregation were mourning before the Lord (on a very humiliation day)
pouring out their brinish tears for the Whoredoms they had committed with the
Cursed Danghters of Moab, even then comes an Insolent Prince of Israel, Zimri,
with his Painted Whore in his hand, flanting it impudently, into the Seat of
her Gallant, in the very Sight of all the People, she not affected with the
least shame, nor he with the least sense of the Plague that (in that very
moment) was raging iu the Camp. Which Insolence was so insufferable, that God
stirred up the spirit of Phineas by a sudden inspiration to act execution upon
them both, and under the very guilt to dispatch away their filthy Souls unto
Judgment. And for these Zimries and Cozbe, Great and Imperious Prostitntes, to
be thus shameless in a time, when the Plagues of God are multiplied so thick
upon us, that we cannot tell, whether the next blow may not be the sealing up
of our utter destruction, and the whole Nation so sick as it seems near to an
expiration, fetchi^g its sad and long broken and fainty Breaths, At such a
time, for these Moabitish Wenches sent in on very purpose to ruin us with
their bewitching eyes and Painted Cheeks, and Gallanting it so shamelesly in
our streets, this I confess, England, looks like the kindly effects of the
Execrable Council of the Sorcerer, who knows no other way to confound us, but
by Whores.

Whose Black-Patches, are but our Blew ones, and the very Tokens of Death upon
us; Toll the Bell, Sexton, and get the Graves ready, for the doleful cry of
the Fatal Carter, calling to us; Bring out your Dead, Bring out your Dead, is
sounding in our streets. While these Infectious Pestilences, with the very
Spots of contagion upon them are suffered to rove up and down (as you know it
is the very Nature of the Disease so enviously to breath out its killing
blasts, upon every face it meets with) and not an Officer zealous enough to
confine 'em to their Lodgings (for prevention of further mischief) and to
charge them to prepare for their Graves.

And methinks the Mourning Coach and Horses (all in black) and plying in their
Foreheads, stands ready harnessed to whirl them to Acheron, though I pity poor
Charon for the darkness of the Night; since the Moon on the Cheek is all in
Eclipse, and the poor Stars on the Temples are clouded in Sables. And no
Comfort left him but the Lozenges on the Chin, which if he please he may pick
off for his Cold; But will find as little comfort in them, as they that wore
them, and lesser in the whole voyage, when opening their mouths, he shall find
no Silver there for his Fare, and will discover them (as we) but Patches still.

But what! am I playing with the Pendants of their Hearse, and profanely
sporting, while the miserably Dead are hawling into Hell! Let me bleed my heart
out rather for them. While the very Cosins of the proud Daughters of Jerusalem
swim in the River of my Saviors Tears, because his Sighs were too weak to blow
off their Spots.

Tertullian, in a prospect of these and other their infinite Vaneties cried
out, (Turtul de Habit Mulier) O Mortuae and Damnatae Mulieris Impedimenta quasi
ad pompam Funeris, constituta. What are all these but the Baggage of a Dead
Creature, and already Damned prepared for the Pomp of her Funeral into Torments.

For how desperate must the condition of those be, who have wiped away the
Graces of the Regenerating Laver that once beautified their Faces with the
virtues of that Holy Water which issued from the Crucified Saviors Wounds, to
Baptize themselves with the unsavory Unctions of the Devils preferring and
devoting their persons preserving them the more unalterably to his service.
Whose Cursed Interests they are so superstitiously bigoted to, that (like the
late Plotters) they receive the Sacrament every day, and Crucify the Church
not by their Apostacies only, but Heresy too.

And because the Holy offerings of God by special Command were to be without
Spot their politic Master, to ensure their Reprobation, has bespotted them all
over, and marked them up for his own Workmanship (as well knovving the Priest
of Heaven at a distant discovery of those prohibited Blemishes, would rather
sacrifice those to the wrath of his God, that should dare present these
Leopards to the Altar. Who wearing on them the badges of Hell, are yet so far
from the shame of that horrid Relation, that they are first secured from the
Grace of blessing, and so well seasoned to the Sodomitical Impudence, that
while the Show of their Countenance does witness against them, they are proud
to declare their Sin and Master.

What Magical Rods have charmed our unfortunate Isle into the woeful product of
such speckled and spotted Cattle, as these? Sure I am, they are not the natural
issue of our fair and beautiful Clymate. Stow tells us in his Chronicle, That
from one Spanish Ewe brought over and placed among other Sheep, there followed
so strange a Murrain that most of the Flocks of England dyed. And is there no
danger in these Ring-streaks? Jude informs us what a plague the coming in of
some black Sheep (that were all Spots) proved to the poor Flock of Christ that
fed among them; and are not these the very bane of Religion professed by us,
the very open enemies to the Purity and Peace of the Gospel?

The Immaculate Lamb, who bled himself to death, to scour away filth with the
Drops of his heart, that he might make a present to himself of a Glorious
Church, without wrinkle or Spot, or any such thing, but holy and without
Blemish, and offered himself without Spot unto God, to that end, and who does
dotes on the Beauty of her that is all Fair, and has no Spot in her, has
Commanded us to be found without Spot and Blemish. And though these Creatures
fancy the Scripture-spots to be of a deeper stain than theirs, yet even theirs
are not the Spots of Gods Children, but such as (the Fathers assure them) were
first invented by the Devil, who has stuck them faster to their hearts than
their Foreheads, (in their love and delight in them) That they will stab once
more, even Jesus himself, with the Speer of this madness, and throw the very
Spittle, (that sticks on these Pa^ches) into the face of God again, rather than
be prevailed with, to cast them away, no, not for the sake of his Blood: And if
that powerful charm has no Efficacy to unseal their (I fear judiciously)
obdurated hearts, (yet they can melt into Luxury fast enough) What effect can I
look for from my weak and contemptible Ink? Let them know though, (even All)
w^ose painted and spotted faces bear an Eye (yet) able to light them to the
reading of this very Paragraph, That One of their Sex, (whose Repentance I
fear, they will not imitate, whose Felicity therefore they can never hope to
attain to) will certainly, confront them in the day of the great Judgment
(whose exemplary Penitence cannot operate them to the same bleeding remorse,
(no not the shadow of it, that so passionately afflicted her gracious Soul) The
great Lady Paula, who under the lighter guilt of a rare and infrequent practice
of these Fooleries in the days of her ignorance, with Floods of bitter Tears
and heart breaking Sobs and Groans, so continually bewailed her Sin to her
Maker, that St. Jerome her Confessor, who himself tells us the Story [a nobis
admonitur, ut panceret oculis] in a tender compassion to her very eyes, was
forced to use arguments to beg her to spare them. No, no, (says she) That
Face that so often has been Painted contrary to the Command of God, does
justly deserve to be all befould with tears. That Body must be chastened a
while on which I have spent so much time in in tricking it up. I have been
merry long enough, it is high time to betake me to weeping: Now my fine Linen,
and Silks and Ornaments, are very fit to be changed into Haircloth. I that have
made it my business to please my Husband, and follow the Fashions of the World,
now should endeavor e^ approve my self to my Savior.

And never while the works of the Holy Saint Ambrose survive in the World, will
the account of the unparalleled virtue of the famous Spurina, be lost in
oblivion, who in her Gentile and Pagan Estate, was so great an Admirer of
Purity, That being a Virgin of incomparable Beauty, and blessed with all the
advantages of a desirable face, was therefore sought for and courted by many
wanton Lovers, and woed to make a Sacrifice of all her Glories to the Lusts of
her Admirers; Did therefore to allay and extinguish those unlawful fires, all
hackle and cut her excellent Cheeks, making Wounds and Scars in them on purpose
to be free from the Solicitations of those who were even distracted for her.
And I will insert the Application of the Story, which cannot be mended by a
better Pen, then his that wrote it -- O thou Christian Woman, who do paint
thy self with an ill intention, seeking to gain that by imposture, which thou
can not attain by truth, and not satisfying thy self with adulterating thy
Beauty, sparest not to discover among company, a scandalous nakedness, to show
in thy Breast the impudence of thy Forehead. Consider a little what thou will
answer to this Paynim with all thy Curiosity, when her Blood, her Wounds, her
Scars, her Beauty disfigured, which served as a Sacrifice to her Chastity,
shall accuse thee before the Inevitable Tribunal.

Saint Jerome in his Directions to Laeta for the right ordering and virtuous
Education of young women, has these very words, (not unworthy to be taken
notice of by all Christian Parents, on whom, the like charge and care is
incumbent) Accustom her not (says he) to wear Pendants in her Ears, nor to
Paint, nor to load her Neck and Head with Pearls; Neither let her change the
Color of her Hair, nor Curle or Crisp it up with Irons, least it prove a
prediction of Infernal Flames. Beware she go not forth with Dinah to see the
Fashions of the Maids of the Country. Let her not be a Dancer, nor gaudy in
Apparel. Let her read good Books, and never go abroad without the knowledge of
her Mother. Let not a young Pretender whisper things into her ears, but cause
them to speak aloud, that the rest may hear.

The advices of this Father are so perfectly out of Fashion, and immodish in
these days of ours, that its become even ridiculous and impudency to press
them; and my design of inserting them, is rather for Lamentation of the ruins
of the Primitive Piety, then from any great hopes of a careful Imitation, or
practice of them. While the shameless immodesty of too many of our Ladies,
makes me more to venerate the memory of the Lady Margaret, Sole Daughter and
Heiress of the great Duke of Burgundy, who by a fall from her horse having
broken her Thigh, chose rather to dye then to expose her self to the inspection
of the Surgeons; yet what that Lady did from an innate Principle of
bashfulness, and perfect respect to the honor of Feminine Modesty, the same
are ours acting too from another of desperate obstinacy; for though they have
long since fallen from all the Ideas of Virtue and Goodness, (yea from the very
pretenses to it) and by that slip have cracked their Honors, wounded their
reputations, dislocated their peace, disjoynted their Consciences, and
endangered their Salvations, yet are they so far from thoughts of setting again
their broken Bones, searching into the bottom of their Wounds, applying
Lenitives to assuage the Tumors of their bruised Consciences, or Corrasives to
eat out the dead Flesh that is about them, That they desperately take up
resolutions of dying too; even these will be modest forsooth, and keep their
Gangrenes to themselves, bravely bear the burning of their festring sores,
running up and down bleeding inwardly, even to death; but so they can set a
good face on the matter plaster over the Orifice of the Wound, and daub it
with the Mortar of a gaudy Swathe, and a few fine Clouts; this answers all
their projects: Their Ambition is no higher than the Hypocrisy of those who
flaunted up and down with a painted Profession of a superficial Goodness, and
appeared like Sepulchers, which when opened yield (of all other) the most
nauseous stench. And for Painted Ladies to yield nothing else but Mummye and
Bones, is very Melancholy to consider.

But this is not all, for amongst some of them, the fury of the distemper has
seized on the very Brain, and utterly deprived them of their Senses. You may
hear them raging as Madly as ever did frantic in Bedlam, and grown into a
perfect insensibleness of any pain or distraction upon them, as God knows
they feel no more Ach, and fear no more danger, than those that have reached
the impeceable Estate: Nay will swear they be the best Saints in World, and
have done nothing but what they dare answer to their Maker; they rail against
others more modest than themselves, and Fanatacize the whole Church, that in
pity and kindness to their lanugishing Souls do but offer the benefit of the
Holy Offices to them, and would apply the most probable remedies, whose virtue
might prevail to restore them to their Wits. The good David once was put to it
to counterfeit a Madness for the saving of his life; but these, a cruel one for
the damning their Souls. Therefore as Achish said, Lo you see the man is mad;
so methinks I hear God say, Shall these mad people come into my house? And what
have I to do with them any longer?

Of Perukes and Hair.
WHat a Bussle have we had about Plots of late, and cries against Popery coming
in? When any that had but half an eye might have seen Pope Joan in the Chair,
and sitting as Head of the Church at least twenty full years already. Don't you
perceive many thousands that have rounded themselves into Priest hood, and
wearing the Mark of the Beast very confidently in their Foreheads? Nay the
devout Ladies so obsequious as to travel up and down with her Bulls. But the
poorer women (in a Flame for her Government) by whole swarms do thwack up the
Nunneries, and have offered up their Hair very humbly to the Abbess (according
to Order) in full resolution to take up the Veyle. So the Streets are full of
the Monks with their Hoods on. And the Friars every where Peep out of their
Coules. Not a young Fellow that takes pet against his Noddle for catching the
least Cough or Cold, but strait in revenge, off goes his Locks, and himself is
shaved into Orders. Leaving the Kingdom as naked of good Subjects to their
Prince, as poor Spain, (whose Soldiers the Pope has garrisoned up in his
Monasteries) That should occasion come for an Army to be raised, a third part
must consist of Holy Fathers. The Rents of her Holiness far exceeds all that
ever her Predecessors received from this Kingdom, and upon strict account taken
of her yearly Revenues, (as heretofore) will be found I fear to vie weight with
the Kings. Her Collecters pass boldly up and down through every Corner of the
Land to gather up the Materials of her Worship, and have Authority to break
open all the Dove-houses and Meal-Tubs to dig for Saltpeter to make Powder
with; which is an absolute Right to her Honor derived from the very first
Founder of the Papacy. Nay the poor Country Girls cannot keep their Coifes on,
for these Officers that have Commission to dig into the very Mould of their
Souls after Oar of all Colors, whether Or, or Argent, or Azure, it all serves
to make Shrines to the Glory of the Goddess, and it is much the Goats escape the
Inquisition; and the poor Shocks will I fear be brought in for their
Peter Pence toward the Maintenance of the Frizzes: Thus with the Egyptians we
are building goodly Temples to the Honor of a Deity. But when the Votaries
come to pay their Devotions there, they find nothing else but the stately Pusse
in Her Majesty, who because she changed her Coat so often, has at least a
Thousand Tailors and their Journey-men, very hard stitching up the Pontificals
of her Dress, which hang up for public view and Sale, (as Diana's Shrines) for
very Strangers to buy up, and bear away as the Medals of her Glory into every
Country of the World, whose Traders are grown to so prodigious an height, that
one of them passing off the Stage (in the Pride of his Business) left yet
behind him an Inventory of some Thousands, which far surmounts the hopes of Ten
poor Heretical Priests, to attain to, in all the long series of their sweat. So
Deliciously do these Idolaters fare at Jezebels Table, when the poor Prophets
of Heaven are put to it, to bite a piece of brown Cake at a Widows. And to
speak plainly, forty or threescore pound a year for Perriwiggs, and ten to a
poor Chaplin to say Grace to him that Adores Hair, is sufficient Demonstration
of the weakness of the Brains they keep warm. And let me take the boldness to
manifest a few of the ill Consequences of this Idolatry.

First with the Woman's Hair we have put on her Art (not of Cookery and the
Kitchen only, and become Hen-Housewifes as my Lord Hereford tells us, but) of
the Chamber and the dressing Room. Tricking up our selves into as delicate
starch'd-up a posture as she. Some of us have gotten the Boddice on, to make us
look slender and pretty; And the Epicene Sleeves do very well fit both the He
and the She, The Sleeve strings are tied with the same Curiosity and the Val de
Chamber that cannot knit the knot Allamode, is kicked away as a bungler in his
Trade and Profession. The Ladies Point, drawn together serves well for a
Crevat, with a Grace while the poor Collars (to make way for a naked Neck too)
that was used when we were Boys, to chuckle us under the Chinn, and bid us look
up to Heaven, like Severus his Tutor, is put to Death, for breeding us up too
Civil. The Ribbon at the Hilt of our Sword, is Security against his being
drawn, while we fix it there, (as Cupids Knights) with no other design but to
help to wound the Hearts of the Ladies.

2. And who sees not the happy Victory, that we have gotten their very-Hearts
in our Bosoms; as close as their Hair on our Heads: Not their Effeminacy only,
but Weakness too, and have perfectly shaved away all our Virility and Prowess
(which formerly made Earthquakes in the world, and the now-formidable France
has trembled at) our Swords lie dangling on our Thighs, with the same Luxury,
as as our Wiggs (of the same length,) sport themselves on our Breasts. And if
we pass on at this rate, we may wear the Babylonian Character, Jer. 51. 30. The
mighty men have forborne to Fight, their Might has failed, they became as
Women. What, cared the great Alexander for six hundred Thousand such Persian
Women, who with another Army of Singers, Dancers, Perfumers, Cooks, Butlers and
Tart-bakers, came to oppose him? Will those Eyes Dart fire in the face of an
Enemy, that are dazzled in the Glitters of the Theater? Will men hope to prevail
while they push with the brissles of a Woman instead of a Pike? well may those
Lances shiver into their own eyes, and muffle up their sight, but never will
they pierce Terror or Wounds into the Heart of an Adversary. Had the Black
Prince and the brave Talbot gone thus accountred into France, the
Flower-de-Luces had never perfumed the Royal Arms of England. Philip de Cominis
tells us, that after the Skirmish which Charles the Eighth of France had with
the Venetian forces at Fornove, the Ground was all strawed with the Gilded
Bourdenasses of the Vanquished, which the French picked up in abundance; but
what sport would it make after a Battle here to carry away an Army of
Periwiggs? If his Majesty was once justly incensed against that VVigg that
whiffled into the Eyes of a Scholar, and disturbed his Preaching, how much
more would he be, and with what Zeal would he Rattle off the Idler Humor from
the Shoulders of his Soldiers, which would hinder them from fighting, since
the Glory of his Nation depends on their Valor?

3. And thirdly with the woman's Hair, (we may leave out the R. and find) we
have gotten her Heat, and God who has given us over to shave away our own, to
put on her Glory, has justly hardened us to glory in the spoils of the whole
Body, as in those of her Head, while she with reason and vaunt enough triumphs
in the Ruins of our Strength. Is it a wonder to find our selves bald and weak,
while we are slumbering in the lap of Dalilah? Alas when her Curles are
twisted about our very heart, and twind themselves there to ensnare us, can we
marvel if our Locks are sheer'd off in our sleep, to make way for the hanging
of hers, when our folly puts the Scissars in her hand, and we cannot wear hers
and our own. And I wish, that Treachery may abate our Heat, when the Mercinary
Hands are still at work, that receive the price of our Bloods, to strip off our
honor and strength, and send us poor Slaves to the Mill. Since we have found
the women so kind to sell us the Hair from their Heads, we have encroached on
the freeness of their Natures, and think they may as well, make a prize of all
the rest. And God knows the Age has not found them overshie of trading.
History tells us, that in the time of Septimus Severus his time at Rome, there
were threethousand Indicted of Adultery, but were all impeached that are guilty
here, the Clerk of the Sessions need not care to change place with the Judge.

4. And it is no less observable, that since we have worn these Coronets on our
heads, we have forgotten our Obedience to our Prince, and thought our selves
his very Peers. You cannot imagine what fancies it creates in our Nodles by its
heat. At Grand Cairo they hatch all their Chickens in Ovens; on purpose heat to
the degree of production; but who sees not since our Brains have been fired by
these Furzes what Serpents the Cockatrices Eggs have produced. While our
Gallants flant along not a step without the graceful Attendants of the tall
Yeoman with their Halberts, guarding each side of their Shoulders. What can
they think themselves less then Kings? The Grand Seigniour with all his golden
Peichi's gliding mutely along by his side, can never ravish himself in the
lofty conceits of his Glory to that Degree, that an Empty skull'd Squire does
now in the dancing of his Aubrey Tresses about, while he looks out here and
there to feast his eyes on the fancied Subjects that admire him. Mahomets
Pigeon inspired a Rebellion which has envasselled two parts of the World under
it: And what know we, what Malignant Influence the dangerous whispers of these
whiffling Flatterers into the addle Brains of so many Hot-spurs, may have upon
our peace? Can you distinguish a Barber from a Justice of Peace, who stalks
with a Port as stately as he? and talks as politickly too, as if he had spruc'd
himself into the Counc^l. It is certain till Law oblige us to wear our own Wool
on our Backs, and our own Hair on our own Heads, we shall never Cool into that
sense of our due distance from the Grandeurs of Majesty as we ought. No sooner
had Israel trimmed themselves up into Gallantry and Long Locks, but they shook
off their obedience to Heaven it self; We are Lords -- we will come no more
unto thee, Jer. 2. 31, 33. Nor is Absaloms Story any news to us.

And who considers the vast contributions that are collected for this Usurper
through the Kingdom! When Princes and Nobles have dispatched away their Groans
over the Alps, to implore a Cessation of those loads that have almost crippl'd
them from Rome, we can suffer these to lie constantly on our Shoulders without
the least sense of their Burden. Though Christ paid Peter's Tax for him by a
Miracle, from the mouth of a Fish, yet would it be a greater, (should his
Successor come to gather here again) if he abate a farthing for the charges we
are at for our Poles.

Our Ancestors were wiser than we, who kept this Tax in their Pockets, which
helped to maintain their Tables, and would hardly have eaten a Crumm, had they
found but an Hair in their Dish, while we are Curling and Powdring up ten
thousand, that fly into our mouths all dinner, and cannot make a Meal in peace
for 'um.

To better purpose would this Hair be employed, should we be put to the shifts
that once the poor Citizens of Bizantium were, when under the extremities of a
three years Seige by the Romans, and almost ready to perish, having occasion to
patch up a Fleet, under the want of Cordage, were fain to make use of the
Women's Hair; Which they poor Wretches very cheerfuly cut off, and gave them to
inch out their Tackle, and though the whole Navy miscarried by a Storm, yet was
not their zeal the less laudable, who did it for the saving of the City or
themselves, when ours do it for no good at all.

It Is some comfort yet, (though our City Esquires continues their Heathenish
Length, which God has so damned in his Word) That our wiser Gentry of the
Country, have of late religiously submitted to Circumcision. And though they
have done it with Sechem in politic design of fair Game, Yet would they hunt
the brave Do still the better, would they quite lay down her artificial Nets,
to try how Nature would weave one.

And they need not fear Absaloms Fate, so long as they hunt not a Father. 'Twas
the short Cut of that poor Princes obedience, that made his very Hair turn
Rebel, and hung him up under an Oak, to receive the reward of his King-hunting.

But though Absalom was graced with a Natural Perriwigg, that was both his
Pride and his Plague, yet a good head of Hair is so vulgar a Blessing, that we
find it as common to the Beggar as the Prince, and he that dares not for his
Ears boast the glory of his Blood, may yet compare with the best in the finess
of his Locks.

The truth is, if the House be well furnished within, in every Room as it
ought, the Brain will find wit enough to excuse the unhappy want of a Bush
without, which seldom prove so fatal to any, as poor Aeschilus, whose Bald
Pate, when mistaken by an Eagle for a Stone, she let fall a Crab upon the poor
Poet and killed him, who had ingeniously written the tragedies of others, but
foresaw not that of his Skull; This Age would have taught him to have prevented
that strange Accident by covering it over with Moss. And though Elisha
underwent the reproach of his want of Hair, from the Children that more wanted
Grace, yet had he Shaggie Creatures enough at his Call, to punish their
insolence with death.

It Is strange what Pliny Records of the Romans, that they never knew the use
of Barber till four hundred fifty four years after the building of their City,
when in the time of Scipio Affricanus, they were first brought in out of
Sicily. Antea Intonsi fuerunt. Before that it seems they hackled off their
Locks with their Kniyes. But however Rough and Uncomb'd they were then, Sure I
am they grew Curious and Spruce enough afterward; for Plutarch tells us of the
two Boundless Heroes that admitted no Superior nor Equal; The Great Pompey was
so nice and effeminate, in the formality of his Hair and Sleek Locks, that he
was noted, for scratching his Head with one Finger, and once suffered a public
Scoff from the impudent Claudus for it, in the midst of the Rout of Plebeians
who joined with him, to second that Reproach. And Suetonius witnesses of the
other, that he was so over curious of his Head and Beard, Vt non solum
conderetur diligenter, ac raderetur, sed velleretur etiam; He would not only
be shaven very precisely, but his extravagant Hairs even plucked.

But what shall we think of his Successor Augustus, who when he felt the
Assaults of Death, invading him, called for his Looking-glass, and commanded
his Hair and Beard to be Combed [Et Malas Labentes corrigi] his Rivell'd Cheeks
to be smoothed up, then asking his Friends, if he had acted his Part well upon
the Stage of the World, who told him he had; Well says he, Vos omnes Plaudite.
Sure he went off very trimly.

Homers lofty quill very often sticks in the Long Hair of the Grecians, whom he
almost everywhere Epithites (...)

Nor are our Neighbors of France (from whom I suppose we have derived it)
without the known Note of Distinction for this vanity [Cometa Gallia] and are
famed to be the Bushy Locked French. But what the modesty of England has been
in former Ages (however vain enough in other Fooleries, yet) sure the Galleries
and Dining-Rooms of our Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom will abundantly
testify from the brave images of their Ancestors, whose open ears never valued
the coldness of the Winds, but which would glow to have heard the monstrousness
of their Childrens Ell-Wiggs. To look no further back than K. Henry's days,
(who had face enough for two Kings, and Wives enough for three, and yet Hair
little enough too) we may easily collect what was the general Cut, from an
act of the Lord Cromwell, who meeting a fellovv in Cheap Side with his Locks
somevvhat too long, commanded him away to the Barbers forthwith for the
execution of his Scissars. Who also threatened to lay him by the Heels, and
humble his Feet, who prided himself so much in his Head. And Wise King James
who knevv well enough what belonged to his Health, had an open Ear to the
brave Cry of his Hounds, as well as the complaints of his people, and
refrained not one hunting-Match which gave him hopes of Sport, out of dread
that he should pay dearly for it the next day by a Cold.

The Noble Prince Henry (who had he lived, had played the Barber) as sometime
Commodus the Emperor was wont) and not have shaven the Crown of Popery
only, but even have cut off the very Ears and Noses of the Priests from ever
having hopes of smelling out the old Monasteries again; (and surely Chelsey
College was pretended to be the Shop for that execution) this brave Prince,
follovved his great Father, and gave his Ears to his Council and Cut together.
And it is impossible but the great influence of so Illustrious Presidents should
prevail with the whole people to follovv the Royal Example of so great a
King, and so good a Prince, in that Age.

And doubtless the same had continued till this day, had not a violation
happened to that excellent custom, if I mistake not, from this occasion. The
Puritans in the Reign of the Royal Martyr, to distinguish themselves from their
Neighbors, took on them an extraordinary short Cut, and their Neighbors in
opposition to them espoused a long one, because they would not be reputed
Roundheads; and in nothing outwardly were the two Parties so much differenced
as in their Hair, and happy had it been that the quarrel had ended in the
Barbers Scissars, which we all know brake out afterward into the long Sword,
and instead of plucking each other by the ears a little, they fell to stabbing
one another in the Guts. So that the mischiefs which the Barber might have
prevented at first, had he kept an even hand on both parties, and sheered them
both to an equal Cut, all the wit of man could not prevent from running into
Commodus his bloody shaving, and cutting off ears and Noses together with their
Hair.

But as once Vespasian upon the apparition of a Blazing-Star which was thought
to portend his death, would needs clap the signification of it on the Persian
King, for he (says he) has Bushy Locks, but I am Bald, jeering both him and
himself together, though afterward it fell on himself. So I pray God both
Parties may take warning by what is past, and take heed of mocking each other,
least falling out about even Goats-Hair, and the smallest matters at first, we
break not forth into Flames which are not so easily quenched.

I cannot pass away from this discourse of Hair, without minding the Ladies of
the best use that ever was made of Hair in the World, And that by her too, who
had made the worst use of it; The never to be forgotten Magdalen, whose Golden
Locks had been the Fetters that had Imprisoned so many hearts to her unlawful
Love, are afterward weaved into a Towel to wipe her Saviors Feet, whom she
had first bedewed with her Tears; Not that they had need of cleansing by any
tears that she poor Creature could shed, but that both water and Towel might
receive a cleaness from them. And Mary by that Act did but weep her self into
Purity -- Let the Ladies that have Curled and Powdered their Tresses into Nets
to catch poor Lovers in, learn (with her) to unloosen them again unto the same
service, by washing the Feet of his indigent members on Earth, and wiping away
their sorrows by the gentle stroakings of their Charity.

And for others of them that build Towers of Arrogance and Pride against God,
where rather a Valley of Humility and Meekness should be flatted, I wish they
would remember, how the great Nimrod was bafled in the same design, whom God
smote into so perfect an astonishment and confusion that he had not one
intelligible word to say in excuse for his Folly. And I fear these will be
Speechless too, when the King of Heaven shall come to take a View of the Dress
of his Guests; and let them not forget the Brains of those that were dashed
out, upon whom the Tower of Siloam (...) securing their weak heads from such
Hazards by the politic course that the Holy David took, in making God himself
his High Tower, and not raising others against him.

Should he send out his Angels (as once he did, and yet every day continues to
do) to mark those in the Forehead for safety, that sigh for their own and
others Sins in the City, the very Frizzes would hinder the good Angel from
setting on Gods, when he shall find already the mark of the Beast upon them,
set on by themselves; the poor Creatures, while they little think on it, sealing
their Foreheads to destruction. But I have been too long about the Ladies head
and Necks, and had not I learned this tediousness from themselves, should have
dispatched them long ago. Dum comantur dum maliuntur Annus est.

Of Apparel.
THere are two things I shall shortly dispatch about Habit and Apparel.

1. The Veneration and Respect that other Countries have for their National
Dress.

2. The reasons of it, arising especially from some apprehensions of Fatality
accruing to such as too lightly have assumed the Fashions of others.

3. How England has been too justly Taxed in all Ages of this Levity.

To the first I need say but very little, it being generally known how most
Nations in Christendom (the French only excepted) have been and still are
devout and superstitious Adorers of their Country Habit. So tender are they of
their Reputations, that they will not suffer under the Aspersion of being
accounted giddy and unconstant by their Neighbor Nations. The very Turks as
well as the Spaniards, giving us an example of an unalterable devotion herein.
And very Remarkable is an old Decree of the Russians to this purpose, That [tam
in Cultu Numinis, quam in Apparatu Corporis, Moribus Legibusque uti
presentibus, etiamsi Deteriores sint] They were resolved as well in the matter
of their Religion, as in the manner of their Dress and Apparel, to stick to the
Laws and Customs then in force, yea notwithstanding perhaps there might be
found some defects in both. So loath were they it seems to introduce any new
Fashion or Invention that men of mutable and Newfangled Spirits should present
unto them Yet by the Favor of this Russian Edict, it cannot be denied, that
After-Ages have found out those absurdities both in that Religion and Dress of
Antiquity, as have well enough justified their modest endeavors in the
Regulations of both. Till Popery give us a better Testimony of its suitableness
and proportion with the grand Pattern received from the Mount, then of late it
has, we cannot so easily be brought to repent of our Departure from the
strange and ridiculous extravagancies of it. And it were enough should I hang
out to view one of the Suits that was generally worn heretofore in England,
where you had a Dublet all jagg'd and pricked, the Wastband coming down but a
little below the Armholes, guarded with eight long Skirts; to this Dublet was
clasped a pair of Breeches close made to the Body, and whose length must make
up the defect of the shortness of the Dublet, The large and ample Cod piss
supplied the want of Pocke^s, which came up with two wings fastened to either
side with two points, which unknit made way to the Linen Bags, tied to the
inside between the Shirt and Codpiss, these Bags held every thing they carried
about them, except the Gloves, which ever hung very reverently at the Girdle.
Where hung a Pouch made fast with a Ring or Lock of Iron, weighing at least two
or three Pound, whether there was any money in it or no. The like I could give
of the women's Gowns, and show the madness of the Fardingale, and other whimsies
-- But the Galleries and Parlours of most old Families are set out with such
disguising Postures, as better will evidence them to the view of the Reader,
then I care my Pen should do at this time. What different Cuts have we our
selves known from this discribed? What huge Breeches, like Petticoats? What
Slashed Dublets? What guarded Breeches with such huge sets of Points round the
Knees, that were invented to hide the French Pox, by forceing men to straddle
above a yard wide. These and many others are in fresh memory; but putting them
all aside, how more exceedingly decent and graceful is the present Cut of our
Gentlemen, answering all the parts and members of the Body to a more Civil and
proportionable end. Always however be excepted the incomparable Tunick and
Vest, so very comely in it self, so very advantageous to the Drapers of the
Kingdom, perhaps the most grave and manlike Dress that ever England saw, which
had the unhappiness to be brought in too late, and the hard Fate to be sent out
again too soon. And would have answered all the expectations of public
Commodity pretended by the Woolen Act, so that had our Gentlemen pleased to
have danced in them any longer, the Farmers would very cheerfully have paid the
Fiddlers. But we can never hold when it is well, such an influence has the
French Pipe to make us ca^per after them, in all their Follies, to our own
dishonor and Ruin.

I mind therefore in the next place to represent to the Reader the dangers of
so great a Levity. Neither is Scripture silent in its menaces against so
prodigious a Folly: We know who has threatened such as Cloth themselves in
strange Apparel. But because examples are more prevalent to work upon us, I
have endeavored to look into History, which has furnished me with three or
four not unworthy of the Readers most serious perusal and application.

Don Sebastian, then King of Portugal, what time this humor infected his
Subjects of attiring themselves after the Castillian Fashion, all the Noble
Persons and Gentlemen practicing nothing more than to speak the Castilian
Language (which it seems is very elegant and expressive) with the same ambition
as we do the French, between whom and them there was no very natural kindness
neither, but a very bitter Antipathy, hating the persons whose Language they
loved. It pleased God that Sebastian dying without issue, and the Crown lying
at Stake as the Golden Ball for every Pretender to venture at, who but King
Philip of Castile, run fairest for it, and with an easy stretch got it set on
his head, to the general sorrow, but little redress of the discontented
subjects. To whom afterward he proved no very Favorable Prince.

In the year of Christ four hundred and twenty, the Grecians whose habitations
bordered upon the Turks, took fancy to cloth themselves after the Turkish
manner; they which before were wont to wear Long Beards, which so very well
became them (quoth my Author) Cut off all, and left the Mustachioes only, and
practiced to follow them in all their actions, till anon comes an Army of
Mustachioes and subdued them to a perfect Slavery to this day.

Although we know their Ruin was both Prophesied and certainly determined as
the dreadful punishment for Crucifying the Lord of Life; Yet I find too, that
the Jews (for about thirty years before the final destruction of their City and
Temple by Titus Vespasian) had gotten a custom to impose no other names upon
their Children but such as were Roman, nor would wear any Garments but after
the Roman Guise; their very Arms for War, and Soldiers Cassocks, were in all
respect like theirs, striving to imitate their Fashion and Garb very entirely,
whom so suddenly after they so dearly suffered under.

Caesar in his Commentaries has an Observation to this very purpose, That
Divisions and Animosities rising up among the Gauls, they began to hate each
other to that degree, That one Party among them separated from the other, by
the visible distinction of their Dress, betaking themselves, some to the Roman
Fashion, some to the Almaine, and left the use of their own short habits and
close Breeches. Which was but as it were, a prediction of the Calamity that
soon after fell upon them from the Arms of those Romans whom they had so
apishly followed.

But remarkable is the Story of the Great Darius, whom several Authors affirm
to us, to have changed the very Fashion of his Sword from the Ancient Persian
into the Macedenian Fashion, but the very year before Alexander invaded and
ruined him; Which his Diviners interpreted truly, into what afterward came to
pass, That those should come to be Lords of Persia, into whose Fashion Darius
had altered his Sword. What application shall I make of all these Stories to
poor England? If not only our men's Swords, and Cassocks, and Perriwiggs, and
Boots, and Breeches; But our very Ladies Mantoes, Petticoats, Points, Shoes,
Hoods and Laces, be not of the French Fashion only, but the very Productions
of the Country; if no proper handsome young men can be picked from the Sons of
our Yeomen and Inferior Gentry, to make Val de Chambres to our Gallants; if no
hand but a French one can serve to Trim and shave our Beards? No Cut but a
French Tailors to shape our Clothes; No Languge but the French to serve our
Tongues; no Religion but the French to content our Souls; I pray you what will
be the end hereof? There is a disease among us called of that Name too, I pray
God it be not too Epidemical; if it be not gotten into our Bodies, sure I am
it is gotten into our Heads, while we set our selve to study and contrive
nothing more than to please our Fancies with the Levities of the French. And
how little did he merit the happiness of our good Cloth and Beef, of our good
Laws and Religion, of our Native Immunities and happy Liberties, who declared
he had rather be served by a French Dog than by an Englishman.

What care and prudence has been used formerly by other Nations for the
prevention of public detriment from the extravagancies, and vain excess of
Apparel, I have already instanced from the Athenians and others, from the City
of Venice etc. To which I will only here adjoyn a Memoire* of the Law
Sumptuaria which Numa Pompilius established, and which proved so exceedingly
advantageous to the prosperity of the then Roman State, Vt in exequiis
Epulisque, etc. It was provided by that Law, that all their profuse expense in
Funerals, and all excessive use of fine Cloths at their public meeting and
Shows should be utterly laid aside; by due obedience and execution of which
they quickly came to find the present Commodity and benefit by extirpating
those two voracious Gulphes that swallow up the prosperity of any Kingdom that
is in the World, delicacy of fare and sumptuousness of Attire. And to show you
what inconveniences this especially of sumptuousness of Apparel, has at all
times brought to poor England, I shall go back to Queen Elizabeth's days, and
give you a remarkable Survey of it, drawn by a Gentleman of good Quality and
Understanding. Representing it to King James in his Book dedicated to him,
(savouring of the Language of that Age) wherein he thus passionately deplored
it to the King.

Our Englishmen more then any Nation of the World has been shamefully branded
among Foreigners for their disguised Fashions, and sumptuous Habiliments
beyond the bounds of Prudence, Moderation and Hability. Some women after a
preposterous Fashion attired like men in Dublets, and some men like women in
Petticoats, this excess has so exceedingly dispersed it self in our Nation,
that by their exterior newfangled Robes the wisest of our Adversaries in
Foreign Parts have past their Judgments of our giddy minds, and unconstant
behaviors, inwardly saying, That in wearing Dutch Hats, with French Feathers,
French Dublets, with Collers after the custom of Spain, Turkish Coats, Spanish
Hose, Italian Cloaks, and Valentian Rapers, with such like; we had likewise
stolen the vices and excesses of those Countries which we did imitate Natural.
Besides what a shame was it for us to be noted for this exorbitant excess, that
base Tailors, and others which work as Hirelings, aspiring to that abominable
and indecent singularity, should equal themselves in the cost and Fashion of
their attire with some of the greatest Barons of this Land. A Fault not to be
imputed to the Laws, (for those are precise and strict in such comely
considerations, but in the dissolute and intemperate affections of people,
which instead of a little Liberty, make a License at large, Tyrannizing upon
the Princes gentle disposition and Lenity. Hence it was that the Nobility to
distinguish themselves by this outward aport of their Degrees and Riches from
the Rascal Rabble and base Ruffians, were driven to most extreme charge, that
they might make a difference of themselves from them, equivolent in proportion.
Which course if the Queen her self had kept, answerable to her State above some
Ladies and others in the like analogy, she might with ease have consumed an
unspeakable Mass of Treasure (Yet Reader, it is known that Queen Elizabeth did
not spare for Cost in her Clothes) By this means the Estates and Substance of
Tailors, Craftsmen, and other Mechanics, was daily more increased, and the
Fortunes of our Gentry utterly exhausted. Which Leprosy did in a little so
spread it self in this Nation, that diverse Livings of very ancient Demesne and
Inheritance, which had continued in succession from many Grand Fathers of one
Race did hang up in Tailors Shops, and were piled up in the Merchants Coffers.
This Emulation of excess having further prevailed, grew to such outrage, that
when proper maintenance failed in some to support such Riot, they violently or
secretly took from others, turning open Robbers, or secret Pilpherers to supply
the same. Which has been the demolition and confusion of many Noble Families,
And persons, lately great in worldly Reputation, and others in private want,
purchased by their own intolerable profuseness, have perished in their
pestilent practices, tending to the common ruin, for satisfaction of their
unsatiable Appetites.

This being the Testimony of a Gentleman, no otherwise concerned it seems then
from the Inconveniences arising to the Commonwealth, by this profuseness, and
Lamenting the ill Consequences of it on that account, without any respect to
the Sinfullness of it, as a Provocation bringing Judgment upon a People where
it should thus exceed. I shall therefore to him add a Divine living in that
very Age, that you shall hear breaking out into this Complaint.

Is there any Nation this day upon the face of the Earth comparable to us in
this Abominable Sin of Pride? (Mr. Teins Leprosy of Pride.) Our Excess in
Apparel, will say no, wherein both Men and Women of all Estates, and degrees
from the highest to the lowest, from the Courtier to the Carter do monstrously
Offend. Servants are in their Apparel more costly then their Masters and Dames,
Yeomen and Yeomens Sons are herein equal to Gentlemen of good Worship, Poor and
mean Gentlemen compare with Lords, Lords with Kings, and Ladies with Queens.
What will become hereof at the last? What is now become of that Moderation in
Apparel that formerly has been in this Land? When every* one went habited
according to their Orders and Degrees, whereas now Gold, Silver, Velvet,
Satin, Fine Cambrick, and such other costly things are worn by very mean
Persons, against the Laws of God and man, against all Commonwealth, and
contrary to all good Examples of our Forefathers; which things rather belong
to Kings and Princes, and to Peers of the Land, then to mean Subjects. As Men
and Women exceed in the Substance of Apparel, so also in the form they daily
show forth their Abominable Pride in their Inconstancy; for no Color, Form,
nor Fashion long contenteth them, One while we Imitate the Spaniard, another
while the French, one while the Italian, another while the Dutch. Every Nation
is a several Pattern for us. -- Let these proud Peacocks but remember to what
end Apparel was appointed by God at the first, verily for a covering to hide
our shame. Diogenes seeing a proud young fellow struting and priding himself in
his fine Clothes, Sir, says he, remember that the Sheep has had your Coat on
his back before you. What Vanity is it for us to be so curious in our Apparel,
to take such Pride herein as we do, we rob and spoil all Creatures almost of
the world to cover our backs and to adorn our bodies withal; from some we take
their wool, from many their Skins, from diverse their Furrs, from sundry their
very Excrements, as the silk which is nothing else, but the very Excrement of
the worm; not content with this, we come to Fishes, and do beg from them their
Pearls to hang about us, we go down into the ground for Gold and Silver, and
turn up the very Sands for Precious stones. And having borrowed all this of
other Creatures, we jett up and down, provoking men to look upon us, as if all
this were now our own, when the stone shines upon our Finger, we fancy our
selves to shine with it, when the Silver and Silks do glister on our very
backs, we look big, as if all that beauty came from us. It is reported of
Athanasius, that when he saw a woman Apparrelling her self in Proud Attire with
Gorgeous Array, he fell a weeping, and being demanded why, Because, said he,
all this Preparation is for her own Destruction. But our nice and Mincing Dames
in England whose whole Life is spent for the most part, in Study and Care to
Deck, Paint, and Beautify themselves, will hardly be persuaded by that holy
Athanasius, that they bestow all this cost upon themselves to their own
Destruction.

Because these seem to be more private and obscure, I will yet add another,
which you must look on as a Singular Witness for God against the Pride and
Vanity of that Age. The most famous Edwin Sands, who dyed Archbishop of York,
and who was so Faithful to the Interest of Religion, as Mr. Fox tells you.

I do not Condemn all Apparel that is Rich and Stately, yea such as is Costly
and Gorgeous may be fit for some Personages and States, I do not doubt ^ut
Hester and Judeth did wear Gold, and were Gorgeously Decked, but if Paul and
Peter did live in our days, they would not spare the Vanity of our Women, much
less of our men. The vain and Monstrous Apparel of all other Countries and
Nations, England has scraped together, and in a Bravery put it on, the
Estimation whereof is little, a light wavering mind matched with a vain proud
Heart, desires a light, vain, strange, proud, and monstrous Apparel to cover
and clad it, but Sobriety is content with that which is seemly*

And in his Sermon before the Parliament, recommending this one evil to their
prudent considerations as fit to be redressed, being so dangerous and very
grievous -- As our principal care must be for the higher matters, Sincerity and
Unity in Religion, so may we not pass over other matters, which need redress
Gorgeous Apparel; and sumptuous Diet may seem small things, but they are the
causes of no small evil. They eat up England, and are therefore to be repressed
by strait Laws -- And elsewhere in a Sermon before the Queen, he expresses
himself pathetically, and it is worth your noting.

Ezechiel teaches that the Sins of Sodom (that Sink of Sin) were Idleness,
fullness of Bread, Pride and unmercifulness to the poor. Are not these the Sins
of this Land, of this City, of this Court, at this day? Half England lives
idly or worse occupied, we be fed to the full, and who is not puffed up with
Pride? And who relieveth his Neighbors wants? No man is contented with his own
Estate, but every one striveth to climb higher and to sit aloft, there is want
of the true fear of God in all sorts and Estates and Ages, yet we please our
selves and walk on, as if God either saw not our Sin, or else would not punish
it! Surely our Sins will not suffer his Plagues to stay long from us. What
Plagues, I dare not presume to Prophecy, for God has kept that secret to
himself. But I stand in fear that we are the men to whom Christ says, The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you. That we are they whose Sins will bring
the Scepter of this Kingdom into the hands of an Hypocrite, [Know Reader, that
this was when the Papists expected so highly the Return of their Religion at
the Death of Queen Elizabeth. And that made the heart of this good man so bleed
in that consideration; he goes on] If God in his Justice do this, ^o worth us
most wretched men! The Loss of the Gospel is the Loss of our Souls, and the
Loss of our Sovereign, the Loss of our Lives. Truly when I fall into
consideration of the wickedness of this world, that all sorts of men fall to
sinning with greediness, that in all conditions Iniquity does abound and
Charity wax cold, that the Zeal of God is utterly dried up in the Hearts of
Men, that God is served for Fashion sake, and not in truth, what should I think
but that God has gathered his Lap full of Plagues, and is ready to pour them
down upon us?

And thus you see how God has stirred up his Faithful Prophets to drop down
their testimony against this poor Sinful Land for the Pride and profaneness
thereof in that Age. Let us come down to King James his time, and see whether
the matter be any whit amended, and one might justly expect it, because they
lay under the obligations of a new mercy, in disappointing the expectations of
the Enemies of the Gospel, by the coming in of a Protestant Prince, who so
zealously by his Learned Pen contended for the Truth. But we shall find this
Vanity still triumphing in its full vaunt and Glory; and I shall not disparage
so holy a Witness as Bishop Sands, by subjoyning a mean or unworthy Person to
him, but will call forth the sweet spirited and excellent Bishop Hall to give
us his Evidence against the Pride of that Age wherein he Lived, and besides
others (which I omit) I will show to what height the Women were grown at that
time, from a Sermon of his Preached at the Spittle.

O God to what a world of Vanity have thou served us to? I am ashamed to think
that the Gospel of Christ should be disguised with such disguised Clients; are
they Christians or Anticks in some Carnaval, or Childrens Puppets that are thus
dressed? Pardon I beseech you, Men, Brethren and Fathers, this my just and holy
impatience. Who can without indignation look upon the prodegies, which this
mis-imagination produces in that other Sex, to the shame of their Husbands and
scorn of Religion, and damnation of their own Souls? Imagine one of our
Forefathers were alive again, and should see one of those his Gay Daughters
walk in Cheap Side before him, what do you think he would think it were? Here
is nothing to be seen but a Vardingale, a yellow Ruff, and a Perriwigg, with
perhaps some Feathers waving in the top; three things for which he could not
tell how to find a Name: Sure he could not but stand amazed to think what new
Creature the times had yielded since he lived; and then if he should run before
her, to see if by the foresight, he might guess what it were, when his eyes
should meet with a powdered Frizzle, a painted Hide shadowed with a Fan not more
painted, Breasts displayed, and a loose Lock swing wantonly over her Shoulders
betwixt a painted Cloth and Skin, how would he more bless himself to think what
mixture in Nature could be guilty of such a Monster. Is this the Flesh and
Blood (thinks he) is this the hair? Is this the shape of a Woman? Or has
Nature repented of her work since my days, and begun a new Frame? It is no
marvel if their Forefathers could not know them; God himself that made them,
will never acknowledge that he never made, the Hair that he never made theirs,
the Body that is ashamed of the Maker, the Soul that thus disguises the Body.
Let me say therefore to these Dames, as Bennet said to Totilaes Servant -- Lay
down that you wear, it is none of your own: All the world knows that no man
will rough-cast a Marble Wall, but mud or unpolished Rags; that false art,
instead of mending Nature, mars it. But if our persuasions cannot prevail, hear
this ye Garish Popingays of our time, if you will not be ashamed to Cloth your
selves in this shameless Fashion [see how the Spirit of this Meek Moses raises
into indignation, against this madness, that all the world knew to be so mild
and tender of it self [God shall Cloth you with shame and confusion; hear this
ye plaister-faced Jezebels, God will one day wash them off with Fire and
Brimstone,

See Reader what a Faithful Witness this holy and excellent man was for God,
against the Pride and Folly of that day.

To this famous Witness for God, Let us adjoin another of his own Order, as
Zealous and Faithful as himself, the worthy Bishop King, who bears his
Testimony for God against the Rage of this folly that Ruffled so proudly.

Throw away your Robes, and costly Cap^^isons, You Kings and Queens of the
Earth, (You that are not so by the Ordinance of God, but by your own
Usurpation, that take such honor upon you not being called there to, but bear
the Bravery of Princes, the Royalty of Solomon upon your backs, throw away your
Robes) Least he give you a rent that gave you a Garment; and Clothe you with
worse then Leprosy, that has hitherto Clothed you in Honor and Beauty. But
why do I spend my time in so impertinent an Exhortation? Fashion brought them
in, and Fashion must bear them out. I would to God our Preaching were in
Fashion too, for then we should win both men and women, we use all the Fashions
therein that our Commission can extend to, we preach in Season and out of
Season; we bring forth old and new, and yet without Success: Fashion brought in
Silks and Velvets at one time, and Fashion brought in Russets and Grayes at
another; Fashion brought in deep Ruffs, and shallow Ruffs, Thick Ruffs, and
Thin Ruffs, Double Ruffs, and no Ruffs; Fashion brought in the Vardingale, and
carried out the Vardingale, and has again revived the Vardingale from Death,
and placed it behind, like a Rudder or Stern to the body, in some so big, that
the Vessel is scarce able to bear it. When God shall come to Judge the quick
and the dead, he wiil not know those who have so defaced that Fashion which he
has Erected. -- What has undone both Gentlemen and mean Men in our Country,
so much as their back and Belly; Pride and Profusion. What means shall we use
to crush these Vipers among you? Declaiming will not serve, Denouncing of the
Judgments of God are here found unprofitable by overlong Experience; have we
not beaten your Ears a thousand times with Faithful and earnest Detection of
these Monsters Pride and Prodigality, Strangeness of Apparel; and what have we
gained, but as if we had preached but Fables? Ninivi repented in Sack Cloth and
Ashes, Stuff of the coursest Wool, and Workmanship of the Simplest fashion
their wits could invent, but we in our Silks and Velvets of French, Italian,
Jewish, Turkish, Barbarian Hellish Devices, for either we repent not at all, or
these are the guises and shows we bring in Repentance. These are the weeds we
carry, I say not to the Theaters to be stared upon, Nor to the Kings Court
where Raiment is more Tolerable to be worn, but with these Weeds we go to the
Temple of the Lord, and as boldly present our selves there, as if the favor of
God were soonest won, by such Intemperancies, whether we be a People defiled or
Corrupted as these in Niniveh were, we are not so shameless to dissemble, and
whether Prophets have been among us, as Jonas was in Nineveh, let their wearied
Tongues and Sorrowful Souls for their lost Labor witness another day.

Application to the Gallants.
See thou yon Coachful, Reader how they glide
With all their Glittering Glories as they pass?
The rich Oar spun all into threads of Gold,
And those wrought into Flourishing Flowers do seem
Restore the Gallants to their primitive shine.
Were not a poor Neglected Soul within,
Shivering with cold, dishevill'd and all torn,
Not daring yet to send up one poor Groan,
To Heaven for Liberty, but hugs its Chains:
Lets go and Confidently Address them Reader.
They seem the Monuments of Love Divine,
All over with Characters of Grace Engraved,
Through every Seam of their Embroidered Coats,
Glorious as those who covered all in Silk.
(And wore Heavens Gold and Silver too) were crowned
In all Perfections of a stately Dress.
Which only served to court the whorish world in,
And threw them into Scorn, and base disdain:
Against him who clasped on all and was so kind.
-- At last
Himself came down to visit these gay Princes,
Who took Offense at his poor plainer Coat,
And was not God, because he was not Fine.
(Yet at his will could send out sparkling Beams
That turned his Russet into Cloth of Gold,
Could glister too, if that were Happiness)
And having naught to do, sat down and wept
A Pearly shower that would have melted Stones,
Any but those whose Hearts were yet more hard.
If thou, even thou -- The rest swims all in tears.
Chanting the Notes of their sad Tragedy,
As if himself had been the Dying Swan.
Whilst they were jolly all, and soorn'd to sigh
But what is Jerusalems to the Gallants case?
The very same, they flanted out in Luster,
And were as high as he can be for life,
Ran from their Happiness with equal pace,
Mistook themselves for Lords, as he does too,
And scorned to vail the Top-sail of their Pride
To any God in Heaven; so does he;
Their Sin, their folly is the very same,
A Vanity that will bury him in their Grave.
Would the Great Sir, Vouchsafe to take a Turn
In yonder Garden, (Gardens are not below him)
Where Heaven has dressed up Flowers as fine as He:
Tulips and Lillies that baffle the gay Solomon,
There could I show him Tears poured out for him too,
And such as never yet were dropped before.
Nay of the very Color of his Coat,
(Fitted on purpose as it were to save him)
And not the Issues of a fluid brain,
Which every Woman flows with, --
But such as dwelt in richer Veins and Heart,
That was Resolved to bleed it self to Death,
'Cause his is hard and cannot --
There is a blood that can dissolve even Adamants
I Will give a knock or two upon the Rock
And all besmear it with a Saviors Gore;
If that prevail not, what can I do more?
Sir will you please to lend your VVandring Eyes
(Rolling ore this and that poor fleeting Object)
And fix them here upon a Weeping God.
(It is no Spectrum, Sir, nor idle fancy,
If any thing below, were ever Truth)
In Red Apparel and Garments of the Crisom blush
(Yet took not tincture from the Worm, as yours)
But streams from his own Heart and Veins have di'd them
When in a cold night they could ill be spared,
Yet flow they must, (or you had gone to hell Sir,)
In curled Clots sitting here and there upon him
And from the abundance, falling to the Ground;
Some passing off, but to make way for more*
To issue forth, and wash your stained Soul.
This is no news, Sir, have you never prayed
For Mercy on your Miserable Soul
Even by his Agony and bloody Sweat?
Yes Sir, he swet and bled, and all for You
While weights of Sorrow pressed his soul to death,
From loads of your guilt, and Ingratitude;
Yet there he lies and Grovels on the ground,
And there resolved to lie, till News of Mercy
Should come from Heaven for You --
Trembling till then least you should perish, Sir,
Whilst suffering torments equal to the damned,
Was cheerful to remember you were free
From the Curse and Plagues your Pride had brought on him
Where is your Sympathy, Sir? what can you sleep,
While Jesus is in Agony, and Struggles
With all the Powers of his Diviner Soul
For ease from the Pressures your self should have born?
Which would dissolved him had he not been God,
And the whole Creation had he not groaned thus,
Yet this is but the Exordium of his Sorrows,
While hence he is haled to bleed again afresh,
And yields his Naked Back to cruel hands,
Which dig long bloody Merciless Furrows on it,
Stripped as a very Malefactor Bare,
Never was Thief so Whipped --
And all because you wrap your Skin so soft,
In silken Folds, and Pride your self in Purple,
(While Scarlet's put in Mockery on him)
'Cause yours has stolen your heart away from God.
Who cannot have one poor thought fixed upon him.
Since Gaudy Clothes have all -- You Ladies think on this too
Who bare your selves as he, not to the Whip
(Yet did that innocent flesh endure the Lash)
But to the cursed effects of Luxury.
Next view his glorious Temples, pierced with Thorns,
Which taught him what it was to undertake
For Pride of Locks, and huffing Perriwigs.
(So Gideon once the men of Succoth taught)
Can you be p^oud of hair when Christ were Thorns.
Thus torn and bleeding into fainty Weakness
Yet is his heavy Cross laid on him too
Which he bore humbly, so long as Nature could,
While you, my Gallant throw off every care,
And hate Religion that but Treats of Crosses.
Yet has he left Crosses behind for you too,
Did you not scorn to take and bear them on you,
Had you love for him, you would never disdain it,
But he bears all while you go free to Heaven.
Come view him now, Nailed to the Cross he bore,
With Hands and Feet pierced through and dropping Blood
The Cruel Spear making that Orifice
Through which you easily may perceive his heart
Surrendering up the poor remains of Life;
And had he had ten hearts all should have bled
For you, who yet have none to thank him for it.
But has commanded you to steep in yours
Into his VVounds, till it become more supple,
And learn to bleed for Damning Sin, like hi^.
Come Ladies will you not vouchsafe one Glance
Upon a dying Savior on the Cross?
Ladies are tender hearted (thought to be so)
And yet to hear this story with dry eyes,
To see this rueful Spectacle of a God
Dying for Sin, and yours too, which the Sun
Refused to gaze on, shut his glorious Eye,
And hid his face in sable Clouds for grief;
And those poor women stood aloof and wept,
While you can see him hang, and bleed, and dye,
And were it yet to do, should bleed afresh,
Rather than one poor Vanity be abated,
Is this your Love to Jesus?
Stark dead, and Bloodless from the Cross he is taken,
And dead as he (from any power to hurt you)
Are all your Sins fast Nailed to the Tree.
Can yon believe this, Gallants? Here Is your pardo*
You Will find it lying sealed in his Grave,
VVrapt in the Cloth that bound his sacred Head,
Whence Mary fetched forth hers -- Can you believe?
If not, himself can do no more to save you;
Nor will do more through all Eternity.
Offer the flanting Banners of your Pride
As Trophies to the Glories of his Cross,
Die and be Crucified with him too,
From all the love of painted Vanities
And hang as naked from them, as did he
Never true Christian triumphed in his shame,
Whose only Glory is a Naked Lord.
He that wore Purple here, is Clothed in Flames,
The Fool that dotes on Rags, deserves them too,
Will curse the false and cheating Glories here,
That thus betwitch'd him to neglect poor Psyche,
For whom are Robes far whiter than the Snow,
And such as Angels wear, neglected all
And worn by poor and mean and lowly Souls
Whilst you my Gallants scorn, the Crowns abov^
And perish in despite of flaming Love.
FINIS.

