THE ENGLISH Manner of SWEARING VINDICATED Or the JVDGMENT of an Eminent
Nonconformist MINISTER of LONDON, concerning these FOUR QUESTIONS VIZ. Q. I. Is
it Lawful in Swearing to lay the Hand upon the BIBLE? Q. II. Is it Lawful to
Kiss it in Swearing? Q III. May one that scrupleth thus Swearing himself, yet
Commissioned, give an Oath thus to another that scrupleth it not* Q. IV. How
far is Swearing by Creatures a Sin?


Wherein several OBJECIONS about the foresaid QVESIONS are Answered.

Published for the Satisfaction of the Conscientious.

LONDON Printed by R. W. for Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXVII.

OBJECTIONS against the English manner of Swearing ANSWERED.
IN the Title Page, the Lawfulness of Laying the hand on, and Kissing the Book
are made two several Questions, which may here be comprehended in one, to both
which one Answer may be Sufficient.

Quest. 1. Is it lawful to lay the hand on the Bible and kiss^ it in Swearing?

A^sw. It is not Unlawful.

Proved 1st. That which is not forbidden by God, is lawful (before God) But so
to take an Oath is not forbidden by God -- Therefore, etc. The minor will be
proved sufficiently by Disproving all the pretenses of a Prohibition. The major
needs no Proof.

2. If it be for bidden it is either, 1. As an Act in Worship not commanded,
and so Will worship, 2. Or as a significant Ceremony in worship not commanded,
3. Or as an uncommanded significant Ceremony, which has in it self some
forbidden m^tt^ or manner: But it is ^o^ forbidden in any of these respects,
therefore not at all.

I. Not as an Act not commanded in worship: Then all Acts in worship not
commanded would be unlawful, which is false; For, 1. The Acts used in swearing,
Genesis 24.2. and 14.22. Rev. 10.5 were not commanded and yet lawful: of which
more anon 2^ God has not commanded what Tune to sing a Psalm in, what Division
to make of the Bible into Chapters and Verses, whether to use a written or a
printed Bible, what words, what method, what particular Text to choose, what
Translation to use, with many such like.

II. Not as a significant Ceremony not Commanded: For then all such should be
forbidden which is not true. For 1. A^raham's Swearing by lifting up the hand
(and so the Angels Rev. ^0.5.) and Abraham's servant by putting his hand under
the thigh were signifi^^nt Ceremonies: And he that will say they were commanded
must prove it: The contrary may well by us be supposed, 1. Because no such Law
is notified in Scripture, and here non apparere and non esse are equal, because
of the perfection of Gods Laws. 1. Because it is mentioned, as Pa^aeus and
other Commenta^ors note, as some accustomed Rite, and so depends, not on any
particular Precept to Abraham alone as a Prophet. 3. Because it is not one but
several sorts of Swearing Rites that are mentioned, Lifting up the hand, and
putting it under the Thigh.

2. Almost all Christians do take some uncommanded significant Ceremon^^^
Swearing to be lawful. The Ceremony mentioned by Paraeus ibid. as used in the
Palatinate is such, of lifting up three fingers. The English Annotations tell
you that the customs of countries are very various in this point, yet most
agree in adding some outward attestation of Action or gesture to words in
taking of an Oath to make it better remembered and more regarded than bare words
of Affirmation, Promise or imprecation. And Josephus (cited by Grotius) tells
us 'twas then the custom among the Jews to swear by this Ceremony of putting
the hand under the thigh.

3. An Action of another part of the body is no more forbidden to express the
mind by, than of the tongue: God never said, you shall no way express your
minds in things Sacred or civil, but by the Tougue: a change of the countenance
may express it: a frown or a pleasant look (Index animi vultus.) Paul did lift
up the hand to the Jews when he would speak for himself: Christ made as if he
would have gone further, Luc. 24. Words are not natural signs, but invented and
arbitrary in particulars, though the Power of speaking words so invented and
learned be natural. If it be lawful to use significant word^, not commanded in
Worship, it is lawful to use significant Actions (under due regulation)
Therefore all the ancient Churches, without one Contradicter that ever I read
of, did use many such. To stand up at the Creed is a significant expression of
Consent, which not only all the Churches else, but the old Non-conformists
never scrupled, nor do the present as far as I can learn: Whether to sit, stand
or kneel, at singing Psalms, is left at liberty. To put of the hat, is a
significant Ceremony or act in worshp, not commanded in it self, nor used of
old for the same signification as now: and where covering the head does signify
reverence, it is better than to be bare. God has commanded us the expressing
of consent, reverence, etc. but left the word, gesture or expressing sign to
liberty He that affirms that God has left no other signification of our minds
in sacred things to our liberty, but tied us to Words alone, must prove what he
says (which he must do against Scripture, against Nature, and against all the
judgment and custom of all Christ's Churches and of the world.)

III. If laying the hand on the Book, and Kissing it be unlawful for any
special matter or manner forbidden more than other significant acts, it is for
some of these Reasons in the Objections following; which now I will answer.

I. Object. It savoureth of the Romish Superstition. Answ. 1. Not at all: Let
him prove it that can. 2. Superstition is the feigning of things to be pleasing
or displeasing to GOD which are not, and using or disusing them accordingly:
whatever be the Etymology of the word ( Superstitutum Cultus, or supra
Statutum, etc.) it is certain that the common use of it among Heathens and
Christians was for an erroneous undue fear of God, thinking this or that was
displeasing or pleasing to Him to be done or to be avoided which was not so,
but was the conceit of a frightened mistaking mind. Therefore to say that God is
displeased with this signification of the mind, when it is not so, nor can be
proved, is Superstition. And this is not the only instance of Satan's
introducing Superstition under pretense of avoiding Superstition.

3. The Sense of the Law is to be judged of by the Law, and by the notorious
Doctrine and profession of the Law- makers and of the Land; which here
renounceth the superstitious use of it. But I confess I was more afraid that
the Papists had too much derogated from the Scripture, than given too much to
it: and they profess they swear not by a Creature. as Paraeus in Genesis 24.2.

II. Object. But Paraeus, in Genesis 24.2. says, Non absque superstitione fit cum
super Crucifixum aut Codicem Evangelii digitis impositis juratur, ut fit in
Papatu. Answ. 1. But that same act which in Papatu is superstitious, because of
superstitious conceits and ends, is not so in all others which have none such.
2. It^s ^o new thing to be quick in accusing our adversaries; but Paraeus
adds not a syllable of Proof; and if he had, it must have been such as
touched not us, or else invalid.

Object. III. Some good men have scrupled it. Answ. Ten thousand to one such
have not scrupled it. 2. They are not our Gods nor Law. And if we avoid all as
sin which some good men have scrupled, we shall make Superstition a great part
of our Religion: And when, on the same grounds, we have but practiced all as
duty which some good men have taken for duty, we shall quite out-go the Papists.

Object. IV. Our Common Law Commissions, that give authority to examine
persons, direct it to be done supra Sacramenta sua per sancta Dei evangelia
fideliter praestanda: And in the form of Administration in Ecclesiastical
Courts the words are Ad sancta Dei Evangelii rite and legitime jurati: Whether
these Forms do not infer that in their first use, (at least) persons either
swore by the Evangelists or offended in the mode of swearing: And our Common
Law calls it a Corporal Oath, from touching the Book.

Answ. 1 To know the sense of our present Law, it is not necessary that we know
the sense of the first users of the Form: For the Law is not now the King's Law
tha^ first m^de it, but the Kings Law that now reigns, and bears his sense.
2. To ju^^^fie our obedience to a Law, it is not necessary that we prove every
Phrase in that Law to be fitly expressed. 3. But examine it well, and try
whether it be not also sit and laudable.

1. There are three things conjoined in the Oaths in question. 1. A testimony
Assertory or a promise, 2. An Oath, 3. An Imprecation. The Assertory Testimony
is here the first thing intended; and the Oath and Imprecation are but as a
means to make that Testimony or promise valid. 2. The published Doctrine of
England, in the 39 Articles, the Book of Ordination, etc. is that the Holy
Scriptures contain all things necessary to Salvation, as being God's Law or
Rule of our Faith and Life. All our Duty to God is there commanded: All the
Promises on which we hope are there contained; all the Punishments which the
perjured or any sinner must feel and should fear, are there threatened.
Therefore, 3. The Laying on the Hand and Kissing the Book, is an Action
directly related to the Imprecation, and not to the Oath, but only by
consequence, as the Imprecation is subservient to the Oath, as the Oath is to
the Assertion. So that this is the plain Paraphrase of the whole, [ I do
believe that God the Ruler of all the world, is the Judge of secrets which are
above man's Judgment, the Searcher of hearts, and the hater and avenger of
Perjury, according to this His holy Word by which He governs us: And to this
God I appeal as to the Truth of this my T^stimony, cons^ning my self to lose
all the benefit of his promises to the just, and to bear all the punishments
here threatened to the Perjured, if I lie.]

And what can be said more fitly, 1. To own the Protestant Doctrine that the
Scripture is God's perfect Word: that the evil to be feared, and the good to be
hoped for, is all there contained, and is all the fu^fi^ling of that Word? 2
And to put the word in its due subordination to GOD? And our ordinary Form of
Swearing shows this [ So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.]
Whether you will call this, Swearing upon or by the Gospel, or call it a
Corporal Oath, or a Spiritual Oath; is only de nomine, and is nothing to the
matter thus truly described. Sacramentum signifies the Oath it self, and Ad
s^ncta Evangelia is a fit Phrase: or if supra Sacramenta signify the two
Sacraments of the Gospel, it can mean no more than [ As one that by the
Reception of the Sacrament does profess to believe this Gospel to be true, I do
renounce the B^nefits of it, If I lie:] And in this sense it has been some men's
custom to receive the Sacrament when they would solemnly Swear.

Object: V. Some seem to object against Kissing the Book, as having the greater
appearance of giving too much to it, or putting some adoration on it; and
because this Ceremony of kissing is held to be of later date than laying on the
hand.

Answ. The Ceremony signifies that I love and approve the Gospel, and place
the hope of my salvation in it. And the public Doctrine of the Kingdom, before
cited, shows as a full Exposition what we ascribe to it. But as some
scrupulous Brethren in Scotland gratify the Papists by rejecting the Oath of
Supremacy, which is the most thorny hedge against them, and this while they cry
out against Popery; so others would gratify the Papists, by sugg^sting that we
give too much to the Bible, and adore it; when the very sum of Englands
Protestantism, is their just ascribing to the Holy Scriptures its Sufficiency
as to all things necessary to Salvation. Thus Satan undoeth still by over-doing.

Object. VI. But Laying on the hand, and kissing the Book, seem of the same
nature with the Cross in Baptism, and other signific^nt ^^remonies; and an Oath
is part of the Worship of God; therefore not to be taken with these ceremonies,
or else will seem to justify the other.

Answ. 1. Significant Words, Gestures or Actions are not therefore evil,
because they are significant, (unless bruitishness be a virtue) nor because any
call them by the name of Ceremonies (else that name might be put upon any thing
to deprive us of our liberty). Therefore I can judge of no Ceremony by that
general name alone, till it be named it self in specie. 2. And of the Cross,
there are these notorious differences in the case: 1. The Cross is an Image
used in Gods Worship: though not a permanent, yet a transient Image, and used
as an Image of the Cross of Christ, though but in water or oil. And God has
more specially forbidden images used in His Worship, than He has done a
professing significant word, gesture or action, which is no image, nor used as
such. 2. The Cross seems to be a third Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace,
while it is used as a Symbol of Christianity, and a dedicating sign, (as the
Cannon-calleth it) by which before the Church, there is made a solemn
self-Obligation as sacramentally, to Renounce the Devil, the world and the
flesh, and manfully to fight under Christ's banner, etc. Implying our trust and
hope in Christ crucified for the benefits of His death. So that if it be not a
complete third Sacrament, it has so much of that which is proper to a
Sacrament, that for my part, I dare not use it. And as I think the King would
not take it well, when he has made the Star the Badge of the Knights of the
Garter, if any Subject should presume to make another Symbolum Ordinis (though
yet many a significant Gesture or Act may be used without offense); So I fear
Christ would not take it well of me if I presume to make or use another Symbol
or Tessera of Christianity. But what is this to things or Gestures significant
of no such kind? You see then the difference of these Cases.

But if the Cross could be proved as harmless as the Swearing Ceremony, I would
be for the Cross, and not against the laying the hand on the Book and Kissing
it: For 1. I am not of their mind that form their judgment of other
particulars to suit with their pre-conceived opinions of things of the same
rank or quality; nor make the interest of my former conceptions, to be the
measure of my after judging. 2. Nor do I think it so great an honor to be
strict in my opinions, as dishonor to be superstitious, and to add to God's
Law, by saying that [He forbids what He does not, or to be affectedly
singular in denying lawful things, with a Touch not, taste not, handle not, etc.
Nor do I esteem him to be the wisest, best, or holiest person who is narrowest
or strictest in his Opinions, but who is rightest; nor him that makes most
things to be sins, but him that commits least sin, which is such indeed; nor
him that makes most Laws to himself and others, but him that best obeys
God's Laws.

Quest. 3. May one that scrupleth thus swearing himself, yet Commissiond, give
an Oath thus to another that scrupleth it not?

Answ. If the thing be (as is proved) lawful, his scruple will not make him
innocent in neglecting the duty of his place. 2. If the Substance of the Oath
were lawful, and only the Mode or Ceremony were sinful (as suspected), then 1.
If the Commissioner must himself particularly command that mode, it were
unlawful for him to do it. 2. But if he only command, and give the Oath as an
Oath, leaving the Mode without his Approbation or Command, to the Taker and the
Law, he may so give the Oath. And Thus Christians in all ages have taken it for
Lawful to make Covenants even with Infid^l^ and Idolaters, and to take a Turks
Oath by Mahomet, when it is only the O^th that we demand, and the Mode is his
own, which we had rather be without, and give no Approbation of. And if a King
may thus demand an Infidel's or an Idolater's Oath, (as God Himself does men's
duty, when He knows they will sin in doing it) much more may one do so, in case
of a doubtful Ceremony, which he is neither the Author nor approver of. But I
think this in question is lawful, fit, and laudable.

Quest. 4. How far is swearing by Creatures a sin?

Answ. It is just like the case of Worshipping Images or by Images: He that
worshippeth an Image or any Creature as God, and ultimately terminateth his
worship in it, does commit direct and full Idolatry; which is so much the
greater sin, by how much the baser the thing is which he idolizeth. But if he
makes the Image or Creature but his medium of that Worship which should be
immediately offered to God, in whom it is ultimately terminated, then it is not
gross Idolatry, but it is false and forbidden worship of the true GOD: but if
the Creature be made but the Medium of that Worship which God would have
offered Him by a Medium, then it is lawful so to use or worship it: (As to
honor and admire God as appearing in His Works; to give that Worship, or
Honor to our Parents or Rulers as His Officers, which is ultimately terminated
in God: just so it is in the case of Swearing: for Swearing is a part of the
Worship of God. He that swears by any Creature as a God, or as the avenger of
those that by falsehood elude the Judgment of man, does commit Idolatry in it:
as Julian did when he swore by the Sun, (which he praised in his Orations, and
worshipped, as God). But he that only swears so by a Creature, as to intend
God ultimately, as the witness and avenger, but yet so as that the creature
only is named, or so named as has an appearance of Idolatry, or tends to
entice the mind from God does swear by the true God intentionally, but in a
sinful manner. But he that dir^ctly swears by God (upon a just call), and by
the creature (or names the creature rather) but in a just and clear and
inoffensive subordination to God, is excusable. So we use to lay our hands on
the Bible, and thus to swear, So help me God, and the Contents of this Book.
Thus on great occasions many good men in their Writings to clear themselves
from some calumny have said, I call God, and angels, and men to witness. Many
in naming creatures intend rather a Curse than a Swearing by the creature: as [
if it be not so, let God destroy me by this Fire, or this Water, etc.]

FINIS.

