ENGLANDS HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE TO THEIR KING And to their PARLIAMENT: SHOWING
The Cause of this bloody and destructive War by the KING against his
Parliament and People.

O Lord let not the KING be unto thy People the rod of thy fierce wrath.
Printed according to Order.



London, Printed for G. L. 1643.

His Majesty's Cause of this War is either just or unjust, or dubious, viz.
partly just, and partly unjust.
1. WE will first suppose his Majesty's Cause to be just, that he has only the
defensive part, and is necessitated to fight; and that the Parliament, as yet,
has offered no terms of Accommodation to him, but such as are more unjust
then all the plagues of this calamitous war.

This so being supposed, makes him innocent, but yet most unfortunate; it makes
him the first man that ever fortune pict out to engage in such a wretched
destruction of men and treasure without blame; amongst all his Ancestors, there
will not appear upon search one of them who was just, and maintained a just
cause, and yet met with such general opposition from his Subjects, much less
from the Lords and Commons assembled in a Parliament.

How trivial soever the Kings side accounts this, there was not ever a worse
prodigy in the World to amaze any State, then this is, if it be true, that the
orderly representative body of this nation, has, causlesly and unnaturally,
risen up against their righteous King to pursue him so far as ours now is.

It is not to be denied, but that some Parliaments have done some unjust
things, when they have been wrought upon by the force and fraud of Princes;
but no Example can be showed, that ever any Parliament did such an unjust thing
as this, contrary to all motives and influences of a gracious and religious
Prince.

Some of the Kings party have argued thus; If Parliaments may err when they
are perfect, having the concurrence of the royal State with them, much more
may they err when the royal State recedes from them, etc.

But this I hold a grand mistake; for if I have any reason to make a right use
of story, Parliaments are repesented to me never less liable to error, then
when they receive least impressions from the King. With what regret then ought
the King to look upon this unprecedented disaster? Certainly if he look upon
us with a natural eye, under such unparalleled sufferings, or upon himself
with a pious eye under such an unequal affliction, it cannot but administer
thoughts of honor to him; bonus pastor ponit vitam pro ovilius, so said that
Prince of Peace in whom only there was no sin, and in whose flock jointly
and severally taken there was nothing else but sin; and yet his death sealed
as much as his mouth affirmed. Moses seemed to prefer the welfare of the
obstinate Jews, not only before all his temporal interests, but also before
his eternal diadem in Heaven; and Saint Paul seemed to be rapt up with a
species of the same Zeal.

The passions of some heathen and heretical Princes toward their liege
Subjects have been almost above the pitch of humanity: With what a wrange kind
of hypochondriacall frenzy did Augustus Caesar cry out, Read mihi Legiones
vare? If the blood of his Subjects had been drawn forcibly out of his own
dearest Veins, it could not have parted from him with a stronger resentment.
How did our Queen Mary even to to the death, deplore the loss of one Town in
Picardie? With what strange Instruments did grief make incission in her heart,
whilst it would ingrave the name of Callice there?

The loss of all Kings in all wars uses to be very dolorous: but native Kings
in civil Wars when they look upon such vast desolation, as is now to be
seen in England and Ireland, must needs think that their own interest, their
own honor, their own safety, is of less consequence.

2 We will now suppose the Kings Cause to be unjust, that the Parliament has
had none but loyal intentions toward him and his royal Dignity, nor has
attempted any thing but to defend Religion against the Papists, the Laws of
the Land against Delinquents, and the Privileges of both Houses against
Malignants; and on the contrary we will suppose, that that private Counsel
which the King has follwed rather then his public own, has aimed at the
Arbitrary rule of France, and to effect the same has countenanced Popery, and
but pretended danger from the Parliament, from the City of London, and from the
best affected of the whole Kingdom: Qui supponit non ponit: We will not
assume, but presume only, that the great Counsel of the Land is in the right
rather then the King and his claudestine Counsel; but see what will follow
upon this supposition, if it prove to be true, as it is neither impossible nor
improbable; if this be true, what a formidable day is that to be wherein the
King shall render a strict account for all the English Protestant blood which
has been issued out, and is to be yet issued out in this wicked and unnatural
quarrel? Manasseh which filled Jerusalem with blood, and made the Channels
thereof flow with the precious blood of Saints, could not contract so black a
guilt, as he that imbrewes two large Kingdoms with blood, and that with the
blood of the best reformed Professors of our Saviors Gospel. That blood of
Protestants which has been shed by Papists, as in the Parisian Massacree; that
blood of Christians which has been shed by Infidels, as in Turkey; that blood
of Saints which has been shed by Heretics, as in the Arian Emperors days;
that blood of strangers which has been shed by conquering Usurpers, as in Peru
of late, may admit of some color or excuse as to some degree of heinousness,
and may plead for some kind of Expiation; but this is beyond all thought or
expression.

The goodly Kingdom of Ireland is almost converted into a Golgotha, and the
more goodly Kingdom of England is hasting to a worse point of desolation. It
must needs be therefore, that he to whose cruelty and injustice so much
confusion shall be imputed, must be perpetually abominated as a plague of
humane kind, more monstrous and portentuous, then any age formerly had the
strength to produce. The ripping up of a Mothers womb, the fiting of such a
Metropolis as Rome was, were but strains of vulgar narrow-hearted cruelty;
Antichrist himself may own the depopulation and vastation of our British
Islands, as acts worthy of his dying fury.

3 But it remains now in the last place, that we suppose some doubt to be in
the Case, or some mixture of injustice in some circumstances: as that though
the King incline not at all to Popery himself, yet he has favored and enabled
Papists too far to do mischief; and though he cannot with safety cast
himself wholly upon the fidelity of the Parliament, yet he has no cause
utterly to reject their consent, and approbation in the filling up of all
places of public power and trust as the emergent necessity of the times now
is, nor to persist in this al-consuming war rather then to condescend to an
Accommodation; if we lay down this for supposed, we must needs conclude that
the King has not punctually, and duly discharged his Office, so as that he can
clearly acquit and absolve himself before God of this lamentable effusion of
Christian blood; for there must not only be a perspicuous justice in the
Cause, but an absolute necessity of the war when Kings take up the sword
against such a considerable number of their Subjects, as our King now fights
against.

Though the Cause may be just, yet the war is not lawful where the miserable
consequences of it do too far out-ballance the iniquity of the conditions
offered and proposed by the assailed party. Wherefore, if the mere and clear
justice of a Cause cannot always wipe off guilt, how shall he be purged from
offense whose Cause is not totally just, nor undeniably evident in a war of
this nature? If the King does not apparently fight for Antichrist, yet it is
most apparent that Antichrist does fight for the King; the whole Hirarchy has
declared their engagement by publishing Bulls and by sending supplies into
Ireland and England out of several Popish Countries.

On the other side, if the Earl of Essex does not apparently fight for Christ,
yet it seems very probable that Christ fights for him; for our great Armies
within the Circle of the last year have four times met, and still the King,
side has gone off with loss and disadvantage. Redding being begirt with his
Excellencies Forces, all his Majesty's power could not relieve it; yet
Gloucester being begirt by his Majesty's Forces, his Excellency found means to
relieve it. And as for Edgehill and Newbery, though neither side was totally
routed, yet the mastery of the field was left to his Excellency; and had not
fraud done better service to the King then force, scarce any other encounters
in other parts had bin prosperous to his Popish Armies.

These things seem to make the Kings Cause at lest dubious, for it were
strange if in these latter days Christ and Antichrist should be so far
reconciled in any one Cause, as to unite their battles in the same Expedition,
or to pitch their Tents in the same field; and grant any doubt in this Case,
and the King can never be capable of justification in prosecuting it so far
with fire and sword; for the King has already sworn to uphold and preserve in
their entire vigor the Laws of the Land, and the Privileges of Parliament; and
we cannot deny, but even this doubt might be decided by the Laws in
Parliament, or by some other Judicatory out of Parliament, if the King would
refer it to such a decision, if the King will admit of no Judicatory to
determine this matter, what are all our Laws and Privileges worth? If he will
admit of one but doubts what it is, and will not be resolved by his Parliament
in that doubt, what will all his oaths profit us? what will all his deep
professions of favor to our Laws and Privileges stand us in stead? Nay, when
the King is not certain of victory, and yet has by so many dreadful oaths
debarred himself from ill advantages by victory, if this devouring war (wherein
so much loss is, and no gain at all to countervaile it) be still protracted,
and preferred before a just Peace, all these inexpiable mischiefs will be
charged upon him, and future ages must needs suspect, that love of ruin and
destruction, and a perfect hatred to the very nature and being of man, was the
execrable cause of it.

Imprimat.

Ja. Cranford.



FINIS.

