AN English VVinding-Sheet FOR THE East India MANVFACTORS.
In a Letter to a Person of QUALITY.
SIR
YOUR Acknowledgment of the satisfaction You have received by the perusal of
the several Late Printed Tracts, That the free Admission of the
Home-Consumption of East India. Wrought Silks, almost has, and will certainly
become the utter Subversion of the English Silk-Manufacturers, both (Weavers
and Throwsters) at London and Canterbury, and wherever it is settled. But your
doubt, Whether the Exportation of those East India Wrought Silks that now are,
and may be still Exported, have not, and may not be of greater Advantage to
England, than the Silk Manufactury ^^ere is, or can be; and that the
Prohibiti^n of the Wearing them here will not ^estroy this Advantage that has,
and may be made by their Exportation, and so Obstruct and Hinder a more Public
Benefit to the Kingdom, than the Preservation of all the Silk-Manufacturers are
to England. And this, you say, is the great Pretense and Plea of the East India
Traders, and that then we must buy Wrought Silks at much dearer Rates, if their
Trade herein be Obstructed, and likewise whether if we should procure all other
Necessary Manufactures in like manner (both for Home-Consumption and
Exportation) Plentiful and Cheap from India, it might not be greatly to our
Advantage, all which, if our selves do not, the Dutch will impose upon us,
under pretense of their own Works, and likewise by Exporting them to all other
parts, Gain the profit thereof from us, which is the matter wherein you desire
farther Satisfaction and Information.

SIR, In Answer to which pray consider, for I am sure these Objections are as
False as Impolytick (we have already, and are now inciting the Indians, and
Chinees that are a numerous and Laborious People, and can and do live, without
Fire or Clothing and with a Trivial Expense for Food) to load us with their
Manufactures, that are utterly destructive of our own, and our very being a
People of any Number or Value, by our not only consuming their handiwork our
selves in the Room of our own Silk and Wooll-Manufactures, or such as are the
Return thereof; but likewise by the hindering or spoiling all our Foreign
Exportations we used to have for those our own Fine Goods, and then plead it as
a Meritorious, and Advantageous Act, thus to help forward our own destruction
with both hands; for had we not pusht forward the Indian Trade, our own English
Wrought Goods had (as formerly served the World and gained that profit) in the
Room of those we falsely pretend this Advantageous Exportation of East India
Manufactures do produce; so that all those Indian Exportations are double loss,
rather than any profit to England, which has for several Years past come to
that Perfection in all Wrought, Figured and Flowered Silks, and Stuffs, as far
to outdo Holland, and Vye with France, or any part of the Universe, and with
those, had not we our selves occasioned the contrary (as before specified) have
served many Countries, with which it is worth our while to Trade; which are
chiefly our own Western Plantations, Ireland, Scotland, and Spain, except
which, our Exports herein have been to little advantage; for what is of
East India Wrought-Silks Exported for Holland, is said (by those that
understand their dealing) chiefly with design to save the draw-back Duty, by
stealing them in again Custom free, which if they cannot, they frequently
re-enter, and turn them again upon us.

In the serving our own Plantations with Silks and Stuffs, it is greatly
impolytick, that any particular Person's Advantage, and the Benefit of the
Indian should be preferred before the Kingdoms, else they might be obliged to
nothing of Silks, and Stuffs, but of English make; but in the stead thereof we
allow them the draw-back in East India Silks, greatly to our own prejunice, and
so are no advantage to the Government neither, and the prejudice England does
sustain in this Single Article, I believe to be greater than the profit of the
Exports all the Indian Wrought-Silks amount to.

And as we have encouraged the Indians to the increasing and making multitudes
of Wrought-Silks, as I shall presently instance; so we have not only Consumed
them our selves, and served our own Plantations; but courted and obliged all
those parts we deal to, to the Use and Consumption thereof. But the Prejudice
England has, and does receive thereby, being added to the former Article, when
we consider that all our English Wrought Silks is the rerurn of our Woollen
Manufacture, and Multitudes of People likewise employed, it must far
out-ballance all pretended profit of India Wrought Silks, which are the
Exportations purchased with our good hard Silver, when as we had otherwise
served those parts with Silks of our own Manufacturing, which had kept, and
increased our Numbers ten times more than now they are.

Yet do we not contend to prevent our Merchants Exportation, if the European
World will not be content without them, but if by our use of English Wrought
Silks, other Kingdoms will follow our Example, as I think it is one of the
greatest Blessings we can hope for our good, I only pray God they may not be
mistaken that fear it; for the advantage England will reap by gaining a
preferrence to our own Manufactur'd Silks, etc. will be far greater benefit to
the Kingdom, than the Exportation of those Indian Silks, etc. that will go in
their stead. And I am sorry any Englishman should grudge it; but whatever their
pretenses be, of vast Exportations when it serves their purpose, we have their
own Confession in print that Two thirds of all Wrought Silks Imported, were
consumed in England; but they freely and most truly since that acknowledged
before the Honorable House of Lords, that Nine Tenths thereof were in England
expended, which is sufficient proof what small advantage England can reap by
their Exportations of Wrought Silks, not to be near answerable to the Damage
they do the Kingdom by the prejudice to the Turkey and Italian Merchants,
besides the forementioned innumerable Manufacturers.

As to your Query, Whether the like advantage may not accrue to England by the
Importation, Consumption, and Exporting of all other India Manufactures. I dare
be positive, That as in the Case of India Wrought Silks, all their Manufactures
hereafter mentioned, or any other which we are possessed of, or that we can have
from other parts in return for our English Productions and Manufactures, is
prejudicial to the Welfare of England. As for what is again Exported, it cannot
hurt us, but as it hinders the Sale of our own Productions and Manufactures
(and therein it does) which would certainly otherwise Vend in those parts, to
which those Indian Goods are so Exported; but this we contest not in the Matter
of Silks for our selves. But let what Goods will be made in India, and come,
let us not consume them here to our own prejudice, or in giving the Example,
nor send them to such places as we may oblige to take our own Manufactures, I
mean our own Western Plantations, let other parts of the European World look to
themselves, and share them amongst 'em; the damage will light on some, and by
this doing, we shall wisely Support our Wealth, Employ and Increase our Numbers
of People which will keep up the Value of Lands. As to the Kingdoms paying
dearer for English Wrought Silks, it is a needless fear; for if men of Substance
has but reasonable encouragement to venture their Stocks in the Silk
Manufactory, we shall soon make such Multititudes of Workmen, as shall enable
us to sell better Penny-worths than the East India Merchants do, and this will
be far better for the good of the Kingdom, than to let them be as at present
about London, reduced to a Tenth of what they were, and at Canterbury to an
Eighth of our former Numbers.

As for the Dutch, or other, serving us with India Goods, under pretense of
their own Manufacture, it is an Objection that has been sufficiently Answered,
and has little of weight in it, unless we give up our selves to despair,
rather than contend with any Difficulty, that may as easily be prevented, as
French Alamodes and Lustrings, if Englishmen can have but the same favor as
the French of that Alamode and Lustring Company have had.

And as to the Exportations of such East India Silks, etc. if they be made and
must come, better we serve the European parts than any other; but it is plain,
That all Manufacturing parts of the World are taking the Alarm, and standing on
their Guard; and this makes the East India Merchants so zealous for a home
Consumption; and it is We, of all Kingdoms in Europe that deserve the greatest
blame, for the sake of a little private profit, to bring this part of the World
into this Straight; for it was not the Dutch, but the English, that first put
the Indians on that vast increase of Silk- worms (as much to the Detriment of
the Turkey and Clothing Trade, as is the farther Manufacturing thereof a great
loss to England, though never so cheap sold to the India Merchants if purchased
with our money, to the prejudice of the forementioned parties) it was the
English that put them on the farther Improvement, to that great Excess they are
now at of Throwing Dying, and Weaving, when both they and the Indians could not
do less than laugh in their Sleeves at the Act that prevents Throwing and
Dying, (the profit thereof being wholly Loss to us, and Gain to India, in being
after Wrought into Silks) it was only the English that sent over Artists of all
these Trades, and Pattern-drawers, and Patterns that might suit the European
Humors; and in plain English, it was the English, it is the English, and it
will be the English, that will be the only mad part of the World, in this
respect, if not by Law prevented, Strict Edicts in France prevent their
Home-Consumption; Flanders and Venice, and all other parts do the like; and we
above all others have great reason to do so too; and it is high time, and how
the Case now is, and hereafter will be, with us, is what I shall briefly
demonstrate to you and the consequence hereof (having with all brevity
satisfied each part of your Objection) by which it will appear, That we had
better prohibit all Trade with India, than go forward as now doing and
projecting.

As to what we are now doing, it is visible to all that observe how the Fancy
and Humor of the Female Sex, with the advantage the Late Law has given,
inclines several men of great Stocks, and many of them out of Necessity, and
against their Judgments and Inclination, merely for the employment of their
Estates to advantage, to strike into this pernicious India Trade; so that the
Vogue and Cry, (under the Notion, of public good. Working backward) is like
our Watermen with a hye India, hye India, hye, to almost a total Neglect and
Disrespect of the Good and Welfare of the Turkey, and other more advantageous
Trades of England, with a Subversion of our most profitable Manufactures; for
as they have left the Imbroiders little more than a Name, and both Cabbinet and
Fan-makers are forced to be contented to become their Jobbers and Broakers, by
Applauding and Advancing the price of those Commodities, that are the ruin of
numbers of their Trade. So they seem to aim at the destruction of all they can.
The poor Button-makers indeed are secured by Law (if that will do) else we
might have expected whole Cargoes of that Commodity. As for the Ribbond-makers
(in which many of the Undone Broad Silk Weavers hoped to take Sanctuary.) Their
Cake is Dough; for the Indian Merchant have set the Indians thereon, and now
bring them (though prohibited by Law) from India, and are entered at the
Custom-house, under the denomination of Parcels of Wrought Silks, and that
lately one parcel was seized, and is in the Custom-house Warehouse; and I hope
will not escape due Prosecution, but that the Custom-house Commissioners will
take care to regulate such dark Entries.

They are now upon a Trial of Skill with the Shoemakers, their being two
parcels lately come for a Sample; and doubtless, considering what empty Hold
their Ships carry to India, it will be worth their while to carry our Leather,
if they have it not there: For Elevenpence in the Shilling saved in the
Workmanship may make it so, though they have not the advantage of Ninepence
more in the Shilling, as they have in the Weaving Materials.

Now by what has been done, and is now doing, we may certainly conclude what
these India Traders will hereafter do if not restrained; and as they have
already almost swallowed and engrossed the Silk- Weaving, Throwing, and
Fan-making of England, brought all our Cabinet-making into contempt; they will
by the same ways and means ruin all Trades and Manufacturies, which their
interest may tempt them to do.

The very Mercers, they strive to spoil, by their setting up Retail Warehouses,
and if not prevented, they will, if possible, effect it.

Now when they break in already upon those that have Laws for their Security,
as in the Case of Thrown and Died Silk, imbroidry, Ribbons, etc. no Trades that
they can profit by are like to escape them. Their plenty of Copper and Tynn
will give them opportunity to ruin both our Brasiers and Pewterers, and
Tynn-men and Mines. The Joyners and Carvers, they have pretty well encroach'd
upon; and though Modish Garments from France was always accounted grievous to
us; yet from East India, Multitudes of them are brought to the great prejudice
of the Tailors.

And it is impossible, but that from the Cheapness both of Silk and Cotton, and
other Materials sit for Stockings, they must in course ruin our most ingenious
Art of Frame-Working, and Needle-knitting, unless they become very self-denying.

That whole Cargoes of all manner of Vpholstrys is preparing, and that our
Vpholsterers shall have the benefit of setting them up, will be a mercy to
them, more than the Weavers have.

That their Shoes will be as highly esteemed as their Silks, their is no
Question, and that Multitudes of them will shortly arrive, is out of doubt.

How much of our Sempstresses work is already swallowed up every East India
Sale demonstrates; and that there will be a further Encroachment thereon, is
most certain; and whether all the money that purchases Chyna Ware, be not lost
to the Kingdom, unless Exported (for the farther profit of Europe) besides the
prejudice it will do the ingenious Potter and Glass-makers of England, may be
well worth our Consideration.

Our Limners are like to be outdone by Ugly faces, and all their pieces shall
be more admired for their deformity; and it is no doubt but in a short time you
shall have whole Auctions of them.

And that our workers in iron and steel; which Commodity will lie more close
than that of Wood, shall in little time escape better than the Silk
Manufactures. is very improbable, which will render that ingenious discovery of
the Slitting-mill (for the which this Kingdom must ever be obliged to the
Memory of the Folio's) of little advantage; for though the Indians have not yet
attained unto it; yet doubtless our public spirited Traders will not fail to
carry it thither, and bars of Iron from hence will make Excellent ballast for
their Ships, if they have it not there, which matters not much, the principal
cost being Workmanship, in which 11 d in the Shilling being saved, will in like
manner be of vast advantage to England, and spare all our Burningham and
Sheffield Workmen, and other Vulkins from their unnecessary Employments to be
busied in Plowing or Fishing, or else begging, stealing or starving; for I know
no reason, why they should have fairer Quarter, if it be thought unreasonable
to preserve the Silk Manufactory, which is of far greater advantage to the
Nation.

I am credibly informed of one instance more which may seem amazing, but a
sufficient Testimony that they will not fail of doing what I have mentioned;
which is, That there is great quantities of Gold and Silver Orris, and other
Trimmings for Ladies and Gentlewomens Garments prepared and coming, which
considering that they have both their Gold and Silver-Wyar Plate, and Thread
from us; or if they have likewise carried the Art of Wire-drawing our
Crown-pieces thither, it is strange to imagine (That unless they do first
adulterate it) They can make it worth their while by the differing price of
Silk and Workmanship to send it hither; but that they presume the English will
overvalue Gold and Silver by Weight, Wrought in India, as they do Silks and
Stufft by Measure; but by these means, and the former of Ribbonds, the poor
Narrow Weavers must be in as bad condition as the Broad; but that they may
carry Spa^ish Wool, Iron, Leather, and other our grosser Materials, to
Manufacture and Return to their greater advantage, is certain, and these
proceeding are not less dangerous to the body of this Kingdom then is
unrectified, Mercury to the Natural Body of Men, for it will in the end Carode
and consume us.

And here I cannot do less than take notice of a passage in a late Tract, few
Months since writ on this occasion, just before the Conclusion of the last
Sessions of Parliament, Entitled, England's Advocate; which without pretense to
a Prophetic Spirit, tells us page the 46th, That if the India Merchants did
not Transport Wool, they would doubtless Project such Cloths or Stuffs of Silk,
Cotton, as should be though sit for the Use of men, to outvye Cloths and
Worsted Stuffs; and though the Author protests he knew not that any such were
made or coming, they are come, and will doubtless farther prove for the
enriching of England, as their Silks, Stuffs, and Painted Callicoes have
already done; and by this and like means, do Thousands of Broad Loombs, and
hundreds of Throwsters and Twisters Mills, stand to spoil and burn, and many
Thousands of People forced to Transport themselves, or beg, or steal, or
starve: Whilst the great Mogulls Subjects are encouraged, and employed, and
multitudes both of Loombs and Mills made and making to imitate the manner and
forms of those Silks and Stuffs (which like Anglers Ground-bate) was lately
Exposed at Skinners-Hall; and if those pieces will not afsord variety enough,
the 50 l. worth of Patterns lately purchased (not any exceeding half a Yard)
will doubtless so direct and inform to make such returns of Cargoes, as shall
make our Scotch Brethren decline their attempt for Gold at Darien, to recover
their loss, and to strive to grow rich by contradictions as we do, at least
thus to furnish their Kingdom with Silks for their own use, if not to spoil
their Scotchcloth Trade; and we have reason to believe that other parts will
avoid our imposing on them, and that the Government will take care that our
Plantations shall advance our Welfare; and that no small body of men shall be a
Monopoly by Law, to the undoing the rest of the Kingdom; and that the making
all necessary Commodities may not be chiefly transferred to India, which as
things now are, it is impossible to prevent, unless our People may buy Corn as
cheap as Indians do Rice, and learn to go Naked, without catching cold, for
Peoples labor and our Productions was the original of our Wealth and Trade,
and it is they chiefly that must support it.

And for these bad purposes are many great Wits and Purses at Work, to make
their Sons great, and their Daughters Ladies and Dutchesses, by impoverishing
and dispeopling the Kingdom; for as these things are accomplishing, so must
both our Wealth and Numbers decrease; and if it be certain, that nothing but
multitudes of people will maintain the value of Lands; and it is as certain,
That as People fails, Rent will do so also. But I believe the damage of the
Silk and Stuff Manufacture (for which I chiefly contend) is of as great
prejudice to the Kingdom, as all the rest of the evils we may expect, in
respect of the dependence the Woollen and Worsted Manufacture has upon it; and
it has been proved, That as that of Silk decreaseth, so will the Exportation
of them decrease in proportion, and poverty abound. Accordingly amongst all the
aforementioned people.

One instance of which, I had accidental opportunity to be informed in, that
the Parish of S. But. Bishopsg. whose many By-lanes and Allies being chiefly
inhabited by Workers of Silk and their dependants, does so abound with Poverty,
that for Maintenance and prevention thereof, though their Assessment is doubled
upon most of their Inhabitants of what they lately used to pay to the Poors
Rate, they were nevertheless, for the last Year obliged to pay 34 Months
Assessment thereto, to pay former Debts, in the which time, the then
Churchwarden (though a prudent and honest man) at giving up his Accounts,
brought the Parish indebted for that Year upward of Three hundred pounds more;
and I doubt not (though I have not opportunity of Inquiry) but all parts where
they inhabit according to their number, suffer alike; all which is the Effects
of this India Trade.

And I am confident in the end (except to the Pattentees) it must produce empty
Purses, empty Houses, empty Towns, a small poor, weak and slender people; and
what can we imagine will be the value of Lands, as things thus are nothing can
prevent ruin, unless we have such interest in our European Confederacy, that
they will agree and be contented that England shall have the sole Monopoly of
this India Trade; and that they will be our Customers, the quite contrary of
which every Kingdom and Country, whose Manufactures they prejudice, are
projecting and practicing.

The Folly and Error of England in this case far surpasses that of Esau in the
selling his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; for we give the Indians and
Pattentees both Flesh and Pottage, when we send our Silver away to purchase a
Curse to our selves, which their Manufactures are, and after this year of 1700
let us never more Laugh at, and Ridicule the poor Negroe Indians, that give us
their Gold dust, which themselves are not capable better to improve; for Beads,
Shells, Knives and Sizars, and such like, which are to them for Use and
Ornament, when we part with our Bullion to invest our Kingdom with China Toys,
or obscene Statues and Images, and other Trifles; but the height of our folly
is chiefly expressed in their Manufactors that are opposite to, and destructive
of our one; nor do I believe that Solomon sent his Ships purposely for; though
they brought Peacocks Feathers with their Gold for which they went; but we send
our Coin to fetch us as mere Toys as Feathers and to worse purpose as before
expressed.

SIR, It Is worthy consideration that abundance of particular Weavers Trades
that are destroyed both in London and Canterbury, Norwich did employ more
numbers of people than any Country or Corporation Workhouse, though great
charge to the public can possibly do; and I will undertake to demonstrate, if
required, that each of them brought annually greater advantage to England, (all
things considered) than any East India Ship. But for the Silk Throwsters,
though not so many in Number, there are several of them that employ such
multitudes as are scarce to be thought, or credited; and if you will please to
view any of their Workhouses, as formerly employed, some of which still remain,
and with me cast your thoughts retrogade, through the Turkey Merchants
Warehouse, from whence the Throwster receives his Silk, and by the way it came
thither Plow the Ocean to Smyrna in Turkey, and observe his Factor employed in
producing this in return of our English Cloth, and then return your thoughts
back again (with your consideration, that this Navigation is of greater
advantage than that of India.) And suppose you see in St. Hellena's or Cornhil,
or Bishopsgatestreet, the Turkey, Merchants Warehouses crowded with those Cloths
prepared for this purpose, and the great advantage his Dependants, Drawers,
Dyers, Clotheworkers make thereon, with whom cast your Eye through
Blackwel-hall, and with the Wagon that brought these Cloths to Town, let your
mind travel to any considerable Clothiers Workhouses, in Worcester, or
Glostershire, and observe the numerous and profitable employment, before you
come to the Loomb side to see the Shuttle, and you will not grudge the poor
Weavers that Shutes it 5 s. per week for his labor Then look on to the less
profitable employment of Shifting, Carding, and Spinning, till we come to the
Shearing House of this Golden Fleece, and then return your Consideration back
to one of the beforementioned Throwsters Shops, and I will be obliged plainly
to demonstrate, that so much of these Operations, when Wrought in Cloth, as
make return in Turkey Silk for the employment of this one Silk Throwster; which
being farther improved in Weaving, Stockin-Making, etc. will gain annually
greater profit to England, than ever any whole Fleet from East India did or can
(if you consider the damage they likewise do) and I believe that on these, or
the like Considerations, did the Wisdom of this Nation think fit by Law, to
prohibit the bringing over of Silk ready Thrown or Dyed; which Laws are rendered
utterly ineffectual, and these Trades with the Weavers destroyed, unless
prevention of the home Consumption of East India Figured, Flowered, and Stripped
Silks be granted, which is all the Silk-Weavers and Silk-Throwsters desire.

For by what has been (now and formerly) said, it is certain that the Living
Bodies of people are the best Riches and Strength any Country can be possessed
of; and that all Manufacturing parts of Europe (especially England) destroy
both their People and Land by admission of Trading in India Manufacturers.

II, It Is impossible any Kingdom can enjoy this blessing of people without
procuring or allowing them Employment and Wages for their Subsistence,
answerable to the price of Provisions and all other Necessaries of Life.

III. That no Manufacture, (excepting that of Wool) maintains or employs so
many people as the Silk Weavers, and the Silk Throwsters, with their
dependants, who are not to be numbered; and that as the Silk and Grogram-Yarn
Manufactures in England decreaseth, the Woollen will likewise in proportion.

IV. That all English Silk Manufactures work for as small Wages as will support
Life.

V. That whatever pretenses are made of purchasing East India Wrought Silks
with any thing, but our money is either false or frivolous.

VI. That the Silk Manufacturers ask not near so much as it is greatly
reasonable should be granted, both for the Kingdom and their own good; which is
a total prohibition of the Use and Consumption of all India Wrought Silks and
Stuffs whatsoever, both Figured and Plain, or Painted in all our English
Dominions and Plantations, and then we should not want Workhouses for the
Employment of our poor in Country or City, nor the Turkey or Italian Merchants
want Vend for their Cloths and Stuffs Abroad, or Silk at Home.

To Conclude; English Tradesmen may bless God that our Laws are alterable, not
like those of the Medes and Persians, else they would be in little better
condition than were the poor Jews under the contrivance and patent of the
wicked Hammond; for doubtless those Jews might within the limited time fly for
their Lives, and so must these Manufactures, or do worse, or starve, as
Multitudes have already done, if not by Law relieved. From all which Evils, I
pray God to incline the hearts of those that Govern, to deliver us, and for
God's sake, Sir, I beg that your assistance may not be wanting.

Jan. the First, 1699. SIR, I am Yours

POSTSCRIPT.
THERE are now no less than 50 Ships coming from, at, and on their way to
India; which, considering the Silver they have carried out, and the
Manufactures they will return upon us, is an Amazing Consideration to all that
value the Preservation of OLD ENGLAND. For it is plain, That since we are become
such Excellent Customers for their China and Bengal Wrought Silks and Stuffs,
they have the Wisdom to serve us with little but the very trash of Raw-Silk, or
superfine Cotton, or Yarn, to employ our poor, whose working and preservation
(whatever some judge) is a greater and surer Testimony of the good Trade of the
Kingdom, than our own enriching the Custom-house Coffers by payment of great
Duties for the Importation of such Manufactures as the 50 or any of the like
sort shall hereafter Import.

Since this was composed, there is one of the 50 abovementioned arrived,,
('it is named the Rising Eagle;) and though Four days since, no Cargo yet
public: But common Roport says, she brought 97 Chests of Wrought Silks, and
not one pound of Raw.

That the undone Broad Figured Silk Weavers both of London and Canterbury that
have already laid down their Trade, and their Mountures spoiled, and their
Harnesses Rotten, can never venture to remount their Loombs on any other
security than a future Prohibition as required (which may be made as secure as
the Payment of any great Duty) and which, if not granted, will occasion the
sinking of those that remain to the utter loss of that Manufactor in England.

FINIS.

