The English-Man's Happiness under a PROTESTANT-PRINCE; And the present
Condition of the Kingdom Considered.
O Fortunati bona si sua norint.
AMongst so many Pamphlets which have been vented of late, some I am very
confident there have been; of good use if read, which have been thrown by,
because they were not crowded into the narrow compass of a Penny Sheet, as if a
greater Charge with an Hours serious Reading, were too much to inform Men's
Judgments, and Reform their Principles, and though it be very hard to keep
within those bounds, I shall endeavor, if not altogether within, to come as
near them as is possible, the end of this Paper is to convince some
Malcontents who are uneasy under the Government, and who reproach the King
with want of Affection for his People; only because he has some for his
Brother; That we are most happy in many great things which the King has done
for us, and that he has done them freely and consequently for the love and
good will he bare us; in doing of which I shall as much as in me lies, avoid
Notions and Arguments, which seldom or never reconcile contrary opinions, and
insist chiefly on matter of Fact, which being of late time, and in every Man's
memory, admits no Contradiction. And here I shall not run back into the late
times, and step between them and the Act of Oblivion to increase the
Obligation; which I do but just name, though it may well be placed in the very
Head of all Subsequent Benefits; and perhaps had never more cause to be spoken
of then now, when most Men seem to have forgot that there has been such a
thing; I do heartily wish, the Principles of those Times were as truly
forgotten on our side, as the practices that resulted from them are forgiven of
his, it is from the Restoration, the New Epoch of this Kingdom, from whence
we may much more truly date Annum Restauratae Libertatis, that I shall begin.

After the Act of Oblivion, the people were very sensible what vast Demands and
Pretensions some Eighteen Years of such Killing and Slaying had given the King
upon all Tenures in Capite and by Knights Service, what Sums would be coming
to him by the Court of Wards and Liveries, how he had a kind of Command over
every person, and an immediate and very considerable Interest in every Estate
by the Wardship of Minors, Marriages, Primerseisins, and Fines, etc. so that
unless this were remitted too, the Act of Oblivion, was in effect no pardon to
them that hold in Capite since with their Lives it gave not their Estates, but
his Majesty prevents their fears, and by Act of Parliament, 12 Car. Chapter 24.
deprives himself of the Richest Jewel of the Crown, a Prerogative so truly
Royal, and of so vast Advantage, that in England the people, in the Judgment
of the Learned in the Law, were never truly free till then, so strict an Hand
of Power could the King keep over us by those Tenures, that not the least
Disrespect or Disobedience was to be feared, and to the vast Advantages of this
part of Prerogative, must all the great Actions of our former Kings be imputed,
when the Gentry were bound to serve the King, and the People the Gentry.

And because good and wholesome Laws are the best Security and greatest
Happiness of a Nation, I desire the Reader to observe, that no one Useful Bill
has been tendered to his Majesty, which he has Refused, till within this Year,
and that but once, of which hereafter, if innumerable and continued Affronts,
Calumnies, and Injuries (which every private Man of Honor would resent and
punish) compelled him for his own Honor and that of all Kings, to make War
with a Neighbor; no sooner was he informed that the same was Prejudicial to
his People, but he shuffles up a peace upon terms very hard for himself, and
sacrifices his own just Resentments to the gainful desires of a part of his
people, and that in a time when (such was the state of his Enemies) he might by
standing off a while have made his own Conditions: But when a War has been
entered into for Injuries offered to his People, no Consideration, no not Plague
nor Fire, which in the compass of Twenty Months impoverished the Land by the
loss of so much Money and People, could persuade him to end the War, till ample
offers of Satisfaction were made, and they for whose sakes he began that War,
either weary of it, or believing themselves sufficiently revenged, desired it;
see the Articles of Peace with Holland, in 1674, and those in Aug. 1667. If
once upon Advice he granted a Tolleration of Religion, did he not so soon as he
was satisfied by his great Council of the pernicious and Dangerous Consequences
of such a Liberty, recall it; when after that the Nation began to apprehend it
self not sufficiently secured by the Laws then in Esse against Popery, and that
in their general opinion a Law was judged necessary to qualify and distinguish
all Persons in Office and place of Trust, did not his Majesty Consent to all
such Laws as they offered him, and particularly to that great and memorable
Act, for preventing of Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants, 25 Car.
Chapter 2d, thereby disabling a Papist from holding any Office or Employment though
but of a Noble a Year, and that without reservation of any one person on his
side, though he had then several by him, of whose Truth and sincere Affection to
his Person and Government, he had unquestionable proofs; Was not this one thing
alone sufficient to belie those Villains, who let fall Words as though the King
himself leaned a little that way, for it is not to be imagined by a Man of
Sense, that a Prince who had power to refuse a Law, would ever pass one to the
utter defeating all designs and measures of a party whose Interests he secretly
favored and meant to Advance.

When afterward that party, restless in contriving Mischief, contrived or
rather continued and carried on the most Hellish Design that was ever inspired
from thence into the very worst Order of Men, and that Design was happily
discovered, how did his Majesty behave himself in that matter, he Summons his
Parliament, and till that can come, proceeds by all imaginable means to search
into the Plot, and after the Plotters, to seize their Persons and Papers, then
lays the whole before the Parliament, assuring them, That he would be always
ready to aid them in the Inquiry into the Plot, in any thing where his
concurrence was necessary, and accordingly, as they desired, by several
Proclamations assisting them, by some commanding the Absence of Papists, by
others enquiring after Blood, with most bountiful promises of pardon and
recompense; Searching all Counties, securing the Ports to prevent any flight
from, and looking into the very Prisons to bring all Malefactors to Justice.
For such as laid hold of mercy and came in upon his Proclamation, he not only
pardoned them, but that no Encouragement might be wanting to bring in others
for the further Discovery of the very depths of that Design, provided largely
for them, assigning them Guards for their persons, till they themselves thought
they were safe enough without them; making them at all times large Allowances,
which if they did not prove equally great, yet were the least more then
sufficient, and that at a time when the emptiness of his Coffers might well
have excused him, and when his own faithful Servants went unpaid; As many as
the Law Condemned were Executed, his Prerogative never interposing betwixt the
Attainder and the Execution; such as were imprisoned, and after long restraint
they might reasonably expect a Trial, and to that purpose applied themselves in
all humble manner to him, received no other satisfaction, then the assurance of
having Justice in Parliament; nay, he was even deaf to the prayer of the Man he
loved, (who desired but to recover his Health in the Country with a strong
Guard,) though he were well satisfied by the Testimony of learned Physicians,
that the continuing in the Tower would in all likelihood be his Death, and this
because his people had accused him.

A War against the French was judged necessary by the Parliament, and to that
end Money, was given by a Poll, by which Bill, 30 Car. (an undeniable proof of
the sincerity of the Kings Intention therein) All Trade and Commerce is
forbidden for Three Years, thereby depriving himself of a very considerable
part of his Revenue, whilst the subtle Hollander, for whose sake that War was
intended, and consequently that Trade forbidden, forbid but for one Year,
whereby the French Commodities did not (as was intended by as they should) lie
on their Hands, but still vented by the means of our Neighbors, from whom we
received them with the advantage of paying dearer for them, and the King of
England received those great disadvantages which by the Intent of the Act were
meant for the French.

An Army they desired to have, and had one to serve against the French, when
see on a sudden that very Army must be disbanded, e're it could be well Shipped
in order to perform the Service it was raised for, this Army raised, and but
just mustered in the Spring, is by act of Parliament in July following
Disbanded, in which the King complied with them, and as far as the Money given
to Disband them, would go, they were Disbanded, with which he acquaints the
Parliament at the opening of the Sessions on the 6th. of March, 1679, and told
them, He waited but for further Supplies from them to Disband the rest; a very
great kindness so soon to return them to their Wives and children, least by too
long a Discontinuance they should have been either unable or unwilling to
return to their first lawful Vocation, a greater compliance than this cannot be
found, will they have an Army, he raises one to please them; will they have
none, he Disbands it to gratify them.

There is yet one thing untouched, which evil-minded Men have always in their
mouths, How have we been squeezed (say they) by that long Parliament, more
Money has been given by them, than by all the Parliaments since the Conqueror,
and yet the King wants more: Men sufficiently ill natured (not to say worse) to
grudge at their own Gifts, and reproach the King with what they indeed are glad
of, that of so vast sums, so little remains unspent; and surely the King has
most reason to be angry, now he sees how hard it is to have more, that so many
sure Friends to, and supporters of Empire, so many English pounds have been no
better Husbanded against an evil day; and yet to do him justice in this point,
I must say, that whatever has been given him, if absolutely he was sole Master
of, and might spend it as he listed, and what has been raised for any special
use or purpose has been constantly applied to the use it was designed and
appropriated to; now as for any sums before the 17th. of April, 1667, there
will be no question, for to that time we may rest satisfied, that the Earl of
Bridgewater and several others, whereof some were of the House of Commons, by
Virtue of a Commission to them directed under the great Seal, (which the King
upon intimation from his Parliament, that several great sums raised for
special uses, had been misemployed, had promise to grant) did then according to
the directions of the Commission enquire into all sums raised till then, and
what they found perverted to wrong uses, by the power they had by that
Commission, did obliege all Treasurers, Pay-Masters, Receivers, and other
Agents to restore; and this was done, says that Commission, that the Kings
people might be satisfied, that what sums had been given to the supporting
that great War with France and Holland, which had lasted some years, and was
ended but in August after, were expended as they had been designed, the
principal sums then under consideration of the Commissioners, were the sum of
1250000 l. 17. Car. Chapter 1st. and that great and famous Royal aid being of
2477500 l. since which time then of April, 1667. they that will take the pains
to examine the several Money-Bills, will find how the Money was designed, and
how it has been spent is in every Man's remembrance; but yet to instance in some
of latest date: for instance, the 584978 l. given to build Thirty Ships of War,
has been laid out accordingly, and more with it: the Poll-Bill was to enable
him to raise an Army against the French, and it did so, notwithstanding that it
fell exceedingly short of what was expected by the King, and Intended by the
Parliament: there is indeed one instance of Money misapplyed, if I may give
that name to the laying out of Money (though to the best purpose imaginable)
intended for a contrary use: for I find the sum of 619380 l. given 30 Car. to
disband the Army, was employed in keeping part on foot, but it was upon so
extraordinary occasion, and to so good a purpose, that the Commons themselves
remained satisfied with the Account his Majesty vouchsafed to give them of the
important accidents that occasioned the continuing of it, and the good service
that accrued by it; so that upon the whole, he has been a most faithful
Treasurer of such sums as were given to any special Use, and for what at any
time was given otherwise, it were the height of Insolence and Ill Manners to
enquire into the spending of it.

When the growing danger of Popery required some further Laws then those then
in force against it, and it was thought as Dangerous for a Papist to Sit in
either House, as to hold Offices or Employs; how willingly did he pass a Bill
to disable all of that Religion upon the very account of their Faith, to the
Disinheriting of many great Peers, for sure, till then, a Seat in Parliament
was their Birthright and Inheritance, and this he did that nothing might be
wanting on his part to secure his People, that he meant for to leave them in as
good a Condition as to their Religion and Liberties (and in a much better
indeed) than he found them; but for further satisfaction we will turn to his
own Speech to the Parliament, 6 March. 1679. I have done, says he, many great
things already, as the Exclusion of the Popish Lords from their Seats in
Parliament, the Execution of several Men, both upon the score of the Plot, and
the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey; and it is apparent that I have not been
idle in prosecuting the Discovery of both as much further as has been possible
for me in so short a time; and above all, I have commanded my Brother to absent
himself from me, because I would not leave the most Malicious Men room to say,
I had not removed all causes which could be pretended to influence me toward
Popish Councils: From these Words of the King, we may very reasonably infer,
(what is true in the judgment of as great a Man as this, and I believe any
other Nation can show) that he who for our sakes could part with such a
Brother, has now to be sure no Favorite but his people; and truly it is to be
believed, that he who in so many Years has denied nothing to his People, (that
one thing excepted, so often desired, and as often denied the Dukes Exclusion)
were he really as well satisfied that he might as rightfully (for no Man
questions but he may legally) and in good Conscience put him by the Crown for
ever, as he may remove him from his person for a time, without all doubt he
would do it, if then so many Denyals to depart from his Resolution of
Preserving the Descent be, as sure they are, the effect of his Judgment; It is
not perhaps a matter of such Wonder that a Conscientious Prince should refuse
to do what he really believes would be a wrongful Act, how profitable and
expedient soever it might be. Nay further, it is perhaps the very worst
Condition of a people to have a Prince, who in acting takes not his measures by
what is Right and Honest, but Profitable and Convenient, yet notwithstanding
all this, the Effects of Judgment are mistaken, and I fear by some wilfully
misconstrued for Inclination, and the King in some Men's judgments believes not
the Plot, an opinion (however much more tolerable than that which concludes him
Disaffected to Religion) severe and impertinent, for without all doubt a Prince
in all Respects so merciful, would never have given way to the Execution of so
many Men, if he had not believed them guilty; they no doubt guess better who
conclude he believes not his Brother in the Plot; now that execution of so many
Men, does as clearly convince me that the King believes the Plot, as the design
in that Plot against his person does assure me that he is not a Man for their
turn, but a firm adherer to the most excellent Church of England and its pure
and primitive Doctrine. Hitherto I have run over some few of the Kings Actions,
I have but Two Words as to his Inclinations, which as they much contribute to
our Happiness, can no wise be omitted: It Is allowed by all Men that Two Vices
there are above all others dangerous in a Prince, Cruelty and Covetousness, for
they alone strike at all, Men hold most dear, Lives and Fortunes, and if this
be so, the contrary of those Vices, Mercy and Liberality may justly be reckoned
the Cardinal Virtues of Majesty, which are no where more remarkably united then
in the person of our King, so that he may well say, Whose Ox, or whose Ass has
he taken, and it shall be restored; May, their Oxes and Asses, their Estates,
Liberties, and Lives, when the Law has adjudged them his, how often has he
remitted: how unreasonable then are some persons, who to prevent a possibility
(and that a remote one too) of Troubles hereafter, would brake the present
peace and happiness of the Nation, under so excellent a Ruler.

FINIS.
London, Printed for T. B. in Green's-Rents, near Fleet-Bridge, 1681.


