THE REASONABLENESS OF OUR Christian Service (As it is contained in the Book of
COMMON PRAYER) EVIDENCED; And made clear from the Authority of Scriptures, and
Practice of the Primitive Christians.

Or, A short RATIONALE upon our Morning and Evening Service, as it is now
Established in the Church of ENGLAND.

Wherein every Sentence therein contained, is manifestly proved out of the Holy
Bible, or plainly demonstrated to be consonant thereto.

Composed and written by Thomas Elborow, Vicar of Cheswick: And since his death
made public by the care and industry of Jo. Francklyn, A. M. and Minister of
Brentford.

1 Cor. 1.10, 11. Now, I beseech you, brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you* but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment

For it has been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them which are of
the house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

Imprimatur.

July 3. 1674. C. Smith, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

To the most Virtuous Mrs. FRANCES ELBOROW, Widow of the late deceased Author.
Madam,
YOur Husband (the Author of this following Treatise) a very worthy, and in his
station eminent, Minister of, and (what of greater note) a faithful Advocate
for the Church of England, besides his continued Exhortations to Piety, to all
whom his Care did reach, or his Interest could prevail with, was in the
Practices of Public Duties an eminent Christian Subject, continually promoting
those Duties fundamental to Government, Loyalty, and a Communion with the
Church by Law Established.

Of the former, and his endeavors for it, he gave a good Testimony (in the
beginning of our late Troubles) by his diligent Persuasion of others to it;
and, what is truer proof, his own Sufferings for it. The latter became (...)
Care in its season too.

When our Sovereign was restored to his Right, the Church to its former Order,
and He to a Place for the exercise of his Function; he endeavored to undeceive
those the foregoing Times had misled, and to make them sensible of the true
Harmony in the Churches Public Divine Service. And as his Endeavor, so was
his Prospect, great too: for, seeing the Present Age even spoiled, he did look
forward and endeavor to mend the Succeeding.

To this end he writ the following Annotations, with a design as great, as
good, (and which I hope will not in a small measure gain upon the World) to
beget the Worship of God its due reverent performance, to gain the Church the
Communication of all ^ational English Subjects, and all of the Churches
Communion a true sense of their Public Devotions.

That neither so great a good, nor the memory of the worthy Author should dye;
not only the care and love, which my Function presses me to, of actions of
this nature; but also many singular acts of kindness and friendship, which I
had received from the Author, made me gratefully concerned.

But having added to these of his, many and great favors received from Your
virtuous hands, and of those most obliging me to perpetuate your Husband's
memory, to have him known to the World, by benefiting it with some Work of his,
I lay under far greater obligations.

To satisfy which, that among other scattered Papers which came to my hands, I
should choose to publish this Piece, was in consideration of his intent
thoughts upon the benefits of it, and of the concurrence of Your generous
temper, rather desiring the benefit of most, then the satisfaction of the most
curious: Knowing moreover, that any name or thing made public, has its
reception, and takes the measure of its estimation, from the greatness or the
generality of the advantage it brings.

There had layn indeed a just accusation against me, as of dis-ingenuity toward
the Public, so of great ingratitude to your Virtues, and to the memory of your
Husband, upon my neglect in this concern. However, now give me leave of this
necessity to make a small piece of virtue, and from that little care the
publishing this Book required in me, take advantage to express my gratefulness
to the memory of the worthy Author; and to you the surviving part of him, my
desire to show my self,

Madam, Your very faithful Friend and Servant, J. F.
Brentford, June 6. 1677.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I ^ind written Eccles. 5.1. that some persons, who come into the Religious
Assemblies to offer up their service and devotions to God, and for want of due
consideration, do absurd things, they do evil, and consider not that they do
it. Now if it be demanded who they are that do so, the same Scripture tells us;
They, who do not keep their feet when they enter into the house of God, do not
demean themselves with all the Reverence imaginable, when they come into that
Holy place, where Gods terrible Majesty is represented, which is enough one
would think to suppress any unworthy and irreligious actions or thoughts; They,
who do not come into Gods house with all holy devotion, and prepared
resolutions to offer to him an holy Worship and Service, such as he will accept
of; They, who are not ready to hear, and to receive instruction to salvation by
the Word of God, which is there publicly taught; They, who do not readily
dispose themsel^es to all voluntary obedience to the same Word, in which
obedience consists that Service, which is more acceptable with God than any
Sacrifice outward; They, who come into Gods house, and special presence there,
to offer him a Sacrifice, and perform it in such a gross and rude manner, as
that God will not, indeed cannot accept of it; they do as it were affront him
in his own house, they offer him an abuse before his face; they come to express
their folly, rather then to show their devotion; they give him the Sacrifice of
fools, and all for want of due consideration: For they consider not that they
do evil. Now to correct all these errors and evils, which may be committed in
the Service of God for want of due consideration, (which are great evils,
however little account we may make of them) I shall fix your considerations
upon some few things very necessary to be thought upon, when ye are either
going about, or are upon the Service of God.

1. When ye are entering, consider that ye are entering Gods house, and therefore
keep your feet when ye enter, Eccles. 5.1. which words are a caution,
commanding our care and our consideration that we do not enter rudely, that we
do not enter rashly and unadvisedly: I or we are going into the house of God,
whither we are to carry nothing along with us which may be displeasing and
offensive unto that God, into whose house we are going. We are to look to our
feet, that is, our passions and affections, which are as the feet and lower
part of our souls. We are to undreg them of all earth, dirt and filth, that
nothing which is earthly or sensual, may mingle with our spiritual employments,
wherein we are to be exercised, and wholly taken up during our stay in that
Holy place. When Moses and Joshua approached that ground, which the presence of
God by his Angel made holy, they were commanded to put off their shoes, Exodus
3.5. Josh. 5.15. By which in a figure was intimated, the cleansing of the soul
from that filth of sin, which is required of every one, who draws near unto
God, Heb. 10.22. When our business is with God, we are to mind our business, to
have our minds, hearts and affections set only upon it. When we come into the
house of God, which is the figure of heaven, we are to leave the earth and the
world behind us, and to have our conversation only in heaven. When Abraham went
to sacrifice, and to offer up the dearest thing which he had, unto God, he left
his Ass and his Servants behind him, Genesis 22.5. And when holy Bernard entered
the Temple, his usual saying was, Stay behind all my worldly thoughts: So when
we are to enter Gods house, and are making our approaches to do him service, we
should have nothing to do with the world, but take off our hearts and
affections clear from it. As we would keep our feet as much as possibly we can
from dirt and filth, when we are to enter the Presence Chamber of a King; so
when we enter into Gods house, which is his Presence Chamber, we are to keep
the feet of our souls clean, and unspotted from the world, though not
altogether clean, yet as clean as they can be kept. Like those, who come out of
the dirt, into a well-swept room, we must cast away that filth and uncleanness,
which we may have contracted in our worldly affairs, when we are entering into
the house of God. Keep thy foot when thou entrest; it is an expression borrowed
from the Heathens, especially the Egyptians, who would not enter their
Idol-Temples with shoes on their feet. And amongst his other precepts,
Pythagoras gave this for one, When thou sacrificest or worshippest, put off thy
shoes from thy feet. By which is intimated to us, who look not so much at the
ceremony, as at the meaning of it, That when we come into Gods house, who is a
God of purity, in whose presence the brightest Angel is impure, we are to see
that all be pure about us; we are to come with pure hearts, pure hands, and to
present him with pure offerings; especially we are to look to our affections,
the feet of our souls, to see that they have contracted no impurity, for if
they be pure, the whole man is pure; Keep thy foot when thou entrest. This is
the first consideration, which if well thought upon, would prevent many of
those rudenesses, evils and misdemeanors, which unwise men rashly commit in
Gods house, and so offer to him the Sacrifice of fools, for want of due
consideration.

Secondly, When thou art entered the house of God, let thy next consideration
be, that thou art in the presence of God, there where God is present in a more
special and peculiar manner: He is everywhere present by his Essence, which is
infinite, and cannot be contained within bounds or limits: He is everywhere
present by his Power, turning the Orbs of Heaven with his hand, fixing the
Earth with his foot, guiding all Creatures with his eye, and refreshing them
all with his influence; but he is more specially present in some places, than
in othersome, by the several and more special manifestations of himself to
extraordinary purposes. Thus by Glory his seat is in Heaven, where his Servants
dwell with him; by Grace and Benediction he is present in Holy places, and
Sacred Assemblies, where his Servants walk with him, and worship him. Well
then, consider what thou art, and what God is into whose special presence thou
art come, and what is thy business with him Thou art a feeble infirm creature,
made up of nothing but wants and weaknesses; God is a Creator All-sufficient to
heal thy infirmities, to supply thy wants, and to manifest his strength in thy
weakness. It is thine own misery and his mercy, which are the two chief motives
that bring thee into his house of prayer. That which brought home the Prodigal
into his Fathers house, Luke 15.17, 18. we may suppose brings thee into Gods
house, want and woe in us untoward Children, pity and plenty in God a good and
kind Father. For is not this our business with him, (if we do truly understand
our own business) to have our needs and wants supplied, our sins pardoned, our
miseries relieved by mercies, and a^ our insufficiencies every way answered out
o^ that inexhaustible fountain of his goodness who is all-sufficient? This is
the best title we can give our selves, we are all but his creatures; and if we
are just to our selves, and not partial, we must confess that we are none of
the best creatures, by our own default, but vile and vicious more than enough.
Our dependence both for our being, and well being, and for what is requirable
to both, is entirely upon our Creator, and him only, whose creatures we are;
but whatever tends to our ruin, undoing, infelicity and misery, is merely from
the Serpent and our selves. So that as I noted before, our own miseries, and
Gods mercies, our wants, and Gods many ways to supply them, our sins, our many
sins to be pardoned, and Gods inclinations, great inclinations for to pardon
them, if we are truly and sincerely penitent, are the two great motives, which
bring us into Gods house, into his special presence; but we are to lay open our
selves before him, from whom we cannot hide our selves though we would; for he
made us, and knows us, better than we know, or can know our selves. For there
is not any creature that is not manifest in his sight; there is no man shall be
able to disguise himself so cunningly, but God will discover him, all things
are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13.

Thirdly, But now in the third place, let us consider what we are to do first,
after we have made our adorations as we ought to do, when we are come into Gods
house and special presence. Now methinks those vile, unprofitable, and
pernicious things called our sins, (which are indeed properly our own) should
come to our remembrance. There is nothing so likely to hinder good things from
us, as our sins unconfessed, unrepented of: They hinder our prayers from
ascending acceptably unto God, for God will not hear sinners, who bring nothing
but their sins unrepented of for an offering, and like Adonijah lay hold on the
Altar with all their sins and rebellions about them; and they hinder Gods
blessings from descending comfortably upon us. Therefore when we are come into
the presence of God, and are all met together in his house, to offer up our
solemn Service and Sacrifice to him, we ought in the first place to make
Confession of our sins, to which necessary and important duty we are not only
moved and invited by the Word of God, in many places, and by many urgent
motives and reasons, but we are also by the same Word instructed how to perform
it. We are not to dissemble our sins before that God, from whom we cannot hide
them, but we are to confess and acknowledge our manifold sins and wickednesses,
with humble, lowly, penitent and obedient hearts, to the end that we may obtain
forgiveness of the same by Gods infinite goodness and mercy. This is a duty
which ought to be done by every private Christian at all times, in the ^loset,
and in the secret hambers, but chiefly and most solemnly is to be done by all
Christians, when they are met together in Christian Assemblies; that having
done this first, they may be the better disposed to do other things, which are
also then and there fit and necessary to be done. 1. To render to God a tribute
of thanks for mercies received. 2. To render him a tribute of praise in the
best expressions. 3. To hear his Word with all attention, due reverence and
devotion. 4. To beg humbly of him all necessary things which we want, either
for our souls or bodies, for our support or duty. All which things cannot be
well done, nor done with any good success by those, who would endeavor to hide
their sins from God, and decline to make sincere confession of them, with a
purpose to forsake them. For he that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but
he that confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13.

Fourthly, Thus far our considerations, as to our affairs in the Temple, and
the house of God, are right, and being well entertained by us, and often and
seriously thought upon, may rectify many evils and disorders, which by fools
and inconsiderate persons are too frequently there committed. Now having
seriously considered all that is before mentioned, and having resolved to do it
too upon serious consideration, then it will in the next place concern us, when
we are all present together, with pure hearts, and humble voices, to make our
approach to the Throne of Gods heavenly Grace, and to confess, (all meekly
kneeling upon our knees) 1. That God is Almighty, able to help us, and a most
merciful Father, willing to hear us. 2. That we are grievuous sinners, who have
neglected to do our duty, and have not refrained to do whatsoever is contrary
to it. 3. That our condition is sad and deplorable, that there is nothing
either in us, or from us, which can minister to us any relief; but that upon
our unfeigned repentance, our departing from sin, and amendment of our lives,
and serious resolutions to live better for the future, Grace is to be had from
the Throne of Grace, by the Mediator of Grace Jesus Christ. For as God
delights not in the sin of any man, but would have all men come to repentance;
so neither is he pleased with the death of any penitent sinner, but has given
forth his promises of pardon and forgiveness, to be authoritatively conveyed by
the mouths of his Ministers, to all who have received the Grace of true
repentance, (which we are constantly to pray for) and are acted on by his holy
Spirit to lead holy and pure lives; that so by living exactly according to the
measures of Grace received here, which is Glory begun, we may come to Glory
hereafter, which is Grace complete, and all through Jesus Christ, unto whose
Throne we may come boldly, yet humbly, not trusting to our own merits, but
relying upon Gods mercies through Christ's merits, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help us in time of need, Heb. 4.16.

Fifthly, Having thus seriously composed our selves by a deep consideration of
our sins both confessed and acknowledged, and by the consideration of our wants
to be supplied, and of the greatness and goodness of that God, to whom we are
to make our addresses for the pardon of our sins, and the supply of our wants;
Then it is very well worthy our consideration, and upon consideration we may
resolve within our selves, that we cannot come with a better and more
acceptable Prayer, to be offered up unto the Throne of Grace, than that which
the Mediator of Grace himself has taught us, saying, When ye pray, say, Our
Father which art in heaven, Luke 11.2. in which Prayer, before we offer it up,
we may do well to take notice both of the method, and of the matter contained
in it. The method of the Prayer is this; 1. There is a Preface, showing whom we
pray to: We pray to God, who is a Father, and so willing; who is in Heaven, and
so able to help us; who is ours in Christ, and so by a warrant and commission
given us from Christ, we may with the more confidence make our addresses to him
As he is a Father, we pray to him in hope; as he is ours, a common Father, we
pray to him in hope; and as he is in Heaven, we pray to him in fear, humility
and devotion. 2. There are Petitions, showing what we pray for, and in what
order: First, we pray to God (as it is fit we should) for those things which
concern his Glory, and by which his Name may be hallowed and glorified: Next,
we pray for those things, which concern our good of Glory, Grace, and Nature.
We pray that Gods kingdom may come, that his power and dominion may appear all
over the world; we pray that his will may be done by us men on earth, as it is
done by the Holy Angels in heaven, and that we may all live in all holy
obedience to his commands. We pray that God would give us daily bread, all
things needful both for our souls and bodies, for our support and duty whilst
we live here. In the next place we pray against the evil of sin past, that God
would in mercy pardon it, and incline us to have the like pity and compassion
one of another; we pray against the evil of sin to come, that God would by his
grace keep us from it; we pray also against the evil of punishment, external,
internal, eternal, that God would keep it from us by his mercy. This is the
sum of the Dominical or Lords Prayer.

Sixthly, Being thus as it were refreshed and enlivened by this Prayer, we are
next to proceed in very good order to the more solemn Service and Worship of
God desiring his assistance to open our lips, that we may praise him in the
b^st manner: ^or without Gods grace we can do nothing; and it is most certain,
that the Devil will be then most ready to hinder us, when we are most
d^sirously bent to serve and praise God* ^aving therefore petitioned God in the
Dominical Prayer, meekly kneeling upon our knees, and having jointly craved his
assistance in what is farther to be done, it follows next that we should in the
most cheerful posture, (which is standing) exhibit to God our Lands and
Praises, for all those blessings which he has most graciously conferred upon
us; which Praises of God cannot be better set forth, than in the Book of
Psalms, which his own Spirit has endited; which once made up a great part of
the Jewish Service, and which Christ himself consecrated by his and the
Apostles use of them, to bear a part in Christian Assemblies. Wherein we are to
consider, 1. Whom we are to praise, The Lord. 2. How we are to do it, jointly
with voices of Psalmodists, and joyful hearts, Let us sing, let us heartily
rejoice. 3. Why we are to do it, Because he is the strength of our Salvation,
our mighty Savior and deliverer, ready to supply all our needs, to help us in
all our dangers and distresses, and can and will succor us (if we rely upon
him) when we are most destitute. O come therefore, let us sing unto the Lord,
let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation, Psalm. 95.1. which
Psalm has been used by the Church of God in all ages, for an Introit Psalm, to
put us in mind how we should praise and glorify God. Now as we invite our
selves by this Psalm to give glory to God, so it is meet and convenient that at
the end of every Psalm we should actually do it, saying, Glory be to God the
Father our Maker, to God the Son our Redeemer, to God the Holy Ghost our
Sanctifier, as it has been the ancient use in all Christian Assemblies.

Seventhly, Having offered up our Lands and Praises to God in a most solemn
manner, whereby we may not only instruct our selves, but edify Gods glory;
then to give a kind of rest to our devotions, that they tire not, it follows in
due and proper place, that we should with all devout diligence, sober, serious,
and grave attention, give up our selves to the hearing of Holy Scriptures
distinctly and orderly read out of both the Testaments: For as it was once the
practice of the Jews in their public Service, to have one Lesson read out of
the writings of Moses, and another out of the other Prophets, that the people
might see the Harmony and agreement betwixt Moses and the rest; so the like use
and practice has been observed by Christians in their public Assemblies, to
have one Lesson read out of the Old Testament, and another out of the New,
(only a Hymn used betwixt both, to take off from the tediousness, and to make
the Service the more recreative) that people may be able to see the Harmony of
both the Testaments, to discern one God, one Christ, and one Spirit in both,
and how the Old Testament carries the New along with it in the same bottom,
that both aim at one and the same great design, to make men first holy, and
then happy. And this reading of Scripture has been in ancient times esteemed
Preaching, as appears Act. 15.21. where it is said, That Moses of old time had
in every City them that preached him, being read in the Synagogue every
Sabbath Day. There are indeed other ways of preaching besides this: Dilating
upon a Text of Scripture, is preaching; Catechizing, is preaching; Expounding,
is preaching; yet this hinders not but bare reading of the Text may be
preaching also, and may for ought I know edify as well as any Gloss made upon
it. ^or can we imagine that a set speech of any man, made upon a Text of
Scripture taken at all adventure, (though it may set an edge upon some hearers
devotion) should yet edify more than the Text it self, or add any efficacy to
that? Certainly the Sermons of Moses, and the Prophets of Christ, and his
Apostles, being often heard with attention and devotion, as they are often
read, may instruct as much as any set speech delivered by men of meaner gifts,
which may be as soon forgotten as it is spoken, and may be oft-times more
obscure too, than the Text which it endeavors to explain. This is not spoken
to detract from solid and seasonable preaching, but only to vindicate the Word
read from that scorn, which too many put upon it in these evil days.

Eighthly, Having devoutly heard the Word of God, and by often hearing of it,
been well grounded and instructed in those points of Faith, which are
necessarily to be believed by all, who seek for salvation by Jesus Christ the
anointed Savior, (which points of Faith are briefly summed up in the Apostles
Creed, and only enlarged by way of explication in the Nicene and Athanasian) it
follows next in very good order, that we should in a posture of resolution,
which is a standing posture, make public and joint Confession of that Faith
with our mouths, which we believe in our hearts; to show that we dare own it in
the face of all the world, and are not ashamed of it. Wherein we confess to
believe, That there is one God maker of all things, one Christ redeemer of
mankind, one Holy Spirit, sanctifier of the elect people of God, which people
are an holy society or Church; Catholic, dispersed over the world; and a
Communion of Saints, firmly united by all the communications of love and
charity, acted by the same Spirit, governed by the same Laws, leading holy and
pure lives, having all the same hopes to have their sins pardoned, their bodies
raised from death to life again, and souls and bodies both reunited and
crowned with glory in an immortal and endless life. This is the sum of our
Faith, which we are to make Confession of after the hearing of the Word;
Because Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17.

Ninthly, Having thus far proceeded in the public Service both for Morning and
Evening, in a right and due order, it is meet in the close of all (when we have
first prepared and fitted our selves by some quickening reciprocal Responds)
that we sum up either in Litanies, universal Collects, or Collects apart, all
that we are to pray unto God for, or to praise him for in public Assemblies.
Now all will come under the heads mentioned 1 Timothy 2. verse. 1, 2. which Text
seems to be a platform, according to which the public Service fitted for
Christian Assemblies was first framed up; wherein we meet with, 1.
Supplications, for the averting of all hurtful things from us, sins, and
dangers, that God would turn us from the evil of sin by Grace, and turn from us
the evil of punishment by Mercy. 2. Prayers, for the obtaining of all good
things, which we want for our souls and bodies; for our souls, pardon of sins
past, and grace to forsake sin for the future; for our bodies, all things
needful and convenient for us whilst we live here, what God knows best for us,
in order to advance his glory, to promote the good of others, and the salvation
of our own souls. 3. Intercessions, for others, for all mankind, for all
Governors secular and spiritual, that they may act their parts over us, and we
may live peaceably and quietly under them; For all persons any ways afflicted,
for enemies, persecutors, and slanderers; and we are to beg of God for them the
same good things as we would beg for our selves. 4. Giving of thanks, wherein
we are to bless God for all mercies already received, vouchsafed to our own
persons, to all who relate to us, to the Church and State whereof we are
members, to all mankind. We are to give unto God the retribution of thanks, for
all spiritual blessings, for giving us his Son and holy Spirit, for affording
all means to bring sinful men from their vicious courses unto himself; for
suffering us to be born within the pale of the Church, to be brought up in
Christian Religion, where we have the advantages of the Word, Sacraments, and
all the means of eternal life put into our hands. We are to render to God our
thanks, for his patience and long-sufferance, in waiting for our repentance;
for his calls and invitations, outward by his Word, inward by his Spirit, to
bring us to repentance; for his good, great, and gracious work wrought upon any
of us, in bringing us clear off from profane, worldly, and carnal courses, to
lead Godly and Christian lives. We are also to praise God, and to give him the
retribution of our thanks for temporal blessings, for the peace and prosperity
of the Church and Nation, for all remarkable deliverances vouchsafed to either;
for all the good things of this life in general, and in particular for health,
food, raiment, friends, all preservations and deliverances, and for all mercies
whatsoever, which cannot easily be enumerated. Under all the forementioned
heads, the main body of the Service constantly used in our Christian
Assemblies, is contained; which Service is to be concluded with the Priests
blessing and benediction, without which the Assemblies cannot well be
dismissed, or dissolved.

These few considerations I thought good to recommend unto you, not so much to
instruct the knowing, as to inform the ignorant, who either enter not Gods
house at all, but it may be are worse employed when they should be there, which
is an evil they consider not of, and so they offer God no Sacrifice at all; or
else they enter it without any devotion or reverence, which is another evil
that they consider not of, and so they offer to God a Sacrifice of fools; or
being entered, it may be do not understand their own offering which they are to
offer up, and so they offer to God they know not what, serve him they know not
how nor wherefore. But to correct those evils, that persons may come to the
house of God, come as they should come, and knowingly and understandingly do
what there is fit to be done, I have presented these considerations to those,
who do evil in Church Assemblies, and consider not when they do it. These,
Christian Reader, with the following Notes made upon our Service Book, I freely
offer to thee, hoping that thou will as kindly accept them, as I do freely
offer them, and I pray God to direct thee, and to give thee a right
understanding in all things.

Farewell.
RUBRIC.
The Order for Morning Prayer daily throughout the Year.


EXPLANATION.
Note 1. THat Prayer is a devout ascent of the Soul to God, whereby we petition
him for such things as we need both for our support and duty; and we ought to
be frequent in this devout exercise, because it is not only the great duty, but
the greatest privilege of a Christian, commanded by Christ's Precept, and
commended by Christ's Example, who was frequent in Prayer not so much for
himself, as for our benefit and instruction.

Note 2. That Prayers, especially public in the Church Assemblies, are to be
ordered, set and prescribed; because in the Church, which ought to be the
School of comeliness, things are to be done decently, by observing every due and
proper Scheme and Figure, which the action shall require, and according to the
order and appointment of Ecclesiastical Governors, 1 Cor. 14.40. It is much to
be wondered at, that any persons of sober judgments, and well ground in
Religion, can employ their time so ill as to devise and study objections
against prescribed Prayers in the public Service of God: Because set forms
were prescribed by God in the Old Testament, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25. Deuteronomy. 26.5.
Christ in the New not only enjoined a set form to be used by his Disciples,
Luke 11.2. but he, whose every action should be our instruction, used one
himself. It was also the practice of the Jews, from the time of Ezra, and long
before, constantly to use set forms of Prayer by way of Liturgy; neither did
they use them only as a necessary provision for the Ignorant, but as a secure
hedge and fence to their Religion, by this means to keep all mixtures and
corruptions out of their Church; and they had 18 Prayers or Benedictions set
and composed, according to the matter and form of which some say the Lords
Prayer was instituted; and it is very probable, that in imitation of the Jews,
the Pagans might use set forms at their Sacrifices, and most certainly they
did; which forms were first approved of by the Priests, before they were used;
and when they did use them, they read them out of a Book, that they might
neither stray in the matter of their Prayers, nor offend in the manner. And
that the Church of Christ has in all ages used a prescribed and set Form, I
think is not to be questioned: After Christ's ascension, and before the Holy
Ghosts descension, they continued all with one accord in Prayer and
Supplication, Act. 1.14. which Prayer was certainly in a set form, for as yet
the Holy Ghost was not come down upon them, neither were they qualified for
Prayer above the ordinary rate of other men; and when the Holy Ghost did come
down with his extraordinary gifts, those gifts continued not long, and
therefore an early provision was made for set forms to be constantly used, to
supply the defects of them; which Liturgies (as ours is) were framed up
according to St. Paul's prescribed pattern, 1 Timothy 2.1. consisting, 1. Of
Supplications, for the averting of all hurtful things, sins and dangers. 2. Of
Prayers, for the obtaining of all good things, which they wanted or stood in
need of. 3. Of Intercessions, for others, for Kings and all in Authority, for
the whole Church. 4. Of Thanksgivings, for mercies already received: in all
which they prayed not only for themselves, but in a greater diffusion of their
charity for all mankind. And all were prescribed, 1. That the people might the
better join with the Minister, and say Amen to the Prayer. 2. That the peoples
wants might be the better enumerated, the people themselves be the better
edified, all absurdities in Prayer might be avoided, and all might with one
mind and one mouth glorify God, Romans 15.6.

RUBRIC.
At the beginning of Morning Prayer, the Minister shall read with a loud voice
some one or more of these sentences of the Scriptures that follow; and then he
shall say that which is written after the said sentences.

When the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed,
and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive, Ezekiel.
18.27.

I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51.3.

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities, Psalm. 51.9.

The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17.

Rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God; for
he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil, Joel 2.13.

To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him; neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his Laws, which he set before us, Dan. 9.9, 10.

O Lord, correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me
to nothing, Jer. 10.24.

Repent ye, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 3 2.

I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy
son, Luke 15.18, 19.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.8, 9.


EXPLANATION.
The forecited sentences are all taken word for word out of the Holy Scripture;
of which the Minister may, according to his discretion, and as a fit occasion
shall be offered, make his choice; which he is to read with a grave, distinct,
loud but humble voice, always considering that they are here set in proper
place to mind the Congregation of their own misery, and God's mercy, and to
prepare and stir up the hearts of people for the better performance of Holy
Duties, following both with alacrity and devotion. --

DEarly beloved brethren, Jam. 2.5. the Scripture moves us in sundry places to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, 1 John 1.9. Psalm
51.3. Psalm. 38.18. and that we should not dissemble, nor cloak them before the
face of Almighty God our heavenly Father, Prove. 28.13. Psalm. 32.5. but confess
them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we
may obtain forgiveness of the same by his infinite goodness and mercy, Psalm.
10.17. Psalm. 34.18. Joel 2.12, 13. And although we ought at all times humbly to
acknowledge our sins before God, 1 Timothy 2.8. yet ought we most chiefly so to do
when we assemble and meet together, Levit. 4.14. to render thanks for the great
benefits that we have received at his hands, Psalm. 68.19. to set forth his most
worthy praise, Psalm. 50.23. to hear his most holy word, Hebr. 3.7. Romans 10.17.
and to ask those things which are requisite and necessary as well for the body
as the soul, Mat. 6.11, 12. Mat. 7.7, 8. Jam. 4.2, 3. Wherefore I pray and
beseech you, as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart,
and humble voice, 1 Cor. 4.16. 2 Cor. 2.8. 2 Cor. 5.20. unto the throne of the
heavenly Grace, saying after me, Hebr. 4.16.


EXPLANATION.
The forementioned Exhortation is grave and serious, exactly agreeable to Holy
Scripture, in which the people are invited and exhorted in an Apostolical
style, to confess their sins humbly to the Lord; who is able to help them,
because Almighty; and willing to hear them, because most merciful. It gives us
in a short sum, the chief ends of our public meetings in the houses of God;
it sets us some steps forward toward repentance, makes us to know that we have
offended, instructs us how and in what manner to acknowledge our offense, and
by degrees brings us to confession upon our knees.

RUBRIC.
A general Confession to be said of the whole Congregation after the Minister,
all kneeling.

ALmighty and most merciful Father, Genesis 17.1. Genesis 35.11. 2 Cor. 1.5. we have
erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, Psalm. 119.176. 1 Pet. 2.25. we
have followed too much the devises and desires of our own hearts, Febr. 3.10.
Genesis 6.5. we have offended against thy holy Laws, Act. 7.53 Dan. 9.9, 10. Jam.
2.10. Jam. 3.2. we have left undone those things which we ought to have done,
and we have done those things which we ought not to have done, Romans 7.15, 19.
and there is no health in us, Isa, 1.5, 6. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us
miserable offenders, Luke 18.13. Psalm. 51.1. Spare thou them, O God, which
confess their faults, Joel 2.17. Hos. 14.2. restore thou them that are
penitent, Psalm. 51.12. Hebr. 6.6. according to thy promises declared unto
mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord, Ephesians. 3.6. Romans 15.8. 2 Cor. 1.20. And grant
O most merciful Father for his sake, John 14.13, 14. John 15.16. that we may
hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, Tit. 2.11, 12. to the glory
of thy holy Name, 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Cor. 10.31. Amen, 1 Cor. 14.16.


EXPLANATION.
This Confession, as appears by the forecited Texts, is exactly agreeable to
Scripture, and is rationally and upon prudent grounds allowed the first place
in our public Liturgy. We begin our Service with Confession of sin for these
reasons, 1. Because our sins make a separation betwixt God and us, Isa. 59.2.
keep good things from us, Jer. 5.25. hinder our prayers from ascending
acceptably to God, and God's blessings from descending comfortably upon us. 2.
It was the practice of God's people the Jews, to begin their Service with a
general Confession of sin, of which we have the marks and signs in the Law,
Lev. 16.16. and the pattern and platform in the Prophets; but the Confessions
themselves are particularly to be met with in the Books of the Jews. This
verbal Confession (of which we have an instance Luke 1.10.) made the Jews fully
acquainted with the true use of Sacrifices: Besides, Almighty God being jealous
of his honor, commanded a brazen Laver to be set between the Tabernacle of the
Congregation and the Altar, for Aaron and his Sons twice in a day to wash their
hands and feet, Exodus 30.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. by which was signified the Laver
of Repentance, which we always stand in need of: From the Jews it afterward
became a custom in the Christian Church, to begin their public Service with
Confession of sin, and to perform it in such a manner as we do. The very
Heathens had something amongst them which seemed to allude to it, for they used
to wipe off the dirt from their feet when they entered into the places of their
Religious Service and Sacrifice. However, it is most certainly agreeable to
right Reason and Religion, that we should begin our Service to God with
Confession of our sins; that having first confessed our sins, and implored
God's pardon for them, we may the better pray unto him, and praise him for
other things. So David began with, Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin, Psalm. 51.2. and then he says, Open thou my lips, O
Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise, ver. 15. because sin does shut
up our mouth, and God pardoning sin, opens it that we may cheerfully pray unto
him and praise him. And whereas Confession of sin is enjoined to be said of the
whole Congregation after the Minister, it is for these reasons; 1. Because the
Minister is the peoples mouth to Godward in Prayer, both to go before them and
to instruct them, as in Preaching he is Gods mouth to the people. 2. By this
means the Church, like a careful Mother, makes provision so far as she can,
that none of her untoward children should dissemble their wickedness, the
humble and penitent confession whereof is made so necessary an introduction to
her Divine Offices. Now this Confession is to be made kneeling, because it is
the fittest posture for Penitents, that by the outward lowliness of our bodies,
we may the better express the inward humility of our minds. All Holy men we
meet with in Scripture, were for this posture of kneeling at their devotion;
David, Psalm. 95.6. Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Ezra, chap. 9.5. Daniel, chap. 6.10.
Christ, Luke 22.41. Stephen, Acts 7.60. Paul, Acts 20.36. God would not have us
when we come before him to worship him, to offer to him, and to receive from
him, to be as if we had no joints in our knees; he expects more from us then
from the Pillars of our Churches: Every day we begin our Service with a Psalm
which invites us to it, Psalm. 95.6. And the first Christians ever used to begin
their Service in this manner, saying, Before all things let us fall down and
worship the Lord who made us. This was the first voice heard, and the first
thing done in the Primitive Church. We daily utter the same voice, and daily
invite our selves to do the same thing, and shall we never do it for all this?
what is this but to mock God? nay to mock and abuse our selves, for God will
not be mocked; he knows our misdemeanors in his Service, and how to apportion
out punishments in his own due time, such as we deserve. As Augustus the
Emperor said to one, who came rudely into his presence to petition, I wonder
how we two come to be so familiar; so if we do but observe how rudely, and with
what unmannerly behavior some persons come into Gods presence, to beg pardon
of him for their sins, it may raise more wonder to think how God and they come
to be so familiar.

RUBRIC.
The Absolution or Remission of sins, to be pronounced by the Priest alone
standing, the people still kneeling.

ALmighty God, Genesis 17.1. the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6. who
desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his
wickedness and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.4. and has given power and
commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being
penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins, Luke 24.47. Joh. 20.23. 2
Cor. 5.19. He pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent, and
unfeignedly believe his Holy Gospel, Act. 10.43. Luke 24.47. Act. 3.19. Romans
1.16. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance, and his holy
Spirit, 2 Timothy 2.25. Act. 11.18. Luke 11.13. that those things may please him
which we do at this present, Heb. 11.6. Romans 8.8. and that the rest of our life
hereafter may be pure and holy, Ephesians. 1.4. Joh. 5.14. Romans 6.6. so that at the
last we may come to his eternal joy, Heb. 12.14. Mat. 5.8. through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 5.21. Romans 6.23.

RUBRIC.
The People shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen,
Nehem. 5.13. 1 Chronicles. 16.36. 1 Cor. 14.16.


EXPLANATION.
The Absolution is as to every part of it grounded upon Scripture; Remission
and Absolution are two names, which signify one and the same thing, a loosing
from sin, wherein the Soul is held bound as in a prison, Psalm. 142.7. Psalm.
119.32. Sin is as a yoke, burden, chain, fetter, which loads, binds, and holds
fast the Soul, Lam. 1.14. Psalm. 38.4. Psalm. 73.6. Absolution helps to remove
this yoke, to lighten this burden, to loose this chain. Sin is a debt, Mat.
6.12. Luke 11.4. Mat. 18.27. by Absolution and Remission we are acquitted and
discharged from this debt. The Heathens looked upon the characteristick (A)
when set alone, as a propitious letter, because it noted amongst the Romans the
Absolution of a Criminal; whereas the characteristical letter (C) was the mark
of a condemned person: but in Christianity, let (C) for Confession be placed
before (A) for Absolution, it alters the case very much. Some persons indeed
have been very much offended at the word (Absolution,) and therefore prevailed
to have the word (Remission) stand by it, to be its Interpreter into milder
sense; those persons I conceive to be like some people, which I have read of,
who fearing their Tigers, called them by more gentle names, that they might not
be devoured by them. But some scruple may again be made, why the Priest alone
should pronounce this Absolution, and that in the standing posture, when all
the people are still upon their knees? Which scruple may easily be removed from
those, who can distinguish the Priest and a Minister in his Office, from an
ordinary person not invested into Holy Orders: For the Priest, especially when
in his Office, and officiating, is in Christ's stead, and acting in one part of
his Commission given to him by Christ, which is to absolve penitents, Mat.
16.19. John 20.23. Neither does he absolve by way of declaration only, but by
way of authority, Jam. 5.14, 15. which authority is absolutely and originally
in God, who is only able to forgive sins by the highest and most unquestionable
authority, Mark 2.8. Yet there is by the Charter of the Church a subordinate
delegate power, derived from God by Christ to the Priests and Ministers, for to
remit or to retain sin, John 20.22, 23. The Priest remits or retains sin, as a
Civil Magistrate pardons or condemns a Malefactor, not by any power originally
in themselves, but by a power delegated from God. And to show by what power he
acts, the Priest pronounces the Absolution standing; and when the Confession
of sin is serious, from the heart, unfeigned, such as God requires and will
accept of, the Priest's Absolution is without question as effectual, as if God
himself did pronounce it from Heaven. Heaven waits for, and expects the
Priest's sentence on Earth; and if the person to be absolved, by an
hypocritical and feigned repentance, make not the key to fail in such cases,
what the Servant binds or looses here on Earth, the Lord himself ratifies and
confirms in Heaven, Mat. 18.18, 19. Now in the Absolution to be pronounced by
the Minister, or rather after it, this clause is added, Wherefore let us
beseech him to grant us true repentance, and his holy Spirit, and may seem to
be added for these reasons following; 1. To show that as Repentance is a
necessary disposition to pardon, so that it is also a necessary consequent of
it; for he who is pardoned, ought to be as much a penitent (if he truly
understands himself) as he who seeks pardon; as we are daily liable to sin, so
for our own safety we are to secure and keep our selves within the state of
pardon, which we cannot do but by continuing in a state of Repentance; besides,
the sad remembrance of sin (though pardoned) ought to be always grievous to us.
2. Because after a sin is pardoned and remitted, the Devil is most busy to
tempt the sinner either to commit the same sin again, or a worse; therefore as
in the Lords Prayer we are taught to pray, first to have our sins forgiven, and
next not to be led into temptation; so here no sooner is Absolution and
Remission of sins declared and pronounced by the Priest, as a great privilege
and favor granted to all sincere Penitents, and sound believers, but the same
pardoned persons are invited and stirred up in their own defense, to pray for a
continued Repentance and assistance of Gods holy Spirit, that they may be
secure from all Satan's temptations for the future, and make the grace of Pardon
already granted, a new obligation to more holy living; that so we may not only
please God in our present Devotions, but also in our future life; for most
certain it is, that every lapse after pardon is the greater sin, John 5.14. 2
Pet. 2.20. But we are to note in the last place, that the people are enjoined
to answer Amen, as at the end of this, so of every Prayer in the Service Book,
because Amen if pronounced as from the heart, is an Indication of the peoples
assent to the preceding Prayer, and an affirmation that the thing prayed for is
good and necessary for them, and a tollification of the peoples votes and
desires to obtain it. It has ever been used at the end of Prayers, and
pronounced with a loud voice, carrying in it devotion, zeal and fervency; it is
the last acclamation of our prayers, in the pronouncing of which the Primitive
Christians were wont to raise up their bodies, as if they had a desire to carry
their bodies as well as their souls up to Heaven.

RUBRIC.
Then the Minister shall kneel, and say the Lords Prayer with an audible voice;
the People also kneeling and repeating it with him, both here, and wheresoever
else it is used in Divine Service.

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, Mat. 6.9. thy kingdom
come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, ver. 10. give us this day
our daily bread, ver. 11. and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us, ver. 12. and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and
ever, Amen, ver. 13.


EXPLANATION.
They must certainly be vain and wicked, acted on by some wild and extravagant
spirit, who to make way for their own crude and humane breathings, (not fit
sometimes to carry the name of Prayers) would thrust the Lords Prayer quite
out, and allow it no place in the public Divine Service, which is as the Salt
of the Sacrifice, and that which should season all our Liturgick Offices.
Certainly as men may use other Prayers, so they ought not to be restrained, nor
to restrain themselves from the use of this, which is a Prayer used by the
Church of Christ all the world over, dictated at first by the supreme wisdom of
our great and eternal Mediator Jesus Christ, who presents our Prayers unto God,
and perfectly knows our Fathers mind: It is the most complete Prayer which can
be made, summing up all the most lawful requests which can be imagined, the
epitome, mirror, rule of all other Prayers, in a wonderful brevity of words,
including so great plenty and variety of matter, as if it would make a Camel to
pass through a Needleseye: It contains in it more histories and mysteries, then
words; it is the most methodical, emphatical, divine Prayer, that ever yet was
or shall be composed, for all the parts of it cohere with an admirable
symmetry; it is exactly made in measure and proportion, all of it is full of
Torches, which enlighten each other; not all the wits on Earth, nor Angels in
Heaven, were ever capable of dictating the like. There is as much difference
betwixt this, and Prayers of man's composing, as betwixt the Tabernacle and
Pattern upon the Mount: the Tabernacle was Earthly, framed by man; the Pattern
Heavenly, formed by God: so this Prayer is all over celestial and divine,
whereas our Prayers are at the best but humane, and framed up by man's
industry: Neither is there any man so knowing or so religious, who is not
subject to many failings in the composure of his Prayers; they are subject to
imperfection, to excess, to disorders, to many irregularities; we cannot
possibly be without some error in this business, either we want or exceed, are
too short or too long, or raise our thoughts out of rank and place, when we
speak our own Prayers; but in saying the Lords Prayer (if our hearts go along
with the prayer) we cannot fail to speak well; we omit nothing, we speak
nothing superfluous, we are not extravagant, we cannot be impertinent in our
words: Therefore having framed up Prayers according to what is possible for us
to do, and having well considered the defects of them, we have recourse to this
most absolute Prayer of Christ, for the perfecting of all the imperfections in
our own. Certainly we, who are Christians, ought to say this Prayer, because
Jesus Christ has put it into our mouths, and made it to be the abridgment of
all Prayer, wherein are summed up all lawful requests. He has given it to be a
rule and guide for us to pray by, and an exact form for us to pray in: It is a
Prayer of universal concernment, in respect of things contained in it, persons
using it, times when, and places where it may be used. All the Churches of the
Christian World pronounce it, and it must needs be a great consolation to us to
keep our part in this great consort; we may say it in prosperity and adversity,
in Peace and War, in health and sickness, in life and at the hour of death;
young and old, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, Princes and Peasants may all
pronounce it together. Therefore not without good reason is it so frequently
used in our Liturgick Offices, because it is so large for matter, so short and
compendious for phrase and words, so sweet for order, in all respects so
perfect and absolute, we give it the most place in our public devotions;
sometimes begin with it to guide our prayers, and sometimes conclude with it to
complete and perfect them. Wherever Christian Religion is professed, this
prayer is used as one of the principal and most material duties of honor done
to Jesus Christ. The often repeating of it, cannot bring it within the compass
of that vain repetition, which our Savior condemned, Mat. 6.7. for repetition
is then only vain, when words are often repeated being directed neither with
reason of Art, nor with zeal and devotion of heart, nor with any supposal of a
justly employed necessity, all which most certainly may meet in the use of this
prayer, how frequently soever we make use of it. For because we cannot pray as
we ought, there is a kind of necessity for us to use it to supply our defects,
and that with art and zeal (we hope) sufficient. Again, seeing we have an
Advocate with the Father interceding continually for sinners, when we seek for
pardon of our sins at Gods hand, we cannot do better then allege unto God the
words which our Advocate has taught us; seeing he has promised that shall be
granted which we ask in his name, we may be confident that will not be denied
which we ask in his name and words. When in our prayers we speak unto the
Father in the Sons own prescribed form of words, we may be sure that we utter
nothing which God will either disallow, or deny. The Minister is to begin this
prayer with an audible voice, and the people all kneeling are to repeat it
orderly after him, for these supposed reasons; 1. That people ignorantly
educated may learn it, and be instructed in it. 2. To show what an esteem we
ought to have for it, and for Christ our Lord and Savior, who was the Author
of it; and for Christianity it self, and the Christian Service, wherein all of
us are to bear a part. But that people may say this prayer understandingly, I
shall add this plain Paraphrase upon it.

Our Father which art in heaven; O holy Father, ours by creation, education,
instruction, compassion and adoption, who remainest gloriously on thy throne in
Heaven, where thou art praised and glorified by the holy Angels, and blessed
Souls of thy departed Saints and Servants, where thou reignest in unspeakable
glory, and art perfectly obeyed. Hallowed be thy name; be pleased by thy grace
poured into our hearts, and the hearts of all men, and by the dispensation of
thy gracious providence, to work all our hearts to such a reverence, awe, and
separate respect unto thee, thy Majesty, thy Attributes, thy works of Grace,
thy Name, thy Word, thy holy days, thy holy places, thy holy Ministers, thy
holy Patrimony devolved from thee upon them, for the maintenance of thy holy
Service, that the sins of Sacrilege, Profaneness, Idolatry, Heathenism,
Atheism, irreverence and indevotion, may be turned out of the world, and the
contrary virtues of Christian piety, reverence and devotion, may be set up and
flourish amongst us. Thy kingdom come; by thy grace inspired into our hearts,
and the hearts of all men, and by thy blessed disposal of all things here
below, weaken the power of the Adversary, give check to the malice of all
opposers, and so begin to set up thy kingdom immediately in our hearts, that it
may by degrees of flourishing daily increase, and that all other things which
are in thy purpose, may be so orderly computed, till at last this mortal
compounded kingdom, which has so much mixture of rebellion, sin and infirmity
in it, may be turned into a kingdom of perfect holiness and immortality. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven; So inspire thy grace into all our
hearts, so direct us by thy providence, and assist us to performance, that we
may obey thee in all thy commands here on Earth, willingly, readily,
cheerfully, speedily, impartially, sincerely, without indulging our selves to
any kind of sin, in the omission of any part of duty; as thy holy Angels obey
thy commands in Heaven, doing all things promptly and readily which thou
command them, without the neglect of any part of duty. Give us this day our
daily bread; Give us day by day, this present day, and for the remainder of our
lives, all the necessaries of life, whatever is agreeable and fit for our
subsistence and being; and suitable to our conditions, taken with all
circumstances, food convenient for us: Give us also thy Grace, the food of our
Souls, in that measure day by day, which may suffice for the remainder of our
warfare here; and give us all bodily sustenance, which we can possibly want or
stand in need of; assist and uphold us in all our wants, for we referr the care
thereof to thee, who carest for us. And forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us; Pardon all our offenses committed
against thee; punish not on us those sins, whereby we have offended and
provoked thee to punish us; and that we may be capable of thy remission, bestow
upon us, we pray thee, that necessary qualification of freely pardoning all
those, who by any injuries done to us, are become our debtors, and might justly
in strict Law be by us prosecuted unto punishment. And lead us not into
temptation; Suffer us not to be brought into any temptation or snare; suffer us
not to be entangled in any dangers or difficulties, which may not be easily
supported by us; may no allurement of pleasure or profit, no determent of
danger of evil, cause or occasion us to fall into any sin; when at any time we
are tempted, which may be the lot of the best men, do not thou leave us, nor
withdraw thy grace from us; nor so deliver us up in time of temptation, as to
leave us unable to extricate our selves, and to be overcome and swallowed up by
the temptation. But deliver us from evil; Give us a proportionate measure of
strength and grace, to bear up and to move under any temptation or pressure,
how heavy soever it may be; temper the temptation to our strength, and permit
not the assault to be too heavy for us. Deliver us from Satan, who is the
artificer, designer and improver of temptations; deliver us from the
temptations themselves, which come from our own lusts, the world, or the
enemies of true piety, that we may not be overcome by any of them, nor drawn
into sin. For thine is the kingdom, and the power and the glory, for ever and
ever, Amen. For it is thy due to have dominion over the world; therefore we
resign up our souls for thee to reign in them, as the sole Prince and Monarch
of them. Thou art Omnipotent and All-sufficient, the fountain of all that grace
and strength which we beg for; therefore we rely upon thee for all that is
necessary for this life and the other. The thanks, honor, and glory of all
that we are, or have, is due to thee, from whom all is received; and therefore
we do not impute any thing to our selves, or our own acquisition. In this Faith
we pray, and confide that what we pray for shall be granted.

RUBRIC.
Then likewise he shall say,

O Lord open thou our lips.

Answ. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise, Psalm. 51.15.

O God make speed to save us, Psalm. 70.1.

Answ. O Lord make have to help us, Psalm. 40.13.

RUBRIC.
Here all standing up the Priest shall say,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, Isa. 42.8. 1
Cor. 10.31. Romans 11.36.

Answ. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without
end, Amen.

Priest. Praise ye the Lord, Psalm. 146.1.

Answ. The Lords name be praised.


EXPLANATION.
The forementioned Versicles with the Responses, are Canonical Scripture, and
taken most-what out of the Book of Psalms; by which we acknowledge our
dependence upon God, and that we are unable of our selves to perform any
Religious duty well, unless God enable us. They are used interchangably by
Minister and People, to testify mutual Love, to strengthen affection, to stir
up devotion, to kindle and inflame it one in another, to oblige us to greater
attention; and this praying by way of Response, is grounded upon the Scripture,
and conformable to the practice of the earliest and purest times of
Christianity. And for the form of giving glory to God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, it is very ancient, by which we avouch our Doctrine and Faith of the
Trinity against all opposers; as we have received from Christ and his Apostles,
so we baptize, believe, and give glory to God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
this we do not without Scripture-warrant, Mat. 28.19. Romans 11.36. It is the
Christians Hymn and shorter Creed; some who professed Christianity, had
corrupted this form of giving glory to God, and had framed up another form, in
favor of their own new opinions and persuasions in Religion, differing from
that of the Ancient Christians both in words and sense; but the ancient form,
which was before, and is still used, was again restored, upon the restoration
of which those words were added, As it was in the beginning, etc. that is, in
the first beginning of the true Religion professed and solemnly owned by the
name of Christian. Now certainly very meet it is that we should give glory to
God, because it is appropriate to God alone, Psalm. 115.1. It is his peculiar
right, which he lays claim to, Isa. 42.8. for he is the King of Glory. The
Heavens declare it, Psalm. 19.1. the Angels chant it, Luke 2.14. Seraphims
resound it, Isa. 6.3. and man is no less obliged to it, then those celestial
Spirits are. No place on earth is more proper for it, then God's house, where
every man should speak of his honor; and there is no better posture to do it
in, then standing, for by it we show our cheerful readiness to give glory to
God, and our pious resolution to stand fast in the Faith of the Holy Trinity.
And for those words, Praise ye the Lord, they are the same with Hallelujah; set
at the end of the five last Psalms in the Psalter, and used in this place, to
be as an impression invitatory to the following Psalms: and the following
Response, The Lords name be praised, is according to what we find written Psalm.
106.48.

RUBRIC.
Then shall be said or sung this Psalm following; except on Easter Day, upon
which another Anthem is appointed: and on the nineteenth day of every month it
is not to be read here, but in the ordinary course of the Psalms.

PSALM. 95.
Ver. 1. O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the
strength of our salvation.

2. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and show our selves glad
in him with psalms.

3. For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods.

4. In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills
is his also.

5. The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

6. O come, let us worship and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

7. For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hand.

8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

9. When your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my works.

10. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: It is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

11. Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.


EXPLANATION.
With this Psalm the ancient Church used to begin her Service; it was the
invitatory Psalm, with which they usually began before the Congregation was
well met together, at the hearing of which, all hastened to Church; and it is
very well appointed to be used in this place before all other Psalms, because
it is the fittest to conform us to the right use of all the rest, and to
furnish out Gods Service with all due reverence. Glory be to the Father, etc.
is added at the end of this, and of every Psalm, that we may reduce that to
practice which is the scope of every Psalm, that is, Give Glory to God.

RUBRIC.
Then shall follow the Psalms in order as they are appointed. And at the end of
every Psalm throughout the year, and likewise at the end of Benedicite,
Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, shall be repeated,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

Answ. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without
end, Amen.


EXPLANATION.
The Psalter was anciently divided into several portions called Nocturns, by
which division the Psalms were read every week, and this was a custom peculiar
only to the Latin Church; for in the Syrian and Greek Churches, the Psalter
was read over every twenty days: Our Church allows a months space for the
reading over the Book of Psalms; and her meaning is, that they should be read
in public, according to ancient practice, by way of Response. Now the reasons
why the Psalms are so frequently read over, and why in this manner, I conceive
to be these. Because the Psalms do contain in them the choice and flower of all
things profitable, which may be met withal in the Holy Scriptures; and do more
movingly express them, by reason of the Poetical form wherein they are written.
No part of Scripture does more admirably set forth all the considerations and
operations, which belong to God, nor so magnify the Holy meditations and
actions of Divine men; They are an universal declaration of things Heavenly,
working in those, whose hearts God inspireth with a due consideration, and
disposition of mind, whereby they are made fit vessels both for receipt and
delivery of whatsoever Spiritual perfection. There is nothing necessary for man
to know, which the Psalms are not able to teach: They are to beginners, a
familiar introduction; to those who are entered into the way of Religion, a
mighty augmentation of virtue and knowledge; and to the most perfect, a strong
confirmation. Heroical magnanimity, exquisite Justice, grave moderation, exact
wisdom, Repentance unfeigned, unwearied Patience, the mysteries of God, the
sufferings of Christ, the terrors of Wrath, the comforts of Grace, the works
of Providence over the world present, and the promised Joys of the next; all
good necessary to be known, done, or had, are laid up in this Storehouse; no
grief incident to man's soul, or sickness to the body, but a remedy may be
found for it in the Book of Psalms. As the Holy Scripture exceeds other
writings in verity, so the Book of Psalms exceeds other Sacred Scriptures in
variety. The Psalter is the common treasury of all good arguments and
instructions; the summary, pith and breviary of the whole Bible: therefore as
the Church esteemed nothing more generally necessary for the Worship of God,
then the Word of God; so she judged no parcel of the Word more full and fit,
then the Psalms. But it is to be wished, that we could all endeavor to make
our lives conformable to those Holy patterns, who were the Penmen of these
Psalms; and that the Psalmists infusions and effusions, may find in us the
Psalmists spiritual affections to go along with them; that when we say or sing
over these Psalms, we may not speak against our sense, knowledge, or
conscience, nor blame the Psalm, or Church for enjoining it to be used, when we
our selves perhaps are in fault. He who would make a right and good use of the
Psalms, read over in private or public, must endeavor to form his Spirit to
the affection of the Psalm: if it be the affection of love, which runs through
the Psalm, it is to be read with the same affection; if of fear, the same
Spirit of fear should be imprinted upon the Soul; if of desire, it should be
carried on with the like transportation; if of gratitude to God, the Soul
should be lifted up with praises, and come with affections that way enflamed:
If the Psalm carries in it the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, of Praise or
Eucharist, he who dares to read it, must still conform, and bring down his
Spirit to the Psalm; and whatever affection is in any Psalm, the heart is to
comply with that affection; that by this means the often repeating of the
Psalms, may not prove a ridiculous piece of Pageantry, we should strive to say
the Psalms with the same Spirit, with which they were inspired who composed
them; and accommodate our selves to them in the same manner, as if we our
selves had been the composers, or as if they had been purposely composed for
our use, by exciting up in our selves the same affections, which we may discern
to have been in David or others, at the same time when they composed them. We
are to love when they love, fear when they fear, hope when they hope, praise
God when they praise him, weep for our own sins and others when they weep, beg
what we want with the like Spirit wherewith their petitions are framed; love
our enemies when they love theirs, pray for ours when they pray for theirs,
have zeal for Gods glory when they profess it, humble our selves when they are
humbled, and lift up our Spirits to Heaven when they lift up theirs; give
thanks for Gods mercies when they do; delight and rejoice in the benefits of
the Messiah, and beauties of the Church, when they do; relate the wonderful
works of God in the creation of the World, and deliverance of his people, with
the like admiration and praise as they do; and wherever there is mention of
punishments inflicted on rebellious sinners, and rewards and favors bestowed
upon the obedient, we are to tremble where they tremble, and to rejoice where
they rejoice; we are to walk in Gods Sanctuary as they walked, and to wish to
dwell in it as they wished. And wherever the Psalmist as a Master teaches,
exhorts, reprehendeth, and directs, we are to suppose him speaking to every
one of us, and we should answer him in such due manner as he requires. And at
the beginning of every Psalm, we should beg of God that affection which the
Psalmist had when he composed it, and desire to attain the same gift and
spiritual savor which he felt. Was this course as constantly used, as the
reading over the Book of Psalms, we should in time be of the Psalmists temper
and devotion; and the usage of the Psalms would not seem so strange, as perhaps
they may to some, for want of observing this good rule prescribed by the
Ancients. It is a course which the devouter Christians ever observed, and they
found it hugely advantageous for the heightning and enflaming of their
devotions. Some scruples may be made by some persons, against the reading of
Scripture in general, and against the Psalms in particular, the most devotional
part of Scripture; for they were most of them composed by David, the Type of
Christ, and the best fitted and qualified of any man to set down a formulary of
Devotions, in which are contained the most remarkable things, which concern
Christ or Christianity; and which may well enough be used by all, who are
sincerely Christian, either as forms of Prayers or Praises, of which they
consist for the most part. Indeed some Psalms seem to have no propriety of the
Spirit of Christianity, being spent in calling down vengeance upon Gods and the
Psalmists enemies, which is contrary to the Gospel-temper, Luke 9.54, 55. but
herein lies our great mistake, for David the Psalmist of Israel, by whom the
Spirit of the Lord spoke, 2 Samuel 23.2. could not have in him the least
malignity or revenge in the penning of his Psalms, not of those of the severest
character; for in those Psalms he did not so properly pray as a petitioner,
that God would bring such and such Judgments upon obstinate sinners, as he did
predict and denounce as a Prophet, the just Judgments of God, which would
inevitably fall upon such sinners. Such Psalms are Prophesies and Predictions,
not properly Prayers, and they may easily be accommodated to the Christian
affection, Spirit and temper. All Texts of Scripture in either Testament, of
this seemingly-severe temper and nature, may be safely admitted into the very
bowels of our Souls, if they could be permitted also to perform the work, which
they are designed for; that is, to melt us into contrition, to mortify us, to
reform us, to bruise our Souls, to purge all dross out of them, to refine and
prepare them for holy duties. Besides, the Jews, under whose Polity the Psalms
were penned and composed, were a Typical people, and Gods Oeconomie to them may
be instructive to us, not in a literal, but spiritual sense; what severity was
required from them toward the Canaanites, and other enemies of God, the same
should be transcribed by us in another way; that is, we should express our
displeasure and revenge upon our lusts and sins, as the greatest enemies of
God, or us; and thus our indignation and zeal, our imprecations and Anathema's,
may be seasonable enough, if we continue them only in this sense; but for the
cursing of any other enemies, it is hardly reconcilable to Christianity;
neither can it be warranted out of the Psalms, or any other part of Scripture,
to be used as a Prayer, but only as a prediction or denunciation; and this may
be done upon a design purely Christian and charitive enough. And whereas many
things in the Psalms, may seem not to suit well with every man's condition at
all times, and so the Spirit of the Reciter may meet with a kind of
contradiction, forbidding to go along with the Spirit of the Psalmist; (as for
instance, how can a man overwhelmed with distress, h^ve the lively vigorous
Spirit of Praise or Eucharist? or a man in a prosperous state, have the true
Spirit of devotion and humiliation?) yet this scruple may be easily removed,
thus; That though the Psalms read may not suit so properly with our own
condition, yet they may suit with the condition of others, to the best
advantages; and in our public Services, we are to put upon us public Spirits,
and mind the state and condition of other men, as well as of our selves: we are
to rejoice with them that do rejoice, and to weep with them that weep, and to
be of the same mind one toward another, Romans 12.15, 16. we are to remember
those who are in bonds, as bound with them, and those who suffer adversity,
being our selves also in the body, Febr. 13.3. Therefore do we pray for the
sick, when we our selves are in health; give thanks for the deliverance of
others, when we our selves are not in their dangers. This we do as Christians,
not as mere men, nor as necessity urges us to it, but as charity binds us;
whereby we show, that as Christ is the Head of the body, so we are Members one
of another. This is truly Christian, when we can zealously comprehend others
within our Prayers or Praises, either for what they stand in need of, or have
received. And it will be a very hard matter for any one of us, to mention any
one of the Psalms, which we may not have some propriety to, in whatsoever
condition we are. In our greatest prosperity, we may have cause enough to
humble our selves; in our greatest distress, there may be good grounds for
giving of thanks. Job was summoned to bless God as well for his sufferings, as
for his enjoyments, Job 1.21. and many holy and pious men, have seen ground and
cause enough for their humiliation, in the midst of their greatest affluence
and abundance. And whereas some of the Psalms are advanced to that high pitch
of devotion, which ordinary men, who are not of the Psalmists spirit and
temper, cannot possibly reach to; yet these very Psalms should be made
familiar, and be of constant use, if for no other reason, yet for this, to
quicken our dull devotions, to give some spirit and life to our dead, and not
enough vigorous performances in the Service of God, and to make us see how much
we fall short of those holy and divine Penmen of the Psalms, who as to their
profession of Faith, zeal, love, and obedience to God, ought to be looked upon
as worthy patterns for our imitation; and by reproaching of us for our own
defects, may humble us before God, because we cannot so vigorously pronounce
these holy Hymns as we ought to do, and may teach us to pray for more growth
and spiritual proficiency, in our constant Religious performances.

RUBRIC.
Then shall be read distinctly with an audible voice the First Lesson, taken
out of the Old Testament, as is appointed in the Calendar, (except there be
proper Lessons assigned for that day) he that reads so standing, and turning
himself, as he may best be heard of all such as are present. And after that,
shall be said, or sung in English, the Hymn called Te Deum laudamus, daily
throughout the year.

Note that before every Lesson the Minister shall say, Here begins such a
Chapter, or Verse of such a Chapter of such a Book: And after every Lesson,
Here ends the First, or the Second Lesson.


EXPLANATION.
The reading of Lessons out of the Old and New Testament, is in punctual
imitation of the Ancient Church; which Lessons are not left arbitrary, but
appointed, some for ordinary days, and some for Festival, according to
Primitive custom and practice. As the Jews used to read some Lessons, and
portions of Scripture, out of Moses and the other Prophets, upon their Sabbaths
and Festivals, Act. 13.27. which they called Sections, or Tractats of a good
day, Colos. 2.16. so it was decreed and ordered in the Church Christian, and in
imitation so near as could be of what was practiced in the Jewish Church, that
the first Lesson should be read out of the Old Testament, and the second out of
the New. And it was so contrived, that Hymns, Lessons and Psalms should be used
interchangably, to take off something from the tediousness of the Service; for
as variety is pleasant to the body, so is it also to the Soul: therefore is the
Service made so Mosaic, and of so many pieces commodiously disposed, to rescue
each other from fastidiousness. Neither do we read only the Canonical
Scripture, but some part also of the Apocryphal Books, which appear to be most
agreeable to the Canonical; in the doing of which, we do not consider both under
the same parity of honor and estimation, for our Bibles have sufficiently made
a distinction. And though it cannot be denied, that the Ancient model of
Canonical and Apocryphal Books, did pass under a complex notion of the Old
Testament; yet we read not the Apocryphal Books, as we do Canonical Scripture,
to ground any Article of Faith upon; only we read them for instruction in life
and manners, and upon the same account as the Epistle of Clement to the
Corinthians, was wont to be read in Churches in Ancient times. Neither are any
Chapters or Lessons so prescribed out of the Apocryphal Books, as that we
should set aside the Canonical Scripture, for the Minister is left to his
discretion, to make his choice as he thinks fit, either of the one, or of the
other. We read the Apocryphal Books, because they are consonant to the
Canonical, because they were respected by the Ancients, because they are
instructive in their style, and some passages in them do explain the Canonical
Scripture, which they, who most oppose them, cannot honestly deny; and why may
they not be as well read and approved of, as our own Comments upon a Text of
Scripture, which (it is to be presumed) we would not have to be taken for
Canonical Scripture. They who are most against the reading of them, cannot but
confess our Sermons and Tractates to have as little of the Spirit of
infallibility and Sanctification, as the Apocryphal Books. So far as they are
consonant to the Word of God, they are Canonical, though not Proto-Canonical.
There is truth in them, and we are to embrace truth wherever we meet with it;
for it is Gods, whoever speaks it or writes it: we read them not to confirm us
in matters of Faith, but to instruct us in life and manners, because they
contain in them many excellent moral precepts, for the regulating of our lives,
and well ordering of our conversations. Again, some part of the Canonical is
not enjoined to be read publicly in the Congregation, not because the
Authority of it is undervalued, but because it is not so useful for
Edification, nor so fitted to the understandings and capacities of the people,
as those portions of Scripture are, which are enjoined to be read; those
necessary parts of Scripture which God has made easy, the Church desires
should be made familiar, and frequently read to the people. Therefore she
orders the Psalms to be read over once every month, most part of the Old
Testament once a year, the New thrice; and has so sorted the Lessons, Prayers,
Psalms, Epistles and Gospels, for some Festivals, that they edify as much as
any ordinary Sermons, if people were but so wise, as to consider the wise
directions of the Church, and to value her prudence, as much as they do their
own foolish humors. Now the Lessons are taken one out of the Old, another out
of the New Testament, that by frequent reading of them, we may observe the
Harmony of both: for as the Cherubins of Glory looked each upon other, and both
closed with their wings over the Mercy-seat; so the Two Testaments look each
upon other, both upon Christ, who is the supplement of the one, and the
complement of the other; in the one promised, in the other exhibited; the Law
being an hidden Gospel, and the Gospel a revealed Law. The Patriarchs,
Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, wrote by the same Spirit, pointed at the same
Messiah, were saved by the same Faith; and this may very much confirm us in the
truth of the Scriptures, when we read that exactly fulfilled in the New
Testament, which was so punctually foretold in the Old. Besides, it may be a
means of converting the Jews, as well as confirming us Christians; for they may
in time embrace Christ's Gospel with us, when they see us embrace Moses and the
Prophets together with them. But in taking Lessons first out of the Old
Testament, and then out of the New, the Church observes the method of the Holy
Spirit, who first published the Old, then the New; first the precepts of the
Law, then of the Gospel; and by this method we are taught to go forward in our
knowledge, from smaller things to greater, from the lowest to the highest; for
the Law is as a Paedagogue teaching the first Rudiments, the Institutions of
highest perfection are contained in the Gospel. The Minister is to read the
Lessons distinctly, with a sober, grave, and audible voice; and he is to turn
himself toward the people, when he reads, because he is upon an office
directed to them; whereas in Prayer, he looks another way, toward the more
eminent part of the Church, where use to be placed the Symbols of God's more
especial presence, with whom the Minister in Prayer has chiefly to do. For the
same reason we may suppose, that the Christians in former times used to pray
with their faces Eastward, because in the Chancel, which was the East part of
the Church, stood the Holy Table, where the highest of Religious Services were
usually performed, and the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood was
administered, which is the special sign of God's mysterious presence. The Jews
at the reading of the Law, and other Scriptures, looked toward the people; but
in Prayer, toward the Mercyseat, or principal part of the Temple, Psalm. 28.2.
and Christians may in all probability do the like, in imitation of the Jews;
for as their Mercy-seat was a type and figure of Christ, so the Holy Table, and
the Sacred Mysteries there performed, are representations of him in a more
special manner. Neither did the Jews, nor do the Christians, this out of any
superstitious conceit, that God cannot or will not hear our Prayers, unless we
look Eastward when we pray, as the Jews looked toward the Oracle or Mercy-seat,
for we know God is Omnipresent, every where present; yet for all this, Christ
directed us by his form of prayer to look toward Heaven, when we pray, because
it is the Throne of God.

Te Deum Laudamus.
WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord, Psalm. 67.3. Psalm.
99.34. Psalm. 148.1.

All the Earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens, and all the Powers therein, Psalm.
148.2.

To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry,

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven, and Earth are full of the Majesty: of thy Glory, Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8.
Isa. 66.1. Jer. 23.24.

The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee, Rev. 4.10, 11.

The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee, Rev. 6.9, 10.

The holy Church throughout all the world: does acknowledge thee, Psalm. 67.2.

The Father: of an infinite Majesty, Psalm. 93.1.

Thine honorable, true: and only Son, Mat. 17.5. Luke 1.32. Heb. 1.3, 4, 5.

Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter, John 14.26.

Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ, Rev. 17.14. Psalm. 24.8. Luke 19.38.

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father, Romans 1.4. Isa. 9.6. Luke 1.35.
John 8.58. John 17.5.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the Virgins
womb, Philip. 2.6, 7. Mat. 1.25.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death: thou did open the kingdom
of Heaven to all believers, John 14.2, 3. John 17.24. Heb. 9.8, 9, 10, 11. Heb.
10.19, 20.

Thou sit at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father, Act. 2.33.
Heb. 10.12. Heb. 12.2.

We believe, that thou shall come: to be our Judge, Romans 2.16. Act. 1.11. Act.
17.31.

We therefore pray thee, help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Psalm. 74.2.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints (...) in glory everlasting, Colos.
1.12. John 17.22.

O Lord, save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever Joel 2.17. Psalm. 28.9.

Day by day: we magnify thee, Psalm. 96.2^ Psalm. 145.2.

And we worship thy Name: ever world without end, Psalm. 61.8.

Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin, Psalm. 17.5. Genesis 20.6.

O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us, Psalm. 123.3.

O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee, Psalm. 33.22.

O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded, Psalm. 71.1.


EXPLANATION.
The Church in appointing Hymns, observes punctually the rule of the Apostle,
Colos. 3.16. and from the practice of Christ and his Apostles, who sung Hymns
together, Mat. 26.30. probably to teach and instruct us to do the like, may the
Antiquity of them in the Christian Church be derived. We have not only Christ's
example for it, and the Apostles command for it, but we read of it practiced in
the Church of Alexandria, which was founded by St. Mark; St. Ambrose brought
Hymns into the Church of Millain; God (says Jerome) is delighted with Morning
and Evening Hymns; St. Augustine (as we read in the Life of him) was very much
afflicted a little before his death, as for the decay of other things in
Religion, and in the public worship of God, so that the Hymns and Lauds used
to be sung to God, were lost out of the Church. Those Hymns were either said,
or sung, but more properly sung, because Hymns are Songs of Praise; and it was
the practice to sing them both in the Jewish, Psalm. 47.6. and Christian Church,
Mat. 26.30. for singing enflames and enlivens the minds and affections of the
hearers; and such music by pleasing the affections, and delighting the minds
of men, makes the Service of God more delectable, and less tedious. And for
this reason is Church Service so intermixed with Lessons, Psalms, and Prayers,
and like the garment of the Spouse, Psalm. 45. made up of such variety, that by
this variety our devotions may be carried on with the more cheerfulness, and
the greater appetite, and without any fastidiousness. Standing was the usual
posture for the saying or singing of Hymns, for it is indeed the most proper
posture for thanksgiving or laud, Psalm. 134.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 7.6. and this
erection of our bodies, does most properly express the elevation of our hearts
in joy, praises, and Eucharist unto God. The forementioned Hymn, called Te Deum
laudamus, was composed (as it is said) by St. Ambrose and St. Augustine, which
they used to sing Anthemwise; and the occasion of its composition, was St.
Augustine's Conversion and Baptism, in both which St. Ambrose was most happily
instrumental. But be the Author who it will, the Structure, though Humane, is
complete, and the materials of it are Divine; and it is worthily enough
vouchsafed a place in our constant Service, for its Antiquity, for its
consonancy with Scripture, for having the Churches both warrant and
approbation; for the contents of it, which are most Christian, hugely
advantageous for the heightning of Devotion, and promoting of Religion; wherein
is acknowledged the Power and Majesty of God the Father, the Divinity and
Humanity of God the Son, his Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension,
Exaltation to Glory, and Power committed to him for to guide, rule, preserve
and govern his Church; and wherein also is asserted, the Divinity of God the
Holy Ghost; and there is nothing in the whole Hymn, but what is very agreeable
to Scripture. Some exception may be made, against this expression in it, When
thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the kingdom of
Heaven to all believers: But what can justly be found fault with in this
expression? by it we do not express this to be our meaning, as if we thought
that the departed Saints were not in a state of bliss and happiness, before
Christ's Ascension; but our meaning is rather, that Christ by his Ascension
prepared a greater, and more complete state of bliss, for those that are his,
meriting their going to it by his Death, and making the way passable by his
Resurrection and Ascension, John 3.13. John 14.2, 3. Heb. 9.8, 12. Heb. 10.19,
20. Heb. 11.40. for by this means he procured greater Grace for them here,
greater Glory for them hereafter. Whatever he did or suffered, the end was to
open the kingdom, which our sins had shut up; which he opened most liberally at
his Ascension, and after he had overcome the sharpness of death, for then he
took a local possession of Glory, for the use of all that are his. Be the state
of the Saints departed before what it will, yet what God bestowed upon their
Souls, was procured by Christ's Death, Resurrection and Ascension, which
followed after; as also the Glorification of their bodies, is most certainly to
follow the Exaltation of his; whither the glory of the Head is gone before, the
hope of the Body is to follow after, and when our bodies and souls come to be
glorified together, then shall we be in our complete and perfect bliss. Glory
be to the Father, is not enjoined to be used at the end of this Hymn, because
it is it self almost nothing else but that Doxology enlarged.

RUBRIC.
Or this Canticle, Benedicite, omnia opera Domini.

O All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him
for ever, Psalm. 145.10.

O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the lord: praise him, etc. Psalm. 148.2.

O ye Heavens, bless ye the Lord: praise him, etc. Psalm. 148.4.

O ye waters that be above the Firmament, bless ye the Lord: praise him, etc.
Psalm. 148.4.

O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 150.1.

O ye Sun and Moon, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 148.3.

O ye Stars of Heaven, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 148.3.

O ye showers and dwe, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 147.8. Psalm. 148.4.

O ye winds of God, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 147.18. Psalm. 148.8.

O ye fire and heat, bless ye the Lord, etc.

O ye Winter and Summer, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 74.17.

O ye dews and frosts, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 147.16.

O ye frost and cold, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 147.16, 17.

O ye ice and snow, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 147.16, 17.

O ye nights and days, bless ye the Lord: praise him, etc. Psalm. 74.16.

O ye light and darkness, bless ye the Lord: praise him, etc. Psalm. 104.19, 20.

O ye lightnings and clouds, bless ye the Lord, etc. Job 38.25, 34, 35.

O let the earth bless the Lord: yea, let it praise him, etc. Psalm. 67.6.

O ye mountains and hills, bless ye the Lord: praise him, etc. Psalm. 148.9.

O all ye green things upon the earth, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 147.8.
Psalm. 148.9.

O ye wells, bless ye the Lord, etc. Psalm. 104.10.

O ye seas and floods, bless ye the Lord: Job 38.8, 9, 10, 11.

O ye Whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord: Genesis 1.21.

O all ye fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord: Psalm. 148.10.

O all ye beasts and cattle, bless ye the Lord: Psalm. 148.10.

O ye children of men, bless ye the Lord: Psalm. 107.8.

O let Israel bless the Lord: praise him, etc. Psalm. 135.19.

O ye Priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: Psalm. 135.19, 20.

O ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: Psalm. 134.1.

O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord: Heb. 12.23.

O ye holy and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord: Isa. 57.15.

O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.


EXPLANATION.
This Song, or Hymn, commonly called the Song of the Three Children, is word
for word to be found in the Apocryphal Scripture, and was used to be read by
Christians in their public Congregations, as a Religious Formulary of pious
thoughts, confessions, and prayers, fit to be used in times of remarkable
deliverances, vouchsafed from great dangers. The names of the Three Children,
mentioned in the close of this Hymn, are to be met with in the Book of Daniel,
which is received for Canonical, Dan. 1.6. and the occasion why this Psalm of
Praise was at first composed, Dan. 3.25. In the Apocryphal Book of Daniel, this
Hymn is set down word for word, (as is before noted) which Apocryphal Books
were anciently of very great esteem in the Church, and were publicly read in
the Congregations, for instruction in life and manners. However, as appears by
the forecited Texts, this Hymn is exactly agreeable with Canonical Scripture,
and the Ancient Fathers did highly approve of it; neither is there in it any
thing liable to a just exception, for it is only a methodical and full
Compendium of the great and glorious Works of God; and the whole scope of it is
to show, that God is, and will be magnified in all his Creatures. We do not in
it speak to the Creatures, for to instruct them what they should do; but we
rather speak of them, to teach our selves what is our duty, that is, to
glorify God together; and therefore do we conclude it with, Glory be to the
Father, that we may actually do it.

RUBRIC.
Then shall be read in like manner the second Lesson, taken out of the New
Testament. And after that, the Hymn following; except when that shall happen to
be read in the Chapter for the day, or for the Gospel on St. John Baptists day.

Benedictus. St. Luke 1.68.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited, and redeemed his
people;

And has raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant
David;

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since the world
began;

That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that hate
us;

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers: and to remember his holy
Covenant;

To perform the oath which he swear to our fore-father Abraham, that he would
give us;

That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies: might serve him
without fear;

In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

And thou Child, shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways;

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins,

Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the Dayspring from on high has
visited us;

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and to
guide our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

RUBRIC. Or this Psalm, Jubilate Deo. Psalm. 100.
O Be joyful in the Lord all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and come
before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure, that the Lord he is God: it is he that has made us, and not we
our selves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.


EXPLANATION.
Let it be here noted once for all, that the Benedictus of Zachary, and Psalm
the 100. for the Morning Service after the Second Lesson; and the Magnificat of
Mary, Luke 1.46. with Psalm the 98. after the First Lesson in the Evening
Service; and the Nunc Dimittis, Luke 2.29. and Psalm the 67. after the Second
Lesson, are ordered to be read as the Minister shall make his choice, This or
That; and however these Hymns or Psalms were composed upon occasion of
particular benefits, yet are they always of singular use in the Church of God.
The forementioned Hymns are frequently used in our public Service, because
they are the Hymns wherewith our blessed Savior was joyfully received, at his
first entrance into this world; and they do somewhat more concern us, then
David's Psalms do, because the Gospel and New Testament is of more concern to
us, then the Law and the Old. These Hymns are proper only to Christianity,
whereas the Psalms are common to the Jews and Christians. The Psalms are
Prophesies and Predictions of Christ, who was to come; these Hymns are plain
discoveries of Christ, who is come. They are the first gratulatory Hymns, which
welcomed into the world our born Savior: And though they were most seasonable
then, when they were first composed and sung; yet we may profitably enough use
them still, as well as Hezekiah in public Service commanded the Songs of David
and Asaph to be used, which were composed long time before, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. For
the promises and performances of God, are not so restrained to particular
persons, but others also may go sharers in them, in regard of the mystical
union of all the faithful; and however the particular occasion may cease, yet
the fountain of goodness and mercy is ever the same: besides, by frequent using
of the praises of the Saints, our minds may daily more and more be inured and
enflamed with their affections. And the Church has very fitly appointed Hymns
after Lessons; for when we have heard God out of the Lessons, speaking as it
were from Heaven to our Souls, how can we do less then rise up and praise him?
and with what Hymns can we praise him better for our Salvation, then with those
which were the first gratulations of our Savior? As for the Hymn and
Benedictus of Zachary, it was indeed composed by reason of Christ's birth, and
manifestation in our flesh; which Zachary, the Author of it, Prophetically
foresaw, and therefore composed it for to entertain Christ withal. Yet though
the occasion of it was, or rather was not, particular, we may convert it to a
common use, as well as the Epistles of St. Paul, which were most of them
written upon special occasions. Neither can that occasion be indeed particular,
where the benefit is common; for the birth of Christ as much concerns us, as it
did Zachary; and therefore we may say it, or sing it, and were justly to be
blamed in case we should refuse the doing so. The 100 Psalm is joined with it,
and the Minister may make his choice of either, because both are Thanksgivings
unto God, enforced almost with the very same reasons and arguments.

RUBRIC.
Then shall be sung, or said the Apostles Creed by the Minister, and the people
standing. Except only such days as the Creed of St. Athanasius is appointed to
be read.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, Mark 9.24.
Heb. 1.2. John 14.1. Psalm. 124.8.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, John 1.18. John 14.1.

Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, Mat. 1.20, 23.
Luke 1.27, 31.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, Mat. 27.2. 1 Timothy 6.13.

He descended into Hell; the third day he rose again from the dead, Act. 2.31,
32. 1 Cor. 15.4. Ephesians. 4.9. 1 Pet. 3.19.

He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty, Act. 1.9. Ephesians. 4.9, 10. Heb. 12.2.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, Act. 1.11. Act.
^0.42. Act. 17.31.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. Act. 19.2. 1 John 5.7.

The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, Psalm. 87. Psalm. 110.3.
Isa. 54.2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.16. Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Heb. 10.22, 23, 24,
25. 1 John 1.7.

The forgiveness of sins, Luke 24.47. Act. 2.38. Colos. 2.13.

The resurrection of the body, 1 Cor. 15.

And the life everlasting, Romans 6.23.

Amen, Mark 9.24.


EXPLANATION.
This is called the Creed, or Belief, because all necessary points to be
credited or believed, in order to our Salvation, are contained in it. It is the
Key of the Holy Scriptures, an Abridgment of the Gospel; Christ taught it the
Apostles, the Apostles taught it the Church, and the Church us. Though it be
not Canonical Scripture, as to the make, yet as to the matter contained in it,
it is; for it contains in it the very Scripture, Word, and Truth of God. It is
of greater Authority then any other Ecclesiastical Traditions of this nature,
whether they are Confessions of particular Churches, or Writings of private
men. The Nicene and Athanasian Confessions, mentioned and used in our Liturgy,
are not new Creeds, but larger Explications of this. It is called the Apostles
Creed, either because they themselves used it, or because it contains the heads
of that Doctrine which they taught the world; and it is the Judgment of some
very learned men, that it is more Ancient then many writings of the New
Testament. At first perhaps it was no part of the Liturgy, or public Service,
only a prescribed Lesson for the Catechumens to be instructed in, and whereof
they were to make public rehearsal, in order to their admission unto Baptism.
There is mention made of it in the most Ancient writers of the Church; and
however some objections may be made against the Apostolicalness of it, yet
those objections certainly are not unanswerable. But however, most certain it
is, that it is so Apostolical, as to the matter, that it may without offense
carry its denomination from the Apostles, and be called their Creed; because it
is a most excellent Epitome and Abridgment of their Doctrine, contrived in a
very near resemblance to their Language, and a great part of it undoubtedly
digested by the Apostolical Church. For if the Apostolical Churches had not
this very Creed in express words, yet they had a Creed very much resembling
this, as to the substance of the Articles, though with some few syllabical
variations. If at any time the Articles concerning the Holy Ghost, and the
Church, were omitted in the Creed, yet they were supplied from the form of
Catechizing then in use; which form was in truth a Creed, and with the
rehearsal of which the Catechumens were Baptized. Though not in Tertullian, yet
in Cyprian we find express mention of the Holy Church, Remission of sins, and
everlasting life; but then indeed, as it is noted by Jerome, all the mysteries
of the Christian Faith, were upon the matter terminated in the Resurrection of
the flesh, into which they were baptized, 1 Cor. 15.19. and with it Tertullian
concludes his rule of Faith; yet was not the Article of Life everlasting, any
after-new addition, only it was represented in a different order. Let but the
African parcels of Tertullian and Cyprian, be united together, and a Creed may
be found, as to the Essentials, conformable to this of the Apostles; and the
like may be found in the Epistles of Ignatius, who was disciple to one of them.
Neither was there any need for the Apostles, or Fathers, to commit this Creed
to writing, in regard it was the great depositum of the Church, conveyed down
from one Age to another in a Traditional way; supposed by some to be the one
Faith, mentioned Ephesians. 4.5. and the form, pattern, or summary of sound words,
mentioned 2 Timothy 1.13. the body of Faith made up in all its proportions,
mentioned Romans 12.6. and the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints,
mentioned Jude verse. 3. This Creed, and the other two, the Nicene and the
Athanasian, which are but Explanations of this, are ordered to be said after
the Lessons, to show that Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of
God, Romans 10.17. we must first hear, and then confess; and they are ordered to
be said standing, because they are summaries of the Gospel, which was ever
rehearsed in that posture; and because the Catechumens used to make rehearsal
of their Faith in a standing posture: which posture is also significant, and
notes that gallant resolution which ought to be in us, to maintain and defend
that Faith and Religion which we profess.

The Creed Explained.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth; I, for my
self, as every Christian ought to believe for himself, do believe there is a
God, do believe God, and do believe in God; I confess him, put all my trust and
confidence in him, acknowledge my self obliged to do his will, and to obey his
commands; I own his title God, his personality Father, his power Almighty, and
admire and adore him for his operations and works, for he is the Maker of
heaven and earth. He is able to do whatever is fit for God to do; he can do
what he will, and more then he will, whatever implies not a contradiction in it
self, or argues not imperfection in him. He is so Almighty, that he is liable
to no imperfections; and his Almightiness appears remarkably in the Creation of
the World, for he is the Maker of heaven and earth. He made something of
nothing, and out of that something he made all things; the glorious Heaven,
Angels, and Spirits; the Starry Heaven, Sun, Moon, and lesser Lights, with all
the glorious Constellations; the Airy Heaven, winged Fowls, Clouds and Vapors;
Hail, and feathered Snow, Rain, Lightning, and terrible Thunder. He made also
the Earth, Land and Sea, Grass, Herbs, Plants and Trees, Beasts, Birds and
Fishes: he made Man to praise him, and glorify him in all, and for all; to
magnify God in all his works, and never to distrust him, who has proved
himself thus Omnipotent. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord; I believe
also in the second person of the Godhead, the Word and Wisdom of God; who is
styled Jesus, to note him a Savior: which name was given him by an Angel,
together with the meaning of it, Mat. 1.21. He is also styled Christ, which is
an appellative title of office and dignity, given to him for three purposes; 1.
To note him an anointed King, to judge, govern, defend us, and to save us from
danger. 2. An anointed Prophet, to teach, instruct us, and to save us from
error. 3. An anointed High Priest, to offer up himself for us, and his prayers
for us, to make Intercession to the Father for us, and to save us from sin. He
is God the Father's Only Son, not by Creation, as men are; nor by Adoption, as
good men are; nor by Office, grace and favor, as Kings and Judges are; but by
Nature, as none other are save only himself: he is God of the substance of his
Father before all Worlds, God of God, very God of very God, and a distinct
person in the Godhead from the Father, Mat. 28.19. John 1.1. He is also Our
Lord, 1. In respect of Creation, for he has dominion over us as he is God. 2.
In respect of Redemption, for he has dominion over us as he is God and Man. It
was God the Son, not God the Father, nor God the Holy Ghost, who did personally
pay the ransom of our sins, purchase our freedom from the slavery of Satan by
his own blood, and by the everlasting efficacy of the same blood once shed,
does wash and nourish us, not as his Servants, but as the Sons of God our
heavenly Father. As he is Jesus, we are to sue and seek to him for Salvation,
for there is no Salvation in any other, Act. 4.12. as he is Christ, we are to
pay all subjection to him as a King, to hear and obey him as a Prophet, to rest
upon his Sacrifice, Satisfaction and Intercession as a Priest. As he is Gods
only Son, we are to pay him that honor which we pay to the Father; and as he
is our Lord, we are to quit Sin and Satan, and to pay to him our real Service.
Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary; In this Article
is declared, how the Son of God became the Son of man, in order to make
satisfaction to God for man's sin, to reconcile God to man, and to work about
man's Redemption; to put him into a salvable condition, and to render him again
capable of those fruitions, which he in Adam had deprived himself of by his
disobedience. In this Article is to be noted more particularly, 1. The mystery
of Christ's holy Incarnation. 2ly. His holy Nativity and Circumcision, together
with his Baptism, Fasting and Temptation. This Son of God, who was very God,
begotten and not made, being of the same substance with his Father, by whom all
things were made, for us men, and for our Salvation, came down from Heaven, and
was conceived and incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
Man; and as he was made Man in her, so he was born of her: God became Man, and
yet remained God; he took our Humane nature, yet did not lay aside his Divine;
and Mary became a Mother, and yet remained a Virgin still; Christ of her took
our Humanity, without the loss of her Virginity. He was conceived without sin,
that he might cleanse and sanctify our sinful conceptions. He was born without
sin, that he might sanctify the birth of us, who are born in sin, and with
sin; and as he was sinless from his birth, so the life which he lived here on
earth, was a sinless and innocent life; that by the sinlesness and obedience of
his life, he might make some kind of amends for the sinfulness and disobedience
of ours. Yet he was Circumcised, though nothing was superfluous in him, that so
amends might be made in that part by him for Original sin, by which it is
propagated. And he was Baptized, though nothing in him was unclean, that he by
his Baptism might sanctify the element of Water, and make it, by the Holy
Spirit joined to it, virtual to cleanse us not only from Original guilt, but as
we are fitly capable, from all actual pollutions. And he was tempted, by all
those ways of Temptation which we are liable and exposed to, that he might in
his own person overcome the Tempter, and grand Seducer, and teach us by his
example how to behave our selves successfully, and to the best advantage, in
all our Temptations. By the same Holy Spirit, whereby he was conceived in the
blessed Virgin Mary's womb, is he to be conceived in our hearts; which hearts
we are to keep as pure and undefiled, as the holy Virgin was, in order to his
conception: we are to prepare Virgin hearts for Christ to be conceived and born
in, and for the Holy Ghost to overshadow; by which Virgin hearts is not to be
meant, an absolute sinless purity and innocence, which only Adam in his created
estate, and Christ could yield; but a renewed purity, and recovered Virginity
by Repentance, joined with sincere resolution and holy purposes of amendment of
life, and humility typified in the temper of Newborn babes: For these are the
only due qualifications, which can fit and prepare the Soul for the Holy Spirit
to overshadow it, and for Christ to be favored in it. As Christ took our
nature upon him, and was pleased to be born of a pure Virgin, without the help
of man, which showed him to be the true Seed of the woman, that should break
the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. so we are to pray for Gods regenerating grace,
that we may be made his children by Adoption and Grace, and be daily renewed
and changed in our Spirits, by his Holy Spirit. As Christ was Circumcised, and
by that bloody ceremony made obedient to the Law for us; so we are to pray for
the true Circumcision of the Spirit, that our hearts and all our members being
mortified from all worldly and carnal lusts, we may in all things obey Gods
blessed will. As Christ was Baptized, not to be cleansed by the waters, but to
cleanse the waters, that they might cleanse us; so we are to come to his Holy
Baptism, to be washed in those streams, the Fountain whereof he himself has
opened, and consecrated not so much for the cleansing of our bodies, and
putting off the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21. as for the sprinkling of our
hearts from an evil conscience, Heb. 10.22. that our hearts being pure, our
actions may be pure also. And when we are thus cleansed, we ought to take
special care and heed, that we return not like the Dog to lick up our vomit
again, or like the Swine to our former pollutions, 2 Pet. 2.22. and so become
the fouler for our once being cleansed, and be drowned in that Holy Laver,
which was designed for our preservation. Lastly, as Christ was tempted, and
that he might overcome the Tempter, did for our sake, and in part for our
example too, Fast even to a miracle; so we are to pray unto God for his Grace,
to direct and assist us in all our Temptations, that we may use such
abstinence, as to bring our flesh in subjection to the Spirit, and ever obey
the Godly motions of Gods holy Spirit, living in righteousness and true
holiness, to the praise and glory of him. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried; The great end and design of Christ's coming into
this world, was that he might suffer, and by his sufferings make satisfaction
to Divine Justice for man's sin. He did not suffer because he was himself a
sinner, but because he became a Surety for us, who are so. He suffered for our
sins, not for his own: He being righteous died for us, who are unrighteous, 1
Pet. 2.21, 22. this he did for our sake, and for our example and encouragement.
He has given us in himself an example of enduring the highest afflictions;
which example, so far as imitable, is to be imitated and transcribed by us, 1
Pet. 2.21. From the manner of his death we are taught the great doctrine of
Mortification, to put off the body of the sins of the flesh, Col. 2.11. to
destroy the body of sin, Romans 6.6. to put our sinful habits to a contumelious
death, to crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts; and in so doing to
conform our selves exactly to the sufferings of Christ, through all the
gradations of it, that so we may be planted with him in the likeness of his
death, Romans 6.5. As a consultation was held against Christ, as he was
apprehended, examined, accused, condemned, shamed and crucified; so strictly
and severely should we deal with our Old man, our whole body of sin: we should
consult deliberately about its execution, choose our most sober seasons for the
doing of it, when we are in the calmest temper of Soul: and we are to proceed
orderly to act against sin; to apprehend it, to stop every course and habit of
it in its career; we are to examine it by the Word of God, by the commands of
Christ, in all its variations from, and oppositions to them. This done, we are
to accuse it, and in so doing, to aggravate it with all the heightning
circumstances of guilt and danger: Then by a solemn full consent of all the
faculties, we are to condemn this dangerous Malefactor, to spit upon it with
contempt and scorn, to give it up to be crucified, never to revive again to any
vital actions. Neither are we to be thus severe against our single habit of sin
only, but against the whole body of sin, and all its parts and members. Again,
from the manner of Christ's death we are instructed further, to take up our
Cross voluntarily and cheerfully, when it is laid upon us, to follow Christ in
his sufferings, and to conform our selves really to the image of our crucified
Savior; for if we are thus partakers of his sufferings, we shall be also
partakers of his enjoyments. He went by the Cross to his Crown, passed through
ignominies and sufferings, into his Glory; so should we. Again, he was dead,
that by his dying he might destroy death, and sanctify the state of death to
all his Servants. Death lost its sting in his side, and so became to all, who
are his, but as a calm sleep. Lastly, he was buried, to show that he was really
dead; and as his body was removed out of sight, so we are to put all our sinful
habits, like dead bodies, out of the way, that they may neither offend nor
infect others. He continued some time in the Grave, to note unto us the reality
and continuance of our mortified state; and that we should not only once for
all repent and mortify, but keep in our Souls a continued death unto sin,
sincere and unfeigned, till we are risen again to the other Diviner life, to
live unto Godliness, as he rose again to live unto God. He descended into Hell,
the third day he rose again from the dead; Here began Christ's exaltation,
after his abasement and diminution: His descent into Hell, was the first part
of his advancement. As his body, not separated from his Divinity, rested in the
Grave; so his Soul, united to his Divinity, had something further to do. He
descended not to suffer, but to conquer. As he overcame the World on Earth,
Death in the Grave; so he triumphed over Satan in Hell, and within the
Territories of his own Kingdom: he went into Satan's quarters, and openly showed
him the Victory, which by death he had gotten over him, over death it self, and
over all the Powers of darkness. However, certain it is, that he remained some
time in the state of the dead, his living Soul being separated from his dead
body. This Article of Christ's descent, is as true as all the rest, though
perhaps not so capable as the rest, of any binding interpretation to be put
upon it: Therefore we pass this part of the Article by, and come to the latter
part, The third day he rose again from the dead; that is, within the space of
less then seventy two hours, and before his body saw corruption, he rose again;
that flesh, which he laid down in the Grave, he by his own power raised up
again from the Grave. As his dying showed his Humanity, so his rising again
declared his Divinity; by which Resurrection of his, not only his Godhead was
demonstrated, Romans 1.4. but the all-sufficient Sacrifice of his death and
passion for sin, was fully evidenced and declared; for had there remained but
one sin unsatisfied for, which he came to make satisfaction for, that one sin
might have kept him from rising. The Resurrection of Christ showed, that a full
satisfaction was made for sin by his death, 1 Cor. 15.17. Again, Christ's
Resurrection is the ground of ours: as Adam brought death into the world to
kill us, so Christ brought Resurrection into the world to give us life, 1 Cor.
15.22. Christ is risen as the Head, we shall follow as the Members; Christ is
risen as the First Fruits, we shall follow as the Harvest. Again, the
Resurrection of Christ is a proof of our Justification before God; for he is to
be considered as a public person, both in his Death, and in his Resurrection,
Romans 4.25. Lastly, his Resurrection from the Grave, should mind us of our
Resurrection from sin, which brought him to it. Our actual rising to new life,
is as necessary as mortification; as Christ rose from the dead to dye no more,
so we being dead to sin, should rise to newness of life, and live unto God,
Romans 6.10, 11. As he after his Resurrection appeared unto men, so should we,
and walk exemplarily before them in heavenly living. We should continue in a
sanctified state of perseverance in Godly living, till by Gods mercy we are
taken up to bliss: We should depend upon Christ for our Justification and
Sanctification, which are both of the effects of his rising. We should also
hasten our Resurrection, as he did his, and not so immerse our selves with
sorrow and humiliation, the Grave of mortified Souls, as to hinder any actions
and vital performances of the new and regenerate life. As Christ dyed, and as
we are baptized into the death of Christ; so we are to beg of God for his
grace, that we may continually mortify our corrupt affections, and being
buried with him, may pass through the grave and gate of death, to our joyful
Resurrection. He ascended into Heaven, and fitteth on the right hand of God the
Father Almighty; that is, after his Resurrection, when he had made his
appearance several times to his Apostles, to confirm them in the truth of it,
whom he had chosen for the publication of it unto the world; after he had given
them many sure proofs and evidences that he was risen, after he had talked with
them about the affairs of his Church, which should be planted and governed by
them, and of many things concerning the Gospel, and his Kingdom, and how both
his friends and his enemies should be dealt withal; after he had eaten and
drank, and familiarly conversed with them, thereby to give them all possible
assurance of the truth of his Resurrection, of his Power and Godhead, and that
he was indeed the undoubted Messiah; after that he had instructed them to tarry
at Jerusalem, to wait for the coming down of the Holy Ghost, and how to prepare
themselves for his reception; after he had reproved them for their curiosity,
and shown their vanity in expecting a Kingdom, which he never intended to set
up; then in the presence and sight of them all, he was taken up by Angels from
the earth in a bright shining cloud, which enclosed him so that they could see
him no more, Act. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. He carried up our nature, which he had
assumed, in which he suffered, and which he had raised out of the Grave, up on
high above all Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. offered it up to the Father as an
acceptable oblation, who placed it on a glorious Throne at his right hand. And
as he descended on purpose to do us good, to bestow and scatter his graces
amongst us; so he ascended also upon a good design for us, that he might send
down the Holy Ghost upon his Apostles, and by that means supply all our wants,
and do what was necessary to be done for the planting and governing of his
Church. The place he ascended from, was Mount Olivet; the place he ascended to,
was the highest Heavens. The time of his Ascension, was sourty days after his
Resurrection; the truth of it appears from the evidence of those who saw it,
and are able to give a good testimony of it; the manner of it was glorious, and
the end of it hugely advantageous, and beneficial to us. But the practical Use,
which we are to make of Christ's Ascension, and Session at the Father's right
hand, is this; 1. As we believe that he is ascended into the Heavens
corporally, so we are spiritually in hearts and minds to ascend after him, and
to dwell continually with him in Divine meditations, carrying heavenly minds in
earthly bodies; seeking, minding, savouring things above at the right hand of
God, where Christ sits, Colos. 3.1. where Christ our treasure is, there should
our hearts be also. 2. Seeing he has withdrawn his corporal presence, we are
to content our selves with his spiritual; not to hang on his bodily presence,
the presence of his Manhood, as it was visible to the eye; but to acquiesce in
his spiritual presence, the presence of his Godhead, and the presence of his
Manhood too, united to his Godhead, yet no otherwise present then spiritually
and by Faith; for though his Godhead be every where, yet his Manhood in a
corporeal and natural sense cannot be every where, but only where it is placed
at the right hand of God. Let us spiritually see him ascending, cordially
believe in him absent, wait and hope with patience for his coming again, and by
his secret mercy feel and enjoy him spiritually present with us. And seeing he
sits at Gods right hand, and is exalted with great triumph into his kingdom in
Heaven; whereby is noted his Reign, and his being invested with all power in
the union of his Regal and Priestly Office, by virtue of which he gives
commands to his Church, intercedes with God for his Church, and that so
powerfully, as actually to bestow that grace and pardon, which he intercedes
for, making continual Intercession with God, who is his Father and ours: This
should teach us, to give up our selves obediently to be ruled by him in all his
holy institutions and commands, and to be guided by all those, whom he has
placed in his Church under him to rule over us; This should also teach us, to
depend upon his Intercession, to offer up all our prayers and praises to God in
and through him only: This should teach us, to be in a readiness to receive all
Grace that shall flow from him, and to make the holiest use, and best advantage
of it. Lastly, This should teach us, to have recourse to him in all
temptations, and to persevere in despite of all assaults to the contrary; to
have our eye upon him in all that ever we do, to improve those Talents well,
which he bestows upon us: for as he is gone to Heaven, he will return again
from Heaven to judge the world. From thence he shall come to judge the quick
and the dead; The very same Jesus Christ, who is gone up to Heaven in glorious
manner, shall come one day from Heaven again in as glorious a manner to judge
us, Act. 1.11. His going up to Heaven, was not an absolute departing from us,
only he went to take possession of that Kingdom of his, which he shall exercise
to the end of the world; and then he shall return again to judge all men,
without respect of persons; all that are dead, and all that shall then be found
alive; all Nations of men in their order, and every man of every Nation, shall
give up their accounts to him, and shall receive according to what they have
done in the flesh, be it good or bad. To those who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for glory and honor, and immortality, shall be given the
reward of eternal life; but to those who are contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, the retribution shall be indignation and
wrath: tribulation and anguish shall be upon every Soul of man that does evil;
but glory, honor and peace to every man that works good, Romans 2.7, 8, 9, 10.
Now the expectation of Christ's coming to Judgment should teach us, to be
constant in making up our accounts against his coming, as persons daily
expecting a righteous, though a gracious Judge, to sit upon us. He is one, who
will come in flames of fire, and in great wrath, to take vengeance on his
Adversaries, and upon all who do not obey the Gospel; one who will not only
sift our actions, but search our very hearts and reins; who will not suffer any
one sin to be carried along under the disguise of Religion, or on confidence of
his favor, but will come from his Throne of Mercy in Heaven, and sit upon his
Throne of Justice here upon the Earth, to judge all his provokers; one who will
not be moved with passions, bribes, flatteries, to punish or reward according
to any other method or rule, but only this, of every man according to his
works, Romans 2.6. This one would think should bring us to a pious awe of him,
restrain us from sin, keep us in good courses, and make us work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling. I believe in the Holy Ghost; who is God, a
distinct person in the Godhead from the Father and the Son, and proceeding from
both. In respect of Nature, the Father is holy, and the Son holy, the Father is
a Spirit, and the Son is a Spirit; but in regard of Office, the third person in
the Trinity is eminently styled the Holy Ghost, or Holy Spirit. He is styled
the Holy, 1. From the holiness of his Nature: 2. From the holiness of his
Office; whose special Office it is to make the Church holy: The Father
sanctifies by the Son and by the Holy Ghost, the Son sanctifies from the Father
by the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost sanctifies from the Father and the Son
immediately by himself. Again, he is styled the Spirit, 1. In regard of his
Nature, which is spiritual. 2. In regard of his procession from the Father and
the Son, being as it were inspired and breathed from both. 3. In regard of his
operation and manner of working, for he inspires and breaths into us holy
motions and desires to good things, and is the Fountain and Spring of all
spiritual life in us. This Holy Spirit is holy in himself, pure from all sin,
pollution, corruption, hypocrisy, partiality, and that most eminently; and he
is the Author of all holiness and purity in us, which he works in us by two
ways of dispensation: 1. Outward, 2. Inward. His outward dispensation was in
most eminent manner, when he descended visibly upon the Apostles, filled them
with Graces, and furnished them with Powers to plant, preserve, and govern the
Church of Christ over the World. The Powers which he invested the Apostles
with, were these; 1. To preach the Gospel. 2. To baptize those Nations, which
embraced it. 3. To confirm those, whom they had baptized. 4. To admit those to
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, whom they had confirmed. 5. To
exercise the powers of the Keys in Censures, in punishing the pertinacious, and
casting those out of the Church, who would not conform to the rules and orders
of it, that so they might be ashamed, and be made to reform their wicked lives,
and be capable of being received in again by Absolution, upon their sincere
repentance evidenced by their Reformation. 6. To ordain others, and to commit
the same powers to them, which the Holy Ghost had settled in themselves, and so
to continue a settled Ministry by succession unto the end of the world. In
respect of all these forementioned donations, the Holy Ghost is styled a
Paraclete; by which word we are to understand, 1. An Advocate, 2. A Comforter,
3. An Exhorter and Instructor. Now the Holy Ghost is to be considered as an
Advocate, 1. In respect of Christ, 2. In respect of Christians. Now the Holy
Ghost is Christ's Advocate, in pleading his cause against the incredulous
world, by a threefold conviction, John 16.8. 1. Of Sin, and that great crime of
not receiving Christ, but rejecting him, who was testified and demonstrated by
the coming down of the Holy Spirit after his Ascension, to be a true Prophet.
2. Of Righteousness, to convince the world that Christ was a righteous person,
and unjustly crucified, as appeared by his Assumption into Heaven, and
participation of his Father's Glory. 3. Of Judgment, to convince all men, that
Christ, who was judged in the world, shall judge the world, and pass sentence
upon the Devil the Prince of this world, who was the first contriver of his
death, and upon all who side with him, and take his part. Again, as the Holy
Ghost is Christ's Advocate, so is he also the Advocate of all Christians; 1. In
settling a Ministry, to pray and intercede for their several Congregations, and
enabling them to form a Liturgy to be continued in the Church to that end,
thereby helping our infirmities, and teaching us to pray as we ought. 2. In
sanctifying those Prayers, which the Church daily offers up to the only true
God, by the only true Mediator Jesus Christ, that so they may be offered up
with acceptance to the Father, by Christ our Mediator. Again, as the Holy Ghost
is an Advocate, so is he also a Comforter; for by power and abilities bestowed
upon men, the comfortable news of the Gospel, the promises of pardon and grace
are divulged to those, who want comfort. Lastly, the Holy Ghost is our Exhorter
and Instructor, in exhorting us to Repentance, to fly from sin, and the wrath
to come, and to walk worthy of the great vocation and calling of our
Christianity, unto which we are called; and by exercising all external means,
which belong to his Titles and Offices, for the working of all manner of
sanctity in our hearts; and by using all inward means, secret preventions,
incitations, over-shadowings, and all other assistances, which are absolutely
necessary to beget and continue holiness in our hearts: All which do attend
upon his outward ministrations beforementioned, and constantly go along with
them, to hollow them to all worthy receivers, and obedient disciples. Now to
believe in the Holy Ghost, is to acknowledge the truth of all that is before
made mention of; and to accommodate our practice accordingly, and to conform to
this Faith: 1. By submitting our selves to those Spiritual Pastors, whom the
Holy Ghost has set over us; as they themselves are to be careful of that
Flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers. 2. By not intruding
into, and usurping upon the Sacred Function and Ministry, nor meddling in it
without a lawful call, and such as may justify it self to be from Heaven. 3.
By obeying all the several Powers, which the Church is invested with. 4. By
devout hearing the Word. 5. By due preparing our selves for Baptism, and
bringing others to it. 6. By fitting our selves for Confirmation. 7. By
examining our selves, that we may come fitly prepared to the Lords Supper. 8.
By fearing the Church Censures; and if we are at any time under them, by
Confession, Contrition, works of Mercy, and all kind of Reformation of our
lives, to labor for Absolution; and in all these humbly to beg of God his
special grace, that it may go along with all these outward ordinances; and
diligently to watch, observe, and receive it in the use of them, and to lay it
up in honest hearts, that we may bring forth fruits with patience, neither
resisting, nor repelling, nor grieving, nor quenching this Holy Spirit of God,
whereby we are sealed (if we do not betray our selves) unto the day of complete
Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints; As
the first part of the Creed was chiefly concerning God, so the latter part of
it is principally relating to the Church of God; as we begin with God in our
Confession of Faith, so we end with the Church; for unless we are of the
Church, we shall lose our interest in God. Now by Church in this place we are
to understand, a society of Believers ruled and continued according to all the
ordinances beforementioned, of the Holy Ghost's settling and establishing;
which Church is described by these three properties, Holy, Catholic, a
Communion of Saints. 1. The Church is remarkably said to be Holy, in respect of
the holy Powers and Offices, which are settled in it, and upon it; in respect
of the Holy Ghost, the author and founder of them; in respect of Christ the
Head of it, who is most holy; in respect of the Faith of the Church, which is
in it self holy, and makes us holy; in respect of that sanctity and holiness of
life, which ought to be in all the Members of it; in respect of the great
design in the first constitution of it, which was to beget and to increase
holiness. 2. The Church is remarkably said to be Catholic, which word
signifies, 1. Orthodoxal, as having Truth in it; and so it is distinguished
from the Societies of Heretics and Schismatics, wherein is error and
falsehood. 2. Universal, dispersed and extended all the world over; and so it is
distinguished from the Church of the Jews, which was an enclosure divided from
all the world beside: It is Universal also in respect of the same Faith, which
it teaches to all men, in all places, and at all times; and in respect of the
same Laws and Constitutions, according to which all Reformations ought to be
made; otherwise they will appear to be rather Innovations then Reformations, an
introducing of new things, rather then a restoring of the old. Lastly, the
Church is remarkably said to be a Communion of Saints, in respect of the
Communion of Faith and Laws, in respect of the Communion of Sanctity and
Holiness, which ought to be in all the Members of it, and in respect of the
communications of Charity; First, Corporal charity, to all the Fellow Members
of Christ that are in need; Secondly, Spiritual charity, expressed to men's
souls by advice, counsel, reprehension, spiritual conference, and in any kind
of effusion of Grace from God to us; in praying with and for one another, in
praising God with and for one another; which last is a duty continued mutually
betwixt us and the glorified Saints in Heaven, so far as is most commodious to
the condition of each. As the Saints in rest and joy, and advanced toward the
Throne of Glory in Heaven, pray for their younger brethren on Earth; so the
Saints who are yet in the Camp, and Militant on Earth, praise God for those
revelations of his Grace and Glory, which he has bestowed upon their elder
brethren in Heaven. As the Saints and Members of the Church, hold communion
with Christ the Head, have interest in all his benefits, go sharers in the
common Salvation; so do they hold communion one with another. As in the body
natural, so in Christ's mystical body the Church, there is a perpetual sympathy
between the parts; if one Member suffer, all suffer with it; if one be had in
honor, all rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12.26. Neither does death it self dissolve
this communion, for the knot of fellowship holds between the Saints departed
this world, and those who still remain in it. The departed Saints pray to God
for our good in general, and we praise God for their good in particular; we
praise God for giving them such eminent graces on Earth, and such unspeakable
glories in Heaven; in affections and hearts we converse with them, we love
their memories, use all innocent means to have their exemplary lives propounded
to us for our imitation; we desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ and
them; and we judge it the greatest honor that we can do them, to imitate their
pious and holy lives: and that we may do this, in our annual day of
commemoration for All Saints, we pray, That as God has knit together his Elect
in one communion and fellowship, in the mystical body of his Son Christ our
Lord; so he would grant us grace so to follow his blessed Saints in all
virtuous and godly living, that we may come to those unspeakable joys, which he
has prepared for them who unfeignedly love him, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
The forgiveness of sins; That is, I believe that by the death and sufferings of
Christ, there is pardon and remission to be had in the Church, for all true
penitent sinners; which pardon, all true penitens, upon exact examination of
themselves, may be able to pronounce unto themselves; but the Minister, whose
office it is upon a clear view of conscience, so far as is fairly possible, may
pronounce it more authoritatively, yet neither of them can do it infallibly: so
that as to their pronouncing, Remission of sins is not properly a matter of
Faith, neither can it well be. But the matter of Faith, which is contained in
this Article, is this; To believe that the forfeiting of our perfect unsinning
innocence in Paradise, shall not be able to exclude us from Gods favor and
grace here, nor from Heaven hereafter, if we sincerely turn from sin, and
return to God; for God is pleased to accept of Christ's sufferings, as a meet
and meritorious satisfaction for all true penitent sinners. We are born in sin,
and we grow from sin to sin, from bad to worse naturally, and it is by the
grace of God that our sins are remitted; which remission is conveyed to us,
whilst we are in the Church, and continue Church Members, by Prayer, the Word,
and the Sacraments. This Remission is not to be imputed to our merit, but to
Gods mercy, who beholds all true penitent Christians in Christ, and upon their
unfeigned repentance and amendment, reputes their sins as no sins. But that we
may have our sins pardoned and forgiven, it concerns us to set our selves
sincerely and industriously to the performance of those conditions, upon which
remission of sins is to be had; to repent of them, to reform from them, to
amend our lives, to fly sin, and to follow sanctity; to continue in a full
assurance of hope toward God, that if we perform our parts, God in Christ will
never fail in his; To pray to God in Christ daily for his mercy; to continue in
the most melting state of humility and meekness, always remembering that all the
good we do, or can attain to in this life or the next, is not to be imputed to
us, or to any thing in us, but is wholly to be acknowledged the purchase of
Christ, who has by his passion and sufferings alone, delivered us from the
punishment of our sins; which punishment is the deprivation of Gods grace here,
and of the vision of God hereafter. For all the strength, which any Christian
has to resist any sin, is but a consequent of Gods being reconciled to us in
Christ, and for his sake not imputing to us our trespasses. The Resurrection of
the body; That is, I believe that this flesh of ours, which by the curse of God
inflicted on sin, goes down to the Grave, shall most certainly be raised again
out of the Grave; though it be the punishment of all mankind, by reason of
Adam's fall, to be mortal and to dye, yet this punishment is removed, and
allayed by Christ, in respect of all his faithful Servants; the bitter and
noxious part of death is taken away, so far as concerns them; the sting of
death is plucked out, and the Grave is turned into a place of repose and rest,
where their bodies shall sleep until they are awakened unto bliss. That power
which raised up Jesus, will raise up us also. God, who fetched all out of
nothing by his word, can by the last Trump call all of us out of the dust, and
restore our bodies again to us, however they may be changed, or transmuted.
Christ is risen as the First Fruits, the heap will follow; Christ is risen as
the Head, the body will follow: and if it should not be so, our bodies, which
are both the instruments and copartners of all sin, and of all righteous
actions and sufferings, would be left unpunished and unrewarded. Now the belief
of the Resurrection of the body should teach us, to keep our bodies in a rising
condition; not by uncleanness, drunkeness, worldly-mindedness or floth, to nail
our hearts, and to fasten our affections to the Earth; but by purity, sobriety,
heavenly-mindedness, and an holy industry, to fit our bodies for that Heavenly
and Divine condition, to which after the Grave we hope to be advanced. And to
pray to God for this perfection and bliss, not only for our selves, but for all
others, who are already entered into Gods rest, that souls and bodies joined,
may dwell together in the heavenly and endless life of bliss and glory. And the
life everlasting; This is the chief good, and last end which we gain by being
in the Church, and true Members of it, Life everlasting: all men on earth have
life, but it is not everlasting life; the damned in Hell shall have that, which
is everlasting, but it shall be death rather then life, for they shall be tied
perpetually unto torments; only the true Members of the Church shall attain to
life everlasting, an inheritance purchased for them by Christ; and yet is it
also, notwithstanding that purchase, Gods free donation: if we begin with God,
and continue Members of his Church, this will be our end, Everlasting life. The
life we lead here, is finite, short, and feeble; but the life which shall
follow the Resurrection of the body, will be infinite, everlasting, an endless
state in endless bliss to every true penitent believer, and of endless woe to
all contumacious provokers. How should this teach us seriously to weigh, and
soberly to consider these two distant states, and to be careful not to forfeit
our interest in the one, nor for a little transitory joy, honor, and gain, or
ease for a few minutes here, to incur the danger of the other? How should this
teach us so to use and improve that moment of life, which we have here, that it
may be made a foundation of Eternity? God has set before us life and death,
and seems to have left either of them too, to our own option and choice. And if
it be so, then if we will not accept of the terms and conditions upon which
life is offered us, we must of necessity for our despising life, fall into
death. Certainly men, as men, were neither created nor decreed absolutely to
Heaven or Hell; for Heaven is our crown, not our fate; our reward, not our
destiny: so neither is Hell our fate or destiny, but our punishment. God, who
made us rational men, provided also for us rational rewards, and rational
punishments; so that if we miss of Heaven, happiness and bliss, and Hell become
our portion, it will be for our own default; it must be our own wretched
contempt, which deprives us of the one, and brings us to the other. There is an
Eternity of joy to be had upon a very rational and easy obedience, and an
Eternity of misery belongs only to those, who fall in love with those things
which will inevitably make them miserable. God made not death for man, but he
created Paradise for him; the everlasting fire was prepared first for the Devil
and his Angels, and ungodly men by their own words and works, made it to become
their portion; they did as it were commit a Riot upon Hell, and invade
Lucifer's peculiar. And it is a sad thing to consider, how foolish men will
strive more vehemently for a sad portion in the burning Lake, and endure more
for Hell, then for Heaven; take more pains for Eternal death, then for
Everlasting life. Now although all is true which is expressly contained in the
Creed, and we may say Amen, give our free and full assent to the truth and
certainty of it, and that there is an Everlasting life, is as true as any
Article in the Creed beside; yet it is to be presumed, that there are two sorts
of wicked men, who shall never come to this life everlasting. 1. Wicked
Infidels, who believe contrary to the Faith of Christ. 2. Wicked Believers, who
live contrary to it. They who would have life everlasting, must have it upon
those terms and conditions, upon which it is offered; that is, not only upon
the condition of a sound Faith, but also of a sincere obedience, as it is
written, If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, Mat. 19.17.

RUBRIC.
And after that, these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister
first pronouncing with a loud voice,

The Lord be with you, Ruth 2.4.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit, 2 Timothy 4.22.

Minister.

Let us pray, Psalm. 95.6.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us, Luke 18.13. Mat. 15.22. Mark 10.47, 48. Psalm. 123.3.


EXPLANATION.
The forementioned Prayers delivered in the very Scripture phrase, are
Christian Salutations very well becoming the people of God, and passing
reciprocally betwixt Priest and People: The like in ordinary use among us are,
God save you, God speed you, God bless you, Psalm. 129.8. 2 John 10. which are
not to be thought idle Complements, whereby we take the name of God in vain;
but Christian and commendable civilities and duties, which were commonly used
and practiced by Christians in the time of the Apostles, 2 John 10, 11. In the
Liturgies of St. James, Basil, Chrysostom, and the Aethiopians, the Priest was
wont to say, Peace be unto you; to which the People replied, And with thy
Spirit. In the old Liturgy of Spain called Mozarabe, (because the Christians
were mingled with Arabians) the Priest said, The Lord be with you; the People
answered, And with thy Spirit. the Priest again said, Help me brethren in your
prayers; and the People answered, The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost help thee.
Petrus Damianus wrote a whole Book upon this argument, entitled, The Lord be
with you. It was used in the Latin Church, ever since their Liturgy was
composed by Damasus, and supposed to be deduced out of the Greek Church into
the Latin; it is of very ancient use, and is one of the first Formula's of
devotion used in the Christian Church; at first it belonged only to the
Ministers of the lower Order; and when the Bishop did officiate, he used in
place thereof, Peace be unto you; but in the Braccarian Council it was decreed,
that the Bishop and Presbyter should use one and the same form, and determined
the form to be this, The Lord be with you; adding this, As it is used in all
the Orient: which shows the custom to be changed since Chrysostom's time, or
else we must reject a great part of his Works for counterfeit. Epiphanius
says, that this form of Salutation was derived from our Savior's first
greeting of his Apostles, after his Resurrection, John 20.19. However, it did
anciently denote a transition from one part of the Service unto another, as it
is here applied by our Church for the very same purpose. These mutual and
reciprocal Salutations, were prudently and Christianly made a part of the
public Service, to continue that agreement and love, which ought to be between
Pastor and People; and the very order of it shows, that it is the Ministers
office to begin, and the peoples duty to correspond in all good affections and
kindness; when the Minister is as Paul, the people should be as Galathians,
chap. 4.15. not only reverence his place, but also love his person: The Pastor
cannot wish a better wish then this, The Lord be with you; neither can the
people make a fitter reply then this, And with thy Spirit: To note, that he is
to offer up a spiritual Service and Sacrifice unto God, and to do it ardently
and affectionately; which he cannot do, unless God be with him, by his Grace
and holy Spirit to aid and assist him. Now Christ has promised to be with his
Apostles and their successors, unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. to be
with his Church in her devotions, in the midst of us, or amongst us, when we
offer up our Services to him: but if our Spirits be not right fixed, so as to
intend and mind what we are about, how can God be with us? How can God be with
our Spirits, if our Spirits are not with God? How can God be in the midst of
us, when we are not in the midst of our selves? Therefore this clause, Let us
pray, is very often repeated in the Service, upon any no^ table transition from
one eminent part of Service to another, to fix us to our devotions, and to make
us the more intent upon what we do; for we are apt to be dull enough in Sacred
duties, unless we are frequently called upon to mind seriously what we are
about. It was anciently the Deacons office to pronounce it, and therefore he
was said to preach, or to proclaim the Service; for it was his office by loud
voice, or proclamation, to warn the people in several parts of the Service,
what was done, or to be done, that accordingly they might order themselves both
in their hearts, and in their bodies, suitable to that which was done or
performed by Christ's Ministers, that so all things might be done with good
order, and due reverence. The Heathens in their Religious Offices had a custom,
not much differing from this; for they had their Preachers and Proclaimers of
their Service for the same purpose, to regulate the carriage and behavior of
the people, and to prevent confusion. The three following Versicles, Lord have
mercy, etc. were called by the Ancients, the Lesser Litany; and they are fitly
placed before the Lords Prayer, because in our resort to him in Prayer, it is
very expedient that we first implore the ^ercy and assistance of the Trinity,
to whom we pray.

RUBRIC.
Then the Minister, Clerks, and People shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud
voice.

See before, page 18, 19.
Our Father, great in Creation, gracious in Love, rich in Inheritance; which
art in Heaven, the Glass of Eternity, the Crown of pleasure, the Storehouse of
felicity; Hallowed be thy Name, in us, by us, upon us, in our words, actions,
lives; that it may be to us Honey in the mouth, Melody in the ear, Jubilee in
the heart. Thy Kingdom come, of Power to defend us, of Grace to sanctify us,
of Glory to crown us. Let it be to us pleasant without mixture, calm without
disturbance, secure without loss. Thy will be done, not ours; as in Heaven, by
the holy Angels, so on Earth, by men, that we may hate what thou hate, love
what thou love, and do nothing but what is pleasing unto thee. Give, for
every good gift is thine, we have nothing from our selves, but crave all from
thee; us, as necessity makes us pray for our selves, so charity for others;
this day, all the time of our living here; our, which we have a lawful and just
title to; daily, what is sufficient for our necessity, not superfluity; to
supply our wants, not our wantonness; bread, what is necessary for our bodies
or our souls, Victual, Doctrinal, Sacramental bread. And forgive us our debts,
whatever sins we have committed against thee, our neighbor, or our selves. As
we forgive our debtors, who have injured us in our bodies, goods, or name. And
lead us not, suffer us not to be led, into temptation, of the world, the flesh,
the Devil. But deliver us from evil, present, past, to come. Amen, So be it.

The Doxology is here and elsewhere omitted, because in St. Luke's Gospel it is
not any part of the Prayer, Luke 11.2, 3, 4. and Mr. Calvin does acknowledge it
not to be extant in any Latin copies; it was supposed to be added by the Greek
Church, but never used in the Latin. However, our Bible in St. Matthew
received it, and no Minister is restrained from the use of it in Divine Service.

RUBRIC.
Then the Priest standing up shall say,

O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.

Answer.

And grant us thy salvation, Psalm. 85.7.

Priest.

O Lord, saze the King, 1 Samuel 10.24. 1 Timothy 2.2. Psalm. 21.1.

Answer.

And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee, Psalm. 4.1. Psalm. 30.10. Psalm.
109.26.

Priest.

Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answer.

And make thy chosen people joyful, Psalm. 132.9.

Priest.

O Lord, save thy people.

Answer.

And bless thine inheritance, Psalm. 28.9.

Priest.

Give peace in our time, O Lord, 2 King. 20.19. Psalm. 122.6.

Answer.

Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Exodus 14.14. Nehem. 4.20. Isa. 31.4.

Priest.

O God, make clean our hearts within us.

Answer.

And take not thy holy Spirit from us, Psalm. 51.10, 11.


EXPLANATION.
The forementioned Prayers are all agreeable to Scripture, of Divine
derivation, and because they are most what taken out of the Book of Psalms, the
Priest is ordered to stand up at the reading of them; they are short, and in
that respect conformable to Scripture pattern, and Primitive practice. The
interchangable way of praying is used here, and often elsewhere in our Divine
Offices, which is agreeable to Primitive practice also; and the end of it is,
to refresh the peoples attention, to teach them their part in the public
Prayers, to unite their affections, and to keep them in a league of perpetual
amity. In these Prayers we pray first for the King, next for the Ministers of
Christ, Priests and Deacons, and in the last place for the People; and in all
we follow that excellent pattern, which was set us by the Royal Prophet David,
Psalm. 132.1, 9. And although it may be our good happiness to live in a time of
Peace, yet we pray constantly for Peace in our time, in the same sense as we
pray in the Lords Prayer for daily bread, when we have it by us; we pray that
it may come where it is not, and that it may continue where it is; we pray also
for the blessing of peace, as well as for peace it self. And although we pray
in express terms for peace in our time, yet we do not forget posterity, only we
dare not presume that it shall remain with us, with her wings clipped, for ever;
as we ask for bread this day, and yet we neglect not to morrow, only we follow
the rule of our Savior, who forbids us anxiously to take care for to morrow.
And whereas it is added in the foregoing Prayers, Because no other fights for
us, but only thou, O God: our meaning is, that we fear not War, but hope for an
eternal Peace of God to defend us; we acknowledge him our Shield, our
Watchtower, and our Keeper, Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 121.4. Psalm. 127.1. Psalm. 73.25.
and that there is none that holds with us, but Michael our Prince, Dan. 10.21.
that is, Christ. Though Angels and men may fight in our quarrel, yet they all
do it but as God's Instruments; God only fights for us as principal Agent: He
it is, who teaches our hands to War, and our fingers to fight, Psalm. 18.34.
And in regard that without Christ's assisting us with his holy Spirit, we can
do nothing, for he is first and last, we can neither begin nor end well without
him; therefore as we begin, so we end with God: First, we desire God to be with
us, and with our Spirit; and in the last place, we desire of God that he would
not take his holy Spirit from us.

RUBRIC.
Then shall follow three Collects; The first of the day, which shall be the
same that is appointed at the Communion; The second for Peace; The third for
Grace to live well. And the two last Collects shall never alter, but daily be
said at Morning Prayer throughout all the year, as follows; all kneeling.

The second Collect for Peace.
O God, who art the author of peace and lover of concord, 1 Cor. 14.33. 2 Cor.
13.11. in knowledge of whom stands our eternal life, John 17.3. whose service
is perfect freedom, Luke 1.74. John 8.32, 36. Romans 6.18. 1 Cor. 7.22. Defend us
thy humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, Psalm. 31.3, 4, 5. that we
surely trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries,
Psalm. 125.1. Psalm. 118.8, 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 62.6, 7, 8. through the might of
Jesus Christ our Lord, Act. 4.12. Amen.

The third Collect for Grace.
O Lord our heavenly Father, Mat. 6.26. Almighty and everlasting God, Genesis
17.1. Genesis 21.33. who have safely brought us to the beginning of this day,
Psalm. 22.9, 10. Psalm. 3.5. defend us in the same with thy mighty power, Psalm.
62.2. and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of
danger, Mat. 6.13. Psalm. 19.12, 13. 2 These. 3.3. Psalm. 17.5. Genesis 20.6. but
that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that is
righteous in thy sight, Psalm. 17.5. Prove. 20.24. Psalm. 5.8. Psalm. 119.5.
through Jesus Christ our Lord, John 14.13. Amen.


EXPLANATION.
Collects are so called, because they are Prayers in short sums, containing
much matter in few words, like so many choice Flowers gathered and collected
out of the Scriptures Garden, and bound up in little Posies to be offered and
presented to God by Jesus Christ. The first Collect here mentioned for the day,
is always fitted to the day, and framed for the most part in reference to
something remarkable in the Epistle and Gospel for the day, which the Collect
is set before. The second Collect is for Peace, because we cannot well pray,
nor offer up an acceptable Sacrifice to God without Peace; where there is no
Peace, there is no Piety, Godliness, nor Honesty; therefore we pray for Peace,
that the rest may be preserved, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. The third Collect is for Grace
to live well, because if there be no Peace with God by holy life, there can be
none with man; There is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 48.22. Peace and Truth,
Isa. 39.8. Peace and Righteousness, Psalm. 85.10. Peace and Holiness, Heb.
12.14. are joined by God in Scripture, and by us should not be parted. Our
Religion, if truly Christian, is pure and peaceable, Jam. 3.17.

RUBRIC.
In Quires and places where they sing, here follows the Anthem. Then these
five Prayers following are to be read here, except when the Litany is read; and
then only the two last are to be read, as they are there placed.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the
only Ruler of Princes, who do from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon
Earth; Most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, and so replenish him with the grace of
thy holy Spirit, that he may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way:
endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long
to live, strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies; and
finally after this life he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Royal Family.
ALmighty God, the fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee to bless
our gracious Queen CATHERINE, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family:
Endue them with thy holy Spirit; enrich them with thy heavenly grace; prosper
them with all happiness; and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Clergy and people.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; send down upon
our Bishops, and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the
healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon
them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor of
our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer of St. Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord to make our
common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests, Mat. 18.20. John
14.13. Fulfill now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may
be most expedient for them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth,
and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.
THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.


EXPLANATION.
Touching the variety of Service, Anthems and Hymns to be sung by way of
Antiphony or Response, I have spoken something before, and therefore shall say
nothing in this place. Indeed here I might have inserted the Anthems, which are
daily used in the Cathedral and most eminent Churches, but I considered it to
be needless, in regard persons upon enquiry may meet with them bound up all
together. The forementioned Prayers I have not here Scriptur'd out, because
most of them, as to the matter and substance of them, will fall within the
Litany, which I shall warrant by Scripture sufficiently. But here let it be
noted, that we pray in particular for Kings, in pursuance of that precept of
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. which is pressed and urged with this reason,
that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; which
can hardly be done, if Kings and eminent persons in Authority, do not help
toward it. Good Kings promote Religion wicked Kings persecute it: Josiah and
Hezekiah did increase true worshippers, as Jeroboam did increase and multiply
false and Schismatical ones. A good King, is a very great blessing; but so
unhappy are we, that we cannot know the worth of him, unless it be in the want
of him. We pray for the Church, which is excellently described by Bishops,
Curates, and the people committed to their charge, all which make up a Church
rightly constituted; and Ignatius the Disciple of St. John the Evangelist,
tells us, that there can be no truly constituted Church without a Bishop. By
Curates here are not meant Stipendiaries, but all Ministers to whom the Bishop
has committed the cure and care of Souls. For the right constituting of a
Church, and for the preserving of it when it is constituted and settled, we
pray for the healthful Spirit of Gods grace to be poured down upon all, who
profess Christ, and embrace Christianity with sincerity. The terms wherein we
pray, may seem strange, in regard we present our prayers to the Almighty and
everlasting God, who only works great marvels; but this expression has a
peculiar reference to Gods sending down of his holy Spirit upon the Apostles,
whereby they were enabled to speak in all Languages the wonderful works of God,
Act. 2.11. and to consirm that Doctrine by Miracles, which they taught the
world. The Prayer of St. Chrysostom, who lived about the fourth Century, is
grounded upon Mat. 18. v. 19, 20. and may be met with word for word in his
Liturgy. We begin and end the Morning Service with the Apostle; as we begin the
Exhortation in an Apostolical style, so we conclude the Prayers with an
Apostolical Prayer; and conclude most of our Prayers and Collects with this
clause, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, because there is no coming to God but by
Christ; what we ask (as we ought) in his Name, God will give us for his sake.
He is our Jacobs Ladder, by whom our Prayers ascend to God, and Gods blessings
descend to us; all good things come from God the Father, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

RUBRIC.
Here ends the Order of Morning Prayer throughout the year.


EXPLANATION.
The Morning Prayer intended in this order, is that which I have before
explained, which did usually begin at six in the morning, and does still in the
Cathedral Churches, where the Canonical hours are punctually observed: Now
every Canonical or greater hour, did contain so many lesser hours; from six in
the morning to nine, was the first hour; from nine to twelve, was the third;
from twelve to three afternoon, was the sixth; from three to six, was the
ninth, etc.

RUBRIC.
The Order for Evening Prayer daily throughout the Year.


EXPLANATION.
THe Evening Service is exactly the same with the Morning; as the Jews had
their daily Sacrifice, a Lamb for the Morning, and a Lamb for the Evening,
Exodus 29.38. so we Christians, in a more Spiritual sense, have the same
Sacrifice to offer up to God by Christ continually in the Morning, and in the
Evening; only here are two Collects to be taken notice of, which are not in the
Morning Service; as also the Hymns and Psalms after the first and second Lesson.

After the first Lesson, Magnificat, S. Luke 1.46. Cantate Domino, Psalm. 98.
After the second Lesson, Nunc dimittis, S. Luke 2.29. Deus misereatur, Psalm.
67.
After this the Creed, the lesser Litany, the Lords Prayer, and the following
Responses, all to be ranked and placed in that order as they stand in the
Evening Service, without either Scriptural Notes, or Explanation: After this
follows the Collect for the day, and then two other Collects proper for the
Evening Service.

RUBRIC. The second Collect at Evening Prayer, for Peace.
O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed, Jam. 1.17. 2 Cor. 3.5. Isa. 26.12. Give unto thy servants that peace
which the world cannot give, 2 These. 3.16. John 14.27. that both our hearts may
be set to obey thy Commandments, Psalm. 40.8. Psalm. 37.31. Psalm. 119.36. Deuteronomy.
5.29. and also that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may
pass our time in rest and quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen. Psalm. 3.5, 6, 7. Psalm. 4.8. Luke 1.73, 74, 75.

RUBRIC. The third Collect, for aid against all perils.
LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, Psalm. 18.28. Psalm. 91. and by
thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the
love of thy only Son, our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.


EXPLANATION.
Out of the 91 Psalm this Prayer may be enlarged, as there shall be occasion in
our private Devotions; in which Psalm there is mention of the terrors by
night, and of the Pestilence walking in darkness; and therefore Evening and
Night Prayers, are certainly a good defensative against both. What remains of
the Evening Service, is the same with that of the Morning, and concludes in the
same manner.

Hereunto is added by way of Appendix, these following Paraphrases.
1. A Paraphrase upon Psalm. 95.
Verse. 1. THe great God of Heaven is he, from whom all our deliverance and
strength does come; O let us uniformly join in praising and glorifying his Name.

Verse. 2. Let us make our daily constant addresses to him, with all the
acknowledgments and expressions of thankful hearts.

Verse. 3. For he is the Supreme God of Heaven and Earth, the only super-eminent
Monarch over all Powers and Dignities, to whom Angels in Heaven are Ministers,
and the mightiest Princes upon the Earth are Vicegerents.

Verse. 4. The bowels and bottom of the Earth are in his disposal, and so are
the loftiest and stoutest Hills; by which it is also intimated, that the
meanest and lowest men or creatures on Earth, are particularly ordered by his
providence in all that befalls them here, and the mightiest men in the world
are bounded and governed by him.

Verse. 5. It is he, that framed the whole Orb of the Sea and dry Land, and so
contrived them the one within the bowels of the other, that they should not
incommode each the other, but both together make up one useful Globe for men,
and all other creatures to inhabit.

Verse. 6. O let us jointly adore, praise, and pray unto him, and make the
members of our bodies, partners and witnesses of the real devotion of our
hearts; let us join inward and outward reverence together, in the most submiss
and lowliest gestures, thereby signifying and expressing the sincere humility
of our Souls, which is a tribute most justly due to him, who is the great Lord
and Creator of all.

Verse. 7, 8. And although we have often rebelled against him, and so have often
deserved his dereliction, and as often smarted for it; yet if now at length we
shall be wrought upon by his calls and warning, and perform unto him sincere
obedience, he is most ready to accept us, to take us into his care and
protection; and to secure us from all our enemies.

Verse. 9. But let not us, like our provoking forefathers, who being delivered
by him, sinned yet more against him, after we have so liberally tasted of his
power, goodness, and long-sufferance, and after his many gracious calls
afforded us to Repentance, rebel against him, and provoke his wrath, by
imitating them in their ingratitude and impenitence.

Verse. 10, 11. For forty years together, wherein for their sins God detained
and perplexed them in the wilderness, they did frequently provoke God to
indignation, and made him resolve that they were a stupid Idolatrous people,
preferring the worship of false Gods and Devils, before the obedience and
worship of him the only true God of Heaven and Earth; therefore being as it
were tired out with their continued provocations, God obliged himself by an
Oath irreversibly, that of the many thousands which came out of Egypt, only
two persons, who were grown up to be men, should enter the Land of Promise: O
let not us follow them in their sins, lest we follow them also in their
punishments, and so fall short of Heaven, as they did of Canaan.

2. A Paraphrase upon Benedictus, Luke 1. verse. 68.
Verse. 68. ALl glory, honor and praise be unto the great Lord and gracious God
of his chosen people and select inheritance, for he has performed his promise
so often made to them, by his gracious Visitation, in bringing them out of
Egypt formerly by a temporal deliverance, which did pre-figure a greater
deliverance to be wrought by Christ the promised Messiah, who is shortly to be
born.

Verse. 69. Of David's Family, and invested with all power, honor, glory,
dignity and triumph, to be a King, Ruler, and eminent deliverer of his people,
whose Kingdom is not Secular, but Spiritual.

Verse. 70, 71. Of whom honorable mention is made by all the holy Prophets of
God, speaking of him as with one mouth, from the beginning of that age, which
was before the coming of the Messiah, unto this present time. The end of whose
coming is to save us from all our spiritual enemies, sins and dangers, by
taking upon him our nature, and in it performing perfect unsinning obedience,
by dying upon the Cross for us, and by giving us precepts and rules by their
own inward goodness most agreeable to our reasonable nature, for the purifying
of our affections, and for teaching and instructing us to lead pure lives.

Verse. 72. By all which God has made good his signal promise of mercy, made to
the holy Fathers and Patriarchs, wherein both themselves and their Seed were
highly concerned.

Verse. 73. Especially that great and gracious Covenant of mercy, which he made
to Abraham and his Seed in a Spiritual sense, and ratified and confirmed by the
Sanction of an Oath.

Verse. 74, 75. Namely, that he would give us power, ability and grace, in and
from the Messiah revealed, to obey and attend him in a sincere performance of
all duties to God and man, and cheerfully and constantly to persevere therein,
being by him rescued and secured from all dangers of enemies without us, though
not altogether from those, which may be founded in our selves, in our own
negligences and miscarriages.

Verse. 76. And thou Child (meaning John the Baptist) shall be a wonderful
person, and extraordinary Prophet of God; for thou shall foretell Judgments on
the Nations, if they repent not speedily, and in a signal manner shall point
out Christ, being his immediate forerunner, and shall preach Repentance and
amendment of life, thereby to fit and prepare men for him.

Verse. 77. Teaching all men, that in Christ there is a possibility for sinners
to obtain Salvation, and to have their sins pardoned, upon their Repentance and
New life.

Verse. 78. Which is a special act of compassion, and signal mercy in God;
through which mercy the Messiah, who is called the Dayspring by the Prophets,
is come from Heaven to visit us, and to abide amongst us.

Verse. 79. And to shine forth to blind ignorant mortals, and obdurate
worldlings, who lived in a state of sin and death; and to bring them and us
into the way of Sanctity and Holiness, which leads to Salvation and life
eternal.

3. A Paraphrase upon Psalm. 100.
Verse. 1, 2 O Let all the people in the world bless, worship and praise, and
offer up their Prayers and Supplications to the great God of Heaven; let them
resort daily to his Sanctuary, and constantly attend his Service, and account
it the most estimable and delectable task, and the most renowned and most
glorious employment, which they can possibly undertake.

Verse. 3. For this is the only way to converse with the great and glorious, and
omnipotent Creator of all things, to whom we owe all that we have, and all that
we are; to him we owe our being, conduct, and preservation, and to him we are
obliged to pay all the obedience and observance, which the meekest creatures in
nature pay to those, who have the care and conduct of them.

Verse. 4. O let us make our solemn addresses to his Sanctuary, where his Divine
Majesty is signally pleased to exhibit himself, and to testify his peculiar
residence, and favorable audience to them, who assemble there. Thither let us
come with all the humility and devotion of loyal and thankful hearts, and
praise and magnify his Name for all the mercies which we have ever received
from him.

Verse. 5. For to do this, we have all imaginable obligations, not only that of
his Sovereign dominion over all, to which all the performances of our lives are
but a most unproportionable tribute; but also his abundant benignity, his rich
promises of a never-failing mercy, and his constant fidelity of performing to
every man, who is fitly qualified for receiving it, the utmost that he ever
promised to any.

4. A Paraphrase on Magnificat, Luke 1.
Verse. 46, 47. MAry the blessed Virgin, and mother of the Lord Jesus, brake out
into this holy Hymn of praise and thanksgiving, saying, All the faculties of my
Soul, my affections and understanding, have reason to bless and praise the name
of God, and to return great thanks unto him, for I have received great things
from him; I my self will praise him, and will not do it only by another; as I
have tasted liberally of his bounty, so will I in my own person perform this
duty. His benefits are so great and so good, so manifest and so manifold, that
I cannot utter them with my tongue, and therefore must devoutly ponder on them
in my heart. I will give him my Soul, the best thing that I have, who has
given to me all that I am or have; I will praise him cordially, unfeignedly,
without hypocrisy, with all intention in my understanding, with all devotion
in my affection; not with a divided heart, but with my whole heart will I
praise him: I will make him, who is great in himself, to be reputed so of
others; I will magnify him, and magnify my self too in the doing of it. He is
a Lord able to help, and he is a Savior as willing as he is able; I adore his
greatness, I joy in his goodnes^, and whatever I take joy in beside, it is only
for his sake. He is my mighty Savior and deliverer, saving me both from sin
and danger.

Verse. 48. He has done the greatest honor to me, the unworthiest of all his
Servants, that was ever done to any; He has s^ken pity of the wretched
condition and state which I, the daughter of David's Seed, was brought into,
and has not disdained my poverty, but has been pleased to make choice of me
for a vessel of Grace, in a very great work: He has looked upon me in my
abased condition, with a most gracious eye, and has not only vouchsafed to
make me his Child, but the Mother of my Maker; so that all posterities shall
look upon me as a most happy person, and most highly dignified by God of any.

Verse. 49. The omnipotent God of Heaven has done mavelous things in me, has
honored me above imagination; has so blessed me, as to make me a Virgin the
Mother of the most Blessed, in whom all Nations of the Earth are blessed, and
his Name shall be ever blessed for it.

Verse. 50. For in me he has accomplished the promised mercy made to Abraham,
saying, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee; which abundant
kindness is not to me only, but ^o all who obey and serve him humbly from time
to time, to help and comfort them, to scatter and confound all their foes, and
especially to make good his promise to them, touching the Messiah and Savior
of the world.

Verse. 51. The great and proud designer-of the world, are so far from being
favored, that they are manifestly opposed and confounded by him; and by his
only power, without any helper, has he now wrought a great and glorious work.
He has established the Kingdom of Christ, and has overthrown all the counsels
and endeavors of his enemies, and has disappointed all, who are proud in the
imagination of their own hearts.

Verse. 52. It is ordinary with him to abase the lofty Atheists, however high
they are raised in might and power; and to advance humble persons, though they
are of never so low degree.

Verse. 53. He takes the poor, who depend upon him, into his protection, and
replenisheth them with all necessaries, when they call upon him; whereas the
rich men of the world, who trust in their uncertain riches, are often brought
into want and beggary.

Verse. 54, 55. He has now performed his promise made to Abraham and his Seed;
has exhibited to them, and to all the believing world, the great promised
mercy; and has made such a provision for them, which shall never fail, having
sent the Messiah, the Savior of the world so long expected, which is a mercy
that shall never be taken from us: Therefore for this unspeakable mercy, and
for all mercies flowing from this, Glory shall be ascribed to God in all the
Churches of his Saints, and that for ever.

5. A Paraphrase upon Psalm. 98.
Verse. 1, 2. IT is now an opportune season to praise and magnify the great God
of Heaven, for all his miraculous deliverances; but especially for the glorious
conquests of the Messiah, who by his own power, and by virtue of his most
perfect righteousness, has obtained for the Humane nature, which he assumed,
and for his whole Church, Victory over all his enemies, and eternal Glory. He
has made a conquest over the Grave, by rising triumphantly out of it, and
thereby has given us a pawn and pledge of our Resurrection. This is a new work
indeed, and deserves a new Song to be sung in all Ages, by all the regenerated
part of Mankind, who are renewed according to Christ Jesus, the most glorious
exemplar of all the Regenerate.

Verse. 3. This mighty work of God, in raising the Messiah from the dead, and
the completion of his predictions and promises therein, his goodness and mercy,
and Evangelical righteousness, by which he is pleased to justify sinful men,
through the merits of his Son's most perfect righteousness, embraced by a
lively Faith, God would have to be published and proclaimed, by the preaching
of the Gospel to all the men in the world.

Verse. 4. And not published only as a Miracle, though of most stupendous
nature, but as an act of infinite goodness and promised mercy, and of great
fidelity in performing it too; the benefits whereof were first reached forth to
his own peculiar people the Jews, and afterward to be published to the utmost
Nations of the world, who have all their parts in the Redemption from sin and
Satan achieved and wrought by it.

Verse. 5, 6, 7. This is true matter of the greatest joy and exultation to all
men, and deserves to be celebrated in the most solemn manner, with all the
Instruments of Music used in the Service of God; and all are little enough to
express the Glory of the work, and the infinite advantages designed to us by
Christ thus entering upon his Regal Office, in order to subdue all the world to
the power of the Gospel, which is the Scepter of his Kingdom. For this we
should praise him in our contemplations and actions, words and works, lips and
life, being all of us as so many spiritual Temples of God, and Timbrels of the
Holy Ghost.

Verse. 8, 9, 10. All the habitable world, the very Heathens, who have been long
under the servitude of their false Idol worships, shall now be redeemed from
that slavery of sin and Satan; the Idol Oracles and Temples shall all be
destroyed, and the Doctrine of the true God, and practice of Piety, Justice,
and Charity, shall be set up in their stead, and thereby a most happy joyful
Reformation be wrought amongst men; which certainly deserves all the
acknowledgments of humble and thankful hearts, and lays obligations upon us, to
ascribe all glory to God in all the Churches.

6. A Paraphrase upon Nunc dimittis, Luke 2.
Verse. 29. O Lord, seeing thou have in great mercy fulfilled thy gracious
promise revealed to me touching the Messiah, I am heartily content now to dye.

Verse. 30. And needs must I dye happy and contented, who have seen with mine
eyes the Messiah and Savior of the world, the great means and glorious
instrument of man's Salvation.

Verse. 31. Whom thou have so long promised, and now exhibited to be seen by
all; which Salvation thou had ordained from everlasting, to be made known in
due time to all Nations, and to make them partakers of it.

Verse. 32. That there might be a light afforded to the Gentile world, to reveal
to them Gods righteousness, and that way of living which is to God most
acceptable; who after he has reformed the Religion of the Jews, teaching them
substantial Duties instead of Ceremonial observances, was to bring in the
Gentiles to embrace the same Religion, and so to bring much glory and honor to
all of that Nation, and of all Nations in the world, who would receive him; for
which unspeakable mercy, all Nations in the world are to ascribe all glory to
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in all the Churches.

7. A Paraphrase upon Psalm. 67.
Verse. 1. THe great and good God of Heaven pardon our sins, supply our wants,
bestow his blessings both spiritual and temporal upon us, behold us with favor
and acceptance, and for ever continue them unto us.

Verse. 2. This may be a means of propagating the fear, worship, and Service of
the true God, to all the Heathen world, when they shall see and consider the
eminent miraculous acts of thy providence (O God) over us, in delivering us
from great dangers and distresses, which have been upon us; when they shall
behold the wonderful order and means, which thou observest in governing of thy
Church, as well in regard of thy Word and Laws, as thy Works and Miracles.

Verse. 3. This universal Reformation and acknowledgment of the one true God of
Heaven and Earth, is a mercy so much to be wished for and desired by every
pious man, that I cannot but give my suffrage to it, and most affectionately
call upon all to join in this wish, and to beseech God that his Kingdom may be
enlarged, and that all the Nations in the world, Jews and Gentiles, may join in
the Service and Worship of him.

Verse. 4. And it must needs be matter of infinite joy and exultation to all
Nations, when they shall be admitted to so high an honor, as to be ruled and
directed by God, to be governed by his most righteous way of Justice in the
Kingdom of the Messiah, by Laws and Statutes so admirably good, and agreeable
to our interests, and by the administration of his works of providence so
admirably wise and just, that all the world both in prudence, care of, and love
to themselves, are obliged with joy to submit to the setting up of this Kingdom
in their hearts.

Verse. 5. And it would be an happy and blessed thing, if all the world would be
duly sensible of it, and all join to acknowledge, worship, serve and obey the
true God, and so partake of this great mercy, and be induced to magnify his
Name for it.

Verse. 6. For his mercies are continually afforded to all; rain from heats,
fruitful seasons, and peculiar acts of his providence, are such as may oblige
the most Heathen men in the world to acknowledge, bless, and give up themselves
to the obedience of him. And it is our duty continually to pray unto him, that
he would bestow his Benediction both upon us, and upon all that which he has
so richly afforded us.

Verse. 7. And our prayer shall be, that the God of Heaven would crown us with
his blessings, and that all the most barbarous people in the world, may be
brought in to acknowledge and worship him, and to pay all uniform obedience and
subjection to him. To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

The Creed of St. Athanasius.
RUBRIC.
Upon these Feasts; Christmas Day, the Epiphany, St. Matthias, Easter Day,
Ascension-day, Whitsunday, St. John Baptist, St. James, St. Bartholomew, St.
Matthew, St. Simon and St. Jude, St. Andrew, and upon Trinity- Sunday, shall be
sung or said at Morning Prayer, in stead of the Apostles Creed, this Confession
of our Christian Faith, commonly called the Creed of St. Athanasius, by the
Minister and people standing.

Quicunque vult.
WHosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic Faith, Heb. 11.6. Jude verse. 3. Heb. 10.23.

By Catholic Faith we are to understand, the Faith of the Church Universal,
which is opposed to the Faith of Heretics, Jews, Turks, and Pagans.

Which Faith, except every one do keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly, Ephesians. 4.5. Jude verse. 20. Act. 15.9. John 3.18.
Mark 16.16.

Faith may be diverse in respect of the subject, or believers, but not in
respect of the object, or thing believed; for there is but one Faith, Ephesians.
4.5. Therefore this Faith is to be kept whole, we are not to divide Christ, 1
Cor. 1.13. and this Faith, if kindly received and embraced, purifies the heart,
and therefore it is to be kept undefiled, Act. 15.9. and upon this account is
it styled, the most holy Faith, Jude verse. 20. Therefore St. Augustine has
expressly declared, That a good life is not only inseparable from Faith, but
that Faith it self is a good life. To believe in God and Christ, is to do the
declared will of the one, and the commands of the other: It is not enough to
profess like Christians, and to live like Heathens; to be Christians in name,
and Heathens in manners; to profess to know God, and in our works to deny him,
Tit. 1.16.

And the Catholic Faith is this, That we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity, 1 John 5.7. Revel. 4.8. Mat. 28.19. Romans 11.36.

Neither confounding the persons: nor dividing the substance.

The Jews and Turks have a Faith, such as it is, for they worship one God; and
many of them keep that Faith whole, and in a sense undefiled; for as they
believe one God, so they live according to what they believe. The mere Pagans
and Heathens have a Faith too, for they worship more Gods then one; they will
rather admit of too many, then none at all: few Atheists are to be met with
amongst any of these, as Atheism stands in direct opposition to a Deity. Yet
all Jews, Turks and Pagans, may be termed Atheists and Infidels, in opposition
to the Christian Religion, in regard they all deny the Trinity of Persons in
the Unity of the Godhead, which all sound Christians do believe, worship, and
adore.

For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the
Holy Ghost.

But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one:
the Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.

Such as the Father is, such is the Son: and such is the Holy Ghost, Mat.
28.19. 1 John 5.7. Heb. 1.3. John 10.30. Philip. 2.6.

The doctrine of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Godhead and Divine
Essence, is the peculiar doctrine of Christians, and that which remarkably
distinguishes the Christian Religion from all other Religions in the world.
Though all the world besides opposed it, yet Christians have ever believed and
embraced it; and as they have believed, so they have been baptized, and have
always given glory to God, one in Essence, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three
in Person; always acknowledging in the blessed Trinity and unspeakable Deity,
one substance, in work not divided, in will agreeing, in omnipotence and glory
equal: The Heathens, especially the Platonists, had some broken notions of this
admirable Mystery, which ought to be the subject of our adoration and devotion,
rather then of our curiosity and search: The Jews had many dark adumbrations of
it, but it was only cleared and revealed to Christians: God the Father, in the
Creation of the world; God the Son, in the Redemption of mankind; God the Holy
Ghost, in the Sanctification of the Church. To search too far into this
Mystery, is rashness; to dispute it, is folly; to deny it, madness: to believe
it, is true piety; and to know it, is life.

The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate, Genesis 1.2,
3.

The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost
incomprehensible, 1 Timothy 6.16.

The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal, Deuteronomy. 33.27.
Psalm. 90.2.

God a self-being, gave being to the Creatures; he was himself without
beginning, gave a beginning to time, and to the world in time; he made
something of nothing, and of that something he made all things. God, who
created the world, was himself uncreated, and as uncreated, so
incomprehensible; for if he could be comprehended, he should not be God: and as
incomprehensible, so eternal, that is, God from everlasting, before all time,
and to everlasting, when time shall be no more.

And yet they are not three eternals, but one eternal.

As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy Ghost
Almighty.

And yet they are not three Almighties, but one Alighty.

So the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God.

And yet they are not three Gods, but one God.

So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord;

And yet not three Lords, but one Lord, 1 John 5.7. Revel. 1.8. Revel. 4.8. 1
Cor. 8.5, 6.

God is potentially one, personally three; one in Essence, three in
Subsistence; in the diversification of Names, as the Scripture has made the
distinction, three; but in Nature, Substance and Essence, one: so the holy
Fathers of the Church have forced themselves to speak, because they knew not
how to speak better, nor more clearly, in so deep a Mystery; neither had they
spoken so much, I suppose, had not the enemies to Christianity extorted it from
them, and forced them to speak out where they had a mind to be silent. When the
great doctrine of the Trinity, which is the peculiar doctrine of Christians,
was opposed, they thought themselves obliged to defend it, and in such terms
too, as to declare their own meaning, though perhaps not to all capacities very
intelligible. For as it follows in this Creed, the meaning of the Church (so
far as she can express her meaning) is this;

For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity, to acknowledge every
person by himself to be God and Lord:

So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to say, there be three Gods, or
three Lords, Revel. 4.8. Heb. 1.3. Romans 11.36. 1 John 5.7.

Christians only defended that form of Baptism instituted by our Savior, and
that Faith into which they were baptized, viz. into the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. and if in their own defense they have used
expressions not so heartily received and embraced by all that read them, they
are not to be blamed for it, but their opposers, who forced them to make use of
what expressions they could in their own defense. They chose rather to be
accounted fools for Christ, then to betray and yield up that form of Christ's
Institution, by which they were initiated in Baptism to be his Disciples.

The Father is made of none: neither created, nor begotten.

His name is, I am, which shows him to be a self-being, Exodus 3.14. and the
Heathen Aristotle dyed with an expression in his mouth not much differing, when
he called upon the Being of Beings to have mercy on him. And other Heathens,
both Poets and Philosophers, taking their Light perhaps from the Sacred
Scriptures, have used terms equivalent to show God the Father, who is the
original principle of the Deity, to be a self-being, by whose bounty and
benefit all things are, as he himself is, by and from himself, and by the
benefit of none.

The Son is of the Father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten, John
1.14, 18.

The Son of God, who is also very God in respect of his Divine Nature, not a
Son by way of Eminence, but by Essence; not by Privilege or Prerogative, but
by Nature and Substance, was of the Father alone, not differing from him in
respect of Deity, but in respect of Personality: He was not made, for he was in
the beginning before any thing was made, and all things were made by him, John
1.1, 2, 3. neither was he created, for he was before all creatures; his goings
forth have been from everlasting, Mic. 5.2. He was before the world was; In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, John
1.1. We read that he was, says Ambrose, but we never read when he was not;
begotten of his Father before all worlds, but the manner of his begetting, or
his generation, who can declare? Isa. 53.8.

The Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son: neither made, nor created,
nor begotten, but proceeding, John 14.26. John 15.26.

How the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, we are not able to
say, need not to search; only because revealed, we ought to believe it so far
as it is revealed. The Holy Ghost's procession, is as ineffable as the Son's
generation: I know not how (says St. Augustine) to distinguish betwixt that
and this, for as both are credible, so both are ineffable.

So there is one Father, not three Fathers: one Son, not three Sons: one Holy
Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts, Ephesians. 4.6. John 3.16. Ephesians. 4.4.

And in this Trinity none is before, or after other: none is greater, or less
then another;

But the whole three Persons are coeternal together, and coequal, John 10.30.
Philip. 2.6. 1 John 5.7.

So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity is to be worshipped, Romans 11.36. 1 John 2.22, 23. Revel. 4.8. Isa. 6.3.

He therefore, that will be saved: must thus think of the Trinity.

That is, The Christian Religion, which offers Salvation to all, who shall
embrace it, obliges those who will become Proselytes to it, to believe God to
be as he has revealed himself to be in his holy Word, that is, God Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. God Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7.
Three, and yet but one; three Persons, and yet but one God. This Mystery of the
Trinity, says Bernard, is to be embraced by Faith, not searched into by
Reason. I believe, says he, the eternal and blessed Trinity, though I
understand it not; and apprehend that by Faith, which I cannot comprehend by
Reason. Many of the Fathers have undertaken to give us some adumbrations of
this Mystery, which yet cannot be seen clearly, and therefore ought not to be
examined curiously. Tertullian has shadowed it forth by the same Sun, in its
body, beams, and light; Lactantius, by the same water, in its Fountain, Spring,
and River; Augustine, by the same Soul, in its understanding, memory, and will;
Basil, by the three distinct colors in the Rainbow; Jerome, by the same hand,
arm, and fingers; Meletius, by three fingers: And the Hand which appeared to
Belshazzar upon the wall, Dan. 5.5. was a hand with three fingers, say some
Expositors upon the place. Humane eloquence, says St. Augustine, has labored
much in this Mystery, but wanted words to express it. Yet however Reason cannot
instruct us to know what is hid, it should direct us to believe what is
revealed in Scripture concerning this Mystery. Heretics have endeavored to
break this mysterious knot, which they were not able to untie; yet they
themselves have been broken, and this Mystery is preserved. Ignatius, Scholar
to St. John the Evangelist, has defended it in his Epistles; so has
Vincentius Lyrinensis, in his Golden Treatise; so have Tertullian and St.
Augustine, in their Books written of it; so Athanasius in his most excellent
Treatise, entitled, God the Word incarnate; and more eminent writers, which I
forbear now to mention. We read, Psalm. 50. ver. 21. some men, who were far
enough from being good men, charged by God himself, who did so far mistake God,
and themselves too, that they thought God like themselves, when they were not
themselves. I know that place is properly applicable to men of the most vicious
lives, and putrified manners, to such as deny God, at least in their practices;
yet it may after a sort be applied to those also, who mistake him upon another
account, and presume to be too familiar with him, only because they are not
well instructed to know their distance; who discourse of God, and of Religion,
as of common things, and by so doing draw contempt and irreverence toward
both. To advance the reputation of Religion, and to gain it that respect and
reverence, which it ought to have, we must advance the reputation of God first,
and show him to be such a one as is rather to be admired and adored, then to be
drawn into a low esteem by our overmuch familiarity. This Creed serves now for
such a purpose, it being framed up not so much to advance our knowledge, as to
edify our reverence, that we may have more humble and reverend conceits of
God, and of Religion too, when we shall see how much fools we are, though we
may take our selves to be very wise men, and that all the knowledge we have of
God, in respect of that which we cannot know, is but ignorance. This Creed may
serve to check that pride which is so radicated in our natures, that we presume
to be acquainted with all the ways, methods, and operations of God, with all
Religion, and all that is Religious; whereas, though revealed to us by the
Creatures and the Scriptures, we know very little of God himself. The greatest
part of what we know of him, is but the least part of what we know not of him:
There is nothing in God, but what is very mysterious; he was not God, if he
could be comprehended; not only the mystery of Godliness, which takes up the
latter part of this Creed, is a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. but the mystery of
the Godhead, which takes up the former part, is also a very great mystery. Now
this should beget in us fear and reverence, that we have such a God to do
withal upon all good occasions, who when he is brought the clearest down to
our understanding, is yet above it. The more he reveals himself to us, the more
is he hid from us; he clothes himself with light, yet we can see nothing but
the dark side of him; that which reveals other things to us, hides him from us:
He is not far from us, Act. 17.27. yet he is out of our reach: He makes his
approaches to us, and yet is unapproachable, 1 Timothy 6.16. He is visible in his
works, Romans 1.19, 20. and yet invisible in himself, 1 Timothy 6.16. He gives
himself several names, and this amongst the rest, I am that I am, Exodus 3.14.
as to show him a God unchangable, so to show him a God unspeakable. The three
great works wherein he was most manifest, are Creation, Redemption, and
Sanctification; wherein we admire three, and are to adore but one; we may
discover three Persons, and yet we must pay our Devotions and Adorations but to
one God. In the Creation we have three Persons creating, yet but one Creator:
The creation of the matter, is ascribed to the power of the Father; the
disposition of the form, to the wisdom of the Son; the preservation of the
whole, to the love of the Holy Ghost. The Persons are three, and yet
inseparable; acting by a strange order in these three great works, yet acting
inseparably. In the first of Genesis, where the Creation is set down briefly,
yet fully too, we have Elohim a noun plural, to note the three Persons
creating, joined to Bara a verb singular, to note but one Creator, Genesis 1.1. So
when the great World was epitomized in Man the little, Let us make, implies
more then one, in his Image, notes one and no more, Genesis 1.26, 27. More
Persons, and one God; all joint Creators together, yet but one Creator. Ye have
the Father creating, Act. 4.24. Job 38.4. Ye have the Son creating, Heb. 1.2,
10. John 1.3. Ye have the Holy Ghost creating, Job 26.13. Ye have all three
creating, Psalm. 33.6. Lord notes the Father, the Word notes the Son, the Breath
notes the Holy Ghost; three, and yet but one: The Father creating by and from
himself, the Son creating by himself but from the Father, the Holy Ghost
creating by himself but from both: All joint Creators, and all but one; whence
we may learn to give glory to all, in all, and for all, Romans 11.36. Indeed this
doctrine of the Trinity is a very deep point, the search of it is too high for
any man's reason; none of the wisest Heathens, unless the Platonists, and some
few others, could ever gain so little as a happy guess at it in broken notions,
and those notions, I suppose, they had from our Scriptures, wherein we find it
so clearly revealed, that unless we will renounce our Scriptures, and in so
doing our Christianity too, we must give up our Faith to the assent of this
doctrine of the Trinity, though we cannot sound the depth of it. The works of
God are wonderful; it is not at all to be admired, if we find so great a wonder
in God himself, who is styled wonderful, Isa. 9.6. We who acknowledge a God,
must acknowledge this withal, that he can be something, and can do something,
which is above our capacities and comprehension. That ever any men should
become Atheists, or Antitrinitarians upon this score, so as to doubt of God or
the Trinity, or to deny them, only because they cannot fathom the depth of
these mysteries, is to me a very strange thing; I should rather think that
Atheism, and Antichristianism, and Antitrinitarianism, if I may so term it,
should arise from the mean conceits which men have of God; and then do they
conceive meanly of him, when they think they can comprehend him, and bring him
within the narrow circle and compass of their capacities. Thus far I thought
good to deliver touching the first part of this Creed, the doctrine of the
Trinity, which we must believe, or else we cannot rightly believe that which
follows after; now it follows in good order thus.

Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also believe
rightly the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 John 4 2, 3.

For the right Faith is, that we believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, is God, and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5. John 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Philip. 2.6, 7.

What Christ the Son of God undertook to heal, cure, and save, that he assumed;
and what he designed to leave in their ruins, he refused: therefore he passed
by the fallen Angels, took not their nature, but took the nature of fallen Man,
the Seed of Abraham, by way of Assumpsit and Incarnation, John 1.14. Gal. 4.4.
Heb. 2.16. Now we must note, that in Christ are two Natures, the Divine and the
Humane; and as be has two Natures, so he had upon the matter two Nativities
also: the first he had before all Worlds from God and the Father, incorporeal
and eternal; the latter he had from the holy Virgin in the end of Ages,
corporeal and temporal: according to his Deity he is consubstantial to God and
the Father, according to his Humanity he is consubstantial to Man and his
Mother: as Man he was capable of sufferings, as God he could not suffer; as Man
he might be circumscribed, as God he is boundless, and without limits or
dimensions; as God he could not be made, as Man he was made; as God he was
heavenly, as Man earthly; as God invisible and intelligible, as Man visible; as
God incomprehensible, as Man he might be comprehended. Thus was he whole Man,
and whole God, that the whole Man might be restored and reformed by him, and
the injured Deity reconciled and satisfied. Therefore was the Word made Flesh,
John 1.14. He, who was the Word and not made before all time, was made, and
became Flesh in time, made Flesh, and manifest in the Flesh. As Man he came to
us in the Flesh, that as the Word he might heal and restore that Flesh and
Nature which he assumed, was made, and was made manifest in. Here was no
mocking of us in the case, but a real making of him; the holy Virgin, in whom
he was made, did conceive him, and not deceive us. Neither was the Word made
Flesh by being converted into it, either the Word into the Flesh, or the Flesh
into the Word, for the Deity cannot be changed into any thing, nor any thing be
changed into it. Nor was he made, as men are said to be made Friends, who had
formerly been at enmity, only by way of reconciliation, so as to continue still
two distinct Persons, as well as two distinct Natures, but his two Natures were
made up into one Person; so that the Word did not stand by as a looker-on only,
whilst he suffered in the Flesh, but contributed very much to the price and
merit of his sufferings. Neither was the Word made Flesh, God made Man, by such
a composition as that a third Person should be made out of both these Natures,
God and Man, which should neither be God nor Man: But he was made by an
Assumption, Heb. 2.16. by taking the Manhood up to the Godhead, both his
Natures being preserved without confusion, and his Person entire without
division. He was so made Flesh, that he still remained the Word; he took what
before he was not, without changing what before he was; he increased what was
ours, without the least diminution of what was his own; we were the better by
this making, he was never the worse for it; this great Mystery of Godliness,
was no detriment to his Godhead; nor the honor done to us the Flesh, any
injury at all to him the Word. This Incarnation of the Son of God, is a Mystery
equal to that of the Trinity, and therefore they who deny the one, will not
believe the other; whereas all sound Christians do firmly believe both.

God of the substance of the Father, begotten before the worlds: and Man of the
substance of his Mother, born in the world.

Perfect God, and perfect Man: of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting, Heb. 1.2, 3. John 1.18. Mich. 5.2. Gal. 4.4. Mat. 1.25.

Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead: and inferior to the Father, as
touching his Manhood, John 10.30. John 14.28. Philip. 2.6, 7.

Who although he be God, and Man: yet he is not two, but one Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5.

One; not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking of the Manhood
into God, Heb. 2.16. Gal. 4.4. John 1.24.

One altogether; not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.

^or as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and Man is one Christ.

Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant of Grace, and glorious Instrument of
man's salvation and restoration, was to suffer in that Flesh, which had sinned,
that he might make satisfaction for the sin of it. Now as God he could not
suffer, therefore was he Man that he might be liable to sufferings; as Man he
would have sunk under his sufferings, therefore was he God that he might be the
better enabled to endure them; a satisfaction was to be made by man to God for
man's sin, and therefore was he both God and Man; his Manhood made him capable
of sufferings, and his Godhead made his sufferings meritorious. Now for the
union of the two Natures in this one Person, who was to suffer, and by his
sufferings to make a full satisfaction to God for man's sin, I know not how it
could possibly better be illustrated, then by the rational Soul and the brutish
Flesh united together, for the making up of one man. The Leviathan, who derides
the Illustration because he really believes not the Union, nor the happy
effects of it, is as monstrous a scoffer at Christian Religion as ^ucian, who
indeed derided the Union, but might be very well pleased, for ought I know,
with the Illustration, if so happy as to be acquainted with it.

Who suffered for our salvation: descended into Hell, rose again the third day
from the dead, Heb. 9.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 1 Pet. 4.1. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23, 24.
1 Pet. 4.18, 19. Ephesians. 4.9. Act. 2.31, 32. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.

Christ, says Ambrose, was wo^^ded in me, and for me; he sorrowed for me, who
had nothing in himself to sorrow for. The curse of briars and thorns, which our
sins had platted into a Crown, was removed to his brows. We raised the Tempest,
and he was the Jonah cast overboard for to appease it, whom Death and the
Grave like a great Whale swallowed up, but cast up again the third day upon the
Land.

He ascended into Heaven, he sits on the right hand of the Father, God
Almighty: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, Ephesians.
4.8, 9, 10. Heb. 12.2. Act. 10.42. Act. 17.31.

Let us, says holy Augustine, look upon him ascending, believe in him absent,
hope for his coming again, and by his secret mercy feel him present with us,
though absent from us; present by Faith, though absent by Sense; spiritually
present, though corporally absent.

At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies: and shall give
account for their own works, Romans 14.9, 10. 2 Cor. 5.10.

And they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting: and they that
have done evil, into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.46.

This is the only expressed rule and instance, by which Christ means to judge
the world, according to their works respectively, be they good or bad; they who
do good, shall receive good, and they who are the doers of evil, shall meet
with a retribution that is answerable, Romans 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. It was the
saying of the learned Seneca, That it is God-like for one mortal to be helpful
to another, and this (says he) is the way to Eternity. Undoubtedly the last
Judgment shall proceed, if not according to the merit, yet according to the
quality of our works, it shall go well with the righteous, ill with the wicked.

This is the Catholic Faith: which, except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be saved.

It is a current Tradition, that the forementioned Creed was composed by
Athanasius; yet Learned men, for some reasons, have strongly opposed this
Tradition: But be the Author who he will, it is undoubtedly ancient, and
contains in it the principal Mysteries of Christian Faith; therefore does the
Church approve of it, and admits it into her Liturgy. It is appointed to be
said upon certain days, because the select Scriptures made choice of for those
days, do treat much of that which this Creed endeavors to explain, viz. the
Trinity in the Godhead, and the Incarnation of God. Neither did the Author,
whoever he was, impose this (as I suppose) as a summary of Faith to be believed
by others, in those precise terms wherein it is expressed; only published it
with confidence to declare his own belief, and to show what he himself held as
point of Doctrine, touching the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead,
and the Incarnation of Christ. Neither is the rigid sentence of damnation,
which is implicitly contained in it, to be extended to all, who believe not
every particular in it, in the terms wherein they are expressed, for all cannot
understand them; but it is designed only against those, who deny the substance
of this Creed, the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Divinity and Humanity of
Christ, and the union of his two Natures in one Person. For this is undoubtedly
a Catholic Doctrine to be believed by all, who profess Christianity, without
the believing of which, so far as cleared and revealed to us, no man can be
saved. For how is it possible for those persons to come to Salvation, who by a
mis-belief oppose the ways, means and methods whereby they are to be brought
unto it? Now Glory be to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is very properly set
at the close of this Creed, because it is before proved and cleared in the
Greed, that the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God; and Divine
glory and worship belongs to all, and is to be paid to all, by all Christians,
as it was from the beg^nning of the Christian Religion, professed under that
name and title.

RUBRIC.
Here follows the Litany or general supplication to be sung or said after
Morning Prayer upon Sundays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and at other times when it
shall be commanded by the Ordinary.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miscrable sinners.

God is the Father of the Rain, the Father of the Dew, Job 38.28. and the
Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17. the great Father of the stupendous works of the
Creation, and the very Heathens themselves have acknowledged him so to be:
therefore we, who are his Creatures, and have deviated from the Law of his
Creation, do petition him to have mercy upon us, and to pardon our deviations.
He is the great and glorious God, who made Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 124.8. whose
goodness we have abused, and therefore upon our bended knees desire his mercy
to pardon those abuses, and vile affronts which we have done unto him, saying
with holy David, Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy loving kindness,
Psalm. 51.1. Neither let any persons think it strange, that Have mercy upon us
is so often repeated in this Litany; for it is agreeable to Scripture, Psalm.
136. 1 Chronicles. 16.41. and to the practice of Primitive Christians, to appeal to,
and to magnify the mercies of God upon all needful occasions, and to beg his
mercy of pardon particularly for those sins, which we are guilty of, and for
which we stand in need of pardon. The like allocations are to be met with in
all the Liturgies extant.

O God the Father, etc.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

As we have deviated from the Law of Creation, so from the Law of Redemption,
which is the greater deviation, and renders us the more inexcusably guilty;
therefore do we petition our Redeemer, the only begotten Son of God, (whom he
sent into the world not to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved, John 3.16, 17. Gal. 3.13. Gal. 4.4, 5. Heb. 2.9. 1 Pet. 1.18,
19.) that he would have mercy upon us, and procure unto us pardon for those
breaches, which we have made against the Law of our Redemption.

O God the Son, etc.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

As we have sinned against the Law of Creation and Redemption, so against the
rule of Sanctification, which was set us when we were dedicated to God in
Baptism, and consecrated to Gods service by the Holy Spirit; therefore do we
petition God the Holy Ghost, who was sent down after the Son went up, to
comfort us, John 14.16. to teach and instruct us, John 14.26. and to confirm
the truth of Christ, and the verity of Christian Religion, John 15.26. and to
seal all those, who sincerely embrace it, unto the day of complete Redemption,
Ephesians. 4.30. that he would pardon those sins whereby we have grieved him, and
those many offers and tenders of grace which he has made unto us, and we have
obstinately rejected and refused.

O God the Holy Ghost, etc.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

As we have broken the Law of Creation, transgressed the Law of Redemption, and
violated the sacred rules of our Sanctification, and so have made our selves
unhappily guilty by our miscarriages and misdoings against all the three
Persons in the Godhead; therefore do we petition them all to have mercy upon
us, and to pardon our misactings.

O holy, blessed, etc.

Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people
whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us
for ever.

This is agreeable to Scripture, wherein we pray that God would make good his
promise to us, and remember our sins and iniquities no more, Heb. 10.17. that
he would not punish the fathers sins upon the children, in the same sense as he
himself has threatened in the second Commandment, Exodus 20.5. We read of the
like form of prayer Ezra 9.7. Nehem. 1.6. Joel 2.17. and we plead the price of
our Redemption, mentioned 1 Pet. 1.19. to move God to remove his anger from us,
that it may not rest upon us, according to those pious expressions which we
meet with Psalm. 85.4, 5, 6.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

The sum of this petition is contained in the Lords Prayer, and all the rest
of the petitions in this Litany may easily be reduced to it.

From all blindness of heart; from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy; from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord, deliver us.

This is all agreeable to Scripture, which mentions in express terms the very
sins, which we here pray to be delivered from: Blindness of heart, Ephesians. 4.18.
Pride, 1 John 2.16. Vainglory, Gal. 5.26. Hypocrisy, Mat. 6.5. Envy, hatred,
malice, and uncharitableness, Fphes. 4.31.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the devil,

Good Lord, deliver us.

We have Scripture-warrant for all that is contained in this petition; touching
Fornication, 1 Cor. 6.18. and other deadly sins, 1 John 5.16. Now they which
are usually accounted of as deadly sins, (though by the general practice of
them they may seem otherwise) are these; Pride, which is opposite to Humility;
Covetousness, which is opposite to Liberality; Luxury, which is opposite to
Chastity; Envy, which is opposite to Gentleness; Gluttony, which is opposite to
Temperance; Anger, which is opposite to Patience; Sloth, which is opposite to
the devout and earnest serving of God. These are called the seven deadly sins,
not because we judge any other sin in its own nature to be venial and not
deadly, but because they are so deeply rooted in our nature, that it is a very
hard matter to mortify them; and therefore do we pray to be delivered from
them, and from the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the Devil, the grand
Enem^es of our Christianity, which we renounce and b^d d^hance to in our
Baptism. For to be entangled with the world, is to be drawn from God, 1 John
2.15. and to live after the flesh, and to be carnal minded, is death, and to be
at enmity with God, Romans 8.6, 7. and to be taken in the Devils snares, is a
very dangerous thing, and a very great blessing and happiness to be freed from
them, 2 Timothy 2.26.

From lightning and tempest; from Plague, Pestilence, and Famine; from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord, deliver us.

When we pray to be delivered from lightning and tempest, our meaning is, that
we may be delivered from the dangers of the whole year, arising many times, and
falling upon us by Lightning in Summer, and by Tempest in Winter; and when we
pray to be delivered from sudden death, our meaning is, that we may not die
such a death as God has threatened to, and usually inflicts upon the wicked,
Psalm. 50.22. Psalm. 73.18. Prove. 1.27. but that we may die comfortably, with
renewed Faith, Repentance, Reconciliation, and setting of our houses in order;
that our death may neither be untimely, nor unprovided for, but that it may be
after the common manner of men, having nothing in it extraordinary but piety.
We desire that we may not be snatched away suddenly, nor perish and come to
fearful ends; that we may not die like Absalom, Judas, Corah, Dathan, Abiram,
Ananias and Sapphira, all which died fearful and unusual deaths; but that we
may die comfortably, as Jacob, Moses, Joshua, David, who leisurably ended their
lives in peace, and prayer for the mercies of God to come upon their
posterities. For however there is no condemnation to the Elect, and those who
are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. yet it may so fall out, that some of the Elect
themselves may die with more scandal, less joy of conscience, and enjoy less
joys of Heaven, then other of their brethren.

From all sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebellion; from all false doctrine,
heresy, and schism; from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

We are cautioned and advised by the holy Scriptures, to fear the Lord and the
King, and not to have any thing to do with those, who are seditious, and given
to change, Prove. 24.21. for such persons are of very unhappy tempers, and plot
mischiefs secretly, Psalm. 17.12. are unquiet in themselves, and will not suffer
others to live quietly by them; their hearts are not stablished with grace, but
are of unstable minds, carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, Heb.
13.9. sound doctrine they regard not, but after their own lusts heap to
themselves Teachers having itching ears, which ears they turn from the truth,
that they may be turned unto fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. they have in them evil
hearts of unbelief, hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, so that they
depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12, 13. contemn his Word, and slight his
Commandment. Now from these persons, and from the evil of their doings, that we
may neither act evil with them, nor suffer evil from them, do we pray to be
delivered.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision;
by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

Christ's Incarnation, Nativity, Circumcision, Baptism, Fasting and Temptation,
we meet with 1 Timothy 3.16. Mat. 1.25. Luke 1.35. Luke 2.21. Mat. 3.16. Luke
3.21. Mat. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

By thine Agony and bloody sweat; by thy Cross and Passion; by thy precious
death and burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the coming
of the Holy Ghost,

Good Lord, deliver us.

These we also find expressly mentioned in the holy Scriptures; Christ's Agony
and bloody sweat, Mat. 26.37, 38. Luke 22.44. his Cross and Passion, Philip.
2.8. Heb. 12.2. his precious death and burial, Mat. 27.58, 59, 60. his glorious
Resurrection, Mat. 28.6. his Ascension, Luke 24.51. and the coming down of the
Holy Ghost, Act. 2. and By all these, or Through all these, we pray for
deliverance. The meanest Grammarian would tell us, that here is no swearing or
conjuration in the case; their eyes must look through very strange Spectacles,
who can spy out an oath here; By, is no more then Through; and in these
prayers we do no other then desire God to aid us, by applying to us the fifteen
benefits here rehearsed. These passionate strains are no forms of Oaths, they
are only a compendious recapitulation of the History of the Gospel, and an
acknowledgment of the chief means of our Salvation. We read the like
expressions 1 Pet. 2.24. Isa. 53.5. By, in these places, is no sign of an oath,
only it notes the instrumental cause of a thing. Zanchy confessed, that in the
Liturgick Offices of the Roman Church, these two things pleased him very much;
First, that they did conclude their Pravers, Through Jesus Christ our Lord;
Secondly, that they did enumerate in their Prayers all the acts and offices of
the Mediator, adding, By thy Cross and Passion, etc. And it was undoubtedly to
very good purpose, that the (...) Fathers of the Greek (...), after they had
recounted in their Liturgies all the particular pains, as they are set down in
the story of Christ's Passion and by all and every one of (...) petition for
mercy, did after all (...) up with this expression, By the unknow^ (...) thy
Body, and agonies of thy Soul, ^ave mercy upon us, save us, and deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

In regard we are liable to many sorts of temptations, which may befall us
either in a prosperous or adverse estate, we pray unto God that he would
deliver us from every evil work, and preserve us unto his Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18. that he would be assistant to us in the hour of death, and destroy
the dread and fear of it in us, by virtue of the death of him, who died that he
might destroy death, and him who had the power of it, Heb. 2.14, 15. We pray
also, that a gracious sentence may be passed upon us at the last Judgment;
implying withal, that we may so lead our lives, as not to fall under the other
more dreadful one. The sum of what is here prayed for, is contained in the
petitions of our Savior's Prayer, mentioned Mat. 6.13.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way, 1 John 1.8, 9,
10. Mat. 28.20.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Thut it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Charles our most
gracious King and Governor, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 72.1, 2. Psalm. 80.17.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory,
Psalm. 21.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies, Psalm. 21. Psalm. 132.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen Catherine,
James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family, Psalm. 89.29. Psalm. 45. Genesis 49.10.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word; and that both by their preaching
and living they may set it forth, and show it accordingly, Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9, 10,
11. Psalm. 132.9. Act. 20.28. 1 Cor. 9.27. 1 Timothy 4.16. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility with grace, wisdom and understanding, Exodus 18.21. Prove. 11.14.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Romans 13.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people, Psalm. 28.9.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

We may read in Tertullian, Clement Bishop of Rome, Eusebius, Ambrose, Cyril,
and others, many early presidents of praying for the Church, Emperors, Kings,
the Royal Seed, Bishops, together with the inferior order of Priests and
Deacons, and for all things indeed, and persons which we pray for in this
Litany; and Litanies were undoubtedly of very ancient use, being at first
composed to be solemnly used for the appeasing of Gods wrath in time of public
evils, and for the procuring of his mercy in common benefits; this may be
easily proved out of Irenaeus, Prosper, Tertullian, Jeront, Ruffin, Augustine,
Cyprian, Basil, and other Writers of no inferior note. And they have Scripture
sufficient to warrant the use of them, for there is nothing in them prayed for
or against, which is not grounded upon the Word of God. The first Litanies
indeed were short, but upon occasions were enlarged by Mamercus Bishop of
Vienna, by Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Averna, and by Gregory the Great, who
framed up that which was called the Great Litany, not only upon the score of
Reformation, but because much affliction and trouble vexed the world in his
time; and Rogations and Litanies were judged meet remedies either to prevent,
or to avert such dangers. Aftertimes might bring Prayers and Rogations into
the Litanies, which were not fit to be placed there, nor could easily be
digested by goodmeaning Christians; but the Litany used by us, is reformed from
those abuses, and there is nothing in it which can be justly liable to any
exception. It is admirable and notable, both for the matter and method of it,
wherein is an excellent particular enumeration of all Christians wants, whether
private or common. The contents of it are innocent and blameless, and the
composure most artificial both to raise up devotion, and to keep it up. It
directs our Prayers to the right object, the Trinity; it contains in it
deprecations against all evil, whether of sin or punishment, from which we
desire to be delivered, through the holy actions and passions of Christ, the
only meritorious cause of all our good. It contains in it also petitions for
good things, in the putting up of which a very sit order is observed: First, we
pray for the Church Universal, the common Mother of all Christians; Secondly,
we pray for our own National Church, to which next the Universal we owe the
greatest observance and duty. After this we pray for the principal Members of
it, the King, the Bloud-Royal, the Clergy, the Nobles, and Magistrates, in
whose welfare the peace of the Church does chiefly consist. Herein we follow
David's method, Psalm. 132. and the Apostles prescribed rule, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
and we have many early presidents of the Christian Church for our so doing, as
may easily be proved out of the Ancient Liturgies and Fathers. In particular
and in distinct terms we pray for Bishops, Priests and Deacons, because they
were the three Orders of the Clergy eminently distinguished in the first Ages
of the Christian Church, as appears clearly out of the Epistles of Ignatius and
Clement, who were both of them Scholars and Disciples to the Apostles. And this
distinction of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, does directly answer to that of
Highpriests, Priests, and Levites under the Law; and the very Heathens
themselves, by the light of Nature, had the like distinction amongst them,
called, as they are styled by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. Teachers, Helpers,
Governors; as under the Mosaical Law and dispensation, the Priests were to
teach, the Levites to help, the Sons of Aaron of the Prelatical Order to
govern; and the same distinction of Priests to teach, Deacons to help, and
Bishops to govern, has been ever observed in the Church of Christ through all
Antiquity, as may be proved from the Records and Registries in all the
Churches. Now whereas we pray, That God would illuminate all Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, our meaning is this, that he would give the beginning of Light to
the false, and the increase thereof to the true, that all may be, like John
Baptist, burning and shining lights, burning in zeal and devotion, shining in
works of charity and mercy, sound in doctrine, and exemplary in life.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations unity, peace, and concord,
Psalm. 122.6. Psalm. 133.1. Romans 14.19.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

To pray that all the world might be at peace about them, was ever one clause
used in the public Prayers of the Primitive Church, as we find in Tertullian,
Clement, Eusebius, Ambrose, Cyril, and other eminent writers of Antiquity.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Psalm. 119. Eccles. 12.13.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit, Jam. 1, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Luke 8.15. Heb. 4.2.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

We are to pray for good life, and that we may be practitioners of the good
Word of God, as well as hearers of it, otherwise our profession will but
aggravate our condemnation; and if we profess like Christians, and live like
Heathens, we shall be the more inexcusably punishable, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred,
and are deceived, 1 Pet. 2.25. Jam 5.20. Psalm. 119.176.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

We meet with the like forms of Prayer in the Clementine Constitutions; and our
Church never erred more grossly and dangerously, then when the untoward Members
of it left off to say this Prayer.

That it may please thee to strergthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weakhearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet, Isa. 35.3. Romans 11.20. Isa. 42.3. Jer. 8.4. Romans 16.20.

We beseech thee to hear us, good I ord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation, Heb. 13.3. Psalm. 146.7, 8, 9.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

In this Litany we pray particularly for those, who most especially need our
Prayers, that is, for all those, whom the Law looks upon as miserable persons;
and were it not to avoid tediousness, I could fetch almost every Paragraph of
it out of the Ancient Fathers and Liturgies.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land, or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

When we pray for all, who travail by Land or by Water, our meaning is, that
God would be assistant to all, who travail in the way of a lawful calling, and
that he would seasonably oppose those in their vicious courses, who do not, and
turn them out of the ways of sin, into the ways of safety. When we pray for all
women laboring with Child, we pray only for their safe deliverance; if they be
honelt women, we pray that God would give them patience to undergo the pains
and perils of Childbirth; if otherwise, we pray that God would also give them
the grace of Repentance, that as their Conceptions have been sinful, so their
Productions may be salutiferous, and the pains of the Body, may work a deep
sorrow upon the Soul, and a Repentance not to be repented of.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

We pray for those, whom God himself has especially declared in Scripture that
he will be careful of, and kind to, and the intimations of his will and
pleasure, are the best directions for our Prayers; neither can we pray more
suitably to the mind of God, for his pity and compassion to be extended to any,
then to those miserable persons whom he has expressly nominated in his Sacred
Scriptures, to be the proper and fit objects of his compassion and protection;
so that he is pleased to style himself, the Father of the fatherless, the
Husband of the widow, the Helper of the helpless, and the Friend of the
friendless; the only succor and sure refuge to all miserable and distressed
persons, who being destituted of the world, six their sole dependence upon him.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

When we pray that God would have mercy upon all men, we pray for his general
mercy to be extended to all, in the same sense as he wills all to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4. and in the same sense as he is pleased to distribute out his
mercies to all, Mat. 5.45.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

In praying for our enemies, we observe that special command given by our
Savior, the observing of which commandment, brings us up to the perfection of
our Christianity, and makes us most like unto God, Mat. 5.44, 45. And because
there is no inordinate lust in our corrupt nature so hard to be mortified, as
hatred is, therefore did Christ in his Sermon upon the Mount, administer
something expressly toward the mortifying of this wicked passion; wherein he
does not only take off the edge of our Revenge, but he turns it quite the
contrary way, teaching us to love our enemies, to bless those who curse us, to
do good to those who hate us, to pray for those who despitefully use us and
persecute us, to love those for Gods sake, whom perhaps for their own sake we
cannot love. The holy Apostle St. Paul teaches the same, Romans 12.20, 21. as
Justin Martyr said to Trypho the Jew, Ye persecute us, and we pray for you.
Such like forms of Prayers may be met with in the writings of the Primitive
Fathers, the Liturgies and Constitutions of the Ancient Church. Ignatius in his
Epistle to Polycarp, and the Church of Smyrna, Tertullian and Cyprian, in their
Treatises of Christian Patience, have written very notably upon this argument.
In all which may be observed, the charity of the Church of Christians, toward
the very enemies of that Religion which she professes. There is not any thing
in this Litany, but may be met with in ancient Writers, and ancient Liturgies
ascribed to Chrysostom, Basil, St. James, and in the Catholic Collect
mentioned in the Constitutions which are fathered upon Clemens Romanus; the
places I could cite word for word; only in regard I am writing to English
People, I have made it my design to write all in English, such as it is, and
not so much as to dip into any other Tongue or Language.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them, Psalm. 104.27, 28. Psalm. 65.9,
10, 11, 12, 13. Mat. 6.11.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

From the Litanies or Rogations then used upon their common Perambulations,
came the three days before the day Anniversary of our Lords Ascension, to be
called Rogation-days, and the Sunday before, Rogation-Sunday; wherein the
Church prayed especially, and most seasonably, that it would please God to give
and preserve to their use, the kindly Fruits of the earth, so that in due time
they might enjoy them. For unless God give them, and preserve them when given,
and preserve them to our use, and give us grace to use them as we ought to do,
we can neither enjoy them, him in them, nor our selves.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Jer.
5.24, 25. Mat. 3.8. Mat. 6.33.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

This petition in very good order follows the former, for unless that be
granted to us, which we petition for in this prayer, all the earthly blessings
before prayed for, may never ripen to maturity; they may be blasted in the
springing of them, the Canker, Locust, Caterpillar, or any thing else, however
contemptible, may be sent on Gods errand, come armed with his displeasure, and
ravish these blessings out of our hands, before we can come to the reaping of
them. One sin (God he knows we are guilty of many) unrepented of, may bring a
curse upon our blessings, like the Frogs and Flies, Locusts and Caterpillars
into Egypt, or the Worm into Jonah's Gourd, and quickly deprive us of all
those blessings of increasing Nature, which we yet hold by no other tenure,
then that of a defeasible expectation. and if it shall please God to be so
merciful unto us, as to give us these good things to enjoy, and to forgive us
our sins, (which is a greater mercy then all besides) yet that we may not abuse
them to luxury and intemperance, when we have them, but use them soberly, that
we may reap the good, and God the glory, we pray for the grace of Gods holy
Spirit, that all these blessings may be sanctified to us, and that they may be
as so many new obligations upon us to amend our lives, and to live as becomes
those, who have received from God, the great donor, such obliging favors.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us, Mat. 9.27. Luke 1.35.

Son of God, etc.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world, John 1.29.

Grant us thy peace, John 14.27. John 16.33. Romans 5.1.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world, John 1.36.

Have mercy upon us, Mark 10.47, 48.

O Christ, hear us.
O Christ, hear us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy, etc.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy, etc.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy, etc.
These repetitions are warrantable by Scripture, and therefore cannot be by men
of Reason and Religion judged vain: it is an argument of zeal and devotion, and
ferventy in prayer, when our petitions are doubled by which we express our
desires. We meet with the like re-duplications frequently used in the Primitive
Church; David used often repetitions, Psalm. 136. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 107. our
blessed Savior repeated one Prayer three times, Mat 26.44. and he questionless
could have altered, had he thought it either necess^ ^^^ or convenient. Such
short ejaculatory ^rayers as these, come nearest to the pattern given by our
Savior, who gave to his Disciples a short form; and in all the Holy Bible, we
meet not with any example or pattern of a very long Prayer; Solomon's Prayer
used at the Dedication of the magnificent Temple, which he built to God, is the
longest we meet with in Holy Scripture. And says holy Augustine, the business
of Prayer is rather done by sighs, groans, and fervency of heart, then by
multiplicity of words.

RUBRIC.
Then shall the Priest and the People with him, say the Lords Prayer.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen. Luke 11.2, 3, 4.


For the often use of this Prayer in our Liturgick Offices, and the meaning of
it, see before.

The Versicle.
Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities, Psalm. 130.3.

Let us pray.


[Why this is so often used, see before.]

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
Psalm. 51.17. nor the desire of such as be sorrowful; mercifully assist our
prayers that we make before thee in all our troubles and adversities,
whenever they oppress us; and graciously hear us, that those evils which the
craft and subtilty of the devil or man works against us, be brought to
naught, and by the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we
thy servants, being hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto
thee, in thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Psalm. 20. Psalm. 86.7.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake, Nehem. 1.9, 10, 11.
Ezekiel. 20.9. Ezekiel. 36.12.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them,
Psalm. 78.3, 4. Psalm. 43.1.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Folly Ghost:

Answ. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without
end. Amen. [Why this is used, and so often, see before.]

From our enemies defend us, O Christ, Psalm. 25.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.
Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.
Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.
Favorably with mercy hear our Prayers.
O Son of David, have mercy upon us, Luke 18.9.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ, John 14.13, 14.

Graciously hear us, O Christ; graciously hear us, O Lord Christ. Priest. O
Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answ. As we do put our trust in thee, Psalm. 33.22.


Note. All the forementioned Prayers, with the Responds, are short, lively,
active and spirited, Prayers uttered with fervency, which are most available
with God, when they come from devout and righteous souls, Jam. 5.16. it is the
short Prayer which pierces Heaven; God looks not at how much we pray, but how
well we pray, how heartily and sincerely we pray. Such were the Prayers of the
most devout Christians in ancient times, whose hearts fired with zeal and
devotion, did passionately send forth short Prayers, as the hottest Springs
send forth their waters by ebullitions.

[See before.]

Let us pray.
WF humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and
for the glory of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved; and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Note the fullness of this Prayer, and by this judge of all the rest: Herein we
pray, that God would in mercy pardon the sinful frailties and infirmities of
our lives, and the imperfections of those very Prayers wherein we beg that
pardon. This we beg, not for our merits, for we can merit nothing at his hands,
but upon the account of his mercy. And we pray further, that he would divert
from us all the evil of punishment, which our evil of sin might move him justly
to inflict upon us; and that whatever calamities befall us in this world, for
our own defaults, yet we may repose confidence in his mercy, and not distrust
him, though he kill us, however we may have cause enough to distrust our
selves; but that we may be awakned, and warned by the punishments which he is
pleased to inflict upon us, to walk more warily for the future, to make our
actions more holy, and our lives more pure, that so we may bring good to our
selves, and honor and glory to him; and all this, as we do all other things
convenient and needful for us, we beg not through the mediation and
intercession of any Saint or Angel, but through our only Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer of St. Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord to make our
common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

Here ends the Litany.

And be it noted, that the Litany is no distinct Service properly, for a
Service consists of Psalms, Lessons, Creed, Thanksgivings, and Prayers
distinct, only it is a distinct Form, and many times made use of as a fit
preparative to other ensuing Offices. Formerly notice was used to be given, by
the tolling of a Bell, when it was to be said. The accustomed days for the
saying of it, are Sundays, Wednesdays, Fridays, the three days of Rogation, and
other Fasting-days appointed to be observed in times of Plague, Famine, War,
and other general calamities; and it is a devotional piece of Service very
suitable to all such times. The usual place for saying of it, where it can be
done conveniently, is in the midst of the Church, and just before the
Chancel-door, the Ministers turning their faces toward the Altar, or
Communion Table, when they say it: For, says Chrysostom, it is fit that the
Minister who officiates in Prayer, should put on the outward garb and
deportment, as well as the inward mind of a Supplicant; and therefore he is to
be in the kneeling posture, the posture of penitents, when he is performing
this penitential Office; and he is to perform it in the appointed place, in
imitation of the Priests and Ministers under the Law, who were commanded in
their penitential Service, to weep between the Porch and the Altar, and to say,
Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the
heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people,
Where is their God? Joel 2.17. To conclude, the Litany, take it in the whole,
and in every part of it, is so excellent a Form of all good devotion, that they
must needs be upbraided either with error, or somewhat worse, whom in all
parts this principal and excellent Prayer does not fully satisfy. The
corruptions brought into former Litanies, by addition of Saints names, and
Invocation of Saints, are purged away in ours, so that there is not any Litany
extant more complete then ours is; the Church in other Divine Offices has
exceeded other Churches, but in this her self.

RUBRIC.
Prayers and Thanksgivings upon several occasions, to be used before the two
final Prayers of the Litany, or of Morning and Evening Prayer.

PRAYERS.
For Rain.
O God heavenly Father, who by thy Son Jesus Christ have promised to all them
that seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, all things necessary to
their bodily sustenance, Mat. 6.33. Send us, we beseech thee, in this our
necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of
the earth to our comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen. Jam. 4.3. Jam. 5.18. Hos. 2.21, 22. 1 King 8.35, 36. John 14.13, 14.

For fair weather.
O Almighty Lord God, who for the sin of man did once drown all the world,
except eight persons, 1 Pet. 3.20. and afterward of thy great mercy did
promise never to destroy it so again, Genesis 8.21, 22. We humbly beseech thee,
that although we for our iniquities have worthily deserved a plague of rain and
waters, yet upon our true repentance thou will send us such weather, as that we
may receive the fruits of the earth in due season, and learn both by thy
punishment to amend our lives, and for thy clemency to give thee praise and
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the time of Dearth and Famine.
O God heavenly Father, whose gift it is, that the rain does fall, the earth is
fruitful, beasts increase, and fishes do multiply, Job 38.25, 26, 27, 28. Genesis
1. Behold, we beseech thee, the afflictions of thy people, and grant that the
scarcity and dearth (which we do now most justly suffer for our iniquity) may
through thy goodness be mercifully turned into cheapness and plenty, for the
love of Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost be all
honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen. 2 Chronicles. 20.9. 2 Chronicles. 6.26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31. Romans 8.32. Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14.

Or this.
O God merciful Father, who in the time of Elisha the Prophet did suddenly in
Samaria turn great scarcity and dearth into plenty and cheapness, 2 King. chap.
6. and chap. 7. Have mercy upon us, that we who are now for our sins punished
with like adversity, may likewise find a seasonable relief: increase the fruits
of the earth by thy heavenly benediction; and grant that we, receiving thy
bountiful liberality, may use the same to thy glory, the relief of those that
are needy, and our own comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 1 King.
8.35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40.

In the time of War and Tumults.
O Almighty God, King of all Kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent; save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from the hands of our enemies; abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devices; that we, being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorify thee, who art the only giver
of all victory, through the merits of thy only. Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen. 2 Samuel 22.32. Isa. 45.22. Psalm. 76.7, 10. 1 King. 8. verse. 44, etc.

In the time of any common Plague, or Sickness.
O Almighty God, who in thy wrath did send a Plague upon thine own people in
the wilderness, for their obstinate rebellion against Moses and Aaron, Numb.
16. and also in the time of King David did slay with the plague of Pestilence
threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy mercy did save the rest,
2 Samuel 24.15, 16. Have pity upon us miserable sinners, who now are visited with
great sickness and mortality; that like as thou did then accept of an
atonement, and did command the destroying Angel to cease from punishing, 2 Samuel 24.16. so it may now please thee to withdraw from us this plague and
grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the Ember weeks, to be said every day, for those that are to be admitted
into Holy Orders.
ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who have purchased to thy self an universal
Church, by the precious blood of thy dear Son, Act. 20.28. Colos. 1.13, 14.
Tit. 2.14. Rev. 1.5. Rev. 7.14. mercifully look upon the same, and at this time
so guide and govern the minds of thy servants the Bishops and Pastors of thy
flock, that they may lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5.22. but faithfully
and wisely make choice of fit persons to serve in the sacred Ministry of thy
Church, Act. 1.24, 25, 26. And to those, which shall be ordained to any holy
function, give thy grace and heavenly benediction, that both by their life and
doctrine they may set forth thy glory, and set forward the salvation of all
men, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 1 Timothy 4.16. Deuteronomy. 33.8.

Or this.
ALmighty God the giver of all good gifts, who of thy divine providence have
appointed diverse orders in thy Church, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1
Pet. 4.10. 1 Cor. 12.4. Give thy grace, we humbly beseech thee, to all those,
who are to be called to any office and administration in the same; and so
replenish them with the truth of thy doctrine, and indue them with innocence of
life, that they may faithfully serve before thee, to the glory of thy great
Name, and the benefit of thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Note. The four Ember weeks were anciently weeks of Abstinence, quarterly Fasts
observed in the four seasons of the year; the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday
after the first Sunday in Lent, for the Spring; the Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday after the Feast of Pentecost, for the Summer; the Wednesday, Friday,
and Saturday after Holy Cross, September the 13th. for the Autumn; and the
Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday after St. Lucies day, December the 13th. for
the Winter. Now the Church enjoined Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday to be
weekly observed, because Christ was betrayed by Judas on a Wednesday, was
crucified on a Friday, and was laid in the Sepulcher on a Saturday. And the
Church enjoined these days to be quarterly observed as Fasting-days, for these
following reasons: 1. That Christians might be as devout as the Jews, who
observed four several and solemn times of Fast in the year, Zechar. 8.19. 2.
Because these are the First Fruits of every Season, which we rightly dedicate
to the service and honor of God, that beginning every Season so devoutly, we
may learn to spend the whole year accordingly; and that by this means we may
procure Gods blessing upon the Fruits of the year arising out of the Earth,
which are at these Seasons either sown, sprung up, come to ripeness, or
gathered into Barns. 3. That we may call our selves yearly to a strict account
for our sins committed every Season, and sadly and seriously repent of them. 4.
That we may implore Gods mercy to our bodies, in freeing us from those common
distemperatures, which usually are predominant at these four Seasons. 5. That
we may procure the greater blessing upon the Ministers received into Holy
Orders at these four Seasons of the year, by Prayer, Fasting, and imposition of
hands. Now the forementioned weeks are called Ember weeks, from an old Saxon
word Enthber, which denotes Abstinence; or, say others, from the word Ember,
now commonly in use, which signifies Ashes, for Ashes were a ceremony
frequently made use of in times of Fasting, and carried with it significancy
sufficient; from which ceremony the first day of the Lent-fast, was termed
Ash Wednesday: of which it is probable I may say something more in proper place.

A Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, to be read during their Session.
MOst gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general, so
especially for the High Court of Parliament, under our most religious and
gracious King at this time assembled: That thou would be pleased to direct
and prosper all their consultations to the advancement of thy glory, the good
of thy Church, the safety, honor, and welfare of our Sovereign, and his
Kingdoms; that all things may be so ordered and settled by their endeavors
upon the best and surest foundations, that peace and happiness, truth and
justice, religion and piety may be established among us for all generations.
These and all other necessaries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we
humbly beg in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ our most blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.


Note. No persons can be offended at this Prayer, who are not enemies to all
goodness, and rather desire that debauchery and wickedness should overspread a
Nation, to the shame and dishonor of it, than piety and virtue, to advance its
reputation.

A Collect or Prayer for all conditions of men, to be used at such times when
the Litany is not appointed to be said.
O God the Creator and Preserver of all mankind, we humbly beseech thee for all
sorts and conditions of men, that thou would be pleased to make thy ways
known unto them; thy saving health unto all nations, Psalm. 67.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.1,
2, 3, 4. More especially we pray for the good estate of the Catholic Church,
Gal. 6.10. Psalm. 122.6. that it may be so guided and governed by thy good
spirit, that all who profess and call themselves Christians, may be led into
the way of truth, and hold the faith in unity of spirit, in the bond of peace,
and in righteousness of life, Ephesians. 4.3. Finally we commend to thy fatherly
goodness all those who are any ways afflicted, or distressed in mind, body, or
estate, Heb. 13.3. [ This to be said when any desire the prayers of the
Congregation.
especially those for whom our prayers are desired] that it may please thee to
comfort and relieve them according to their several necessities; giving them
patience under their sufferings, and a happy issue out of all their
afflictions. And this we beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer that may be said after any of the former.
O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive, receive
our humble petitions, Psalm. 103.13. and though we be tied and bound with the
chain of our sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us, for the
honor of Jesus Christ our Mediator and Advocate. Amen.


Note. Touching the preceding Prayers, and following Thanksgivings, may it be
observed, that extraordinary dangers should of themselves invite us, and stir
us up to extraordinary Prayers; and extraordinary deliverances from those
dangers, should equally move us to extraordinary thankfulness; as we are to
pray to God for the blessings we would obtain, so we are to praise him when
they are obtained; when God opens his hand to gratify us, we should open our
mouths to glorify him. It is the Apostles prescribed method to begin with
Prayer, and to end with Thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 2.1. indeed where the concernment
is National, a provision in such cases is usually better made, by fixing set
days to be solemnly and religiously observed; but it many times happens, that
the calamities inflicted, and mercies received, are only Provincial, or
peculiar to some one County, Town, City, or Vicinage, so that they may not
reach the cognizance of the Supreme Magistrate; therefore are these Prayers and
Thanksgivings composed, that they may be ready upon all occasions for us to
have recourse to, when there are no set days indicted for such a purpose.

THANKSGIVINGS. A General Thanksgiving.
ALmighty God Father of all mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. we thine unworthy servants do
give thee most humble and hearty thanks, Psalm. 116.12, 13. for all thy goodness
and loving kindness to us, and to all men, 1 Timothy 2.1. [ This to be said when
any that have been prayed for, desire to return praise.
particularly to those who desire now to offer up their praises and
thanksgivings for thy late mercies vouchsafed unto them] We bless thee for our
creation, preservation, and all the blessings of this life; but above all for
thine inestimable love in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ;
for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory. And we beseech thee give us
that due sense of all thy mercies, that our hearts may be unfeignedly thankful,
and that we may show forth thy praise, not only with our lips, but in our
lives, by giving up our selves to thy service, and by walking before thee in
holiness and righteousness all our days, Luke 1.74, 75. Tit. 2.11, 12. through
Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honor and
glory, world without end. Amen.


Note. This Thanksgiving is not only warrantable by more Texts of Scripture
then I have cited, but it is so excellent both for matter and method, that all
Churches and Writers can hardly show a better form, so full of matter, and that
comprised in so few words. This needs no vindication, because no persons in
their right wits, can object any thing justly against it.

For Rain.
O God our heavenly Father, who by thy gracious providence do cause the
former and the latter rain to descend upon the earth, Deuteronomy. 11.14. that it may
bring forth fruit for the use of man, Psalm. 104.84. We give thee humble thanks
that it has pleased thee in our great necessity to send us at the last a
joyful rain upon thine inheritance, and to refresh it when it was dry, Deuteronomy.
28.12. Psalm. 147.8. Jer. 5.24. Psalm. 68.9. to the great comfort of us thy
unworthy servants, and to the glory of thy holy Name, through thy mercies in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For fair weather.
O Lord God, who have justly humbled us by thy late plague of immoderate rain
and waters, and in thy mercy have relieved and comforted our souls by this
seasonable and blessed change of weather; We praise and glorify thy holy Name
for this thy mercy, and will always declare thy loving kindness from generation
to generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Plenty.
O Most merciful Father, who of thy gracious goodness have heard the devout
prayers of thy Church, and turned our dearth and scarcity into cheapness and
plenty; We give thee humble thanks for this thy special bounty, beseeching thee
to continue thy loving kindness unto us, that our land may yield us her fruits
of increase, to thy glory and our comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Peace and Deliverance from our Enemies.
O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies; We yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto
them, Psalm. 124. beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us,
that all the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty deliverer,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For restoring public Peace at home.
O Eternal God our heavenly Father, who alone make men to be of one mind in a
house, Psalm. 68.6. and stillest the outrage of a violent and unruly people,
Psalm. 65.7. We bless thy holy Name that it has pleased thee to appease the
seditious tumults, which have been lately raised up amongst us; most humbly
beseeching thee to grant to all of us grace, that we may henceforth obediently
walk in thy holy commandments, and leading a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. may continually offer unto thee our
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for these thy mercies toward us, Heb.
13.15. through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For deliverance from the Plague, or other common sickness.
O Lord God, who have wounded us for our sins, and consumed us for our
transgressions, by thy late heavy and dreadful visitation, and now in the midst
of judgment remembering mercy, have redeemed our souls from the jaws of death;
We offer unto thy fatherly goodness our selves, our souls and bodies, which
thou have delivered, to be a living sacrifice unto thee, Romans 12.1. always
praising and magnifying thy mercies in the midst of thy Church, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.
WE humbly acknowledge before thee, O most merciful Father, that all the
punishments which are threatened in thy Law, might justly have fallen upon us,
by reason of our manifold transgressions and hardness of heart. Yet seeing it
has pleased thee of thy tender mercy upon our weak and unworthy humiliation,
to assuage the contagious sickness, wherewith we lately have been sore
afflicted, and to restore the voice of joy and health into our dwellings; we
offer unto thy divine Majesty the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, lauding
and magnifying thy glorious Name for such thy preservation and providence over
us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Note. These Thanksgivings extraordinary, answer most of them to the Prayers
extraordinary foregeing; we praise God in the latter, for what we prayed for in
the former. They need not be Scriptured out exactly, for they are the very
Scriptures themselves, both for ground of matter, and form of words. They are
of a very rational contrivance, for great deliverances ought to have perpetual
remembrances, and the gracious favors of God bestowed upon us, are to be
remembered and acknowledged with gratitude. The very Heathens in their Histories
show it to be usual, and God in Scripture by his injunction makes it necessary,
Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. that we should dutifully repay to God our tribute of praise, for
the great and undeserved benefits which we have received from him, Psalm. 111.4.
Thus have I, for the good of the Church, (I hope) and for the glory of God, and
for the satisfaction of some who may have prejudices against our public Divine
Service, and upon that account may absent themselves from it, or not join in it
with that devotion as they ought to do; and I am sure without making any
unhandsom and uncharitable reflections (which is a very great error of the
Pen) upon any persons whatsoever, who do but own Christ and God as they are
revealed in Scripture, and profess Christianity, contributed my poor endeavors
to invite so many in, as can be rationally moved and persuaded, to join with us
in our Christian Assemblies, that we may with one heart, mind and mouth
glorify God, and serve him without distraction, who is I am sure the God of
order, and not of confusion.

FINIS.

