A PROSPECT OF THE Primitive Christianity, as it was left by CHRIST to his
APOSTLES, BY THE Apostles to their Disciples Saint Polycarp and Holy Ignatius,
Both Contemporaries with and Disciples to the Holy Evangelist and Apostle Saint
JOHN.

Whose Lives follow in this short Treatise, together with their famous Epistles
written to several Churches.

Translated according to the best Copies out of the Original Greek into
English, By Thomas Elborowe Vicar of Chiswick in the County of Middlesex.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for William Grantham, at the Sign of the
Black Bear in Westminster Hall. 1668.

TO THE REVEREND FATHER in GOD, ROBERT Lord Bishop of Worcester.
My Lord,
I Have been your debtor these many years, and although I was persuaded
formerly to appear in print in a short Exposition upon the Book of
Common Prayer, yet that small and imperfect piece did seek protection from the
wings of another. It is my happiness now to make choice of a Subject most
proper and fit for your Lordships Patronage; wherein Christianity and the Fence
about it, the Vine and the Hedge are so delineated, according to the Primitive
Patterns, that this present age, wherein we live, may blush and stand amazed to
see how much short they are in the practice of that Religion which they
profess, and be ashamed of themselves that they of the first Age should be
Christians indeed, whilst too many of this are only Christians in Name. It
has been very well observed by the Ancient Fathers, and as much by these two
as by any, Holy Polycarp, and Divine Ignatius (who fly to the sacred wings of
your Lordships protection to secure them from a second Martyrdom, which the
unkind world may threaten them withal) That Religion consists more in practice
than in speculation, and is rather an Occupation than a mere Profession. But I
will detain your Lordship no longer from the reading of them in our plain
English, whom you have so often conversed with in their own Language. Thus
having discharged a small part of my debt, which yet your Acceptance will
double upon me, I remain your Lordships debtor still, ever praying for your
Lordships health and happiness.

Your dutiful and obedient Son, Thomas Elborowe.

The Life and Death of Saint POLYCARP Martyr, Bishop of the Church of Smyrna,
and Disciple to Saint John the Evangelist.
POlycarp was a man of an excellent Spirit, an eminent Christian, fruitful in
every good work, the Disciple of the blessed Apostle and Evangelist Saint John,
not only instructed by the Apostles in the Doctrine of Christianity, and
continually conversant amongst them, who had seen Christ in the flesh; but he
was by the Apostles themselves ordained Bishop of the Church of Smyrna in Asia.
He was that famous Angel so much commended for his Piety, Patience, and
Constancy, Revel. 2. 8, 9, 10. when (...), very great persecutions disturbed
and vexed all Asia, and fell very heavy upon that City, where he was then
Metropolitan. Irenaeus, who was Polycarps Disciple, makes mention of (...), his
conversation with John, and gives him this Style, that Iren. epist. ad Florin.
he was (...), That blessed and Apostolical Iren. lib. 3. advers. haeres. c. 3.
Presbyter. He further reports of him thus, that he was (...), made Bishop over
the Church of Smyrna Tertul. in lib. de praescript. advers. haeres.
in Asia by the Apostles themselves. Tertullian, showing how the Apostolical
Churches derived their Successions, mentioned Polycarp placed over the Church
of Smyrna by Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib 3. (...).
John. He is styled by Eusebius, (...), a person very familiar with the
Apostles, and is said by the some author to have obtained (...), the
Episcopacie of the Church of Smyrna, by the joint suffrage Jerome. in Script.
eccles. catalog.
of those, who had seen the Lord, and were his Ministers. Jerome says he was a
Disciple of John the Apostle, and by him ordained Metropolitan Bishop of
Smyrna, for he was Totius Asiae Princeps, the Prince of all Asia. Gildas in
castig. cler. Britan.
Gildas says, he was Egregius Pastor, Christi testis, an excellent Pastor,
and Witness of Christ. The very heathens thinking to disgrace him the more did
give him this honorable Eulogie, that he was, (...), The Doctor of Asia, the
Father of the Christians. This godly Professor and great Prelate lived to a
very great age and finishing his life by a glorious Martyrdom, (...), Eusebius. l.
4. c. 12.
did as it were seal up by his Martyrdom, and put a Period to the persecution
which then raged. This happened under the reign of Marcus Aurelius Philosophus,
and Lucius Verus Roman Emperors. Very memorable things are recorded of this
great Saint and Martyr by Eusebius, to Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 4.
whom I refer my Reader. This briefly touching Polycarp himself. I come now to
speak as briefly of his Works and Writings. Diverse are by diverse attributed to
him. Some make mention of many Tracts, Homilies, and Epistles which he wrote,
and of Vid. Halloix. vit. Polycarp. c. 16.
One entire Book composed by him upon the Death of Saint John the Evangelist,
his Master. Suidas mentions Epistles written Suidas in (...). Iren. epist. ad
Florin.
by him to Dionysius the Areopagite, and to several Churches. Irenaeus, who was
his Disciple, mentions Epistles written by him, (...). To neighbor Churches,
and to certain of the Brethren. But these shall not be a matter of my further
inquiry, whether so, or not so. I shall now give you a brief account out of
some of the Ancients touching this Epistle Photius in Bibliothec. number. 126.
of his, written to the Philippians. Photius reports it to be read publicly in
Churches, his word is (...), and gives it out to be an Epistle, (...), full of
many admirable Admonitions, clear and plain, (...), according to the
Ecclesiastical form of interpretation Jerome. in Scrip. Eccles. catal.
then used. Jerome styles it Epistolam valde utilem, a very useful Epistle, and
reports it to be read in the Churches of Asia to his very time. Irenaeus says
it is (...), a most full, and complete Epistle, out of which all, who are
willing to learn, and have any care or value for their Iren. advers. haeres.
lib. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. (...). Suid. in (...).
Salvation, may learn (...), the exact form of Faith, and Doctrine of Truth.
Eusebius says the very same out of Irenaeus. Sophronius and Suidas style it an
Epistle (...), very admirable. Maximus the Scholiast reports him to have
written Epistles to the Philippians, but that is supposed a mistake, (...)
being put for (...). This Epistle so excellent for the building of us up in
Faith and Love, and in whatever may adorn Christian Profession, I now offer to
the charitable and courteous Reader, translated into English, out of that Greek
copy, which was published by the Right Reverend Prelate, and learned
Antiquarie, Doctor Usher, Primate of Ireland, and printed at Oxford, Anno Dom.
1644.

The Epistle of Saint Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, and holy Martyr, to the
Philippians.
POLYCARP, and the Presbyters with him, to the Church of God within the Diocese
of Philippi;
Mercy unto you, and Peace from God Almighty, and from the Lord Jesus Christ
our Savior be multiplied.
I congratulate you highly in our Lord Jesus Christ, in that ye have embraced
those Patterns of true love, and accompanied (as became you) those who were
involved in holy Bands, which are the Diadems of those, who are truly the
elected of God, and of our Lord; and because the root of your faith, which was
preached to you, continues firm even from the beginning until now, and brings
forth fruit unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who suffered for our sins even to the
death, whom God raised up, having loosed the bands of death, in whom, having
not seen him, ye believe, and believing rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory. Into which joy many desire to enter, knowing that through grace ye
are saved, not by works but by the will of God through Jesus Christ. Wherefore
having your Loins girt about, serve God with fear and truth, forsaking empty
vain babble, and the error of many, believing in him who raised up our Lord
Jesus Christ from the dead, and has given to him glory, and a throne at his
right hand. To whom all earthly and heavenly things are subject, and every
thing that has breath pays service, who shall come to judge the quick and
dead, and whose blood God will strictly require at the hands of those, who do
not believe in him. But he, who raised him from the dead, will raise up us
also, if we do his will, and walk in his Commandments, and love the things
which he loved; Abstaining from all unrighteousness, incontinence,
covetousness, detraction, fals-witnessbearing, not rendering evil for evil,
reproach for reproach, railing for railing, cursing for cursing, but remembering
what the Lord said teaching in this wise, Judge not that ye be not judged,
forgive, and it shall be forgiven you, be merciful, that ye may obtain mercy,
in what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again; it is also said,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, and they, who are persecuted for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. These things (Brethren) I write unto
you concerning Righteousness, not imposing any commands upon you as from my
self, but because ye have moved me so to do. For neither I, nor any other like
unto me, can attain to the wisdom of blessed and glorious PAUL, who, being
amongst you, and conversing face to face with men then living, taught you
exactly and firmly the word of Truth; who also being absent wrote Epistles unto
you, by which, if ye give heed unto them, ye may be built up in the faith,
which was delivered unto you; which Faith is the mother of you all, being
followed by Hope, and led on by Love, which directs you to God, and Christ, and
our Neighbor. For if any man is possessed of these, he has fulfilled the
command of Righteousness. He, who is possessed of Love, is free from all sin*
but Covetousness is the root of all evil* Knowing therefore that we brought
nothing into the world, and that we shall carry nothing out, Let us arm our
selves with the armor of Righteousness, and teach our selves in the first
place to walk in the Commandments of the Lord. And let us in the next place
teach the Women, that they walk according to that rule of faith, which was
delivered unto them, and in love, and holiness, and that they love entirely
their own husbands with all sincerity, and all others equally with all
continency, and that they instruct their children in the discipline and fear of
God. And let us teach the Widows to be sober and wise, according to the faith
of the Lord, and to make intercession for all without intermission, keeping
themselves from all detraction, accusation, fals-witness-bearing, covetousness,
and all evil, knowing that they are as the Altars of God, who observes the
faults of every one of us; for nothing is hid from him, neither of our
reasonings, understandings, nor secrets of our hearts, and because we know that
God cannot be mocked, we ought to walk worthy of his command, and of glory.
Likewise let the Deacons be unblameable in the presence of his righteousness,
for they are the ministers of God in Christ, and not of men; Let them not be
accusers, nor double-tongued, nor covetous, but continent in all things,
compassionate, careful, walking according to the truth of the Lord, who was
made the minister of all, from whom, if we please him in this world, we shall
receive a future reward; for he has engaged for us to raise us from the dead,
and, if we have our conversation worthy of him, we shall also reign with him,
as we believe. In like manner let the Young men be unblameable in all things,
chiefly let them study chastity, and restrain themselves as with a bridle from
all that is evil. For it is a good thing to be elevated in our desires above
all the desirable things of this world, because all concupiscence of the world
warreth against the Spirit, and neither fornicators, nor effeminate persons,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind shall inherit the Kingdom of God, nor
they, who do absurd things. Therefore it is necessary that ye abstain from all
such things, being subject to the Presbyters and Deacons, as to God and Christ.
And let the Virgins walk with a blameless and chaste Conscience. Let the
Presbyters be of tender bowels, compassionate toward all, converters of those
who are in error, visiters of all that are sick, careful of the Widow, the
Orphans, and the indigent, always providing that which is good in the sight of
God and men, not given to wrath, no respecters of persons, not unjust in
judgment, keeping themselves far from all covetousness, not hastily believing
any thing against any man, not rash in passing judgment against any, knowing
that all of us are the debtors of sin; and, as we pray the Lord would forgive
us, we ought also to forgive, for we are continually in the sight of the Lord
God, and must all stand before the Tribunal of Christ, and every one of us give
an account for himself. Therefore let us serve him with fear and all reverence,
as he has given in Commandment, and as the Apostles have evangelized to us,
and the Prophets, who preached beforehand the coming of our Lord. Be zealous of
that which is good, and keep your selves from scandals, avoiding the company of
false brethren, who carry the Name of the Lord in hypocrisy only to seduce
vain men into error. For every one, who does not confess, that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is Antichrist; and he, who does not confess, the Martyrdom
of the Cross, is of the devil; and he, who shall pervert the Oracles of the
Lord to serve his own private lusts, and shall say that there is no
Resurrection, nor judgment, is the firstborn of Satan. Therefore let us
decline the folly of many, and their false doctrines, and give heed to that
word, which was delivered to us from the beginning. Let us attend unto Prayers
with all sobrierie, and unto Fastings with all perseverance; and in our
supplications let us pray unto the Al-seeing God, that he would not lead us
into temptation, as the Lord has taught, for the spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak. Let us endure without fainting, resting our selves upon our hope
and pledge of righteousness, which is Jesus Christ; who did bear our sins in
his own body upon the tree, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth, but he patiently endured all things for us, that we might live through
him. Therefore let us be the followers of his patience; and if we suffer for
his Name, we glorify him; for he set us such an Example in himself, as we
believe. Therefore I exhort you all to obey the word of Righteousness, and to
exercise all Patience, as ye have seen it exemplified before your eyes, not
only in the blessed Ignatius, Zosimus, and Rufus, but in others among you, in
Paul himself, and the rest of the Apostles. For ye may be confident, that all
these have not run in vain, but in Faith and Righteousness, and having obtained
the place due unto them, are now with the Lord, with whom also they suffered;
for they loved not this present world, but him, who died for us, and was for us
by God raised again from death to life. Stand fast therefore in these things,
and follow the Pattern of the Lord Be steadfast in the Faith, immutable, Lovers
of the brotherhood, kind one to another, united in Truth, performing all
meekness each to other, and despising none. When ye can do good, do not defer
it, for Alms delivers from death. Be subject one to another, having your
conversation unblameable among the Gentiles; that your selves may receive
praise from your good works, and the Lord be not blasphemed by your means. But
woe to that man, by whom the Name of the Lord is blasphemed. Therefore teach all
men sobriety, and be your selves conversant in it. I am very much troubled for
Valens, who was made a Presbyter among you, because he is unmindful of his
place, which was committed unto him. I therefore admonish you, that ye abstain
from Covetousness, and that ye be chaste and true. Keep your selves from all
evil. But how can he preach this to another, who cannot govern himself in these
matters? If a man keep not himself from Covetousness, he will be defiled with
Idolatry, and accounted an heathen. But who knows not the judgment of the
Lord? Do we not know, that the Saints shall judge the world, as Paul teaches?
But I have neither perceived, nor heard of any such thing among you, amongst
whom blessed Paul labored, who are also in the beginning of his Epistle. For
he glories of you in all those Churches, which only knew God at that time, for
as yet we had not known him. Therefore, my Brethren, I am grieved for him, and
for his wife, to whom the Lord give true Repentance. And be ye sober as to this
very thing, esteem not such as as enemies, but restore them as frail and erring
members, that the whole body of you may be saved, for in so doing ye build up
your selves. I trust that ye are well exercised in the holy Scriptures, and
that nothing is hid from you, which thing is not yet granted unto me. As it is
written, Be angry, and sin not; let not the sun go down upon your wrath.
Blessed is he, who shall believe, which thing I believe to be in you. Now the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ the eternal
Highpriest, and Son of God, build you up in faith, and truth, and in all
meekness, that ye may be without anger; and in all patience, longanimity,
long-sufferance, and chastity; and give you a lot and part amongst his Saints,
and to us together with you, and to all, who are under heaven, that shall
believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in his Father, who raised him from the
dead. Pray for all Saints. Pray also for Kings and Potentates, and Princes, for
those, who persecute you, and hate you, and for the enemies of the Cross, that
your fruit may be manifested in all, and ye may be perfect in him. Ye and also
Ignatius have written unto me, that, if any man go into Syria, he may carry
also your Letters, which I will either do my self, if I have a fit opportunity,
or he, whom I shall send upon your message also. According to your request we
have sent unto you those Epistles of Ignatius, which he wrote unto us, and so
many others of his as we had by us, which are subjoyned to this Epistle, and by
which ye may be very much profited; for they, contain in them faith, and
patience, and all that is necessary for the building of you up in our Lord.
Signify unto us what ye shall certainly know concerning Ignatius himself, and
those who are with him. I have written unto you these things by Crescens, whom
I formerly commended to you, and do now commend, for he was conversant amongst
us unblameably, and I believe he was the same amongst you. Ye shall also have
his sister commended, when she shall come unto you. Be safe in the Lord Jesus
Christ in grace, with all yours.

Amen.
The Life and Death of Holy IGNATIUS, Bishop of the Church of Antioch in Syria,
Holy Martyr and Disciple of Saint John the Evangelist:
Together with a true account of these following Epistles of his; 1. To the
Smyrneans. 2. To Polycarp. 3. To the Ephesians. 4. To the Magnesians. 5. To the
Philadelphians. 6. To the Trallians. 7. To the Romans.
All faithfully translated out of the Original Greek into English, according to
the most genuine Copy found in the Library of Lawrence De Medicis by the
Learned Isaac Vossius, and by him published at Amsterdam in the year of our
Lord. 1646.
THis holy man Ignatius was a man of an extraordinary Zeal, vast Charity, most
clear Apprehensions as to Divine things, devout and religious, even to a
Miracle. He was styled Theopherus, as he calls himself in all his Epistles,
either (as is supposed by some) because he was that Little Child mentioned in
the Gospel, which Christ took up in his arms, when he would teach his Disciples
Humility by the low Character of Childhood; or because he did constantly bear
God about with him in his holy and pure heart. My purpose is in brief, to show
you what he was, of what esteem in the Church, and how he ended his life by a
glorious Martyrdom; which I shall do out of those Writers of Antiquity, who
were (...), persons worthy of credit, and of very venerable esteem in the
Church of Christ. Origin reports him, Episcopum Antiochiae Homil. 6. in Luc.
post Petrum secundum, The second Bishop of Antioch after Peter. Athanasius In
lib. de Synod. Arimin. and Seleue.
said he was, (...). Made Bishop of Antioch after the Apostles, and a Martyr of
Christ. Irenaeus has written Iren lib. 5. advers. haer s. c. 28.
of him thus, that he was, (...), for a testimony of his faith toward God
condemned to beasts. Chrysostom says, (...), Chrysost^in Ignat encom. ^om. 5.
edit. ^avil p. 499.
that he was familiarly conversant with the Apostles, nourished up together with
them; (...), and that he was by them esteemed worthy of so great a
Principality; meaning undoubtedly the Episcopacie of the Church of Antioch, for
he says presently after, that he was not only (...), worthy of so great a
Principality, but (...), he obtained that dignity from those holy persons,
(...), and the hands of the blessed Apostles themselves were laid upon his holy
Theod r. Dialog 1.
head. Theodoret says he was, (...), a most famous Doctor of the Church, and
that he received, (...), the Grace of the High Priesthood by the right hand of
glorious Peter, and that after he had governed Jerome. Scriptor. eccles.
catalog. Socrat. eccles. hist. l. 6. c. 8. Evagr. eccles. hist. lib. 1. c. 16.
Gild as in cactig^^. Cler. Britan.
the Church of Antioch, he was crowned with Martyrdom. Jerome says he was the
third Bishop of the Church of Antioch after Saint Peter the Apostle. Socrates
says the same, and that he was very much a companion of the Apostles. He is
styled by Evagrius, I (...), the Divine Ignatius. Gildas in his time said, that
the British Clergy were not only not good enough to be accounted Priests, but
scarce good enough to be esteemed mean Christians in comp r^son of him.
Scaliger s is he was Vir singulari eruditione, a man of singular Learning.
Neander says he was, Vir magni spiritus, fidei, and zeli, a man of a great
spirit, faith, and zeal. Baronius styles him, Copiosam Apostolicarum
traditionum Apothecam, fortemque adversus haereticos armaturam. A copious
Storehouse of Apostolical traditions, and a strong armor against heretics.
He suffered a glorious Jerome. in Script. eccles. catal.
Martyrdom under the Emperor Trajan, and being brought bound from Antioch to
Rome was condemned to be devoured by beasts. Here I conclude touching Ignatius
himself. I come now to speak something of his Writings. It is the judgment of
learned men, that many Epistles are ascribed to him, which were never written
by him, but were the Epistles of some latter supposititious writers, who did
imitate his Style, which are these Epistles following. 1. The Epistle written
from Philippi to the Church of Tarsus. 2. The Epistle written from Philippi to
the Church of Antioch. 3. The Epistle written from Philippi to Heron Deacon of
the Church of Antioch. 4. The Epistle written to the Philippians touching
Baptism, which Epistle makes mention of several Feasts, the Quadragesimal Fast,
and the Passion week to be observed, and from Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. c. 13.
Sect. 29.
this very passage Mr John Calvin took his occasion to speak against the
Epistles of Ignatius, or rather against that Epistle; now his objection being
against that, which is Vid. D. Rivet. Critic. Sacr. c. 1.
not numbered amongst the Genuine Epistles, can make no thing against those
Epistles of his, which will hereafter appear to be Genuine. 5. An Epistle
written from Antioch to Maria Cassobolita is ascribed to Ignatius. 6. Two
Epistles written to Saint John the Evangelist. 7. One short Epistle written to
the blessed Virgin Mary; these are all ascribed to Ignatius. Indeed in the
forementioned Epistles we may meet with much of Ignatius Spirit, Style, Method,
Matter, and his very Expressions, yet they are not accounted his Genuine
Epistles; and in regard they are not received for the true Epistles of
Ignatius, nor found in that Sylloge or Collection made by Polycarp, at the end
of his Epistle to the Philippians, therefore, though I have translated them, I
have forborne the publishing of them, and yet there are many excellent things in
them very much conducing to Christianity. Having hitherto given a brief account
of those Epistles which are supposed false, I come now to make enquiry after
those, which are without all question true. First, that Ignatius wrote Epistles
is not to be questioned, unless we will also question all Antiquity; for the
Ancient Fathers of the Church make frequent mention of his Epistles, and fetch
Citations out of them as being of great moment, and good authority. Eusebius by
name, tells us expressly what Epistles Ignatius wrote, and from whence he wrote
them, and to whom. Whilst he was at Smyrna, and upon his voyage to Rome, he
wrote Epistles from Smyrna, to the Ephesians, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 3.
(...).
Magnesians, Trallians, and Romans; when he was gone from Smyrna to Troas, he
wrote from Troas to the Church of Philadelphia, to the Church of Smyrna, and to
Polycarp. Here we have the just number of those Epistles which were accounted
his, being seven in all. Well, though we have found out the seven Epistles
which were his, yet we have not brought our search to the full point, the
proper (...); for there were several Copies of these Epistles found in several
Libraries, and Manuscripts, by the diligent search of able and learned men
fitted for such an employment. Now of these Copies some were corrupt and
interpolate, such were the Epistles published in Greek with the Vulgar Latin
version by the Right Reverend Father in God Bishop Usher Primate of Ireland,
and by him printed at Oxford, Anno Dom. 1644. Master Isaac Vossius published
the same in an Edition of his, which was printed at Amsterdam, Anno Dom. 1646.
I believe Master John Calvin, the Centuriators, Doctor Whitaker, and some
others made their Exceptions and Objections against these Epistles, and justly
enough rejecting them as (...), and (...), refuse and adulterate stuff; for
their quarrel was not against the Epistles of Ignatius, but against the
corruptions, and interpolations inserted, and put into his Epistles. And this
is the opinion Rivet. Crit. Sacr. c. 1.
of Doctor Rivet, Calvinum non in Ignatium, sed in quisquilias and nanias
depravatorum Ignatii invectum esse. That Calvin inveighed not against Ignatius,
but against those who corrupted and depraved him. But besides these, there is a
later, truer, and more refined Copy, wherein are the very Epistles of Ignatius
found out, by the diligent search of Master Isaac Vossius, all in Greek (the
Epistle to the Romans only excepted) which is called the Laurenti^n Copy,
because it was found in the Library of Lawrence de Medicis, and published by
the said Isaac Vossius, together with the forementioned Edition printed at
Amsterdam, Anno Dom. 1646. which Copy agrees word for word with two ancient
Latin Manuscripts lately found out by the Right Reverend Bishop Usher, one in
the public Library of Gunwel and Caius College in Cambridge, the other in the
private Library of Doctor Richard Montague late Bishop of Norwich, both which
Manuscripts are printed with the Edition of Bishop Usher, Anno Dom. 1644. This
is judged to be the most true, pure, and incorrupt Copy of Ignatius, which is
now exstant, containing in it all that ever was cited by the Ancient Fathers
out of Ignatius, and agreeing very exactly with the exemplar used by Eusebius
more then 1300 years ago; in so much that Doctor Blundel upon the sight of this
Copy confessed, Se gratulatum seculo nostro, quod illud ipsum exemplar, quo
ante 1300 annos Vid. D. Blund. praef. in animad. contr. D. Ham. p. 40.
usus erat Eusebius, novam ipsi propediem affulsuram lucem sponderet, That he
congratulated our age, because that very Copy, which Eusebius used 1300 years
ago, did promise now to bestow new light upon the present age. This is the Copy
which I have attempted the Translation of, out of the Original Greek into our
Vulgar English, and that for the use and benefit of the Vulgar and common
people, that they may be able to discern the true state of the Christian
Church, its Regimen, Doctrine, and Discipline in those very times, which were,
I am sure, nearest to the times of the Apostles, for Ignatius lived with, and
was Disciple to one of them. But before I set down my Translation, I shall give
you the account of Master Isaac Vossius himself touching the Edition by him
published, and according to which I have made my Translation, as it here
follows translated out of Latin, so exactly as I could;

Most courteous Reader,

SO it happens (as thou and I may have very often observed) that all things,
which are either formed by nature, or framed by art, are of such a condition,
that the most perfect in their kind do still appear the more beautiful, and
artificial, as men employ their study and endeavors in the contemplation of
them. Some such thing has happened to me touching Ignatius, in whose Epistles,
when ever I gave them a second reading, I still observed something not observed
before, from which they challenged my further approbation. So often (I say) as
I reassumed them into my hands, so often did something appear in them, by which
I could make discovery of the genuine writer of them. One while that elegant
Simplicity, which was most suitable to the age wherein he lived; another while
the verity and harmony of words and things so every way corresponding; besides
this the zeal and fervencie of the Martyr, which as in other of his Epistles so
in that to the Romans is most conspicuous. All these are a sufficient evidence
unto me for the owning, and finding out of the true Author. Which raises the
greater admiration in me, that there should be any persons, who do not only
deny these to be the very Epistles of Ignatius, but also doubt not to affirm
that he wrote none at all. Neither do they use any other argument to persuade
us to think that Ignatius wrote no Epistles, but only this, because (say they)
no ancient Author before Eusebius makes mention of them. For they confidently
affirm that those sayings of Ignatius, which are extant in Irenaeus, and
Origin, were not taken from the Epistles of Ignatius, but from his own mouth.
Certainly those very learned men took little notice of that place in Origin,
which is to be seen in his sixth Homily upon Luke, By chance (says he) I found
in an Epistle of a certain Martyr (I mean Ignatius the second Bishop of Antioch
after Peter, who in his persecution fought with beasts at Rome) it elegantly
written thus, That the Virginity of Mary was a secret kept from the Prince of
this World. But we shall now make our approach to more ancient times, that so
the Antiquity and Verity of this our Ignatius may be the more apparent, and the
error of those men also be the more conspicuous, who are otherwise persuaded
of him. The first therefore, who made mention of these Epistles of Ignatius is
Polycarp the Martyr, in his Epistle to the Philippians, whose words are these,
We have sent unto you those Epistles of Ignatius, which he sent unto us, and so
many other Epistles of his as we had by us, according to your desires, which
are all annexed to this Epistle, out of which Epistles ye may reap very much
benefit, for they contain in them Faith and Patience, and whatever is
convenient to build us up in the Lord. Now it cannot be doubted by any man, but
that Polycarp had the Epistles of Ignatius, to whom amongst his seven, Ignatius
did in particular entitle one; which Polycarp himself gives testimony of; when
he says, Ye have written unto me, and also Ignatius. Now Polycarp was about 60
years survivor to Ignatius. So that I propound this question; What appearance
of truth can there possibly be, that (so long as Polycarp was alive) these true
Epistles of Ignatius should be suppressed, and others suborned in the place of
them? Did Polycarp destroy the first, that there should be a necessity to
devise others in their stead? I think no man will render himself so ridiculous,
as to make an attempt to prove any such thing. Now I proceed. If Polycarp had
these Epistles, certainly Irenaeus his Scholar who cited them, had the same;
and Origin received them from Irenaeus, whose Citation out of them we mentioned
a little before. And I am of opinion that no man can imagine, that the Epistles
of Ignatius cited by Eusebius, were any other Epistles then those which Origin
made use of: Athanasius, Jerome, Chrisost^m, Theodoret, Antiochus, Damascen,
Photius, and innumerable others, who all of them made use of the testimony of
Ignatius, did follow that Copy, which Eusebius had. So that Ignatius was never
accounted of by any as Apocryphal, and yet all the Books of the New Testament
had not the luck to escape so, but some were questioned as to their Original
and authority. Seeing therefore we have such a continued succession of eminent
men, who have given their approbation touching these Epistles, I do not see by
what argument they can possibly defend their opinion, who are otherwise
persuaded of them. It is confessed his Epistles have been corrupted, and
abused, and been read over with their corruptions and interpolations to these
present times; yet there have not been wanting men of piercing judgments, who
have discovered truth to be in those very interpolate Epistles; Andrew Rivet an
eminent man makes this out sufficiently. However I now publish those Epistles,
which are genuine, and in all respects agreeing with the testimony of the
Ancients; so that they, who will deny these, must deny also that this Martyr
ever wrote any Epistles. But let them enjoy their own opinion, for my part I am
assured that they will meet with very few of the same, and none that can be of
it with reason. But (Courteous Reader) thou art indebted to the Medicaean
Library, that thou have these writings of Ignatius pure, and not counterfeit;
and thou art indebted to the most Serene Prince Ferdinand the second, the great
Duke of Etruria, through whose incomparable Love to Learning and Study I gained
an opportunity of having the use of that famous Library, and so of finding out
this incomparable treasure of Ignatius, which we now exhibit and publish to the
world.

The Epistles of Saint Ignatius.
To the Smyrneans.
Ignatius, who is also Theophorus, to the Church of God the Father, and of the
beloved Jesus Christ, which has obtained mercy in all Grace, replete with
Faith and Love, failing in no good gift, most becoming God, and fruitful in
holiness, which is at Smyrna in Asia, be very much joy in the immaculate Spirit
by the Word of God.

I Glorify the God Jesus Christ, who has filled you with Wisdom. For I
understand that ye are perfected in an immovable faith, and are as persons
fastened with nails to the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, both in flesh and in
spirit; and well-grounded in love by the blood of Christ, having a full
assurance in our Lord; who was truly of the stock of David, according to the
flesh; the Son of God according to the will and power of God, truly born of a
Virgin, baptized by John, that he might fulfill all righteousness, and who truly
suffered for us in the flesh under Pontius Pilate and Herod the Tetrarch. From
the fruit of whom we are, even from his divinely blessed Passion, that he might
by his Resurrection lift up an ensign to all ages, to the Saints, and to all
who do believe in him, whether they be Jews or Gentiles in one body of his
Church. For he suffered all these things for us that we might be saved. And he
truly suffered, as also he truly raised up himself; neither did he suffer only
in appearance, as some infidels affirm, who themselves are only in appearance,
and according to their wisdom shall it happen unto them being incorporeal and
daemoniacks. For I my self saw him in the flesh after his Resurrection, and do
believe that he is risen. And when he came to those, who were with Peter, he
said unto them, Take hold of me, handle me, and see me, for I am not an
incorporeal spirit. And straightway they touched him, and believed in him being
convinced by his flesh, and by his spirit. And hereupon they contemned death,
for they found themselves to be above it. And after his Resurrection he eat and
drank with them as one in the flesh, though he was in spirit united to the
Father. Touching these things (Beloved) I admonish you, however I know ye are
already of this persuasion. I do it to preserve you from beasts in the shape of
men, whom it is necessary for you not to entertain, but to avoid as much as
possible. Only pray for them, if happily they may repent, which is a thing
very difficult. But Jesus Christ, who is our true life, has the power of this.
But if these things were done by our Lord only seemingly, then am I also
seemingly in bonds. And why have I yielded up my self to be put to death? why
to the fire, to the sword, to the beasts? but because to be nigh to the sword
is to be nigh to God, and to be enclosed with beasts is to be compassed about
with God. Only in the Name of Jesus Christ do I endure all things, that I may
suffer with him, who is himself made a perfect man, and now strengthens me.
Whom some ignorant men deny, but they are rather denied by him, being more the
Preachers of death than of truth; whom neither the Prophets have persuaded, nor
the Law of Moses, nor yet the Gospel hitherto, nor those sufferings of ours,
which are according to man. For they are of the same mind concerning us. But
what would it advantage me, should any man speak in my praise, and yet
blaspheme my Lord, denying him to have taken flesh upon him? For he, who
confesses not this, has perfectly denied him, and puts him to death. But I am
unwilling to write down their infidel names; neither may I make any particular
remembrance of them, until they shall happily repent into a belief of the
Passion, which is our Resurrection. Let no man be deceived. For if things in
heaven, and the glory of Angels, and Rulers visible and invisible believe not
in the blood of Christ, it will be even unto them condemnation. He who
receives it, may receive it. Let place puff up no man; for Faith and Charity
is All, and nothing is to be preferred before them. But observe those who are
otherwise opinioned of the grace of Jesus Christ, which came unto us, how
contrary they are to the judgment of God. They have no regard at all of
Charity, they neither care for the Widow, nor Orphan, nor any afflicted person
be he bond or free, hungry or thirsty They absent themselves from the
Eucharist and Prayer, because they will not confess the Eucharist to be the
flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which suffered for our sins, and which the
Father by his goodness raised from death to life. Therefore contradicting this
gift of God, and disputing about it they die, but it would be better for them
to Love it, that they may rise again. It is very convenient that ye abstain
from such persons, and that ye have no converse with them, neither privately,
nor publicly. But that ye give heed unto the Prophets, and chiefly to the
Gospel, wherein the Passion is made manifest unto us, and the Resurrection is
completed. But avoid Divisions as the beginning of evils. And be all of you
observant of the Bishop, as Jesus Christ was observant of the Father; and
observe the Presbytery as the Apostles; and Reverence the Deacons as the
command of God. Let no man presume to do any thing belonging to the Church
without the Bishop. And let that Eucharist only be accounted firm, which is
either performed by the Bishop himself, or by his License. Where the Bishop
shall appear, there let the multitude be, for where Jesus Christ is, there is
the Catholic Church. It is neither lawful to baptize, nor to keep the
Love-feast without the Bishop; but whatever he shall approve of, that is
well-pleasing to God, that so every thing, which is done, may be firm and
established. Furthermore, it is a blessed thing to grow sober, and whilst we
have opportunity, to return to God by repentance. It is a becoming thing to
know God and the Bishop. He, who honors the Bishop, is honored of God; but
he, who does any thing without the Bishops approbation, performs a service to
the Devil. Therefore let all things abound among you in grace, for ye are
worthy. Ye have every way refreshed me, and Jesus Christ will refresh you. Ye
have loved me both when I was absent, and present, God will requite you; and if
ye patiently endure all things for his sake, ye shall enjoy him. Ye did well in
that ye gave an honorable reception to Philon, Rheus, and Agathopus as the
Ministers of God-Christ, who have accompanied me for the Word of God. They also
give thanks unto the Lord for you. because ye have every way refreshed them.
Nothing, which ye have done to them, shall be lost as to you. I could offer up
this my spirit upon the service of your Souls, and upon the same account carry
about these my bonds, which ye have neither despised, nor been ashamed of;
neither will Jesus Christ the perfect faith be ashamed of you. Your Prayer
reached as far as to the Church which is in Antioch of Syria, from whence being
carried a prisoner for God in most venerable bonds, I salute you all. And
however I am not worthy of such an honor being the last that came thence, yet
by the will of God I was accounted worthy, not from any thing which I know
worthy in my self, but through his grace, which I pray may be perfectly
bestowed upon me, that through your Prayers I may obtain God. And that your
work may be perfected as well on earth as in heaven, it would be an honorable
Service very much becoming your Church, which is worthy of God, to appoint some
fit person for the honor of God, and to dispatch him into Syria, to
congratulate them for their restored peace, that they have again received their
proper splendor, and that their little body is reestablished in such a way as
is fit for them. Indeed it seems unto me a worthy work for you to send some
person from amongst you with an Epistle to join in glory with them, for that
tranquillity, which is amongst them according to God, and that they are now
come to the quiet haven through your Prayers. Being perfect your selves mind
the things which are perfect. For if ye have but a will to do good, God is
ready to assist you. The Love of the Brethren, who are at Troas, saluteth you,
whence also I write unto you by Burrus, whom ye sent along with me together
with your Ephesian brethren, who has refreshed me in all things. I wish all
would become imitatours of him, who is the Exemplar of the Ministry of God.
Grace shall remunerate to him according to all that he has done to me. I
salute the Divine Bishop, and most venerable Presbytery, and the Deacons my
fellow servants, and all in the name of Jesus Christ man by man, and together,
both in his flesh and blood, passion and resurrection, carnally and
spiritually, in the name and unity of God and of you. Grace be unto you, and
Mercy, and Peace, and Patience always. I salute the houses of my brethren,
together with the women, children, virgins, and select widows. Be strong to
me-ward in the power of the spirit. Philon, who is with me, saluteth you. I
salute the house of Tavia, whom I pray that she may be established in Faith and
Love both carnally and spiritually. I salute Alke a name to me very desirable.
Farewell in the grace of God.

To the Smyrneans from Troas.
To POLYCARP.
Ignatius, who is also Theophorus, to Polycarp Bishop of the Church of the
Smyrneans, who has rather God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ for his
Bishop, be very much joy.

HAving embraced thy judgment, which is according to God, founded as upon a
rock and immovable, I glory exceedingly that I was accounted worthy of thy
unblameable presence, which I would enjoy in God. I exhort thee by that grace
wherewith thou art endued, that thou would add unto thy race in admonishing
all men that they may be saved. Justify thy place by using all diligence both
in a carnal and spiritual way. Be careful to preserve Unity, than which nothing
is better. Support all as the Lord supporteth thee. Bear with all men in
charity as also thou do. Find leisure to be constant in Prayers. Desire a
larger understanding than yet thou have. Be watchful, keeping in thy possession
a vigilant spirit. Converse with all man by man as God shall enable thee. Like
a complete Champion bear the infirmities of all, the more the labor is, the
more is the gain. It is not so much for thy commendation to love eminent
Disciples, as by thy Meekness to bring into subjection those who are more
pernicious. Every wound is not healed with the same Plaster. Mitigate their
Paroxysms by Embrocations. Be in all things wise as the Serpent, and harmless
as the Dove. For this cause art thou carnal and spiritual, that thou may use
a gentle hand in the managerie of those things, which are manifest to thee;
praying that those things also, which are concealed, may in time be made
manifest, that so thou may be defective in nothing, but abounding in every
grace. This very season calls upon thee to desire the fruition of God, as
Governors of ships wait for the winds; and he, who is tossed with the waves,
covets after the haven. Be watchful as a Champion of God; that which is
deposited for thee, is incorruption and life eternal, of which also thou art
persuaded. I would in all things freely offer up my self for thee, and these my
bonds, which thou have loved. Let not those persons at all astonish thee, who
seem to be persons worthy of Credit, and yet are teachers of strange doctrines.
Stand thou firm as an Anvil, which is beaten upon. It is the part of a gallant
Champion to be stripped of his skin and yet to overcome. And in this respect it
is necessary for us patiently to endure all things for God, that he may
patiently bear with us. Be more diligent than yet thou have been; Consider the
seasons, and wait for him, who is above season, not limited to time, invisible,
yet for our sakes made visible, not capable of touch or suffering, yet
suffering for us, and enduring every manner of way for our sakes. Let not the
widows be neglected, under God do thou take care of them. Let nothing be done
without thy sentence, and do thou nothing without the sentence of God, that
whatsoever thou do may be established. Let Congregations be gathered more
frequently, and take the names of all persons. Let neither men nor
maidservants be despised by thee, neither suffer them to become proud, but let
them be more and more servants to the glory of God, that so they may obtain a
better freedom from God. Let them not love the common freedom, that they may
not be found the servants of Concupiscence. Flee evil arts, but especially have
no conferences about them. Bespeak my sisters that they love the Lord Christ,
and that they furnish their husbands with all necessaries both for their
fleshly and spiritual estate. And in like manner admonish my brethren in the
name of Jesus Christ to love their wives as the Lord loves the Church. If a
man can continue chaste to the honor of the flesh of our Lord, let him remain
so, but let him not glory. For if he glory in it, he will be destroyed, and if
he would be more taken notice of than the Bishop, he is corrupted. It is meet
that they who marry and are given in marriage should be joined together by the
sentence of the Bishop, that so the marriage may be according to God, and not
according to concupiscence. Let all things be done to the honor of God. Be
mindful of the Bishop, that God may be mindful of you. I could give my life for
those persons who are subject to the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, and wish
that I may receive my part in God together with them. Labor together one for
another, strive together, run together, suffer together, sleep together, awake
together as the Stewards, Assessors, and Ministers of God. Do things pleasing
to him, whom ye fight for, and whose soldiers ye are, from whom ye expect your
salarie. Let none among you be found a desertor of his Colors. Let your
Baptism arm you, Faith be your helmet, Love your spear, Patience your whole
armor, and your Works your gage, that ye may receive a reward worthy of you.
Therefore bear patiently in meekness one with another, as God bears with you.
Let me enjoy you always. But in that the Church, which is in Antioch of Syria,
is at peace through your Prayers, as it is manifested to me, I was therefore
the more cheerful, and intent upon the things of God without distraction, that
by any means I may through sufferings enjoy God, and be found your Disciple at
the Resurrection. O Polycarp, most blessed of God, it becomes thee to gather
together a Council most becoming God, and to appoint some worthy person, whom
ye esteem highly in love, whom ye look upon as a diligent man, fit to be called
a Messenger of God; and that this honor be bestowed upon him, To go into Syria
there to spread abroad your forward Charity to the glory of Christ. A
Christian has no power over himself, but is to attend the things of God. When
ye shall have dispatched this business, tho work shall be ascribed to God and
to you. For I believe that through Grace ye are prepared for so good a work
pleasing to God; and knowing how compendiously ye are capable of truth, I have
exhorted you in few Letters. But because I cannot write unto all the Churches,
in regard I am suddenly to sail from Troas to Neapolis, as I am commanded; thou
shall write to those other Churches, who art possessed with the mind of God,
that they do the same thing. That they, who are able, may send footposts,
others Epistles by thy Messengers, that ye may all be glorified by an eternal
work, as thou art worthy. I salute all by name, and the wife of Epitropus, with
her whole house, and her childrens. I salute my beloved Attalus; I salute him,
who shall be accounted worthy to go into Syria; I pray that the grace which is
in our God Jesus Christ, may be always with him. In whom do ye continue
permanent in the Unity and Visitation of God. I salute Alke a name desirable
to me. Farewell in the Lord.

To Polycarp.
To the Ephesians.
Ignatius, who is also Theophorus, to the Church blessed in the greatness of
God the Father with all fullness, praedetermined before ages to be ever
permanent unto glory, immutable, united, elect by real sufferings, through the
will of the Father and Jesus Christ our God. To the Church worthy of all
blessedness which is in Ephesus of Asia, be very much joy in Jesus Christ, and
in immaculate grace.

APproving of thy name in God highly beloved, which ye have possessed by a just
title according to the faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus our Savior, I
exhort you to continue followers of God, and that* being re-inlivened by the
blood of God, ye perfect that work which is so suitable to you. For ye heard
that I was a prisoner from Syria for the common Name and Hope, and that I hoped
through your Prayers that I should be enabled to fight with beasts at Rome,
that so I might become through Martyrdom a Disciple of him, Who offered up
himself to God for us an oblation and sacrifice. I have compendiously
apprehended your very numerous multitude in the name of God by Onesimus your
Bishop in the flesh, whose charity is beyond expression; whom I beseech you to
love according to Jesus Christ, and all of you to be like unto him. Blessed be
he, who has bestowed so worthy a Bishop upon you, so worthy of him. And I pray
that my fellow servant Burrus, who is your Deacon, every way blessed according
to God, may continue to the honor of you and the Bishop. Crocus also, who is
worthy of God and of you, whom I have received as the Exemplar of your Charity,
has refreshed me in all things, as the Father of Jesus Christ will also give
refreshing unto him, and to Onesimus, and Burrus, and Euplus, and Fronton, in
whom I have viewed you all in love. I would enjoy you always if I might be
worthy of it. Therefore it becomes you every way to glorify Jesus Christ, who
glorifies you; that being perfected and knit up in one and the same subjection,
and being of one mind and one judgment, ye may all speak the same thing, and
being subject to the Bishop and the Presbytery, may be sanctified in all
things. I do not give commands to you as if I my self was a person
considerable; for though I am a Prisoner for his Name, yet am I not perfected
in Christ Jesus. For now I begin to be a Disciple, and speak to you as my
fellow teachers. For it is meet that I should be admonished by you in faith,
instruction, patience, and long sufferance. But in regard my charity toward
you would not suffer me to be silent, I have therefore taken the first hold of
this opportunity to exhort you to concur in the judgment of God. As Jesus
Christ himself, who is our incomparable life, did follow the judgment of his
Father, and the Bishops designed to the ends of the earth follow the judgment
of Jesus Christ. Therefore it is a comely thing for you to concur in the
judgment of the Bishop as also ye do; for your Presbytery most worthy of
praise, and of God is so adapted to the Bishop, as strings are fitted to the
harp, in so much that Jesus Christ is celebrated through your Unanimity and
Agreement in love. Ye are all made up man by man into one Chorus, and keeping
the Melody of God, which is Unity, ye shall with one voice glorify the
Father by Jesus Christ, that he may also hear you, and acknowledge you by what
you do to be the members of his Son. So that it is profitable for you to
continue in immaculate Unity, that ye may always be partakers of God. If I in
so short a time have gained so great a conformableness in manners with your
Bishop, which is spiritual, and not after the manner of men; how can I estimate
of your happiness, who are continually united to him, as the Church to Jesus
Christ, and Jesus Christ to the Father, that all things may be consonant in
unity. Let no man be deceived. If any man is not within the Altar, he is
deprived of the bread of God. For if the Prayer of one or two is so effectual,
how much more effectual is the Prayer of the Bishop, and all the Church? He
therefore, that will not come into one place, (or join with the Congregation)
is a proud man, and has separated himself, and it is written, That God
resists the proud. Therefore let us endeavor to be in subjection to the
Bishop, that so we may be God's Subjects. And if any man take notice that the
Bishop holds his peace, let him fear and reverence him so much the more; for we
ought to receive him, whom the Master of the Family has sent to govern his
House, as we should receive the Master himself, who sent him. Therefore it is
evident that we ought to respect the Bishop as the Lord himself. But Onesimus
does himself very much commend your good Order, which is according to God; for
ye all live according to truth, and there is no heresy amongst you, neither do
ye hear any but Jesus Christ speaking according to truth. Some indeed by an
evil deceit have accustomed themselves to carry about his Name, but they do
things unworthy of God, and these ye ought to shun as beasts. For they are like
mad dogs biting unawares, whom ye ought to avoid, and have a special eye upon,
being persons very hard to be cured. There is one Physician fleshly, and
spiritual, begotten, and unbegotten, God made in the flesh, and the true life
in death, both of Mary and of God, first passible, and then impassible. Let no
man seduce you, as ye are not yet seduced, being wholly of God. For so long as
there is no contention amongst you, which may be hurtful to you, ye live
according to God. I am made as an Offscouring for you, and as a Purgatory
expiation for you Ephesians famous to ages. Carnal men cannot do spiritual
things, nor spiritual men do the things which are carnal; neither can Faith do
the things of Infidelity, nor Infidelity the things of Faith. But those very
things, which ye do as carnal men, are spiritual, so long as ye do all things
according to Jesus Christ. I have known some passing from those parts, who held
an evil doctrine, but ye would not suffer them to sow their seeds amongst you,
but stopped your ears against them, that ye might receive none of the doctrine
sowed by them. For ye are Stones of the Father's Temple, prepared for the
building of God the Father, carried up on high by the Engine of Jesus Christ,
which is his Cross, by the Cord of the holy Spirit. But Faith is your Guide,
and Charity your Way, which leads unto God. Ye are all therefore
Fellowtravellers, carrying about with you God and the Temple, Christ and
Sanctity, being in all things beautified according to the commands of Jesus
Christ, in whom I am exceedingly rejoiced, being vouchsafed so great a dignity
as to converse with you in writing, and to joy together with you, who live
according to the other life, and love nothing but only God. Pray also without
ceasing for other men, for there is hope of their repentance, that they also
may attain God. Admonish them, and let them be wrought upon by your works to
become your Disciples. Oppose your meekness to their anger, and whilst they
boast of great things, do ye mind the things of humility. Pray for them who
speak evil of you, keeping your selves firm in the faith against their error.
Be mild how morose soever they are; neither be hasty to requite them according
to their own examples. Let us be found their Brethren by our mild carriage
toward them, and endeavor to be the followers of the Lord. Though some among
you may be injured, defrauded, despised, yet let no one amongst you be found an
Herb of the devil. Keep your selves in all Purity and Temperance both in flesh
and spirit through Jesus Christ. The last times are come; Therefore let us
reverence and fear the long-sufferance of God, that it be not our condemnation.
For either let us fear the wrath to come, or love the present grace. One of the
two is only to be found in Jesus Christ, that we may live indeed. Nothing can
become us without this; for this I bear about my bonds, which are as spiritual
Pearls, through which by your Prayers I may rise again. And let me always be
partaker of your Prayers, that I may be found in the lot of those Ephesian
Christians, who were ever of the same mind with the Apostles, through the power
of Jesus Christ. I know who I am, and to whom I write. I am a condemned person,
but ye have obtained mercy. I am under danger, but ye are established; Ye are
the Passover of those who are killed for God, being the Fellow-ministers of
sanctified Paul, who was martyred, worthily blessed, under whose feet I would
be found, that I may enjoy God; who in a whole Epistle makes mention of you in
Jesus Christ. Make have therefore to meet together more frequently to the
Eucharist of God and to glory. For when ye often come together into one place
the powers of Satan are rendered frustrate; and his enmity is destroyed through
your Unity of Faith. Nothing is better than peace, by which all hostility of
heavenly and earthly powers is made void. None of these things are concealed
from you, if ye hold perfectly that Faith and Love in Jesus Christ, which are
the beginning and end of life. For Faith is the beginning, Love is the end;
these two united are of God, and all other things tending to Honesty do wait
upon these. No man, who has covenanted into the faith, commits sin, nor
does he hate another who is possessed of Charity. The tree is known by its
fruit; and they, who have solemnly engaged to be Christians, shall be seen by
the works they do. For it is not now the work of an Engagement, but it is
through the power of Faith, if a man be found to the end. It is better to be
silent and to be; than to speak and not to be. It is a good thing to teach, if
a man do as well as teach. There is therefore one teacher, who spoke, and it
was done, and the things also, which he did in silence, are worthy of the
Father. He, who is truly possessed of the word of Jesus, can hear also his
silence, that he may be perfect, that he may do according to what he speaks,
and be known according to those things wherein he is silent. Nothing is hid
from the Lord, but our very secrets are nigh unto him. Therefore let us do all
things as having him dwelling in us; that we may be his Temples, and he may be
our God in us; for whatever is shall be made manifest to us, and therefore do
we justly love him. Err not (my brethren.) They who are destroyers of houses
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Therefore if they are dead, who act such
things according to the flesh; how much more is it death for any man by an evil
doctrine to corrupt the faith of God, for which Jesus Christ was crucified?
Such a one being defiled shall go into the unquenchable fire, and so shall he
who hears him. For this cause the Lord received the unction upon his head, that
he might breathe into his Church incorruption. Be not anointed with the
doctrine of the prince of this world, which has an ill odor; neither let him
lead you captive from the life, which is set before you. Why are we not all
wise having received the knowledge of God, that is, Jesus Christ? Why are we
foolishly destroyed, being ignorant of that Grace, which the Lord has truly
sent amongst us? My spirit is the Offscouring of the Cross, which is a scandal
to unbelievers but to us Salvation and Life eternal. Where is the wise? where
is the disputer? where is the boasting of wise men so called? For our God Jesus
Christ was conceived by Mary according to the Oeconomie of God, of the seed of
David by the holy Ghost, who was born and baptized, that he might through
sufferings cleanse the water. And the Virginity of Mary, the Child born of her,
and the Death of the Lord, were hid from the prince of this world, being three
crying Mysteries yet wrought up by God in silence. How came he then to be
manifested to ages? A Star in Heaven appeared, which out-shined all the other
stars, and the light of it was ineffable, and the Noveltie of it did contain a
strangeness in it. All the other stars together with the Sun and Moon were a
Chorus to this Star, which did carry in it a brightness and splendor above
them all. The world was troubled about it, to find out how this New-Star should
appear amongst the other stars so unlike unto them; hereupon all Magic was
dissolved, and every bond of wickedness dis-appeared, ignorance was taken away,
the old kingdom was destroyed, when God appeared as man for the renewing of
Life eternal. But that, which was perfect with God, took a beginning, and
thereupon all things worked together to bring about the destruction of death.
If Jesus Christ through your Prayers shall make me worthy, and it be his will,
in a second little Book, which I am about to write unto you, I will lay open
unto you how I began my Oeconomie in the New man Jesus Christ, both in his
Faith, Love, Passion and Resurrection, and I shall the rather do this, if the
Lord shall reveal it unto me. Because all of you man by man through the grace
of his Name concur together in Jesus Christ, of the stock of David, according
to the flesh, the son of man, and the Son of God; and ye are all obedient to
the Bishop, and to the Presbytery with an undivided mind, breaking one bread,
which is the Medicine of Immortality, an Antidote against death preserving to
Life eternal in Jesus Christ. I could give my life for you, and for him whom ye
have sent to Smyrna for the honor of God; whence also I write unto you, giving
thanks unto the Lord, loving both Polycarp and you. Remember me as Jesus Christ
also remembers you. Pray for the Church which is in Syria; whence I am led away
a Prisoner unto Rome, being the last of the faithful there, if I may be
accounted worthy to be found to the honor of God. Farewell in God the Father,
and in Jesus Christ our common hope.

To the Ephesians.
To the Magnesians.
Ignatius, who is also Theophorus, to the Church blessed in the Grace of God
the Father, through Jesus Christ our Savior, which is at Magnesia near to
Maeander, which I salute in him, and wish it very much joy in God the Father
and in Jesus Christ.

KNowing your most excellent Order of Love, which is according to God, I
joyfully made it my choice to speak unto you in the faith of Jesus Christ. For
being accounted worthly of the Name most becoming God in these bonds, wherein I
carry it about, I celebrate the Churches, praying that they may be united in
the flesh and spirit of Jesus Christ, who is our endless life, by Faith and
Love, before which nothing is preferred; but chiefly of Jesus and the Father,
through whom having patiently endured every injury from the prince of this
world, and escaping them we shall enjoy God. For I was accounted worthy to see
you by Damas your Divine Bishop, and the worthy Presbyters, Bassus and
Apollonius, and Sotion the Deacon my Fellowservant, whom I would enjoy, because
he is subject to the Bishop as to the Grace of God, and to the Presbytery as
to the Law of Jesus Christ. And it becomes you not to make any use to your
selves of the age of the Bishop, but to give him all Reverence, according to
the power of God the Father* (as I have known holy Presbyters) not presuming
upon that juvenile order which appears, but as wise men in God, concurring with
him; yet not with him, but with the Father of Jesus Christ the Bishop of all.
Therefore for his honor, who wills it, it is meet we perform obedience without
hypocrisy. For a man does not deceive this Bishop, whom we see, but puts a
fallacy upon him who is invisible. This is not spoken in reference to the
flesh, but to God, who knows secrets. Therefore it is meet not only to be
called Christians, but to be so. For some indeed there are, who own the Bishop
in name, but do all things without him. Such men appear to me to be men of no
good Conscience, because they hold meetings not established by commandment. All
works have some end, two are propounded, Death and Life, and every man shall go
to his proper place. As there are two sorts of Coin, one of God, another of the
world, and each Coin has its proper stamp set upon it. Infidels have the stamp
of this world; Believers in love have the stamp of God the Father by Jesus
Christ, whose life cannot be in us, unless we can through him voluntarily die
into his Passion. But seeing I have in the persons prescribed taken a view of
your whole multitude in Faith and Love, I admonish you to do all things in the
unanimity of God; your Bishop being President over you in the place of God, and
the Presbyters in place of the Council of the Apostles, and the Deacons most
pleasant to me, having the Diaconie of Jesus Christ committed to them, who was
with the Father before ages, and in the end appeared. Having therefore all
received manners like unto God, reverence one another, and let no man defraud
his neighbor according to the flesh, but love one another always in Jesus
Christ. Let nothing be amongst you, which may possibly divide you, but be
united to the Bishop, and to those who are Presidents over you, according to
the Type and Doctrine of incorruption. Therefore as the Lord being united to
him did nothing without the Father, neither by himself, nor by the Apostles; so
neither do ye act any thing without the Bishop, and the Presbyters. Neither
attempt any thing upon your own account however reasonable it may appear unto
you. When ye come together into one place, let there be One Prayer, One
Supplication, one mind, one hope in Love and in immaculate joy. There is one
Jesus Christ than whom nothing is better. Therefore all concur together as into
the Temple of God, as to one Altar, to one Jesus Christ, who came from one
Father, and being one is returned to him. Be not deceived by strange opinions,
nor old fables, which are unprofitable. For if we still live according to the
Law and Judaism, we confess that Grace is not received. For the most divine
Prophets lived according to Jesus Christ; and therefore they were persecuted,
being inspired by his Grace, that they might work a persuasion in those, who
were not persuaded, that there is one God, who manifested himself by Jesus
Christ his Son, who is his eternal Word, not coming forth from Silence, who in
all things pleased him that sent him. Therefore if they, who were conversant in
the works of old time, came to the Newness of Hope, not Sabbatizing any longer,
but living according to the Dominical life of that day, whereon our life did
rise again through him, and through his death (whom some deny;) through which
mystery we have received both to Believe, and also to endure with Patience,
that we may be found the Disciples of Jesus Christ our only Master; how shall
we be able to live without him, whom the Prophets, being his Disciples, looked
for in Spirit as their Master? and because they justly expected him, he, when
he was come, raised them from the dead. Therefore let not us be insensible of
his Goodness; for if he should retribute to us according to what we do, we
should cease to be. Therefore being made his Disciples let us learn to live
like Christians. For he, who is called by any other name than this, is not of
God. Therefore put away from you the evil leaven, which is old and corrupt, and
be ye changed into the New Leaven, which is Jesus Christ. Be ye seasoned in
him, that none of you be corrupted; for ye shall be disproved by your savor.
It is an absurd thing to profess Jesus Christ, and yet to Judaize; for
Christianism has not believed into Judaism, but Judaism into Christianism,
that every tongue believing might be gathered unto God. But these things (my
Beloved;) not because I have known any of you to be such, but because, though I
am lesser then you, I would have you to be preserved, that ye may not fall into
the snares of a vain opinion, but may have a full assurance in the Nativity,
Passion, and Resurrection, effected in that season when Pontius Pilate was
governor, all truly and firmly accomplished by Jesus Christ our hope, from
which hope may none of you be perverted. I would every way enjoy you, if I may
be worthy; for though I am in bonds, yet am I not to be compared to one of you,
who are at liberty. I know ye are not puffed up, for ye have Jesus Christ
among you. And I know the more I praise you, it does but shame you so much the
more, as it is written, The just man is an accuser of himself. Make it your
endeavor to be confirmed in the determinations of the Lord and the Apostles,
that whatever ye do may be prosperous both in flesh and spirit, Faith and Love,
in the Son, and in the Father, and in the Spirit, in the beginning and the end,
together with your most venerable Bishop, and your Presbytery, which is as a
spiritual Crown decently platted, and the Deacons, who are according to God* Be
subject to the Bishop, and one to another, as Jesus Christ to the Father
according to the flesh, and the Apostles to Christ and to the Father, and the
Spirit, that there may be unity both carnal and spiritual. Knowing that ye are
full of God, I have exhorted you but in few words. Remember me in your Prayers,
that I may obtain God; and that Church which is in Syria, from whence I am not
worthy to be called. For I very much want your Prayer united in God, and your
Love, that the Church, which is in Syria, may be accounted worthy to be watered
by your Church. The Ephesians from Smyrna salute you (whence also I write unto
you) being present to the glory of God, as also ye are; who have refreshed me
in all things together with Polycarp the Bishop of the Smyrneans. The other
Churches also salute you in the honor of Jesus Christ. Be strong in the
concord of God, being possessed with a discerning Spirit, which is Jesus Christ.

To the Magnesians.
To the Philadelphians.
Ignatius, who is also Theophorus, to the Church of God the Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ, which is in Philadelphia of Asia; which has obtained mercy, is
settled in the concord of God, rejoicing in the Passion of our Lord
indiscernably, and fully assured of his Resurrection in all mercy; which I
salute in the blood of Jesus Christ, for she is my eternal and permanent joy,
chiefly if they continue united with the Bishop, and the Presbyters with him,
and the Deacons manifested to be according to the Sentence of Jesus Christ,
whom he has firmly established according to his own will by his holy Spirit.

WHich Bishop I have known to have obtained the Ministry for the common good,
not by himself, nor by men, nor out of vain-glorie, but by the love of God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, whose mild temper I have been amazed at, for
by his silence he can do more than they who speak vain things. For ye are as
harmoniously agreeing in commands, as the harp and the strings. Therefore my
Soul blesses that sentence of his, which is according to God, knowing that it
is virtuous and perfect, and that he cannot be moved, nor provoked to anger,
being in all the meekness of the Living God. Being therefore the children of
light and truth, fly division, evil doctrines. Where the Pastor is do ye as
sheep follow him; for many wolves, who seem worthy of credit, do by an evil
delectation lead captive persons running to God, but through your unity they
shall have no place. Depart from evil herbs, which Jesus Christ does not
cultivate, for they are not the Plantation of the Father. Not that I have found
any Division amongst you, but a Resining us from the Dreggs. So many as are of
God, and of Jesus Christ are with the Bishop, and so many Penitents as come
over into the Unity of the Church, shall be of God, that they may live
according to Jesus Christ. My brethren, be not deceived. If any man follows
him, who is the maker of Schism, he is no inheritour of the Kingdom of God If
any man walks about in a strange opinion, he is not conformable to the Passion.
Let it be your endeavor therefore to use one Eucharist; for there is One flesh
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Cup for the Unity of his blood, One Altar,
as One Bishop with the Presbytery and Deacons my fellow servants, that
whatever ye do, ye may do according to God. My brethren, I am very much poured
out in Love toward you, and exceedingly rejoicing strengthen you, yet not I,
but Jesus Christ, for whom I am in bonds, and therefore am the more afraid,
because I am not yet taken out of the world. But your Prayer to God will
perfect me, that I may obtain that Lot to which I was chosen, flying to the
Gospel as to the flesh of Jesus, and to the Apostles as to the Presbytery of
the Church: We love also the Prophets, because they preached the Gospel, and
did hope in him, and expect him; in whom also believing they were saved in the
Unity of Jesus Christ, being holy men worthy to be beloved, and most worthy of
admiration, born witness of by Jesus Christ, being his Martyrs, and numbered up
together in the Gospel of the common hope. But if any man preach Judaism to
you, hear him not. For it is better to hear Christianism from one circumcised,
than Judaism from one uncircumcised. But if both of them speak not of Jesus
Christ, they are to me as Pillars and Monuments of dead men, whereon the names
of men only are written. Fly therefore evil arts, and the frauds of the
prince of this world, lest being troubled with his opinion ye be weakened in
charity. Be all of you made up into one with an undivided heart; I thank my
God that I have a good Conscience as concerning you, and that no man has
whereof to glory, either privately or publicly, that I have been burdensome to
any either in little or much. And I beseech all to whom I have spoken, that
they possess not this as a Testimony. And although some would seduce me
according to the flesh, yet my spirit, which is from God, is not seduced. He
knows whence it comes, and whither it goes, and is a reproover of secrets. I
have cried in the midst of you, I have spoken it with a lofty voice, Attend
unto the Bishop, and the Presbytery, and the Deacons. And though some have
suspected me to have spoken these things as foreknowing the Division of some;
yet he is my witness, for whom I am a Prisoner, that I have not been taught it
by man, but the Spirit preached it, saying these things, Do nothing without the
Bishop. Keep your flesh as the Temple of God. Love Unity. Fly divisions. Be
ye followers of Jesus Christ as he himself is of the Father. Therefore I did
what was proper for me as a man perfected unto Unity. But where there is
division and wrath God dwells not. Therefore the Lord pardons all Penitents,
if they shall return by Repentance to the Unity of God, and the Council of the
Bishop. I believe the Grace of Jesus Christ, who will loose every bond from
you. And I exhort you to do nothing with contention, but according to the
Discipline of Christ. For I have heard some speaking in this wise, That if I
find it not amongst the Ancients, I do not believe the Gospel. And when I
replied to them, That it is written. They answered me, It lies before us. But
Jesus Christ is to me Antiquity, and the Records not to be touched are his
Cross, and his Death, and his Resurrection, and the Faith, which is by him, in
which things I would be justified through your Prayers. Honorable are the
Priests, but more honorable the Highpriest, to whom are committed the Holies
of Holies, and with whom alone are deposited the hidden things of God. He is
the Door of the Father, by whom Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
Prophets, and Apostles, and Church of God have entered. All these things are
for the Unity of God. But the Gospel has something in it chiefly valueable,
and that is The Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, his Passion, and
Resurrection. For the beloved Prophets preached of him; but the Gospel is the
Perfection of incorruption. All things together are excellent, if ye believe in
Love. But seeing that through your Prayers, according to the bowels which ye
have in Christ Jesus, the Church, which is at Antioch of Syria (as is told to
me) is at peace; it becomes you, as the Church of God, to ordain a Minister to
go thither as an Ambassador upon the Embasie of God, to joy together with them
that they are made one, and to glorify his Name. Blessed in Jesus Christ shall
that man be, who shall be accounted worthy of such a Ministry, and ye your
selves shall be glorified. This is not impossible for the Name of God, if ye
have but a will to it, as some neighbor Churches also have sent Bishops,
others Presbyters and Deacons. As for Philo the Deacon of Cilicia, he is a man
that has given a good Testimony, and now ministers to me in the Word of God,
together with Rheus Agathopus a choice man, who accompanies me from Syria,
having renounced this life, these also bear testimony to you, and I give
thanks to God for you, because ye have received them, as the Lord you. But
they, who have dishonored them, may obtain Redemption by the Grace of Jesus
Christ. The Love of the Brethren, who are at Troas, saluteth you, whence also I
write unto you by Burrus, who was sent along with me from the Ephesians and the
Smyrneans for the Word of honor. The Lord Jesus Christ will honor them, in
whom they hope, in flesh, soul, faith, love, and unanimitie. Farewell in Christ
Jesus our common Hope.

Ignatius to the Philadelphians.
To the Trallians.
Ignatius, who is also Theophorus, to the holy Church, beloved of God the
Father, of Jesus Christ, which is in Trallis of Asia, elect, and divine, having
obtained peace in the flesh and blood, by the Passion of Jesus Christ our hope,
and the Resurrection grounded upon him; which I salute in fullness, in an
Apostolical Style wishing much joy.

I Have known you to have a blameless understanding, not to be severed in
Patience, and that not by use, but by nature, as Polybius your Bishop has
manifested to me, who by the will of God, and of Jesus Christ, was at Smyrna;
and did so congratulate me a Prisoner for Jesus Christ, that I did view over
your whole multitude in him. Therefore receiving from him that good disposition
of mind, which is according to God, I gloried finding you as I had known you
the followers of God. For in regard ye are subject to the Bishop as to Jesus
Christ, ye appear to me not to live as men, but to live according to Jesus
Christ, who died for us, that believing in his death ye may escape death.
Therefore it is necessary, as ye do to do nothing without the Bishop; but that
ye be subject to the Presbytery, as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ our Hope,
in whom we should be found having our conversation. It behooves the Deacons
also, being the Mystery of Jesus Christ, to please all men every manner of
way. For they are not the Ministers of meats and drinks, but Ministers of the
Church of God. Therefore it is necessary for them to avoid accusations as fire.
Let all in like manner reverence the Deacons as Jesus Christ, and the Bishop,
being the Son of the Father; and the Presbyters as the Council of God, and
company of the Apostles. Without these a Church is not called. Of whom I am
persuaded that ye are so informed, (For I have received the Exemplar of your
love, and have it by me in your Bishop, whose behavior is a great
Disciplination, and his meekness power; whom I think that very Atheists do
reverence) being satisfied that I spare not my self. Formerly though I might
have matter to write, I thought not fit for this cause, lest being a condemned
person I might seem to command you as an Apostle. I am wise in God as to many
things, yet do I measure my self, that I may not be destroyed by boasting. For
now it behooves me to be very much afraid, and not to give heed to those, who
would puff me up. For when such speak unto me they scourge me. Truly I love to
suffer, but know not whether I am worthy. For my zeal appears not to many, but
I have the greater war within. I have need therefore of meekness, that by it
the prince of this world may be defeated. Cannot I write unto you of things
celestial? but I am afraid, lest I should give you some offense being yet but
babes. Therefore pardon me, for I would not perplexe you with those things,
which ye are not able to bear. For it is not for a slightie matter that I am a
Prisoner, being acquainted with things celestial, and the Angelical Orders, and
their governing Constitutions, things visible and invisible; and besides this I
am now a Disciple. For many things are wanting to you, that we may not fall
short of God. Therefore I exhort you, not I, but the love of Jesus Christ, to
use only the Christian nutriment, and to abstain from that strange herb, which
is heresy. For the times are such, that persons worthy of credit seemingly do
fold in heresy with Jesus Christ, like those, who administer deadly poison,
and temper it with a drink made of honey and sour wine, which the ignorant
receives with pleasure, and so dies by an evil delectation. Therefore preserve
your selves from such, and so it shall be, if ye are not puffed up, being
inseparable from God, Jesus Christ, and the Bishop, and the Orders of the
Apostles. He, who is within the Altar, is pure; that is, he, who does any thing
without the Bishop, Presbytery, and Deacons, is of an impure Conscience. Not
that I have known any such thing among you, but foreseeing the subtilties of
the devil, I take care of you before hand being my beloved. Do ye therefore,
re-assuming your mild disposition, build up your selves anew in the faith,
which is the flesh of the Lord, in love, which is the blood of Jesus Christ.
Let none among you have any quarrel against his Neighbor. Give no offenses to
the Gentiles, that the Multitude which is in God be not blasphemed by a few
foolish men. For Woe to him, through whose foolishness my Name is blasphemed
amongst some. Therefore be deaf to him, who speaks to you without Jesus Christ,
who was of the stock of David, and of Mary, who was truly born, eat and drank,
was truly persecuted under Pontius Pilate, was truly crucified, dead, things in
heaven, on earth, and under the earth beholding him. And was truly raised again
from the dead, his Father raising him up according to his likeness, as his
Father will raise up us also, if we believe in him, through Jesus Christ,
without whom we have no true life. But if, as some Atheists, that is, Infidels
s^y, He suffered only in appearance, as they themselves are only in appearance,
why am I in bonds? and why do I pray that I may fight with beasts? therefore do
I not die without reward? and am I not a liar against the Lord? Fly therefore
evil plants, which bring forth deadly fruit; which if a man taste of, he dies
presently. For these are not the Plantation of the Father, if they were they
would appear branches of the Cross, and their fruit would be incorruptible.
Through which Cross by his Passion he Advocates for you being his Members. The
Head therefore cannot be born without the Members, God having promised the
Union of them, who is himself. I salute you from Smyrna, together with the
Churches of God, which are present with me, who have every way refreshed me
both in flesh and spirit. My bonds, which I carry about for Jesus Christ, do
admonish you, that I desire to enjoy God. Continue in your Unanimity, and in
Prayer one for another. For it becomes you all one by one exceedingly, and the
Presbyters to comfort up the Bishop for the honor of the Father of Jesus
Christ and of the Apostles. I beseech you in love to hear me, that writing unto
you I may not be a witness within you. Pray also for me, out of that Charity
which is in you, for I need the mercy of God, that I may be accounted worthy of
the Lot, which I labor to enjoy, and may not be found Reprobate. The love of
the Smyrneans and Ephesians saluteth you. Remember in your prayers the Church
which is in Syria, whence I am not worthy to be called, being the last of them.
Farewell in Jesus Christ, being subject to the Bishop as to the Commandment,
and likewise to the Presbytery. And love one another man by man with an
undivided heart. My Spirit shall be an expiation for you, not only now, but
when I shall enjoy God. For as yet I am in danger, but the Father, who is
faithful, will fulfill my Petition and yours in Jesus Christ, in whom may ye be
found unblameable.

To the Trallians.
To the Romans.
Ignatius, who is also Theophorus, to the Church which has obtained Mercy
through the Magnificence of the most high Father, and Jesus Christ his only
begotten Son, sanctified and enlightened by him who wills all things, which
are according to the love of Jesus Christ our God; which is President over the
Churches about in the Region of the Romans, as over a Quire, being divine,
comely, most blessed, worthy of praise, in a becoming order, eminently chaste,
and set up for a President of Charity, having the Law of Christ, and bearing
the Name of the Father; which I also salute in the Name of Jesus Christ the Son
of the Father, according to the flesh and spirit united in every command of
his, filled with all the Grace of God without any difference, and purged from
every strange tincture, wishing very much joy in our Lord Jesus Christ our God
immaculately.

HAving beseeched God, I happened to see your divine faces, as I much desired
to receive you. And being in bonds for Jesus Christ I hope to salute you, if it
be his will, that I may be accounted worthy to continue to the end. For the
beginning is well ordered, if thereby I may obtain Grace so as to obtain my Lot
unto the end without impediment. For I fear your charity, lest it prove
injurious to me. For to you it is easy to do what ye will; but to me it is a
difficult thing to enjoy God, unless ye are the more sparing to me. I would not
have you to please men, but to please God, as ye do please him. I shall never
have such an opportunity to enjoy God, neither shall ye be entitled to a
better work, if ye can but be silent. For if ye be silent and let me alone, I
shall be of God, but if ye love my flesh, I shall be but a voice, and to run
again. Ye cannot do better than to let me be sacrificed unto God, in regard the
Altar is already prepared. That ye being made up a chorus in love may sing to
the Father in Jesus Christ; because God has accounted the Bishop of Syria
worthy to be found, and to be sent from the East unto the West, to set and go
down gloriously from the world unto God, that I may rise again in him. Ye have
never bewitched me in any thing; ye have instructed others, and I would that
those things may be firm, which ye as teachers have commanded. Only pray for
me to be enabled inwardly and outwardly, that I may not only say it, but will
it, and not only be called a Christian, but be found so. For if I shall be
found so, I may also be so called, and then be a Believer, when I appear not to
the world. Nothing is good which is only in appearance; For our God Jesus
Christ being in the Father appears the more. A Christian is not a work of
persuasion but of greatness, especially when he shall be hated of the world. I
write to all the Churches, and lay my commands upon them all, that I may
willingly die for God, if ye shall not hinder me. I entreat you that ye would
not be unseasonably kind unto me. Suffer me to be the meat of beasts that by
them I may enjoy God. I am the wheat of God, and shall be ground by the teeth
of beasts, that I may be found the pure bread of God. Allure those beasts the
rather to become my sepulcher, and to leave no relics of my body, that when I
am fallen asleep I may not be burdensome to any. Then shall I be the true
Disciple of Jesus Christ, when the world shall not see my body. Pray to the
Lord for me, that by these instruments I may be found a sacrifice to God. I do
not give you commands as Peter and Paul; they were Apostles, but I am a
condemned person, they were free, but I am a servant even until now, yet, if I
suffer, I shall be made the Freeman of Jesus Christ, and shall rise again free;
and being now a Prisoner I learn to desire nothing. From Syria even to Rome do
I fight with beasts, both by Land and by Sea, by night and by day, being bound
to ten Leopards, (which are my military guard) which are the worse for being
kindly treated. But by their injurious dealings I am the more made a Disciple,
yet am I not therefore justified. I would enjoy the beasts which are prepared
for me, and I pray that they may be found sharply set, nay I would entise them
greedily to devour me, and not fearfully to decline the touching of me as they
have avoided some. But if they shun me, and will not, I shall provoke them.
Pardon me. I know what is convenient for me. Now I begin to be a Disciple in
that I have a zeal to nothing visible or invisible, but that I may gain Jesus
Christ. Let the fire, the cross, the violence of beasts, scattering of bones,
concision or chewing of members, grinding of the whole body, buffetings of the
devil come upon me, so that I may but enjoy Jesus Christ. The ends of the world
will profit me nothing, nor the kingdoms of this age. It is good for me to die
for Jesus Christ, rather then to rule over the ends of the earth. I seek him,
who died for us, I will him, who rose again for us. He is the Gain set before
me. Pardon me, brethren, do not hinder me to live, do not separate me by the
world, who am willing to be of God, nor seduce me by that which is material.
Suffer me to receive the pure light, when I approach to that, I shall be a man
of God. Suffer me to imitate the Passion of my God. If any man has him within
him, he may understand what I will, and sympathize with me, knowing what things
have taken possession of me. The prince of this world would spoil me, and
corrupt my judgment, which is according to God. Therefore let none of you
being present contribute any assistance to him, but rather be for me, that is,
for God. Do not speak Jesus Christ, and covet the world. Let no fascination be
amongst you. Neither do I exhort you being present to believe me, rather
believe the things, which I write unto you; for I write unto you being alive,
yet withal willing to die. My Love is crucified, and the fire, which is in me,
desires no water. But there is one living and speaking in me, who says to me
inwardly, Come to the Father. I take no pleasure in the meat of corruption, nor
in the pleasures of this life. I will the bread of God, which is the flesh of
Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, and the drink which I will, is his blood,
which is incorruptible love. I would live no longer according to men, and this
shall be if ye will. Will it therefore that ye also may be accepted. I entreat
you by a few writings, believe me; but Jesus Christ shall manifest these things
to you, that I speak truth. That is no lying mouth, by which the Father has
truly spoken. Pray for me that I may obtain. For I have not written unto you
according to the flesh, but according to the mind of God. If I suffer ye have
loved me, but if I prove Reprobate ye have hated me. Remember in your Prayers
the Church in Syria, which in my stead has God for its Pastor. Jesus Christ
himself shall watch over it, and your Love. But I am ashamed to be named from
them, for I am not worthy, being the last of them, and an abortive. But I may
through mercy be something if I obtain God. My Spirit saluteth you, and the
love of the Churches which have received me for the Name of Jesus Christ, not
as one passing by them; for they did not meet me only on the way according to
the flesh, but conducted me to the City. These things I write unto you from
Smyrna by the Ephesians, worthy to be most blessed. Crocus also is with me a
Name desirable, together with many others, who came from Syria to Rome to the
glory of God. I believe they are known to you, to whom ye may make manifest
the things approaching me. For they are all worthy of God, and of you, and it
becomes you to refresh them in all things. I have written unto you these things
upon the day before the ninth of the Calends of September. Be strengthened to
the end in the Patience of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
The Life of Saint BARNABAS the Apostle.
SAint Barnabas was a man of excellent and divine Qualifications, beautified
and adorned with singular gifts and graces for the propagating of
Christianity, and promoting the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus; being one of the
secundary Apostles, which were in that age made choice of in imitation of the
twelve, and chosen together with Paul to this honorable employment by God
himself, Act. 13. 2. All were not Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 29. Hoc magnum erat, and
per paucorum privilegium, This was a great Privilege, and only of some few.
Christ was the Apostle of God. Heb. 3. 1. the Twelve the Apostles of Christ,
Joh. 20. 21. and they, as the Spirit gave direction, did constitute Eusebius. li.
1. c. (...).
others in like manner. (...), There being many Apostles besides the Twelve
after their similitude. Of this number was Barnabas, who needs not any humane
Character, in regard he abounded with so much of Divine Approbation, for
honorable mention is frequently made of him in the Acts of the Apostles
written by Saint Luke. He and Paul were tanquam jugati boves, as Gods chief
yoke of Oxen, ploughing over much ground, and manuring the field of
Christianity; He was a person of very great Eminency and Integrity in his
Place and Office, often employed upon honorable Services for the Church,
sometimes alone, and sometimes in conjunction with holy and blessed Paul, and
when he had done the Church all honest and faithful Service he possibly could,
and had improved his talents to his Masters glory, the Churches benefit, and
his own, he finished the course of his natural life by a glorious Martyrdom,
and under the power of Nero the first of Persecutors, and worst of men, was
burnt at the stake for his Religion, upon the eleventh of June, which day is
Annually observed by our Church to perpetuate his memory, and to advance Gods
glory. This briefly concerning the Author; his following Epistle indeed may
not prove so very acceptable to some, in regard of his strange Explications of
Scripture, which are not after the modern and more refined mode. But it is to
be noted that, when he wrote, Christianity was but in the Cradle, and scarce
advanced into her morning Dress, then God made choice of the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty, and of rude and illiterate men to confound the
learned. Since that time Christianity has made a conquest over the world,
heathen learning is become subservient to divine Truths, the rudeness and first
Draught of Christianity has been polished over, and adorned by the most able
and learned Pens; The following Translation of this Epistle is according to the
Original Greek Copy set forth by Mr Isaac Vossius, and printed at Amsterdam,
Anno Dom. 1646. who himself gives this following account of it in his
Annotations upon it. Some years have passed over, since it was my resolution to
publish this Epistle of Barnabas, which I received from the incomparable
Salmasius; but being prevented by a journey, I could not then perfect what I
intended. When I went for England to make my self acquainted with that Nation,
another opportunity offered it self unto me, whereby I was encouraged speedily
to make public the Epistle before mentioned, which had merited long before to
be sent forth to the public view. For the Right Reverend Dr Usher, Bishop of
Armagh, and Primate of Ireland was then preparing to publish a new Edition of
Ignatius, and when he made it both his request and offer that this Epistle of
Barnabas might be printed with his Ignatian Epistles, I not only freely
consented to it, but was very glad, that so very Ancient a Monument should fall
into those hands, from which I was assured it would borrow not a little
splendor. And had not a great fire consumed a great part of the City of
Oxford, and destroyed all Exemplars, we had had long since a very fair Edition
of this Author. However there were not wanting in France some learned men, who
thought it a very unworthy thing that such a writing as this should be so long
concealed. Thereupon Claudius Menardus of the Order of Saint Maurus lately
fitted out for us a new Edition; and that he has very well deserved of the
public for this act of his no man can deny. Yet he had merited more had it
been his good fortune to see more Copies For seeing that Edition of his was
wholly taken out of one only book, it could not possibly come forth any other
then very faulty. Though fortune has not so much favored me as to minister
occasion to any man's envy, yet this happiness has been afforded me, to have
the use of three Manuscripts, whereby to correct that Edition; The Medicaean
Library of Florence supplied me with the first, and that of Theatins at Rome
furnished me with the other two; and Lucas Hostenius an eminent man, who cannot
be praised according to his deserts, is the person, to whom I am indebted for
the use of them. What help these three Manuscripts have afforded me, he will be
best able to judge, who can think it worth his while to compare this with the
other Edition before mentioned. But I cannot imagine upon what grounds some men
should think that this is not the Epistle of Barnabas, whereas Clement, Origin,
and others ascribe it to him. Learned men (I believe) may take offense at some
unusual Expositions of his, made upon some places of Scripture; but they can
have nothing whereon to ground a persuasion, that those places should be
misinterpreted by a man of so great authority, whom the holy Scriptures make so
frequent mention of, and who was always an inseparable Companion of the Apostle
Paul, and himself one of the Minor Apostles. But who could expect all kind of
Science and Learning from those first Christians? and think that they might not
as well be mistaken as their Relatives, especially in things not appertaining
to Faith? Do we not meet with many things as strange in the Epistle of Clement?
which Epistle was published by Patricius Junius the Kings Library Keeper, and
an eminent man, to whom I am so much a debtor, that he cannot possibly oblige
me more. For who can well digest that fable of Clement about the Phoenix, and
his many worlds beyond the Ocean? neither do I believe that some will easily
admit of that Exposition about the Scarlet thread of the Harlot Rahab, that it
should be a Type of the blood of Christ, and other things of this nature which
I could reckon up, but they are not so proper for this place; yet was this
Clement called an Apostle by as good right as Barnabas was. Therefore no
persons ought to find fault with that in the one, which they excuse in the
other. It is known to every one how very mystically, superstitiously, and
almost impertinently, those first Christians did interpret the Scriptures.
Therefore if some things should be met with in this Author, which may displease
the Learned, let them rather impute it to the manner of expression used by
those ancient Christians, than entertain the least thoughts that this writing
is supposititious. Nor let any persons therefore like the worse of this Epistle
of Barnabas because Eusebius, and other Greek Writers of a later date, have
placed it amongst the Apocryphal writings. For they did not question the
Author, only they approved not of those mystical Interpretations of his, made
upon many places of Scripture. And for the same reason many works of Clement of
Alexandria and of Origin, were accounted Apocryphal, whereas it was never yet
doubted of, whether those very works so accounted of were their genuine works.
And certainly if we should reject all Writings, which have at any time been
accounted Apocryphal, we should reject the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews, and
the Epistle of Jude the Apostle, and that of Clement to the Corinthians; which
thing should we do how absurd would it seem to any man? Others have given out
that they have discerned this Epistle to be spurious both from the Style, and
manner of Writing, and they have affirmed the very same things of the Epistles
of Ignatius; but they, who boast of such things, would seem more accute than
becomes them. For it is not so easy to distinguish spurious writings from
genuine, as it is to know true Pearls from counterfeit. When true Stones are
compared with counterfeit, the fucus of the counterfeit soon appears, as a true
people will discover a false one; which is a thing ordinary in other
traffiqueable commodities. But from what is it possible for these men to take
the ground of their conjecture, who deny these to be the very Epistles of
Ignatius and Barnabas? Have they seen other Writings of theirs? Certainly not.
Therefore how come they to know what Style Barnabas and Ignatius used? Yet they
go on and say, that what they think to be true, they know to be true, and if it
be so with them, I will not add one word more about them.

The Catholic Epistle OF Saint BARNABAS the Apostle.
MY sons and daughters, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us, I
wish you much joy and peace. Knowing that there is in you an abundance of the
great and comely Graces of God, I am rejoiced above measure by your blessed and
excellent spirits; for by this means ye have received a natural grace. So that
I am hereby very much comforted, hoping to be set at liberty; because I verily
perceive that the spirit is infused into you from the honorable Fountain of
God. And seeing I am of this persuasion, and know it the more fully so to be,
in regard that, whilst I am conversing with you, many things have succeeded
well with me, according to the equal way of the Lord; therefore is it happily
Brethren in my thoughts to love you more than my own soul; because the
greatness of faith and love dwells therein, and the hope of that other life.
Thinking of this (and because it was my care to impart something unto you of
what I have received) that it would be a sufficient reward to do service to
persons of such a spirit, I made it my proper business, as allotted to me,
speedily to send unto you some few things, that together with your faith ye may
have also perfect knowledge. There are also three Constitutions of the Lord,
The hope of life, the beginning, and the consummation. For God has made
beforehand things plain to us, by his Prophets, who are passed, and has given
unto us the beginnings of future things. But, as he has said, It is a more
honorable and high thing to approach to his Altar. Yet I shall not as a
Teacher or Doctor, but as one of you, show you a few things, by which ye may be
the more joyful in many. Seeing therefore that the days are most wicked, and
that the adversary has the power of this world* we ought diligently to make
enquiry into the equal ways of the Lord. Fear and Patience are the Coadjutors
of your faith; and the things, which fight for us, are Longanimitie and
Continence. Where these remain pure, according to the Lord, wisdom,
understanding, science, knowledge rejoice together with them. For he has laid
it open to us by all the Prophets, that he will not use our sacrifices,
victims, nor oblations, saying in this wise, Isai. 1.
To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I
am full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of lambs; I delight not in
the blood of goats and bulls. Neither do I regard you, when ye come to appear
before me. For who has required these things at your hands? neither shall ye
tread my courts. When ye bring your course bread it is vain, your incense is an
abomination to me. Your new moons, and sabbaths, and great day I cannot endure*
Your fast, idle time, new moons, and feasts my soul hates. God has therefore
made these void, as the new Law of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is without the
yoke of necessity, has made void the humane oblation. The Lord says again
unto them, Have I commanded your fathers, when they went out of the land of
Egypt, that they should offer unto me sacrifices and victims? but this I
commanded them, saying, Let every one among you bear no malice toward his
neighbor, and let no man swear falsely. Seeing therefore that we are not
without understanding, we ought to understand the counsel of the goodness of
our Father. For he being willing to seek us also going astray, has told us how
we should come unto him, saying, The sacrifice of God is a contrite heart, and
one that is humbled, God does not despise. Therefore (Brethren) we ought to
enquire more certainly concerning our Salvation, that nothing may have entrance
into us, which may turn us away from our life. God speaks again unto them as
concerning these things, saying, Isai. 58.
Wherefore do ye fast to me, that your voice may be heard on high, as this day?
I have not chosen such a fast, nor a day for a man to afflict his soul; neither
shall thou bow down thy neck like a bulrush, nor spread sackcloth and ashes
under thee, nor shall ye call this an acceptable fast. But to us he says thus,
When ye shall fast, Loose every bond of iniquity, dissolve the obligations of
violent contracts, set the oppressed at liberty, make void every injurious
obligation; break thy bread to the hungry; bring the poor that are without
shelter into thine house* when thou see the naked clothe him, and hide not
thy self from thine own flesh; then thy light shall break forth as the Morning,
and thine health shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go
before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward. Then shall thou
call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am:
if thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the
finger, and speaking Vanity, and shall give thy bread to the hungry with all
thy soul. Therefore in this (brethren) God is provident and merciful, in regard
the people, whom he has acquired to his beloved, should believe in simplicity,
and he has shown to all us, that we should not run as Proselytes over to their
Law. it concerns us to write much of the things in hand, which cannot heal. Let
us fly every work of iniquity, and hate the error of this time, and love
things future. Let us not give liberty to our soul, nor suffer it to wander
with most lewd men and sinners. For the trail is consummate, as it is written,
as Daniel says, it is at hand. For this cause does the Lord divide times and
days, that his beloved may hasten to his inheritance. So says the Prophet,
Dan. 7.
Ten kingdoms shall reign upon the earth, and a little king shall arise, who
shall depose three into one. Concerning the kingdoms, and this very thing
Daniel says again, I saw a fourth beast dreadful and terrible, and exceeding
strong, having ten horns, and another little horn grew up in the midst of them,
before whom there were three of the first horns plucks up by the roots.
Therefore we ought to understand, and I entreat you again, as one of you,
loving you above mine own life, that ye would take heed unto your selves, and
that ye would not be like unto those, who heap up their sins, and say, That
their Testament is also ours. But ours it is, for they have for ever destroyed
that which Moses received. For the Scripture says, And Moses was in the mount
fasting forty days and forty nights, and he received the testament from the
Lord, the tables of stone written with the hand of God. But they being turned
unto idols destroyed that, for the Lord says to Moses, Go down quickly, for
thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, has transgressed.
And Moses cast the tables of stone out of his hands, and their Testament was
broken, that the love of Jesus might be signed upon your hearts unto the hope
of the faith of him. Therefore let us give heed unto the last days; for all the
time of our life and faith shall profit us nothing, if we do not endure unjust
things, and future temptations, as the Son of God says, Let us resist all
iniquity, and hate it. Consider therefore the works of an evil life. Ye ought
not to separate your selves as being justified, but meeting together in one, to
enquire what may be in common profitable and convenient for the beloved. For
the Scripture says, Isai. 5.
Woe to those, who are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.
Let us being spiritual, be made a perfect Temple to God, as much as in us lies.
Let us meditate upon the fear of God, and endeavor to keep his Commandments,
that we may rejoice in his judgments. The Lord accepting no man's person
judges the world; every man shall receive according to his deeds. If he be
good, his goodness goes before him; if wicked, the ways of his wickedness
follows after him. Take heed lest at any time being called, and at ease, we do
not fall asleep in our sins, and the wicked one getting power over us, do not
awake us out of our sleep, and exclude us from the Kingdom of the Lord.
Understand a little more; Having seen the great signs and wonders among the
people of the Jews, and that the Lord does so leave them; therefore let us take
heed, lest happily we be found, as it is written, Matt. 22.
Many called, few chosen. For this cause, the Lord endured to deliver up his
body to death, that we might be sanctified by remission of sins, that is,
through the sprinkling of his blood. For it is written of him to the Jews, and
to us, in this manner, Isai. 53.
He was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities; by his
stripes we were healed. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb
before the shearer dumb, so opened he not his mouth. Therefore we ought
exceedingly to rejoice in the Lord, because he has shown unto us things past,
and has made us wise, neither are we without understanding of things to come.
But he says, The net surely is spread in vain in the sight of any bird. This
he says, in regard that that man shall justly perish, who has knowledge of
the way of truth, and yet will not refrain himself from the dark way. Moreover,
the Lord endured to suffer for us, and yet he is the Lord of the world, to whom
he said upon the day before the world was consummate, Genesis 1.
Let us make man according to our image and similitude. Learn therefore how
much he endured, who would suffer this from men. The Prophets having the gift
from him prophesied of him; and he, that he might abolish death, and make
manifest the Resurrection from the dead, endured, because it was necessary for
him to appear in the flesh, that he might make good the Promise to the Parents.
And preparing a new people by his being upon the earth, he declared by making a
Resurrection the judgment, and in the end by teaching, and doing great signs
and wonders, he preached to Israel, and dearly loved him. Then he chose proper
Apostles, who should preach his Gospel, who were sinners above all sin, that he
might show that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
Then he manifested himself to be the Son of God. For had he not come in the
flesh, how could men looking on him have been saved? For the Sun, which is the
work of his hands, men cannot look directly upon with their eyes intent upon
the beams of it. Therefore the Son of God came in the flesh, that he might
consummate the sins of those, who persecuted his Prophets unto death. And for
this he endured. For God says, Isai. 53.
By the stripe of his flesh all are healed. And again, Zech. 13.
When I shall smite the shepherd, then shall the sheep of the flock be
scattered. He would thus suffer, and it was necessary that he should suffer
upon the tree. For he says, who prophesied of him, Thou shall deliver my soul
from the sword. And, Fasten my flesh with nails, for the congregations of
wicked men are risen up against me. And again he says, Behold, I have given my
back to scourges, and my cheeks to strokes, and set my face, as a firm rock.
Who shall condemn me, let him be set against me? or who shall judge me, let him
come near to the servant of the Lord? Woe unto you, for ye shall all wax old as
a garment, and the moth shall devour you. Again the Prophet says, He was set a
stone for contusion. Behold, I will lay in Sion for foundations a precious
stone, elect, a chief cornerstone, honorable. What says he after? And he,
who hops in it, shall live for ever. Is our faith therefore placed in a
stone? Far be it. But because the Lord has given strength unto his flesh. For
he says, And he bath set me as a strong rock. Again the Prophet says, The
stone which the builders refused, is made the head of the corner. And again he
says, This is the great and wonderful day, which the Land has made. I write
the more simply to you, that ye may understand. I am the offscouring of your
love. What says the Prophet again? The congregation of wicked men came about
me, they enclosed me as bees do the wax. And, They cast a lot upon my vesture.
Seeing he should be manifest in the flesh, and should suffer; his Passion was
manifested long before. For the Prophet says to Israel, Woe to the soul of
profane men, for they take evil counsel against themselves, saying, Let us
seize upon the righteous, for he is unpleasing to us. Moses also says unto
them, Behold these things says the Lord God, Enter into the good land, which
the Lord has sworn to Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and inherit the land
flowing with milk and honey. Learn what knowledge says, Hope in Jesus, who
will come in the flesh to be manifested unto you. Man is a suffering land. For
from the face of the earth was the figment of Adam driven. Why therefore says
he, A good land flowing with milk and honey? Blessed be our Lord, who has put
wisdom and understanding in us of his secrets. For the Prophet says, Who shall
understand the parable of the Lord, but only the wise and the intelligent, and
he who is a lover of the Lord. Seeing therefore he renewing us by remission of
sins has made us to be another figure, he has made us to have souls like
children and has formed us anew. For what he says to the Son, the Scripture
says concerning us, We will make man according to our image and likeness, and
let them rule over the beasts of the earth, and the fowls of heaven, and the
fishes of the sea. And the Lord seeing man an excellent figure, he said,
Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth. These things to the Son. Again,
I will show you, how in the last days he made a second figure as concerning us.
The Lord says, Behold, I will make the last things as the former, and
therefore did the Prophet preach thus, saying, Enter into the land flowing with
milk and honey, and have dominion over it. Behold therefore we are formed anew,
as he also says in another Prophet, Behold, says the Lord, I will take from
them, that is, from those whom the spirit of the Lord has foreseen, their
hearts of stone, and will give them hearts of flesh. For he was to be
manifested in the flesh, and to dwell in us. For, my brethren, the inhabitation
of our hearts is an holy temple to the Lord. Again the Lord says, How shall I
appear before the Lord my God, and how shall I glorify him? He says, I will
confess unto thee in the Church, in the midst of my brethren, and will praise
thee in the midst of the Church of Saints. Therefore we are they whom he has
brought into the good land. But why milk and honey? because a little child is
first quickened with milk and honey, and nourished. So we also being nourished
and enlivened by the faith of the Promise and the Word shall live, and have
dominion over the earth. For he said before, Let them increase and rule over
the fishes. What can this be now, that a man should have power to rule the
beasts, or fishes, or fowls of the heaven? For we ought to be sensible. To
govern, is of power and authority, and he shall bear rule who is thereto
appointed. And if this be not now, he has said that it shall be; when? when we
our selves may be perfected to be made heirs of the Covenant of the Lord.
Understand therefore (sons of joy) that the good Lord has before hand
manifested all things to us; that we might know whom we ought to praise with
thanksgiving according to all; Therefore if the Son of God being Lord, who
also shall judge the quick and dead, has suffered, that his stripes may
enliven us; we ought to believe that his Son of God could not suffer, unless it
was for us. And when he was crucified he had Vinegar and gall given him to
drink Hear how the priests of the people have manifested this, there being a
command written concerning it. The Lord commanded that if a man would not fast
the fast, he should be destroyed. Because he would offer up in sacrifice for
our sins the vessel of the spirit, that the type also which was made in Isaac
offered upon the Altar might be completed. What says he further by the
Prophet? And let them eat of the goat offered on the fast for the sins of all.
Mark diligently: and let all the Priests alone eat the entrails unwashed with
vinegar. Why this? because ye shall give me gall and vinegar to drink, when I
shall offer up my flesh for the sins of the New people. Eat ye alone the people
fasting and bewailing in sackcloth and ashes; that he might demonstrate that it
behooved him to suffer by them. Therefore what has he given in command?
observe; Take two goats fair and alike, and offer them; and let the Priest take
one for an Holocaust; but what shall he do with the other? He says, Let one he
made an execration. Mark how the figure of Jesus is manifested. And ye shall
all spit upon it, and pierce it, and put crimson wool about the head of it,
and so let it be sent into the wilderness; and when this is done, he who bears
the goat into the wilderness, shall take of the wool, and put it upon a dry
brushie thorn, called Rubus, the berries of which we usually eat if finding
them in the field. For the fruits of this thorn only are pleasant. But what is
the meaning of this? Observe; One goat was for the Altar, the other for an
execration, and the goat for execration was crowned. Why? because they shall
see him in that day having his flesh clothed in scarlet, and they shall say,
Is not this he whom we have crucified, setting him at naught, piercing and
mocking him? Truly this was he, who then said, That he was the Son of God; and
he was used in like manner as those fair goats which were alike. So that when
they saw him they mourned over him, who was to come under the figure of a goat.
See therefore the Type of Jesus who was to suffer. But why did they put the
wool into the midst of thorns? This is a Type of Jesus appointed to the
Church. He, who would take away the scarlet wool, must needs suffer many
things, for the thorn is terrible, and he who would rule over it, must endure
affliction; so, says he, they, who would see me, and approach my king-dom,
ought to receive me through tribulations and sufferings. But see what figure
this was, when it was given in command to Israel, That man, in whom sins were
completed, should offer an Heifer, and killing it should burn it, and then
servants should take up the ashes, and put them into earthen vessels, and then
the servants should take scarlet wool and hyssop, and so sprinkle the people
one by one, that they might be purged from their sins. Understand in what
simplicity it speaks unto us. This Heifer is Jesus Christ, the men offering it
are those sinners, who brought him to the slaughter; for they seemed partly
men, and partly sinners But the servants sprinkling were they, who preached
unto us remission of sins, and purity of heart. To whom he gave the power of
the Gospel, they were Twelve in testimony of the Tribes, for they were the
Twelve Tribes of Israel, which they were to preach it to. But why were there
three servants sprinkling? These were in testimony of Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, who were honorable with God. But why was the wool put upon wood?
Because the kingdom of Jesus was from the wood, and they therefore, who hope in
him, shall live for ever. But why was there wool and hyssop together? Because
in his kingdom shall be evil and gloomie days, wherein we shall be saved. For
he, who is wounded in the flesh is healed by hyssop cleansing away the filth.
And for this cause are these things, which are made thus manifest to us,
obscure to them, because they hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord. Lord
says by the Prophet something of the ears, teaching us thereby how we should
circumcise our heart, saying, By the hearing of the ear has he heard me* And
again he says, They, who are afar off, shall hear with the hearing, what I
have done, and shall know me; And, ye shall circumcise your hearts, says the
Lord. And again he says, Hear, O Israel, for the Lord thy God speaks these
things unto thee. And again the Spirit of the Lord prophesies, Who is he that
would live for ever? let him hear with the ear the voice of my servant. And
again he says, Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth; for the Lord has spoken
these things for a Testimony. And again he says, Hear the word of the Lord, ye
rulers of this people. And again he says, Hear, O children, the voice of one
crying in the wilderness. Therefore he circumcised our ears, that hearing we
may believe the word. For the Circumcision, of which they were persuaded, is
abolished. For he said, There should be a circumcision not made upon the flesh.
But they have transgressed, because a wicked Angel has taught them. He says
again unto them, These things says the Lord your God. Here I find a
commandment, Sow not among thorns, but be circumcised to your Lord. And what
says he further? And circumcise your hard heart, and do not harden your neck.
And again, Behold the Lord says, All nations are uncircumcised having on the
foreskin, but this people is uncircumcised in heart. But thou will say, The
people has received circumcision as a seal. But so every Syrian, and Arabs,
and all the idolatrous priests, and the Egyptians have received circumcision,
therefore are they also within the Covenants. Learn therefore (Children)
abundantly concerning all nations, That Abraham, who first gave circumcision in
the spirit, did see so far as to the Son, for receiving the definitions of
three letters, he gave circumcision. For he says, That Abraham circumcised the
males of his house, which were ten, and eight, and three hundred. Therefore
what knowledge was given to him? Learn, there were first ten and eight, (...).
then three hundred, the Ten note 1. the Eight note n, there ye have (...). And
the Cross, which should have the grace, was noted in the three hundred, for the
numeral of that is T. Therefore it is manifest that Jesus was figured in two
letters, and the Cross in one. Abraham knew the implanted gift of his doctrine,
and gave it for a sign to us. No one has learned a more genuine word from me,
only I know that ye are worthy. Moses has said, Ye shall not eat swines
flesh, nor the eagle, nor the hawk, nor the crow, nor any fish which has not
scales upon it; undoubtedly he received in his understanding three
Constitutions. Afterward he says to them in Deuteronomie, I will give to this
people my judgments. Undoubtedly therefore the command of God was not that
they should not eat, but Moses spoke in the spirit, When he spoke of not eating
swines flesh, he spoke it to this effect, Thou shall not, says he, be joined
to such men, who are like unto swine, who, when they are fed and wanton, forget
their Lord, but when they are in wants acknowledge him* For the swine, when he
has eaten, knows not his Lord, but when he is hungry, he cries, and when he is
filled again is still, and holds his peace. Neither shall thou eat, says he,
the eagle, nor the hawk, nor the kite, nor the crow. In this he says, Thou
shall not associate thy self with such men, who do not make provisions for
themselves by labor and sweat, but live by rapine, and injurious taking from
others, and however they appear to walk in simplicity, yet they observe what
things may be offered to them without any labor, these they diligently pry
out, and being idle themselves, and very pernicious creatures by reason of
their wickedness, they devour and feed upon the flesh of others. He says, Thou
shall not eat the Lampry nor the Polypus, nor the Cuttle-fish. That is, he
says, Thou shall not be joined to, nor like unto those men, who are ungodly to
the end, and condemned to death; for these fishes alone being accursed, swim
only in the deep, not diving as other fishes, but inhabiting in the mud of the
deep. He has said again, Thou shall not eat the Conie. Why said he it? only to
show, that thou should not be alascivious lecherous person, nor like unto
such; for the Hare or Conie does every year breed abundantly, and as many years
as she lives makes her so many burrows. Neither shall thou eat the Hyaena.
This he says, Thou shall not be an adulterer, nor defiler of men or women, nor
like unto such. Why so? for this kind of animal every year changes its nature,
and is one while a male, and another while a female. Again he well said, Thou
shall hate the weasil; this he says, Thou shall not be like unto those, of
whom we hear, by reason of their impurity, that they do unlawful things at the
mouth, neither shall thou associate thy self with impure persons, who commit
iniquity with the mouth; for this animal conceives at the mouth. Therefore
Moses by the spirit delivered three constitutions touching meats, but they
understood them to be meant of meats in a fleshly sense; But David took the
true knowledge of these three Constitutions, and spoke in this wise. Blessed is
the man, who has not walked in the Council of the ungodly, as those fishes
which walk in the dark down into the deep. And has not stood in the way of
sinners; as persons seemingly reverencing their lord, and yet transgressing
like swine. And has not sat in the seat of pestilent men. Like unto birds
which sit watching for prey. Thus have you a perfect knowledge of Moses his
Constitutions about meats But Moses says, Thou may eat of whatever has a
cloven hoof, and cheweth the cud. Wherefore says he it? because every such
creature having received food does seem to acknowledge his feeder, and being
refreshed to rejoice in him. He spoke it well seeing the Commandment, therefore
what said he* He gave in Commandment that they should be joined to those who
fear the Lord, and who meditate in the heart upon the Command of the Word which
they have received, and to associate with those, who speak the judgments of
the Lord and keep them, and to those, who knowing that Meditation is a work of
joy, do ruminate upon the word of the Lord. But what means the beast with a
cloven foot? This shows that a just man, though he walks in this world, yet he
expects and lays hold upon another. Observe how excellently Moses gave his
laws. But they could not know or understand these things: Yet we rightly
understanding the Commands, do speak as the Lord would; therefore has God
circumcised our ears, and our hearts that we might understand these things.
Lord's care to manifest any thing before hand touching the Water, and the
Cross. As concerning the Water it is written to Israel, how they should not
receive Baptism, which should bring remission of sins, but should build up to
themselves. Therefore the Prophet says, Be astonished, O heaven, and let* the
earth very much tremble at it, for this people has committed two great evils,
they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed out to
themselves broken cisterns. Is my holy mount Sion a desert rock? Ye shall be as
the young ones of a bird fluttering about the forsaken nest. And again the
Prophet says, I will go before thee, and will level the mountains, and will
break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron, and I
will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places,
that they may know that I am the Lord God. And he shall dwell in the deep cave
of the strong rock: afterward what says he? His water shall be sure through
the Son. Ye shall see the king with glory, and your soul shall meditate on the
fear of the Lord. And again he says in another Prophet, He, who does these
things, shall be as a tree planted by the watercourses, which shall give its
fruit in its season; and his leaf shall not wither, and whatsoever he does it
shall prosper; not so the ungodly, not so, but they shall be as the dust, which
the wind scatters before the face of the earth: Therefore the ungodly shall
not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the counsel of the just. For the
Lord knows the way of the rightcous, and the way of the ungodly shall perish.
Be ye sensible how he has appointed Water and the Cross for the same thing.
For this he says, Blessed are they, who, hoping in the Cross have descended
into the Water. And whereas he says, he will give a reward in its season. This
he says, I will retribute to them. The leaves shall not wither. This he says,
That every word which shall proceed out of your mouth in faith and love, shall
be for the conversion and hope of many. Again another Prophet says, And the
land of Jacob was praised above all lands. This he speaks of the Vessel of his
spirit which he will glorify. Afterward what says he? And there was a river
drawing from the right hand, and trees in their season grew up out of it, and
whosoever shall eat of them shall live for ever. This he says, Because we
descend into the water full of sin, and filth, and we ascend out of it, bearing
fruit in the heart, having fear and hope in the Son Jesus through the spirit.
And whereas he says, Whosoever shall eat of these shall live for ever. This he
says, Whosoever, says he, shall hear the things that are spoken, and shall
believe, he shall live for ever. He determines in like manner concerning the
Cross by another Prophet speaking thus, And when these things shall be
consummate, and when the wood shall be bowed, says the Lord, and shall rise
again, and when blond shall distit from the wood. Thou have something again
touching the Cross and him who should be crucified. For he says again in
Moses, When Israel was warred against by strangers, and that they were to be
put in remembrance that they were warred against, that they might be delivered
up to death for their sins, the spirit spoke to the heart of Moses, That he
should make a type of the Cross and of him who should suffer, to show that
unless they hoped in him, they should be warred against for ever. Therefore
Moses laid the armor one piece upon another in the middle of a fountain, and
standing higher than all, stretched out his hands, and so Israel prevailed, and
when he drew in his hands again they were put to death. Why was this? That they
may know that they cannot be saved, unless they hope in him. And in another
Prophet he says, All the day long have I stretched forth my hands to a people
that will not be persuaded, contradicting my just way. Moses again makes a type
of Jesus, because it was necessary that he should suffer, and give life, when
they supposed to have destroyed him in the sepulcher. For when Israel fell he
made every serpent to bite them, and they died, because the transgression in
Eve was by the serpent, that he might reprove them, and convince them, that for
their transgression they were delivered up to the anguish of death. In the end,
though Moses had commanded that there should be no molten nor graven image
amongst them for a God, he made one to show the type of Jesus. For Moses made a
serpent of brass, and placed it gloriously, and by Proclamation called the
people. They coming together entreated Moses that he would pray and make an
offering for them, that they might be healed. Then Moses said unto them, When
any of you shall be bitten, let him come to this serpent set upon a pole, and
let him hope, believing that though it is dead, it is able to give life, and he
shall be immediately healed; and they did so. In this thou have the glory of
Jesus, for all things are in him, and to him. What says Moses again to Jesus
the Son of Naue, giving him, being a Prophet, this Name, That all the people
should hear him only, because the Father would reveal all things touching his
Son Jesus to the Son of Naue. And when he gave him this Name, and sent him to
search the Land, He said, Take a little book in thine hands, and write what the
Lord says. Because the Son of God in the last days will cut up all the house
of Amalek by the roots. Behold again Jesus, not the son of man, but the Son of
God, but manifested by a type in the flesh. And because they would say that
Christ is the son of David, he fearing and understanding the error of sinners
says, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my right hand, until I make thy enemies
thy footstool. And again Esaias says in this manner, The Lord said to Christ
my Lord, I have holden his right hand, that the nations may hear him, and I
will break in pieces the power of kings. See how David calls him Lord, and the
Son of God. this people be the heir or first people, and whether the Testament
be ours or theirs. Hear now what the Scripture says concerning this people.
Isaac prayed for Rebekah his wife, because she was barren, and she conceived,
afterward Rebekah came to enquire of the Lord, and the Lord said unto her, Two
nations are in thy womb, and two people in thy bowels, and one people shall
prevail over the other people, and the Elder shall serve the Younger. Ye ought
to be sensible who is Isaac, and who is Rebekah; and which of the two he has
demonstrated to be the Elder people, this people, or that. And in another
Prophesy he says, Jacob spoke more plainly to Joseph his son, saying, Behold,
the Lord has not deprived me of thy presence; bring thy sons unto me, that I
may bless them. And he brought forth Ephraim and Manasses, desiring that the
blessing might be given to Manasses, because he was the elder, and he set him
on the right hand of his father Jacob. But Jacob saw in the spirit a type of
that people which should be. And what follows? And Jacob changed his hands, and
put his right hand upon the head of Ephraim the second and the younger, and
blessed him. And Joseph said to Jacob, Put thy right hand upon the head of
Manasses, because he is my firstborn son. And Jacob said to Joseph, I know it
my son, I know it, but the Elder shall serve the younger, yet he also shall be
blessed. See which of these he has appointed to be this first people, and heir
of the Covenant. Yet further, let it be remembered that through Abraham we have
a greater perfection of our knowledge. Therefore what says he to Abraham, That
because he believed, it was counted to him for righteousness? Behold, I have
made thee a father of nations which should believe in the Lord through
uncircumcisions. But let us now enquire, whether he has performed the Covenant
which he swear to the fathers, to this people? He gave it, but they were not
worthy to receive it, by reason of their sins. For the Prophet says, And Moses
was fasting in the mount Sinai forty days and forty nights, that he might
receive the Covenant from the Lord for the people; and he received of the Lord
the two tables, written with the finger of the Lord's hand through the spirit:
and when Moses had received them, he brought them down to deliver them to the
people. And the Lord said to Moses; Moses, Moses, go down quickly, for thy
people have transgressed, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt. And
Moses understood that they had made them molten idols, and he cast the tables
out of his hands, and the tables of the Covenant of the Lord were broken. Moses
indeed received them, but they were not worthy. Learn now how we received them.
Moses received them as a servant, but the Lord himself gave them to us, who
suffering patiently for us was made manifest, that they might be consummate in
their sins, and we might be the people of the inheritance, and receive the
Covenant by the heir Jesus Christ. The Prophet says again, Behold, I have set
thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou may be for salvation to the ends
of the earth, says the Lord God who redeemed thee, who was prepared for this
very thing, that he making discovery of our evils destructive to death, and
how wholly we were given up to the transgression of error, might deliver us
from darkness, and put his Covenant in us by the Word. For it is written how
that the Father commanded him to redeem us from darkness, and to prepare for
himself an holy people. Therefore the Prophet says, I the Lord thy God have
called thee in righteousness, and I will hold thy hand, and will strengthen
thee, and I have given thee for a Covenant to the nations, and for a light to
the Gentiles, to open the eyes of the blind, and to deliver those that are in
bonds, those that sit in darkness from the prisonhouse. Know therefore how we
were delivered and redeemed. Again the Prophet says, The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, because he has anointed me, and sent me to preach the glad tidings of
grace to the humble, to heal the brokenhearted, to preach liberty to the
captives, to open the eyes of the blind, and to call an acceptable year of the
Lord, and a day of retribution, and to comfort all that mourn. Sabbath in the
Ten words, wherein he spoke in the Mount Sinai face to face to Moses; And ye
shall sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord with pure hands, and with a pure heart.
And in another place he says, If their sons shall keep my Sabbaths, then will
I put my mercy upon them. He calls it a Sabbath in the beginning of the
Creation. And God made in six days the works of his hands, and finished upon
the seventh day, and rested on it; and sanctified it. Sons observe what he
says when he says, He finished in six days. This he says, That God the Lord
will finish all things in six thousand years; for a day with him is a thousand
years, He himself witnesses it, saying, Behold this day, A day shall be as a
thousand years. Therefore, Children, in six days, in six thousand years all
things shall be finished. And he rested on the seventh day, This he says, When
his Son coming shall finish the works of his time, and shall judge the ungodly,
and shall change the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, then he shall rest
honorably upon the seventh day. In fine this he says, Thou shall sanctify it
with pure hands, and a pure heart. Therefore how can any one now sanctify the
day, which God has sanctified, unless he be of a pure heart in all things? Let
us not be deceived. For if he resting gloriously does sanctify it, we being
just, and doing just things shall be able to sanctify it, when we have
received the Promise of iniquity ceasing, all things being made new by the
Lord. Then we shall be able to sanctify it, when we our selves are first
sanctified. Afterward he says to them, Your new Moons and your Sabbaths I
cannot away with. See how he says, That the Sabbaths which are now are not
acceptable unto me. But in that he rested, he made all things which he had made
the beginning of the eighth day, that is, the beginning of another world.
Therefore we observe the eighth day with alacrity of mind, whereon Jesus rose
from the dead, and being manifested, ascended up into the heavens. Temple: How
they being in misery did err in their hope upon the way, for they did not
hope in the God of the Temple, who made them, but in the Temple as being the
House of God, for almost, like the very heathens, they confined him within the
Temple; but learn what the Lord says making void the Temple. Who has measured
the heavens with his palm, and the earth with his fist? Is it not I? says the
Lord. Heaven is my throne, and the earth my footstool; what house will ye build
unto me? and what is the place of my rest? Know that theirs is a vain hope.
After this he says again, Behold they who destroy this Temple, shall
themselves build it. It is done. For when they warred it was destroyed by the
enemies; and the ministers themselves of those enemies shall build it. Again he
has opened, How the City and people Israel should be delivered up. For the
Scripture says, And it shall be in the last days, That the Lord will deliver
up the sheep of the pasture, and their fence and their tower to destruction.
And it is come to pass as the Lord has spoken. Therefore we shall enquire
whether there be a Temple of God. There is where he says he would make and
finish it. For it is written, It shall be when a week is finished, that the
Temple of God shall be built glorious in the name of the Lord. Therefore I find
that there is a Temple. But how shall it be built in the name of the Lord?
Learn. Before we believed God the dwelling of our heart was corrupt and weak as
a Temple built truly by the hand; for the house was full of Idolatry, by
Idolatry it was the house of devils, so that we did whatever was contrary to
God. But it shall be built in the name of the Lord. Learn, that a glorious
Temple of the Lord shall be built: But how? Learn; we receiving remission of
sins, and hoping in the name of the Lord were made anew, and created again as
from the beginning. So that in our house, that is, in us, God truly dwells.
How? The word of his Faith, the calling of his Promise, the wisdom of his
judgments, the commands of his doctrine, he himself prophesying in us, he
himself dwelling in us, opening to us the gates of the Temple, who were before
the servants of death, that is, opening that mouth which gives repentance to
us, has brought us into the incorruptible Temple. And he, who desires to be
saved, minds nothing but him dwelling in him, admires nothing but him speaking
in him, desires to hear nothing but the words spoken from his mouth. This is
the spiritual Temple built unto the Lord; so far as he would in power and
simplicity manifest it unto us. My Soul hops with desire, that I have omitted
nothing convenient for you, and conducing to Salvation. If I should write unto
you of things future, ye would not understand me, because they are shut up in
Parables: but these things are so.

Let us now pass over to another kind of knowledge and doctrine: There are two
ways of doctrine and power, either of Light or of Darkness: and great is the
difference of these two ways. Over one are appointed the Angels of God, the
Ministers of light; Over the other the angels of Satan; over the one is the
Lord from ages to ages; over the other the prince of the time of iniquity. The
way of light is this; Thou shall love thy Maker. Thou shall glorify him who
redeemed thee from death. Thou shall be simple in heart; and being rich in the
spirit, thou shall not join thy self with those who walk in the way of death.
Thou shall hate to do that which is not pleasing to God. Thou shall hate all
hypocrisy. Thou shall not forsake the Commandments of the Lord. Thou shall not
exalt thy self, but be of an humble mind. Thou shall not assume glory to thy
self. Thou shall not take evil counsel against thy neighbor. Thou shall not
give boldness to thy soul. Thou shall not commit adultery, nor fornication, nor
buggerie. Thou shall not refrain to correct the impurity of some by that word,
which comes from God; and when thou reproovest transgressions, thou shall not
respect persons. Thou shall be meek and quiet, trembling at the words, which
thou have heard. Thou shall not remember evil things against thy brother. Thou
shall not be of a double and wavering soul, doubting whether thus or thus. Thou
shall not take the Name of the Lord in vain. Thou shall love thy neighbor
above thy soul. Thou shall not destroy the child by abortion, nor kill it when
it is born. Thou shall not take away thy hand from thy son, nor from thy
daughter, but from their youth shall teach them the fear of the Lord. Thou
shall not desire thy neighbors goods, nor be a covetous person. Thou shall not
adhere in thy soul to proud persons, but be numbered amongst the just and
humble. Thou shall embrace temptations, when they happen, as good things. Thou
shall not be of a double mind, nor a double tongue; for a double tongue is the
snare of death. Thou shall be subject to the Lord, to Masters, as to the type
of God, in reverence and fear. Thou shall not command thy maid or manservant
with bitterness; especially those who hope in him, left thou be found destitute
of the fear of God, who is over both. For he came not to call men by their
persons, but those whom his spirit prepared. Thou shall communicate to thy
neighbor in all things; and shall not call any thing thine own; for if ye are
communicative in incorruptible things, how much more in corruptible. Thou shall
not be hasty in tongue, for the mouth is the snare of death. Keep thy Soul as
chaste as thou can. Do not stretch forth thy hands to receive, and shut them
when thou should give. Thou shall love every man speaking to thee the Word of
the Lord as the apple of thine eye. Mind the day of judgment night and day.
Seek out every day the persons of holy men, and searching by the Word go forth
to exhort, and meditate to save a soul by the Word. And thou shall labor by
thy hands for the redemption of thy sins. Thou shall not doubt to give, nor
murmur when thou give. Give to every one that asks of thee, but know withal
who is the good recompenser of the reward. Keep the things, which thou have
received, neither adding to nor taking from them. Hate a wicked person to the
end. Judge justly. Make no Schism. Make peace betwixt those who are at
variance. Confess thy sins. Come not to Prayer with an evil Conscience. This is
the way of light. the dark way is crooked, full of that which is execrable. For
it is the way of eternal death with torment; wherein are things destructive to
the Soul, Idolatry, Boldness, Sublimitie of power, Hypocrisy, Doubleness of
heart, Adultery, Murder, Rapine, Pride, Transgression, Deceit, Malice,
Arrogance, Witchcraft, Magic, Covetousness, Want of the fear of God,
Persecutors of the good, Haters of the truth, Men who love but know not the
wages of Righteousness, Persons not adhering to that which is good, nor to just
judgment, Men who regard not the widow nor fatherless, being not watchful to
the fear of God, but to do evil, from whom Meekness and Patience are far
removed; Lovers of vain things, seekers of revenge, such as have no pity for
the poor, nor endeavors to relieve the oppressed, ready to detract, nor
knowing their Maker, murderers of children, corrupters of the figment of God,
such as turn away themselves from the needy, oppress the oppressed, advocates
for the rich, unjust judges of the poor, and sinners every way. commands of the
Lord, which are before written, to walk in them; for he, who does them, shall
be glorified in the Kingdom of God* but he, who chooses the other things,
shall perish with his works. Therefore there is a Resurrection, and a
Retribution. I entreat those, who are eminent, to take the counsel of my good
will. If ye have any amongst you upon whom ye may work, forsake them not. For
the day is at hand, in which all things shall perish together with him who is
evil: The Lord is at hand, and his reward. I entreat you again and again, that
ye be good Lawgivers to your selves, and that ye remain faithful counselors
to your selves. Take away from amongst you all hypocrisy. And may God, who
governs the whole world, give to you wisdom, science understanding, and
knowledge of his righteous judgments in patience Be ye taught of God, seeking
out what the Lord requires from you, and do, that ye may be saved in the day
of judgment. And if there be any remembrance of good, remember me, meditating
on these things; that my desire and watchfulness for you may come to some good.
Begging grace* I beseech you, that as the good vessel is yet with you, ye may
fail in none of these things; but search them out diligently, that ye may
fulfill every command. For they are worthy things. I therefore endeavored the
rather to write unto you of such things as I was able that I might cheer you
up. Be safe the sons of love and peace. The Lord of glory, and of all grace, be
with your spirit.

Amen.
The end of the Epistle of Barnabas the Apostle Companion of Saint Paul the
Apostle.
A Postscript to the Reader,
THe Scope and designed end of this most excellent Epistle of Barnabas was to
keep Christians from Judaizing, and to fix them upon the substantial duties of
Christ's Oeconomie, whereof Moses Polity was but a shadow. He sets down the
types, and the things typified, the figures, and the things prefigured, shows
in the former part what of Moses is done away, and in the latter part what of
Christ is come in place of it. The Style is obscure, because the subject is so.
If it please not (Reader) now it is translated, thou may, it is to be hoped,
for that very reason, pity the pains, and pardon the mishaps and miscarriages
in it of the Translatour.

Farewell.

FINIS.

