AN EPISTLE OF A CATHOLIC To his Friend A PROTESTANT Touching the Doctrine of
Real Presence.

OR, The Answer to a Question propounded in these Terms.

What should move you, contrary to the plain Testimony of your Senses, to
believe, that after Consecration the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is become
REALLY Christ's very Body and Blood.

Matthew. 22.29. Ye do err, not KNOWING the Scriptures, nor the POWER of God.
It is a manifest sign of an UNBELIEVING Heart, in the Works of God to ask HOW
This or That can be. St. Basil. lib. 5. contr. Eunom. Printed in the Year, 1659.

An Epistle of a Catholic to his Friend a Protestant touching the Doctrine of
Real Presence.
SIR,
YOu having desired me to give you some probable Reasons, which did, or do
persuade me to believe, that after the words of Consecration, the Bread,
contrary to the Senses of Seeing, and Feeling, and Tasting, is Christ's very
Body, and the Wine his Blood; in answer to your demand, I shall, according to
my weak Capacity, tell you truly by what Reasons I am chiefly so persuaded.

First, the Holy Scriptures unanimously in express terms say, That it is his
Body, and that it is his Blood: the places in the Evangelists are so manifest
and well known, that it may seem needless to name them; however for the
importance of the matter I quote them to you. Mat. 26.26, 28. Mark 14.22, 24.
Luke 22.19, 20.

Secondly, the Ancient Fathers did never understand those places otherwise,
then in their literal and proper sense; as appears by their Works left in
writing, which are too numerous here to insert: and is acknowledged by many of
the most eminent Protestants themselves, as namely, Philip Melancthon, the
Centurists, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Calvin, and others; as you may see in the Book
called The Progeny of Catholics and Protestants. lib. 2. cap. 8. page 35, 36,
37. and lib. 5. cap. 3. page 13.

Thirdly, it was the unanimous Doctrine of the Councels: not one of them ever
determining the contrary, though at some times moved so to have done by some
few private persons, that Heretically opposed the Doctrine; and many of the
said Councels having expressly determined for it.

Fourthly, it was ever the constant Belief and Practice of the universal
Church throughout the world: and whenever any did oppose it, they were
presently judged, condemned, and cast out by the Church of that Age, as
Heretics, and in all after ages so likewise esteemed, namely Heretics, and
their memory held abominable: stinking like to those Carcases ( Esaias 66.24.)
which it is not improbable the Prophet in Spirit might principally mean, when
he said that the Carcases of the men that had transgressed, being cast out,
shall be an abhorring to all flesh. For so indeed most commonly are the
memories of all Heretics; they are an abhorring, not only to the Catholic
Church, but to all flesh: for the latter Heretics do, in one kind or other,
usually condemn the former as much as Catholics do.

Fifthly, the Divisions and Differences, which are among those, whose opinions
in this matter be contrary to the Church, are so many and manifold, that it is
not easy to reckon them; and do clearly convince, that there can be no
certainty of Truth in any of their said different opinions. Luther in his time
observed Eight several Expositions of those words, Hoc est corpus meum, (This
is my Body) all contrary one to another, and coming (as he says) not from the
Spirit of God, but from the mouth of Devils; and not long after him Claudius de
Saints, a learned Bishop of the Catholic Church, in his Book of the
Eucharist, reckoned no less then fourscore different Expositions of the said
words of Institution, This is my Body, etc. and this is my Blood, etc. all
earnestly maintained by learned Protestants with rejection of the contrary
sense. So that we see, once out of the way of true expounding of Scripture, and
there is no end of erring. Luther speaking of Carolstadius, Zuinglius, and
Oecolampadius, (all three Sacramentarians, as he calls them) says, Cursed be
their Charity and Concord for ever and ever; signifying, that he would have
nothing to do with them in the matter of this Sacrament. He said moreover, that
they expounded the words, This is my Body, as absurdly, as if one should
expound that Text in the Book of Genesis, In the beginning God made heaven and
earth, thus, The Cuckoo did eat up the Tittling, (or Hedge-Sparrow) bones and
all: and as for that Passage of Saint John, Chap 1. v. 14. of his Gospel, The
word was made flesh, their Exposition, says Luther, is as good as to say, A
crooked staff is made a Kite. Thus did Luther not without cause set out and
deride the Sacramentarians expounding of Scripture, as you may see more at
large noted page 22. of the Answer to Mr. Charks Preface called The Trial of
Spirits.

Sixthly, if the words This is my Body be to be expounded thus, This is a
figure, or, This is a sign of my Body, then is there no hard mystery, no hard
saying at all in those words; nor in those other which our Savior spoke, John
6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you: which were utterly contrary, not only to the speeches,
language, and confessions of all Writers, and of all Records of Antiquity,
which acknowledge a great difficulty and hardness in this Mystery, and a great
irreconcilable repugnancy to carnal sense and Reason; that the Eucharist (or
Sacrament) should be verily and truly Christ's Body and Blood; but contrary to
the whole purport of our Lords Answer to the Capernaites, whose great stumbling
question was, how Christ could give them his flesh to eat. This both They, and
also some of his Disciples, called an hard saying; they could not understand
how it should be done: nor yet by the Answer which our Savior gave them, did
they, or indeed could they in reason, understand it as the Sacramentarians now
do, to wit, that the Bread (in a Spiritual sense) is only a figure of his
Body, and not his very Body indeed. For what hardness had there been then to
conceive, and comprehend the full nature of the Mystery? especially how could
his Saying have been thought so hard, that it should move many of Christ's own
Disciples to leave him, and to walk no longer with him. And surely a sad
parting it was, seeing our Lord presently upon it said, as it were mournfully,
to the Twelve, and will ye also go away? And yet notwithstanding, though it
were for their satisfaction, and to keep them from going away with the rest,
our Savior (even he who is so great a lover of souls) thought fit to make them
no other answer but this, Does this offend you? what if you shall see the Son
of man ascend up where he was before, John 6.62. as much as if he had said,
though I do ascend and leave you, yet of necessity my flesh must be eaten, and
my blood be drunken, for otherwise life cannot be had; if therefore this
saying, You must eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, offend
you now, and seem an hard saying to you now, while he is present with you, what
will it do then, when you shall see him leave you, and ascend up in his Body
into heaven, where he was before? how will you then think it possible to eat
his flesh? This (I say) was the effect of our Lords answer to them, concerning
their wondering how they should be able to eat Christ's flesh, and their being
scandalized at it as a thing altogether impossible, as you may see, John 6.53,
54. Whence surely it appears, that if either our Savior had expounded
himself to mean, or they had understood it that he did mean, that his flesh
should be eaten and his blood drunk in a sign or figure only, that speech of
his, what if you shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before, could
have had no sufficient reason. For doubtless the sign (or figure) of his Body,
whatsoever it were, might easily enough be eaten by them, after that his Body
should be ascended. To take Bread, and to break it, in token that Christ's Body
was broken for us upon the Cross, is no such hard thing, but that it may be
done as well in Christ's absence, as in his presence, yea something more
properly in his absence, then in his presence, at least then in his visible,
natural and ordinary presence: but now it is clear, our Savior in that place
mentions his Ascension to his Disciples, as a thing that should make the
mystery of eating his flesh to seem more difficult to them, and not less;
therefore he meant they should eat it, more then in a bare sign, or figure
only: for that (I say) they might as easily do, when he were in heaven, as
while he was on earth.

Moreover our Lord knowing, that the Capernaites looked upon him as a mere man;
and also that, while he spoke of giving them his flesh to eat, they understood
him in a gross and carnal manner, as that he should give them his flesh cut in
pieces to eat, or the like; to extinguish and take away that gross conceit out
of their minds, he tells them, that Flesh, to wit, according to their gross
manner of understanding, profitteth nothing. But now first, his Flesh, was not
mere humane flesh, as they apprehended it, but it was the flesh of the Son of
God, yea of the true God, 1 John 5.20. it was flesh united to the Deity; and
therefore in respect of other common flesh, (whether of Beasts or Men) Christ's
Body was to be accounted, rather a Spiritual and Divine Body, rather Spiritual
and Divine Flesh, then natural and common. It was the Lords Body, who came down
from heaven, and is eternally, from everlasting to everlasting, always in
heaven; it was a Body full of grace and excellent virtue, and also a Body full
of divine and incomprehensible Mystery. It was a Body Incarnate by the Holy
Ghost without man, and born of a Virgin without forcing or violating the Womb;
a Body that passed through a multitude, and was not discerned, Luke 4.30.
compared with John 8.59. A Body that went out of the Sepulcher, not forcing
away the stone, Matthew. 28.2, 5, 6. That came into the room, where the Disciples
were gathered together, the doors being shut, John 20.19. it came in, I say,
and stood in the midst of them, before they ever perceived it, just as if it
had been a Spirit; and insomuch as the Disciples, Luke 24.36, 37. took it
verily to have been a spirit. And therefore of such a Body as this, and of such
a Person as Christ was (God even the true God, bl^ssed for ever) to say, how
can this man give us his flesh to eat, or how can the Sacrament rightly
consecrated be his Body, is a foolish and an infidel question. For he can do it
well enough; he can give us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, though
our sense perceive it not: and though (as he says) we must eat his Body, yet
his Body remains always whole; it is not to be cut or torn in pieces, as the
Capernaites imagined: for he does not say, he would give us a piece of his
flesh, or a part of his flesh, but his flesh entirely, that is to say, his
whole Body, the entire Humanity which he received of the Blessed Virgin; this
he would give to every one of us. He can do all things; to him nothing is
impossible. He was with two of his Disciples at Emmaus, talking with them, and
conversing with them, and immediately vanished out of their sight, and was
present with other Disciples at Jerusalem, as may be gathered from Luke 24.29,
31. compared with John 20.19. And though he be always at the right hand of God
in Heaven, as appears Acts 3.22. yet is he also sometimes (when he pleases)
upon earth to convert sinners, as for example Saul, Acts 9.17.27. and to
comfort the faithful in their prisons, as Acts 23.11. He can do all things, I
say; he can (as God) do whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and Earth. What are we
then (silly creatures) to question, how he can give us his flesh to eat, seeing
he has said, that we must eat it, or perish.

But still you object, and say, that this Doctrine, viz. that Bread should
become Christ's real Body in truth and substance, is so strangly absurd, that
you cannot believe it. I answer, no more could the Jews, nor some of his
Disciples; of whom therefore (as taxing and noting their incredulity thereby)
our Lord says, John 6.64, 65. That no man can come unto him, and believe his
words, except it were given him from above: and if there had been nothing, that
is, no greater mystery, in these words of Christ, This is my Body, etc. but
only this, viz. a figure or sign of my Body, what needed all that contest, so
long, so difficult about the words, as was betwixt Christ and the Jews? Yea
then have the universal Church, Councels, Fathers, Martyrs, and all been
deceived; for never any of them all took the Sacrament to be only a Figure of
Christ's Body.

But you say you cannot believe it. Tell me; Is it not as easy for our humane
Reason to conceive that the Bread, which our Lord said was his Body, should be
so indeed, as it is to conceive, that the little Babe, sucking at his
Virgin-Mothers breast, was the Creator of the whole Universe, both of the
Heavens and Earth, of the Sea, and of all things therein contained? Is it not
as easy for a Christian to believe this Doctrine, as to believe, that the
little Babe in the Manger, whom the three Sages adored, was the Almighty God?
Faith may and must believe these things, though sense and reason cannot.
Therefore St. Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 10.5. of captivating our understanding, and
every thought and imagination to the obedience of Christ; and Romans 1.5. he
says, that the Gospel is made known unto all Nations for the obedience of
Faith, that is to say, that by faith, and by believing all that the Gospel
required of them, men might show themselves to be entirely obedient and subject
unto God, in their understandings no less then in their affections and wills.
And truly considering the way and order of God Almighties dealings with the
sons of men, we ought not to think it strange, that he should, in this
particular of eating, require a renuntiation of our senses. We may do well to
remember, that when time was, by following our senses contrary unto Gods
command, we lost Paradise; and if now by obeying God contrary to our senses,
Paradise may be regained, we shall have no great cause to murmr. So that
indeed this Imposition of believing and eating contrary to our senses, seems
(as it were) a certain Penance, which God lays upon man for his first and
great sin; to the end, that as by following his senses contrary to Gods express
word and command, Adam lost Heaven and eternal happiness, as much as in him
lay; so by an obedient and submissive Faith in Gods word and unto his command,
renouncing the dictates of our own sense and all suggestions of flesh and
blood, the sons of Adam might, through Grace, recover Heaven and eternal
happiness.

Sense and natural Reason tells Naaman, that the Rivers of Damascus were as
likely to cure him of his Leprosy, as Jordan in Judea, 2 Kings 5.12. but he
found it otherwise. So it was contrary to sense, and contrary to all natural
reason, that the walls of Jericho should fall down at Isreal's blowing with
Rams-horns; yet we know they did so, Joshua 6.20. Contrary to sense Moses
divided the Sea by the stroke of a rod, Exodus 14.16, 21. And contrary to sense
Jordan divided it self, as soon as it was but touched by the feet of the
Priests, Joshua 3.15, 16. And contrary to sense Iron did swim, 2 Kings 6.6.
It was contrary to sense, that a little meal and oil (no more then would make
one cake) should feed the Widow, the Prophet, and her Son many days, or a long
time together, and not waste, 1 Kings 17.12, 16. It was contrary to sense, that
five loaves and two fishes should satisfy the hunger of five thousand persons;
and that there should remain twelve baskets full of broken meat, after all had
eaten, Mat. 14.20. Mark 6.43. John 6.13. Considering the deadness of Sarahs
womb, as the Scripture speaks, Romans 4.19. and also of Abraham's own body, it
was contrary to sense and reason, that Sarah should have a child; yet Abraham
believing what God had said to him, his Faith found the effect of the promise,
and it was counted to him for righteousness For by believing, says the
Scripture, Romans 4.20. he gave glory to God, and was counted the friend of God,
James 2.23. So is it in this matter and mystery of the Eucharist; they that
believe what our Savior has said, and accordingly trust thereupon, give glory
to God by this their believing, yea are made thereby and esteemed the friends
of God, to wit, so far as they do not frustrate, or make void the merit of
their faith by the demerit and wickedness of their lives. Many other places and
examples might be alleged, that demonstrate Gods people always to have walked
with God by faith, and not by sense: and why not then in this Mystery as well
as in others? why should this Doctrine seem so strange to men of understanding
and knowledge in the ways of God, considering the greatness of the Almighty,
and how he vails his will and mysteries oftentimes unto us? Considering how
terrible in the Old Testament he was to such as would pry into his ways and
secrets further then was permitted them; how fearful the wiser sort of Jews
were so to do; and lastly how answerable the practice of the universal Church
of Christ has been in this thing, and that for above sixteen hundred years,
namely to walk by faith rather then by sense in this business, and to rest more
upon the Word, and Power, and Truth of God, then upon our own reason or
understanding. Consider I pray what the Prophet says, Isa 7.9. If ye will not
believe, surely you shall not be established. By reason of unbelief was that
Lord, on whose hand the King leaned, trodden to death in the gate of Samaria, 2
Kings 7.20. A believing heart is the root of all spiritual excellency and
acceptableness with God; and it is the character which he gives them. I take to
witness, says God, 2 Esdras 1.37. the grace of the people to come, (meaning
the Christians, such as should believe in the Messiah that was to come) whose
little ones, says he, rejoice in gladness, and though they have not seen me
with bodily eyes, yet in spirit they believe the things that I say. Hitherto
also comes that saying of our Lord to St. Thomas, Because thou have seen me,
Thomas, thou believe; but blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed, John 20.29. Wherefore let us not dispute, but rather pray to the
Almighty to captivate our understandings to the obedience of Faith, that we may
here, in reverence to his word, be willing to believe what we do not see, that
so hereafter, in the blissful vision of his glory, we may be admitted to see
more then we do now believe.

And besides all this, the Prophetical Types and Shadows of the Sacrifices in
the Law, as also the Prophetical sayings, or predictions of the Prophets,
concerning somewhat of greater worth and far exceeding the dignity of Mosaical
Sacrifices, that should be sacrificed and eaten under the Gospel, are a further
and undeniable argument, that the Eucharist is not a figure only of Christ's
Body, but his very real and true Body. It Is granted by all, at least by the
most learned and ingenuous amongst Protestants, to wit, by all such as pretend
any show of respect to Antiquity, that those Prophesies of the old Testament,
do point at the Eucharist, or Sacrament of Christ's Body in the new. Now if the
Sacramentarian opinion be true, to wit, that the Bread of the Eucharist remains
still, even after Consecration, in truth and substance but a morsel of Bread,
and nothing else, and the Wine, after Consecration, nothing but mere Wine, how
is the Sacrament of the Eucharist a more noble and excellent thing, then were
the Sacraments and Sacrifices of the Jews? for they also were no less signs and
figures of Christ's Body, then the Bread of the Eucharist is. Yea who sees not,
that the Jewish Sacrifices upon this supposition, viz. that the Eucharistical
Bread is indeed nothing but Bread, and the Eucharistical Wine nothing but Wine;
I say, who sees not upon this supposition, that the Jewish Sacrifices far
exceeded the Christians in the worth and dignity of the things sacrificed? for
example, the Paschal Lamb, was it not a more excellent Sacrifice in its own
nature, then a piece of bare Bread? But now Malachy prophesies that under the
new Law should that more excellent Sacrifice be. He prophesies that God would
reject and cast away the Priesthood and Sacrifices of the Jews, and instead of
them, would have anther more pure and more excellent Sacrifice: and that not
offered in Jerusalem only, or in any one place, or city of the world, but all
the world over, from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, Mal.
1.11. Neither can this be any other but the Body of our Lord offered upon the
Altar; which upon the rejection of Moses daily Sacrifice, was to come in place
and to be accepted of God, according to that of the Psalmist, speaking in the
person of Christ, Burnt-offering and sacrifice for sin thou would not have,
but a Body thou have fitted me, Psalm. 40.6. according to the Translation of the
Septuagint; which St. Paul likewise follows, leaving the Hebrew, Hebr. 10.5.
Doubtless by virtue of the word of God in the Priests mouth, this Body is
fitted both for a Sacrament, and also a Sacrifice, after the order of
Melchisedech: who being the firstborn of a great and honorable family in
Salem, was according to the custom of that age, both Prince and Priest there,
as Jethro was in Midian, Exodus 18.1. And so likewise our Lord, being the
firstborn among many Brethren, Romans 8.29. and the firstborn of every
creature, as he is called, Colos. 1.15. is therefore by God the Father, and
that by an oath, ordained a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech:
whose sacrifice, as the learned affirm, was Bread and Wine first offered in
sacrifice to God, and afterward eaten by such as participated of the
sacrifices, as appears, Genesis 14. where it is not improbably thought, that with
part of the Bread and Wine which Melchisedech brought forth, as a Priest of the
most high God, he refreshed Abraham returning from the slaughter of the four
Kings. So that as the Aaronical, or Mosaical sacrifices of Beasts were types
and figures of our Lords Bloody sacrifice of himself upon the Cross for the
sins of the world; so in like manner was Melchisedechs sacrifice in Bread and
Wine a figure of our Lords unbloudy sacrificing of himself upon the Altar for
the Church. Which unbloudy Sacrifice our Lord did institute and ordain at his
last Supper, when he said to his Apostles, Do this, Luke 22.19. and which
Action of our Savior, was by the Apostles, who were eyewitnesses thereof,
celebrated in like manner throughout the world, to wit, in all parts and in all
places where they preached the Gospel; and has been ever since continued in
the universal Church to this day.

The word which our Translation reads ministering, Acts 13.2. as the learned
affirm, signifies in the Greek properly sacrificing, and so it is translated by
Erasmus; As they were sacrificing to the Lord, and fasting, the Holy Ghost
said, Separate unto me Saul and Barnabas. The Sacrifice of the Cross was a
bloody and general Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world: but this of the
Altar is unbloudy, and more particular for the Church, but most especially for
those members of the Church for whom in particular it is offered. The Jews had
their Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings, and Bloody Sacrifices; to which
Christ answers. Upon the Cross he was that Bloody Sacrifice, which fulfilleth
that which was typified by those bloody Sacrifices of the Beasts that were
killed: upon the Altar he is the unbloudy Sacrifice, and fulfilleth the Types
of those Sacrifices, wherein there was no shedding of blood; such as were the
Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings, and the like. The Paschal Lamb was in a
diverse respect both a bloody Sacrifice, and also an unbloudy; and therefore
our Savior answers the Type of it in both respects. As it was a Lamb taken out
of the flock and killed, and the blood sprinkled upon the door-posts; so it was
a bloody Sacrifice; and so our Savior fulfils the Type of it by the offering
of himself up to death upon the Cross: but as it was to be roasted afterward
with fire, and the flesh eaten within the house, Exodus 12.7, 8. it is unbloudy,
and a Type of the Sacrifice of the Altar, which is eaten within the House, that
is to say, within the Church, by the Members of the Church only; Jews and
Gentiles, with all Excommunicated persons, Heretics, Schismatiques, and the
like, being excluded and not permitted to partake thereof. Also to the great
comfort of all Catholic Christians, the general Sacrifice of the Cross is
applied particularly, in the Sacrifice of the Altar, to the Church and to the
true members thereof, for whom in special it is offered. This, I say, is a
great and unspeakable comfort and benefit; here does our Lord meet with us. God
commanding the Jews to offer the Sacrifices of Beasts at the door of the
Tabernacle, said, that he would there meet with them, Exodus 29.43. Certainly
this was a great comfort to the Jew; but* has not the Christian as great? yes
certainly, and far greater. If he come as he ought, well prepared to the Altar
of God, if his hands be cleansed in innocence, and his heart purified from the
conscience of sin through faith and true repentance, he comes (as the Apostle
Paul says, Heb 4.16.) and that with boldness, or great confidence, unto the
throne of grace, and finds help in time of need. There does our Lord
vouchsafe to meet with us (Cathol^que Christians) not by virtue of the blood of
Bulls and of Beasts, in which the Father said, he had no pleasure; but by
virtue of his own blood, in which Sacrifice the Father testifies that he was
well pleased. Burnt offerings and Sacrifices, says the Psalmist, thou had no
pleasure in; but then says the Son, Lo I come, to do thy will, O God, as it
follows in the Psalm last cited.

O thou Christian, come thou then to this Altar in faith, come in innocence,
come in charity, come prepared, come reverently: serve the Lord with trembling,
and rejoice with fear; for our God is a consuming fire. We have an Altar, says
the Apostle, Heb. 13.10. of which they have no right to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle, meaning the Jew; among whom though the Priests might eat of some
offerings, yet they might not eat of the Sin-offering; that was to be burnt
without the gate, Lev. 4.12. and 6.30. But the Christian Law offers more
Grace. Our Lord, who was made an offering for sin, Esaias 53. says to all, both
Priests and People, that except they eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, they cannot have life: yet he was an offering for sin, and also
suffered without the gate of Jerusalem, as the Sin-offering was commanded to be
burnt without the gate, of which the Priests of Moses might not eat: but the
Christian may eat of the Sin-offering of Christ's Body; yea he must eat of it,
if he will have life and benefit by it. Therefore it is, that the Apostle says
of Christians, that they have such an Altar, ( viz. an Altar of a sin-offering)
as the Jewish servitours of the Tabernacle were not allowed to partake of. And
by this we may see, that all mysteries whatsoever covered in the Law under
Types and Shadows, (whether Burnt-offerings, Meat Offerings,
Free-will-offerings, Heave-offerings, yea the very Sin-offering it self, with
the Altars both within the Veil and without) have all relation to Christ's
Sufferings, Passion, and Death, commemorated at the Christian Altar. And not
only these, but the Mercy-seat also, the Ark, which even under the Law to pry
into was present death, do all contain some mystery of Christ, and which
always required them not to be looked into by the eye of sense, but the eye of
faith. There the Cherubims stand over the Mercy-seat, their faces looking down
upon it, but their wings spread out, Exodus 25.18, 19, 20. signifying that under
a Type, which the Apostle St. Peter plainly expresses, 1 Pet. 1.12. namely,
that the very Angels themselves desire to look into, and to be made acquainted
with the great mysteries of God revealed in Christ: the mysteries, I say, which
were hid in God from the beginning, and by his Apostles and Prophets made known
unto his Church, and by the Church unto the Angels themselves, even to the
highest Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, Ephesians. 3.9, 10. For they
are all of them by office ministering Spirits, sent out to minister for them who
shall be heirs of salvation, that is, for the service and Protection of the
Church, Heb. 1.14.

In the Church, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.21. Glory shall be given to God
throughout all ages: whence it appears, that there is not one age, or ever
shall be, wherein the Church of God is not in being: in this Church are the
mysteries of Christianity celebrated, but more especially, as the Fathers
commonly teach, in the adorable Sacrifice of the Altar: great mysteries indeed,
and for the right understanding of which, faith and not sense, has its
exercise: here we must believe, not reason and dispute from principles of
Sense, Nature, and Philosophy: That is a thing, which the Apostle forbids and
forewarns us of, Colos. 2.8. We must believe, I say, that the Bread duly
consecrated is no longer Bread, but that very Body of Christ, which God the
Father Almighty has fitted, and ordained to be a daily Sacrifice, offered up
to God after the order of Melchisedech, according as it is written of Christ,
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110.4. And
when this Sacrifice totally and unversally cease, then the world shall end,
as it is written in Dan. 9.27. compared with Matthew. 24.15. But before this can
be, says our Lord, the Gospel must be preached for a Testimony in all Nations,
and then shall the end come. Therefore, says Christ, when you see the
Prophecy of Daniel come to pass, then let him that reads, understand, for
the end is near. Hitherto comes that saying of the Jewish Rabbis, noted by
Ainsworth on Leviticus, Chap. 5. v. 15. Our wise men have said, say the
Rabbis, that for the service of the Sacrifice the world does continue: whence
it may be collected, that if the daily Sacrifice of Christ's Body, (of which the
Jewish Sacrifices were but Types and Shadows) if that comes once to be totally
and universally abolished, the world will quickly be at an end. Moreover, the
same Rabbis affirm, that the mysteries contained in their Sacrifices, are so
great, that the meaning of them cannot be fully attained in this world; and
therefore, says Mr. Ainsworth, they advise people not to be over curious to
pry into them presumptuously, lest God break out upon them, as he threatens to
do, Exodus 19.12, 24. Thou shall, says God to Moses, set bounds, that the
people go not up into the mount: and it was of such consequence, that the
people might not presume to pry, that God said the second and third time to
Moses Go down, and charge the people, that they break not through to gaze, and I
break out upon them, and many perish, ver. 21. The Bethshemites but only for
looking into the Ark, or Chest wherein the Book of the Law was kept, God smote
of the people no less then fifty thousand and seventy men, 1 Samuel 6.19. Surely
a terrible warning this must be to us, if we duly consider it.

By all which we may see, (as the same Aynsworth also notes) that inquisitive
curiosity to have humane Reason and Sense fully satisfied touching the
mysteries of Religion, is a thing forbidden by God. Men must walk by faith in
the things of God, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. which considered, I leave it
to you, and to all rational and indifferent men whatsoever, whether it be not
safer, in this great mystery of Christ's Body on the Altar, whether it be not
safer (I say) with the whole Christian world of all ages, to Believe and Adore
though contrary to sense, rather then to pry and examine by sense, or the
dictates of carnal reason. For in Believing and Adoring I follow the pure word
of God both of the Old and New Testament; I follow the Doctrine of the Ancient
Fathers, the Decrees of Councels, and constant practice of the universal
Church, and that from the one end of heaven to the other. Is it not safer
(think you) to follow all these sure and infallible Guids, rather then
(contrary to all these) to follow the conjectures of my own brain, or at best
of some other particular Sect-master, or Sect-masters? one of these three of
necessity I must follow: either the Catholic Church with the Ancient Fathers
and lawful Pastors of it; or else some particular Sect-master, or
Sect-masters, divided from the Church, and teaching contrary to the Churches
sense; or lastly my own brain, my own private reason, spirit, or what else you
will call it: for a fourth I cannot find. And as such a Sect-master is
followed in this world, so let his followers make their account, that they
shall stand with him before the judgment seat of Christ; they shall not be
separated for ever: whom they loved to follow here in this world, contrary to
duty, and contrary to the ordinance of Christ, (who commands us to hear his
Church, and not particular Sect-masters, either departed or cut off from the
Church) they shall be made to follow and keep company with, against their
wills, in the next life, in eternal flames and miseries. I wish all would
consider this, who so easily put themselves under the tuition of every private
and presumptuous Sect-master, that they would consider it, I say, and return in
time to the obedience and communion of the Catholic Church, which only has
lawful Authority to teach them, and also a faithful promise from Christ to
teach them Truth, Matthew. 28.20. John 14.16, 17.

And beside all this, is it not even miraculous to consider, that the universal
Church, all Ancient Fathers, both in and out of Councels, and that in all ages
since Christ, should believe and hold a thing so repugnant and absurd to sense
and all humane reason, as Sectaries make the Faith of Catholics in this point
seem to be? and that the generation of Catholics should do and believe this
from age to age to almost seventeen hundred years; and this without any self or
by-ends, of profit, pleasure, honor, or other interest whatsoever, but purely
for conscience sake, and out of obedience to Gods word, and to the Catholic
Doctrine of Christianity? This certainly may seem no less then a miracle in our
eyes; we must confess the finger of God, and his special Providence to be in
it, unless we be very partial: especially if on the other side we do but
consider, how every other Sect that has risen, and upon pretense of reforming
abuses and errors, has ever persecuted the Mother Church, really for her not
complying with them in their greater Errors; (as for example, the Arians in
that of the Trinity, the Calvinists in that of the Eucharist, etc. endeavoring
still to make the Church forsake her first Faith, and comply with them in their
following of sense and humane reason contrary unto Faith) I say, if we do but
consider, how short-lived and how little or nothing prevailing* both these and
all other Sects have been; how they have been able to do nothing, but only to
procure disturbance and persecution to good Christians in some particular parts
of the Church, we must needs more clearly see and acknowledge the hand of God
in it; and that as it was their intent indeed, and endeavor to disturb and
destroy, so Gods intent and purpose was to purify his Church thereby, and to
purge it of Hypocrites and Time-servers, and such like dross. St. Austin
expresses the evil practices of these men by the similitude of barking Dogs;
They bark (says he in his Book de Vtilit. cred. cap. 17. speaking of
Heretics and Sectaries) They bark perpetually against the Apostolic Chair,
but all in vain. They effect nothing by their barking. Yea he confesses that
even himself was a Barker too, all the time that he was a Manichean, that is,
he was one that exercised the patience of true Christians by detraction and
other injurious treating of them. St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be
Heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest: and for
that reason God permits some Heresies and Sects, as it were, to reign and
carry all before them for a time. By false Teachers, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 13.1,
2, 3, 4. God proves you, whether ye will cleave unto the Lord your God with
all your hearts and with all your souls. Nevertheless they also in time,
declining the infallible rule of Faith, which is the Authority and Tradition of
the Catholic Church, and refusing to be obedient, and to captivate their
understanding to the high mysteries of Faith, but following humane reason and
their own private sense, have vanished and come to nothing. All their wit, and
worldly glory, and power, and interest, and learning, could not preserve them
from the contempt and violence of some contrary Sect.

Witness the late Protestant Church of England. How was it it established and
secured, as to all humane judgment, from all danger, and from all fear of
being so suddenly rooted up! How was the Government thereof settled by Bishops,
confirmed by Law, and countenanced by the State! Their form of Ordination,
Articles, Sacraments, Liturgy, and their whole order of Worship, so regulated,
and so ratified both by the Prince and State, that nothing could seem to be
desired more. Yet because it was all of private judgment, all differing or
contrary to the Tradition of the Catholic Church, and done either out of
hatred, or contempt, or contradiction to the Apostolic Sea, whose Authority
is the root and fountain of all true Christian Ecclesiastical Unity, how
suddenly is her day come! what a strange, unexpected, unfeared judgment has
taken her away in the height of her worldly glory! For noncompliance she
persecuted the children of her Mother Church even to blood, imprisoning
multitudes of them unto death; but as for her Priests, hanging, and drawing,
and quartering them, as Traitors and the most infamous of all sorts of
Malefactors whatsoever, and setting their flesh upon poles, to be meat for the
fowls of the air, and permitting none to bury them; and taking Two of Three
parts of the Lands and goods of the Common people, that professed themselves
Catholics. But O ye, stand now amazed, and behold how she is judged. She that
was thus bottomed, strengthened, and established in her way of Religion and
Church Government, she that sat as Queen, and said in her heart, I shall see
no widdow-hood, what is become of her? where is she to be found in the whole
earth? in less space then one hundred of years, she is both risen and fallen,
and come to nothing: and though her sin in the punishment thereof be even
written upon her forehead, yet she repents not, but like the strange woman in
the Proverbs, she wipes her mouth and says, I have not sinned, I have done no
ill, I am not either Heretic or Scismatique. Our original Ordination was
good; our compliance with Princes for our safety is warranted by the examples
of some other Nations; though we have dissented from our Mother Church and from
all the world beside, in doctrine, in ordination of Priesthood, in a Leiturgy
and worshipping of God, in the Sacraments and Church Government; yet all this
is nothing, so long as (our selves being judges) we are one in Fundamentals, we
are neither Schismatiques, nor Heretics, how much soever we be outwardly cast
down. Thus they seem to plead. But O miserable Apology! how unable is it to
justify, or palliate Schism, especially the Schism of them, who for so many
years together have labored the extirpation of that Church, which first
brought them off from Paganism to Christianity! Consider this I pray, ye that
are now upon the stage, that ye act not against Gods Church. Destroy it you
cannot; persecute it, trouble and afflict it you may for a time, so long as it
pleases God to permit you; but you shall sooner destroy your selves, then it.
Remember what befell Pharaoh, who thought by oppression to keep Israel low and
weak; but his wisdom proved folly. What became of Jeroboams wisdom, 1 Kings 12.
though he was made a King of the ten Tribes, yet he ought not to have altered
Gods worship? It Is true, in doing so, his policy aimed only at his own safety,
but yet that proved his ruin.

And for you my friends, (the Catholics of this Nation) who have solemnly in
your Baptism promised and professed to believe the Articles of Christian
Religion, and the Catholic Church; as also to forsake all that appertains to
the lust of the flesh, to the lust of the eyes, and pride of life, which are
not of the Father, but of the Devil, 1 John 2.16. in this Covenant be ye
faithful to the death. The time we have to labor for Eternity is short; but a
short moment: even as a drop of a bucket to the whole ocean se^, and one gravel
stone in comparison of the sands upon the sea shore, so are a thousand, yea a
thousand thousands of years, to the days of Eternity. Therefore, O my soul.
says Esdras, 2 Esdras 8.4, 5. swallow down understanding, and devour wisdom;
for thou have no longer time, then only to live, wherein thou must gain
eternity. Wherefore, as the Preacher says, Eccles. 9.10. whatsoever thy hand
has found to do (to wit, of good) do it with all thy might; for there is no
laboring in the grave. Let us now resolutely and courageously resign up our
selves to all manner of afflictions for heavens sake; and by so doing lay hold
of eternal life: let us not let slip any opportunity; for in that way we shall
best gather to our selves treasures of glory: we may think our selves happy, as
many of us, as in this kind and for this cause, suffer persecution. Diverse
Catholic Countries want this high favor from God, which we in England have.
Such in other Countries, as fix their eyes upon eternity, force themselves to
long and sharp Penances, in Fastings, Watchings, hard Labor, austere
Discipline, with other mortifications of the flesh: but instead of these, we in
England have contrymen and neighbors, persecuting us to the loss of goods,
liberty, and life, sometimes. O, let us be content, and account, that this time
is our Fair and Market; our Mart-time to get both precious, glorious, and
durable riches to eternity. And as for those, who are our Persecutours, let us
mourn and pray for them. Our Lord said to the daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not
for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children. So I would to God,
these would pity themselves, more then they pity those whom they persecute;
which yet sometimes they seem to do. Let us pray earnestly for them, and fear,
that it is for some great foregoing sins, still aggravated and continued by our
own iniquities, that has so incensed and moved the merciful God to permit our
neighbors to be our persecuters, and that God uses them as his Battle-ax, as
the Rod of his wrath, and the Staff of his indignation, to punish Hypocrites,
but to purge and purify those whom he loves. O it is a woeful condition, that
such our persecuters are in; let us pray heartily for them for their Conversion
and amendment, before the Altar of our God; that it would please the merciful
God of all flesh, and Father of Spirits, to illuminate those that live out of
the Church, seriously to apprehend the danger of their estate, and the great
importance of eternal Salvation; and that it would please the Almighty to
incline the hearts of our Magistrates, both rightly to understand our Religion,
and impartially to consider our Sufferings: and however they oppress and
persecute us, yet, O Lord, make us ever with exact fidelity to perform our
duties to them. And also let us pray, that God would be pleased to assuage his
anger toward our Nation; to forgive the sins of our forefathers and ours, and
to turn away his wrath from us their postetity; to deliver the ignorant from
being any longer seduced by false Teachers, and the learned from being mislead
by their worldly interests and passions; and the whole Nation from the Spirit
of Contradiction, Licentiousness and Discord; that instead of so many Sects,
Divisions and changes of Religion, they may all again be restored to that One
True Religion, and to that unity of Mind, and steadiness of Faith, and
tranquillity of Conscience, which is no where else to be sought, no where else
to be found, but in the Communion of Gods Church, nor by any other means to be
attained, but by the conduct of his Grace.

Amen.
An Appendix to the foregoing Discourse, in Answer to an Objection, etc.
Dear Friend,
WHereas you object, that Tertullian, and some other of the Arcients, do call
the Symbols of Bread and Wine after Consecration, Figures only; I wonder that
you being a knowing man in these matters, should thus speak. That they call
them Figures sometimes its confessed; and so do diverse Catholic Writers of
present times, as you may see in Bellarmin. ( Libr. 1. de Sacram. Eucharist.
cap. 5) but that they called, or esteemed, them Figures only and no more, or
Figures without the Substance, as Protestants do, is denied. The Holy Scripture
calls the Son ( Heb. 1.3.) the express Image, or Figure, of his Fathers
Substance, or Person: Is he not therefore of the same Substance, and Divine
Nature with the Father? The Quakers indeed understand and esteem him only a
Figure, because of this Text: but the Church and all true Christians believe
otherwise, namely, that though he be the Figure of God, yet he is also in the
verity of his own Person true and eternal God; and that in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. And therefore for you to say, that the
Fathers esteemed the Sacrament duly consecrated to be a Figure only of Christ's
Body, is a great mistake and undervaluing of the Fathers Judgments; supposing
them to be so stupid, that they should both Adore, and also Offer up to God, as
a Sacrifice of such Divine Virtue and Merit, and of so Supreme and Superlative
Excellency above all other Sacrifices whatsoever that had been offered before
it, that which was in it self but a piece of Bread, a thing so much inferior
even to the meanest of the Jewish Sacrifices. I say, that the Fathers should
thus Magnify and Adore that which they believed to be nothing else but a piece
of bread, is the greatest absurdity that can be imposed upon men. But you will
not believe (perhaps) that the Fathers Adored the Sacrament. To convince you of
this, I shall allege some few examples (of many) out of their Works; by which
it will undeniably appear, what both their judgment and practice was
concerning this matter.

First, St. Augustine ( Epist. 118.) says, It is he the Apostle says shall be
damned, who does not with SINGULAR VENERATION, or Adoration, make a difference
betwixt this meat and all other meats. And again (upon the 98. Psalm) No man,
says he, eats this Sacrament, but first he Adoreth it. Secondly, St. Ambrose
( lib. 3. cap. 12. de Spir. Sanct.) We ADORE (says he) the flesh of Christ in
the Mysteries. Thirdly, St. Chrysostom Homil. 24. in 1. ad Cor. We ADORE him
on the Altar, as the Wisemen did in the Manger, Matthew. 2.11. Fourthly, St.
Gregory Nazianzen (in Epitaph. Gorgon.) professes of his Devout and Faithful
Sister Gorgonia, that being in a distress she ran to the Church, and casting
her self down before the Altar, invocated, or called upon Christ who is adored,
or worshipped, thereon. Fifthly, Theodoret. ( dial. 2. entitled Inconfusus)
The Mystical Symbols (says he) are ADORED, as being in truth the things they
are believed to be, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ. Lastly, St. Dennis
Areopagita, Scholar of the Apostles themselves, ( Ecclesiast. Hierarch. cap. 3.
part. 3.) makes a solemn Prayer expressly to the Blessed Sacrament upon the
Altar; and generally all the Ancient Leiturgies of the Church do show, that at
the time of Elevation, and whenever the Consecrated Symbols were openly
presented, especially before Receiving, the custom of the Church was with one
voice to make their prayers unto it, in these and the like words; Lamb of God,
that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us; God be merciful to
us sinners; Lord I am not worthy thou should come under my roof, etc. Many
other examples might be produced, but these may suffice to show how
unreasonable your conceit is, that in the Fathers opinion the Bread and Wine
were but bare Figures, and did not really contain the very Substance of Christ's
Body and Blood.

Wherefore, my Friend, in the depth of your Solitude and nightly Meditations
considerately think upon the doings of these Ancient Fathers. Shall we say with
Protestants, that they adored Bread, as the old Ethniques said, that the
Christians did eat Man's flesh at their solemn Meetings? which though it were a
Calumny, in the sense that the Heathens charged it upon them, yet it is certain
it took its rise from the Belief which Christians were known to have concerning
the Blessed Eucharist, namely that it was Christ's Flesh and Blood in deed and
truth, though after a divine and incomprehensible manner, and not only a
Figure of them. I told you before, that St. Augustine, ( lib. 6. Confess. cap.
3.) for the nine years in which he was a Manichaean Heretic, confesses of
himself, that he did nothing but clamor and bark against the Church. But O
Lord (says he, being now converted from that Heresy) I find to my great
comfort, that I barked not, all that time, so much against the Catholic Faith,
as against certain vain Fancies, which my carnal thoughts and conceptions had
fixed to the Faith. And are not Protestants most patently guilty of the same
Frenzy? Do they any thing else, but form to themselves false conceptions of
the Doctrine of Catholics and of the Catholic Church, and then rail at it?
But let us pray, that with St. Augustine they may be converted from this great
evil. Let us consider also, whether it be not much more safe, to follow the
plain words of Christ, which say, This is my Body; and the Universal Church,
which has always understood those words in their plain and litteral sense:
then either the private and contrary expositions of Heretics, or the
suggestion of your own natural sense and reason, against the words of Christ,
and against the universal Belief of his Church, in a business of such sublime
and high Mystery; wherein it is far better, and far more agreeable to the
humility of Christians, to captivate our understandings (as the Apostle says)
to the obedience of Faith. When we were in the Loins of our first Parent Adam,
we lost Paradise by following our carnal sense and reason in the eating of that
forbidden Fruit: is it any more then equity then, that upon Gods command, and
in full Belief of his Word, we should renounce (as it were) our reason for a
time, and resign up our natural understandings unto God, to regain Paradise?
Reflect, I pray, attentively upon those places of the Fathers, which you think
make most for your opinion, viz. That the Symbols of Bread and Wine are but
mere Figures, and see, if they be not capable of a fair and reasonable
Interpretation to the contrary, and more agreeable to the Catholic Doctrine.
In times before any controversy about the Eucharist was moved, the Fathers,
conscious to themselves of their own true sense and meaning, took a liberty of
speaking sometimes, and uttered some things in a dubious and ambiguous manner of
expression, at least as may seem so to us, whose judgments are for the most
part biased, and set one way more then another, by reason of Controversy.
There is scarce any Heresy against the Truth of Christian Religion, but if we
will be partial Interpreters of the Fathers, we may find some passages in
them, that through this foresaid liberty and ambiguity of speech, may seem to
favor it. But then let us be so equal and indifferent, as to consider the many
and more plain passages, which the same Fathers, and others contemporary to
them, have left us in their writings to the contrary, and in full assertion of
the Catholic Truth; and our minds will quickly be satisfied: especially if we
cast into the Balance the perpetual practice, not only of the Ancient Fathers
themselves, but even of all the Churches upon Earth, concerning the most
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar.

Declare therefore, if you can, (for I even challenge you to it) Declare, I
say, if you can in all your reading, what one Orthodox Father, or any other
Author of good name in the Church of God, what one General Council, what one
particular Synod, or National Church upon Earth, for the space of 1500. years
after Christ, did so Officiate or celebrate the Holy Eucharist upon a Table, as
that they held it to be a mere Figure, or Sacramental sign, only signifying
Christ's Body and Blood unto us, as Protestants hold, and not really being, or
not really containing, or not really exhibiting and conveighing it in verity
and Substance to us; or that they denied the real Sacrifice of Christ's Body in
the Eucharist, upon a true, proper, and real Altar. A Sacrifice, I say, in it
self, and according to the original Institution thereof, generally Propitiatory
for all mankind, but more particularly effectual for the Church, and those for
whom it is specially offered, or that by special Faith and Devotion do make
themselves capable of the Actual Benefit and Virtue of it.

But if this be too hard, and cannot be showed, then (because the weal of
Eternity is a matter of so great consequence; and this Ordinance of the daily
Sacrifice a thing of so great efficacy and value, that (as Mr. Aynsworth notes
upon Levit. 5.15.) the wisest among the Jews held, that the world did continue
and was upheld by it; and that the general (though not total) abolishing
thereof amongst Christians is to be the work of that great enemy of our Lord,
(Antichrist) Matthew 24.15. Mark 13.14. Dan. 9.27. (according to the judgment
and consent of the Fathers) in consideration, I say, of these things, I would
gladly have it shown, as well by the Testimony of Gods Holy Word, as by the
judgment and belief of some Orthodox Church, Council, or Synod, within the
time above specified, how my poor soul may hope to be saved, if I leave the
universal way and rule of all good Christians, which is Tradition and the
continued practice of Christ's Catholic Church, and follow the enemies and
opposers thereof in any of their private and contrary paths.

Lastly, because by multitude of words Truth may be darkened, Job 38.2. I
desire, that the Answer which shall be given to these demands, may be plain,
perspicuous, and direct to the purpose; without evasions and shiftings to any
other matter, without any vain and unnecessary Circumlocutions of words,
without Scholastical Distinctions, or any kind of that cunning craftiness of
speech and reasoning, which is contrary to the simplicity of true believing,
condemned by the Apostle Ephesians. 4.14. and fit for nothing, but to abuse and
mislead simple and sincere minds into error: according as in all Ages it may
be observed to have been the practice of false Teachers, and their chief
engine, wherewith to entangle and deceive souls. The wise man does well
describe them, Prove. 2.15. Their ways, says he, are crooked, -- like the way
of a Serpent upon a rock, Prove. 30.19. ever inconstant and varying, like that
of the wanton woman, who has forsaken the guide of her youth. So these forsake
their Mother the only True Church of Christ; and run gadding, every one after
their own Fancies and groundless Imaginations. But let them wander alone. I
desire, I say, that the Answer to these Queries be punctual and downright to
the matter, that is, having named the Author, and set down his words truly and
faithfully, that you use no enlargement at all upon them, at least not further
then is necessary for the clear explication of his meaning, and withal giving
your Reasons in brief. Thus doing, Sir, you shall much oblige your faithful
Friend, etc.

FINIS.

