AN EPISTLE By Way of TESTIMONY, To Friends and Brethren of the Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings in England, Wales, and Elsewhere, concerning the Decease of
our Faithful Brother GEORGE FOX.
From our second Days Morning-Meeting in London, the 26th of the 11th Month,
1690. Dear, and truly Beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, in Christ Jesus
our Blessed Lord and Savior.
WE sincerely and tenderly salute you all in his free and tender Love,
wherewith he has graciously visited us, and largely shed it abroad in our
Hearts and Souls, to our own unspeakable Comfort and Consolation, and toward
his whole Heritage, and Royal Offspring, blessed be his pure and powerful Name
for Evermore. And our Souls do truly and fervently desire and breath unto the
God of all our Mercies, that you all may be preserved and kept truly faithful
and diligent in his Work and Service, according to your Heavenly Calling and
Indowments with his Light, Grace and Truth, unto the end of your Days; as being
livingly engaged thereby, all your appointed time to serve him, and to wait
till your Change come, that none may neglect that true Improvement of your
Times and Talents that God has afforded you here, for your Eternal Advantage
hereafter, in that Inheritance and Life Immortal that never fades away. And
that the whole Flock and Heritage of Christ Jesus which he has purchased and
bought for himself, with a Price incorruptible, may always be so preserved in
his own pure Love and Life, as to grow, increase, and prosper in the same; and
thereby be kept in Love, Unity, and Peace with one another, as becomes his true
and faithful Followers, is that which our very Hearts and Souls desire, being
often truly comforted and enlarged in the living sense and feeling of the
Increase and Aboundings thereof, among faithful Friends and Brethren.

And Dear Brethren and Sisters, unto this our Tender Salutation, We are
concerned in Brotherly Love, and true Tender-heartedness, to add and impart
unto you some Account of the Decease of our Dear and Elder Brother in Christ,
namely, his, and his Churches true and faithful Servant and Minister, George
Fox; Whom it has pleased the Lord to take unto himself, as he has diverse
others of his faithful Servants and Ministers of late Time, who have faithfully
served out their Generation, and finished their Testimony and Course with Joy
and Peace. Howbeit, O Dear Brethren and Friends! That so many Worthies in
Israel, and serviceable Instruments in the Lord's Hand, are of late taken away
and removed from us, so soon one after another, appears a Dispensation that
deeply and sorrowfully affects us and many more, whose Hearts are upright and
tender toward God, and one to another in the Truth. The Consideration of the
Depth, Weight, and Meaning thereof, is very weighty upon our Spirits, though
their precious Life and Testimony lives with us, as being of that same Body,
united to one Head even Christ Jesus; in which we still, and hope ever shall
have secret Comfort and Union with them whom the Lord has removed, and taken to
himself out of their Earthly Tabernacles and Houses, into their Heavenly and
Everlasting Mansions.

This our said Dear Brother, George Fox, was enabled by the Lord's power, to
Preach the Truth fully and effectually, in our Public Meeting in
White-Hart-Court, by Grace-Church Street, London, on the eleventh Day of this
instant 11th Month, 1690. After which he said, I am glad I was here; now I am
clear, I am fully clear; Then he was the same Day taken with some Illness, or
Indisposition of Body more than usual, and continued weak in Body for two days
after, at our Friend Henry Goldney's House in the same Court, close by the
Meeting House, in much Contentment and Peace, and very sensible to the last; in
which time he mentioned diverse Friends, and sent for some in particular, to
whom he expressed his Mind, for the spreading Friends Books and Truth in the
World, and through the Nations thereof; as his Spirit in the Lord's Love and
Power was universally set, and bent for Truth and Righteousness, and the making
known the way thereof to the Nations and People afar off, signifying also to
some Friends, That all is well, and the Seed of God Reigns over all, and over
Death it self. That though he was weak in Body, yet that the Power of God is
over all, and the Seed reigns over all disorderly Spirits; which were his
wonted sensible Expressions, being in the living Faith and Sense thereof which
he kept to the end. And the thirteenth Instant, between the ninth and tenth
Hour in the Night, he quietly departed this Life in Peace, being two days after
the Lord enabled him to Publish and Preach the Blessed Truth in the Meeting, as
aforesaid. So that he clearly and evidently ended his days in his faithful
Testimony, in perfect Love and Unity with his Brethren, and Peace and Goodwill
to all Men; being about sixty and six years of Age (as we understand) when he
departed this Life.

And on the sixteenth of this Instant, being the day appointed for his Funeral,
a very great Concourse of Friends and People assembled at our Meeting House in
White-Hart Court aforesaid, about the Midday, in order to attend his Body to
our Burying-place near Bunhill-Fields, to be Interred as Friends last Office of
Love and Respect, due on that account. The Meeting was held about two Hours,
with great and Heavenly Solemnity, manifestly attended with the Lord's Blessed
Power and Presence; and diverse living Testimonies given from a lively
Remembrance and Sense of this his dear ancient Servant, his Blessed Ministry
and Testimony of the breaking forth of this Gospel day; his innocent Life, long
and great Travels, and Labors of Love in the Everlasting Gospel, for the
turning, and gathering many Thousands from Darkness, to the Light of Christ
Jesus, the Foundation of true Faith; also of his manifold Sufferings,
Afflictions, and Oppositions which he met withal for his faithful Testimony,
both from his open Adversaries and false Brethren; and his Preservations,
Dominion, and Deliverances out of them all by the Power of God, to whom the
Glory and Honor was, and is ascribed, in raising up and preserving this his
faithful Witness and Minister to the end of his days, whose blessed Memorial
will Everlastingly remain.

He loved Truth and Righteousness, and bore faithful Testimony against Deceit
and Falsehood, and the Mystery of Iniquity; and often of late time especially,
warned Friends against Covetousness, Earthly-mindedness, against getting into
the Earth, and into a brittle Spirit; and the younger sort, against Looseness
and Pride of Life, etc.

A few days before he died, he had a great concern upon his Mind, concerning
some in whom the Lord's Power was working, to lead them into a Ministry and
Testimony to his Truth, who through their too much intangling themselves in the
things of this World, did make themselves unready to answer the Call and
Leadings of the Power of God, and hurt the Gift that was bestowed upon them;
and did not take that regard to their Service and Ministry as they ought, and
mentioned the Apostle's Exhortation to Timothy, to take heed to his Ministry,
and to show himself approved, etc. And expressed his Grief concerning such as
preferred their own business before the Lord's business, and sought the
advancing worldly Concerns before the Concerns of Truth: And concluded with a
tender and fatherly Exhortation to all, to whom God had imparted of his
Heavenly Treasure, that they would improve it faithfully, and be diligent in
the Lord's Work, that the Earth might be sown with the Seed of the Kingdom, and
God's Harvest might be minded by those whom he had called and enabled to labor
therein; and that such would commit the care of their outward Concerns to the
Lord, who would care for them, and give a Blessing to them. However, this is
not mentioned to encourage any to run unsent, or without being called of God.

Many are living Witnesses that the Lord raised him up by his Power, to
proclaim his mighty day to the Nations, and made him an effectual Instrument in
our day, to turn many from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to God;
and freely to suffer and bear all Reproaches, and the manifold Persecutions,
Buffetings, Haleings, Stonings, Imprisonments, and Cruelties that were in the
Beginning, and for some time inflicted on him and others, for the Name of
Christ Jesus. He was in his Testimony as a fixed Star in the Firmament of God's
Power, where all that be truly wise, and that turn many to Righteousness, shall
shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever.
He knew and Preached the Mystery of Christ Revealed, the Life and Substance,
and the power of Godliness, above all Shadows and Forms. The Lord endued him
with a hidden Wisdom and Life. He loved Peace, and earnestly labored for
universal Love, Unity, Peace, and good Order in the Churches of Christ. And
wherever he met with the contrary, it was his great Grief and Burden. He was
greatly for the Encouragement of faithful Laborers in the Lord's Work; and it
was a great Offense and Grief to him, to have their Testimony weakened, or
Labors slighted through Prejudice in any professing Truth.

And inasmuch as the Lord suffered him not to be delivered up to the will of
his Enemies and Persecutors, who often heretofore breathed out Cruelty against
him, and designed his Destruction, but in his good Pleasure so fairly and
quietly took him away in his own time, when his Testimony was so blessedly
finished, and his Work accomplished. This is all remarkable, and worthy of
serious and due Observation, as being by a special and divine Providence and
Wisdom of God, to whom we ascribe the Glory of all, and not unto Man or
Creatures. Though we must needs allow and own, that good Report and due Esteem,
which faithful Elders, Ministers and Servants of God and Christ have by Faith
obtained, to the Praise of that blessed Power that upheld them in every Age in
their day; Many whereof are even of late taken away from the Evil to come, and
are at Rest in the Lord out of the reach of all Envy and Persecution, where the
wicked cannot trouble them any more.

And we must patiently bear our parting with them, and our loss and sorrow on
that account, with respect to their unspeakable Gain: Yet how can we avoid
being deeply affected with sadness of Spirit, and brokenness of Heart, under
the sense and consideration of such Loss and Revolutions, which we have cause
to believe are ominous of Calamities to the wicked World, though of good to the
Righteous? Did the death of plain upright Jacob, namely Israel, (who was as a
Prince of God,) so deeply affect both his own Children and Kindred, Genesis 50.
as that they made a great and exceeding sore Lamentation for him; and even the
Egyptians also, that they bewailed him seventy days? And the Death of Moses so
deeply affect the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 34.
as that they did weep and mourn for him in the Plain of Moab thirty Days? And
the Death of Stephen that faithful Martyr of Jesus, so deeply affect certain
Men fearing God, Acts 7.
as that they made great Lamentation for him? And the Apostle Paul, when taking
his leave of the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and telling them, Acts 20.
They should see his face no more? If this did so deeply affect them that they
wept all abundantly, sorrowing most of all for these Words, That they should
see his face no more? (With many more of this kind;) How then can we otherwise
choose but be deeply affected with sorrow and sadness of Heart (though not as
those which have no hope) when so many of our ancient, dear and faithful
Brethren, (with whom we have had much sweet Society) are removed from us one
after another? (We pray God raise up and increase more such.) Yet must we all
contentedly submit to the good Pleasure and Wisdom of the Lord our God in all
these things, who takes away, and none can hinder him, nor may any say unto
him, What do thou? Yet we have cause to bless the Lord, that he has of late
raised, and is raising up more to publish his Name in the Earth. And we that
yet remain, have but a short time to stay after them that are gone, but we
shall be gone to them also. The Lord God of Life keep us all faithful in his
holy Truth, Love, Unity, and Life to the end. He has a great Work still to
bring forth in the Earth, and great things to bring to pass in order to make
way for Truth and Righteousness, to take place therein; and that his Seed may
come forth, and be gathered, and the Power and Kingdom of our God and of his
Christ, made known and exalted in the Earth, unto the ends thereof.

Dear Friends and Brethren, Be faithful till Death, that a Crown of Life you
may obtain. All dwell in the Love of God in Christ Jesus, in Union and Peace in
him; to whom we tenderly commit you to keep and strengthen you; Bless and
preserve you to the end of your days. In whose dear and tender Love, we remain,
Your Dear Friends and Brethren, Stephen Crisp, Geo. Whitehead, Fra. Camfield.
James Park, John Elson, Peter Price, John Field, John Edridge, Nicholas Gates,
Francis Stamper, John Vaughton, Gilbert Latey, Charles Marshal, Rich. Needham,
James Martin, Daniel Monro, Jo. Heywood, George Bowls, William Robinson,
William Bingley, John Butcher.


POSTSCRIPT.
BEfore his Death he writ a little Paper, desiring all Friends every where,
that use to write to him about the Sufferings and Affairs of Friends in their
several Countries, should henceforth write to their several Correspondents in
London, to be Communicated to the second Days Meeting, to take Care that they
be answered.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1690.


