ANABAPTISM CONSIDERED.

Wherein the chief Objections of that Sect against Infant Baptism, and the
manner of Baptizing by Aspersion, or Sprinkling, are fairly stated and answered;

AND REASONS given why Dipping is not to be taken as the essential or necessary
Mode of Administration.

In a familiar Letter of Advice to a Parishioner inclining that way.

By William Eratt, M. A. and Minister of Hatfield near Doncaster.

Gal. 4.16, 17. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?
they zealously affect you, but not well.

Prove. 14.15. The simple believes every word, but the prudent man looks well
to his going.

LONDON: Printed by W. B. for A. and J. Churchill. And for Robert Clark in
York. MDCC.

Neighbor Woodward,
I Must needs say (and complain too) you have been unjust to your self, and
unkind to me as your Minister, in not thinking me worthy of being consulted in
your spiritual Concerns, (as to which I am given to understand, you have lately
been under some Scruples, doubting of the Truth of your former Profession in
the Communion of the Church of England, and seeming to incline to the
Anabaptists Persuasion.) Now to set you at rights herein, the Errand of this is
to acquaint you, that I look upon it as a Duty incumbent upon me, to give you
the best Advice I can (though not desired) in this your grand Affair, the
Welfare of your Soul.

Pray then, let not the Length of my Letter affright you, for it is honestly
intended for your good; and I hope it will prove so, be but you as easy and
sincere in the Perusal as I was in the Writing of it: And if my little pains
taken herein do but satisfy your Scruples, and bring you home to our Mother
the Church, from whence you were unadvisedly straying, I shall think my self
plentifully rewarded, who am, without Dissimulation,

Your loving Friend and Minister,
Jan. 9. 1699/700. William Eratt.

ANABAPTISM CONSIDERED, etc.
J. W.
I Am apt to think, your rash separating your self from the Church wherein you
were baptized and bred up, is a Case, when well examined, you will not easily
answer, either before God or Man, for all the new Light you so much (as I hear)
now boast of; for as our Savior speaks in the Gospel, If the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! Matt. 6.23.


You are pleased to say, you have been hitherto in Error and Darkness; but
however that be, are you now infallibly sure of your being in the right way?
This Principle of Popish Infallibility (I presume) you will hardly pretend to,
for that savours too much of the blind Zeal and Enthusiasm of Ignatius Loyola
the Founder of the Jesuits. If then it is possible for a Man to be mistaken
(though himself believes otherwise) and if Zeal does not always prove the best
cause; for as St. Romans 10.2.
Paul affirms of some of the Romans that they had a Zeal of God, but not
according to Knowledge; from hence then I gather, there may be an erroneous
Conscience, that is, a Man may be zealously affected in an ill matter.

Not to instance herein Examples of former Times, we have modern ones
sufficient.

1. As to the Case of the Papists, they are infallibly sure of being in the
right, and all others in the wrong; and that there is no Salvation out of the
Communion of their Church.

2. As to the Quakers, they are as confident of their way, that they are
inwardly taught of God by his Spirit; and yet, I dare say, for all the Zeal of
the one; or the other, you will easily agree with me, they are both grossly
mistaken in matters of Religion and Religious Worship.

From what has been said, I thus argue; That a confident Zeal is not always an
Assurance of Truth being there; and (this premised) give me leave to tell you
what a Lover of Truth ought to do, suppose he has some Scruples upon him that
he has been in a wrong way. In this Case, a scrupulous Conscience should take
especial care to inform it self these two ways.

1. Examine into the Validity of those Scruples that seem to disuade him from
the Profession he has lived in.

2. If after all his Searches after Truth, his Scruples do still grow upon him,
and he cannot satisfy himself to continue in his former Profession; in the
next place, a Wiseman, and a prudent Christian, should by all due ways and
means examine into the truth and safety of the new way he intends to make
choice of; else, though the way he has been in (as he fancies) is not good, yet
so may it fall out, he may take a worse.

1. Then, A prudent Christian, who is a Lover of Truth, should by all due ways
and means examine into the Validity of those Scruples that seem to dissuade him
from the Profession he has lived in. Inconstancy, in any one, argues a
Weakness, insomuch that the Wise man urges us, Prove. 24.21.
not to meddle with them that are given to change; and it is excellent Advice
which the Apostle St. Paul gives, Heb. 10.23.
to hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering. And the same
Apostle begs of Roman Converts, to beware of following those who occasion
Schisms or Divisions in the Church of God; Romans 16.17.
I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary
to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

Now who those are who have always been for dividing the Members of Christ's
Body, hear the Character of them given, the 2. Tim. 3.6, 7. Of this sort are
they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led
away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth.

To bring the Matter home to our present purpose, you see how dangerous a thing
it is to be guilty of Heresy or Schism. If you had then been a Lover of Truth
and of Peace, you ought first to have consulted me as your Minister, and laid
before me your Scruples, ever you had openly dissented from the Communion of
the Church. You ought to show me from the holy Scriptures, the Standard of
Truth, wherein the Terms of our Communion are unlawful; what Doctrines they are
our Church maintains and teaches, which are contrary to the Word of God. Will
you try and condemn the Church you have been baptized and brought up in,
without hearing what she has to say for her self? It is against the Law of
Nations to condemn any Person (indicta causa) before his Cause is heard: and to
caution you by the way, you are to be very careful in your enquiry of the
Doctrines taught in the Sacred Writ, and not to pass your Judgment rashly in
favor of this or that Opinion in contradiction to the received Doctrines and
constant Practice of the Church of God since the time of Christ and his
Apostles; for I must tell you, that the worst of Heretics, in all Ages, have
pleaded Scripture in behalf of their Erroneous Principles: the Socinians, the
Antinomians, the Deists, and the very Atheists themselves, have something to
allege out of Holy Writ in the defense of their naughty Cause. Now how this
comes to pass, St. Peter gives us to understand, 2 Pet. 3.16. that the
unlearned and unstable do wrest the holy Scriptures to their own destruction.

I beg of you therefore for Christ's sake, and for your own Soul's sake, not to
be of the number of those who are, as the Apostle affirms, Ephesians. 4.14.
Children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine by the slight of men,
and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

It Is a hard matter to think you should have lived to these years and yet have
your Religion to seek: the meaning of Religion is, to bind us up to the
performance of our Duty toward God and toward Man; and in this respect our
Church is not wanting in giving sufficient Rules and Directions, do we but
follow them; and if we do not, it is our own faults, not the Churches. In this
way you have been brought up, and herein Christian prudence does oblige you to
continue, till you be assured of a better, and shown where it is; and that
falls next under our Consideration: Namely,

2. That a prudent Christian should not upon some nice Scruples forsake the
Religion he has been brought up in, until he has Assurance given of a better:
and no prudent Man would change for the worse. All is not Gold that glisters.
We ought to try before we trust: and he must be a very weak Man that will
change his Religion at the first sight of another offered in its stead, before
he has examined the Truth of it.

Now to come to the matter in hand, you are persuaded to leave the Communion of
the Church of England, and to join with the Anabaptists, and why? For
Conscience sake, you say, that way being, as you think, the better, and the
more for your Soul's health: But then there should go two words to a Bargain;
and it is but common Prudence and Justice to your old Religion, to examine
wherein the new one is better. Now to put you in a right way of Examination,
the Question will be, Wherein is your new Persuasion better then my old
Profession? The Answer, according to Scripture and Reason, is, it is purer in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship.

But then we must go on to Particulars, and Examine from Scripture and Reason
the Truth of the matter. Now I do say, it lies upon you to show me, wherein the
Purity of this new way excels the old one in the aforementioned respects, and
you are to keep to your old way till that be done: And this, in the name of God
and Christ, I demand of you to do, as you will Answer the contrary at the great
Tribunal. You are obliged hereto upon two accounts;

1. With regard to your own Soul, should this new way prove a false one.

2. With regard to the Souls of others, who may be led into Error by your
Example.

I shall be glad to have your answer, and desire that it may be in the Spirit
of meekness, as coming from one who seeks after the Truth, and (when found) is
willing to embrace the same and to stand to it: Our Church has still the best
right to you. You have not as yet, I hope, renounced your Baptism, and the true
Mother will not agree with the Harlott to divide; but if you are resolved right
or wrong to forsake the Church, at least do not abuse her: Pray then let your
answer be modest and free from Cavil.

Now I must needs tell you, that did I doubt of the way I am in (as I thank God
I do not) of all the several Persuasions among Christians the Anabaptists would
be farthest from my thoughts of joining to, and that for these Reasons.

1. With respect to those Persons who were the first Broachers of this Sect in
the City of Munster in Germany, about the Year of our Lord 1533. viz. John
Matthias, Jo. Buckhold (alias Jo. of Ieyden) Mancer, Knipper-dolling, Nicholas
Stokins, Knippenbury, and others, their first Reformers, whose Persuasion was
founded in Blood; they raised a Sedition in the City, seized of the
Magistrates, degraded the Senate, and set up their own Ringleaders, plundered
all places sacred and profane. John Matthias being killed in a Skirmish,
Knipperdoling pretended a Revelation, that Buckhold must be exalted to royal
Dignity, and to the eternal Throne of his Father David; and having his Regalia
put on him, he had a Throne built him in the Marketplace, and was called the
King of Justice, and of the New Jerusalem. Buckhold openly, before the People,
made a mock Sacrament, gave every one an unleavened Loaf, saying, Take, eat,
and celebrate the Lord's death. He had three Wives, which were called his
Queens; one of which, who had been a Glover's Wench, happening to offend him,
he struck off her Head in the Marketplace, charging her with Adultery: in the
mean time his other two pretended Queens sung a blasphemous Hymn, beginning
with Glory be to God on high. Whilst these wicked Reformers were for two years
together carrying on their seditious and base Designs, several thousand Souls
perished in the City by Famine and the Sword: but I forbear saying any more of
those sad Varlets, those lewd Reformers, who never learned this way of
reforming from Christ or his Apostles. And now let us see what Doctrines they
taught. And can we expect to gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles?

2. Then with respect to their Doctrines: they taught, that Christ was not the
true God; that we are righteous by our own Merits and Sufferings; that there is
no original Sin; that Infants are not to be baptized; they maintained Poligamy,
that a Man may put away his Wife if of another Religion; that the Godly should
enjoy a Monarchy upon Earth; and that any Man may Preach and give the
Sacraments. These and such like were their pernicious and fulsome Doctrines,
which it is a shame to mention amongst Christians.

To all this I expect as short an Answer as was given lately to the Reverend
Mr. Wesley's Book of the Sacraments, by one of that Party at Epworth, It is all
Lies: But if the Truth hereof be denied, I can bring in a cloud of Writers of
that time in testimony of what has been said, of several Nations and several
Persuasions. If they are now ashamed of some of their Primitive Doctrines, I Am
glad of it; but however, hence I think I may justly infer, that if the
Fountainhead of this Sect was so corrupt, the Streams flowing thence cannot be
very pure: And it must be supposed an intolerable foul way I was in, should I
leave it to follow those Men.

3. With respect to the present way of the Anabaptists managing their Disputes,
I should not be very inclinable to be of that Persuasion; for their usual way
is; to speak or write more against their Adversaries, than in the Merits of
their own Cause: And this to me seems an Argument of a bad one, when a Man by
way of Subterfuge is forced to fly in his Adversaries face, when he has little
to say in his own defense: And for once the Party must not take it ill if I
serve 'em in their own sauce. Well then,

I must ask them, How they can, with any face of Authority, call themselves a
Church? for, pray whence had they their Ministry? for, as the Apostle argues
Romans 10.15. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in him on whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? and in Hebr.
5.4. the same Apostle declares, with respect to the Ministerial Function, that
no man takes this honor to himself but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron. It Is plain our Savior first chose twelve Apostles, and gave 'em Power,
by Prayer, and Imposition of hands, to ordain others after them for the
supplying the several Orders and Offices in the Church to all future Ages. This
St. Paul affirms, Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; and for what end, we are
given to understand in the next Verse, viz. for the perfecting the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. And the
three Ministerial Orders of Bishops, Priests (or Presbyters) and Deacons, so
often mentioned in St. Paul's Epistles, have been happily preserved in the
Church ever since the time of the Apostles, and were rightfully and lawfully
continued in the Church of England at the time of our Reformation from Popery.

Quest. But pray then, Where had the Anabaptists their Authority of Ordaining
Ministers? Who gave the Laity the right of Imposition of hands, to Ordain
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons?

Answ. The Answer is (I Will warrant you) They have an inward Call of God. This
is plainly Buckhold and Knipperdoling. And thus far however they will own their
first Reformers.

At this rate they may have as many Teachers as People; for every one that has
but enough of Confidence or blind Zeal, may set up when he will, his Call is
good. But I wish such Pretenders would consider the Danger of offering strange
Incense, and also what befell Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for usurping the
Priest's Office ( Numb. 16.10, 31, 32.)

Quest. And now I Am doing, I must ask 'em another Question or two: If they have
no lawful Ministers, where is their lawful Ministry? and then, Where are their
Sacraments, if they have not proper Persons to administer them? And now, my
Friend, the Consideration of this matter alone, would sufficiently startle and
keep me off from going to this Sect, which is, in deed and in truth, according
to the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, no Church at all.

Pray then, good Neighbor, be not so conceitedly foolish as to strain at a
Gnat and swallow a Camel. And thus I Have paid 'em in their own Coin, hoping that
hereafter they will let our Church alone; for they have work enough at home, if
they will but look to it, to keep their own House clean, they having neither
Doctrine, Discipline, nor Worship (as matters are with them) truly Apostolical.
If what has been said will not dissuade you from running after those People, I
shall however have the inward Satisfaction of doing my Duty, as the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks, Chap. 3. v. 19. Since I have given you warning, if you die in
your Sins (as doubtless Heresy is a grievous one) your blood must lie at your
own door.

And now (Neighbor) I think I might conclude, having already exceeded the
usual Limits of a Letter. But forasmuch as the matter I Am upon is the Cause of
God and of Truth, is concerning the Welfare of your Soul, and the Peace of my
dear Parishioners; I hope you will excuse me if I go on farther, and examine some
Objections made by the Anabaptists against our Mother the Church; for I would
not willingly leave one Stone in your way, that should in the least make you
stumble in your Return home to that Profession of Faith you have been brought
up in, which is built upon the Doctrines of the Apostles, Christ Jesus being
the chief Cornerstone.

The chief Objections then of our Adversaries (for so I must term them so long
as they prevaricate with the Gospel of Christ) are chiefly two, which they seem
the most to insist on in proselvting or gaining Disciples: both these concern
the Sacrament of Baptism.

Obj. 1. That we are mistaken in the Subjects of Baptism, in baptizing of
Infants.

Obj. 2. That we are wrong in the manner of Administration, in sprinkling
instead of dipping.

I shall speak to these two Objections severally; but forasmuch as my Letter is
swollen already too big, if therefore my Answer herein proves not satisfactory
(as being too brief) give your particular Reasons of your Dissatisfaction; and
if they are not already answered, by the Assistance of Almighty God, you shall
not long want another Answer to such Objections as you shall make (if of any
weight or moment,) wherein I shall argue the matter with you more at large.

I begin with their first Objection, theirs I say, not yours; for you do the
Cause of your Mother the Church great wrong, should you be on the offensive
side, when you ought to be on the defensive; 'twould be even unnatural to
arraign her, when you ought to plead in her behalf; to join and engage your
self with the adverse Party, when in Duty and Prudence you should stand against
it: for what will all your Brethren, my Parishioners, and all other indifferent
Persons, say of you, should you so shamefully give up the Cause (wherein both
your Conscience and your Credit are concerned) before the same is fairly heard
and tried. But I must go on with the Objection; and as they put it, the
strength of it lies in these two things, That there ought to be Faith and
Repentance before Baptism: the one, say they, Children cannot have, the other
they cannot perform, and so are not capable of receiving this Ordinance. Now to
set the matter in question in a true light, I shall examine the two Branches of
the Objections separately.

1. As to Faith, I answer, If thereby they mean an actual or outward Profession
of Faith is necessary in Children before they can receive the sign of the
Covenant, this I deny, and it lies upon them to prove it; but then I affirm,
that Children of believing Parents have such I mean an outward or foederal
Holiness, such as the Jewish Children had.
an imputed Righteousness of Faith as is requisite to entitle them to the
initiating Covenant, and so have a right to the Sign or Seal of that Covenant,
namely, Baptism, whereby they are discipled or initiated into the Christian
Profession, and so are made visible Members of Christ's Church. But for the
farther clearing of this point, let us compare Circumcision and Baptism are
Seals of the same Evangelical Covenant; the former given by God to Abraham, the
latter given by Christ himself.
Circumcision and Baptism together as they respect those two things; viz. 1.
Matter of Fact. 2. Matter of Right.


Now it cannot be denied but Circumcision was the Seal of the Of the promised
Messiah to our Father Abraham who was to come.
Evangelical Covenant; and was not that a Covenant of Faith? yea, doubtless. We
have the Authority of St. Paul for it, who calls it, Romans 4.11. the Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith. And were not (I pray you) Children capable of receiving
this Seal of Faith given to Abraham? You answer, Yes: tell me then why not
Children of Believers now? or were Infants under the Old Testament more capable
of receiving the Seal of Faith then, than Children are now under the Gospel? or
was the Seal of this first Covenant of Faith more privilegial and extensive in
favor to Abrabam and his natural Seed, than the second Seal of the same
Covenant is in and through Christ to all those who are of the Faith of Abraham?
Who will presume to affirm this?

I Am not ignorant what a Noise the Anabaptists make about the Commission our
Savior gave his Apostles in reference to the Sacrament of Baptism; Go teach
all Nations, Mar. 28.19.
Baptizing them in the Name of, etc. They Will tell you, Persons must be taught
before they are baptized; but with their Favor, this is not always to be taken
in their meaning, but only in the case of adult Persons.

For if we consider the Etymology and real Signification of the Word Teach, in
the Original it is (...); which according to very learned Expositours,
signifies also discipling: and then the Commission runs thus, Go ye, and by
Baptism make disciples. To what end? That they may be taught and instructed in
the Duties of the Christian Faith; as will plainly appear if you take the
Commission mentioned in the 19th ver. together with what follows in the 20th:
and it is thus, Go ye, Disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Teaching 'em to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. They Will answer, we are only for the
literal Sense of the Word. I reply, discipling is also as true a meaning of the
Word, if the Original must be judge; but if they do not understand it, or will
not believe it, I cannot help that.

And now that we are upon Christ's Commission, let us examine it a little
farther, as to the extent of it -- Go ye, Baptize all Nations, etc. Ask'em what
this means, and then they are against the literal Meaning; for we say this
Authority must needs reach the Baptism of Infants, if Children are part of the
World; and there cannot be all Nations, if they are excluded. No such matter,
say they; this Commission extends only to adult Persons of all Nations, who are
first to be taught, and then to be baptized. When we urge farther that of the
Apostle St. Peter, The promise is to you and your children; they answer as
before, This is to be understood to you and your Posterity, as when Moses
speaks of the Children of Israel, is meant all Persons of that Stock: and if we
agree to this, how then? Are not young Children (I pray ye) part of that Stock?
Truly there are not many Families in comparison without them; and if it was
otherwise, there would soon be left but few, or no Nations at all.

From the extent of the Commission, let us go the Execution of it, and see if
that can help to reconcile us. Well then, from Scripture we tell'em of whole
Families that were Baptized together, as Lydia and her household, the Jayler of
Philippi, he and all his straitway, and how St. Paul affirms that he baptized
the household of Stephanas (1 Cor. 1.16.) And are they sure there were no
Children in these Families.

But farther, there is one thing more I must observe unto you before I leave
the Authority of the Scriptures as to this point; that there were three ways of
Proselyting among the Jews, namely Circumcision, Baptism, and Sacrifice: The
first belonged only to the Males, the two latter to all, Men, Women, and
Children; and all the Rabbis do with one coment affirm, that Persons of all
Ages and Sexes were admitted into the Church by Baptism: In the Gemara it is
thus expressed: If with a Proselyte his Sons and his Daughters are made
Proselytes also, that which is done by their Father redounds to their good: and
again in the Babylonian Talmud, They baptize a little Proselyte according to
the Judgment of the S^anhedrim; that is, as the Gloss renders it. If he is
deprived of his Father, and his Mother brings him to be proselyted, he is
baptized according to the Custom; which was this, there was to be three Men
present at his Baptism who were accepted instead of a Father to him.

From hence I observe, That the Custom of Baptism being a thing so common among
the Jews when they sent Messengers to John, the Question was not, Why do thou
baptize? which in all likelihood had been the first Question, had not Baptism,
with them been so usually a way of discipling; no, but they demand the
Authority of the Baptizer, and they asked him and said unto him, Why baptizest
thou then, if thou be not the Christ, nor Elias, John 1 25.
neither that Prophet.

Hence also I farther observe, that Pedobaptism being so common and known a
Custom in the Jewish Church, when Multitudes flocked to John's Baptism, who
dare positively affirm they did not bring their Children along with them to be
baptized? As to our Adversaries alleging, where is it said, Go, Baptize
Infants? I answer, What need was there to strengthen Baptism with any
particular Precept, when it became an Evangelical Sacrament? for that our
Savior took it as he found it, this only added, that he promoted it to a more
worthy End, and to a larger Use, to be a Seal of the Covenant of Faith, as
Circumcision was before; and to be also the Laver of Regeneration, not only to
the Natural Seed of Abraham, but to all those who should be of the Faith of our
Father Abraham; and that there is in some Measure An outward or foederal
Holiness.
an imputed righteousness of Faith as well as an actual one, seems to me very
plain from St. Paul, when he thus argues, The unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the wife, 1 Cor. (...).
and the unbelieving wife by the husband, else were your children unclean, but
now are they holy.

I cannot tell what can be meant by this Holiness, but that the These
(necessitate cogente) may have private Baptism; but the other, I think, cannot
without Sponsors be admitted visible Members of Christ's Church.
Children of believing Parents have a Right and Privilege to the Seal of the
Covenant above those of Unbelievers, namely to Baptism, which the Apostle calls
the Laver of Regeneration; and this new Birth must suppose a great advantage
redounding to them by receiving this Sacrament: and for this I refer you to our
Church's Explanation herein touching Baptism, That it is an outward visible
Sign of an inward spiritual Grace, given unto us, ordained by Christ himself,
as a means whereby we receive the same, and as a Pledge to assure us thereof;
and that being by Nature born in Sin, and the Children of Wrath, we are hereby
made the Children of Grace.

To this add the Common usage in the Church of executing this our Lord's
Commission ever since the Apostles days, in all Nations and Countries where the
Gospel has spread it self: and whether the baptizing of Infants has not been
the received Doctrine and Practice of all the Churches in general (whether
Eastern or Western) I appeal herein to the unanimous consent of the Ancient
Fathers; and the same is yet (for any thing I have either read or heard) the
Custom of all National Churches in the whole Christian World to this very day:
and if we should speak of single Christians (on which I lay no other stress
than to discover the presumptuous Confidence of our Adversaries) the Number of
those who are for Pedobaptism, in comparison of the Anabaptists, is as much
disparity (I believe I may affirm) as ten thousand Men are to one. And so much
as to matter of Fact.

In the next place, we come to matter of Right; and I hope, Neighbor, we need
not stand long upon this; for where matter of Fact is by divine injunction, in
the same or in a parallel Case, matter of Right cannot be disputed without
reflecting upon the Authority of the Lawgiver or Commander. To come then to an
issue in this Point, you have heard that the command is general, Go, Baptize
all Nations; and that Children must be taken as part of that All: and in
general Laws the relating of particulars is not required, because Laws always
pass on the whole kind, and a part must necessarily be supposed to be included
in the whole, as a particular in an Universal.

Besides, I judge the Anabaptists themselves are of this opinion in the case of
the other Sacrament, the Lord's Supper: else why do they admit Women to it? We
own, it is true, that all ought to celebrate the Lord's Death; but I ask, Where
is it particularly commanded that Women are to receive as well as Men? Our
Adversaries in this case must clear it thus; They are part of Mankind, Persons
for whom Christ died as well as Men, and so are within our Lord's general
Precept, Do this in remembrance of me. I take this as a good Answer. But then,

I ask them, Why is not the Command in the initiating Seal to be looked upon as
extensive as it is (they being Judges) in the confirming Pledge or Seal? It
must needs be as general (with regard to the Precept) else some Persons might
receive the Lord's Supper before they are baptized, and so their Confirmation in
the Christian Faith might in order of Time precede their Initiation, and those
might be admitted Guests at the Lord's Table, who never were really his
Disciples; which none, I think, will allow, that own the Sacraments. And thus
it seems plain to me that it must needs follow, if Children are included in the
general Precept of Baptism, then they ought of right to be baptized; for in
every Law of God there must be supposed a Reasonableness and Equity in the
Performance, because every such Law is the Sanction of Truth and Justice, in as
much as the same is enacted by an all-wise Lawgiver.

But here is another Objection thrown in my way, and I fear (Neighbor) you will
not let me go on, till it is removed; and it is this.

Obj. Say our Adversaries, Now we'll fight you with your own Weapons; If the
Law of the two Sacraments be general, and the one as extensive as the other,
why is not the Lord's Supper given to Infants as well as to Men and Women? I
answer, For very good Reasons it is most convenient and necessary, that Children
as well as adult Persons, be baptized, that so Christ's Flock may be
distinguished from Jews, Heathens, and Pagans; and it shows a wonderful kind
Love in our Savior in bringing those Infants (in whom there is no actual let
or hinderance of their own) nearer unto him, by his gracious Ordinance^ of
Baptism, wherein he sets his Seal that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. And I
the rather believe this, for that when our Savior was on Earth he manifested
such Love and personal Tenderness for them even as a Father, his Words and
Actions were both full of Affections toward them; He took them up in his arms,
Mark 10.16.
put his hands upon them, and blessed them.

Add to this, That we are all conceived and born in Sin; and that as in Adam
all died, how then? Psalm. 51.5.
so in Christ all should be made alive, that is (Salvabiles) savable (1 Cor. 15
22.) and without all doubt Children are a part of this All, for whom Christ
dyed and rose again. Now this being so, and there being no other means that we
know of in an ordinary way, but Baptism, whereby Children have the Grace of the
Covenant conveyed unto them, that being the outward Seal thereof, and that
being also the Laver of Regeneration wherein the Stain of Original Sin is
washed away.

This then implies a necessity of their being baptized; and this Doctrine our
Savior himself confirms, when he says, John 3.5. Except a man be born of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Except a
Man, here must be meant all the Kind of Man, else may Women be excluded as well
as Infants. Thus it is most reasonable Children should be baptized. But then,

As to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the case is far different; the
Reason of the thing shows that there is a great distinction to be made 'twixt a
Disciple or one that is newly entered a Scholar in Christ's School, and those
who are come to some growth and stature in the Christian Profession: in young
Beginners a tractable Disposition or Inclination to learn is accepted; whereas
in adult Persons, because more is given so more is required of them; they come
to the Lord's Table to renew their baptismal Vow, and to set forth the Lord's
Death; they are Guests invited, bid to prepare themselves, and therefore it is
expected they put on the Wedding Garment: they must go thither with actual
Faith and Obedience; they must call themselves to account; and, as our Church
piously admonishes such, They are to examine themselves whether they truly
repent them of their former Sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new Life,
having a lively ^aith in God's mercy through Christ, with a thankful
Remembrance of his Death, and to be in charity with all men. So that whether we
respect the Conditions qualifying a worthy Communicant, or the end of his
receiving, that Duty cannot be expected from babes, but from those who are
Proficients, are grown up in the Knowledge and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And this I hope you will take as a sufficient Answer to this Objection: and we
may therefore go on. Having then shown, both from matter of Fact, and matter of
Right, that Infants ought to be baptized, let us make forward to the second
branch of the first Exception against the baptizing of Children, namely
Repentance, the Scripture saying, Repent and be baptized. This, I hope, will
not take us up much time, so pray, Neighbor, let us to it.

Obj. Thus then object our Adversaries, and argue upon it, Repentance ought to
precede Baptism, but Infants cannot repent, and therefore should not be
baptized.

I answer, There are two kinds of Sins (generally speaking) Original and
Actual: As to the first I say, the Obedience of the second Adam is as extensive
as the Prevarication of the first Adam, and that there are no other means
revealed unto us to wash off this stain in Infants but Baptism, and so most
reasonable and necessary, that they should, as you have heard before, be
Partakers of this Sacrament: but of actual Sins, they being not guilty of
those, they have no occasion to repent.

So that the Exhortation of St. Peter, Repent and be baptized, does not at all
concern Infants, but adult Persons; and this will be undeniable, if we observe
the occasion and purport of the Discourse preceding the same. So it was, that
the Feast of Pentecost being come, and vast numbers of People residing then at
Jerusalem to keep the Feast, both Jews and Proselites of diverse Nations, as
Parthians, Medes, Elamites, etc. the Apostles being met there also, and
assembled together in one of the upper Rooms of the Temple (as their daily
custom was) whilst they were performing divine Service, Vid. Dr. Hammond on
Acts 1.13. compared with cap. 2. ver. 1.
it pleased Almighty God at that time to pour down upon them the miraculous
Gift of the Holy Ghost: hereupon they began immediately to speak unto the
People in their Master's Name, and upon his Business, in their several Tongues
and Languages.

The Rumor of this brought a mighty Concourse to them at the Temple. Now the
People finding it even so as it was told them, whilst Peter and the rest of the
Apostles expounded unto them the Doctrines of the Christian Faith, many of them
were convicted in their Consciences at what they had seen and heard, and
therefore cried our of a sudden, Men and Brethren, What shall ue do? Answer was
made by Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Repent, and be baptized in the name
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins. And this plainly shows, that
Repentance here required before Baptism was of adult Persons, whether Jews or
Profelites (for in this case they are all one) that they should be heartily
sorry for all the actual Sins they had been guilty of, resolve to become new
Men, and to believe in the Lord Jesus, that so they might be qualified for
Baptism, the initiating Seal of the Covenant of Faith.

This is therefore the Apostolical Doctrine touching the baptizing of adult
Persons, they ought to repent and believe, to qualify them for receiving the
Seal of the said Covenant: And so far our Mother the Church does agree with the
Anabaptists (if this is their Doctrine) as may be seen in her Office of Baptism
of those of riper Years. Thus the Exhortation before it runs: Save your selves
from this untoward Generation, for that Baptism does now save not by the
putting away the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience. And
the Rubric expressly requires, That due care be taken for the Examination of
such Persons as are to be so baptized, and that they prepare themselves with
Prayers and Fasting for this holy Sacrament. I need say no more on this Head;
and I hope this Point will give you no occasion to leave the Church. Having
then agreed thus well in this matter, I shall be glad if we can close so well
in the next Objection, and that is as touching the Manner or Mode of Baptizing.

Second General Objection.

That Dipping, not Sprinkling, is the essential and necessary Mode of the
Sacrament of Baptism.

Answer.

In Answer to this Objection, I Will not deny any thing herein that Scripture or
Antiquity seems to favor, as to the custom of Immerging or Plunging under
Water Persons to be baptized. It Is confessed then, the Jews in their
proselyting or making Disciples by Baptism, used, I believe, generally to put
the Persons to be baptized all under Water, being conformable to their legal
Purgations: Thus Maimonides speaking of their manner of baptizing, If any
Person (says he) washes or dips himself all over but the tip of his little
finger, he is yet in his Uncleanness. And if any one had much Hair on his head,
that was also to be washed, else the Person was reckoned unclean. Suppose
farther, that in conformity to the Jewish Custom, the Mode of John's Baptism
was after this manner too, as seems to be inferred from his baptizing in Jordan
and Enon, Joh. 3.23.
because there was much Water there; and suppose farther, that this Custom
continued in the Church for some time after Christ and his Apostles in the hot
Countries where Dipping of Children might be safe as to Cold; and if it be so
in these places (pray ye) who is against it?

What! The Church of England? That she is not: for in her Rubric about the
Baptizing of Infants, it is thus ordered; That after the Naming of the Child,
the Minister (if they shall certify him the Child may well endure it) shall
dip it warily in the Water, saying, I baptize thee, etc. So that you see,
Neighbor, you or any other Person might have your Child dipped at its Baptism
openly at the Font in the Church, if the same is desired. here is therefore no
Plea left for your separating from our Church upon this account, unless Dipping
in the River A River in the Isle of Axholm in Lincolnshire famous for Dipping.
Torn by a Layman shall be looked upon to answer better the end of Baptism, than
Dipping in the Font by a lawful Minister.

But they will tell you, that Dipping is Essential to Baptism, and therefore
those that have not been dipped have not yet been duly baptized: but this I deny,
and let them prove it if they can; and till then, in all reason, you ought to
stand to your former Baptism. And I make this fair Offer, Do but continue of
our Communion till the Anabaptists shall be able, from Scripture, Antiquiquity,
or Reason, to make appear, that Dipping is essentially necessary to baptism
(sine qua non) and I shall desire your Conformity no longer.

Here I might very justly lay down my Pen, and at present say no more, the
Authority of the Church (I mean not of England only, but all or most Christian
Churches in the Western and Northern parts of the World) now using the
Sprinkling or Pouring Water upon Infants at the time of their Baptism instead
of Dipping of them, is methinks sufficient Satisfaction to me, and ought to be
so to any indifferent or unprejudiced Christian, until the contrary is made
appear, viz. That there is an essential necessity in the very Nature of the
Sacrament of Baptism, that Immerging or Plunging be the only Mode of
Administration.

Yet on second Thoughts, when I consider I am not disputing against an
Adversary, as to whom, I ought to take all reasonable advantage in the way of
Argument; but that I am writing to a Parishioner, and a Friend, and am
endeavoring to satisfy one under my Charge in some Scruples of Conscience,
which is a Duty incumbent upon my Office, upon this Consideration (Neighbor) I
shall be free'r with you than otherwise I had need to have been, and so will
give you some Reasons, why I think Dipping not essentially necessary in the
Administration of Baptism. And,

1st. For that I look upon it, there is a vast difference to be made betwixt a
legal washing and a sacramental one: John indeed, in his Baptism, does seem to
conform to the Jewish Mode of Immerging; and this Symbol might truly better
comport with the then present Circumstances of those his Disciples, who were
polluted with an outward, and as it were visible Stain (as well as an inward
one) either of Being grown very corrupt by their Superstititious Traditions.
Judaism or Heathenism: but now (thank God) the case is far otherwise (the very
name of a Jew or an Heathen, being among us in the Country a strange thing) the
Subjects of Baptism, generally speaking, are now the Offspring of Christian
Parents, and to it there is a promisory Right or Title included in the Grace of
this Covenant: Acts 2.39.
The promise is to you and your Children, in whom there remains no legal or
outward Impurity.

But now to come to the point in question, why should not a little Water, as
well as a great deal, represent the inward washing of the Spirit to Infants at
their Baptism, who are after a sort clean before, as being of the stock of
Believers? So the Apostles, Else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy. For instance herein, by way of Simile; Was I to sign you a Bond, would
not the impress of a little Wax, the bigness of my finger's-end, make the
Condition of the Bond as good and as sure unto you, to all intents and
purposes, as if it had been stamp't with a Seal ten times as big? Now in the
reason of the thing, Why should not a little Water be as good a Seal of the
Covenant of Baptism, as a greater quantity? and why is not the inward washing
of the Spirit as virtually represented in a small quantity of Water, as well as
Christ's Body and Blood in a little quantity of Bread and Wine? The excess
herein was the Fault of the Corinthians, and justly condemned by the Apostle;
but I never understood 'twas a Crime to eat or drink sparingly at the Lord's
Table, for that the food there is sacramental, and the strengthening and
refreshing of our Souls by the Body and Blood of Christ is to be looked at, and
not the strengthening of our Bodies by the Bread and Wine: should any think
otherwise, I must stop their Mouths with St. Paul's Question, 1 Cor. 11.22.
Have you not houses to eat and drink in, or despise you the Church of God? etc.

So in the other Sacrament we are not so much to look at the outward
Circumstances of it (viz.) how much or how little Water is necessary toward
its due Administration, as to consider the Design and End of it, and not the
outward washing of the Body of the Person baptized, the putting away the filth
of the Flesh (as St. Peter speaks) which might require more or less Water for
its Purification, according to the Stature, Age, or Uncleanness of the Person
to be washed: For the use of Water in this Sacrament is symbolical and
representative of the inward washing of the Spirit at the time of
Administration; Church Cat.
It is an outward visible sign of an inward spiritual Grace, given unto us, and
ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof: and so a little Water does as virtually represent
the Operation of the Spirit in the new Birth, as well as a little Bread and
Wine does represent unto us in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper the Operation
of the same Spirit in exhibiting to us spiritually the Body and Blood of
Christ, in order to strengthen and confirm in us the new Birth, that we may
thereby be enabled to walk in newness of Life.

2dly, To this add,

Upon this very account the Anabaptists in Holland do only pour Water upon or
dip the Head.
The reasonableness of this Custom being altered from Dipping to Sprinkling,
(even necessity herein compelling;) for in our cold and Northern Climates
should all the Children (and those are the most who want baptizing now) be
dip't, well truly they might be said, in a literal sense, to be buried with
Christ in their Baptism; the washing (...) of Regeneration might be the cause
of sending them to their Graves. But God loves and delights in Mercy more than
in Sacrifice; and therefore that Commission which our Savior gave in order to
the health of our Souls, we cannot, without manifest prejudice to the gracious
intention of the Lawgiver, suppose he would have so executed as to endanger the
health of our Bodies.

Upon this very Account also, we read that the Sanhedrim of the Jews was
petitioned, that Dipping in their Female Purgations might be taken away; For
what Cause? For that the Women of Galilee, by reason of the Cold they then got,
became barren. Did the Galileans pity their menstruous Women, and shall not
Christ have compassion of his poor Babes, to whom, when on Earth, he made such
kind Promises, gave such tender Embraces, and his Divine Blessing, and was so
angry they should be kept from him.

In fine, I should never condemn any Person for desiring to have his Child
dipped; but should he stand upon it as of the Essence of the Sacrament (sine qua
non) that I think would argue his hankering too much after the legal and
Judaical Washings; his putting too much stress on the outward Element of Water,
which is but the visible Sing; and his slighting the thing signified, (viz.)
the inward invisible Grace, the secret Washing and Purification made by the
Spirit at the time of Administration. I shall conclude this Point with the
Judgment of an Ancient Father, when consulted upon this very account: his words
are these; That Immersion in Baptism is now generally disused in these parts of
the World, and Sprinkling succeeds in its room, because the tender Bodies of
most Infants (the only Persons now to be baptized) could not be put under water
in these cold Northern Climates without apparent prejudice to their Health, if
not their Lives. And therefore in this, as in other cases, God requires Mercy
rather than Sacrifice; especially considering that the main Ends of Baptism are
attained this way, and the mystical Effects thereof, as virtually represented
by Sprinkling (...) Dipping. And to this Mode of Baptizing the Prophet Ezekiel,
chap. 36. ver. 25, 26. seems prophetically to refer, when he says, Then will I
sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your Filthiness;
and a new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you.

Now what has been said upon this Head, will, I hope, satisfy you (Neighbor)
and all other Persons that are not wilfully prejudiced against Reason and
Truth: and as for such who are resolved to dissent and wrangle on whatever is
said or whatever is proved, I shall advise 'em to consult St. Paul for an
Answer that may be more satisfactory; namely, If any man seems to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16.

And now (Neighbor) having gone through the Particulars I was to speak to, and
having also fairly answered some of the main Objections our Adversaries (the
Anabaptists) chiefly insist on; I shall only leave the whole matter before you
in order as it is written, with some useful Inferences, and so conclude.

In the Introductory Part of my Letter, I gave you to understand, that there is
such a thing as Men call an Erroneous Conscience, and that there is a Zeal
sometimes which is not according to Knowledge; and hence I infer what a prudent
and soberminded Christian ought to do, when he had some Scruples upon him
before he left the Communion of the Church he was in: he ought first, from
Scripture and Reason, to examine into the Validity of the Scruples that seem to
dissuade him from his former Profession; and when he has done the best he can
herein, if his Scruples still grow upon him, before he quits his old way, he
should then, by all due ways and means examine into the Truth and Safety of the
new way proposed unto him instead of the old one, else it may so happen, that
his Change may be for the worse, and this no wise Man would make.

Now, in the making this Examination, I put you in this way for finding out
whether your old Profession or the new proposed one was the better; I advised
you to consult the holy Scriptures (the Standard of Truth) and thereby try your
old Religion and your pretended new one, and see which of them is purer in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship: and if, upon a Fair hearing of the Cause,
the old one should prove the better, it would then be clear you ought not in
prudence to change; and till this is done, you are to keep to your old way. And,

For the more orderly trying this Cause, our Adversaries being Complainants,
and accusing our Church of false Doctrines, it lies upon them to prove what
those Doctrines are, and what be those unlawful Terms of Communion she
requires, that are not justifiable by the Word of God; and till then we are to
keep our Ground, and to act only as Defendants in the Cause, no Man being by
Law bound to accuse himself. And he that voluntarily espouses a Quarrel against
the Religion he has been brought up in, without knowing first, why and
wherefore, acts the part of a weak, not to say a contentious, Christian; and
it is a true Maxim, He that accuses another of dishonesty, ought to look to
himself in the first place: Therefore in dealing with our Adversaries (who are
so free of their obloquies) I took this Method, pursuant to the proverbial
Saying now mentioned, and so inquired what pretense they have for the Truth;
for if they are in the wrong, there is no color for your joining with them,
what ever there may be for your leaving the Church: for suppose, for Argument
sake, the way you have been in is not good; yet if the new way you are invited
to be worse, it is madness to change: so that be the Title naught, that in
possession by the Courtesy of all Laws, is to be looked upon the best, and
ought to be so esteemed, until a better is proved. In examining then into the
Goodness and Truth of their Cause in Matter of Religion, I took this Method,

1st. I gave the Character of those Persons who were the first Broachers of
this Sect of the Anabaptists; and this (Neighbor) is a very material thing to
be considered: For suppose I had a journey to take of great Consequence, and
being a Stranger to the way, some Persons come, and do very officiously offer
themselves to be my Guide, pretending they understand the Road very well, and
are making to the same place; well surely in this case, before I give my self
up to their Guidance and Conduct, I should know who they are, enquire into
their character, whether they are (boni and legales Homines) honest and true
Men, and should I find them otherwise, it would be very madness to take them
for Guides, let them pretend never so fairly: For thus has many an honest Man
been choust out of his Money (and sometimes his Life too) by the fair Speeches
of Thieves and Robbers. In this Case, he that values his own safety should with
all speed rid himself of their Company, and while he may without hazard, bid
them adieu. Now,

To bring this matter home, I have let you know, what the first Setters up of
this Sect were; when and where it was they cried up their stupendous Doctrine,
Repent and be rebaptized, or else you are damned; what horrid Exploits they
played, what Barbarous Acts they were guilty of, how they sacked and plundered
all before them, filling all the places wherever they came with Blood and
Confusion at Leyden, Munster, Amsterdam, Utrecht, and other places. Now this is
matter of Fact, and cannot be denied; and pray what think you of these new
Guides? Is it safe to follow them? Did Christ and his Apostles ever take these
methods to plant the Doctrines of the Christian Religion? And should it be
alleged, that the present Leaders of the Anabaptists are other sort of Men; I
answer, Where there are the same Principles, there wants nothing but Power and
Opportunity to produce the same Effects. And this brought me,

2ly. To consider what Doctrines they taught. They held that Christ was not the
true God; to this let them take St. John's answer, 1 John 2.22.
Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist
that denies the Father and the Son.

They taught also that we are to be saved by our own Merits and Sufferings, and
that there is no Original Sin; and this takes away the Merit of our Savior's
Intercession, and the Satisfaction that he made on our behalf. They excluded
Infants out of the Grace of the Covenant, contrary to our Lord's command,
denying them Baptism, which is a Means whereby we receive the same, and a
Pledge to assure us thereof. They held it lawful for a Man to have more Wives
than one; and this shows their Continence and Chastity; that the godly was to
inherit the Earth; and Oaths not to be kept with the Magistrate; and this
discovers their Principles of Civil Government: That any Person might take upon
him the Ministerial Office; and this invades our Savior's Authority he left
with the Apostles and their lawful Successors in this behalf. But enough of
the Doctrines of this new way. -- I went on,

3dly. And showed that the present Methods our Adversaries usually take in
managing their Cause argues that the same is naught, for that they are always
inveighing against the Doctrines or Practice of others, instead of proving from
Scripture and Reason the Truth and Goodness of their own way. To this add the
great Confidence (without Reason) they have of their Cause; and that being
buoy'd-up with Ignorance and Prejudice, what a noise and pother they make in
promoting it, as if they were so many Goliath's in arguing, that none could
stand before them.

Witness the late confident and presumptuous Challenge they made at Epworth, to
enter into a public Dispute with the Reverend Mr. Wesly the present Minister
thereof, who is indeed (the Effect of his good Nature) too civil to them, and
too much forbearing of their insolent Behavior, in confronting the established
Religion, in Opposition and open Defiance to the wholesome Laws of the Land,
made and provided for the Honor and Security of the same.

But let me tell them, They who do not value the Peace of the Church, will
never regard the Peace of the State: But we desire no more of their
Munster-broyls, occasioned by their seditious Disputations; therefore it is good
for them not to use their liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness; for if they
will so far tread in the steps of their first Reformers as to entrench upon the
Authority and kind Indulgence of the Magistrate, they must be let understand,
that he bears not the Sword in vain. And as for their Goliath's Arguments,
let them not produce them as is their common usage in a seditious and
tumultuous manner, where noise shall prevail above Truth and Reason, but in a
manly and christian way, and we fear them not; for I do not doubt but when
their Locks of Pride and Ignorance (where their boasted Strength lies) are
lop'd off, they will be found in Argument like other Men, and those of the
meanest Rank too.

Thus (Neighbor,) if you will but seriously consider the Men, or their
Principles, or their manner of spreading and abetting of them, I hope you will
think it most advisable to keep to your old way, until a better than this
before us is shown you to walk in: and thus we might (as I told you) stand our
ground, and act only defensively. But being it is the Cause of God and Truth,
and the design of this Letter being not so much to assail our Adversaries, as
to satisfy your Scruples, which if not solid, are at least, I believe, well
meant; I put the Cause still to a fairer Issue, and laid before you the
Strength of our Adversaries in the two main Objections.

1st. As to the Objects of Baptism.

2dly. As to the manner of its Administration.

As to the first Objection, I showed you the Stress of it lay in this, That
Faith and Repentance should precede Baptism, which Children not being capable
of, are not to be baptized: and that none of the force of the Objection should
be lost in the handling of it, I took it in pieces, and spoke severally to the
Branches of it.

And first, as to Faith, I showed you by way of parallel, that Circumcision in
the old Testament being a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, of which Infants
were then capable, it must needs follow by parity of Reason that Children of
Believers under the Gospel, must be also capable of Baptism which is the Seal
of the New Testament, unless they will suppose that the first Seal of the
Covenant given to Abraham was more privilegial and extensive in favor, than
the second Seal given by Christ. I showed farther, as matter of Fact, That
Children, as well as Men and Women, were always discipled by Baptism in the
Jewish Church, and that Children were included in our Lord's general
Commission, they being part of all Nations: And that the manner of executing
this Commission in all Nations wherever the Christian Faith has spread it self
ever since the Apostles Days, and in all probability in their time also does
ascertain the matter of Fact as to the baptizing of Infants beyond all denial.

For matter of Right, I showed you that Infants have an unquestionable Title to
the thing signified, of such being, as our Savior says, the Kingdom of
Heaven, who can question their having a right to the sign? besides that the
Promise is to you and your Children, and that the promissory Grace in the
Sacrament is no ways let by the personal Incapacity of the Recipient, for
that a King may be crowned in a Cradle, and become really King, though he knows
not of it; and many Kindnesses may be actually done to Infants, by their
Parents, Friends, or Guardians, though they are not privy to it; and however at
the least, Children now of believing Parents are every whit as capable of the
Seal of Baptism as the Children of the Jews were of the Seal of Circumcision,
as was before declared, and for the Reasons there alleged.

As to the second branch of their first Exception, Repentance.

I showed you very plainly, that it concerns adult Persons only; for Infants
having not been guilty of actual Sins, there is no occasion for their actual
Repentance; and as for Persons of riper Years (if they are not baptized till
then) we do agree they ought first to believe; for it would be most
unreasonable to admit an adult Person Christ's Disciple, who did not first
believe in him and acknowledge him for his Savior; and that there is also in
these a necessity of Repentance; for such having been also guilty of actual
Sins, they ought and must repent of them, before they are capable of this
Sacrament which is the Laver of Regeneration; and he that puts on Christ must
become a New Creature. I came then,

To the second general Objection relating to the Mode of Baptism, and did so
far agree, that Dipping was probably the manner of baptizing in the Jewish
Church, and that the same was likely so too in John's Baptism; but then I
showed you there was at that time a particular Reason for this Mode of
baptizing, for that the Persons then to be baptized had, as it were, a visible,
or outward Uncleanness upon them, namely Judaism or Heathenism. I agree
farther, that this Custom was probably in use in hot Countries some time after
Christ and his Apostles, where the same might be done without endangering the
Health of the baptized: and I showed you also that our Church is not against
this use when it may be done with fafety, as appears by her Rubric of Baptism.

But then to urge, that this Mode of dipping is Essential in the very nature of
the Sacrament, that I denied, and put it to the Anabaptists to prove it if they
could; and did say, and do say still, that a little Water in Baptism, by
sprinkling or pouring the same upon the Person baptized, does as virtually and
sacramentally exhibit the Seal of the Covenant, as the greatest quantity
whatsoever; even as I showed you by the like parity of Reason, that a little
Bread and Wine, the least Sup, as well as the biggest Draught, in the other
Sacrament, does sufficiently represent the Body and Blood of Christ to every
worthy Communicant; and hereupon did urge farther, that for any Person to
insist upon Dipping as essential to the Sacrament of Baptism, it seemed to me
to be a leaning too much to the Judaical Washings, and putting too much stress
upon the outward Sign (the Element of Water) and a slighting the thing
signified, the inward washing and invisible operations of the Spirit. I showed
you what was the Judgment of an ancient Father of the Church when consulted on
this occasion, and what was and is the Practice of all, or most, Christian
Churches in the Western and Northern parts of the World: and now in the close I
shall refer the whole matter of this Letter to your serious and Christian
Consideration, with this Caution only, 2 Timothy 2.14.
that you bear always in mind, in the perusal of it, St. Paul's Advice to
Timothy; Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the
Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of
the hearers. To conclude,

Thus (Neighbor) you see, upon due enquiry made, there is really nothing in the
new way we have been speaking of to invite you to it, unless Principles of
Sedition, Heresy and Schism, can be any due Motives herein. No, the Apostle
St. Paul positively affirms, that they who upon this account cause Divisions in
the Church of God, are such as love not our Lord Jesus Christ, but that by
their good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple. Romans
16.18.
Pray then, be not led away with an outward show of pretended Sanctity and
Holiness, for such a Vizard the false Teachers were to put on. It Is our
Savior's own Affirmation, that there should arise false Christ's and false
Prophets, who should be so artful in their counterfeit shows of Piety, as to go
near imposing upon the very Favorites of Heaven, the Elect or chosen of God.
Mat. 24.24, 25.


Take therefore our Lord's Advice herein; If they shall say unto thee, he is in
the desert, go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chamber, believe it not.
For when the Root is unsound, the Branches must be so likewise: A corrupt Tree
may bring forth Fruit fair to the eye, but not really good. Where the Doctrines
of any Sect are against God's Word (as it is plain the Anabaptists are) they are
none of Christ's, let them pretend what they will. Hear what our Lord bids us
do in this case; Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.

And as there is nothing in the new way, things rightly considered, to invite
you to it, so you have heard there is nothing in the old way, the good old
Religion you have been baptized and brought up in, to dissuade you from it. All
the Objections our Adversaries have yet made are vanished, and fled as Chaff
before the Wind. Truth is great, and will prevail. If you are therefore a Lover
of God and of Christ, of Truth and of your own Soul, hold fast to your former
Profession without wavering, and our Lord Jesus Christ give you a right
Understanding in all things.

Which is the sincere and hearty Prayer of Your loving Friend and Minister,
Hatfield, Jan. 19. 1699/1700. William Eratt.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Am told (Neighbor) by several, that you seem concerned, for that you hear
I Am angry at you. Now to be free with you, and that you may have no more
occasion to listen to Hearsay, I tell you frankly I am in some measure really
so: but that I may not be misunderstood in this, you must give me leave herein
to express my own Meaning; and this is but common Justice, every Man being
supposed the best Interpreter of his own words.

In order then that you or any other Person may the better understand my
Meaning when I say I am angry at you, I shall consider the matter two ways,
with regard to an unjust or a just Anger: and the Word bears these two senses
in the common Usage of it, and so it is also taken in Holy Writ. To these I
shall speak a little severally.

1. As to unjust Anger, taken in a strict sense, it imports, properly speaking,
not so much an Evil, as a groundless and hasty Passion. The former of these our
Savior condemns, when he tells us, Matt. 5.22.
We must not be angry with our Brother without a cause; of the latter I take
the elder Son in the Gospel to be guilty; for though his Anger, with regard to
his prodigal Brother, might not be altogether groundless, yet was it too rash
and hasty.

The Thoughts of his Brother having wasted his Father's Goods in riotous
living, gave cause of just Resentment; but then the consideration of his being
reformed, of his becoming a new Man, of his being returned home in his Person,
but not in his Vices, which moved the tenderness of a Father to pardon, should
also, if it had been well considered, have prevailed with the Brother too not
to have been angry: the greater Good should have out-ballanced the lesser Evil;
and so the occasion of the Father's Mirth should have stirred up Joy in the
Brother also, and not a fretting Passion, being grounded upon this solid
Reason, For this thy Brother was dead and is alive again, Luke 15.28, 32.
was lost and is found.

I am, alas! too much Man to clear my self of having been never guilty of both
these two foolish Passions, a Groundless and Hasty Anger; and, to take up the
words of holy Job, Should I justify my self herein, my own mouth would condemn
me. Job 9.20.
No, far be that Presumption from me; but I must freely with the Apostle own my
self of like Passions with other men. Acts 14.15.


Now as to the latter instance of an hasty Passion, I wish I might with the
elder Brother be blamed and condemned by all good Men, should I be angry when I
ought to rejoice if my straying Brother who was lost should be found and return
home. And so much for unjust Anger in the aforementioned respects.

But then there is an unjust Anger which goes farther, and may come within the
Verge of a malicious Temper. Now should any be so uncharitable as to insinuate
from my saying I was angry at you, that I maliciously intended you an ill turn,
the occasion of it might be supposed one of these two things; either it was in
prejudice to your Person, or in pique to the Sect of the Anabaptists which you
seem inclining to: As to both which, I thus apologize for my self.

1. As to a malicious Temper: I appeal to all my Neighbors, whether ever my
Carriage or Behavior among them has deserved such a Censure. That I have been
ever ready upon all occasions to serve my Parishioners, and to do them any
kindness that lay in my power, I promise my self so much, that every one of
them (not excepting John Woodward) would (if need require) averr in my behalf.

2. As to any bitterness of Spirit toward Dissenters from the Church, with
that I hope none can justly charge me; and I put the Question to your self,
Whether all the last Year, in your Converse with me (when Churchwarden) you
ever at any time heard me rail against any Persons whatsoever that differed
with me in point of Religion. (This then being premised,)

I must tell you there is a great difference to be made betwixt one who has all
his Lifetime been brought up a Dissenter (whom Education and Custom has so far
blinded that he cannot easily, if he would, discern and embrace the Truth) and
a Person that out of an unadvised and wilful Humor runs away from the Church,
and knows not Why or Wherefore.

The first is an Infirmity, and is really to be pitied; the other is a Disease,
and so proper means are to be made use of in order to a Cure. Now in this case,
all gentle Methods are first to be taken; and he must be reckoned an unwise or
an unfaithful Physician, that should do otherwise: but if all this is done, and
the Disease still grows worse and worse, turns to a malignant Distemper, and
threatens Danger to the Public,

In such an Extremity, when the Infection cannot be cured, it has always been
thought advisable to shut up or remove the Person infected, though never so
near a Friend. And I think I may herein, without being guilty of a Droll or
lightness of Expression in so serious a matter as is now before us, apply the
common Proverb, which is as true as plain, That one scabb'd Sheep may infect a
whole Flock. But,

2. There Is a just Anger. And of this sort we have sufficient Examples in Holy
Writ; and thus Jacob did justly resent Rachel's too forward Petition, Give me
children, or else I die; as if that Blessing had been absolutely in the Power
of Man; and therefore Jacob's Anger was kindled against Rachel, (though it is
known he loved her well) and he said, Am I in God's stead? who has withheld
from thee the fruit of the womb? Genesis 30. ver. 1, 2.

And so was Moses justly displeased at Korah and his Company for their
presumptuous usurping the Priest's Office, and private tampering with the
People, to set them a murmuring against Moses and Aaron, their Governor and
their Priest.

Thus did our Blessed Savior unkindly resent the Abuse of the Temple, the
House of Prayer, in the Peoples profaning of it by their merchandising in the
same; his Words and his Actions show this: He cast out them that bought and
sold in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the
seats of them that sold doves, saying, my house shall be called of all nations
the house of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of Thieves, Mark 11.15, 17.

And thus is God Almighty said to be angry with his People, when they offend
either by their Words or Actions. And to give you another Instance; When the
People, out of a pretense of greater Holiness, dissented from the public
Worship, made their private Sacrifices, and offered strange Incense. Now as to
the Crime, and how God Almighty resented it, hear from his own Word; I have
spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious People which walks in a way
that was not good, (after their own Thoughts) a People that provokes me to
Anger continually to my face (and how was this?) that sacrifices in Gardens
and burns Incense upon brick, which say, Stand by thy self, come not near to
me, for I am holier than thou: these are a smoke in my nose, and a fire that
burns all day.

From what has been urged on this Head I infer, That in some cases there is a
very just Anger. Thus Magistrates may, and ought, sharply to reprehend all
seditious and villainous Practices. So also Parents disobedient Children,
Masters unruly Servants, and the Ministers of God's Word ought to tell the
People under their charge of their Faults: Cry aloud and spare not (says the
Prophet Isaiah, chap. 58. ver. 1.) show my People their transgressions, (and
these related to Errors in Principles as well as Practice:) so I also as a
Minister of the Gospel (though one, God knows, the unworthiest of my Brethren)
do think I fall a share in this Authority or Power of reprehending Errors in
my Parishioners, whether of Opinion or otherwise.

And in this Case, and upon this Account, I am angry with you, who having lived
so long in the Communion of our Church, who the very last Year performed the
Office of Churchwarden, and I must needs say, did, I believe, according to your
Oath, and the best of your Knowledge, honestly discharge your self herein; who
was the same Year confirmed by the Bishop, and did then, (if you understood
your Duty therein) renew your Baptismal Vow, and promise to remain steadfast in
your holy Profession. Add to this, your frequent receiving the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, which is or ought to be the Seal of our Confirmation in the
Faith and Doctrines of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now for you to have done all this, and as soon as ever you was out of Office
of Churchwarden, to run away from the Church, from your Baptism, from the late
solemn Confirmation thereof, from the Communion with your Brethren at the
Lord's Table, and never to tell your Minister Why or Wherefore you did it, is
to me very unaccountable; as if the Profession of our Church was so groundless
and so despicable, that nothing could be said for it worth your regarding.

But now to see how the Case is altered is admirably strange: You are already
more civil to your new way; witness what you said Yesterday at Mr. Pryms, among
your Neighbors; namely, That did I come, you had nothing to say to me: but, if
I pleased, one of your Teachers should give me a meeting, and dispute it out
with me. In the name of Goodness what a shame is it, that you should already be
so muffled and blinded, as to pin your Faith on another Man's sleeve!

It not this plain Confession, you have forsaken your old way, and taken a new
one, and you know not Why or Wherefore. This is not according to the Apostle
St. Peter's Rule, which bids us be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you the reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.

It had indeed been a decent and modest Answer, with regard to your old
Profession you had so long lived in, had you told your new Teachers thus: Sirs,
before I turn, you must give me leave to advise first with my own (or some more
able) Minister, and then you shall hear farther from me.

But to say, with respect to your new way, You refer me to your Teachers,
discovers the Sandiness of the Foundation you build upon: It Is a Popish
Principle, and argues an implicit Faith. This very plainly shows, that you are
become one of those St. Paul speaks of when he thus declares,

The time shall come when Men will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their
own lusts shall heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears: And they
shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and shall be turned to fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.

I cannot but farther take notice of the indecent, not to say censorious,
Expression that you left me last night as a bone to pick on; viz. That you
would stay no longer, for that you loved not the works of darkness.

Pray what do you mean? If you speak it with respect to me, I desire to know
what are those black and hellish Deeds you have to lay to my charge: A
God's-name speak out, and no more than you know is true, and I ask you no
Indulgence.

But if you would insinuate into my People a Belief of things that are false,
this I must needs say is neither Christian nor fair dealing.

If by the Works of Darkness you meant, that I, which regard to my Profession,
am a blind Guide, and so those that follow me, like Men in the dark, must fall
in the Ditch.

I answer, That I believe those of my Parishioners who were with me last Night,
and heard what I said, did not think so. I add farther, however the Cause I
have taken upon me to justify may suffer by my Weakness or Inability in its
Management.

I must tell you, the Light of the Church you have left, and so much despise,
will shine bright as the Sun in the Firmament, when your new Lamp, having spent
all its drossy Oil, shall be quite extinguished, and leave only an unpleasant
smell behind it; shall vanish in Smoke and Stench.

Now to prevent your rash censuring after this manner for the future, a Talent
peculiar and remarkable in the Sect you are inclining to. I advise you to bear
in mind what the Apostle says, Why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do
thou set at naught thy Brother? for we shall all stand before the Judment seat
of Christ.

Those things considered, I cannot but think I Have a just Cause to resent and be
angry at your too forward and indiscreet Zeal. But then,

By way of Apology in your behalf, I consider also (Humanum est errare) Mistake
is a common Infirmity, and demands a Christian Compassion and Forbearance, so
that a Man does not persist wilfully in his Faults; for when any one's Errors
are detected, he ought and must own and forsake them: and the doing this is so
far from being a shame, that it is Manly and Christian.

Pray then (Neighbor) do not tie up your Reason and your Conscience, but give
your self the freedom of Thinking and Judging, the only distinguishing
Character of a reasonable Man. It Is yet in your power to do your self and your
Church Justice: and I have already learned from St. Paul how to behave my self
toward a penitent Offender; Brethren, if any Man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual, restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, considering
thy self, lest thou also be tempted.

What remains, but to beg of God to give you Grace to return home; and me your
Minister, and all your Brethren, my Parishioners, Grace also to receive you
again as we ought. Which is the unfeigned prayer of,

From Valkenburgh-Hall in the Levels, Jan. 30. 1699. Yours as before, W. E.



FINIS.

