Here his arraignd unjustly you may see:

THE HISTORY OF Erastus, And The Seven Wise Masters OF ROME.

Aphro^icia: Erastus

engraved title page

ERASTVS: OR, THE Roman Prince.

BEING A more full Account of that Famous HISTORY OF THE Seven Wise MASTERS.

WITH Many Pleasant Additions of Excellent, and Divertive Discourses, and
Songs, not unsuitable to the Design of the Story.

LONDON. Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms, and Benj. Alsop at the
Angel and Bible in the Poultry, 1684.

TO THE READER.
THe History of Erastus, or the Roman Prince, has Justly obtained a great
esteem amongst men; For whereas other Works of this Nature tend to the
depraving and Corrupting the tender Inclinations of Youth, we find the design
of this to be the Promotion, and Encouragement of Virtue, and Ingenuity. What
Fortitude and Constancy? What Patience and Humility is there not Conspicuous in
the whole Series of Erastus's Life? We see him one day the Minion, and Darling
of Fortune, courted with all the Favors of a Prodigal and Excessive Bounty:
Another time, we have him tossed and hurried by the Black Tempest of Adversity,
on the Ruinous Rocks of Envy, Distrust and Inhumane Malice. One day the Object
of the Emperors Care and Affection, the next of his Rage and Contempt. Such is
the Inconstancy of Sublunary Estates, and Conditions! That for the first and
second Scean of this Princes Life, he seemed to be one of the Ludibria Fortune,
a mere Tennis Ball of the Blind Goddess: But then if we observe the equallity
of his Temper, his Constancy to himself, and Virtue, under all those direful
Circumstances; we may conclude him one destinated by the Gods to be a President
of a Victorious Virtue and Humanity. For the Latter Scenes of his Life, they
seem to Import that happy and Flourishing Condition which Heaven appoints as a
reward to a Philosophical and Manly Fortitude, and looks like the Glorious, and
All-enlivening beams of Apollo after he has chased away the shades of the Cold
Nocturnal Nymph, and made the Morning smile with the Welcome approach of his
Amorous heat.

And as Erastus answers the Character of a Heroic and brave Man; so have you
in Dioclesian an Emblem of as great Inconstancy, and soft Efeminacy; and yet
not altogether without some good Impressions, whilst under the hamering of
Reason, and sage Advice; but soon deluded with false appearances, and violently
hurried by Inordinate Appetite, and unruly Passion; still taken up with the
next Plausible Object, without considering any Congruity of Circumstances.

In the Seven Masters, you have the description of a true and Sincere
Friendship, and a constant and inviolable Adhesion to the Truth, which is
indeed one of the best Figures in the make of a Wise Man. Some will have these
Seven Masters to be the Seven Liberal Sciences, which if a Man be thoroughly
acquainted and instructed withal in his Youth, they will be constant helps to
him in Adversity, and the best of his Ornaments in a Prosperous State.

Under the Notion of the Empress, you have the Description of a Venomous, and
Implacable Malice, Covered over with all the Artifices of Deceit. She enters
into a League and Contract with Hell; sets up the most Diabolical Resolutions
in the World, and pursues them with as much fury and subtilty as the Devil
himself could do. What did she not Feign? What not Attempt against the Life of
the Innocent Erastus? How often had she Imposed upon the too Credulous
Dioclesian to his own Destruction. Take a survey of all the Impieties,
Cruelties, Frauds, and Treacheries that ever were in that Deceitful and
Deceptible part of that Sex, and you will see the Wife of Dioclesian crawling
all over with that sort of Vermin; so that you may well conclude it was
impossible for Woman to render her self more infamous. Then you have the
natural Consequence of all her Villainy; she was (after all her shams) Detected,
Rejected and Despised: She became Nauseous to others, Loathsome to her self;
weary of her wretched Life, and Dyed rather Obstinate than Penitent.

Thus have I in brief Opened and Vindicated the design of the Following Story;
but you will find it much enlarged, and Embellished with great Variety of
Additions, for the Delight, as well as Profit of the Reader. Many Songs are
incerted that are not unsuitable to the Purpose, and I may without Vanity tell
the Reader, that the Roman Prince never yet appeared in a Dress so agreeable to
his Quality. I have made way for another Volumn to Complete the Story of
Erastus; which (if the Reader kindly accept of my Poor Endeavors in this) I
shall be much Encouraged to Publish.

Farewell.
THE Seven Wise MASTERS: Or, The Delectable HISTORY OF Prince Erastus.
CHAP. I. The Emperor Dioclesian chooses Seven Philosophers to Instruct his Son
Erastus in the Liberal Sciences. The Death of the Empress.
ONe thousand and forty Years after Romulus had laid the Foundation of that
once famous City of Rome, there Reigned the Renowned Emperor Dioclesian; the
Reputation of whose Wisdom and Greatness stretched far beyond the Confines of
his own vast Empire. This Monarch having been Married to a Princess, no less
Conspicuous for Beauty and Extraction, had their Nuptials crowned with the
Birth of a Son, whose excellent shape, and fair outside bespake the unparalleld
perfection of its Inhabitant, which at his first appearance seemed to be born
for the Grandeur of Empire, and looked more like an offspring of the Gods,
than any thing of human Race, which gave the occasion of his name Erastus (that
is to say) Amiable or Lovely. This was confirmed by the Nativity-Casters, and
Magicians of that Age, who by their Schemes had given the Emperor an account of
what he was to hope from a Child, born under such fortunate Configurations.
Which made the Parent solicitous to Season his very Infancy with the best
principles for the Enobling of his High Birth; wherefore he chose him Tutors,
to the Number of the Grecian Sages, which were Seven; and proportionable to the
Liberal Arts: These having withdrawn him to a Princely Mansion near the City,
where both privacy and delight contributed to the furtherance of his Studies:
For the shady Groves, the pleasant Walks, the warbling Birds, the crystal
Streams, and sumptuous Palace, proclaimed the Delicacy of this sweet Retreat.
So that at ye Age of ten years, this Royal Pupil discovered a great proficience
in Grammar, Logic, Geography, and the other Sciences, to the Astonishment of
the Philosophers themselves, who were struck with Wonder, both at the Growth
and Beauty of his outward Form; and especially his vast Improvement in the
knowledge of Philosophy. And now, as a Trial of this young Princes Courage,
comes the Death of the Fair Empress his Mother; to whom, although he bare all
the Tenderness of Affection, as became a most Dutiful and Loving Child; yet
having his Courage heightened by reading the Stoics, be submitted not to
Effeminate Tears, but vented his Sorrows in an ingenious Song, Composed by him
on that Occasion; which s^ice has not been unluckily Translated; To this
purpose.

SONG.
THe Glories of our Birth and State
Are shadows, not substantial Things;
There is no Armor against our Fate:
Death lays his Icy Hands on Kings:
Scepter and Crown, must tumble down,
And in the Dust be equal laid,
With the poor crooked Scithe and Spade.
Some Men with Swords may reap the fields,
And plant fresh Laurel where they kill:
But their strong Nerves at last must yield;
They tame but one another still.
Early or late, we bend to Fate,
And must give up our murmering Breath,
Whilst the pale Captive creeps to Death.
The Garland's withered on your Brow.
Then boast no more your mighty Deeds;
For on Death's purple Altar, now
See where the Victor victime Bleeds:
All Heads must come, to the cold Tomb;
Only the Actions of the Just
Smell Sweet and blossom in the Dust.


CHAP. II. By Advice of his Parliament, the Emperor Marries the Princess
Aphrodisia, who hearing of Erastus, became Enamored of him; and shows him her
Affection.
THe Solemnities of the Emperess's Funeral being over, the Senate doubting, if
the Excellent Erastus dyed, the Royal Line might be Extinct for want of Issue,
prevailed with Dioclesian to admit to his Embraces the Princess Aphrodicia, of
whose Beauty and Breeding, Fame had made a loud Report: The good old Emperor
being the more ready to entertain a good opinion for the fair Ones of that Sex,
by reason of the excellent Virtues of his former Queen, the Mother of his Heir
apparent, soon yielded to their Request: And had his Wedding celebrated with
all manner of Royal Diversions, as Music, Dancing, and Ringing the Bells,
whilst they sung to the Tune of -- Four and Twenty Fiddlers all on a Row;
And there was Fidle, Fidle, and twice Fidle, Feedle, etc.


But Erastus was none of the Gallants that attended this Nuptial entertainment,
either having a greater inclination for his Studies, or else loath to put off
the Mourning for his Mother: But all discourses were so loaded with the Fame of
his Youth, Parts, and excellent Acquirements, that it deafned all the other
Music of the Court; insomuch, that the new made Bride could not relish the
Caresses of her Amorous Sovereign, for the Pain she was in; being smitten with
the unknown parts, and endowments of the famous Erastus. So that letting loose
the Reins of her Affections, she was driven by the violence of Passion, thus to
make known her Affection to her beloved Prince, and Son-in-Law. Having taken
into her Apartment, a Slave that served her for her most pleasant Privacies,
and tied him fast, by the usual Oath of Secresy, never to divulge her Story to
any Male or Female, but her adored Erastus; she sent him with a present of very
rich Linen, some Plain, some Laced, with Cravats of Venetian Point, and Shirts
curiously wrought in Flames, expressing this Motto, Thus do I Mourn for you,
and Burn. Herewith she sent a Looking-Glass carved of precious Stonee, with
such Art, that it diversely represented the passion of Venus for Adonis, Dido
for Eneas, with many more, whereof Romances are full; there were also costly
Perfumes of great Virtue to move Affection, and a Sweetheart of Pomander, made
by Punteus, which having locked up in a right Indian Cabinet, covered with
Filligreen of Silver wire; she dispatched her Messenger, commanding him to
deliver these Presents, as from the Emperor and her self; but by no means to
Omit any possible demonstrations of the violence of her Affection to the
Youthful Prince; who being contemplative in the Garden of his retirement, was
encountered with the amorous present from the Queen, his unchaste Mother-in-Law,
which by the Page, was with great artifice presented in both the Emperor's and
her name, desiring Erastus to return to the Court, and afford his presence with
a Father, and Mother, that esteemed him more than her very Life: then drawing
out the exquisite Curiosities that were sent, and opening them one by one, he
failed not to expound the great Tenderness and Love the Emperess had for him,
if possible, more than for the Emperor himself. But these Gayities obtaining
nothing on his Phylosophical constitution, had been rejected, had it not been
for the interposition of the Seven Wise Masters, who perceiving the great
richness of the Present, and fearing the displeasure of the Emperor or Empress,
if they should be rejected, prevailed with their princely Pupil to admit them,
not without commending his Virtue for thus despising the tempting vanities of
the Court. So the Queens Messenger being dismissed, he resolved to dissemble
the success to his Mistress, and craftily acquainted her, That Erastus had
received her Tokens with infinite Joy, kissing every part, and praying her that
his Affection might be accepted, which he would not fail, vigorously, to
express when he came to Rome. This wrought so on this beguiled Princess, that
verily believing her deceitful Slave, she Royally rewarded his Negotiation;
promising, if he were instrumental in accomplishing her wishes, she would at
least get him to be Knighted: And though he had no hope of prevailing against
the impregnable Virtue of Erastus; yet the consideration of his own profit made
him nourish the Empress with feigned hopes of success; whilst she burning in
the heat of an intemperate desire, retired into her Closet, and casting her
self on her Couch, in a Dream, fancied she had her dear Idea in her Arms; so
that speaking aloud with the extacy, Ah! My better Life, you are welcome. At
which noise, her Ladies coming into the Room, and awakening her, she told them,
she had dreamt of a Serpent that affrighted her: whereupon they urging, that no
credit was due to Dreams, persuaded Her Majesty to divert her self at the
Playhouse, until Supper time.



CHAP. III.
SVpper being ended, and the Emperor, and his Queen retired to their Lodging;
whilst the soft Diadem of sound Sleep crowned his Temples, the wretched Queen
could not rest, fearing an enterprise so well begun should miscarry through her
neglect; therefore rising early in the Morning, and pretending to go to her
Beads, she privately writ this Letter to her dear Idol.

Aphrodicia to Erastus.
LEt not your fair Eyes be displeased with the Rudeness of these Unpollished,
which proceeding from the deepest Affection, come to show the unsufferable Pain
I endure, until I enjoy the most Amiable Erastus. It is impossible a person of
your Youth and Beauty can be insensible of Cupids Flame, which so preys upon my
Vitals, that without it be quenched by a reciprocal Ardour^ on your Part, my
gasping Spirits must soon Expire. In confirmation of my real Affection, I have
herewith sent the best of my Jewels, too mean a present for the Master of my
Heart. The grandeur of the Empire is too mean an Object for her, whose Soul
cherishes your Idea. Come then, and let your Embraces make me happy, or I
shall soon dye the most unfortunate of Women.


This Letter being sealed, she placed, with many Jewels of richest value, in a
Cabinet, whereon, in most curious Work, she had taught her Needle to express
the Story of Penelope and Ulisses; and delivering it to her private Messenger,
she gave him Charge, with all running insinuations, to ^xpress to the Prince
the fervent Ardour ^f her Passion; which he had the fitter ^pportunity to do,
finding the Prince alone ^n his Closet: But before he brake into mention of the
most important matter, be resolved to see with what Countenance the noble
Erastus would receive the Amorous Present; but as soon as the Letter had
discovered the true meaning of the Design; ^ow did a virtuous disdain show it
self in ^is Countenance; and having torn the lewd Epistle, with sharp reproofs
he dismissed the Slave, commanding him to advise his Mistress to desist her
unchaste and wicked Inclinations, and to carry back the Tokens of her foul
desire. The Slave, being returned, had no easy part to act, being for his own
advantage to dissemble the just Resentments of Erastus; therefore, craftily,
^he acquaints the Queen (who wondered at the return of her Jewels without any
Letter) That the Prince had returned them, as not esteeming himself worthy of
so great Rarities, that were fitter for a Ladies Cabbinet; that her Affection,
was that which, above all things he valued; and kissing the Letter a thousand
times, had returned an answer in writing, but seared a discovery by the sudden
approach of some one of h^ Tutors, only prayed her, that he might li^ in her
favor until he came to Rome, whi^ should be speedily; and that then she shou^
receive the Satisfaction she so much desire^ This Story infinitely satisfied
Aphrodici^ who liberally rewarding her (as she though trusty Slave; with most
ardent Expectati^ she waited the coming of Erastus.

CHAP. IV.
IN the mean time the impatient Empress took all Occasions, by setting before
the Emperor, the great Renown the would redound to him by the presence (...)
his Son, who was a person of so rare a^complishments, as was not again to (...)
matched in the World; and that it wou^ mightily engage the Affections of his
Su^jects to see before their Eyes a Prince (...) such excellent perfections, so
qualified f^ the imperial Diadem. With such Insinu^tions she soon prevailed on
the easy Dioclesian, who had likewise no less inclin^tion to see an only Son of
such admirab^ Improvement: who suddenly dispatch^ one of his principal Lords to
the Palace (...) the young Prince; where having to t^ Seven Wise Masters given
an account of the Emperors pleasure, That his Son should ^ome to Rome on the
next day, and the said Tutors accompany him, if they thought (...) might be
without prejudice to the Stu^ies of their Royal Pupil. The Learned Masters
having, with much attention, con^idered the Emperors message, and knowing,
their charge, Erastus to be accomplished to the ^ighest degree that Philosophy
could improve him to. After they had conducted the Ambassador to the presence
of the hopeful Son of the Empire, where they propounded several abstruce
Questions in the deepest Sciences, that the Roman Lord might be able to give
the Emperor an account of his Sons proficience; which all being answered by
Erastus with incomparable Skill, and prompness of Wit far beyond his years: The
Ambassador returned the most satisfied Man alive, acquainting Him, That the
next day the young Prince would not fail to signify his Obedience to his Royal
pleasure; and would come attended with his learned Masters, who all presented
their most humble Duty to their Lord the Emperor; which answer being received
by Dionysius, together with an account of his Sons wonderful proficiency in
Learning, it rendered him the most joyful Man in the World. So that, forthwith
he ordered his Senate and Nobles to be ready the next day to mee^ their young
Prince, and with greatest pom^ conduct him to the Court. The whole City was
employed in fitting Pageants, Arches^ and Equipages for his reception: But
above all, Aphrodicia could hardly suppress the excess of Joy she was in, at
the apprehension of the so near approach of that welcom^ day, wherein she
should enjoy (as she thought) the Object of her most fervent Wishes, an^
elevated Desires: The rest of the Ladie^ omitted no bravery that might express
their acknowledgement of the most accomplished^ and desirable of Mankind.



CHAP. V.
But on the Evening before this great Solemnity, the young Prince walking in
his Garden, observed by a cross aspect of ye Stars, that some most eminent
danger threatened him in this his splendid expedition; but that which most
troubled him, was the apprehension of an ignominious Death, which by his great
skill in Astrology he saw must happen; not so much dreading Death, which his
Philosophy taught him was the result of Nature, as the shameful manner of it:
Therefore communicating this discovery to his Seven Tutors, they heard him with
great astonishment, and finding by the Scheams (which on that Occasion) they
erected, that it was but too true, as the Prince had discovered; they were cast
into the greatest Sorrow and Destraction imaginable; not finding any
possibility to prevent this speedy Ruin and Destruction, in which they must all
be involved. But Erastus, who was ever in an extraordinary manner befriended by
the Gods; had it revealed to him, that if he could but keep silence for seven
days, the fatal Aspect would be over, and he should, with great honor, escape
the threatened Mischief: They being convinced of the likelihood of this
project, and confirmed in the belief of it by an Eclips that had hapened not
long before: resolved, being Seven in number, each Man would take his day to
Mediate and Intercede for this Innocent Prince, during the time of his Silence,
thereby to divert that misunderstanding and mischief, which the Malice of
Erastus's Enemies might suggest on that occasion; which being on all hands
resolved on, they, with most Princely Equipage, adress themselves to their
Journey the next Morning.

CHAP. VI.
THe morning of this splendid day being come, a select company of the Eldest
Sons of the Roman Nobility waited the young Prince's Motion out of the Gate o^
his Palace, where they attended him, dressed in the richest Habits, most
deviceful Furnitures, and costly Liveries, that the Gallantry of the Roman
Empire (then in its Glory) could furnish them withal: in thi^ Equipage waiting
upon him to the City-gate, they were there met by the Empero^ in a Chariot of
State, and all the Noble^ of the Court; some on Horseback, other^ in Coaches
curiously Gilded, and set of^ with the best Italian Painting, whilst all the
Bells in the City were rung in musical Changes, and the Conduits running with
Wine, and the Mayor, and his Liveries linning the Streets with their Ensigns
and Liveries; besides the Pageants, and Rope-dancers, with other pompes of
Diversion, far exceeded the gayity of a Bartholomew-Fair. But all this Triumph
was soon turned into the greatest Dejection, and Sorrow imaginable: when the
Emperor speaking to the Son of his best hopes, and giving him the welcome of a
most indulgent Father, received no other answer but a dumb Obeisance, and
silent Reverence; at which, the Emperor being in great heaviness, feared lest
his too much Study might have deprived him of his Reason, or that in a too
strict pursuit of Philosophy, he had lost his Morrals: this opinion was much
hightened, when the young Prince, being conducted into the Chamber of Presence,
and sat on a Throne by his Father, could by no arguments be prevailed with to
unlock the Cabinet of his Coral-Lips, but had there Immured the most Learned of
Tongues to a rigorous Silence: So that calling for the Philosophers, the
enraged Emperor with great transport and vehemence, told them, That if they did
not again restore his Son to his Speech, both they and their sottish Pupil
should speedily expect to be condemned to the House o^ Silence, and have the
Organs of their Voices stopped by Ax of Justice: But they, with the greatest
Submissions that could he endeavored to allay the mighty Tempes^ of the Kings
wrath, assuring His Majesty. That this wonderful silence of his Son, a^ it did
proceed from some secret cause, to them unknown, so they doubted not bu^ time
would manifest, that it was by some divine power, or command at least, tha^ the
wisest of Princes had imposed this silence on himself: For that the Lord tha^
had brought the Emperors Message, bu^ the day before, was witness with what
excellent demonstration of Reason and Learning he had discoursed in his
presence bu^ the day before.

But the Queen, who sitting under (...) Cloth of State in the same Room, ha^
been all this while devouring with her Eyes the dear Object of her highest
desires; an^ finding that flame, which report had kindled was now so much
heightened by the presence of the most attractive, and desirabl^ person in the
World, that without it were a little allayed by a speedy fruition, it would
certainly reduce her to be the most miserable of Women; took this occasion to
acquaint the indulgent Emperor, that she had in her Closet a Secret,
recommended by a Physician of great note, that would in short time recover the
speech of such as were dumb: Therefore if His Majesty would so order it, that
the Prince might retire with her, to her Apartment, she doubted not but in some
short time, if she had him alone with her, both to discover, and cure the cause
of his Distemper.

The good Emperor, not suspecting this Serpentine cunning of a fair Woman, gave
command, That Erastus should attend upon the Queen in her Closet; where this
worst of Women put in practice, the devilish design you will hear of in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
THe Lustful Aphrodisia having by this occasion, as she thought, taken sure
hold of her Prey: the doors being shut, she, with most amorous words and
gestures, began to explain the meaning of her former Letters and presents,
recounting the violence of her passion, in the most inticeing manner that a
wicked and depraved Woman can devise. And is my Beauty (said she) and my Youth,
that is here prostrate to your pleasure, become an object of scorn and
contempt: Am I the occasion of this stupid silence of yours? speak my dearest
Erastus; and e're it be too late, revive the languishing Spirits of her that
cannot live without she enjoyes you. Then with a storm of lacivious Kisses, she
attempted a battery on the impregnable Fort of his Chastity; exposing her most
enticeing beauties, with the greatest alurement; and hightening the
demonstrations of her passion, by words, expressing the most arden^ and sincere
Affection: What (said she) my Erastus, must then my royal Favor, and all
conquering Beauty be the contempt of your pretended stupidity, and icy silence
or can you think, though you abuse these Tears, the showers of my Love, that
you shall be able to avoid the tempest of my just Anger? No, no, Erastus, think
no^ thy dull Morallity shall balk my expectations of their desired end; but
that tho^ may see how far the malice of a disappointed Woman can reach, be
assured I will make so effectual an example of Female rage, as shall astonish
the Generations to come, when they shall here thereof. Then trying whither
force might not prevail upon him, she endeavored to constrain him to her
Couch; which the poor transported Prince perceiving, with great nimbleness,
seized the door, left the infectious Room; but was soon pursued through the
Gallery by the enraged Empress, whose Lust being now turned to hellish and
barbarous Revenge, she was heard over the Court, with most feigned, and
Crocadile Lamentations, to exclaim, stop, stop, the young Traitor to his
Fathers honor, the Viola^or of my Chasticy, with many ^ther Blasphemies, as
her devilish and exquisite Malice could invent; still tearing her Hair,
rendering her Face and Breasts, and shattering her neglected Jewels, and regal
Robes, that should have been the modest covering of her Honor: So that meeting
the King in this posture, who had by this time detained the innocent Prince,
whom he met flying the beastial Rage of this Fury: casting her self at his
Royal Feet, she, with great artifice so acted the Hypocrite, that the Emperor
was gulled into a belief of that shameless Fact, which this most Savage of her
Sex had alleged, with feigned tears, and bitter execrations. So that taking
the Princes silence (which the Stars had joined him) for a contempt of his
Authority, and an infallible argument of Guilt; he ordered the Guards to to
take this model of abused Innocence into close Custody, until it should be
determined what Sentence was the just reward of so foul a Crime.

Which was soon resolved on, for the Council being presently called, and having
only heard the Plaintiff (who now undoubtedly concluded she had a plenary
revenge on the Contemner of her brutal desires) they Sentenced him to be
draw'd, hanged, and guarter'd; and that within the space of three hours: But
all were astonished that beheld his unmoved Constancy under this most unjust
proceedure; and greatly Lamented, that a young Prince, of such growing hopes,
should be thus cut off in the bud, and morning of his Princely youth: So that
nothing but dismal Lamentations were to be heard, and sable Consternation
appeared to cover the Face of the whole City. This gave so great an Alaram to
the Seven Philosophers, who had engaged to be his Advocates for the seven
days, until the Malignity of his Stars were expired; that they hardly knew
what to determine, because of the shortness of the time: But withal
considering, if they moved not in this instant, the Fortune of the Empire would
be lost, and Posterity deprived of the happiness of so excellent a Governor.
The Lot for the first day fell on Euprosigorus; who accordingly addressed
himself to oppose the Torrent of the imperial Rage, in executing that direful
Sentence on the best of Princes, Erastus.



CHAP. VIII.
NO sooner had Euprosigorus entered the presence of Dioclesian; but it may well
be imagined what a storm of fury fell on him for his presumption, in that he
impudently had intruded himself upon the Emperors presence, when his fury, and
transport on the forementioned occasion were such, as none durst attempt to
come into his sight: Especially such as he thought the Tutors to the
unfortunate Erastus must be, having instead of the excellent dictates of
Philosophy (as he thought) instructed him in nothing more than to seek the
shame and ruin of himself, and cast perpetual infamy on his Parents. I say
it is not hard to guess how welcome Euprosigorus must needs be to a presence
that had entertained such thoughts as these confirming him. But the good
Philosopher arming himself with the Male of innocence, and the consideration of
the Care the Gods had over such, without the least show of trouble or concern,
thus replied to the Emperor; having given place to the first shocks of his
fury. And is it then (most excellent Dioclesian) so small a thing (said he)
with one sudden, and undeliberate stroke to cut of the Glory of your stock, I
had almost said of mankind, through the importunities; nay, perhaps false
suggestions of a weak and silly woman, whose Passions sometimes admit not of
the Councels of reason or deliberation. Hear me then mighty Emperor (continued
he) and suspend this rigid Sentence until I have (by commemorating an accident
that once befell in this City) showed your Highness the irrecoverable loss that
attends a hasty and rash Determination: which request being complied withal;
he assumes his discourse to this purpose. There was not many years since, a
noble Man of this your Emperial City, who had one only Child, which he
delivered to the care of a Nurse, to be brought up in his own House; he had
besides a Dog, in which he took great satisfaction; for many qualities incident
to that active and faithful Creature, in the which he had observed this Dog to
excel. Now it happened on a certain day, when this Lord, with his Lady and
Attendants, went to see a Tournament performed in the Olimpick fields,
according to the custom of the ancient Romans; and having left only the Nurse
with the care of their darling Child, her curiosity carried her to the top of
the house, to observe what she could of the Sport at so great a distance,
leaving only the fond Dog in the Room, where the Child slept in its Cradle; but
whilst this careless Woman was there diverting her iule and wanton Fancy, a
Serpent came into the Chamber where the Infant lay, which soon espied by the
trusty Spanniel, was as soon set upon, in defense of the dear little Pledge,
whose charge he maintained; the Contest was fierce and long, so that in the
fray, the Cradle was overthrown, but to such advantage, that it secured the
Child from what it might otherwise have been exposed to: At length the Dog won
the Victory; but not without the loss of much Blood; which being perceived by
the careless Nurse, as soon as her impertinence gave her leave to descend into
the Chamber; without further enquiry, she flies, with the Alarm, to the Place
where her Lady was, accusing the faithful Spanniel that had been the protector
of his little Master, to have been his Destroyer. All enter the Room with all
that have which Passion and Fury could convey them withal, and finding the
Cradle overthrown, the honest Guardian bloody; without more ado, rewarded his
Fidelity by knocking out his Brains, thereby robbing the pooor Dog of his life,
that had been the Instrument to preserve the Child's. But when a little respite
and breathing had given them leave to search for the deplored Infant; it was
found alive, and entire, under the Cradle; and on a stricter view, the remains
of a venomous Serpent, from whom the trusty Dog had received his wounds in his
Ma^ters defense: when these and other circumstances began more clamly to be
re^lected upon; then indeed did the errors of rash and precipitate passion
show themselves in their true colors: Insomuch, that the too credulous
Gentleman now saw, how, for want of consideration, he had rewarded the valiant
and faithful Defender of his Child and House, with a base, cruel, and
treacherous Death; and believing it impossible, that ever such another faithful
Servant could fall to the share of one that knew no better to distinguish his
services: these, and such like reflections had like to have put him on the
sending Wife, Nurse, and Servants into the other World, to expiate the
irreparable loss of his trusty Spanniel. This, mighty Sir, may be your case,
and much worse, if by the advice of your wisest Counselors, you do not take
such measures in this great and important Affair, as the just merit of the
Cause requires. Wherefore let me crave your Royal deferrence of this so rash
and severe Sentence; which the Emperor (being much taken with the Morality of
the Story) granted accordingly.



CHAP. IX.
IN the Evening going to the Apartment of the Empress, as he was want to do;
having the greatest tenderness of Affection for her, by reason of the great
attraction youth naturally over Age: he found her all in tears, and with bitter
sobs venting (it may be) one of the dolefullest Lamentations that e're was
heard of: But that which most astonished the good Dioclesian, was to observe,
that the more he endeavored to administer to the mittigation of her Sorrows;
the more they were exasperated, and broke out with no small reflections on his
being wholly a stranger to all principles of Justice, and common Honesty; for
(said she) as the place you hold in the Roman Empire obliges you to the
strictest observance of the Laws of Justice and Equity; So the personal
Relation you stand in to me, more particularly requires at your hand a due
vindication of my Honor, but both of these you have much departed from, in
delaying the reparation of the violence offered to your Bed, as well as mine,
by him whom you call your Son; but what proportion his actions bear to that
Relation, let the world judge. In this case I can compare you no better to any
thing, than the old Pine Tree: What Pine Tree, said the Emperor? She replied,
because the case is so parallel, I will give you the trouble to hear it; and
composing her Face to a formal s^riousness, she began thus, A Gentleman that
took great delight in an Vmbrage he had near his Garden, and especially to an
old Pine Tree that gave great Ornament to it: One day as he was contemplating
in the shade of that place, he observed a young sprout arise from the root of
the ancient Pine, and taking his Gardener, consulted how to preserve and
cherish the young Tree. The Gardener told him, that the bigger Pine bore too
much head, which shaded and hindered; whereupon he had order to pare that part
of the old Pine that was injurious to the Sprout: The Gentleman about that time
took a journey, and at his return, found one half of the old Tree withered; and
asking again his Gardener, had this answer, That it was better wholly to take
away the ancient Pine^ that the young might the sooner fill his place. This my
Lord, this is what I fear* and I wish my Omens prove not too true; as for
instance, Your Majesty is the Princely Pine, under whose shadow the Roman
Shepherds have with non-interrupted delight reposed themselves: your supposed
Son is the fatal shrub, for whose cherishment, your Royal Self, the Emperial
Pine, must be cut down and destroyed; they having killed your better part, your
Honor already: The Gardiners are these base Sycophants; ye Philosophers, who
(so they may divide the Government of Rome between them) are all bent to the
cherishing this graceless Shrub. And here a well-dissembled Tide of Tears stopped
the farther current of her speech; so that looking most disconsolately on the
Emperor, as expecting his answer to her diabollical Fable: she might see him
make several demonstrations of his too absolute belief of her sham, by thumping
his breast, beating the ground, cursing the very gods, and endeavoring to dart
his fury at them, in the fierce cast of his eyes and countenance: At length,
Too well my dear Empress (said he) do I discern this execrable Conspiracy; but
I hope it shall not be too late: then leaving the room, he immediately gave the
second order for executing the dire Sentence on the Peerless Erastus.



CHAP. X.
THe Philosopher Dimurgus have undertaken to take off the second days shock
from the innocent Erastus; in order to the seasonable effecting it, very early
in the morning was waiting at the door of the Kings Chamber, and being
introduced by one of the Pages, had the liberty of being heard, with greater
patience than one could have thought was possible, considering the dreadful
ferment the last discourse, with Aphrodicea, had put the Emperor in: but
whether it was that the slumbers of the Night had somewhat moderated the
acuteness of the Fumes; or only adviseing his Pillow, abstracted somewhat from
the rigor of his resolution. Certes (as we were saying) Dimurgus found him in
a temper much more serene, than could have been expected: the circumstances,
but now related, being considered, which gave the Philosopher more freedom to
debate the injustice of the Sentence, than otherwise could have been permitted;
insomuch, that he obtained a second days Truce, with the Emperors indignation:
which he did, by relating the sad, and most unfortunate adventure of the
learned Hipocrates, in this sort.

The young Prince of Hungary being very sick, the King and Queen sent
Ambassadors to the famous Doctor, with large presents, and assurance of larger,
if he would come and secure the life of their only Son: It so happened at that
time, the old Physician had himself need of a Doctor* and the Messengers seeing
him not in capacity to Travel, accepted of a young Scholar, a Nephew of
Hipocrates, whom he had, with all diligence, instructed in the greatest Secrets
of his Art: this person being arrived at the Court, was very well received by
both the King and Queen, who discovered in him, more than ordinary, symptoms of
an exquisite Artist.

One day taking the Queen aside, privately he acquainted her, That the young
Prince, now so sick, was not the natural Son of the King; and therefore, unless
she would relate who was his real Father, he could do no more toward his Cure;
but on consideration she would disclose that, he would secure the young Princes
life. The Queen much astonished at his great Art; after having taken of him an
Oath of Secresy on the Mass Book, and modestly acquainted him with the
Circumstances inducing her thereto; which, without Magic, you may suppose to
be the King's coldness, and a natural Inclination that Queens have to furnish
the world with Princes, that have the Spirit of Government: She acquaintes him
with the only Secret of her Cabinet, that he was the Son of an Irish man, that
had serv^d the King in his Wars against the Turk, who taking the opportunity of
the King's being gone a Hunting; one day took such acquaintance with me in my
Closet, that after some time, it was the product of this Son; who indeed
passes for the Prince: and I promised the Captain, for his kindness to me, to
make his child (if a boy) Heir to the Crown of Hungary. By this the King has
the satisfaction to think himself a Father; I the happiness of being a Mother:
and you the only person entrusted with the Secret, of the which, you may make
such use as best pleases you, only preserving the Sons life, and the Mothers
Honor; which I am the easier induced to confide in, by reason of your Oath to
Hipocrates. The young Doctor having given great attention to this Relation;
promised to answer both her requests, both in relation to the Secret, and to
apply himself to use his utmost skill for the recovery of the young Prince;
which he did with such success, that in a little time he being perfectly
restored, to the exceeding satisfaction both of the King and Queen: the
Physician was Royally rewarded, and dismissed with great Honor; who returning
to his Uncle, the great Hipocrates, and having given him a particular account
of his good Success, with the extraordinary bounty of his Royal Benefactors.
The subtle old Doctor seemed wonderfully pleased with what his Nephew had
related; and forced himself into an appearance of highly congratulating the
young Man's fortune; whilst inwardly he had very different resentments: for it
wrought in him a strong regret, which at length swell up to a perfect
maligning, and repining at the prosperity of this young Physician; and as it is
natural for old men to be largely stockt with jealousy, and envy: These two
passions wrought so powerfully on the declining Hipocrates, that he put on a
felonious resolution of eclipsing the growing Grandeur of his kinsman, lest in
time it might exceed the dimension of his own long acquired Fame. He therefore
takes his kinsman into the fields, one day, to observe the mediciaal Herbs of
the earth, and having asked him diverse questions of the nature and quality of
such and such Plants; at length, said the old Man, reach me that Herb that
grows so low on the ground; which the young Doctor stooping to do, the other
mortally wounded him on the hinder part of his head, with a hatchet he (for
that purpose) had placed under his Gown. Thus this envious old man having put a
period to his life; and as (he the^ thought) to his own fears and jealousies,
he cast the Body in a pit thereby, inwardly rejoicing at the bloody Tragedy.
But a very short time convinced him of the barbarous effect of his rash and
indeliberate Action, when being seized with a violent distemper; the pains, and
decay's of his Body put him in mind of his cruel Bloodshed; besides, wanting
now the help of his only Nephew, whom so basely he had butchered. So that
continually exclaiming on the irrecoverable loss his rashness had brought on
all Men, and particularly on himself, and filled with the Terrors of black
horror, and endless despair, he most wretchedly expired in one of his Agonies.
Thus (mighty Prince) said the learned Dimurgus, have I laid before your
Emperial Majesty, the most sad, and irreparable effects of rash, and
inconsiderate Actions; which once finished, and determined, can never be
repaired; but end in endless, yet vain Repentance. The Emperor having weighed
the purport of this discourse, ordered a second Reprieve to the dismal Sentence.

CHAP. XI.
THe ungracious Empress seeing the Council of Dimurgus, had prevailed to respit
the fatal Sentence against the most virtuous Erastus; and fearing the delay of
his Execution, might one day discover her inhuman Treachery, and pull a just
vengeance on her own head: that she might yet again incence the blinded Emperor
to comply with her barbarous Treasons; feigned her self almost dead with
sorrow, because her Honor had not received that satisfaction which the Law had
granted to the justness of her Complaint. Wherefore retireing into the most
private part of her Apartment, she permitted none to administer Comfort to her
Sorrows, but the Slave that had been the Secretary to her devilish practices.
This sad retirement coming to the Emperors ears; he out of an excess of
Affection, would go to comfort his implacable Crocadile, and being, with great
entreaties, admitted to the place, which was the doleful Scene of her feigned
Sorrow; he found her weltering in tears, in the midst of her Rosaries and
Beads, afflicting her self in the most passionate manner imaginable; so that
the poor deluded Dioclesian could not forbear shedding his Royal Juice at the
dismal prospect. Till having almost tired her self with the excess of her
fiction, and (as she thought) mollified him to take the impression of her
cursed Council: She thus adres'd her self to her design. Think you, most Royal
Dioclesian, that these tears, and this profound sorrow in which you see me
cast, could possibly proceed on the account of the most unfortunate Aphrodicea?
or that my own affairs (which bear no proportion in my Soul with yours) could
work me to so sharp regret? No, mighty Prince, it is the eminent danger that I
see your Sacred Person exposed to, whilst you permit these ungracious, and
traitorous Philosophers to work you into a belief of Erastus's innocence: That
Erastus (said she) whom I cannot mention without an Agony: and here stopping
her speech, which gave way to a volly of Sighs, and well-dissembled Groans; and
fixing her Basilisk eyes on the almost distracted Emperor, she proceeded after
this sort: The Gods, and all the Supreme Powers ever defend the Sacred Roman
Emperor, and never suffer my ominous portents to take effect on his Royal
Person. Oh! my Sovereign Dioclesian (said she) How like are you to the Royal
Bore, of which the Moralist gives account? who having long swayed the Scepter
of the Forest, and with great contempt overthrown the pride, and power of all
that opposed his Empire; yet at last was by a wilely stratagem, and seeming
friendship destroyed, by a stily Sheapherd, after this manner: This treacherous
Swain had observed a stately Pear Tree, the Fruit whereof, best pleased the
princely Bore, and to the which, for that reason he made frequent resort: The
Heardsman takes an opportunity to convey himself upon this Tree; where having
been but little time, the generous Bore came to his repast, and giving the Tree
a shog, to shake down his delicates, the cunning Swain had gathered many in his
coat, which at that instant he flung down to the Royal Beast, and ever now and
then sent fresh supplies of the delicious fruit, until at length (having made
too large a meal) the unwary Bore lay down to rest under the fatal Tree: the
traitorous youth taking hold of this opportunity, softly descended, and gently
clawing the slumbering Prince, soon had an opportunity to thrust his knife to
his heart: To whom the expireing Bore thus spoke; Persidious wretch, who in
contempt of my Royal Authority, have thus traitorously destroyed my person;
know, that if I had known what poisonous fruit had been on this ungrateful
Tree, I would ^ave set fire to the roots of it: and have by the ruin of such a
deceitful Caitif, have prevented my own. What need any Explanation to be made
of a parallel so visible? But if your imperial Highness take not warning by
this Story, you may too soon feel the Sword of him that now claws and flatters
you, sheathed in your Bowels. This Advice, set off with the greatest Artifice
that a subtle malice could devise, wrought with the easy King, that he once
more promised the false Aphrodicea, that the next rising Sun should be witness
to the Tragedy of Erastus.



CHAP. XII.
THe third days care of the excellent Prince Erastus, by Lot, falling on the
wise Philosopher Thermus; and he understanding the strict order the Emperor had
given for the punctual Execution of the direful Sentence, that day, very early
in the morning waited at the Royal Apartment: And though he considered he was
to encounter the anger of an Emperor, exasperated by the wiles, and subtilties
of an implacable wicked Queen; yet did the sense he had of the Justice of the
Princes cause, the Innocence of his person; together with the indispensible
duty of a Philosopher, to withstand (what in him lay) the Execution of a
Sentence so barbarous, and against the very light of Nature: these, and such
like considerations, armed the Philosopher against the mighty opposition he met
withal; so that notwithstanding he was (with much difficulty) admitted to the
presence, and with many a Regal frown, and sharp reflection entertained by
Dioclesian: he with great humanity, and undisturbedness, gave way to the
passionate Tempest; and with a Stoical bravery overcame, or at least despised
the effects of an Emperors blindness, and a Queens rage. So that taking a
convenient opportunity, he with a sage and graceful presence, and discourse, so
fa^ charmed the evil spirit, that the Magic o^ Aphrodicea had raised in the
Emperor (...) that the half-subdued Dioclesian gave way to the Morals of the
learned Thermus; which, in such sort, be expressed: That (...) wise man (by
over-indulging, either his own Passions, or the Councils of a secret Enemy) may
be induced to an Act of the highest rashness, and injustice: and that a
remediless, and irreparable mischief, may be the product of such undeliberate
determinations, has been proved by the excellent Discourses of the Sages,
Euprosigorus, and Dimurgus. Now (by the permission of your Imperial Majesty) I
humbly crave leave to Infer, that all this mischief may probably derive from
the malice, and subtlety of a mischevious Woman: And though we ought always to
be cautious, and suspicious of our own Determinations; especially in matters of
Importance (and what can be of greater, than the Fate of the Roman Empire,
which depends on the execution, or remission of this days Sentence) yet ought
we never to be more circumspect in such-Affairs, than when a Woman shall be the
Instigatress of the Action: (...) having been always observeable, that ^he
most notorious, and desperate Villainies have been managed, either by the
coun^il, or asistance of that Sex. So having obtained a Reprieval of the
Sentence till ^he next day, he went on with his Story, as the Author has it. A
Wealthy (but Ancient) Nobleman of Toscany, was Mar^ied to a young and
beautiful Lady, of one of the most Honorable houses of that Coun^ry, to the
great satisfaction of all their Relations; this Marriage was celebrated with
all suitable demonstrations of Mirth and Gallantry: So that Feasting, Danceing,
Masqueing, and Entertainment, took up almost as much time, as might well have
looked toward a Gosiping; when all this while the old Knight dressing himself
in a Habit, and Humor more agreeable to a Lad of Eighteen, and being in his
own Imagination, at least Thirty years younger than his true date: by the
briskness of his behavior, seemed (tollerably) to answer the gayity of his
young Lady. But these Dancing days being over, and the old Knight appearing in
bed to be quite another thing than what his dress, and forces humor bespake
him, occasioned the young Bride to pass the Night in considerations very
different from what they might have been, had she been Married to one, more
suitable to her years: For the old man ha^ only tickled her into a longing, for
tha^ which was not in his power to give; s^ that being almost distracted, with
a vehement desire of enjoying a more agreeabl^ bedfellow; and having wearied
her thought^ with casting, how to accomplish it: she on^ day took an occasion
to disclose her (as she called it) unsupportable Passion to her Mother; and
being with her in her Closet, she thus bespake her: Madam, you have now before
your eyes, one of the most unfortunate of woman kind; Married to what I must
ever Loath, because he can never afford me the only solace of a woman's life:
think with your self dear Madam, was ever one of my Form and Age, condemned to
be tied up to a Flaxen-Perriwig, a Point-band, a trimmed pair of Pantaloons,
Fringe-Gloves, and a Beaver-Hat; for at night, when the Page has laid these in
the dressing Room, there remains nothing youthy, nothing handsome, or worthy my
Embraces; when by my side lies the sad Skelleton of a decayed human, which
instead of giving me the relish of my life, grates my thoughts all the long
night, with apprehensions of unwelcome Death. Oh! cruel Matrimony, that
fette^est youth under such Tyrannous restraints. I therefore humbly implore
your Mother^y affection, as ever you have been scorched with the Flame of Love;
that you will ^se some endeavor to ease this my un^ufferable pain, and afford
some refreshment to my languishing spirits. The good ^ld Lady being strangely
surprised at this ^iscourse of her Daughters, and dreading ^he consequence of
such unruly Passion, dissembled her true Resentments, and seem^d to condole
with the young woman in her misfortunes; by this means, designing to ^ind out a
prevention for the threatening mischief: She therefore desired to know whether
she had fixed on any Object, particular for the satisfying her desires, and
promised her best asistance therein. The Daughter not perceiving her Mothers
dissimulation, took all she said for true, and casting her self on her knees;
Dear Madam (said she) you are by this most affectionate Grant become twice my
Mother; for by your assistance herein, you will save that Life, which before
you gave me. Then she proceeded to acquaint her, that her Confessor was (as
she thought) one of the most Amiable, and Charming persons in the world: for
Madam (continued she) his Eyes are so piercing, his Discourse so sof^ and
courtly, his whole Mien so attractive that if you can but so bring it to pass,
I may have the enjoyment of his person; I would not change Fortune with the
greate^ Empress. I will repeat you a Song, which the other day, after
Confession, he sung t^ my Guittar, which he found in my Closet^ and I am apt to
think he uttered it in commileration of my Circumstances: the Son^ was this:
SONG.
I.
NOw fie upon him: What is Man,
Whose Life at best is but a Span?
When to an Inch it dwindles down;
Ice in his Bones, Snow on his Crown;
That he within his crazy Brain,
Kind thoughts of Love should entertain:
That he, when Harvest comes should Plow
And when it is time to Reap, go Sow;
Who (in Imagination only strong)
Though twice a Child, can never twice b^ young
II.
Nature did those ordain for Fools,
That sue for Work, yet have no Tools:
What fellow-feeling can there be,
In such a strange disparitie?
Old Age mistakes the youthful Breast;
For Love dwells there, not Interest:
Alas good Man! take thy repose,
Get Ribband for thy Thumbs and Toes,
Provide thee Flan^el, and a sheet of Lead;
Think on thy Coffin, not thy Bridal Bed.


The Song ended, Madam (said he) I hope you will pardon this Levity; and with a
look that testified his compassion for my unhappiness, he left the Room. Think
Dearest Madam, what impression such a discovery, of so desirable an Affection,
must needs make; and how welcome such a Feast must be to one acquainted with
nothing but broken Meals and Abstinence: If therefore I have any interest in
your Motherly Compassion! Let me beg your best h^lp in assisting me to the
enjoyment of the Chaplains embraces; without which, I must be the most
miserable of Woman kind. The good old Lady was inwardly much grieved at this
discovery of her Daughters disloyalty, and unchaste inclinations; yet seemingly
assented, telling her, That she would, with all immaginable secresy and
diligence further her designs: but that for the greater security, it were
convenient to make trial of the old Man's humor, by crossing and affronting him
in some other circumstance, before they attempted an Abuse so gross and
infamous: So that, if she could but hansomly acqu^^ her self, if she a^tempted
two or three injuries upon him, in some other respect, first of all, it might
be a means the better to work his disposition to a compliance with hers in the
main design, at least it might bring him to yield her a liberty, that might be
useful toward the satisfaction of her desires.

The young Lady (though she thought o^ nothing more than present enjoyment,
yet) by the advice of her Mother, assented first to attempt some notable Abuse,
by crossing him in something or other he was fond of; and this resolution she
speedily put in practice; for she was no sooner returned to her Parlour, but
she presently knocked a little Beagle Bitch on the head; a Bitch, for which the
old Knight had a greater esteem, than for any Horse in his Stable; and because,
when it was first discovered to him, he only gently Admonisht her not to
destroy any thing that he liked without his consent; and soon seemed to have
forgot it: She therefore, the day following, cut up an excellent Plumb tree
that stood in his Garden, the Fruit whereof was very delicate, and fair; and
therefore he was very tender of this Tree: This indeed put the Knight into a
heat more than was usual; so that, with some passion, demanding the reason of
her why she had done it, he was soon answered, that it spoiled the form of the
walks, and that she intended to have a border of Flowers in the place of it.
The good old Man gave way to the humor of his young Wife in this; whereupon
she concluded the day was her own, and therefore acquaints her Mother with the
Success: telling her, That doubtless her Husband could not be offended with
what ever liberty she took in the satisfaction of her Humor: To the which, the
prudent Matron made this Reply, Daughter, it is very probable that your Husband
(through his great Tenderness to your Youth) may give way to you it matters of
so small Importance as a Dog, or a Tree, but if you should injure him in any
thing reflecting on his Honor, you might find him not so easily Appeased; for
old Men are never more Jealous, and Implacable, than when touched upon that
Sore. I have therefore thought on an Expedient, how you may try him in that
point, and if you therein can Acquit your self with the same Success, as in the
other two Experiments, I will engage the next day to accomplish your Wishes.
This last Promise was so powerful with the young Lady, that had it been to have
leapt out at a Window, she would scarce have stuck at it, in order to the
Consummating her Wishes: she therefore entreats her Mother to let her know what
this last Trial might be, and assures her, she will not fail to attempt it.
Said then the old Lady, You know diverse Friends have an Invitation to Dine with
your Husband three days hence, therefore I advise you, when we are all just
sat at Table, that you pretend to have forgot your Knife, and having secretly
taken hold of the Table-cloath, you hastily start up to fetch your Knife, and
draw all the Plates and Dishes on the Floor. If therefore you come cleaverly
off with this, I will make good my Promise. Nothing stuck with the young Wife,
but that it must be three days more before she could hope the Enjoyment of her
Wishes, which she looked upon to be three Ages; but at last, the day being come,
the Guests met, the Table richly Furnished with variety of the Rarities,
according to the Season; the Chaplain having craved a Blessing, and all
prepared to partake of the sumptuous Treat: on a sudden, down come the costly
Dishes, with their Garnishes and Sauces, on the Ground. This strange Accident
was no small suprizal to the Knight, as well as his noble Guests: But by reason
of their presence, he seemed to take no notice of it, farther than to put it
off with a Laugh, and making it a part of their Mirth to discourse of it: in
the mean time the Servants had soon covered the Table with another brigad^ of
Dishes, not inferior to the former; so that the Entertainment of the day was
not at all lessened thereby. Music, Dancing, and Cards, took up a great part
of the night: when every one satisfied with the Magnificence of their
Entertainment, took their Leaves, leaving the old Knight to consider a way how
to cure his Wifes Levity, and she how the next day to entertain her Confessor.
But the Morning of this much desired Day being come, the Knight sent one of his
Pages for his Surgeon, who, with many menaces and threats, was forced to
draw so much Blood from the Arms of the young Lady, as for that time stopped
the Calenture of her Lust. The fainting Daughter sent for her Indulgent Mother;
who glad at heart, that her design had obtained the wished Success; and that her
Daughter was thereby prevented of staining the Honor of her Family by her
wanton Embraces; gave her the sober Advice, for time to come, to mind her Duty
to her Lord and Husband, and not to think of a Lacivious violating that Bed,
which she was bound to Preserve from all Pollution. The Languishing young Lady
showing great Penitence, promised so to do, to the great satisfaction of all
her Friends.



CHAP. XIII.
THe Philosopher Thermus having ended his elegant Narrative, much to the
satisfaction of the Emperor; needed not make any Comment thereon; for every
Circumstance had made deep Impression on the sensible part of Dioclesian: So
that dismissing the Wise Man, with Royal Thanks for his seasonable Admonition;
the good Dioclesian had put on a Resolution of having the Case of his Son, the
excellent Erastus, debated in full Senate: but had that determination
frustrated by the most mischevious of her Sex, the Implacable Aphrodicea; who
finding her Wiles not likely to take; but that by the Wisdom of the
Philosophers, they had been hitherto prevented, and fearing that if Erastus
were permitted to Live, it would at some time or other discover her devilish
Impostures: She therefore, in the greatest rage of one in Desparation,
threatened to Revenge upon her own person, the loss of her Honor, and
disappointment of her barbarous design on the Innocent young Prince. So
retireing to her Chamber, and shutting all her Servants out of her Presence,
she gave them occasion to fear what the Issue of this her seeming Phrensy would
be: So that having acquainted the Emperor with what Resolutions she had shut
her self up in her Lodging; the easy Dioclesian could not forbear going to her,
that he might endeavor to aleviate her Sorrows, and prevent the sad Mischief
which her Retirement threatened. And here it may not be amiss a little to
consider the Artifices of a Malicious, and Implacable Woman, and with what
subtilties they seek the accomplishment of their hellish enterprises. Nothing
was more in the Mouth of this wicked Queen, than a sense of the great violence
offered to the Honor of the King: the extreme danger of his Royal Person; and
that for her own part, she had no value for her own Life, farther than to seek,
and endeavor the Safety of his Imperial Majesty: such expressions as these,
were ever now and then the Accents of her Sorrow: when alas, nothing was really
less in her heart, but that she might again awaken the Rage of the too
credulous Monarch, she refreshes his Memory with a Story of a certain King of
England, who having given himself wholly to Pleasure, and the Allurements of
Debauchery; and delivered the Care of his People to the management of Seven
Counselors; they, on the other side, were so addicted to their Covetousness;
that the common Justice was turned into Wormwood; Extortion, Cruelty, and
Oppression, taking place of Equity, and Reason. Now, as this Prince had
wilfully blinded himself in Matters of State, by putting Confidence in such
evil Instruments; the Justice of Heaven deprived him of the use of his natural
Eyes; so that, if at any time he went out of the Gates of the City, he became
perfectly blind: This was so great an Affliction to the wretched King, that he
sought all probable means for Cure, but finding none; at length, he had notice
of a strange natural Magician, or Prophet, by name Merlin, born in the
Territories of his own Kingdom of England; to whom, having applied himself for
advice, he had from him an astonishing Relation of some Magical Balls that
continually were burning underneath the Ground, over which, his Royal Chamber
and Bed stood: so that, until these Balls could be extinguished, there was no
hope of Cure for this Princes blindness. Whereupon the Celler being searched,
there was found underneath the Pavement, the likeness of a Cauldren, wherein
were seven burning Balls, exactly to the number of his seven State Ministers or
Inglers, one of them being bigger than the rest. The King finding this strange
Relation of Merlin to be so far true, Councelled with him, how they might be
extinguished, and the Malignity of their Influence prevented.

Know then Mighty Prince (said Merlin) that these seven Balls are your seven
Counselors, to whom you have committed the Management of the great Affairs of
your Kingdom; and as long as you suffer these to live, the Balls will not cease
to burn, nor can your Sight return unto you: but if Your Majesty make trial by
taking off the head of the chief of them, you will find that the great Ball
will be dead and extinct; and so consequently of the rest. Whereupon the King
ordered the Captain of his Guard to cut off the head of his greatest or chief
Minister of State, and immediately the great Ball disappeared: then gradually
Lopping off the rest, the Balls all vanished, and the Charm ceased: The King
returned to his perceptive Faculty, and the due exercise of his Government, to
the great happiness and satisfaction of all his People. Thus have I given Your
Imperial Majesty, a short, but true Account of this Story of the famous Mirlin;
and I fear Your Highness needs the Council of such a Prophet; for certainly, as
long as you are managed by the Councils of these seven Masters, Your Majesty
will be blinden, and infatuated in relation to your own welfare, and that of
your Empire. Therefore, although hitherto the humble Request I have made to
Your Imperial Malesty, has not had that Success, as for your Honor and Safety
I only desired: I hope your serious consideration of the foregoing Relation
will at least animate you to secure the Fame and Grandeur of the excellent
Dioclesian. Here a torrent of Crocadile Tears stopped her discourse for some
time; till gaining breath of her sighs, she added, But oh! Sir, be sure first
strike at the great Ball, the mischevious and disloyal Erastus. How Powerful
and Charming is the Eloquence of a Woman's Passion, especially humored to the
height, and between a pair of warm Sheets (for now you must know, the Vxorious
Dioclesian had laid himself by her, on her Treacherous Bed.) What can he more a
Devil, than a wicked Woman in a Curtain Consult? Certainly it had that
Operation on the easy old Man, that he again pronounced that most unjust, and
unnatural Sentence; and ordered the most virtuous, and innocent Prince Erastus,
to be Executed the next Morning.



CHAP. XIV.
ANd now let us a little cast our Eyes into the Prison, and pay a Visit to the
abused Prince in his Misfortunes. Here we see one of the greatest Examples of
heroic Chastity, Sentenced for no less than Incest, and a Rape: A Son, the
most Loyal, Obedient, Dutiful, and Affectionate; Condemned for a Traitor,
Disobedient, Undutiful; and void of natural Affection: And can the All-seeing
Justice behold this! Can the Gods see the Compleatest Resemblances of their
Divinity, Goodness, and Excellence, dressed up in the Form of Devils, and
Condemned for such? All this by those who really are what they would represent
the Virtuous to be, As it is well expressed by a Poet: THey were so Ripe for
Hell! Could she delay,
Not Gape, and Swallow quick, her greedy Prey?
Could Earth endure
Their Footsteps? was the Air grown so impure,
To give them Breath? Could Heaven behold their Riot
With patient Eyes? or could the Gods be Quiet?
Yet had the Learning of this young Prince so Improved his Morals, that he
Contemned the utmost, their Rage and Cruelty could impose upon him: Having
learnt of the Philosophers, that he was born a Mortal, and therefore must once
Dye, He calmly expected it; submitting the time and manner to the Gods.

And now, in all appearance, it drew near; for the Emperors Commands were
enjoined with the greatest Severity, and on Penalty of utmost Rigor, not to be
delayed this Morning; which was the fourth time the most inhumane Sentence had
been pronounced. To prevent this, the studious ^inoscopos waited the first
opening of the Palace Gate; and having an Opportunity, got into the Royal
Apartment among some Physicians that were come, to attend the Queen: And they
understanding, by the Pages of the Chamber, that the great Satisfaction she had
received by the King's last Order, and concluding her Design now obtained, was
fallen into a sound Sleep, after the good Success of her Night-endeavours; so
there being no farther occasion of them there; they waited on the King, who was
now with drawn into his Dressing Room: But quickly perceiving the good
Philosopher, and scenting his business; having discharged at him several
Fireballs from his wrathful Eyes at last, he thunders on him a volly of small
Shot, in bitter words, after this manner: Cannot (then) the Bars of my Palace,
my Guards, nor my Royal Displeasure protect my Person from being haunted with
these Phylosophical Fiends? Impudent Dog, How durst thou appear in our
Presence; whom thou, and thy infamous Crew have so much abused? was it not
enough, that you robbed me of my only Son, whom I delivered to your Care, with
the use, both of his Tongue and Reason? Whom now by your Sorceries, you have
deprived of both, and poisoned him with all manner of Vice: whom (for the
Reverence ye ought to have to our Person; and the Regard to the Roman Empire)
you should have Instructed in the best Science of Honor, and Virtue. But as ye
have sought my Ruin, and the Destruction of the Empire; be assured, yours is
not far off: For, if our Justice spare not our own Impious Son; think not that
you, his Diabolical Tutors shall escape. During all this Storm, Enoscopos stood
like a Picture of a Light-within-man before the Inquisition: But the Tempest
being somewhat over, and Dioclesian almost out of Breath; some of the Lords
there present, who had long known the Philosophers to be persons that through
the Wo^ld had acquired a vast stock of Reputation; and especially that Nobleman
being present, who was sent to fetch the Prince to Court, and had there heard a
sufficient proof of his excellent Acquirements. These I say, mistrusting some
Monstrous Intrigue in the bottom of this strange Transaction, prevailed with
the Emperor, That the Sage Philosopher might have freedom to deliver the
Massage that had brought him thither. With much add he had Permission, and with
an unmoved Athenian Face; but such Majestic Gravity, as commanded Reverence,
even from Dioclesian himself; Enoscopos thus addressed to the King.

GReat Prince, could the sense of your mighty Displeasure, or the fear of Death
have afrighted me from the performance of my Duty to your Majesty; and those
great Obligations to common Justice: I had not at this time given Your Majesty
the trouble of so loathed a Presence. But ill does he deserve the name of a
Philosopher, that prefers not his Adherence to Moral Virtue, and the public
Good, beyond all the gay Felicities that deceived Mortals Idolize. Nor have I
any reason to believe, that Humanity has so far forsaken the Roman Emperor,
but that he will permit a defense in the behalf of the Innocent; and not suffer
so rigid a Sentence to be put in Execution on the bare word of a weak; and
perhaps deceitful Woman. And I humbly beg Your Imperial Majesty, not to be
offended at the harshness of the Expression: And if you will this once more
grant your Princely Remand of the Sentence against Prince Erastus, until I
have, by infallible Demonstration, convinced Your Majesty, that in this affair,
the greatest Caution, and Circumspection is most agreeable to the proceedings
of the Roman Emperor: Then let me bear him Company in his Fate; and I shall,
with all acknowledgment, for so great Clemency put my Head under your Royal
Feet.

The Emperor touched with a Sense of Humanity, of which the Philosopher had
minded him; and being too, out of the Circle of Aphrodicea; began somewhat to
Relent, and dispatched a Messenger to the Captain of the Guard, who was now on
his way to the place of Execution, to return the Prisoner again, till farther
Order. In the mean while Enoscopos entertained the Emperor with this Relation.

The unfortunate (because credulous) Cleander lived at Rodes, and was justly
esteemed one of the Wealthiest, and most Honorable Inhabitants of that famous
City: This person being, by the Importunity and Advice of his Friends, Married
to a Lady, whose Beauty, Fortune, and Family, spoke her no less Honorable;
did, as is usual among persons of Quality, commit the management of all
Household Affairs to the Conduct of his Lady: who having with her a
Maidservant, that had always waited on her at School, and of whose Fidelity
and Wit she had a very good Opinion; therefore she entrusted her, mainly, with
the oversight of the other Servants. This Girl being young and wanton, out of
her Ladys sight, had one day got into her Embraces a young Lad of the Family;
and this Lady, by accident, took them in the very Act: whereupon being much
surprised, that her Woman (in whom she had the greatest Confidence imaginable)
should, by her wantonness, pull so great a dishonor on her Husbands House: She
was once of the mind to have told her Lord of it; but fearing, lest his
resentment or so foul an Act might have too far inflamed his passion, and have
urged him to some Violencies, that afterward might have reflected to his
prejudice. She, poor Lady, endeavored, for that time, to conceal the Fault of
her Servant; but suffered it not to escape without her own most just
Correction, for immediately she turned the Fellow out of doors, and having
soundly Rated and Corrected her Maid, she permitted her still to all the same
place in her Family; hoping so gentle a Chastisement might work her Amendment.
But alas! the sad effect of base Ingratitude, and the Rage of disappointed
Lust; nothing certainly is more implacable than a Strumpet, balkt in the
enjoyment of her inordinate Pleasures: This will appear by the sequel of my
Story, which I shall as much as possible abreviate.

This detestable Slut, although her Indulgent Mistress, had laid on her the
Obligation Your Majesty has heard; studied nothing from that time, but to
Revenge the Loss of her loose Pleasures, with the Loss of the Life of that most
Virtuous and Innocent Lady: And accordingly, one Afternoon, when her Mistress
was diverting her self in the Garden, with some other Ladies; her Master alone
reading in the Parlour* she takes this opportunity to insinuate into his belief
the most incredible Falsehood i^ the World; but having long deliberate^ how to
varnish and disguise it; she thus began her Treasons.

Sir, I most humbly crave Pardon of your Honor for this, my bold, intrusion
into your Privacy; and withal, I earnestly entreat you to believe nothing but
the hearty Zeal I have for your Happiness, and just satisfaction could have put
me upon it: This you will have, all the reason in the world to believe, when
you perceive, that I, who have ever been bred up at the Feet of your Lady; I,
who so particularly share in her extraordinary Favor, and that can hope for no
happiness, but what her Benevolence imparts to me; that even I am compelled by
the obligations I owe to Virtue; not to see so excellent a Person, so good a
Master as your self, in the highest measure Abused. And therefore, with the
greatest Violence to my own Circumstances, I come to declare to you that
Secret, which I much fear will Transport you into some extraordinary Violence
to your self; you having a long time had the misfortune to have been abused by
one of the most Treacherous of Womankind. This Sir, is that which has made my
Food unpleasant, and my Sleep full of distraction; when I consider, that a
Person of her excellent Endowments, extraordinary Education, most reputed
Virtue; should lay aside the Regard she ought to have to her own Honor, the
happiness, the satisfaction of the most incomparable Husband in the World; and
suffer her self to be debauched by a Boy that lives by the meanest drudgeries
of the house: Here she was stopped in her Career, by the half distracted
Cleander; who had long before this, torn any other Tongue, that had been guilty
but of half these Blasphemies, out of the cursed Traducers Throat; but
considering the Relation this wench stood in to his Lady, and her entire
dependence upon her Favor; he was so miserably deluded, as to give her leave
to go on with her divellish Narrative; which she did to this manner: The Gods
are witness how often, and with how earnest supplication I have, on my Knees,
prayed her not to defile so Sacred a Tie, as the Holy Priest had joined her in,
with so unworthy a prostitution of her excellent Person, and violating her
Obligations to the best of Husbands But it has been my unhappiness to beat the
Air, and all the Success my unwearied Endeavors have met with, have been, my
self to be beaten; of which, I think some of the Marks yet remain. So that,
seeing she has laid aside all sense of shame, and virtue: I could not possibly
rest, until I ha^ discharged my Conscience in making known a practice so
disloyal and brutish unto your self; that by such means, as shall be most
agreeable to Reason, and the innate Law^ of Humanity, you may endeavor yet to
reclaim her from utter Ruin and Perdition. But I most earnestly beg of your
Honor, not to seem to take any notice hereof, until I have given you an Ocular
Demonstration of what I have now related.

Ye Gods! said Cleander: and is it possible so excellent Beauty and Sweetness,
can harbor a Soul so Deformed and Divellish! Oh! most unfortunate Cleander:
Could the Fates mark out no one to make the Object of their utmost Violence and
Injury, but unhappy thee? A miserable Man. But perceiving the Ladies coming in
from the Garden, he sent out the wench, ordering her to take no notice of what
had past: and put himself into the best posture he could to receive them. Which
he did, with the best dissembled Countenance that possible he could; so that it
happened no notice was taken of the disorder he was in. From this time, his
great care was to mark, and observe all passages betwixt his poor innocent
Wife, and her reputed Paramour, who was a Boy, Son to a Tennant of his Ladies
Father, and having ever been bred up in the Family, was very dilligent in
observing his Masters and Mistress Commands; Every cast of an Eye was attended
on by the officious Henry (for that was his name) who little thought how dearly
he was, in a short time, to Suffer for the honest Testimonies of his Fidelity.
But not a gesture or motion, though never so innocent; and that before, past
only as instances, honest diligence; but now, by the Eyes of Iealousy, were
represented wanton, and as having a Lascivious tendence: Insomuch, that this
Humor rankling, and being fomented in the Heart of the wretched Cleander; it
rendered him incapable of receiving any real Satisfaction in any thing.
Therefore he determined now to enter into a final Consult with his Hellish
Informant, how to have this Oculer Demonstration, upon which, he resolved
immediately to dispatch the Objects of his Rage: She soon told him, That if he
only took his Cane and Gloves, and pretended a visit for three or four hours
time, and then made a short turn in the space of an hour, she would not fall to
be as good as her word; provided he only came in at the door (which she would
leave open) without knocking, and straight repair to his Chamber. To which he
having consented; and told his poor innocent Lady that he was going to see some
Friends, from whom he should not return until the Evening; putting on his
Rapier, he trent forth, taking no Servant with him. The tender Lady perceiving
her Husband gone forth, and having observed of late, a Cloud to sit on that
Brow, that always was wont to be serene and clear; being some what indisposed
went to her Chamber, and lay on her Bed, to Sigh away a fit of Melancholy, Now
was the cursed Maid to play her Game, which she did in this manner: Having (as
she was Governess of the House) commanded the poor distrustless Page to get up
into his Chamber, and exercise himself in his Writing; she had now Lodged her
Prey, and was ready, as soon as she could discern the Abused Cleander coming
home, to send him into her Ladies Chamber. This she had soon occasion to do,
for perceiving her Master at hand, she calls Henry; you must presently go to
your Mistress, who has an Errand to send you in: The poor Lad dispatches to
his Ladies Chamber; where she having given an account, that she called him not,
his Master met him just coming out of the door; and seeing his Lady on the bed;
without farther Examination, immediately runs him through; of which, he
presently dyed: then dragging the amazed Lady to the same place, he cast her on
the Page, and sent them together to Elisium. Thus were two Innocents most
barbarously Murdered, a most Honorable Family destroyed, and all by the
over-credulous Rashness of Cleander: who having the bare Suggestion of a
depraved and malicious Slut, most cruelly Butchered the most Loyal, Spotless,
and Indulgent Wife in the World; and sent a Ga^^less Page to attend her Ghost.
These Royal Sir, are the effects of misguided Passion, and blind Justice; that
strikes the blow without considering the Equity of the Cause. Let it suffice,
that Cleander afterward having destroyed his Peace, had this Hellish Wench on
the Rack, which Confessing the whole Truth in his presence, he immediately cut
out her Heart, and Stabbed himself; falling a Sacrifice to his own remediless
Rashness: And thereby giving occasion for this Epitaph, which afterward was set
on his Tomb.

Cleanders Epitaph.
THis Marble Weeps wretched Cleanders Fate;
Who saw his blinded Phrensy, when too late:
And vainly fell his Fault to Expiate.
Reader, beware of Femal's treacherous Tales,
Learn hence the dire Event, when Reason fails;
And blind, rash Passion Impiously prevails.
Thus Royal Sir, have I given Your Majesty the Relation of this Famous Story of
Padua, on which, if you please seriously to reflect, you will find it very
pertinent to the great Affair now in debate. Here was a soul Crime charged on
those that understood nothing but Innocence; a forward, and easy mistrust,
grounded on a Malicious Slander, and that vouched but by one Witness: the
Consequence whereof was an Act of Indeliverate, and unparalled Cruelty, wc
ended in the Destruction of an Honorable Family: But what would not the Knight
have given, when he once understood his Irreparable Error? what would he not
have suffered, to have retrieved his Loss, and the Murder of two Innocents?
But 'twas too late, the fatal Blow was given; and that Sword that had been
stained in the Blood of the Guiltless, by the same hand Revenged it on the
Guilty. I need make no farther Remarks on the Allusion of the Circumstances,
where so profound Wisdom is present, as could dive into much abstrucer points.
If what I have said avail to the Advantage of the excellent Erastus; so that a
rash Sentence may not pass against him, without the Debate of a full Senate,
which is most Consonant to the Honor, and Grandeur of the Potent'st Emperor in
the World: I have then the Answer of my Prayers. Thus, with a constant Gravity,
the Famous Enoscopos ended it is Learned Oration: Which wrought so effectually,
both on the Emperor, and many of the Senate there present; that for that day
his Request was granted.



CHAP. XV.
THe Emperor (as was said) having compiled with the Request of the Learned
Philosopher, at the instance of the Senators; and finding that he should always
be vexed with the Queens Importunities, whilst he continued in the same Palace
with her, Removed to a Castle he had about eighteen Miles out of the City;
leaving Orders with his Senators, that they should in the mean time Debate the
Affair of the Prince; and Act therein, as was agreeable to the Justice of the
Empire.

But who can think so easily to Evade the Crafts of an implacable Woman: As the
Poet Sings: So hard it is, where an old Grutch is
To get out of a Woman's Clutches.
For no sooner had Aphrodicea understood of the King's Progress, which was
taken without her privity; but though she had met with four Defeats of her
Serpentine wiles: She resolved to attempt the Fifth; intending that her Pen
should make a deeper Impression, than possible her words could before:
Therefore entering her Closet, and dropping some of the Verjuice of her Eyes
into her Standish; she wrote a Letter to the Emperor, to this effect.

The Letter.
Sir,
THough, contrary to the Laws of Honor, and Your Royal Contract, you have
Conveyed your self from your Palace, without permitting the Unfortunate
Aphrodicea to know of your Removal: Yet Your Majesty may be assured the Walls
of your Castle will prove too Weak a Fence against the Batteries of my Just
Importunities. Does any Story mention an Emperor (who ought to be the Standard
of Justice) that should four times violate his Sacred Promise, and that upon
one and the same Occasion: And especially, when for ought we know, his Life (or
at least his Honor, that ought to be much dearer) is so visibly Exposed
thereby? How ill does the Sovereign Diadem set on her Brow, that is denied the
Birthright of the meanest Vassal in Rome. Remember (Dioclesian) I say remember
the Burning Balls! But if you are still resolved to be led by the Nose by a
parcel of Threadbare Philosophers: I will once more enter my Memorial against
your irregular Proceedings, and Relate to Your Majesty, what happened to a
great Treasurer of Egypt, Who having a Riotous young Extravagant to his Son;
the too Indulgent Father took care forsooth, to breed him up in the Study of
Philosophy, and to that end committed him to the Care of such another crew of
worthy Tutors, as you disposed your Son unto: These, in short time, made even
with the good old Man's Estate, and reduced him to such a state of Poverty,
that he had not longer wherewithal to subsist: Therefore calling his young
Philosopher to Council, he advised with him, what were best to be done to
Conceal the shame of his Poverty from the World. The Lad having sufficiently
been Trained up in the science of Mischief, advises his Father to make some
secret Passage under Ground, in at the Foundation of a certain Tower, where the
Treasure of the Egyptian Kings was kept, and that from thence, they might
privately supply themselves, as often as Need required: Present Necessity made
every thing seem probable that presented it self; and therefore, without
farther debate, the old Treasurer sets upon the Enterprise, with his graceless
Son; who having found a Cave, not far from the Tower Wall, that formerly had
been the Habitation of a Hermit; they, through one side of this Vault, soon
wrought Access unto the Treasure: But the Crany being of so small Dimention,
that one Man could hardly, and with much difficulty enter it: The Father made a
shift to put himself in thereat, and conveyed thence so great a quantity of
Gold, as for a long time Maintained the Port of their Family. In short, this
Store was likewise spent, and a second Adventure must be made for a farther
Supply: The poor old Man once more puts himself into the Bilbo's, but not with
such Success as before: For by this time the Keepers of the Tower had
discovered, that some of the Treasure had been conveyed away; and as they
supposed by means of that Crevice, which they observed in the Wall: Therefore,
that they might make sure of their Prey, they fixed there so Artificial a Gin,
that whosoever was once got in, could by no means escape therefrom with Life:
This the old Treasurer soon perceived (for he was taken in the Toil) and it
being impossible for the young Man to bring him off alive; he most unnaturally
put an end to that Life that had given him his; by taking off his Fathers Head:
Which he did, that the Officers not knowing the Body, the Surviving Family
might escape that Severity, that otherwise the Law would have inflicted on
them, for an Offense so heinous. But his Wickedness ended not here, for
returning home, and knowing his Mother had been privy to the Theft; doubting
her weakness might some time or other betray the Treason, he most inhumanly
knocked her on the Head. Here Mighty Prince, you have a plain Demonstration of
what must be expected from a Son Educated amongst Philosophers: They only wait
to see you in the Snare, and you will soon fare as the old Treasurer; and as
for me, I shall soon follow you in Fate; which indeed is the only Consideration
that affords me any Comfort. For what Pleasure is it possible the wretched
Aphrodicea can be capable of, after the Murder of the unwary Dioclesian. What
shall I say my Dear Lord? must I then be the Contempt of the whole World,
whilst Foreign Princes deride; and my own Subjects despise my Misfortune? I
have taken the boldness thus once more to cast my self at Your Royal Feet, not
doubting, but your Natural Inclinations to the Common Justice, will not permit
you any longer to deny a due Reparation to the Honor of the most Unfortunate

Aphrodicea.


This Letter having Signed with her privy Signet, she gave to one of her
Bedchamber, to be speedily delivered to the Emperor; which accordingly being
performed: Dioclesian, at the perusal of it, was like one at the violent return
of a Feavor Fit; for though his absence from her perpetual Clamours, had
procured him a tolerable good Settlement of Mind, and the Fervor of his
Passion intermitted; yet as soon as he had perused this Paper, it presently set
him all in a Flame. So that immediately calling for Pen and Ink, he, with his
own Hand, wrote an Order to the Captain of his Guard, to deal with Erastus
according to the pleasure of Aphrodicea; for that he had wholly put that Affair
under her Determination: And Sealing it with his Royal Signet, he sent it back
by the same Messenger.



CHAP. XVI.
But as these things could not be so secretly managed, but that the Sages had
Intelligence thereof: The tender Philantropus, who was to Obviate the Fifth
Sentence against the most Innocent Prince; very early in the Morning pressing
through the Guards, who had great veneration for him; and perhaps some regard
to the preservation of the most to be Lamented Erastus: It matters not much
upon what occasion, but the resolute Philosopher having got to the Royal
Presence (depending perhaps on the Friendship of the Stars) he gave not leave
to the Emperor, to muster up his Passion, by the usual method of telling him
his resentments, or displeasure; but to prevent the gathering of that Storm, He
presently throws himself on the Ground, and in a posture that testified the
greatest transport of extreme Sorrow: He began with most admirable Eloquence to
bewail the Ruin, both of the Emperor, and the Empire, in a Language so
Charming, so vigorous force of Reason; that Dioclesian himself thought nothing
less than Marble could be unmoved at it. What, said the compassionate
Philantropus, and is it the inevitable Misfortune of Crowned Heads to be thus
prejudiced, and blinded by the most inhumane, cruel, barbarous, and perfidious
Sex! Cannot the Sacred Diadem, nor the Interest of the Empire (in which their
own is concerned) prevent this Blanket-Dominion? Sad Fate of Monarchy! Consider
most Excellent Emperor; but what it is you have Signed, and at whose Instance;
and you will doubtless see the greatest Reason in the World, to retract a
Determination so directly opposite to your own Royal Interest, and the Honor
of the Roman Empire. Must the most Illustrious, and only Branch of your
Princely Stock; the only Hope of the Empire; the most accomplished, and
greatest Example of Heroic Virtue, be Sacrifized to the Lust, Malice, and
Designs of an insatiate Woman? The most Sovereign Justice of the Gods forbid
it! One would have thought, the sad Instances my Brethren had given Your
Majesty of the Constant Treachery of that Sex, might at least have tied Your
Majesty to your Promise of having the Matter debated in full Senate! Which I am
apt to believe, would sound much more for the Honor of Dioclesian's Justice,
and the privileges of the Roman Senate, than thus rashly; and, as it were, by
your own Hand, to cut off one, whom the Gods have destined to give Laws to
Mankind; and not only Subjugate Kingdoms, but Hearts to the Roman Yoke. I shall
only make bold to refresh your Royal Remembrance, with one or two Stories of
the Subtilty, and unmatcht Cruelty of Womankind; that when you have taken a
view of them in their own Actions; you may be the better Induced not to comply
with their Flatteries. And because what I am going to say, is so generally
known, I shall give Your Imperial Majesty the less trouble; and will only give
a hint. The first shall be of Cleander; whose unchaste Wife frequenting Night
Debauches, whilst her Husband was Sacrifizing to Morpheus; she had blinded his
Intellect with frequent Excuses for her absence, which was often perceived by
her Husband, and he, as often, had his Credulity Imposed on, by her sophistical
Shams and Evasions. But one Night, having a more than ordinary mistrust, he
goes down out of his Bed, and makes the Door fast on the inside; which the
loose Harlot perceiving, at her return from her night ramble, made many
Entreaties to her Husband to open the Door, that she might not be Apprehended
by the Watch: For such was the strictness of that City, that whosoever was
taken by them in their Rounds, were most Ignomiously exposed to the Public,
for Persons incontinent, and vicious Livers: The old Man thinking this little
Severity might Correct the head of her Inclinations, seemed to defer giving her
Admittance, and would have wrought her into a Promise of Reformation: When the
subtle Courtezan ran to a Well there adjoining; and casting in a great Stone,
made the over-credulous Husband believe, that she had thrown her self into it;
whilst indeed she only conveyed her self behind the Porch: The poor Husband
runs to the Well like a Man in distraction, calling on his Wife; and letting
down the Bucket, in order to preserve her from perishing; cursing himself, that
he had so much urged on her patience, to bring her to so miserable and shameful
an end. In fine, the Man having tired himself with fruitless Lamentations, and
being almost starved with cold, having only his Shirt on; and now concluding
his Wife buried in the Water, was in great Sorrow returning to his Bed, when,
to his great Surprizal he found the Door shut against him. What shall I say? It
was now the implacable Fiend's part to play; which she did to purpose; for a
thousand importunities, and protestations of the truth of his Intentions could
not prevail with her; she was deaf to all, kept him in the street till the
Watch came, and there Accused the Innocent old Man of Ribaldry, and
Incontinency to the Officers; charging, and loading him with a thousand Crimes
that he knew not of. Thus was this Abused Man carried to a cold Prison, and
having passed the Night in incredible Misery, was he next day set in the
Pillory to the great Astonishment of the Citizens, who had known him a Person
of a long, and unblemish. Reputation. Thus was the shameless Harlot permitted
to Triumph in her Diabolical Revenge on her Honest and Immaculate Husband; here
is Female Craft and Malice to the height exalted: The Moral of which, I shall
humbly submit to your most Serene Majesty's Consideration; not doubting but it
may produce in Your Royal Breast, a Resolution of Relinguishing the Influences
of that Treacherous Sex And I shall humbly crave Your Princely Pardon to refer
the Recital of my other Instance to the next Chapter.



CHAP. XVII.
THe Emperor being somewhat wrought upon by the former Relation of Philantropus
was very Attentive for the second; which the Philosopher thus began. Should I,
most Mighty Emperor, undertake to set out the Frauds of evil Women, time would
fail me, for there is no end of their Treachery; however, I shall make one
short Instance more to confirm what I have Asserted: It is said, The Governor
of Morocco had a Wife so Fair, that he feared the Power of her Beauty would
make Prise of all she looked on; to prevent which, he prepared a very rich
Apartment for her in a Tower he had standing in a Wilderness near his Palace,
the Cituation of it was exceeding Pleasant, standing amongst Groves of Myrtle,
and Fountains of most Admirable Work: nor wonted it the most rich and splendid
Lining, for Guilding, Painting, Tapestry, curious Beds, abundance of Plate,
with Aviaries of most Melodious Birds, that made the Air Echo with their
warbling Music: She had Maids and Eunuchs in very rich Liveries to Attend her;
and was Carressed with all the Charming Daliances of a King's Mistress. Yet
amongst all these Splendid Entertainments, she was Unpleasant, Sullen, and
Unsatisfied; for the Governor himself kept the Key of this Enchanted Castle,
never permitting her to come forth, but on some particular days; and that only
in his own Presence; nor admitting any to the sight of her but her own Servants
beforementioned. Yet it so happened, that one day at a Tilting, the Governor
having set her by him under a rich Pavillion, she was observed by a young Lord
of Greece, who, at first sight, took the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy to
her Beauty; and after performing things beyond the power of belief in Honor of
her: But it was a long time, and cost him many a tiresome Night before he could
understand how it was possible for him to let her understand his Passion; till
at last, having understood of her strict Confinement to this Tower, he took a
House of a great Courtiers, who was gone beyond Sea on an Embasy; which House
stood void, and on one side of this pleasant Wilderness: So that having
Furnished his new House very Richly, and fallen into some Acquaintance with the
Governor, whom he often Treated with a Magnificence, more agreeable to a great
Prince, than a private Nobleman; he began to consider how he might accomplish
his Project, and Arrive to the Enjoyment of the Adored Idea of his Love:
Consulting therefore the most advantageous Windows of his Lodging; he at last
observed a Casement that fronted directly over a Walk to the Window of this
Recluses Closet: So that sometimes by the advantage of the Sun, he could show
himself to her, and observe her G^sture (which as yet was all the Language that
passed) thereupon. To be short, it was come thus far, that when a Rose was
showed out at his Window, another would peep out of hers; if he sometimes with
his Looking G^ass Darted the Sunbeams into her Closet, she would give his
Chamber a Reflection of the same Divertisement; so that now there wanted
nothing but a nearer Access to their being inwardly Acquainted. In order to
this, a way was found to dig a passage from a Vault under his House, through
the Foundation of the Governors Garden-wall; which being well managed, obtained
a Secret Entrance at the Root of a great Pepler Tree, standing, by a Brook, in
a very obscure part of the Wilderness: This Tree being hollow, proved the most
Advantageous to the furtherance of their Designs imaginable. For one Evening,
observing the Coast to be clear, and his Saint at her Window-devotion, he fixed
a Paper to the end of a Thread, and gently letting it slide out at the
Casement, would, in her sight, draw it up again; so that often repeating the
Signal, she became instructed, That it would be needful for her to hang a
Thread to her closet Window; which having done, our young Gallant took the
occasion to pass through his Loop hole, and fasten a French gilded Paper
(sealed with perfumed Wax, having the Impression of a wounded Heart) to the end
of the string: So the Fish having took the Hook, was soon Landed in the Fair
Hand of the Amorous Lady, who having opened it, found therein these Verses.

HOw unhappy a Lover am I!
Thus to Sigh for my Phili^s in Vain,
All my hope of Delight, is another Man's Right,
Who is Happy, whilst I am in Pain.
But were the vast Rocks thy strong Tower,
I would rend their tough Cement in sunder,
And force my dear Saint from her Bower,
Or I Would borrow of Vulcane his Thunder.
She having read this Rapture, and performed all those Solemnities to the
Paper, that Lovesick Nimphs are wont, took an occasion to drop another in
return, the inside whereof contained this:

Sir,
I Have no Vein in Poetry, and therefore must crave leave to thank you for your
extraordinary Passion in Prose; and that I may the sooner have an opportunity
to do it, do you wear the enclosed Signet in my Husbands presence, and with all
possible speed let me have it again: If the project take, you may in short time
make me the happy, who am now the Unfortunate

Cloe.


The Transported Greek having received this first Pledge of her Affection, laid
it next his Heart, and making a hundred Cringes to his Idol, hasted through his
Conny-berry, to understand the Pleasure of his Goddess. He had no sooner read
it, but on goes the Ring, and the guilt Coach is immediately made ready; not a
Page but had his best Embroidered Livery: in this Equipage, two stately white
Flanders Mares rattle him to the Gate of the Court, where having understood,
that the Governor was at a Gaming Ordinary at the other end of the Town, he
orders his Coach to drive thither; and going into the Room, after passing the
usual Complements, the Tables were took in hand, and consequently the Ring
displaid it self to the Eye of the Governor; who being much surprised with
Apprehension, that it was a Ring he had given his Lady; and suspecting that it
might be Feloniously come by, was almost at his Wits end; his Countenance
changed, his Breath grew short, and he was very near falling into a Swoon; but
at last, considering that it might be a mistake, he made enquiry of the young
Grecian, where that Ring might have been bought; who returning, that it had
been given him by his Father: The Governor, at that time, made no farther
Appearance of being uneasy. Some Guinnies having been got and lost between the
Gamsters, and plenty of Bottles emptied; the Grecian took leave of the
Governor, leaving him in company with some Nobles, who intended to pass the
rest of the Night in a Ball. In the mean time, our Tower-Lady having nothing on
but a Damask night Gown, was at her post, expecting the Result of her Lovers
Enterprise: And it was not long e're, by the Moonlight, she perceived her good
Angel under the Window; who having fastened the Ring to the Thread, gave his
Mistress a fair opportunity to make the best of her Stratagem on the deluded
Governor; which she did in this manner: For he was no sooner returned the next
Morning to his Palace, but immediately he makes to his Ladies Chamber, and
seeing the suspected Ring on her Finger; withal, observing the exact
Resemblance in all things, between that, and what he had lately seen on the
young Lords Hand; it put him upon some strange Considerations, which occasioned
a more than ordinary Melancholy on his Forehead. The Lady, according to the
true method of Woman-craft, taking notice thereof; and being seemingly
inquisitive of the cause of it: After he had, with some pretenses, excused
himself; at length acknowledged he had been surprised to see a Ring so (in all
things) alike hers, worn by a Gentleman of his Acquaintance; but withal, told
her, That he was sat^sfied they might both be made by one and the same
Workman. Nay Sir, replied the Gipsy, you will have but little reason to wonder
at a resemblance of this kind in things Inanimate, which may be formed to any
figure, or proportion the Artest pleases, for, if I am not misinformed, there
is lately Arrived at the young Grecian Lords House, a Lady much resembling my
self, who has a little Dog so like mine, that it is impossible to know them
one from the other: That is somewhat strange, said the Governor; but I will
endeavor to satisfy my self in that point, in a little time. In short, this
was but an Artifice of the Woman's, the sooner to accomplish the Enjoyment of
her Adored Grecian: So that as soon as the Governor had left her, she gave the
signal, and dropped a Note out of her Window, contain^ng what you may read in the
following discourse.

THe Plot of the Ring has so well Succeeded, that if you can procure a Gally
to Convey you into your own Country; I have laid a Design that will infallibly
give you the opportunity of taking me along with you; for as soon as I have
Notice that a Yessel is ready, I will convey my self by the Window, which is
toward the private Passage you have made into your Lodging; and there put such
a Device in Execution, as shall not fail to Accomplish our Mutual Desires. In
the mean time, be sure, as soon as you have secured a Vessel, Invite the
Governor to Dine with you the day following,

Eraspe.


For that was the then Queen of Morocco's Name. The Grecian presently got to
the Port, and finding there one of the Gallys of his own Country newly Arrived,
he hired it for his Service, and ordered the Men to be in readiness the next
Morning, to put to Sea as he should command them. This being dispatched, he
presently Applies himself to the King, acquainting him, That upon some
Important Notice he had lately received from his own Country, he must crave his
Majesty's leave to depart, and invest himself with a principallity lately
fallen to him; and that a Vessel was ready in the Port to attend him. Only he
prayed the King, that, for the many Favors he had conferred upon him, it would
please his Highness to accept of a Dinner with him the day following; which the
good King accepting, and withal, testifying great Sorrow for the Loss of a
person he had so great a Value for. As for this Grecian Prince, they parted for
that time: this being soon signified to the Queen, she put all things in
readiness for the next Morning; giving Notice to her Paramour, That he should
expect her at the Foot of the Pepler Tree in the Garden. The King in the
Morning, considering he was that day to Dine with, and take his leave of his
great Favorite the young Grecian Lord, went early to see the Queen, and
acquainted her, he was to Dine abroad that day, and that she was not to expect
him until the Evening: from thence, he went to the Council Chamger, to give
Order for the dispatches of that day. He had no sooner left the Queen, but she
placing her self, and her Dog in a Basket, fastened by a little Pully on the
outside of the Window, and holding by the Cord, gently let her self down into
the Garden; and by the young Lord was conveyed through the private Passage into
his Lodging; and being got into hiss Closet, with his help, was put into the
Habit of a Grecian Lady, richly Adorned with costly Jewels; and the Plot laid,
that the young Grecian was to Affirm her to be a Sweetheart of his, in their
own Country; who, for Love of him, had come over the Sea to Marry him. Things
being thus ordered; at last comes the Governor, with some of his Nobles, to
take their Farewell of the Famous young Grecian Lord; who having received them,
with all imaginable demonstrations of Gallantry; at last, expressed himself to
the King after this manner.

Mighty Prince, since my coming to Morocco, I have daily had such Experience of
your Royal Goodness and Favor; that I esteem my poor Life too mean an
acknowledgement for such high Obligations. But since a Royal Patrimony in
Greece calls for me; and here is lately Arrived a Lady of singular Quality and
Perfection, who, being bred up with me, has sought me in diverse Courts, and is
resolved, for the Love of my Person, to run all Hazard^ in my company.
Therefore I am resolved, before I go to the Gally, to Celebra^^ the Hymeneal
Rights; and if it please You^ Majesty to give her to me in Marriage with Your
Royal Hand, I shall receive (...) as the greatest Adition to your Princel^
Favors. The good King was easily prevailed with, to comply with any thing th^^
might testify his great Respects to the youn^ Grecian; especially in a matter
of this Importance: So that the young Lord immediately leading his Lady into
the Room where the Princes of Morocco were; they were, on the sudden, much
surprised at the appearance of so excellent Beauty, so splendidly Adorned: the
King, the more he looked on her, fancying he saw his own Queen but that the
Secureness of his Tower, an^ the discourse his Wife had made to him o^ a Lady
at this Grecians Lodging, that had so great Resemblance with her; besides the
likeness of the Kings. These things running in his thoughts, fixed, in his
imagination, the strongest conceit of resemblance, and parity you can imagine.
But the Prie^^ being come, the King gave the Bride (...) Marriage; and after
the Solemnity, they were Treated at a most Magnificent Dinner; but nothing
Feasted them more, than the deligate and charming Behavior of the ^ride, which
was so full of Attracti^n, that ^ll present, became Tributary to her Beau^^y.
The Music, all the time, entertained their Ears with an excellent Consort,
some^imes of Viols, sometimes of Voices, with ^he best Songs for that occasi^n;
until a Messenger, from the Gally, acq^ainted the Brid^groom it was time to put
to Sea; which immediately the^ did, and going into ^he King's Coach, he in
Person accompani^d them to the Vessel, where Embracing ^he young Grecian and
^is Lady; and ma^ing them many rich Presents, according to ^is Quality, the
Nobles also pa^ing them ^reat Acknowledgement, they Embarked in ^he Gally, and
were quickly out of sight; ^ut all the while they were in view, the ^ing, and
his Princes were drinking to their Bon-Voyage on the Strand, often ^iscoursing
of the extraordinary Qualificati^ns of the Bridegroom, and the surpassing
Beauty of the Bride. The Ship out of ^^ght, the King hastens to his Tower, to
ac^^uaint his Queen of the Wonders he had ^een that day; and that the Grecian
Lady ^ery much resembled her, as she had told ^im; but being come into the
Chamber, the ^retched King could see nothing but forsaken Walls, and an open
Casement, b^ which, he might easily conjecture which way the Bird was flown: So
that looking out at the forlorn Window, a sudden Giddiness seized him, that his
Senses failing, he fell over to the Ground, and miserably Dyed. Think now
Mighty Dioclesian, sai^ the Learned Philantropus, What Credi^ is to be given to
a Vicious Lacivious Woman: And let the excellent Discourses you^ have had of
this kind, prevail^ with You^ Imperial Clemency, to forbear the dreadful
Sentence against the Incomparable Erastus, until the Matter be fully debated
before the Senate, lest, too late, you repen^ your over Credulity and Rashness.
The Emperor thanking the Philosopher for hi^ seasonable Advice; promised to
follow it; and dismissed him with a considerable Reward.



CHAP. XVIII.
NOw was the Implacable Aphrodicea in the greatest extremity of Rage, and
Confusion; having still been defeated of her Hellish Purposes, and Designs on
the Person of the Incomparable Erastus: For the High Sheriff of the City,
during Dioclesian's Retirement, had took occasion to visit a Country House, he
had some Forty Miles from Rome; so that the King's Warrant came not to his
hand, until the day after; when the Emperor, by the Interposition of
Philantropus, had recalled his Sentence, with resolution to put the whole
Matter under the determination of the Senate. This, as we said, was so great a
disapointment to the Diabollical Queen, that she ordared a Train of Coaches,
and Wagons, with a great Retinue, which were in readiness to have removed her
into the Territories of her own Relations; when the Astonished Emperor Arriving
from his Country Palace, was much surprised at so strange an Equipage; and
Admiring what it meant, was informed by a Courtier, that had marked the whole
proceeding, That the Empress was moving her self out of the Dominions of
Dioclesian; pretending she could not have. Justice, in the satisfaction her
Honor claimed on Erastus, for (as she called it) his Inhumane and Traitorous
Attempt upon her Person: Thus many times are the most Hellish Designs, and such
as would have the most savage Sythians blush, Varnished with the shinning Laere
of Justice, and Honor. This was now the last Card she had to Play; and
therefore, with all imaginable Cunning, she acted the Counter-part of an
Innocent Person, that lay under the greatest Injuries, Violences, Indignities,
and Abuses that Injustice it self, or the greatest Misfortunes could possibly
Expose her to: Often would she beat her Breast with her hand, and discharge such
Vollies of Sobs and Sighs, as if her Heart, a Prisoner there, would force its
way out of its Irksom Lodging: So that the Deluded Dioclesian finding her on
the Ground in this miserable plight, being naturally Compassionate, especially
to Objects of this kind, which are certainly the most moving, and
Heart-wounding Language in the World: The abused Emperor lifted her up in his
Arms, and mingling his Tears with hers, promised the next Morning to put an
end to the Cause of her Sorrow and Affliction; and therefore gave Order to the
Servants to bring in the Trunks that had been laid in the Carriages; and
spending the Afternoon in drying the Queens Eyes, he gave her opportunity to
insinuate her Treasons, to that degree, that he believed her the most Innocent,
and Abused of Women, and himself Designed upon by the Philosophers, who (now he
doubted not) had contrived to Depose him, and set up their Tool Erastus in his
stead: It Is strange that the Poison of one base Woman's Rage, and Revenge should
spread so far; but no doubt the Devil that set her on work, had furnished her
with Councellers, and Abettors of her Designs: Since Princes Courts have never
wanted such, as for Covetousness, or Ambition, would not stick at the most
Execrable Villainies. But leaving them to their last Act; hugging themselves,
in hope that their cursed Plot had took Effect; we shall now begin to draw our
Tragedy to a Conclusion, and show you, by the following Example, the admirable,
and stupendous Care, that Heaven takes of the Innocent; and how certainly, in
due time, it detects, and brings to Justice, the most Potent, and Politic
Contrivers of Mischief.



CHAP. XIX.
NOw was the Morning come of that which was designed to have been one of the
blackest, and foulest that ever the bright Eye of Heaven had looked upon: The
Guards were ready, the honest Citizens and Senators in Tears, and great
Confusion, apprehending the fatal Consequences of that Bloody day: The Emperor,
in the greatest Transport of blinded Rage, resolved (as he thought) to put an
end to the Fears that attend Crowned, Hends, especially when they are Imposed
upon, by the Malignant Influences of Beauty, and Woman-craft: The Empress, and
her Ladies dressed in their greatest Bravery, her Priests kindling the Fire on
the Altar, to sing Te Deum at the cursed Stroke: The Innocent Prince Adorned
with all the Beauties of shining Virtue; and Moral Gallantry, despising the
worst Potent Envy, and Malice could Attempt upon him, and with most Heroic
Magnanimity braving Death it self. All things were thus ready for the most
Inhumane Act: When the Philosopher Lencus have urged through the Guards, who
gave him easy passage, being desirous the Prince might not Fall by suggestions
of Treachery, or Malice: Lencus threw himself at the Emperors Feet, and
delivered him a Paper, whereon was Written to this Effect; THe Gods to Morrow
by Six of the Clock,
Will Prince Erastus Lips unlock;
Then Dioclesian shall know,
Who is his Friend, and who his Foe:
Therefore the Heavens bid thee stay,
The Sentence of thy Rage this day;
Or thy neglect, thy Crown shall pay.
The Emperor startled at this Oraculous way of Writing, and strangely Ravished
with the News of his Son's returning to Speech; immediately sent express Order
to the Captain of the Guard to stop the Sentence until farther Order; and
calling for the Philosopher, said thus unto him. Lencus, the Execution of
Justice has been often prevented by you, and your fellows, and it may be out
of some design; but be assured, if Erastus do not speak by to Morrow Six of the
Clock, you shall All run the same Fate with him; to which, the Philosopher
replied, I receive Your Majesty's Determination with all Submission. And
although these Learned Men that have Attended Your Imperial Majesty before me,
on the same Occasion, have recited many excellent Stories, setting forth the
Baseness, and Treachery of a Deceitful Woman, and Confirmed them with diverse
Tragical Examples, of the Falseness, and Cruelty of that Implacable ^^ex: I do,
with all Humility, return Your Majesty thanks for your favorable retracting
your Royal Sentence this day, and humbly Crave leave by one Example more, to
Evince to Your Highness what my Brethren have Insisted upon, until to Morrow
shall Convince you, beyond the Power of Suspicion. Whereupon the Emperor
commanding him, he thus proceeded: Mighty Sir, the Story of the Ephesian Lady
is so noted, being recited in diverse Authors, that I shall be much the briefer
in my Retion of it. She had buried her Husband somewhat near the City,
according to the custom of that Country, and had built a little Room in the
Sepulcher, where she intended (with the greatest Mortification that was ever
heard of) to finish the rest of her Life in the company of that beloved Corpse:
She had not been long a Recluse in this Extravagant manner, when a Malefactor
that had been Executed, was hung not far from this Tomb; the custom of Ephesus
being to have the Body of the Malefactor watched by a Soldier for some certain
days, that it might be exposed to the greater Terror of others; and if it
happened to be stolen from the Gibbet, then the Sentinel was to be hung in the
room of the Criminal. The Weather being cold, and the Sentinel perceiving a
Light not far from him, it being Night, drew toward it; and coming to the Door
of the Sepulcher, craved entrance: the half Mortified Widow demanding who he
was, was Answered; I am a Soldier, set by Order of the Council, to Guard the
Body of a Malefactor Executed here this Morning, for Subordination; but the
Night being so extreme cold, I know not why it may not be esteemed as great
Charity in your Ladyship, as well to admit the Living into your company, as to
afford your company to the Dead. The Woman opened the Door, and received the
Soldier, who might soon perceive the Tide of her Sorrows; give way to some
other Contemplations; she was content to exchange Glances with him, and
permitted him to Entertain her with his discourse; which you may imagine to be
such, as brisk young Sons of Mars entertain handsome Women withal. In short,
she began to be weary of her Dead Companion, and to apprehend, that the Society
of a Living one might be more agreeable; she was prevailled with to take a
dragme of his Bottle, the Air of that place being somewhat raw, and damp; so
that a brisk Gayity began to show in her Face: in this pleasant Company the
Red-coat passed so much time, that returning to his Charge, he found the Body
gone indeed; so that being half Distracted, he returned to the disconsolate
Widow, desiring once again to be admitted into that lonely Vault, which was
soon granted; and acquainting her of his ill circumstances, by reason the Corpse
of the Criminal had been removed; there might be perceived, in his Countenance,
an Aspect, much more dismal than what the Widow had put on, when she shut up
her self with her Dead Husband. The Woman seeing him in this sad dumps, began
to entertain some Fears, lest she should lose her new Gallant, in the Porch of
her Expectations; and having, according to the Faculty of that Sex, a quick
Invention in the Nick of Exegent, she began thus to Salve his Sorrows, Soldier
(said she) be not dismayed; she that is willing to Exchange a Dead Husband for a
Living, need never a better occasion to accomplish her desires: Behold, the
Carcass of my Dead Husband is at your Devotion, as well as the Body of his
Living Widow, who is now resolved to lose no more of her Juice in fruitlesly
bewailing an unprofitable Cavaver, but to reserve it for the allaying your
Amorous Heats (my Dear Soldier) said she; and Embracing him, began to Fan away
the Sorrows from his Cheeks, take this loathsome Trunk then, and hang it in the
room of the Fellon; and glad am I, the old Villain serves to so good use. Dear
Madam, replied the Sentinel, the Executioner will soon discover the Cheat; for
the Body of the Thief wanted a Leg, and an Arm; besides, his Ears were cropped,
and his Genitals cut off; And is it then so difficult (said she) to reduce this
Corpse to the same form? And taking his Cimetar, she chopped off a Leg, and Arm;
and with his Knife, cropped and lopt the Premises; giving thereby a most signal
Testimony of Female Constancy, and Affection: Now, said she, dear Sentinel, we
have naught to do, but to hang up this Cripple, and Entertain our selves with
Enjoyments suitable to the Living. I will rather hang up my self, said he, than
be Joined to a Woman so Infamous; she that can offer such Violence to the Body
of a Dead Husband will be ready to do so to the Living, for a fresh Gallant:
And so hasted out of the Sepulcher; leaving her to bewail the effect of ^er
Cruelty, and disappointment of her Lust.

Can any thing be more frequent in Histo^y, or Observation, than the Frands,
Gulls, and Shams of insatiate Women? But I shall now give Your Highness no
^arther trouble, but leave the proof of what (...) have said, unto to Morrow;
repeating ^gain my most Humble Thanks to Your Majesty for this days Reversion
of the Princes Sentence; for the which, you will ^ave cause to make the Altars
of the Gods ^o Smoke.



CHAP. XX.
NOw had the Glorious Morn to this Propitious day, put on her Rosy Mantoa,
spotted with Gold; and dressed the Sky in a gilded Tapestry, expressing the
happy Success of that day: She no sooner peept out at the Eastern Windows, but
she was Saluted with all the Harmony of the Aerie Quire; which made the Groves,
and Valleys Echo to their shrill Music; whilst the purling Streams Danced the
Hayes, in winding Meanders to the well Tuned Consort. Such a beauteous Serenity
might be observed, as if Universal Nature had put on her best Apparel, and
utmost Gayity: When the Incomparable Erastus, Dres'd in his Native Innocence,
and Acquired Excellencies (with unmatch't Luster, Out-shined the Splendour of
the others Glories; and seemed a Diety, for whose Entertainment, the other
Pomps had been prepared) came Attended with his Guard, and his Faithful Tutors,
to the Gate of the Royal Palace, demanding Admittance to his Princely Father.
What shall I say! Down fell the Iron Gates; the Guards were Petrified, Estonied
at the Majesty of the Presence, and ^he Charming Oratory of every Accent: every
Eye was Ravished, every Heart Transported at the All-conquering Pre^ence of
such Admired Perfection; All struck ^umb with Joy, at the Opening of his Lips,
and with Excess of Affection to his Princely Person: A Conquering Sweetness
showed ^n every Gesture; and a Commanding Maje^^y dwelt upon his Lips. Being in
the ^reat Hall of the Palace, the Seven Ma^ters persuaded him, not suddenly to
show himself to the Emperor, lest a Violent Excess of Joy should prejudice him:
Therefore the Philosopher, that last waited upon Dioclesian, went to his
Dressing-Chamber, where the Emperor was making ready to Enquire of Matters; and
acquainted him, That the Innocent Erastus was now come to Compurgate himself of
the Horrid Crimes, and Treasons, that Hellish Malice had laid to his Charge:
But desired, that, before the Enterview, His Imperial Majesty would prepare
himself for the Reception of so Violent a Joy, by admitting some Music to
Usher that surprising Welcome. The Kings Violius were called in, and one of
them sung a most incomparable Song, much like that of Young Jemmy; some think
the Latter to be but a Translation of it. Then appeared the most Abused Son and
Disabused the most deluded Father^ when casting himself at the Feet of
Dioclesian, and kissing his Royal Knees: The Gods Great Sir (said he) will not
always permit the Innocent to be Unfortunate -- and would have uttered much
more, but the Overjoyed Emperor stopped his Mouth will a Torrent of Tears, that
fell from his Royal Eyes on the Princes Cheeks. But whilst Father and Son were
in this Ecstasy, all the Emperors Apartment was filled with Joyful Throngs of
Honest Senators, and Citizens; which made the Palace Ring again with their
loud Acclamations. This Music Awaked Aphrodicea, who Enquiring the meaning of
that Noise, was answered by one of her Bedchamber, That it was Prince Erastus,
who was now come to Compurgate himself to his Father; and was by the Emperor
received with the highest Carresses imaginable: She therefore, to save the
Hangman a labor, sent for her Confessor; who having given her Absolution, and
Tallow'd her for a long Voyage; she dexterously cut her own Throat, before the
Kings Guards were come in to Seize her, in order for her Trial. This being
understood by the now convinced Dioclesian, she was privately Buried in Flora's
Chapel; all her Courtiers, Secretaries, and great Officers, escaping, as well
as they could, the Storm Impending. One of her Ladies, that used to Lie with
the Queen, the Prince would needs have uncloathed in the Royal Presence, who
appearing to be a Man, gave a sufficient Testimony of his Mistresses Morals.
Dioclesian asked his Sons Forgiveness, for having Distrusted, and Abused such
unparalleled Innocence; he Crowned him King of the Romans in full Senate,
Preferred the Seven Excellent Philosophers, highly approving their Learning,
Courage, and Fidelity: Ordered general Oblations to be made, and Sacrifice paid
so the Supreme Justice, that had Miraculously Saved him a Son, and the Empire a
Prince; and one of such Excellencies, as the World could not show his Parallel.
Many days were spent in the City, and Country, in public Triumphs, and
Magnificencies; and to this day there is, or ^ught to be, an Aniversary
observed in Memory of the Incomparable Erastus.

A Supplement To the LIFE of Prince Erastus. By the same Hand.
HItherto we have Related the great Misfortunes (if we may so call the Trial of
Heroic Virtue) that attended the excellent Erastus; and it is admirable to
Consider, with what Impudence, the most bloody Malice, and damned Hypocrisy,
dare Magnify themselves in the Courts of the greatest Monarchs; What, Mighty
Patrons the grossest Injustice, and vilest Conspiracies shall meet withal! One
would have thought it impossible for all the Fiends of Hell, to have laid such
a Train of Mischief against the Innocent, as this Hellish Woman had contrived
against this unparalleled Prince? To have Chastity branded with Incontinence;
nay a Rape, the most Loyal Son, and Subject; reputed a Rebel, and Undutiful.
The Valiant proclaimed a Coward; and that Prince, whose incomparable Gallantry
had signalized him to the whole World, to be Rediculed, Traduced, and
impudently Aspersed? Is this the Fate of the Generous, and Heroic; the
Virtuous, and the Brave? Or is it so dangerous for Princes to keep themselves
unsullied from the Taint of Debauchery, and the modish Vices of the Court? But
it is now high time to turn the Scale, and acquaint you with the Glorious
Sunshine that succeeded this Storm, and the happy Serenity that ensued upon
this Tempestuous Morning. The Joy of the Transported Romans had now over-slown
the Banks of their own Tyber, and sent the happy News of Erastus's Deliverance
into the remoter Parts of the Empire: So that all the depending Princes sent
their great Ambassadors to Congratulate, and Compliment on so Extraordinary an
Occasion. Nor were the Triumphs, and public demonstrations of Joy, confined
within the Walls of Rome; but had diffused and spread themselves over the Face
of all the Provinces: So that, by the many Bonfires (which in the Night
Inlightend the Air, as if they designed, by Art, to lengthen out the happy day,
beyond its natural Allowance) you would have thought they had Sacrifized whole
Cites for the good Fortune of their Prince. Nothing was omitted that might
testify the Universal Satisfaction, they received in his so wonderful
Preservation. In the midst of these Transports, and general Acclamations, the
good Dioclesian (Surfeited with an Ecstasy of Joy) makes a journey to Jupiter,
and resigns the Roman Empire to his Countries Royal Patron, Erastus.

After the Rites of the Old Emperor's Funeral were performed (which were done
with a Pomp suitable to the Grandeur of his High Dignity) there appeared
another Scene of Triumph; for now came the Coronation of the Darling of his
Country, the Incomparable Erastus.

The Senate (who had ever born a just Respect to the Character, and Virtues of
the Heroic Erastus) now thought they had a sufficient Opportunity, both to
signalize their Loyalty to their Prince, and Invest themselves in the
Affections of the Romans; by setting the Imperial Diadem on the Head of the
most deserving of Princes: One, whose Valor, Patience, Allegiance, and
Firmness to the Interest of the Empire, had sufficiently Entitled him to the
Monarchy of their Hearts.

All things were now set in order to carry on the Magnificence of that Glorious
day; Triumphal Arches were Erected, where, in excellent Figures, were
represented, the several Studies, and Exercises the Prince had been Trained up
in his Minority: Some were Logical, some Mathematical, some Geographical; some
showed his admirable Horse-manship, and his excellent Dexterity in the use of
the Sword and Spear; wherein Fame proclaimed him to Excel any Prince Alive in
his time. But above all, near the Palace of the Empress, they had ordered a
Colossus to be set up, whereon, in large Figures, were Carved, the manner of
the Queens Scratching her self, when she pretended, the Prince would have
Ravished her; his severe Imprisonment, the cruel Manner that he often was brought
in to the place of Execution; with all the other particulars of the foregoing
History, admirably Exemplified; which would swell this Paper too large to be
here recited: On the top of this, was the Tragical manner of the Emperess's
violent Death, with the Execution of her Heathenish Priests, that had consented
with, and advised her to, the bloody Design against the Life of the Prince: All
the Balconies, in the Capitol Streets, were hung with richest Tapestry, and
Persian Silks; they were lined with Beautiful Ladies, and Persons of great
Honor; who still, as the Prince passed by, Testified their high Approbation of
that days Transaction. The Senators Guards (all in New Equipage) were placed
round the Capitol; (which in Rome was the Palace where the Senate met) and
within (on a low Assent of E^ony inlaid with Gold) was set a Chair of State.
Around it were Galleries curiously Gilded, and filled with more shining
Beauties; in the midst, were Couches of Embroidered Velvet, whereon the
Senators sat, richly clad in Scarlet Robes; and having Seated Erastus in his
Chair; the Consul, or principal Man of the Senate, spoke to him after this
Manner.

My Lord Erastus,
THe People of Rome (whose Representatives we are) have this day unanimously
Determined to set their Imperial Crown on Your Royal Head; This they do out of
the great Confidence they have in Your Princely Virtues, and High
Accomplishments for so great a Trust. We have seen with what Constancy, and
Serenity, you have Supported under the greatest Abuses; and with what Evenness
of Temper you have Graced all Conditions: So that your Noble Qualifications;
have already made you Emperor of their Hearts. We therefore require you to
Promise to keep inviolate the Liberties, and Properties of the Roman People;
and to use that Sword which they put in your Hand, for their Just Preservation
and Defense.

Then the Prince Arising, and lifting up his Hand, Swore by the Gods which they
Worshipped, To maintain the same Law among them, as had been Confirmed by the
Senate; and to do nothing against, but for the Good and Weal of his People.


Upon this, the Consul (in the name of the People of Rome) set the Imperial
Crown upon his Head; then with an Universal Shout, they proclaimed him Emperor;
which was presently answered by the Guards without, with large Vollies, and
Acclamations, and all the Ordinance round the City discharged their Thunder.
Then (after a splendid Guard of Partisans) the Senators, in order, march to the
Pallace-Royal, the Consul bearing the Sword before the Emperor; who was
followed by many Princes of that Empire: Some, of whom, carried an Vmbrel of
Extraordinary Value over his Head.

By the way, they were met by the Priest, in his formallities; who had ever a
wet Mouth to be dealing in Festivals; he was going to the Temple, to smoke his
Gods, on this great Occasion; and (that he might obtain a Grace at Court) to
Offer some Incense to the Genius of his new Prince, and Lord Erastus. At the
Entry of the Palace, they were Entertained with a Levit of Five Hundred
Trumpets, and in the first Court, with all other sorts of Wind Music, in the
second Court, with Violins and stringed Instruments, in the great Hall, with
the Organ, Skilfully played on; to which, accorded an excellent Voice, singing
this Song.

SONG.
COme from the Dungeon to the Throne,
So much the Gods thy Virtues own:
Then Reign, till such as did design
Thy Ruin; pay for it at the time:
For there their Treasons must resign.
But they are gone! Their Murtherous hands,
Prevent the Magistrates Commands;
They Strangled lie in their own Bands:
Whilst Conquering Rome's proud Diadem,
Thy Sacred Temples round does Hem.
He that can Teach himself To Obey,
Is fit'st the Imperial Sword to Sway;
Erastus gave his Passions Law;
And this the Equal Gods then saw,
And Saved him, Mighty Realms to Aw.
This ended, they withdrew into the more private Rooms, and were there
Entertained with as much Gallantry, as the Pomp of the Roman Empire could
pretend to. The rest of the Night was passed in Magnificent Masks and
Fireworks, which wonderfully expressed many Historical, and curious Figures.
Some few days more were spent in Courtly Gallantries, and Royal Entertainments;
whilst the City Conduits flowed with Wine, and all Imaginable Expressions of a
Universal Joy, range in every corner of the Streets. It was wonderful to see
what a Mighty Change there was in the Face of things, in the City of Rome: For
the Senators, and principal Citizens, who, but few days since, were in great
heaviness; and entering into Mourning for the barba^ous Cruelty to be Executed
on their most Accomplished Prince; were now filled with ^ayity, and Satisfaction
at the happiness ^hey enjoyed, in having him preserved; un^er whose Government
they could not doubt (...) all the blessings that attend the Admini^ration of a
Prudent Monarch. Even now, ^ou could have heard nothing but Lamen^^tions, and
sad Camplaints of Dioclesians ^nnatural Cruelty to his Excellent Son; ^he whole
City seeming to languish in a ^niversal sadness: But now, Smiles and Triumphs
sat on every face, and the Air ^^choed with Shoutings, Acclamations, Mirth and
Music.

Strange, but very pleasant was the Change, the Prince (with good reason)
beleved himself the greatest Potentate on the ^ee of the Earth, because he
ruled in the ^ery Souls of his Subjects: ( For even in the Roman Empire we
find, That a Tyrannick, all Controuling, sway a rough and Austere Management,
made the Government Odious and Unsupportable, when on the other hand Moderation
and Clemency, a Compliance with the Senate, and a Tenderness of the Public
Good; has so far recommended the Prince, that it has Extended his Empire, and
made it more Absolute and Terrible to his Enemies, than all the Severe and
Arbitrary Methods in the World could e're pretend to.) So that nothing in the
World has so much promoted the Grandeur of the Monarch, as this Popular and
Gentle way.

Yet some there were who Secretly murmured at this Tranquillity, whose diseased
Eyes could not bear the Splendour of this glorious and equal Government, these
(being Enemies to Mankind, and of the Nature of the Devil) repined a^
whatsoever promoted the peace and welfare of the Public; indeed nothing in the
World so grated their Spirits, and set their blood in a kind of Ferment, as the
Common good. They were perfect haters of Morality, and could not endure the
encouragement of any thing that but looked like Virtue; Massacres and Stakes,
Rod^ and Axes, Iayls, and Gibbets were the brave prospects that delighted them:
like Nero they could sing Carols at the Burning City. Nothing in nature was so
terrible to them, as a Calm and serene Season. They delight in Storms and
Hurricanes; for like Sharkes and Whales they thrive by Tempests, and Live upon
the Public Wrack. But these Enviperated worms, were now crept into their
holes, and there secretly Croak't out their Venom, for they were not able to
stand before the Justice of the Roman Senate.

These were some of the principal savou^^tes of the late wicked Empress, and
the ^nly fit Tools of her Priests to work with^^l; Nothing so fit to promote
Vicious and ^ase Designs, as Persons of Immortal and Debaucht Principles:
Therefore that these wicked Priests, might not want fit Instruments to carry on
their bloody Designs, they first poisoned their Proselites with all manner of
Corrupt, and Noisome Theorems, which their Vitiated Natures ^are too apt to
Imbibe: that so (having sufficiently Renounced whatsoever looked like Moral)
they might be the better qua^ified for the Villainies they were to per^etrats.
These were they (who having by ^^se ways crept into the Court) were still
Instilling, and buzzing into the Emperors ^^rs, against the most Innocent and
Dutiful Prince Erastus: For from the time the Queen had made her first
complaint, they ceased not to aggravate whatsoever she suggested against him;
always Insinuating their whispers in detraction of his Virtue, and shamming
over all his Excellent Accomplishments, with false Callumnies, and slanderous
Imputations; never permitting the abused Dioclesian to view his Son, but
through their false perspectives, that rendered him all over Monster. By these
Hellish Artifices, the deluded Emperor had been trapanned to Ruin both
himself and the Empire, had not the Justice of the Gods raised up the Seven
Wise Masters, we before mentioned, to prevent the Fatal Blow.

CHAP. II. The War of the Emperor Erastus with King Siwel, the manner of his
Overthrow.
NOw tho these Infernal Agents found all their base Attempts Successess against
the Incomparable Erastus; yet could they not so soon forsake their dear
Mischief, nor be drawn from the sweet Treasons they had been engaged in: but
persisted still in new Consults to destroy the Young Emperor, and in him the
happiness of the Empire.

But Erastus (whose noble Soul tasted no relish in all the Splendid Feasts,
Masks, and Effeminate Entertainments of the Court) Imagining that he that wore
an Imperial Crown, was by the Gods designed to somewhat else besides soft
Luxury; and that business of greater Importance was appointed for him that sat
at the Helm of Empire; thereby manifesting the Conduct of a Wise and Gallant
Prince. Appointed the Senate to meet at the Capitol in three Days, and all
things being in Readiness for that great Assembly, the day of their Congress
being come, they first met in the Forum, and the Emperor, with a Royal Retinue
being come to them, they there put on their Respective Robes, and in great
State proceeded to the Imperial Chamber, the Roof whereof was raised on Pillars
of fine Porphirie, curiously wrought with Chapiters of Gold: The Ceiling was of
Antic Work, wherein were Carved the many Victories of their Famous Generals,
with Figures aptly representing the several Provinces; A Sumptuous Figure
showed it self in a stately Oval in the Midst, Representing the Roman State, to
which the other Provinces, seemed to stretch their hands, humbly Supplicating
her protection; at one end was set a Royal State for the Emperor, whereon he
Seated himself, and the Senators being set on Chairs covered with Tissue; the
Noble Emperor made them an excellent Oration, in this manner.

Most Renowned Romans,
BY Your Kindness, and for your sakes i^ is, that I wear this Diadem; the Care
therefore that results from the Trust You have laid on me, has occasioned my
caling You together; for I cannot be one of those that think it sufficient if
they get the Reigns of Government into their hand, and then take no farther
care what becomes of the Commonwealth. My Lords, I know their are great Duties
incumbant on a Crowned Head, and the burden will be too heavy for me, unless
Assisted by Your Councels; You are the most proper Advisers I can possibly
Consult with, for I think the Interest^ of the Prince, and his People
Inseparably Interwoven: Let us therefore Jointly endeavor to promote the
Public good, and preserve the Peace of the Empire: Our Neighbor Siwel (who
lately was Our Conquest, and held his Crown of the Romans) is of late grown
formidable in Arms, and a great disturber of the Tranquillity of his Quiet
Neighbors; Invading their Teritories, and Depopulating their Countries with
Intolerable outrage. It is not Consistent with the Grandeur, or Policy of the
Roman State to permit such Insolences. We are farther Informed, that by his
Masqued Emisaries, he keeps alive, and foments a Party amongst those
Miscreants, who were the Creatures of the Late miserable Emperess: Let us
therefore Unite our Councels, Asume our Courage, and Scourge the unsufferable
Presumption of this Proud Invador; let us discord his Factors here, and Oppose
his Forces in the Neighbor Provinces; that it may not be said Hereafter, The
ROMAN STATE was lost, when ERASTVS sat at the Helm.

This Incomparable Speech of the brave Young Emperor, was received by the
Senate is an Oracle; their loud Acclamations testifyng the high Approbation
they had of their Prince, and the Noble Advice he gave them. They verily
thought all ye happy constellations ^f their Great Ancestors, had clubd
together (...) confer the Noble Genius of their several Heroes on Erastus, with
such profound Wisdom did he search into the Affairs of ^he State, with such
brave Gallantry, re^olve to oppose the Power of Prince Siwel, and with such
Affection Espouse the Inte^est of his Country; that the Antientest of ^he
Senate seemed as amazed at the Ma^estick Sweetness of his Incomparable Person,
and charming Oratory.

Several of the Senators strained their ^hetorick in Congratulating the happy
for^ne of the Empire, that had in the Throne a Prince of such Excellencies, and
sublime Endowments, as from whom they could not hope for any good, but what
they might reap by his courage, nor fear any ill; but what would be prevented
by his Wisdom. At length the Consul recapitulated, and enlarged upon, the
several Paragraphs of Erastus his Speech; and Moved that they might presently,
put the Matters therein contained upon the Debate. But it was soon determined
in the Affirmative, there being not one Rotten Member in that well Constituted
Body, that offered to oppose the Public Interest of the State. They therefore
resolved to take as many as they could, of their secret Enemies into custody,
and presently to raise an Army to march into Germany, there to oppose the
Forces of the Revolted Siwel: Erastus himself offering to March in the head of
the Army. Imediate Orders were dispatched to the Keeper of the Magazines, that
they should provide all sorts of Arms, and Ammunition for the Expedition.
Several other decrees past, for Public matters; which will not fall under the
cognizance of this History: We shall therefore continue the Relation of the
Engagements between Erastus the Emperor; and Siwel King of the Gauls.

Scarce had the Drums given the signal in the Street of the City, that the
Senate had determined to enter into a War with the Gauls, and reduce them to
their forme^ Obedience to the Roman State, but the Forum was thronged with
Multitudes from all parts of the City, so that in two days they had Listed an
Army of Forty Thousand; which was thought sufficient (they still retaining the
Tried Valor of the Noble Romans) to oppose a far greater Number of the Gauls.
Nor were they confined for want of Volunteers to so small an Army; for the
People offered themselves so readily to promote this War, as if they had
entertained a Universal hatred to that perfidious Nation. Long had this
Treacherous King Siwel, by underhand Practices sought to undermine, and by
open Violence opposed (at several times) the Roman Power; and in his Province,
with great cruelty destroyed many Towns and Families which he thought had
Friendship for the Roman State: So that Erastus had but two just cause to
chastise him for his breach of Faith, and evil practices. Therefore in few
days the Army Advanceed to the confines of Gaul, and by the suddeinness of
their March had entered some Leagues into the Country of Siwel, before he had
time to draw his Forces together to oppose them: The Towns and Villages in
their March, Joyfully putting themselves under the protection of Erastus; being
no longer able to hear the Tyrany of their Savage Master. Erastus sent for more
Fortes to the Senate, which he placed in Garrisons to defend the Country from
the Cruelty of Siwel, and his Forces; and being come in a days March of the
Galick Army, he entered into a large Campane Country, fit for his designed
Engagement; where he posted himself, and Entrenched his Camp, the better to
observe the Motion of the Enemy. The Gauls were now approached within a Mile of
the Imperial Troops, and having discovered that Erastus his Force Consisted but
of Forty Thousand (his own Army being above a Hundred Thousand) he resolved
(according to his wonted Valor) to give them Battle the next Morning; and
accordingly having given notice to his several Quarters, they appeared very
early on the Plain, in half a Mile of Erastus's Camp: His Scouts, in the mean
time, had given him notice of the Enemies motion; so that his Army was in as
great forwardness to Advance, as the Gauls were to receive him; Therefore
drawing his Men out of the Camp, he Posted on a convenient side of the Plain,
in a little more than a Flightshot of Siwels Army; with undaunted Bravery
faceing a Foe of almost Treble his Number. In the mean time the Gauls had
discovered, that Roman Baggage was left in the Trenches, and guarded but by a
few Bow-men, and some light Horse with Lanches: At this Siwel (being ever more
inclined to plunder than to fight) Commanded his Left Wing, to fall down, and
make themselves Masters of the Imperial Carriages. The Emperor (though he soon
perceived the design) gave them opportunity to Advance within Shot of the
Trenches, which were maintained with extraordinary Courage, by that very small
Guard; not an Arrow they discharged, but did its Execution; the Lawnce-men with
notable Resolution keeping the Horse from entering a small breach, their
Pioneers had made; insomuch that they dismounted many of the Gauls from their
Horse, who were never able to mount again. Now they were thus far engaged,
Erastus commanded a single Brigade of his Right Wing, to relieve the Wagons;
so that speedily falling on the Rear of the Gallick Right Wing, they did such
Execution, that in little time, almost half of them were slain, or wounded, or
taken Prisoners; the rest with great Confusion falling into the Body of their
Army. This defeat so Exasperated Siwel, seeing so great a Body of his Men
routed by a handful, that he presently came on with the main Body of his Army,
thinking to crush the small Brigade of Erastus his Troops to Pieces; but he
little Considered the steady Valor of the Romans, who never thought that
worth the name a Victory, that had not been obtained at some great
disadvantage; that the Romans had long before known what it was to Conquer the
Gauls; and therefore were less apt to be daunted by their Noise or Numbers.

The Emperor (discovering that he had no small ^kill in Martial Discipline, or
Stratagems of War) had chosen out a Bris^que Forlorn of about three Hundred
tried Soldiers; these were all coated in Male, after the Roman manner, having
Scythian Spears, and Symiters of Russian Steel, their Horses too had Armor of
Proof; these he ordered to brake through the Ranks of Siwels Army, which they
did with such force, that their courage levelled whole Files before them; doing
such wonders, that should they be here related, it might be looked on as a
Romance. The Violence of their Action, soon put the Gallick Army in disorder
(for they indeed, were more used to purchase a Victory with their Money, than
their Valor; having rarely met with an Enemy that had Courage like the
Romans;) so that Erastus coming up to them with the small Body of his Army,
soon made himself Master of the Field: Whilst Siwel's Right Wing (seeing the
Fate of ^he rest) never stood an Engagement, but ^ed the Field: But being
closely pursued ^y the Left Wing of the Romans, there ^ere but few of them
escaped, to car^y home the News of their Over^hrow. Erastus (still) where he
thought ^here was any one Master of more than ^ommon Courage; picked that person
out for ^is Rival, and by that means gave seve^al of them the Honor to fall by
his own ^and: but this he did, hoping to send the ^nemy of his Country, and the
principal ^ccasion of this m schief, to wash his Crimes (...) the Stygian Lake;
But Siwel had no ^uch design, (for doubting his Fate too ^ose pursued him) he
(with one or two ^f his Council) sought to fly the Field; ^ut falling into the
hands of a Party of ^he Romans, was by them brought Priso^er to Erastus.

He was just then retired to his Tent, ^iving orders for the disposal of the
Priso^ers; and the better refreshing his Soul^ers after that Days Signalizing
their Valors. Siwel at his approach to the Em^eror (discovering a mean and
degenerous Soul, which usually creeps, and fawns when unfortunate) cast himself
at the Feet of the Brave Erastus; and with Vn-Princely Cowardice, begged for
his wretched Life, and that with such miserable Submission, as largely
testified the Narrowness of his Soul; But this beggarly Action of his, rather
Inflamed, than abated the Just Indignation of the Roman Emperor; so that
instead of Treating him with that respect that a manly Bravery always claims
of a Generous Enemy, he orderd him to be bound in Chains; and in that posture
he followed the Emperors Chariot in his Marches through the Country. So much
had the Tyrany and Cruelty of this unworthy Prince Exasperated the minds of his
own Subjects against him; that still as he passed, they denied him the common
Testimonies of Pity due to the Miserable; but reproached him with his Breach
of Faith and Inhumane Oppressions, whereby he had Enslaved, and reduced his Own
Province to a State of Beggary and Vassallage. In the mean time with loudest
Acclamations they Applauded the Conduct, Gallantry and good Fortune of Erastus;
Thanking the God of Victory, that by his hand had redeemed them from the
Intolerable Bondage they endured under the cruel Tyrany of the base minded
Siwel. So natural is it to Mankind to hate a Tyrant, and give all possible
demonstrations of their Satisfaction, and enlarged Joy, under the Sweet
Influences of an equal Administration. The Generous-Soul'd Erastus, (still as
he passed hrough the Villages and Cities of that Country) with a Princely
greatness confi^med to them those Privileges, which Siwel's Injustice had
robbed them of, and bestowed on them such other Testimonies of his Royal
Favors, as bespoke him to be a Prince hear^^ily designing the Weal, and
happiness of the People, and not the rugged Satisfaction of a Tyranical or
Ambitious Monarch. He Empowered them to choose Governors of their own, to see
Justice duly Administered, and the Peoples Righ s kept Inviolate: Who were to
be Responsible to the Imperial Chamber for their neglects therein

Thus in a very short time were the Longgrowing Evils of those Provinces rooted
up; and (by the great care of that Excellent Emperor) the pleasant Plants of
Public Tranquillity and a general Peace grew up in the room of them. Here was
confusion reduced into Order, Riotous Debauchery, reformed to manly Sobriety,
and a Philosophical Morality, Tyranny and Oppression were Bannished, and
Equity, and Clemency took place? The Groans and Tears of the Oppressed Gauls
were turned into Tryumphs; and Every man had his Life, and Labor, once more
called his Own. Having thus happyly settled Affairs in those Parts, the Emperor
returned in great. Triumph to Rome: and was there received by the Senate and
Citizens with such a welcome, as well showed the sense they had of their
Happyness under his August, and propitious Influence.

I might here relate the Magnificence of his splendid Reception, by giving the
Reader the particulars of the Trophies, Arches, Companies, Pageants: and all
the braveryes which Poets usually feign, to guild their Romances; (for indeed
the World never saw greater Pomps, than those with which the Gallant Romans
used to welcome home their Victorious Generals): But (my design being rather to
Paint an Extraordinary Prince, than a Gaudy Pageant) I shall omit the Mention
of those lesser matters: only acquaint the Reader (who may be desirous to know)
what became of the unlucky Siwel. He therefore was led to Rome in the manner
you have heard; and after a few days, was brought before the Senate; where the
Consul largely sum'd up the Foulness of his Detestable Life, telling him, That
he had fallen so far below a Prince, that he came short of the very Brutes,
which (ordainarily) delight to Cherish one another; and (in their way) revenge
the injuries offered to their kind: but that he (contrary to the very dictates
of Brutal Nature) had not only usurped unto himself the Government of others,
but had with great Cruelty, and Rapine, endeavored to support his Arbitrary,
and unjust Usurpation: So that he had ^ot only Invaded, but even divested the
People of their Natural Rights; refusing to a^ow them the Common Privileges,
which ^re the undoubted Claim of Humane Crea^ures; but that on the Contrary he
had exacted of them Tributes larger than their Estates could reach unto, and
had after a Tyranical manner Levied them by the Power of his Sword; setting
Ruffenly Of^^cers to Oppress the People at their pleasure; and had refused them
their Just Redress, by an application to the Senate; That ^e had Treacherously
withdrawn himself from his Obedience to the Roman Emperor, to whom Gaul owned
as much Obedience, as the rest of the Roman Conquests. Adding, that now the
Gods had Chastised him for his Impieties; they left his Treasons to be Punished
as the Victorious Erastus should direct.

Siwel, like a Wretch in great dejection (all this time) swam in abundance of
Tears; and made such pitiful demonstration, of a Poor, Low and Contemptible
Spirit, that it might indeed have moved pity; had it not proceeded rather from
the disapointment of his base designs; than a due resentment of the foulness
of his Loathsome Crimes. The Generous Erastus scorned to Foul the Sword of the
Public Justice with the Blood of such a Cowardly, and Capon-hearted Miscreant;
but having sufficiently tied him up from attempting (any farther) his base
designs; he left him to the Consideration of the Virtues of his past Life: The
Tranquillity of his Government, and the Disappointment his Cowardly Ambition
had met withal; which reflections soon made such a Battery on his frailty, that
his narrow Soul (not longer able to endure such Assaults) made its escape to
his Old Confederate Pluto, Prince of the Lower Regions; where doubtless he had
an Entertainment Suitable to the Designs he had managed, and the Service he
done on this side Acheron.

Thus he (whose Ambition graspt at Empire, whose Soul delighted in Cruelty,
that had diverted himself in Torturing of Others) Expired Vnpittyed,
Unlamented, and left a perpetual Infamy entailed to his Memory.

CHAP. III.
AFter the Reduction of Gaul; whereby it was again made a part of the Empire,
so universal a Serenity Shined in all parts, as if the Gods designed under the
reign of this Prince to give the world a taste of that happiness men enjoy,
under a prudent and well-disposed Magistrate; no Complaints troubled the quiet
Palace, nor did the Oppressor lord it amongst the humble Cottages. The
Shepherd rejoiced in the fruits of his Flock, and the Labourer of his Vines:
The Bashful Virgin knew not what it was to be assaulted by the Lustful violence
of the rude Debauches: nor were the Gods denied their Insence, though in pots
of Clay.

Nothing was heard over the Well-governed Empire, but the voice of a well-tuned
Harmony, and mutual Congratulations for so happy a Restitution of the common
Tranquillity. The Prince so Virtuous, no tongue durst detract him; nor was the
Venom of the Quill (at that time) diffused, to poison the Public Quiet: Men
enjoyed their Estates, free from the Envy of the greedy Misers, and their
Religion, without the Flagitious Remarques of Pestilent Flatterers; or the base
Reflections of Scandalous Libellers. The Government was made easy to the
People; and the Emperor Enjoyed all the Blessings arising from so well turned
a Government. What shall I say? the Roman Empire (till then) never saw so great
serenity; nor did the Grandeur of any of their Emperors, compare with the
unparralleled Greatness of the most Incomparable Erastus. His admirable
Conduct, and Succesful Administration, was the Theme of every prudent man's
discourse, and of the Poet's Song; the Rival Pastorals resounded with the
Praise of Erastus: and the unmolested Merchant Transported his Fame into the
remotest Indies.

The Empire being thus settled, to the general satisfaction of all good men, the
Emperor Resolved to visit the Remoter Collonies, and (with his presence) to
enliven and cherish the hearts of those his Subjects, that had only tasted the
sweetness of his distant Influence; carr^ing with his Person, all those welcome
Blessings, that use to accompany a Prince in favor with the Gods. Pursuant to
this his resolution, he called the Senate (resolving to do nothing without the
Advice of his best Council) and communicated to them his Intention; withal
committing the care of the Government to their Management, until his return:
and giving such other Orders as were necessary to be observed in his Absence.
He took but few of his own Servants with him, and some particular Noble Men,
that had been still Constant to him, during the Frowns of Dioclesian, which
(with a small retinue) made about an Hundred Horse. He needed no Guards, for
his Interest was so great in the affections of his People; that he had a
Citadel in every Village, and a Fort in every Breast; in fine, all his
Territories were safe as his own Palace: So great is the Influence that a good
Prince has, over the most sordid Dispositions; The most Churlish Boor paid an
Homage to his Virtue, and the most depraved Plebean was struck with
astonishment, and Conquered by his Gallantry.

His First Progress, (after having past the Confines of Italy) was through the
(once Famous) Kingdom of Hungary, along the pleasant Banks of the Fertile
Banow; and so passing through that Gallant Country, since fallen to the House
of Austria, be came to the Princely Country of Bohemia; at that time one of the
most Flourishing Kingdoms in the World. Through the vast number of its
Inhabitants, every Village swoll to a City, whose lofty Towers and Palaces,
showed a stately Prospect to the Neighboring Plains. And though the Great
Erastus met with all the Loyal Caresses Imaginable, in the whole course of his
Progress; and was received by his People, rather as a God, than one of Mortal
Race: Yet could not all these Pomps of State, nor the Extraordinaryes of the
Entertainments provided for him, withdraw him from the Exercise of his Moral
Contemplations; or those more Virtuous Considerations, which are the Natural
product of a Noble Soul. So that in the midst of all these splendid Gayityes, a
Contemplative recess seemed more E^igible to the good Emperor: He therefore
retired for some days to a Country Palace not far from the Stately City of
Prague, leaving most of his Retinue at that Court.

Erastus was extremely pleased with the sweet solitariness of this Castle; it
had been an Ancient Mansion of the Emperors; and wanted not sufficient Bravery
to testify great the quality of its Inhabitant: the Towers were Lofty, and of
Marble: The Apartments were spacious, and delightful, it stood on a small
Assent of a Hill, which overlookt a large Valley of many Miles extent, which
was replenished with Pastures, and Vineyards in great abundance; through the
midst of which the Silver-breasted Danow brought the Treasures, and Commodities
of Foreign Parts, into the heart of that large Country, and Exported their own
Wines in Exchange: In short; nothing was wanting that might recommend the
Cituation of this House, for one of the Noblest Retraits in the Empire: Only
the lonely humor of the Lord, affected not the Noise and Tumult of a Numerous
and Unnecessary Attendance, which was so much the more agreeable to the Temper
of Erastus; who had given strict Orders (for his greater privacy) that it
should be still reported he continued at the Court at Prague; to prevent the
Crowd that otherwise would have spoiled his more retired Divertisements. The
Lord of this Palace daily Entertained the Emperor with such Airy, and wholesome
Sports, of Hunting the Stagg, the Bore, sometimes the Fox, and other Savages as
the Woods and Forest could afford; where the Thundering Northern Hound, and the
Shril-Mouth'd Beagle, rang many a Melodious peal through the Ecchoing Vallyes:
with such kind of Recreations they usually passed the time till Dinner, but the
Afternoon was spent in a more silent Retirement; for toward the Evening, the
Fragrance of the Air, and the Charming Melody of the Airy Quire, commonly
called them (through a spacious Garden) into an adjoining Wilderness of
Iessamines, Mirtles and Roses; The native Sweetness, and Pleasantness of those
Walks, drew the Emperor at a greater distance from the Palace than he was
aware of; and brought him at length by the Side of a Crystal River, whose
pretty murmur seemed to bear a Consort with the Featherd Choristers of the
adjoining Grove. On the Bank of the Liquid Mirror, Sat down the Contemplative
Prince, under the shade of a well-spread Almon Tree: On the other side the
River was a Large tract of Meadow ground; where the Herds-Men and Shepherds
used to feed their Wanton Herds, and Quiet Flocks; On that side by a Covert of
Mirtles were seated Melander and Florius (two of the Pastoral Fraternity)
unbosoming each to other their Rural Cares; the shade of their Myrtle Obscured
Erastus from their View, which gave him the better opportunity to observe their
Discourse; the Theme whereof was such as is usual to Shepherds; for the Cruelty
of Amarillis, the coyness of Chloris, the disdain of Phillis, the Severity of
Pastora, and the Inconstancy of Serina; had set their Enamored Captives Hearts
on akeing, their Breasts a panting; their Eyes a Mourning; had filled their
discourse with rueful Complaints, whilst the Neighboring Woods and Rivers were
made acquainted with their Piteous Lamentations. But above all, the strange
humor of Prunella (the Idol of Florius) may not be unpleasant to Interlard
this dull Discourse.

My Melander (said he, after he had discharged a Volley of Sighs, and made
three or four Grimmaces) Thou know with how great Constancy I have ever
served the Lovely Prunella; thou art witness of my cares for her, and the Care
that (for her sake) I had for her Flock, not a Sore Sheep but I dressed, not a
Straggling Lamb, but I fetched home, when she sighed, I sighed; and when she
smiled, it looked like the sweet simpering of a Rosey Morning; when she slept,
Sympathy would shut up my Eyelids as truly as if the null god of slumber had
done it himself; when she Sang, I could not forbear playing on my Pipe, and
never were its Notes so pleasant as when tuned to the Melodious key of her
Voice. What shall I say Melander? I have bin thus her Slave above these Seven
Years; I have no Joys, but hers; nor no dedesires, but with Submission to the
good pleasure of Prunella? Just after our last Sheepshearing. I sent her a Copy
of my thoughts in Rythme, and I fancy they were not contemptible neither; but
would you think it? She answered them with that Intolerable disdain, as would
have broke a Heart of Millstone.

Prithee Florius (said Melander) bless me with a little of thy Poetry; this is
the first time I ever heard thou had any gift that way, but what will not
Love. Ah! the Charms of All-Inspiring Love, what cannot they do? Let the Dull
old Bards talk of the Efficacy of their Watery Helicon, one drop of that Nectar
that flows from the Lips of Prunella, will do more than an Ocean of that cold
and melancholy Liquor: therefore dear Florius, hide not the satisfaction of
this Chiming humor from thy faithful Confident Melander. Well (said Florius) I
will not conceal them from thee, if thou will but assist in answering her
contemptful Lines: which Melander consenting to, Florius repeated him the
Lines, which you are like to hear.

When first I saw thee, thou did sweetly Play
The Gentle Theif, and stol'st my Heart Away:
Give't me again, or I will Swear thou art,
A sweet-Face't Creature with a double Heart.
Pish, Pish (quoth Melander) these are as old as Paul's; but however, it argues
a very good memory, that you so well retain them besides, they are very pat to
the purpose. Ay (quoth Florius) I think so and much too good for the Abusive
answer she returned, which I will show you, that you may read them. Melander
opening the Paper, found these Lines.

Sitting at Shiting, I received your Letter,
Perusing it, I Sh -- t the better;
And finding it so full of Wit,
The more I Read, the more I Sh -- t.
The place whereon their grew no Grass,
Your Letter came Just fit to wipe mine Ar --
This is Comical indeed! (said Melander) would ever an insulting Carryon thus
abuse the Faithful Addresses of her Bigoted Shepherd? But it is even too good
for the Dotard Florius; well, trouble not thy self! thou shall have a draught
of my thoughts concerning this Idol of thine; but first for an answer to her
Scurrillity, which methinks might run well enough in these words.

O my Pretty Fool,
How glad am I it gave thee so good a Stool;
What e're it cost me, I will have
This Epitaph set on thy Grave.
Beauty fair, this Tomb does hide;
Shiting she Lived, Shiting she Died;
Who ever he be, that passes by
The Place wherein her Bones do lie,
Can do her no greater Honor,
Than to come and Piss, and Sh -- t upon her.
Dear Melander! I con thee thanks with all my heart, cried the almost
Transported Florius, by Venus thou have clawed her ofe^ with a witness, now am
I resolved to send her this Epitaph as a last farewell of Florius's Love, and
bury my Inclinations under the same beshitten marble; for after this Honorable
defiance, she shall never more make a Nokes of her Humble Servant Florius. But
now sweet Melander (continued he) let me have a Copy of thy thoughts
concerning her, as thou did promise: which Melander accordingly gave him
after this sort.

If we agree with those that affirm Fancy to be the Creator of Beauty, as the
Poet has it, If I Fancy Black or Blew,
Or any other Hue,
That Fancy does a Beauty make.


Should we be of this Opinion? I know no reason but your Prunella may pass for
a Beauty; but if we believe, that there is a certain proportion, and regularity
of parts, together with a mixture of somewhat called Complexion, that are
necessary ingredients to the composing a Handsome woman; then I assure you I can
by no means allow your quondam Mistress to put in for any share amongst the
many Pretenders to handsome Faces; for (how much soever you adore her) her eyes
look a cross, and one of them is bigger than the other by above half an inch
like a Tumblers; her nose looks like a Cloak Button set in the midst of her
face; and her mouth is drawn up to one ear on one side, and the other Cheek
Stuffed out with a Tennis Ball; her breath smells much like as her Tombstone
must, if there be any Charm in the Epitaph I gave you: And for her Complexion,
I can no better describe it, than a friend of mine did by a Mistress of his, who
desired him to paint what kind of Wife he could wish; Madam, replied he, If you
would sit to draw it by, it must be thus, Eyes must be Brass,
Her Lips of Pearl,
Teeth as green as Grass,
Hair like a Squirrel,
Her Nose of Rubie,
Her Brow of Steel,
Her Cheeks should Blew be,
And her Neck Braziel.


Which Description of his had its desired Effect, for it begat such a distance
in her, that he was never after troubled with her loathsome Importunities. At
this they arose and followed their Flocks to the Fold, it being now grown
toward Sunset. The well-pleased Erastus that had passed many a smile dureing
their divertive discourse, returned to the Palace, all the way, not a little
admiring at the Innocent pleasures of the Shepherds life; but most of all taken
with the Witty Drollery of Melander.

He could not forbear at Supper to acquaint his generous Host with much of the
discourse he had heard; to whom the Noble Man replied, that he had enquired
concerning Melander, and understood him to be a Noble Britain, who for some
private (but supposed Amorous Reason) spent his time amongst the Shepherds in
that disguise.

That night the Emperor gave order to have all things in readiness by the next
morning for the pursuing his Progress, which accordingly he did, being well
satisfied with the Temper, and Entertainments of that Country; which accounted
his presence among them the greatest of their Felicities; whilst Long Live the
best of Emperors, was the general Acclamation that filled the resounding Air
as he passed. He Iournied through Helvetia and Flanders to the Town of Donkirk,
where he Embarked for Britain, then called Albion, and Feliciana, and through
the Noble and Opulent Channel of the Thames, was brought attended by a Fleet
which the Britains had ordered for the purpose, to the Ancient and Great
Metropolis of London.

In those days had this Island purchased so great Esteem among the Victorious
Romans, that they justly accounted it the fairest Branch of the Imperial
Laurel; and either the ever famous Erastus, Or some other Emperor bestowed on
that City the Sovereign Name of Augusta, an Honor which proud Rome her self
could never attain to; no nor any of the Aspiring Chambers of the Emperors.

Erastus was infinitely satisfied with the Pomps of their Buildings, the
Magnificence of their Treats, the prodigeous Wealth of their Merchants, the
Fertillity of the Soil, affording so vast plenty to that prodigeous Forest of
People, that seemed as a World of themselves, that it was a little difficult to
resolve whether these Considerations, or that of the Economy of their Laws the
equallity of their Government; the gentleness of their Dispositions, and the
Generosity of their well-tempered Souls, mainly drew the Affections of the
Roman Emperor to this (then) Fortunate People. I have not come to incert the
many Various ways they endeavored to manifest the Honor and happiness they
conceived in his presence with them; Nor the many Statues, Medals, Altars,
Inscriptions, and vast Buildings the Emperor was at the expense of, to testify
the high Esteem he had of them. This is largely done by other Historians. I
have only place to incert two Disticks; which either Erastus, or some other
made in praise of a Rural Life; and to promise an account of his Marriage with
an English Princess, and his return to Rome; with many various and pleasant
accidents in another Volum. But I must conclude with the Verses, which were
these, Happy is the Country Life,
Blessed with Content, good Health, and Ease,
Free from Factious Noise, and Strife,
We only Plot our selves to please.
Peace of Mind's our days Delight,
And Love's our welcome dream at Night.
Hail green Fields, and shady Woods,
Hail Springs and Streams that still run pure,
Natures Uncorrupted Goods,
Where Virtue only is secure.
Free from Vice, VVe're free from Care;
Age is no Pain, nor Youth no Snare.


FINIS.

