AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS, Given forth from Leinster-Province Meeting in Ireland,
held at Castledermot the 9th. 10th. and 11th. days of the 7th. Month School.

Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World: If any Man love
the World, the Love of the Father is not in him,

1 John 1 Chap. 15. verse. Printed in the Year 1699

The Epistle,
Dear Friends,
THE following Epistle is recommended to be read, in the fear of the Lord, in
which I doubt not but you will have a sense of the Godly Care and Concern,
which the Lord has raised in the Minds of some of his faithful Elders, for the
Good and Preservation of his Heritage But if there be any amongst our selves,
or others not acquainted with our Christian Discipline, (who for want of truly
seeing the great danger and hurt, that has attended the Professors of
Christianity, by unbounded desires, and persuit after the things of this
World;) shall censure our Christian care, as if we went about to exercise
Lordship over one another, or would hinder, and limet such Industrous and
capable persons, who in the fear of God, and in Moderation, do improve the
Creation in general, or their own worldly Talents in particular, which God has
been pleased to give them. I say if any shall thus Judge of our Godly Care and
Endeavors, Let all such know they are mistaken, and that no such thing is
intended.

But as a People, whom the Lord has made sensible, of the many snares that do
attend, and the Loss some have sustained, by the unsatiable Desire, and too
Eager Persuit after the Lawful things of this World; A concern came upon us,
that if possible we might all come to be limited, with truths bounds that leads
to Moderation and Content; and to depend more upon that providential hand of
the Lord, that will afford us, what we stand in Need of, then in an Inordinate
desire to pursue after the gain of this Worlds Goods.

And now dear Friends and Brethren, this Brotherly Caution arises in my Heart
to you, who were Eyewitnesses and partakers of that wonderful and Eminent
bowing power and presence of the Lord God, that appear amongst us at that
Meeting, that none who were Witnesses, of the Power of the Lord at that time,
and thereby brought into a lively sense and sight of the great danger,
attending that mind which would be going after Covetousness, may in the least
give way thereto, or enter into Reasoning and Consulting with Flesh and Blood,
by which you will loose the sense you then had of that Spirit, and be in danger
of becoming Monuments of God's Displeasure. But on the contrary keep to the
guidance and direction of Gods Spirit in your selves; which will limit your
desires (to the lawful things of this World) within the bounds of Truth, which
is the earnest desire of one that desires the good and preservation of all in
that which will tend to the glory of God, and bring everlasting comfort in the
end.

Thomas Trafford.

To all our dear Friends and Brethren in this Nation of Ireland, and elsewhere.
THE Salutation of our dear love in the Lord JESUS CHRIST in tender Bowels,
flows forth to the whole Heritage of God with fervent desires, that all may
walk worthy of his great love and Fatherly kindness and care to us, and over
us, who has blessed us in turning us from our Iniquities, and brought us to
the knowledge of himself, by the blessed light of his dear Son shining in our
hearts, and by the evidence of his holy Spirit confirmed our faith in the great
unspeakable benefit we have, both in his first and second coming for to suffer
for us, in that prepared Body, and now in Spirit and glorious power of the
Father, to perfect our Redemption and Salvation, and to reconcile us unto
himself by washing us with the Water of Regeneration, and sprinkling us with
the Blood of his covenant and under his daily Cross, which crucifies us to the
World, and renews his heavenly Image in us, and has preserved us in all
Exercises of Troubles, Temptations, and Perils of all sorts, inward and
outward, and fed us plentifully with the wholesome and sound doctrine of his
heavenly Kingdom, and watered us abundantly from time to time with the
Distillations of the Showers thereof flowing from the Clouds; that he has
prepared and filled with his holy spirit to replenish his Husbandry and
Vineyard with the Mysteries of Faith and Godliness, as the former Rain in its
season, and the latter Rain in its season; and clothed us with Religious
Discipline, and Gospel Order, that no nakedness may be amongst us, but every
Member of this Body of people which Christ is Head of may be covered with his
Righteousness in Words and Actions, following him in the daily Cross and self
denial by Faith in him, as Lights in the World to the praise and glory of God;
and in order to carry on and perfect this good Work for our Establishment and
his Honor, He has raised and settled, and is raising Instruments according to
his blessed promise that he would give his People Judges as at first, and
Counselors as at the beginning: Men fearing God and hating Covetousness,
gifting them for this great Work with his holy Spirit of Counsel with a sound
Mind and Understanding, and a concern for his Honor, and prosperity of his
blessed Truth amongst Men; the Enlargement and Exalting of the Government and
Kingdom of Christ with all Godly diligence, according to the ability and gift
of his holy Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding given to them for this work and
service for the Lord and his People, as help-meets in Government, and Overseers
and Doorkeepers of the Flock and Church of Christ, walking before them as good
Examples in self-denial and daily Cross of Christ, not only to the unlawful
things of the World, but to the lawful things; The Lord bounding them in their
getting, and ordering them in their Management, and disposing thereof that the
Flock may follow by their footsteps as they thus follow Christ.

And dear Friends, You of this Nation knows that for several Years past there
has been, and yet remains, a Godly care on the minds and spirits of such whom
the Lord has thus raised and concerned as Overseers; that all things might be
well in the Church of Christ, and he may present it to the Father as a Chaste
Virgin, without blemish; and on this Account much labor of God has been
bestowed at Opportunities and Seasons, which the Lord has put into our hands,
and has been sanctified to us, the Lord owning his work and us in it, and
honoring our Assemblies in this service with his powerful glorious presence to
the overcoming of our hearts with comfort and satisfaction, opening our
Understandings by the Enlargement of his holy Spirit, in many things absolutely
needful to be put in practice for the preservation of his People, out of the
snares of the Enemy of Mankind, which he lays in the World and baits them with
the things of this World. And God has wonderfully owned and blessed our
labors to our great Comfort and Encouragment, and the great benefit and
satisfaction of many who gives thanks and praises to the Lord for the benefit
received, on many Accounts through those close Concerns and Labors of love for
the good of one another, as Saviors on Mount Sion.

And now that which remains and chiefly is before us in this service of this
our day, is to warn and admonish the Church of Christ to beware of the snares
of that unwearied Enemy which he lays in secret, and baits with the lawful
things of this World in this time of Ease and great Liberty; for his baits is
suitable to the times and seasons to answer the Inclination of Peoples minds
that goes from things that are above, after the things that are below; and it is
easy to understand the generality of People is taken in his snares and carried
away after Riches, Preferment, Honor, Greatness, and Vainglory in the things
of this World that is uncertain, and soon comes to an End: And he is striving
to break in upon the People of our Society whom the Lord has called by his
Grace out of the World, to obey and follow him in all things as Lights in the
World to his Honor. And this Enemy of all Righteousness has prevailed on
many, that are not so careful and watchful in the Light of Christ as they ought
to be, against this Adversary of Mankind, in the lawful things of this World,
with which he blinds the Eyes of the Understanding, and leads the Heart, Mind
and Affections into Captivity, they not Eying the Lord and his blessed Truth to
limit and bound them, so falls into many Temptations, Snares, and hurtful
Lusts; and others following their Examples to get Riches, and be big in the
World, Invades other Men's Properties, and fails in their purposes, so
sacrifices Religion and their own Credit to their greedy desire after gain, and
gives occasion for Men to brand us with the Character of Covetousness, which
causes Truth professed by us to be evil spoken of; Stumbles the minds of some
that otherwise might join with us, and hinders the Lords work of Reformation on
many Accounts, and grieves his good Spirit, and wounds the hearts of his
faithful Servants, that are given up in Heart, Mind, Body, and Substance, that
the Lord may limit, bound, order and dispose of them and all they have, and
hold as stewards under him; that has all power in Heaven and Earth: and his
Will and Mind to be known and observed in Earthly things as well as in heavenly
things, with all due Reverence, Subjection, and Obedience, where our
preservation is from the Inrodes the Enemy makes to hinder the Progress of the
Lords People, and to make them unfruitful to the Lord as his Vineyard, in
heavenly and spiritual things; but instead thereof to bring forth wild Grapes,
Briars, Thorns, Thistles, and Tares, the fruits of the Mind, Heart, Spirit, and
Affections that goes in their own Wills into Earthly things, beyond the Bounds
and Limits of the Lords Everlasting Truth, which is great provocations for the
Lord to curse the Ground, and to lay his Vineyard waste which he has bestowed
great labor upon, that it might bring forth good fruit to the Praise, Honor,
and Glory of his great Name.

Now under a due consideration of the great Injury and damage the Church of
Christ has and does sustain in our day by this floating Spirit that leads into
the lawful things of the World, beyond the Bounds of Truth, and beyond the use
for which they were created and given of God. A great concern came upon several
of us in a spiritual Travel for the Honor of God and the preservation of his
People, the Comeliness, Beauty, and Credit of the unspotted Religion professed
by us, and under this Godly care and concern the Spirit and power of the Lord
mightily appearing with us, and in us, in which the Testimony of the Lord Jesus
rose in many as a Standard lifted up against the Invasions of an Enemy, and
great Labors and Endeavors were used to stop this unsatiable Mind and Spirit
that is so earnest and eager after Earthly things, and yet not willing to be
called by the name of Covetousness, and to bring it within the Bounds and
Limits of Truth. This Religious concern being practiced from time to time for
several Years, at such Opportunities as the Lord put into our hands to be
concerned in Church Affairs, that nothing thing might get in nor grow which God
has not sowed nor planted, but be plucked up and rooted out in due time; that
the Lords Plant and good Seed that he has planted and sowed, might grow,
flourish, and bring forth good fruits in due Season, to the Honor and Glory of
the great Husbandman, that the cares of this World and Covetousness of Riches
might not choke it.

Now we being at our Province Meeting, before mentioned, and a great Appearance
of Friends both Men and Women, and the mighty power of the Lord amongst us, his
Glory covering our Assembly, and crowning our meeting with his presence, and
under a weighty sense thereof the Affairs of the Church were managed in great
Unity, Peace, and Concord; And under this heavenly Canopy of the Lords Ancient
goodness a weighty concern came upon our Spirits, as at other times on the like
Occasion, concerning the Bounds and Limits of Getting, and the right using the
lawful things of this World; and how far Friends might safely go into them. And
much time being spent in Church Affairs to good purpose and satisfaction the
Meeting adjourned till the next day, and after the Meeting for the worship of
God was over, then Men, Friends, and Ancient concerned Women, to meet together,
and consider of this weighty matter; and accordingly Friends met and sat down
in great Silence, retired to the Lord for his Aid and Counsel, and the Lord was
pleased to appear, and his power was great through his Spirit to our great
Comfort, for his Glory covered our Assembly, and many hearts were melted before
him, because of the weight of his Goodness, which bowed all Spirits, and many
heavenly things were opened in the Testimony of Jesus concerning the Bounds and
right use of the lawful things of this World, and in the demonstration of the
Spirit and power of Christ then abounding amongst us, and governing our
Assembly, and guiding our hearts and understandings. Unanimously mously it was
agreed and adjudged that a Competence of the lawful things of this World is
sufficient for every one, and is the right bounds with a due consideration of
every ones Charge, Station, place and service. And that Mind which will not be
content with this bears the Character of Covetousness, and renders such unfit
to Rule in the Church of Christ; And under the Overruling power of the Lord
there was an Unanimous Consent, one by one, to offer up our selves to the
Judgment of the Province-Meeting, or other approved Elders, as the
Province-Meeting shall think fit, if in any thing we do exceed those Bounds,
that Truth may bound Us that has all power in Heaven and Earth: And in a
Subjection one to another in our Possessions, Holdings, Callings, Trading and
dealing amongst Men, not to be our own Judges, or walk in the light of our own
Eyes, considering the Wise Man's saying, that every Man's Cause is good in his
own Eyes, but his Neighbor finds him out, and in the multitude of Counsel is
safety. Not that we intend to deprive any, of the moderate and lawful use of
the things of this World, or to take from any Man his Possessions, or to invade
and take away Property, but to bring all things into right bounds, and set them
in their right places, that so none may be guilty of the great sin of abusing
the Lord's Mercies, but might use and enjoy them to his honor; that in so
doing they may enjoy his Peace and Blessing, which indeed is the true comfort
of all Enjoyments. Thus shall we give evident Testimony to the World by our
Moderation, even in the lawful things, that we are true followers of the Lord
Jesus Christ in a self-denying life. And thus, as helps meet together in the
Lord Jesus, we may be as Saviors on Mount Sion, building up one another in our
most precious Faith, and in our heavenly possession in Christ Jesus, over the
greedy Gain, Greatness, and Vainglory of the World, and perishing fading
things thereof that soon comes to an End; and here the rich Man will not Glory
in his Riches, but see the danger of them, and not lay hold of Opportunities to
heap up more, to make himself and posterity great in the World, but rather
Endeavor to lessen, that with more ease and cheerfulness he may serve God and
his Generation with what he has, with all his might, being glad of every
Opportunity that presents, that he may do good and be rich in good Works,
considering he is a Steward, and his time uncertain in what he enjoys, and must
be accountable to the Lord of all, for all things he possesses under him; and
under the like consideration the mean Man will be glad that he is free from
many Temptations and Snares that the Rich in this World is liable to fall into,
(and pierce themselves with many sorrows and hurtful Lusts,) and bless the Lord
for what he enjoys, not wanting Food and Raiment with which he is well content
and easy in his mind, that is toward the Lord, and seeks not from place to
place, and from one Country to another in a covetous Mind to heap up Riches,
but looks to the Lord with an Eye of Faith, to receive Counsel from him in his
undertakings, and dare not go beyond his Limits, nor without his countenance;
and all Murmuring, Repining, and Unbelief is kept out of the Camp. And there
will be no craving Spirits where the Lord Rules, but all in their stations
according to serve the Lord with all their might and Substance in their places
where the Lord has raised them, or ordered them, and may be serviceable;
Shaking themselves from the dust of the Earth, putting on their beautiful
Garments of the Lords Government, and shining under the discipline thereof,
rising over the Earth and Earthly things in the life and power of Christ, as
Lights in the World in this glorious day of the Lord, wherein he is staining
the Glory of the lawful things of this World, and the goodliness thereof by the
brightness of his coming in the Glory of his Fathers Kingdom; and is whipping
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, that it may be a house for the service of
God, which holiness becomes; that he may walk, sup, and make his abode, and the
Offerings of his People may be acceptable to him when he has purged away all
this dross, Tin and reprobate Silver.

Our hearts are deeply affected with the care and kindness of the Lord for our
preservation from the Snares of the Enemy, which he lays for us in the lawful
things of this World, far more dangerous, and we more liable to be taken in
them in this time of great ease and liberty, than in the time of persecution
and sufferings, to be frighted from our stedfastness in our Faith and
Principles.

And dear Friend, we may well understand that as to our Society, self-denial
stands mostly in the lawful things, hoping by this time of this glorious day
you have overcome the base and unlawful things, and your hearts and minds is
cleansed from them by the Blood of Christ that sprinkles our hearts from an
evil Conscience, and washes our Bodies with clean Water of Regeneration, and
renewing of his Holy Spirit. And he that has done this for us is perfecting
what is lacking, that he may present us to God the Father faultless, to whom be
praises for ever. Amen.

Subscribed in behalf of the Meeting by William Edmondson. Thomas Trafford.
Roger Roberts. John Pim. George Rooke. Thomas Wilson.


POSTSCRIPT.
AT the first when the Lord called and gathered us to be a People, and opened
the Eyes of our Understandings, then we saw the exceeding sinfulness of sin,
and the wickedness that was in the World; and a perfect Abhorrence was fixed in
our hearts against all the wicked, unjust, vain, ungodly, unlawful part of the
World in all Respects; And we saw the goodly and most glorious lawful things of
the World to be abused and misused: And that many Snares and Temptations laid
in them, and many troubles and dangers of diverse kinds, and we felt the Load of
them, and that we could not carry them and run the Race the Lord had set before
us so cheerful as to win the Prize of our Salvation; So that our care was to
cast off this great Load and Burden of our great and gainful ways of getting
Riches, and to lessen our concerns therein, to the Compass that we might not be
chargeable to any in our stations and services required of us, and be ready to
answer Christ Jesus our Captain that called us to follow him in a spiritual
warfare, under the discipline of his daily Cross and self-denial; and then the
things of this World was of small value with us; So that we might win Christ,
and the goodliest things of the World was not near us; So that we might be near
the Lord, and the Lords Truth out-ballanc'd all the World, even the most
glorious part of it. Then great Trading was a Burden, and great concerns a
great trouble, all needless things, fine Houses, rich Furniture, and gaudy
Apparel, was an Eye fore; Our Eye being single to the Lord, and the inshining
of his Light in our hearts, which gave us the sight of the knowledge of the
Glory of God, which so affected our minds, that it stained the Glory of all
Earthly things, and they bore no Mastery with us either in dwelling, eating,
drinking, buying, selling, marrying, or giving in marriage; the Lord was the
object of our Eye, and we all humble and low before him and self of small
Repute; Ministers and Elders in all such cases walking as good Examples, that
the flock might follow their footsteps as they followed Christ in the daily
Cross and self-denial in their dwellings, callings, eating, drinking, buying,
selling, marrying, and giving in marriage; And this answered the Lord and his
Witness in all Consciences, and gave us great credit amongst-Men.

And as our Number increased, it happened that such a Spirit came in amongst
us, as was amongst the Jews, when they came out of Egypt, and this began to
look back into the World, and traded with the Credit which was not of its own
purchasing and striving to be great in the Riches and Possessions of this
World, and then great fair buildings in City and Country, fine and fashionable
Furniture, and apparel equivolent, with dainty and voluptuous provision, with
Rich Matches in Marriage, with Excessive Customany, uncomely smoking of
Tobacco, under color of lawful and serviceable, far wide from the Footsteps of
the ministers and Elders the Lord raised and sent forth into his Work and
service at the beginning; And far short of the Example our Lord and Master
Christ Jesus left us, when he was tempted in the Wilderness with the preference
of the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, and despised them. And
Moses that refused the Crown of Egypt, and to be called the Son of Pharoh's
Daughter, rather chused Affliction with the Lords People, having a regard to
the recompense of reward. And the holy Apostle writes to the Church of Christ
both Fathers, Youngmen and Children, and advises against the love of the World,
and the fashions thererof: And it is working as the old Leaven at this very
time, to corrupt the Heritage of God, and to fill it with Briars, Thorns,
Thistles, and Tares, and the Grapes of the Earth to make the Lord reject it,
and lay it wast. But the Lord of all our mercies, whose Eye has been over us
for good since he gathered us to be a People, and entered into Covenant with us,
and according to his ancient promise is lifting up his Spirit as a Standard
against the Invasion of this Enemy, and is raising up his living Word and
Testimony in the hearts of Many, to stand in the Gap which this floating high
worldly libertine Spirit has made; And that is gone from the Footsteps of them
that follows Christ as at first, and knows him to bound them, and to keep in
his Bounds: and not in their own Will, and time lay hold on Presentations and
Opportunities that may offer to get Riches, which many has had and refused for
Truths sake, and the Lord has accepted as an offering, and rewarded to their
great comfort, and to the Praise of his great Name.

William Edmondson.

The End.

