Imprimatur,

Dan. Nicols R. P. D. Arch. Cant Capel. Domesticus.
Ex aedibus Lambethanis, Martij 21o 1662/3.
Geologia Norvegica. Or, a brief instructive REMEMBRANCER, Concerning that very
great and spacious EARTHQUAKE, Which happened almost quite through the South
parts of NORVVAY: Upon the 24th. day of April, in the year 1657.

Also Physical, Historical, and Theological Grounds and Reasons concerning the
causes and significations of EARTHQUAKES.

WRITTEN In the Danish Tongue, by Michael Peterson Escholt, sometimes Minister
of Ackers-house Castle in Norway.

And Englished by DANIEL COLLINS.

London, Printed by J. H. for S. Thomson at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1663.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.
GEORGIUS D. G. MAG. BR. FR. ET HIB. REX F. D.
portrait of Geroge I blazon of Cambridge University Library

To the worthy Company of Merchants Trading into the Kingdom of Norway. D. C.
wishes much happiness.
Honored Friends,
THis small ensuing Treatise falling into my hands in Norway some time since,
after a serious perusal, I thought it not amiss to spend a little time in the
translation thereof: and as an acknowledgement of the civilities you have been
pleased to show me: do offer it to your acceptance; knowing, that as your
abilities can judge of my endeavor to do the Author no injury, in rendering his
sense; so your ingenuity and Candor will excuse such failings, as herein
possibly you may observe to have escaped him who is

Yours to be commanded DAN. COLLINS.

To the Reader.
ALthough the publication of this little Translation, may seem superfluous unto
many: whose knowledge gained by their study of, and search into, the wonderful
works of God and nature, may very well make it so to them: yet I am apt to
believe that others (not so learned) may receive some satisfaction hereby. It
having been originally written in the Danish tongue by a Divine of Norway,
reputed eminent for his Piety and parts, (upon an occasion of the proper
subject whereof it discourses, which I think is not very common, as having not
seen the like, yet resembling a little the cause of its being Englished) and
was well accepted of by the people there; I doubt not but it may find
indifferent, if not the like entertainment here; however if any benefit do
accrue unto any hereby, my pains will be recompensed. The judicious Reader is
desired to understand it in the best sense it contains; in case the relish of
the Danish dialect should any where make it ingrate to the sincerer palate of
his judgment, or the Historical part thereof, should seem to Hyperbolize. In
confidence of which favor it is left to his mild censure,

By the Cordial wisher of his welfare, DAN. COLLINS.

The Preface.
FOr the right and more perfect understanding of this speculative Discourse
concerning Earthquakes, the Reader may have especial respect unto it under
these following Heads or particulars, viz.

1. The Qualities and Properties of the Earth, its wonderful, yet natural
operations within it self. 2. The Fire which is found to be below in the Earth,
its wonderful nature, and powerful effects. 3. The several Minerals, Metals,
and Substances in and under the Earth, and how they are wrought and changed. 4.
The Air and Wind which is enclosed in the earth, and how it does occasion great
and terrible Earthquakes. 5. The Physical Description of Earthquakes, with
their Species, Operation, and Natural Effects. 6. Historical Relations, what by
Experience has been commonly observed to follow after such great and
remarkable Earthquakes. 7. A Theological Conclusion and Instruction out of the
Holy and Infallible Word of God, what Earthquakes do signify and teach unto
us.
Unto the Consideration of all which, and for the common Benefit of others, I
was moved to compose this little Memorandum, by occasion of that very
remarkable and spacious Earthquake which happened in the South parts of
Norway, the 24th. of April, in this present Year 1657. about a quarter of an
hour before 12 a Clock at Noon, when the Sun was in the 15th. Degree of Taurus,
and the Moon above the Earth in the first Degree of Aquarius, and the same day
happened also the Planetary Aspect, Quadratus Saturni and Veneris, and the
following night, about 3 or 4 a Clock in the Morning another particular
Earthquake began afresh, but was not so great as the former.

Concerning the Earthquake which began in the day, I have true and certain
Intelligence, That it stretched North and South, from Oasterdale, Sollewer,
Totten Wallyers, Ringer Rick, the upper and lower Rummerick, down all along the
Land, and through all Weeken, almost to Bawhouse, above 160 Miles in Length.

And also from the Borders of Sweden that lie Eastward of Norway, thwart over
all the Land Westward as far as Lindesnesse, being about 40 Miles more, and it
carried such a noise and sound along with it, that the people at first knew not
but it was the noise of Thunder, until they perceived the Houses shook, and all
their Movables, as Beds, Tables, and Benches, to totter, and as it were dance
with shaking. As yet, I have not had a further Relation concerning it, but
possibly it might have stretched* it self much farther both in breadth and
length. Now this Earthquake was so strong and powerful, that it shook the very
Islands in the Sea, and the great and small Rocks in the fresh Lakes; and by
the very great concussion and trembling did much amaze and terrify those that
were upon the water, and was more especially seen by such as were upon the
great English and Hollands Ships, then here, as also upon other Vessels, Hoyes
and small Boats. Yet it has not done any remarkable harm (that is yet known)
any where in the Country; either to Houses, Walls, or other Buildings, for
which we ought to be very thankful to God, and to receive it as an especial
Token of his Grace and Mercy, as not signifying unto our Country too very
great Calamity or Destruction.

But nevertheless in regard that this same Earthquake was of such a length and
breadth, namely 160 miles in length, and as much in breadth, contrary to the
Nature of all those Earthquakes that I ever read of, we need not doubt but that
it does fignifie some especial and remarkable Change and Alteration.

And this puts me in mind of what the ancient Historiographer Herodotus has
recorded in his Lib. 6. That when any remarkable change or common calamity
approaches, or is impendent over any Land, or people, it is commonly made
plainly known by some such unusual preceding Signs and Tokens. And this may be
more clearly verified by Examples out of the Scriptures; for before the
Canaanites and their bordering Neighbors were subdued and expelled by Joshua
and the Israelites, this strange Sign was seen, That the water of Jordan
contrary to its nature, stood still above, and ran out below, and gave the
Israelites a free passage through upon dry ground, Josh. 3. 16.

And likewise before the 5 Kings of the Amorites were conquered, and their
Country possessed by the People of Israel, the Sun and the Moon stood still each
in his Celestial station, about the space of a whole Day, and a Night, Josh.
10. 13. Also before the Moabites were subdued by the Kings of Judah and Israel,
the Moabites Water was turned into blood, 2 Kin. 3. 22. I will not now speak of
the many Signs and Tokens that preceded the Desolation and Destruction of the
hardened Egyptians, and Jerusalem, because it would be too tedious to recite
here: But I do aver, that when such unusual signs and tokens do happen,
especially when such a Mountanous and Rocky Land, Meaning here Norway.
even from its Foundation upwards, with its Seas, Streams, and Rivers, shall
for the space of so many Miles together, tremble and quake, we ought not in any
case to slight, or think lightly of it Wherefore without any longer Delay, I
will now enter upon my proposed Discourse.

CHAP. I.
Concerning the Qualities and Properties of the Earth; its wonderful, yet
natural, operations within it self.
WHen we seriously weigh and consider the inward and outward nature and
properties of the earth, which God Almighty has given unto it for the benefit
of Mankind; not only that we should have our being and habitation upon it, but
also receive our natural lives support and maintenance from it: Then we may
very well say with great Joy and Admiration, as the Kingly Prophet David did in
Psalm 8. O Lord our Lord, how wonderful and glorious is thy name in all the
earth. For we do in truth experimentally find, That the earth is in every kind
like unto a loving and serviceable Mother, or Nurse unto us, and therefore is
justly termed by that great Teacher of the Oeconomicks, namely Sirach, The
Mother of us all, Chap. 40. v. 1.

For when we are born into the world, the Earth entertaines us, and as long as
we live in the world, by her plenty and liberality she nourishes and sustaines
us, and finally, when we shall at last depart from hence again, she like a
tender Mother, receives us, as it were into her Bosom, or Lap, and preserves us
from all that evil whereof this world is full, and lets us rest within her self
in peace, until the last day; when she shall make such perfect restitution of
us again, that she shall not suffer the least Joint or Member of us, to be lost
or perish; no not a hair, or one drop of Blood, wherewith Job comfort
himself in his great misery, in the 19th. Chap. of the Book of his Patience, V.
27.

And besides this, we can never sufficiently conceive and apprehend what rich
Treasure and precious Jewels the Earth retains within it self, partly hidden,
and partly discoverable, some whereof she yearly distributeth to her
Inhabitants. None of the four Elements is more constantly near us, or a more
faithful, and continual Assistant unto us then the Earth.

For the Elements of Water and Air do often much damnifie and endanger us; the
Element Fire is too high for us, or else might do us good by its warmth and
operation, yet sometimes by Thunder and Lightning does sufficiently affright
and hurt us. But the element of Earth only, as a faithful Nursing Mother, never
forsakes us, so long as the world endures, but without cessation does
constantly assist us in Life and Death, in Prosperity and Adversity, so that we
are never forsaken of her in this World, no not after Death.

And who can sufficiently conceive or express the wonderful Operations and
Labors which the Earth yearly undergoes and performs, night and day for our
sakes? She has never any rest, neither outwardly nor inwardly. Outwardly she
produces and provides grass and Hay for those Creatures which are appointed by
God to cloth and feed us; and also several fruitful Trees, each according to
his kind, in great numbers: Likewise diverse sorts of Herbs, as well for our
delight, as Food, Physic, and preservation of our healths. Besides great
variety of Corn, as wheat, Rye, Barley, Pease, Oats, and diverse other sorts of
Grain, which afford us necessary Maintenance and Subsistence.

Inwardly she works and produces for us many kinds of Minerals, Metals, and
precious Stones, which those that labor in the Mines know well how such her
Treasure to search for, find, and get, out of the depth of her Bowels, and
bring them to light and use. So that we may sufficiently see and observe that
God Almighty has his especial Laboratorium, or Workhouse, even in the deepest
and most bottomless places, not only to cause wholesome waters, warm Baths,
Springs and Rivers to arise, but also to make and produce Gold, Silver, Copper,
Tin, Iron, Lead, Brass, etc. And Multitudes of precious Stones.

But now, when this Laboratorium or Workhouse of the Lord, with all its
Treasure and Glory, shall quake, tremble and shake, contrary to its Creators
solid fixation, Psalm. 89. 11. and 2 Pet. Chapter 3. v. 5. Then certainly there must
be something out of order somewhere, that does signify some especial and
unusual thing.

Moreover touching such things as Nature does so work and produce in the
innermost parts and bowels of the Earth, they do partly show themselves openly
above the earth, and do often break out both to the greatest admiration, and
terror of men: Such are Meteors, that is, Fogs, Mists, bright burning Damps,
like a flame that flies about, which the Vulgar in Denmark call the
Lanthorn-man, and also Rings about the Sun and Moon, and a certain moveable
Light in the Heavens, which often shows like Soldiers fighting, Ships
sailing, two or three Suns together, and the like; All which is caused partly
by only earthish, and partly by earthish and waterish Mixtures and Damps
together, proceeding from the wonderful workings of Nature within the earth.

And this we may be assured of, that there happens no such admirable and
powerful effects of Nature above the Earth, but that there is far greater, and
more wonderful operations below and within the earth, by the various workings
and Concoctions of Nature, partly by subterraneous water, and partly by
subterraneous fire.

Concerning the subterraneous waters, you shall have better Information in the
Second and Fourth Chapters, how they may be the Cause of Great Earthquakes; but
we must speak something here concerning the subterraneous Fire, which does also
cause great motion and powerful stirrings in the Earth, and does often help to
the production of Earthquakes, and shall be handled in the Following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Concerning Fire which is found to be below in the Earth, its wonderful Nature
and powerful Effects.
THe Learned and wise Searchers and Inspectors into Nature deny not, but that
such substances, as the waters in the innermost parts of the Earth have their
course through, and do cover, steep and soak, do give the same waters several
and distinct virtues, smells, qualities, tastes, and colors. As for example; The
water that runs through, steeps, soakes, or covers Brimstony or Victrillish
earth, has a far different nature, virtue, taste, and color, from that which
runs through Salt-Peterish, Allomish, or Limish earth; but they will by no
means grant that Brimstone Bitumen, or other such stuff which easily and
suddenly takes fire above the Earth, should so heat those seething hot Springs
within the earth, which do arise in several places thereof, because the fire is
not after such a manner secretly contained and hidden in them, as it is in a
Flint, Steel, or in Calce viva, that is, unslak't Lime; for as soon as the Flint
and Steel is forcibly struck together, they do presently produce apparent fire.
And when water touches, or is cast upon unslak't Lime, it kindles it self, and
presently discovers the secret nature of the fire that is in it, and that so
plainly, that it will quickly set any thing a fire that will be kindled by fire.

And therefore we must not think that either the heat of the Sun, or motus
continui, strong and perpetual motions, which do otherwise occasion great heat
here on earth, and sometimes produces fire in Nature, or the inward Warmth of
the earth, or any other substance which the subterraneous waters have their
course through within the earth, can be the cause of the said waters being so
boiling hot, as it is in the hot Bathes, and in many other places of the Earth
where it springs up; but it must be the subterraneous fire it self, to which it
only and properly belongs in altissimo Caloris gradu, to heat it in so high a
degree. Which fire without doubt is kindled in several parts of the earth, when
the subterraneous water forces it self per subterraneos meatus, or the
subterraneous passages and pores of the Earth, where Calx viva, or other such
kind of inflameable matter is, as aforesaid.

And it is here to be observed, That Bitumen (by us called Jews Lime) will
burn in the water, without having any air, but then it must first be set on
fire above the water in the open Air, and when it is kindled, it will not be
quenched by water, no more then burning Pitch or Tar will; but the more water
is cast upon it, the fiercer it burns.

There is also a Stone called Gagates, that will burn vehemently in the water;
which Galen did so much admire, that only to find and see it, he sailed with
great danger of his Life round about Lycia.

Now Brimstone is a substance found in the Earth, which is easily kindled when
it is above the Earth, but it will not burn except it have Air, whence it may
readily be observed, that it is not Brimstone, but Bitumen, or Calx viva, or
some other substance yet unknown, which is the thing that so burns in the
subterraneous waters, and from whence they receive such their extraordinary
heat, that in many places of the Earth they spring up so extreme boiling hot,
that one may scald Swine, Foul, or the like in them, and that so suddenly,
that a man can scarce dip them into those warers before the hair and feathers
come off: and if one hold them never so little in, their very flesh will be
boiled from the bones, like some hot Springs in Island, and in Germany: as
Thermae, Badenses, and the like.

Of this sort of hot springs, called in Latin Thermae, and by us commonly
called hot Baths; There are enough to be found in several countries and
kingdoms, but especially in Germany: as Leuker Bath in Wallissen Land by the
Alps of Poeninas, Thermae, Badensis in Hegoja, the Wild Bath in the Land of
Wittemberg, Wiss-Bath in the Land of Hessen: one by Elbogen in Bohemia, and
another at Achan in Brabant. And that there is a great and dreadful fire in the
innermost parts of the earth; a man may apparently see and understand by those
Mountains that do perpetually flame and burn without cessation, giving a
terrible prospect, and yearly casting up vast quantities of Brimstone,
Pumistone, and other burnt stuff like that of a Smiths Forge, which the earth
works and casts up of it self, through such open hiatus or holes, by the heat
and force of the subterraneous fire, where the said fire has (as I may say)
its breathing places.

Such a Mountain there is in Island called by Cosmographis Mons Heckla, and by
the Inhabitants Hecklefield: the same Mountain burns continually with a blue
brimstone-like and most dreadful flame, casting up, and bestrowing the fields
round about with such great quantities of Brimstone, that diverse Ships may
yearly be laden off with it; and it often times strews the Land with so many
ashes and other burnt stuff, that the Country for the space of ten miles round
about, can yield no profitable increase; and when it burns with greatest
vehemence (for it burns sometimes more fiercely then others) it makes a
terrible rumbling, like the noise of loud Thunder, and a fearful crackling and
tearing, that may be heard a long way off by the Inhabitants, and such as sail
by it. The fire of this same Mountain is of a strange quallity and nature, it
can burn and consume water, but cannot set on fire or consume Tow. Saxo Gramm.
in praefatione.

Anno 1626. did this mountain of Heckfield break out with such a flame, that it
cast terrible and unusual pieces of fire out, which flew round about a great
way, and burnt up many Houses, and did irrepairable mischief to the Land: and
according to intelligence, the ashes of that fire flew about certain hundreds
of miles: and was also seen in the Norther most parts of Norway, which seems to
be impossible: yet it is related for certain that it was so. The late
Historiographers do write very strangely cerning such things as do yearly
happen by, and about this mountain.

In Campania hard by Neapolis there is also a burning mountain called Vesuvius,
or as some call it, Vesevus, which also burns continually without cessation.
This mountain has several times bestrewed the Land thereabouts with so many
ashes, that they have covered the tops of the trees in the adjacent woods. In
the time of Titus Vespatian. And Fl. Domitian, the same mountain cast up such a
fire, that two Towns were burnt by it, and also caused such a mighty and thick
smoke, that it wholly deprived the Sun of its light all over Italy, so that the
day there was as dark then as the darkest night; And it also bestrew'd the
whole Country with such an infinite and incredible quantity of ashes, that it
was covered over as with a great Snow: which ashes were so blown and carried
about by the winds, that they flew to Africa, Egypt and Syria. Munster lib. 2.
de Italia.

In the 16th year of the Reign of Constantine the 5. the said Vesuvius did very
great harm. And in the year 1538. it broke out fresh again with a terrible and
dangerous fire, and an Earthquake, and made a fearful deep hole in the earth,
in plain and even ground, and round about the same hole cast up a mighty deal
of earth like unto a great mountain. Munster ibidem.

Pliny that great Naturalist, when he endeavoring to profound the nature of
this burning mountain, went too near the mouth of the hole in the top of it,
was choakt by the smoke and damp of the said fire, and lost his life.

In Sycillia there is also such a Mountain called Etna, which in old time was,
and is yet much spoken of for its continual casting up of fire and brimstone:
whose fire is only seen at nights, and nothing but smoke a days, except when it
breaks out very vehemently: then the fire may be seen day and night. In the
year 1537. the same Mountain cast up a great piece of burning Brimstone into
the Air, which fell down again in several places in pieces, and spoiled the
adjacent Countries, Woods and Villages.

The precedent year, namely 1536. the 22. of March, did this Mountain of Etna
begin to cast out a most terrible fire, so that the whole Country was amazed
and trembled at it: and there was such a dreadful Earthquake, with a crackling
and rattling noise, that many dyed for very fear; and the ashes which that same
fire cast up, covered over not only Sycillia, but also Calabria (a Province in
Italy) like a great Snow.

The Learned Philosopher Empedocles was choked and destroyed by this mountains
fire and smell: when he to satisfy his curiosity concerning the nature and
qualities thereof, went too near the hole.

Philosophers give the reason and cause of such wonderful and continual
burnings to be this, viz. That the Earth is hollow in many places within it
self, (as shall be further declared in the fourth chapter) and is full of
Brimstone, Bitumen, and other kind of substances, which can feed the fire; As
also unslakt Lime and Water, by which the subterraneous fire is easiest and
oftnest kindled; Now the fire cannot burn except it have Air, or, (as we may
say) a breathing place: And therefore it is thought that Therma or those hot
Baths that are found in several Countries, must be certain Spiracula, or
breathing holes, by which the subterraneous fire does in some kind get air unto
it: and when the air, by what means soever it be, gets into the hollow places
in the earth where the fire is; Then that fire increases into a flame and
makes burning coals, or living Embers as it were, even in the innermost parts
of the earth. Therefore it cannot be doubted, but there must needs be great and
wonderful, yet natural Meatus, ways or passages, in, and under the earth,
through which the heat and flame of the often named subterraneous fire, has in
several places its passage, until it gets an open Spiraculum or breathing hole
through such flaming mountains. Here it is to be noted that those flaming
mountains do not burn always alike outwardly, but sometimes more, and sometimes
less for such reasons as this: When the Hiatus or hole which is above in the
mountain is stopped with any kind of stuff, so that the fire is smothered and
cannot have its free air or breathing-place, then it goes out, though not
quite, but burns notwithstanding below in the earth; and only sends forth some
few sparkles or small flame, and sometimes nothing but only smoke, and a
stinking burnt damp smell above the earth, which shows that the fire below in
the earth is not dead or wholly quenched, but burns and works faintly under the
earth, as long, as till either the former hole opens again, or it cannot break
through and make another Hiatus, or breathing hole, and then breaks out afresh
again with so much the greater power and vehemence, not without doing great
mischief and damage to the adjacent places, as is before declared.

Now from hence may any man sufficiently understand and observe, that by the
power, operation, and force of such fire, in, and under the earth, there must
needs be a boiling, working, distilling, and changing of several Minerals and
Metals: especially considering that the Sun, with the rest of the Planets, have
also their influence, and do work effectually under the earth: and this must
needs be no small cause of great and terrible Earthquakes. How Minerals and
Metals are wrought, decocted and prepared by nature under the Earth, shall be
handled in the following chapter.

CHAP. III.
Concerning several Minerals, Metals, and substances, in, and under the earth,
and how they are wrought and changed.
TOuching Minerals which are wrought by nature below in the earth, it is
according to Physical judgment thus.

When any dry substance, in, and under the earth, mixeth it self with any wet
or moist substance, by what means soever it happens; whether by the Airs,
Fires, or Waters passage under the earth: and the same mixture either by the
powerful influence of the Planets, or by the heat of the often named
subterraneous Fire and warm waters, is decocted and well boiled together: then
there is produced a Mineral according to the nature of the substances which are
mixed together. Also when the subterraneous waters in their several passages or
courses under the earth, do happen to cover over, soak or steep, any kind of
metal so long, that they do contract and gather a thickness to themselves from
it, and become like unto troubled waters above the earth: and the same waters
(afterward) comes where the fire is; or the heat of the subterraneous fire
does penetrate and force it self through to the same waters, then there is
boiled of that water a certain moist substance or matter, which in time comes
to be a hard and solid Mineral, according to the nature of that metal which
the waters did so cover, soak, or steep; and from which it had gathered its
quality or thickness under the earth. Moreover, when such thick, troubled, and
changed subterraneous waters continue long in a place without motion: then that
quality with which it is so thickened, mixed, or changed, settles it self to the
bottom, (as any thick and troubled water naturally does) where it remains; and
when the water gets any kind of passage out, it runs away; and that which is
left behind in the bottom is dried and hardened by the power and influence of
the Sun and Planets, and also by the subterraneous air or heat wrought into a
Mineral, suitable to the nature and quality of that, from whence the
subterraneous waters that are run away, had gathered and received its
thickness. And this may now be more easily apprehended and understood by the
following examples.

When the waters have their courses and passage through that earth which is
full of Copper and such like Ore, and covers, soaks, or steeps it so long and
often, that it becomes thick and muddy, and its nature thoroughly altered and
changed, or infected by the quality thereof. And the same waters afterward by
the heat of the fire, or the power and influence of the Planets, is boiled and
distilled in the earth: then it becomes a Succus or natural green moist
substance, whereof being dried, comes the Mineral called Chrysocolla, (that is
Mountaingreen) and Virdigrease.

In like manner when the subterraneous waters covers over, soaks, or steeps
pyriten aerosum and friabilem* that is a rusty Firrstone, which is easily
ground to pieces, and is called in High Dutch Kys: then it becomes a bitter
Succus, which afterward turns to Victril, and Alumen liquidum, that is Allom.

Likewise where the subterraneous waters, or liquid substances have their
courses and passage thorough, or into Gold and Silver Ore: then it becomes
Lithargyrium Aureum and Argenteum, that is Litharidge of Gold and Silver.

Nor must we think that all Minerals are produced in the earth after this
manner now spoken of; but some after this manner, and some otherwise, by the
influence of the Planets and other occult natural causes, which ought to put us
in mind of the omnipotency of God, who by nature works the rough and unshapen
earth, and earthish liquid substances, into such several, very necessary, and
precious Minerals and Metals, for the great benefit and good of Mankind.

And it is also found by experience that many Minerals are so perfectly
decocted and wrought below in the earth, that they do afterward spring up of
themselves thorough the Clefts and Cranies of the Rocks, like a pot that seeths
and runs over.

As touching Metals, they are by nature wrought and produced below in the
earth, after diverse secret and incomprehensible ways and manners, yea even
amongst and within the hard stones and mighty mountainous Rocks by which in
like manner we have cause given to consider the omnipotency and bounty of God,
whereby he in so wonderful and inconceivable a manner, does change earth and
stone into Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, Tinn, Lead, and other very necessary
Metals for the profit and benefit of man. And as the Fish is never so deep in
the main Sea and other great waters and streams, but it is brought up for the
food and sustentation of man; in like manner is Gold, Silver, Iron, Brass,
Tinn, Lead, etc. never so deep below in the earth, nor so hard fastened in, and
between the hard rocks under it; but that by the Almighty power of God, and the
Art and Labor of those that work in the Mines, it is brought up to light, for
the use and great benefit of Man. Concerning which, Job in his 28 chap. 1, 2
verses, writes thus. The Silver has its secret passage, and the Gold its
place, Iron is taken out of the earth, and Stone is melted into Copper.

Such favor has the goodness and omnipotency of God showed now in these last
times of the world, unto this Land and Kingdom of Norway, especially since the
year 1623. when that rich and famous Silver Mine in Sanswerd, and since that,
time after time, the rich Copper-Mine in Ewster-dale, and Gulbrands-dale as
well as the excellent Iron-Mine in Hedemarken, and other places, were found out
and improved to the great and profitable advancement of Trade.

And here is especially to be noted, that Metals are not discovered and
brought to light and use in all places alike soon, but some in one seculo or
century of years, and some in another. After two, three, or more hundred years
time: and the reason is, because they are not ripe all alike soon, or
perfectly wrought and prepared; as the fruits of Trees or Herbs of the field,
are some of them sooner, and some later ripe; and that because some Metals are
so deep below in the earth, that they cannot so soon grow up, and show
themselves above, or upon the earth; nor can be perfectly wrought and prepared
so soon as those Metals that are placed higher up in the earth; and it is also
partly because many Countries and places that are full of Ore, and metallish
substances do yet lie so far from the Suns and Planets Courses which
principally works and prepares them: yea even in the deepest and innermost
places of the earth, that they cannot come so soon to maturity, or be
discovered and brought to use so soon, as those Mines that are in the Southern
Countries, either nearer, or under the Suns and Planets courses.

And hence it is that the Mines in these Northern Countries, especially here in
Norway and Sweden, (whose Southermost borders lie not above 34. degrees from
the Artick or North Pole, but the Northermost reaches up to 71. degrees of
North Latitude) lying far from the Sun and the other Planets courses and
operations, have not so soon come to maturity, as those Mines in the South
countries, and also in the East and West Indies, which lie but 30 or 40 degrees
from the Equinoctial on both sides: from whence great quantities of Gold and
Silver has been, and is now yearly brought into these Norther Countries. For
the heat of the Sun, and the power of the Planets, by their presence there,
have a far greater force and influence in their operation, then they have here
with us, where they never come so near: and besides their power and influence
is much obstructed by that natural frost and cold which is here so near under
the Pole.

It is therefore well worth the notice, that when any Ore-Mine is found here in
Norway, (as happens often, and in many places) which upon trial is found to
yield good and fine Metal, or Ore, though not so rich as to defray all charges;
that therefore such Mines ought not to be wholly neglected and slighted, but
diligently registered, and taken notice of, for the benefit of our posterity:
because the Ore shows that there is good and fine Metal preparing in that
Mine; and possibly being deeper searched into, would be found rich enough: but
if it should not then be able to bear the charges; it is because the Metal so
found, is not yet ripe enough, and come to perfect maturity, which in time may
be; wherein Nature, and the Planets may do very much in half a hundred, or a
hundred years; so that what is not yet ripe enough, and come to full perfection
in our time, may be more ripe, and come to better maturity, in process of the
time of our posterity, to the great profit, benefit, and advantage of these
Kingdoms hereafter.

Now when Metals are thoroughly prepared and come to their maturity, and
perfection under the earth, then they do discover themselves above the earth;
(like as the fruits of trees, when they are ripe enough, fall down of
themselves,) showing thereby that they are now ripe, or fit to be dug up and
used.

And it is related amongst us, that the rich Silver-Mine in Sanswerd by Dram,
did discover it self, by showing, and putting forth its Ore through the
cracks, and clefts of the stones in that rocky Mountain, in the year 1623.

And it happens often, that when the Country people here, do burn the wood off
from such great places where they intend to sow Corn, that the force and
vehemence of the fire reaches into the Rocks, and makes them glowing hot, and
then the melted Ore or Metal, runs out of their clefts and cracks, whereby they
are often discovered, and in time improved.

It is also to be admired how wonderfully nature does prepare and produce
several sorts of Ore in strange forms, and shapes: such as are whole pieces of
pure Silver, or Copper, in the shapes of Men, Women, Horses, Fowls, Fishes,
Dragons, Trees, and the like: which have been really found both in the Silver
and the Copper-Mines here in Norway, and are safely reserved by such as are
partners in the Mines, as miracles of nature.

It is likewise certain, that there are diverse Spirits found in many of the Ore
Mines: amongst which some do the workmen no harm at all, but otherwise wander
up and down below in the Mines, and seem to imitate the Laborers in the Mine,
in doing all kind of work after an Apish, Antic fashion; some seem to hew the
Ore loose, some to fill that which is hewn, into tubs, and to wind it up: some
seem to hasten the rest to follow their work, and yet they do nothing at all,
but only mock the Laborers in the Mines; and these are most frequently seen in
those Mines where much Ore is shortly after found.

But some of these Spirits are so dangerous and pernicious in some places, that
they do destroy and kill the Laborers in the Mines, infesting and expelling
them, so that they are forced wholly to give over, and forsake the Mines, and
repair to other places, as it happened at Anneberg in Elsatz in Germany, at a
M^ne-pit then called Corona Rosacea, or, Rosen Crown.

And here is to be observed that nature does often, yea, for the most part, mix
more sorts then one together, as Gold, Silver, and Copper; as also Silver,
Copper, Tinn, and Lead, one with another; from whence this word Metal derives
its name from the Greek, quasi (...), the one mixed with the other.

And moreover, besides this, Nature does sometimes work and produce Metals
below in the earth, that are found to be hard, tight, and solid: as if they had
been cast, or wrought with the hammer, but sometimes, and most commonly it is
found growing in, and mixed with stone: so that the Ory stones must be beaten
with pestles as in a mortar, and then the Ore-power melted in Furnaces, and
afterward refined from the dross, before any necessary thing can be made of
it.

And this may suffice to be spoken concerning several Minerals and Metals, and
how wonderfully they may be wrought and changed, within, and under the earth,
and do help to the production of great Earthquakes.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning Air, and Wind, that is enclosed in the Earth, and how it does
occasion great and terrible Earthquakes.
IT is an universal Axiom, and Physical rule; non datur vacuum in rerum
natura; that is, there is nothing found empty in Nature; whence it follows that
all things over or under the earth, must of necessity be full, or filled with
something, especially with one or more of the four Elements; which be, Fire,
Air, Earth, and Water; and where none of the visible Elements are, there the
Air is present, being a thin, subtle, and invisible body, that fills up all
places and things every where, which seem to our eyes to be empty; the which we
may easily try and experiment, by putting a hollow Reed, Straw, or Feather,
into Wine, Beer, Water, or other liquid stuff; yea, though it were Sand, or
loose Earth; and afterward strongly sucking out, and drawing to us the Air
that is in the hollow reed or straw; we do presently see, that before the reed,
or straw will be empty, the heavy stuff that is below, will come up into and
fill the hollow place in it, until it can recover its lost air again; the same
may be perceived when one drinks Tobacco: for when the Air is sucked out of the
pipe into the mouth, then before the hollow of the pipe will be empty, the
smoke is forced as it were by the power of nature, to forsake the fire that is
in the tobacco, to fill up the hollowness of the pipe, least it should be empty.

Now the earth within, is not generally close and tight, but cleft and parted
one piece from another in many places. And there are also many Rocks, and great
stones below in it, that have their Clefts, Cracks, and Cranies, which are wide
and large, and as it were hollow and empty; besides, the earth in many places
is sunk down from the Corners, Angles, and uneveness of those Rocks, and
Stones, which makes many great, hollow, and as it were, empty places within the
earth.

And besides this, the earth is on all sides environed with water, and is with
several Seas, and running streams, both salt and fresh, enterlac't, and filled,
as the body is with veins: and is also with great and long Rains often wet and
moistened, by which means she is soakt thorough with water: and the same water
in time gets into those hollow places below in the earth, but being hindered in
its course to such places, does again spring up in certain places of the earth,
as may by several Springs be perceived and observed; And besides all this,
there must needs be a wonderful great water in the innermost parts of the
earth, which Moses, that man of God, the writer of the creation of the worlds
foundation, calls the fountains of the great deep, Genesis 7. chap. 11. ver. and
8. chap. 2. ver. which springs up in many places so abundantly, both hot and
cold: that it makes great and rapid streams above the earth. Now where such
great waters under the earth, cannot break forward, and force themselves
thorough to those hollow places in the earth: there the Air being a more thin
and subtle body than the water, forces it self through, and fills them. For
as the moisture, humors, and spirits do often force themselves through the
Pores of a man's warm body, or a horse that sweats, through whose thick hide,
the humors and moisture so pierces, that the Horse seems to smoke again with
reek. In like manner the Air goes about to and fro below in the earth, seeking
to fill those hollow and empty places, according to the appointment of nature,
which suffers nothing to be empty, as is before mentioned.

Now when such hollow places are filled with subterraneous water, or with other
stuff, then is the enclosed Air, expelled, and forced thence: coming up out of
those holes, and appearing above the earth, as a thick fogg, mist, or smoke:
which in Latin is called halitus, exhalationes, evaporationes: but we here in
Norway, call it a mist, whereof some are thicker then others, and of different
colors, according as the said Air so arising and expelled, has contracted its
thickness and color from that moisture below in the earth, with which it was
mixed and enclosed.

And then if the earth be so close, Tight, and solid, that the Air cannot so
suddenly get passage to depart away, it breaks out by force; and when this
conflict and breach betwixt the subterraneous Air and Water happens: then the
earth (as the seat of this war) must certainly quake, tremble, shake, and be
moved; and this is called Terrae motus, that is an Earthquake: whereof the
following chapter more plainly and particularly discourses.

And that there is no little Air, or Wind in the hollow places of the earth, we
may apparently perceive, when it breaks forth in Earthquakes: for then we see
that it can cast great stones up into the Air, and lift up the earth: yea great
Mountains, and make such a terrible quaking of the earth, that mighty Citys and
Towns, Castles Fortresses, high Towers, and Walls, great Churches and
Buildings, have been thereby utterly overthrown, sunk, and lost; as it is
Recorded concerning the great and mighty City of Antioch in Asia: which in the
year of Christ 528. was wholly destroyed by an Earthquake, and there was 4870
persons killed by the fall of its Towers, Spires, Walls, and Buildings.

Likewise in the year of Christ 1509. the 14th of September, the City of
Constantinople was very much defaced and spoiled by a dreadful Earthquake,
which continued 18 days: for it overthrew that long, thick, and strong wall,
which stood along by the waterside, and all the houses that stood near it, to
the ground, and filled up the Motes and Ditches without the walls, with
Rubbish, Stones, and Chaulk, that one might have gone dry-shod over them; The
same Earthquake shook down that part of the Grand-Signiors Palace where the
Treasury was: and five great and strong Towers quite and clean; and besides all
the mischief that it did by Sea and Land, which could not be repaired for many
Tun of Gold: it killed and destroyed 13000 persons. Munster lib. 4.

Likewise in the year 1517. the 16th of June. There happened a terrible
Earthquake at Norlingen, 40 miles from Nuremburg in High- Germany, which
overthrew St. Emerania's Church to the ground: and 2000 houses besides within
and without the City, for about the space of eight miles; and the same
Earthquake did also overthrow many great trees both in Orchards and Woods.
Munster lib. 3. de Suevia.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the Physical description of Earthquakes, with their species,
operation, and natural effects.
THere are certain Divines, which will by no means grant, that Earthquakes
should proceed from natural causes: but only from the particular power,
appointment, and dispensation of God, according to the Testimony of Job, chap.
9. ver. 5, 6. He removes Mountains, and they know not, He shakes the earth
out of her place, and the pillars thereof do tremble. These I do in equity
allow, the retention of their received opinions.

But other Divines do acknowledge that Earthquakes have also their natural
causes, by which God Almighty does occasion their production; and to speak
Physically to this: Naturalists do describe it thus.

An Earthquake, is a violent, moving, stirring, shaking, or quaking of the
earth: occasioned by the subterraneous, salt-peterish moisture and damps
enclosed together, with the Air, or wind, in the hollow places of the earth.

Now when such damps and moistures grow so great, strong, and thick, by length
of time, that they cannot continue with the subterraneous Air any longer in one
hole together: then they do forcibly expel the subterraneous Air from thence:
which by nature always gives way to solid, and thicker bodies: and then there
is a kind of civil conflict between them, which of them shall give way, and
depart from those hollow places in the earth: if the earth then be poreous,
sandy, or loose, the enclosed Air and Wind gets out thorough those Pores or
sweating holes, and is seen above the earth like a smoaky Fogg or Mist, as is
touched before in the last preceding chapter. But if the earth be so hard,
close, and tight, that the enclosed Damps and Air, cannot by its thinness and
subtilty penetrate, exhale, and force it self thorough the pores and sweating
holes of the earth: then it breaks thorough the earth violently by its natural
force and strength: and thereby causes the earth to shake, and quake, until it
can split and burst assunder in some certain place, to give them room.

And hence it is, that such Earthquakes do seldom happen in those countries or
places, where the earth is porous, loose, or sandy: because there the enclosed
air, damps, and moistures, can easily penetrate, and force themselves through
the earth, and make their way without the shaking or moving of the earth, which
cannot be where there is close, tight, and solid earth round about them.

Now as touching the several kinds and species of Earthquakes it is certain
truth, found by experience. That all Earthquakes do not happen after one and
the same, but after diverse kinds and manners. Aristotle in libello de mundo,
reckons up, and describes seven sorts of Earthquakes, each by its particular
properties and fashion, according to the strength or weakness of the
subterraneous contest of Nature.

1. Amongst which, by some Earthquakes, whole Citys and Mountains, with Houses,
and People, sink quite down into the earth: as Pliny writes, lib. 2. cap. 48*
That in Asia, in the time of the Reign of the Emperor Tiberius, there sunk
twelve great Citys, and principal Towns, quite and clean down in one night by
an Earthquake. Eusebius in Chronic. ad Annum Christi 33. Nicephorus lib. 1.
cap. 14. do suppose that this was the great Earthquake that happened at the time
of Christ's death, which was in the 18th. year of the Reign of the Emperor
Tiberins.

2. By some Earthquakes, the earth is swollen, and heaved up high above its
natural shape and proportion, so that great Mountains and Hills are made there,
where before it was plain and even ground. Freeburgum Brisgojae was destroyed
by such an Earthquake, in the year 1509. And there are many great Islands and
places encompassed with water, often thus made; for when this kind of
Earthquake happens under the waters, it heaves, and raises up the earth
sometimes, and in some places so high, that it reaches up above the water, and
there it remains, and in time is changed, and comes to be an inhabitable
Island. It is Recorded that the Island Delus, Rhodus, Alone, Thera, and
Therasia etc. came up so, and also the Islands of Echinades, were so lifted up
out of the River Acheloo: and certain others in Egypt, out of the River Nilus,
as Pliny witnesses. lib. 2. cap. 87.

3. Some Earthquakes do raise and lift up the earth very high above its natural
shape: but as soon as the Earthquake is past, it presently sinks and settles
down, and recovers its former natural shape again, and does not much hurt.

4. By some Earthquakes the earth is torn and divided assunder in a certain
place, so that there is a horrible great Hiatus, or open hole made, as it
happened in Moses his time; when such a Hiatus, rending, or opening of the earth,
swallowed up Moses seditious adversarys: such were Korah, Dathan, and Abiram:
with certain other men of the children of Israel, 250 Princes of the Assembly,
famous in the Congregation, and men of renown: with their Houses, Goods, and
all the men that appertained to Korah, sunk alive down into Hell, with all that
they had, and the earth closed upon them, they perishing from amidst the
Congregation. Concerning which, we may read in the 19 Chapter of Numbers, ver.
2, 31, 32, 33.

5. Some Earthquakes make the earth to sink lower down then it was before: and
it never rises up again, but remains always such a low and sunken Land.

6. In some places, especially by the Sea, and sides of great Rivers and
Streams; the earth carries away Houses, Trees, Pastures, and Meddows into the
Sea, and Rivers; and such particular Earthquakes do often happen here in
Norway, chiefly in the South parts thereof.

7. In some places the Earthquake carries a great rumbling sound and noise
along with it, like unto the noise of Thunder; and so did this, that was now
amongst us: for at first we knew not otherwise, but it was Thunder, before we
saw the houses and movables apparently to totter and shake.

1. Now where such Earthquakes as these do happen, there commonly follows
storms and tempestuous winds, with an unusual smell, which arises with the
Earthquake out of the earth. And such an ensuing storm we had here, in, and
about Christiana, upon the second Whitsun-holyday, which was the 24th day after
the Earthquake was past, when we poor sinners, (especially in Ackers Church,)
were fain to get out in all have, fearing least the Church should have fallen
down upon us: the violence of which storm or whirlwind, continued about a
quarter of an hour.

2. And Earthquakes do use to cause drought, and burning heat in the air, which
we also were aware of certain days and weeks time: to the no small damage of
the fruits of the earth.

3. The Pestilence also, and other poisonous diseases, do commonly follow after
great Earthquakes according as the Air and Damps, which in such Earthquakes
break out of the hollow places of the Earth, was poisoned under it, and
afterward poisons the Air above the Earth, and does naturally produce
pernicious and poisonous diseases. But God by his mighty power can graciously
divert all these things; what otherwise usually ensues after Earthquakes, is
shown in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Historical Relations, what by experience, has commonly been observed to
follow after such great and remarkable Earthquakes.
THat which is Recorded concerning Comets, viz. That they are never seen in the
Air or Heavens, without signifying some great and remarkable judgments and
alterations ensuing; we may well and truly both say and write, concerning such
remarkable and great Earthquakes, that they do signify extraordinary great
mutations: for Histories do show clearly, even from the beginning of the world;
that when any such great and remarkable Earthquake has happened in Nature, there
has followed great and notable accidents, and changes upon the earth in
several Countries and Kingdoms.

Concerning those Earthquakes which are Recorded to have happened before the
birth of Christ, I will not speak at this time, but only commemorate certain of
the most notable that have happened since, and what ensued afterward in diverse
places.

In the year of Christ 62. There was a terrible Earthquake in Rome: and the
year following, that cruel Tyrant Emperor Nero, caused the City of Rome to be
set on fire, of purpose to have burnt it quite down, thereby to delight
himself with seeing after what manner the lamentable destruction of the
ancient and famous City of Troy was. And when the fire of the City burnt with
greatest violence: he went up to the highest Tower, or Terret of his Palace,
and caused the destruction of Troy to be played, upon several Musical
instruments, and sung before him; that fire continued six days and seven nights.

In the year of Christ, 80. there was a great Earthquake in Cypris, upon which
followed a great Plague, which also reached to Rome, and there increased
mightily. Thereupon ensued a great and destructive war against the Romans: for
Diurepaneus the King of the Goths, advanced with the power of Gothland over the
River Danubius, and held a bloody battle with Opius Sabinus, General of the
Romans, giving him and his Army a total defeat, and killing all, so that there
scarcely escaped a man that could carry the Romans any certain intelligence
concerning it.

In the year of Christ 104. there happened a terrible Earthquake in Syria, for
certain days together, whereby many stately buildings were demolished, and many
people were killed and destroyed; and it followed thereupon, that the Emperor
Trajanus fell into Armenia with a great power, and vanquished it; marched
afterward into Arbella, and subdued the Parthians, and advanced forward in
such a manner, as if he had purposed to have conquered the whole World: having
great fortune and success at the first; but afterward the Jews rebelled
against the Romish power, and would by no means be any longer subject to them:
wherefore under the conduct of Artemone their Leader, killed and destroyed in
Cyprus 240000 men, and slew all the Romans that they could find or surprise
every where. And after this the Emperor Trajanus raised a great and puissant
Army, under the command of Marcus Turbonus, and Lucius Quietus: and sent them
into Jewry, and the Countries thereabouts, which took and destroyed all that
came before them: and did conquer and subdue Hiberos, Sarmatia, Agarenos,
Arabia, Bosphorum, Colchos, and also Saleuciam, Ctesiphont, and Babylon. Dion
Ammianus lib. 14.

And after the aforesaid Earthquake, the third general persecution began
against the Christians, under the Emperor Trajanus; some writers do relate,
that it was as impossible to number the sand in the Sea, as to compute the
number of those that were most miserably Butchered and Martyred in this
persecution, for the confession of the faith of Christ.

In the year 111. when that wicked Emperor lay in his Winter quarters at
Antioch: there happened a terrible Earthquake again: so that the Emperor
Trajanus, caused himself to be carried out at a window, and remained under the
open Heavens, till the Earthquake was past, not daring to trust himself in any
house, or under any roof, for a long time after; and thereafter followed such a
lamentable drought, exceeding hot Air, mis-growth of the Fruits of the earth,
Famine, and poisonous Pestilence, and a loathsome Stink from the earth: as if
all the Elements had conspired and plotted together, to revenge the blood of
those multitudes of innocent Christians, so lamentably butchered and destroyed
by that in humane Emperor.

In the year 151. there was much harm done in many places of Italy by
Earthquakes, and thereupon ensued a fearful Plague, which increased so mightily
there, that it left many Towns wholly desolate; and terrible inundations of
Water did also spoil many fair Cities; and a multitude of Grasshoppers devoured
all the fruits of the earth, almost all over Italy.

In the year 240. there happened another terrible Earthquake in Italy: whereby
many Cities, and much people did perish by the opening of the earth; whereupon
there was appointed, (ex libris Sybillinis,) that general burnt offerings
should be made to the Gods: not only in Rome, but all over the Romish Empire;
And thereafter followed that very great and destructive war, between the
Persians and the Romans on the one hand, and the Goths and Romans on the other
hand: to the great weakening and spoiling of the Romish Empire.

In the year 256. there sunk down many fair buildings, people and all;
especially in Italy: whereupon there followed terrible distempers all over the
Romish Empire, that all the Provinces of it were full of wars and uproars: and
there was such a mighty Plague at Rome, and in Achaia, that there dyed at Rome
in one day 5000 people, all of the plague.

And the year after, did arise the Sect of the Samosatenians, by Paul
Samosatenus a Bishop of Antioch, which did much prevail, and caused very great
disturbance in the Church of God

In the year 345. there happened a destructive Earthquake, in, and about Antioch:
whereby many Towns were spoiled and destroyed, and it continued almost a whole
year: sometimes ceasing, and presently beginning again. Thereupon followed a
great war between the Emperor Constantine, and his Brother Constantem, for the
Emperial Monarchy, wherein Constantine was beaten, and overthrown by
AnAnquileja, and afterward cast into the flood Alsa, where he had his burial.

And after the same Earthquake, did also happen fearful Schisms and differences
in Religion: for the Emperor Constantem, himself turned Arian, and caused an
universal Synod to meet at Laodicea: in which those holy Fathers of the Church,
and Bishops; namely, Athanasius of Alexandria, Eusebius of Vercelis, Dionisius
of Meiland, Hilarious of Pictavia, Paulinus of Trier, and many other Bishops,
and at last Pope Julius himself were deposed from their offices and places,
and banished.

And presently after that, did the Socinian Heresy arise by Photinus
Praesbiterius Sirmienses, which filled the Church of Christ with much trouble
and confusion.

About this, there was a great Synod of Divines met at Sardis in Illyrico,
wherein were Assembled 376 Bishops, at which time the Church of Christ was
wretchedly distracted and divided; for although 300 of the Bishops remained
constant to the true Christian faith and Religion: yet the 76 Eastern Bishops
fell from it, and became Arians. But the Sect of the Socinians was condemned by
both sides.

In the year 348, there happened a great Earthquake in Campania, and Italy:
whereby Dyrachium was wholly destroyed, and Rome shook and trembled for the
space of three days and nights; In Campania were many towns quite spoiled: and
thereupon there followed again great distractions and disturbances both in
Church and State* For the Emperor Constantem caused two general Synods of
Divines to be Assembled, one in Armenia in Italy, in which the Catholic
Christian faith was confessed and maintained by more then 400 Fathers of the
Church, and the other at Saleucia in Isauria: wherein the Arian Heresy, was by
a hundred and fifty Bishops approved, justified, and acknowledged for good. And
in the temporal state, there followed a long and destructive war between the
Emperor Constantem and Magnentius, with unspeakable efusion of blood on both
sides.

In the year 366. there happened terrible Earthquakes all over the world; the Sea
broke through in diverse places, doing much harm; At Constantinople it Hailed
such great stones, that they destroyed many People, and much Cattle; Nicaee was
wholly demollished to the very ground: the Romish Empire was filled with wars
and uproars in all places. The High Dutch robbed and plundered in France:
Sarmatae, that is the Polanders and Muscovites on the one side, and Quadi, that
is the Silesians on the other side, invaded Hungary. The Saxons on the one
side, and the Scots on the other side, fell upon England: the Goths did what
they listed in Panonia, and overcame Scythia, and Thracia; the Persians
subdudued and took Armenia: so that the Romish Empire was lamentably imbroyled:
and it proved Earthquake sufficient to the Inhabitants of those Countries and
Kingdoms.

In the year of Christ 400. There happened a very great and dangerous Earthquake
in High Germany; and the Heavens looked like a burning flame for diverse days
together. Thereupon it followed, that King Snie of Denmark, waged a destructive
war against King Biorn of Sweden, in which war he lost his own life; and the
Lombards, together with a great resort of several other Nations, marched out of
the Country of the Vandals 300000 strong, over the Rhine into France, and
plundered it quite through; from thence they advanced into Spain, where they
did the like, and continued there a long time. The Hunnes also at that time,
made an unspeakable war upon the Romans: lost in one battle 125000 men, but
slew 210000 of the Romans; shortly after this, they had another battle again,
wherein the Hunnes lost 40000 men.

In the year 406. there happened several Earthquakes in High Dutchland:
especially by the River Rhine. Thereupon King Rorick of Denmark fell into High
Dutchland the year following: vanquished, subdued, and possessed himself of the
Country round about; went over the River Rhine, and destroyed Mentz, Worms,
Spire, and Trier: ruined and destroyed all the adjacent Towns: so that the
Inhabitants, yea, even nature it self seemed to be amazed, and to tremble at
his approach. For, (which is strange) when he came before the City of Metis,
(that is Metz:) and laid siege unto it; a great part of the City walls fell
down to the ground by an Earthquake: so that without any resistance, or
striking a stroke, he took the City.

In the year 412. there happened many Earthquakes both in Asia and Europe.
Whereupon ensued a great plague of pestilence in most Countries; and also a
most terrible famine and scarcity, by means of the great mis-growth of the
fruits of the earth. Also fearful Tempests, Storms, and Hail, that many
Hailstones weighed eight pound. Alaricus, the King of the West Goths, fell into
Italy, and almost utterly destroyed the City of Rome, purposed to have
destroyed Italy, and called Rome by the name of Gothia. And after these
Earthquakes, did also arise the Pelagian heresy, by Pelagius, an English
Heretic: against which was holden an universal Synod at Carthage, consisting
of 270 Bishops: amongst which especially was St. Jerome, and St. Augustine; also
Attilla the King of the Hunnes, began to tyrannize cruelly in Europe, having
great and wonderful fortune and success.

In the year 488. there happened great and terrible Earthquakes in the Romish
Empire, for a months time together: whereby many Mountains, Castles, and
Cities, were destroyed and overthrown, and many people perished. And it ensued
thereupon, that Odoacer of Saxony, by open Hostility invaded Italy, and was
defeated three times by King Diderick of Bern: so that he was forced to fly
for refuge to Ravennam, and was besieged there by the Goths three years
together.

In the year 544. there happened (as is Recorded) several terrible Earthquakes,
almost all over Europe: but especially at Rome, and in Italy. Whereupon it
followed, that Totillas the King of the East Goths, besieged Rome so
straightly, that the Inhabitants were forced to eat Dogs and Cats for hunger.
Afterward he took the City, broke down the Walls, Fortresses, and places of
strength, plundered, and destroyed all that came before him, sparing none, and
set the City on fire: so that for the space of forty days, no body could be
there for fire and smoke. Thus was Rome utterly destroyed by the Goths,
according to the prediction of Scipio of Carthage, who had prophesied it with
tears 700 years before, when the Romans burnt and destroyed Carthage.

Two years after, the same King Totillas, besieged the City of Placentia, so
long, and hard, that the Inhabitants were fain to eat one another, and at last
were forced to surrender up the City to him.

In the year 591. there was such a dreadful Earthquake in Antioch, that more
then 60000 persons perished thereby; and thereupon followed an extraordinary
hot, and dry Summer; after which, ensued a most fearful famine and a plague:
and the Lombards with much bloodshed did reform the old Lombards gross
Barbarism to the Christian faith.

In the year 832. there was a terrible Earthquake in Italy, whereby certain
Citys and Hills were quite swallowed up; Thereupon arose a destructive war,
between the Emperor Lodovicus Pius, and his three Sonns, who sought by open
war, raised against their Father, to deprive him of his Government; these
three sonns made a League with Gregory the 4th, Pope of Rome, who threatened to
depose the Emperor Lodowick. But the German Bishops stuck close to the
Emperor, and said that if the Pope came thither to excommunicate, he should
depart thence excommunicated. The year following, namely, 834. The Emperor
Lodowick advanced with a great Army into Alsatz, to reduce his seditious and
rebellious sonns to obedience and submission, but was surprised in the battle
of Lugenfield by Basell, and Lotharins. whom Lodowick fully empowered to manage
the Government, together with himself, carried his Father prisoner a long time
about with him, as a spectacle of wonder. At this the Princes of Germany were
highly displeased, and desired his Sons, Lodowick and Pipin, that they either
by good means, or by force, would procure their Lord and Father's enlargement,
if they expected to find any faithful friendship from the High Dutch, whereupon
the Emperor was set at liberty again.

In the year 868. there was a great Comet seen in the Air: after which followed
many Earthquakes, and after that, a great plague: and there did arise a
terrible war between the three Brothers, the sons of the Emperor Lodowick,
which of them should get and enjoy the Empire alone. The Danes sailed over and
invaded Scotland, and there with sword, fire, and plundering put all things
into confusion: went afterward into England, and took Edmund the King of
England prisoner in a Church, dragged him out, and hanged him up on a tree, and
shot his body full of Arrows, the 20th day of November in the year 870. as
Matthew Westmonster writes. And King Harrald Haarfager waged a furious war in
Norway, for the space of ten years; subdued, and expelled all the petty Kings,
and turned the Government into a Monarchy, in the year 878.

In the year 882. the 29th of December, there happened a fearful. Earthquake in
Germany: whereby many fair houses and buildings in Worms were destroyed.
Thereupon it followed, that the Normen and Danes under the conduct of Godfrid
their King, marched to the River Rhine, robbed and plundered all wheresoever
they came, demolisht and destroyed to the very ground, Camerich, Tornai, Arras,
Tarren, and Gent: burnt up Lowen, Utrecht, Lurich, Neus, Coln, Achen, and
Gulich. Whereupon the Emperor Carolus Crassus was sent for cut of Italy, by
the French and German Princes, to defend his own Country against the tyranny
of the Normen; but he could not prevail by force of Arms, and therefore
concluded a peace with them, and delivered into their possession the Province
of Newstria in France, to be their own free inheritance: which is called by
them now at this day, Normandia, or Normandy.

In the year 983. there was a most terrible Earthquake in Italy, whereby
Beneventura and Capua were destroyed. Thereupon followed an extraordinary dry
Summer, and burning drought, which occasioned a great scarcity, and a fearful
plague.

In the year 990. there happened terrible Earthquakes in many places: and
thereupon ensued fearful, and incredible inundations of water all over Europe;
upon which followed an extraordinary hot and dry Summer, that burnt up the
fruits of the earth: which occasioned a great scarcity and famine every where.
In Saxony, there rained F^sh out of the Air; and in Albania, there rained Corn
from Heaven, but unfit for the use of man. The Sunn was wholly Eclipsed, and a
great piece of fire fell down out of the Air, and burnt upon the earth; after
which, followed a most terrible plague: so that the living which bare the dead
(to their graves) fell down dead themselves, and were buried together; and
there came much fire from the River of Rhine also, by which many of the
adjacent Towns and Villages were wholly burnt up.

In the year 1085. there happened a fearful Earthquake in England: whereby many
houses were overthrown, and much harm done; and it followed thereupon, that
King William of England, caused all his Subjects annual Profits, Estates, and
Incomes, of every kind, both of Corn-land, Medows, Woods, Pastures, Cattle, and
Sheep, and every thing they had to live upon, to be Registered: and accordingly
required great contribution of the Country: which caused danger ous civil
tumults, uproars, and discontents in the Land; and there followed also a very
unfruitful year.

In the year 1085. there happened a terrible Earthquake in Lorain; whereupon
there followed a fierce plague, and sudden death of people. And the same year,
there was unspeakable harm done in the Netherlands, by great and unusual
inundations of water, both to people and Cattle.

In the year 1126. there was another terrible Earthquake in Italy which lasted
40 days. Thereupon followed a lamentable mis-growth of the fruits of the earth,
and a most miserable famine, as also a destructive and bloody war between the
Emperor Lotharius, and the German Princes: and between the Bohemians, and
Conrad, Duke of Frankenland.

In the year 1135. there were several terrible Earthquakes heard of, both in
England and in Germany; whereby many houses were thrown down; the fire also
burnt fearfully out of the earth, for certain days together, and could not be
quenched by water, nor by any other kind of thing. And besides that, there was
very great mischief done in many places of Germany by other fire: Mentz and its
Cathedral was burnt: in the Cities of Spire, and Strasborg, many Churches and
Cloisters were laid in Ashes: Ausburg was almost quite burnt up, and a third
part of Goslar* Hall in Saxony, flew up into the air in a smoke: and the next
year following, there was such an extreme hot, and dry Summer, that the waters
in great Rivers, Channels, and streams, contrary to Nature, did so diminish,
that men might have gone dry-shod over, where great Ships used to sail; the
Wells and Springs also became dried up in many places, that many men fainted
and dyed of thirst, as well as Cattle: yea many Buildings and country Villages
were set on fire by the heat of the Sun, and it caused a terrible famine in
Europe.

In the year 1155. there fell many houses down in Burgundy, and thereafter
followed a great dissension between the Emperor Frederick Babarosa, Note, that
this must doubtless be by an Earthquake.
and the Pope of Rome: which continued many years with much efusion of blood:
until the Emperor was openly excommunicated out of the Romish Church, and
suffered himself to be publicly absolved in St. Marks Church in Venice; where
Pope Alexander was not therewith contented, that the Emperor went bareleg'd to
the Church, and there kneeled on his bare knees, with Prayer and Fasting, for
his offense committed against him: but the Pope also shamelesly trod upon his
neck with his feet.

In the year 1194. there was a great Earthquake in Denmark, and it followed
thereupon, that the Vandals fell from the Danish Crown, forsook their Christian
faith, and returned to the former idolatrous worship again; whereupon King
Knute of Denmark raised all the power of his Country, caused the Schleswickers
to prepare 130 Ships, the Reepers 120, the Wendsussellers 50, the Fyeners 100,
the Sealanders 120, the men of Skone 150, in all 670 ships: and therewith fell
upon Knute, King of the Vandals: who destroyed and killed all that came before
them, and carried away much plunder of Goods and Cattle out of the Country.

In the year 1300. there happened a fearful Earthquake almost all over Europe;
thereupon followed an unusual dry Summer, with extraordinary heat: so that in
Denmark, and the small Islands, men scarcely knew where to find any fresh water
in any place.

And in Italy there arose such a fearful civil war and dissension between two
Princely Families, called the Guelphs, and Gibilines, that it had near ruined
whole Italy.

It will be needless to write any thing more out of History, concerning
Earthquakes, and what remarkable things have always ensued; for from those many
that are Recorded, it may sufficiently be seen, that Earthquakes signify no
great good to Countries and Kingdoms: but God, by his Almighty power, can
divert much evil.

A Theological conclusion, with some instructions out of the Holy and
infallible word of God: what Earthquakes do signify and teach unto us.
NOw when we enter into the Sanctuary of God: that is, into his Holy and
infallible Word, and there seek and enquire diligently for right instructions
concerning Earthquakes: then we shall receive this information. viz. That God
did create the world at first, that it should be, and remain fixed and
unmovable: concerning which, the Scripture gives this testimony. 1 Chronicles. 16.
30. Fear ye the Lord all the earth, the world also shall be stable, that it be
not moved. And also Psalm 89. 12. and 102. 25. In fundasti terram, Thou have
laid the foundation of the earth, and all that is in it. Also Psalm. 104. 5.
Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever.
Also Prove, 3. 19. The Lord by wisdom has founded the earth. And Isai. 48. 13.
Mine hand also has laid the foundations of the earth.

From whence, and other the like Oracles of the wholly Scripture, we may
clearly discern and understand, that God did not create the earth so loose and
unfixed in the beginning, that it should shake, tremble, and quake, but always
to remain steady, and unmovable. 2 Pet. 3. 5.

But when the Earth, contrary to the fixed nature of its Creation, shall
tremble, quake, and shake; then there must certainly be some extraordinary and
important causes: of it whereof the Holy Scriptures more especially intimates
two; which moves God to permit and produce such great and terrible
Earthquakes; namely. First, When the wickedness of men is great upon the
earth, and the earth is corrupt, and filled with violence, Genesis 6. 5, 11, 13.
Then is the Righteous and just wrath of God provoked to move the earth
himself, and cause her to tremble, thereby to destroy men, yea even the earth
it self also. Genesis 6. 13. By removing the Mountains, and they know not, which
he overturneth in his anger, when he causes the earth to be shaken out of its
place, that the pillars thereof do tremble, as Job speaks, chap. 9. 5, 6.

Concerning which, the Holy scriptures do give this further testimony, Exodus
15. 12. when thou strechedst out thy right hand the earth swallowed them. Psalm.
18. 7. The earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the Hills moved,
and were shaken, because he was wroth. And Psalm. 104. 32. He beholds the
earth and it trembles, he touches the Mountains and they smoke. And
concerning such Earthquakes, the Prophet Isaiah teaches thus, Chap. 13. 13.
The earth shall be removed out of her place, by the fury of the Lord of Hosts,
in the day of his fierce anger. And chap. 24. 18, 19, 20. The foundations of
the earth do shake, the earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean
dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly, the earth shall reel to and fro like
a drunken man. And Isai. 29. 6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with
Thunder, and with Earthquakes, and with great noise: with storms and tempests,
and with the flame of a devouring fire. Also Nahum 1. 5, 6. The mountains quake
at him, the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his presence, etc. Now where
God in his wrath has thus shaken the earth, there her inhabitants might very
well sigh deeply, and pray with David in Psalm. 60. 2. O God thou have made the
earth to tremble, thou have broken it, heal the breaches thereof, for it
shakes.

Secondly, when God has been about to do some extraordinary thing upon the
earth, or make any remarkable alteration in Countries and Kingdoms; the Holy
Scriptures do testify, that it is made known by preceding Earthquakes, as by
so many prodomos or Harbingers; As for example, when God himself descended
down after an especial manner upon mount Sinai, and there gave his wholly Law
to the Isralites, for the direction of themselves, and of the whole world, Then
did the whole Mount greatly quake, Exodus 19. 18.

And when God brought his people out of Egypt, (though Moses has not recorded
that any Earthquake happened then,) yet the Holy Scriptures do show, that it was
not done without a notable Earthquake: by which the red Sea was divided in that
place that the children of Israel went through, and was so dry for the space of
about sixty miles, as the Tables of Cosmography do show, that the Israelites
could go through dry-shod, Exodus 14. 21, 22. As Deborah the Prophetess and
Judge, and Barack the son of Abinoam the Captain, do testify concerning this
in their song of praise, Judge. 5. 4, 5. when the Lord went out of Seir, and
marched out of the fields of Edom, the earth trembled, and the mountains melted
from before the Lord. And with this agrees that of Asaph, one of King David's
chief Musicians, Psalm. 77. 16, and 18. The waters saw thee O God, the waters
saw thee and were afraid, etc. the voice of thy Thunder was in the Heavens: thy
Lightning lightened the world, the earth trembled and shook. And that none
should doubt that this happened at the very same time when the children of Israel
came out of Egypt. Asaph concludes the aforesaid Psalm with these words in the
last verse, Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron.

Moreover, when God would in an especial manner, appear unto that precious man
of God, the Prophet Elias upon mount Horeb, and there verbally instruct him,
what he in the Lords behalf should do in several Kingdoms; Then there happened a
great Earthquake before, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake, as we may read
in 1 Kin. 19. 11.

It is also Recorded by the Prophet, Amos, that there happened in Jewry a great
Earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and of Jeroboam the son of
Joash king of Israel; and Amos was called by God two years before the said
Earthquake, from amongst the Heardsmen of Tekoa, to preach and reprove sharply
the great and manifold fins which did then abound in all the Countries
thereabouts: as we may read in the first chapter of Amos, ver. 2. etc. and in
the following Chapters.

And that this same Earthquake was no small one, we may sufficiently understand
by that prophetical Doctrine, which the Prophet Zachary preached unto his
Auditors certain hundreds of years after: when he puts the remnant of the
people of Israel that were returned home from their 70 years Babylonish
captivity, in mind: and did then cause them plainly to understand, that the
said Earthquake, was a great, terrible, and dreadful one; for the Prophet
writes thus, Zac. 14. 5. ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the
Earthquake in the days of Uzziah King of Judah.

As for the new Testament, therein do the Holy Evangelists make mention,
concerning several Earthquakes that happened in those times.

The Evangelist St. Matthew in chap. 27. 51. and forward; writes, that at the
time of the death of Jesus Christ, the vail of the Temple was rent in twain
from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent, and
the graves opened: So that the Centurion, and those that were with him watching
Jesus, when they saw the Earthquake, and those things that were done, feared
greatly.

By this Earthquake, doubtless the Lord for his part did show his fierce wrath
against those that had dealt so unmercifully with his only beloved son: and on
the other side, Christ himself did also show his enemies, how easily he could
have caused the earth in that Earthquake, to have opened under them, and
suffered them altogether, like the seditious Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, in
former time, with all their retinue, wives and children, to have sunk down
alive into Hell, Numb. 16. But our most Gracious and patient Savior, was not
come then to destroy, but to redeem and deliver mankind from the wrath and
righteous judgments of God Luk 9. 56. And therefore not one Jew of the enemies
of Christ perished in this Earthquake, but the long suffering of God did hereby
yet seek to draw them to repentance, Romans 2. 4.

Also at the time of our Lord Jesus Christ his Resurrection: there happened a
great Earthquake again, concerning which, the above named Evangelist St.
Matthew writes thus, chap. 28. 2, 4. Behold there was a great Earthquake, etc.
and the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.

Concerning this Earthquake, Divines a^e of several opinions: for some think
that this Earthquake happened, sub descensu Christi ad inferos, when Christ
descended into Hell, or to the lowermost, or innermost parts of the earth, as
St. Paul writes, Ephesians, 4. 9. And then presently did a mighty great conflict
begin, between the Prince of darkness (the Devil) on the one side, that would
have preserved his Palace, and kept what he had in peace, Luk 11. 21. And the
Prince of life, and Lord of Glory, the Lord Jesus Christ, on the other side,
that is called a stronger then he, that came upon him to overcome him, Luk 11.
22. And by this great and powerful conflict, Christ redeemed mankind, and took
away the power from him that had the power over death, (that is the Devil) and
delivered them, who through fear of death, were all there life time subject to
bondage, Heb. 2. 14. 15. wherein the Devil with all the powers of Hell, strived
mightily to oppose him, but Christ gets the victory at last, having spoiled the
principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in it. as St. Paul writes, Collos. 2. 15. and that according to his own
prophecy by the Prophet Hosea, chap. 13. 14. where he in time of old speaks
thus, O death I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction.

Now at such a mighty contest, happening in hell, or the innermost parts of the
earth: could not the earth contein it self, but was forced thereby to shake,
tremble, and quake, so that the Evangelist might well say: Lo there was a great
Earthquake.

Concerning this, Luther writes thus. Annotante D. Johanne Gerhardo Homil.
Sacr. part 2. super Feria, pasch. 1 Concione 3. in hoc terrae motu, Christus
ad inferos descendit, Satanam ligavit, captivam duxit captivitatem, infernum
destruxit, claves abstulit, morti praedam, eripuit, etc. That is, in this
Earthquake Christ descended into Hell, bound Satan, took captivity captive,
spoiled hell, and carried away the keys, and took away the prey of death from
him.

Other Divines, especially those that are preachers, are of this opinion; that
this Earthquake happened at the time of Christ's Resurrection, which was upon
Easter Day in the morning; thereby showing, that as the earth at the time of
Christ's death, did quake and tremble in compassion of the bitter pain, and
innocent death of its Lord and Creator; so by a particular great Earthquake,
she did now rejoice again at his Resurrection: and did leap and dance, for joy
of the victory and conquest obtained by Jesus Christ: and as it were with both
hands (to speak after the fashion of men) delivered her Lord and Creator from
her, which now she had enclosed in her to the third day.

Each of these Divines opinions do I allow to be worthy and Godly: forasmuch as
neither of them do in the least oppose the Holy Scriptures.

But besides this, the Evangelist St. Luke Records, that when Peter had
preached that excellent Sermon in Jerusalem, in the great festival of
Whitsontide, concerning the death of Christ on the one side, and his glorious
and victorious Resurrection from the dead on the other: and then by the same
Sermon converted about 5000 men to the faith and confession of Christ, Act. 4.
4. After the same Sermon, with the unanimous, and earnest prayers,
supplications, and thanksgiving of the faithful were ended; it is mentioned in
the 31 verse of the before named Chapter, that the place was shaken wherein they
were assembled together, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and
spoke the word with boldness.

And again, when Paul and Silas were cast into prison in Philippi, the chief
City of that part of Macedonia Act. 16. 12. and they then in the prison prayed
and sang praises to God, there was suddenly a great Earthquake, so that the
foundations of the prison were shaken, and immediately all the doors were
opened, and every ones bands were loosned. ibid. ver. 26. so that the Keeper
and all his house were thereby converted to the faith of Christ, and were
baptized, ver. 33. etc.

I will not now speak concerning what the Evangelist St. John Records in his
Book of the Revelations, chap. 6. 12. 8. 5. 11. 13, 19. and 16. 18. Because
generally Divines, and the faithful Teachers of the Christian Church do expound
those things Allegorically: and do understand thereby, the great and terrible
persecutions and efusion of blood, which the Church of Christ has partly
suffered, now lies under, and hereafter shall suffer by means of diverse
Heretics, false Teachers, and Tyrants which will assist them, toward the end
of the world: from whom the Lord in mercy preserve these Countries and Kingdoms
for Jesus Christ his sake.

But that most serious prophecy which Jesus Christ the foundation and mouth of
Truth, as a true Prophet, did prophecy and leave unto his Church, concerning
such Earthquakes as should really happen before his last Glorious appearance,
ought by no means to be here forgotten or omitted. And Christ himself has
prophesied concerning Earthquakes toward the end of the world, after this
manner, Mat. 24. 7. and there shall be famines, and pestilences and Earthquakes
in diverse places. And Mar 13. 8. there shall be Earthquakes in diverse places,
famines and troubles. Also Luk 21. 11. And great Earthquakes shall be in diverse
places, and famizes, and pestilences, and fearful sights, and great signs,
shall there be from Heaven.

From whence it may be concluded, that when God Almighty now in these last
times of the world, does permit such great and spacious Earthquakes, so many
miles in length to happen; men ought not lightly and carelessly to slight them,
and think no more of them: but to regard and receive them, as signifying
partly, some certain new, and unusual accident impending, or approaching. And
partly as the infallible prodomos, or forerunners of the last day: yea, and the
creatures earnest expectation that waits for the glorious manifestation of
the sons of God; Forasmuch as the creature is made subject to vanity against
its will. And the creature groaneth, and travaileth in pain together with our
selves to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, as Paul teaches, Rom*
8. 19, 20, etc.

Now therefore mark attentively, and consider well with thy self, O thou
intelligent Reader: that if the senseless and dead creatures, such as Earth,
Rocks, Seas, Islands, and the like; that have neither mouth nor tongue, brain,
nor heart, can so quake and tremble: yea, as it were, bewail and condole
themselves, when their Lord and Creator is angry, or intends to visit
Countries and Kingdoms, with any uncouth or strange thing; how much more ought
the hearts of men whilst they live, and in time too: to be amazed, and to
tremble and quake for fear of the wrath of God, and his impendent judgments.

And if so be they will not do it now in the time of Grace, then may we justly
cry out, and complain upon them, with that Holy and reverend Father of the
Church Saint Ambrose. O hominum pectora Saxis duriora. Oh thou heart of man,
that art harder, and more insensible than the Rocks and Stones: for they can
quake, but the heart of man not; yea then we may well complain with the Prophet
Jeremy, chap. 5. 3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, thou
have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made
their faces harder then a Rock, they have refused to return. And also with the
Prophet Zachary in chap. 7. 12. Yea, they have made their hearts as and Adamant
stone, therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts.

O man, man! consider now well with thy self in time, that if thou can not
now be moved to tremble and quake for that God, that can so move the earth, and
cause her to tremble and quake: then thou may justly fear, that when the Lord
Almighty will so move the earth, that the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the
works that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10. that it will be then
too late for thee to tremble and quake.

And if any now may be moved to great fear and amazement by these small
Earthquakes, which do no very great harm; what kind of anguish and terror
think thou, will at that time fall upon all ungodly and incorrigible men,
that here would never fear such a God?

Truly then the Kings of the earth, and the rich men, and the chief Captains,
and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every freeman, shall hide
themselves in the Denns and in the Rocks of the mountains: and say to the
mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand?

Oh Jesus Christ, Suspirium
thou Rock of Salvation, and precious cornerstone of Zion, do thou mollify
our hard and stony hearts, and according to thy promise, give us hearts of
flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26. That we may now in the time of Grace, be amazed and
tremble at our bloody sins, and their well deserved and impendent punishment,
that so the punishment may be either graciously mittigated, or wholly diverted,
according to thy Divine will, for thy great mercies sake, Amen.

Now he that can give any better, or more perfect instruction or information,
concerning Earthquakes, and yet will not do it: commits a great sin,
inasmuch as he concealeth such wonderful works of the Lord.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the 3 page of the Preface, line 19. for 40. read 160. page 18. line ult.
for cannot read ca^.


