LONDON's CALAMITY BY FIRE Bewailed and Improved, In a Sermon Preached at St.
James Dukes-Place; wherein the Judgments of God are Asserted, the times of
those Judgments specified, the Reasons for those Judgments assigned, and all in
some measure suitably applied.

By Robert Elborough, Minister of the Parish that was lately St. Laurence
Pountney, London.

Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. Lament. 1. 12. Rejoice not against
me, O mine enemy; though I am fallen, I shall arise; though I sit in darkness,
the Lord shall be a light unto me, Micah 7. 8. Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Dorman Newman, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Surgeons Arms near the Hospital-gate in Little Britain, 1666.

TO THE Lately most Renowned, but now sadly Ruined CITY, And all concerned and
Sufferers in her sore Affliction.
Oh thou afflicted and not comforted!
THe Lion has roared, who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who can but
prophecy? Amos 3. 8. I, God has spoken in the voice of Mercy, and thou have
not heard; in the voice of his Ministers, and thou have not heard; in the voice
of Threatenings, and thou have not heard; in the voice of sad Presages, and thou
have not heard; in the voice of the Plague, and the Sword, and thou have not
heard; and now in this dreadful Judgment of Fire, and thou do not hear; no,
though the Fire has burnt round about, and in the midst of thee, and there be
such sad and dismal effects of it, yet thou do not hear. What therefore shall
be done unto thee, or wherewith shall I bewail thee? Is this the joyous City,
whose Antiquity was of Ancient days, whose Merchants were Princes, and whose
Traffiquers the Honorable of the Earth? Isa. 27. 7, 8. How art thou fallen, Oh
thou Darling of England! How art thou levelled with the ground, Oh thou Wonder
of Europe! How art thou brought to Ruin, Confusion, and Desolation, Oh thou
Queen of Cities, whose Fame was spread in all Nations, far and near, by reason
of that Comeliness which the Lord did put upon thee! Was there none of all thy
Sons, whom thou have brought forth, to deliver thee? Was there none of all thy
Sons, whom thou have brought up, to quench the Flames for thee? The Lord had
and has purposed to stain the pride of all Glory, and to bring into contempt
all the Honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23. 9. These things will be told in Gath,
and declared in the streets of Askelon: I, the Philistines will rejoice, and
the Daughters of the Uncircumcised will triumph over thee. But laugh not too
soon, lest you cry and repent at leisure. If Judgment begin thus at the City
of God, what shall and will be done to those that are none of Gods Cities? If
God cause his people to see and feel such terrible things, what terrible things
shall those see and feel, that are none of Gods people? If God kindle* such
Fire in Sion, what Fire shall be kindled in Babylon? I, the Lord is risen out
of Sion, and he will not sit down, till he be come to the Gates of Babylon. For
thus says the Lord to His afflicted One* I have taken out of thy hand the cup
of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury: thou shall no more drink it
again: But I will put it into the hands of them that afflict thee, which have
said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou have laid thy body as
the ground, and as the streets to them that went over, Isa. 51. 22, 23. Now
that all this may be made good to thee, I would (and Oh that I might) persuade
thee, and all those sufferers with thee, to see thy Abomination, by reason
whereof thou art under this Desolation; lay thy self low before that God, who
has laid thee low; accept of thy Calamity as the punishment for thy Iniquity;
cry mightily unto the Lord for the pardon of thy transgressions, and he will
delight in thee notwithstanding thy affliction, and then may thou say
indeed, Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy: though I am fallen, I shall
arise; though I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, Micah 7. 8.
I, assemble your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel
together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand;
for God is with me, Isa. 8. 9, 10. Thou can not be so sinful, but God is as
merciful; and where Gods mercy, thy misery, and thy Favorites spiritual
fervency meet at the Throne of Grace, the result thereof will be thy
Restoration and Re-edification; to thy Enemies Confusion, and to thy Sons and
Daughters Consolation: For it is Gods own promise, In the day that I shall have
cleansed you from all your iniquities, I will also cause you to dwell in the
Cities, and the wastes shall be builded, Ezekiel. 36. 33. Accept of my desires
earnestness for thy good, which has prevailed with me, not so directly to
apply my self to those toward whom under a Ministerial consideration I more
peculiarly stood (and still stand) related* yet in remembering thee, I don't,
neither shall I forget them, and accordingly I hope the same will be
acknowledged by them. I have seen the Plague (adored be Divine Goodness for
preserving me) not leaving any Persons in Houses, and now this dreadful
Judgment of Fire, not leaving Houses for Persons; the sense therefore of my
duty, as sympathizing with thy misery, and, I say, the desire for thy
Prosperity, has drawn forth these Lines and the subsequent Subject, with
bleedings of heart, and distillings of tears; and may the same be so seriously
considered and improved by thee, as that no more Judgments be inflicted on
thee. For, whatsoever is said as to thy Restoration, remember, and so I must
be understood, that it depends upon thy Reformation. The Lord grant therefore
that thy Magistrates that are and shall be, may be Vigorous, thy Ministers
Zealous, thy People Conscientious, and All every way pious. The Lord grant that
thy dispersed Ones may be gathered, thy suffering Ones succored, thy
succouring Ones solaced, thy dismayed Ones encouraged, and thy poor Ones
enriched. The Lord grant that thy Windows may be of Agates, thy Gates of
Carbuncles, and all thy Borders of pleasant Stones, I, and above all, that thy
Foundation be Holiness, thy Superstructure Righteousness, and the Topstone
thereof crying, Grace, Grace. This is and shall be the desire of him, who is,
and desires to be

Thy fellow-sufferer and unfeigned well-wisher in the Gospel, Rob. Elborough.

LONDONS CALAMITY by Fire BEWAILED and IMPROVED.
EZEKIEL. 20. 47. Behold, I will kindle a Fire in thee, and it shall devour every
green Tree in thee, and every dry Tree: The flaming Flame shall not be
quenched, and all faces from the South to the North shall be burnt therein
THese words are a true Comment upon our Times, and our Times are a sad Comment
upon these words. In the words we have a sad Judgment threatened, and in our
Times we have seen a sore Judgment of Fire inflicted. If therefore I have made
choice of these words to recommend them to you, it is because God has made
choice of them in verifying them upon us. The Lord grant, that what shall be
discovered, may be so improved, as that though our houses be destroyed by Fire
on earth, our souls may not be destroyed by Fire in Hell.

In this Chapter we have Promises on the one, and threatenings on the other
hand; Promises of mercy in case of obedience, and threatenings of misery in case
of disobedience. It Is usual with God to apply Lenitives and Corrosives, and to
administer Cordials and bitter Potions. It must be a Sun-shiny day indeed that
is without any Clouds; and it must be a cloudy day indeed, that is without any
shining of the Sun. God had done more for them than he had done for others; he
wooed them by Promises, and he endeavored to awe them by threatenings: and when
by reason of their abominations he might again and again have broken in upon
them with the fury of his indignation, he was pleased to work for his Names
sake, bestowing good things upon them, and withholding evil things from them,
verse. 9. 14, 22. But alas, Promises did not work upon them, Threatenings did
not at all prevail with them, and Gods Patience and forbearance did not at all
engage them to Repentance: and therefore what was it God commissionated Ezekiel
to prophecy? and what was it Ezekiel prophesied according to his Commission?
Behold, I will kindle a Fire in thee, etc. This you will find to be the sum of
the Chapter in general; and this we find, alas, we find to be the substance of
our condition by virtue of Gods dispensations in particular. We have had
Promises, and they have not wrought; we have had threatenings, and they have not
prevailed; we have had the forbearings of Gods wrath and indignation* and the
same have not been influential as to a Reformation in Church and State, in our
Magistracy, Ministry, and Commonalty; and therefore what was in Ezekiels
Commission is made good upon us, as to our sad, ruinated, consumed and
destroyed condition. I will kindle a Fire in thee.

The words of my Text are a Declaration of Gods more than ordinary Judgment
against Judaea and Jerusalem, termed a Forest, by reason of its
unfruitfulnesse; and The Forest of the South, as lying Southwards from
Chaldaea. You have here, sad, doleful, and dreadful tidings, as never ear heard
before, lips expressed before, eyes saw before, or, in some sense, the hand of
God inflicted before. From the first to the last there is nothing but woe and
misery, and destruction, and desolation. Hear O Heavens, and be astonished O
Earth, yea, be amazed O you inhabitants of the South, for the Lord has spoken,
yea the Lord speaks, yea by Fire does the Lord God contend; I will kindle a
Fire in thee, etc.

But I come more close to the words, wherein we have observable four
particulars.

First, What God will do.

Secondly, What this Fire will do.

Thirdly, What they shall not be able to do toward this Fire.

Fourthly, What they shall find and feel by reason of and in this Fire.

First, What God will do; I will kindle a Fire in thee. Fire is taken in
Scripture, amongst other significations, either,

Literally, for a material Fire, consuming houses, laying wast, and bringing
level to the ground good and stately Structures, Jer. 21. 10.

Metaphorically or Typically, for great and sore Judgments, whereby God will
ruin and destroy us, even as Fire consumes and destroys whatsoever it meets
with, Nah. 1. 6. Jer. 4. 4.

I can see no reason but that both, and in particular the former may be, and
that right and apposite enough, understood here, inasmuch as it was made good
in a great part of Jerusalems conflagration when it was taken by
Nebuchadrezzar, and afterward by Vespatian, and that the Church and people of
God acknowledge the truth hereof, Isa. 64. 11. Lam. 4, 11. Now this and such
Fire God threatens to kindle, and that in thee; not about thee, but in thee;
not in the skirts, but in the heart; not in the Suburbs, but in the City; not
within the usual Lines of Communication, but in the Center whence those Lines
are drawn.

Secondly, What this Fire shall do. Ah! what should this Fire do but undo! and
indeed this it does: It shall devour every green Tree in thee, and every dry
Tree. Whether by green Tree you understand the Saints, usually compared to
Trees that flourish; or by dry Tree you mean the sinner, compared to Trees that
don't flourish: Or whether by green you take things that are delightful, or by
dry you take things that are needful; the one being for ornament, the other
being for exigent; both one and the other shall be consumed in thee, Ezekiel. 21.
3, 4.

Thirdly, What they shall not be able to do toward this Fire; The flaming
flame shall not be quenched. He does not say, they shall not endeavor to
quench it. In a common Calamity, who will not put to his helpng hand? though in
our sad disaster I wish every one had conscienciously discharged their duty:
But notwithstanding their endeavors it shall not be quenched. Such, such shall
be the rage and violence of it, as that aching hearts and helping hands, as
that, to speak in our dialect and usual practice, Buckets, Engines, Ladders,
Hooks, the opening of Pipes, and sweeping of Channels, shall not avail any
thing at all: No, they would not withdraw the fuel of their corruption, and
God would not withdraw the Fire of his indignation. If the sinner do not leave
off finning before God comes, God will not soon leave off punishing when he
comes.

Fourthly, What they shall find and feel by reason of and in this Fire; And all
faces from the south to the North shall be burnt therein. None shall have cause
to rejoice, but all cause to complain and bewail. Do any live in the Southern
parts of the City, they shall be burnt? Do any live in the Northern Parts, and
so think it will not come at them? they shall likewise be burnt, All faces from
the South to the North. Alas, poor sinner, how do thou toil and moyl to
build thy nest! but there is too much of sin within, and so suddenly it is
burnt, and thou it may be, with the Pelican art burnt therein. Thus you see,
Beloved, the Parts of a sad Text.

First, What God will do; that speaks his Judgment.

Secondly, What the Fire shall do; that evidences the greatness, soreness, and
extraordinariness of Gods Judgments.

Thirdly, What they shall not be able to do toward this Fire; that shows the
irresistibleness of those Judgments.

Fourthly, What they shall find and feel by and in this Fire; that intimates
the universalness of this sore, sad, dismal and unusual Judgment.

From these particulars I might, but must not, recommend several Truths to you.
I shall only present you with one as suitable to the occasion; and Oh my
bowels, my bowels, that there is such an occasion to present you with this
Truth and Doctrinal Observation.

God is sometimes more than ordinary in his sore Judgments upon a Nation or City.

God will not always bear with a sinful Nation and City, but let them know
what abused mercy, and disdained Grace, and provoked Justice, and an incensed
God means. God sometimes whips a Nation with some small twigs, when at other
times he scourges it with Scorpions: God sometimes lays upon it his gentle hand
of correction, when at other times he pours forth the Vials of his indignation.
So Isa. 42. 13, 14, 15. Jer. 9. 10, 11. Jer. 16. 9. Jer. 19. 3. Ezekiel. 7. 2, 3,
4. Ezekiel. 2. 9, 10. By all those places you see, that the Sun of prosperity does
not always shine in a Nations Horizon; I, and sometimes it is hid in such a dark
cloud, as that all faces gather paleness, the hearts of Adams children ready to
fail, and they are within a step or two of being utterly ruined and undone. Oh
how many places have found God more than ordinary in his Judgments, who little
thought that he would have been such a God of Judgment. Little did Sodom think
of a fiery rainy day, when they had such a Sunshiny morning. Ah how art thou
poor London a sad instance and evidence of the truth of this Doctrine, when in
the midst of thy security thou art overtaken with unparalled misery. But to
methodise a little, what as to this, though constrained, must be spoke unto, I
shall

First, Instance in some of those sore and great Judgments, wherewith God
punishes a Nation or City.

Secondly, Discover unto you what those times are, wherein God is more than
ordinary in his sore Judgments upon a Nation and City.

Thirdly, Study to give you an account, as near as I can, with the Spirit's and
Scriptures assistance, why it is that God is so eminent and extraordinary in
his Judgments.

Fourthly, See what improvement may be made of it by way of Application; and in
all have reference to Gods late proceedings, especially as to that sore
Judgment of Fire.

As to the First, I shall name, amongst others, four sore Judgments, which God
inflicts upon a Nation and City.

First, The Plague. Gods hand has been, and that so severe as to this
Judgment, as that the greatest Atheist cannot but acknowledge him a God of
Judgment. When God takes away here one, and there another, it is not much; but
when God leaves but here and there one amongst those many thousands that be
taken away, that is much indeed, 1 Chronicles. 21. 14. Amos 4. 10. Jer. 42. 17. If
an Atheist do not see the works of Gods hand, let him but go to the places of
Interment, and he may see Gods handy work. I bless God for his goodness
continued toward me in the midst of those many thousands destroyed round about
me. I have seen Londons health exchanged into sickness, fullness into emptiness,
and where one could not pass for Inhabitants, no Inhabitants at all to pass by;
and God forbid that any one should not say, God has done more than he has
done before. London's Pestilential Visitation, cannot but be an evidence of
Gods more than ordinary Judicial dispensation. Certainly, God did ride his
Circuit in Judgment, when the Judgments of God did thus ride their Circuit.

Secondly, The Sword. When God has furbished the Sword in his hand, it cannot
but be an evidence of the sore displeasure of his heart. I hope you will take
the Judgment of God to be truth as to this; and what is the truth of his
Judgment, but that it is the severity of his Judgment, Jer. 16. 5. Chapter 25. 15,
29. Amos 4. 10. And therefore consult, Ezekiel. 5. 12. Jer. 50. 35, 36. Ah how do
Christians complain of the loss of those Relations, who having escaped the fury
of the Pestilence, have not escaped the edg of the Sword. Certainly, It cannot
but be a severity, though not parallel to our iniquity, to be preserved from
the Plague, and to be rereserved to the Sword. They who spiritually have not
known God, have looked upon the Sword as a sore* Judgment from God. Oh how sore
and how soon must that place needs be undone, in reference whereunto God says,
The Sword, the Sword is drawn for the slaughter, it is forbished to consume
because of the glittering.

Thirdly, Famine When the figtree don't blossom; and there is no fruit in the
Vine, when the labor of the Olive fails and the fields yield no meat, when
the flock is cut* off from the fold, and there is no heard in the stalls. Too
too many have turned their fullness into sinfulness, and God, has turned their
fullness into emptiness. Those that commonly are wanton under mercies are not
like to have those mercies continued long in Common. What was Judahs sin but
fullness of bread; and God soon made even with her in giving her cleanness of
teeth. In England there was a Famine of three years continuance, and the same
so violent, that not only many died daily for hunger, but great numbers joining
hand in hand threw themselves headlong into the Sea. In Samaria the famine was
so great, as that an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and
the fourth part of a cab of Doves dung for five pieces of silver. And therefore
what says God? Amos 4. 6. Ezekiel: 5. 16, 17. Jerem. 14. 16, 18. It Is good,
Christians, to make much of a little. It Is great impiety to sin much in much;
and so it is great and righteous severity not to have either little or much. God
is the great housekeeper of the world, and for him to let his family starve,
his creatures pine away, and those that had their dependence upon him to have
no sustinance and allowance at all from him. Ah those that have felt any thing
as to this, have found it sad enough when God at any time brought this Judgment
upon them. If as yet London there be not this calamity, the Lord grant that
this calamity may never be.

Fourthly, Fire. Fire and Water are proverbially said to be good servants, but
bad masters. Both are good enough, whilst within their limits, but bad enough
God know's when got beyond their bounds. It Is usual with God in Scripture to
set forth the greatness of his wrath by Fire and fiery indignation. God when
eminently he would avenge himself on Sodom for their abominations, it was by
raining Fire and brimstone from heaven. What can be more terrible to man than
Fire? and therefore how sore and terrible must needs those Judgments be that
are inflicted by Fire! Ezekiel: 20. 47. Jerem. 17. 29. Chapter 15. 14. Lamen. 4. 11.
God is great in this Judgment; and oh how great must needs this Judgment be,
when London that lately was is no more, and she that gloried in the stateliness
of her structures, has now none of those structures to glory in* I, thy houses
are burnt, thy Churches consumed, thy places of Judicature ruined, thy Halls
and Pinacles brought low, even to the ground, I, those that see thee cannot but
bemoan thee; that pass by thee, cannot but pity thee; they that know thee cannot
but say (and alas poor London for it) Is this the joyous City, whose antiquity
was of ancient days? Whose Merchants were Princes, and whose traffiquers the
honorable of the Earth! Isa. 23. 7. 8. My beloved, our eyes have seen, our
goods and estates have found, and our persons have experienced the greatness of
Gods Judgment, when he has made a City an heap, and a ruin of a defenced
City, Isa. 25. 2. Thus much as to the first thing proposed, which I shall close
with recommending to your perusal, as suitable enough to our condition, and
whereby you may see the sense of God as to those former severe judgments, Jer.
29. 17, 18. Ezekiel. 14. 21. Ezekiel. 15. 6, 7.

The second thing premised, is to show what those times are wherein God is more
than ordinary in his judgments upon a Nation and City: And as to this I shall
in plainness, and I hope, faithfully instance in these following.

First, Times of more then ordinary iniquity. Times of more then ordinary
abomination are times of more then ordinary desolation. Though God may bear
with peccadilloes, and not presently evidence his displeasure from heaven; yet
when persons sin in heavens face as to gross enormities, he will stretch out
heavens hand as to sore calamities. Sin is a cloud in the air; the more it is
thickened with vapors from the earth, the more the cloud empties it self into
dismal showers and storms, Ezekiel. 5. 5, 6, 7, 12. Jer. 15. 5, 13, 14. Jer. 4.
18, 19, 20. When the Amorites cup was full as to iniquity, the Amorites cup did
not remain long empty as to calamity: Oh London, had not thou been more then
ordinary as to thy abomination, God would not have been more then ordinary as
to thy destruction and desolation. It is a remarkable expression, Genesis 18. 20,
21. And therefore see, Lam. 4. 6. If we go on in Sodoms defilement, we shall
not go without Sodoms punishment; and if we outgoe Sodom as to iniquity, we
shall outgoe Sodom as to Calamity. We are fallen into sad times as to
sufferings, I, and we were fallen into sad times as to sinning; we commit those
sins against God, which we committed not before, and so we have undergone
those punishments from God, which were not undergone before: The ready way for
a Nation and City to be undone by calamity, is to do all manner of iniquity.
That is the first.

Secondly, Times of oppression and cruelty. It Is an hard thing for us to be
hard-hearted, and God to be tenderhearted; when we put off the heart of
Humanity, God will put out the hand of severity; when we do what we can to
bring others under the hatches, God will bring those hatches upon us. Methinks
I hear poor oppressed souls crying out in the bitterness of their Spirit, and
there is none to help; methinks I hear poor souls crying out, Bread, Bread for
the Lords sake. And therefore look to it England, and those remains of London,
for if no repentance as to this, there is sure to be vengeance as to this, Jer.
34. 16, 17. Micah. 2. 2, 3, 4. And therefore those expressions in Amos cannot
but must be observed, Amos 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. The cries of poor oppressed souls
so pierce Gods ears, as that they cannot but work upon Gods heart. I could
wish I had not seen so much of Cruelty, and I am confident I should not have
seen so much of calamity: What has been thy sin, London, as to this but
oppression? and therefore how deservedly punished! Oh if you that are preserved
go on in your rigorous exactions, in your unheard of Fines, and your high, ah
too high Rents. You that now Let your houses, ere long may have no houses at
all to Let: To make an advantage of your suffering brethren, will but be a
disadvantage to your selves in your sufferings. If we drink out of Babylons cup
as to cruelty, we shall drink out of Babylons cup as to calamity. That Is the
second.

Thirdly, Times of Pride and Arrogance. God will soon bring those low enough,
that think they can never be high enough. God will make those remember they are
but dust and ashes, that forget themselves to be dust and ashes. When persons
deface the Image of God which is Humility, God will maintain his power and
authority in their Calamity. Herod's heart was no sooner lift up against God,
but Gods hand was as soon lifted up against Herod, Isa. 16. 6. 3. 10. 24.
Humility is one of the best jewels in a Nations Crown: Its impossible a
political body should be in a good Crasis and constitution, whilst swelled
with this Tympany of pride. Oh God cannot bear with this sin of pride in
persons, or that persons should pride themselves in this sin. If we don't lay
our selves at Gods feet, in a way of Humility, God will lay us at others in a
way of misery; I, thou have prided thy self in what thou had, and God has
sent a sore Judgment of fire to remove what thou had, Jer. 50. 31, 32.
Remember oh you daughters of London, remember your sin in this, when they that
did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, and they that were brought up
in Scarlet, Alas, alas, now embrace dunghills. If we ruffle it up and down the
streets with those garments, for which we are still endebted in heavens
debtbook, God will soon send some sore Judgment or other as a Sergeant to
arrest us. How much better is it for us to be humbled that we may be exalted,
then to be exalted that we should be humbled! Arrogance turned the Angels out
of heaven into hell, and Humility turns persons out of hell into heaven.
That Is the third.

Fourthly, Times of carnal confidence and Reliancy. When we look for help more
from man then from God, and assistance from the creature more then from the
Creator, and comfort from broken Cysternes more then from the fountain of
living waters. The sin of carnal Confidence is sure to be attended with more
then ordinary Vengeance. God will let us see the creatures emptiness in our
ruin and misery, if we look to the creatures fullness for our safety and
security. If we lay Gods honor in the dust, in giving that to man which is
Gods, God will lay our honor in the dust in suffering us to be dishonored by
man, see Isa. 30. 15, 16, 17. Hosea 8. last. I would willingly be resolved in
this question, Whether ever the Nation was less in it is sufferings from God,
then when least in it is dependence upon man? Thou trustest not a little in thy
much customed shop, well replenished warehouses, full and crowded
Congregations, and in thy great practice; and so God kindles a fire, and thy
shop's destroyed, thy warehouses ruined, thy Churches consumed, and thy
patients scattered and dispersed. My beloved, God will be sought unto in all we
do; and if we are so far of seeking to him as that it is something else, alas
what miseries have and will not break in upon us! Never needst thou have
feared, London, I, and never would thou have felt this calamity, if thou
had but come to this, It Is God and God alone, and not man that is my safety,
and security: They that will not make use of God as a place of refuge in time of
trouble, will find trouble enough in their times, and the inlet to all their
troubles this, their not dependence on God. That Is the fourth.

Fifthly, Times of heedlesness and security. Times full of security are
commonly times full of calamity: we are never nearer destruction, then when we
are farthest from it in our apprehension. God would have us sensible of
judgments threatened, as not knowing how soon they may be inflicted; but if we
put the evil day far from us, the more sore and sudden it is sure to overtake
us, Jer. 21. 13, 14. Micah. 3. 12. Ezekiel. 39. 6.

Little did Dives think of his souls being required, when he sang such a
lullaby, Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years. Agag
cries out in the fondness of his Spirit, surely the bitterness of death is
past, when on a sudden hewn in pieces. You remember, Christians, ah you cannot
but remember Gods sore judgment of the Plague; and were we not ready to say,
Oh now God has done with us? I, we soothed our selves in all being well, we
cried, the bitterness of death is past, we ranted it up and down the Taverns,
Oh a severe judgment cannot overtake us; and behold, where the Plague left us,
there the Fire found us; and how, Alas, are we brought to the ground that did
dwell securely! I, thou tookest many a sweet nap in thy downy bed of security,
and on a sudden thou art awakened with this dreadful Fire about thine ears. Oh
that we were awakened to our duty by this calamity: I pray, Sirs, Let me tell
you, that the only way to be safe is not to be secure. God will, and he has
already disappointed us in our delighted insecurity, in laying on us those not
delighted in fiery calamities. That Is the fifth.

Sixthly, Times of Sabbath unobservancy. When persons make light of Gods own
institution, God will avenge himself in our ruin and desolation: God has set
apart this day for his own use, but if we abuse it, God will be sure to abase
us for it. Ahasuerus would not respite Haman at all, when, in his judgment, he
would offer violence to his Queen. The Sabbath is the queen of days; and
therefore when he sees we offer violence to her by our looseness and
profaneness, by our Moore-fields-walkes and Hide-park Recreations, Execution
shall be done upon us. How many places have been eminent in their sinnings as
to this, who have been eminent in their sufferings as to this, Jer. 17. 29. I
pray, when was the Sabbath more profaned within these late years then now? and
therefore how severely and justly has God punished us on the Sabbath! If thy
Sabboths be continued to thee, I wish they may better be sanctified by thee; If
we do the work of iniquity on Gods day, God will do his strange work of
severity on his and our day. That Is the sixth.

Seventhly, Times of Popery and Idolatry. The great quarrel God has with his
people is their being an apostatising people; and though God may bear with them
as to other backslidings, yet when it comes to this, Baal and not the God of
Eliah; the language of Ashdod, and not the language of Canaan; Bethaven and not
Bethel, God will not bear with them. God is so far of giving his power to
graven Images, as that they are sure to be destroyed, I, and the supporters and
upholders of them shall fall with them, Isa. 42. 8. Hosea 8. last. Jer. 7. 18,
19, 20. I could wish that what of Popery and Idolatry there has been and is,
were suppressed; it may be we should then not have been destroyed: How much
better it is to stub up those briars and thorns, which if let alone, may set on
fire the tallest Cedars in our Lebanon. The Jews will acknowledge to this day,
that in all those judgments that have befallen them, there is an ounce of the
golden Calfe made by their forefathers in the wilderness. That Is the seventh.

Eighthly, Times of Remisness in the Ministry. When those that should tread
out, tread down the Corn; that should be laborers, are loyterers; that should
tell England of her sins, and London of her iniquities, cry peace, peace,
healing but slightly the wound of the Sons of Sion, and the daughters of
Jerusalem, Lament. 4. 11, 13. Ezekiel. 22. 25, 26, 31. That body cannot be long in
a good constitution, whose more noble and essential parts are in a
consumption. God soon left the Jews house desolate unto them, and them unto it,
when from the Prophets of Jerusalem profaneness went forth into all the Land,
Jer. 23. 15. One may well write, Lord have mercy upon a Nation, when those that
are Angels in their Function and Profession, are far of being Angels in their
Lives and Conversation. That Is the eighth.

Ninthly, Times of Incorrigibleness, notwithstanding former misery.
Incorrigible times are miserable times. Times of continued abomination are
times of renewed and increased desolation. What can be thought of that Nation
that has been twenty years and upwards in the furnace of affliction, and no
removal at all of the dross of Corruption? The patient not recovered by
milder, must undergo sharper and more severe medicines, Levit. 26. 27, 28.
Amos 4. 9, 10, 11. The Sword, my beloved, was sheathed for several years in
one another bowels, and we are not reformed; we have been under turnings upon
turnings, and under powrings forth from one vessel into another, and not
reformed; the Plague has been in the midst of us, and yet not reclaimed, the
Sword has been and is still furbished in in Gods hand, and no amendment; and
therefore God is come now with this dreadful Judgment of Fire, and has made
such a desolation in the midst of us. I dare appeal to any person concerning
the righteousness of Gods proceedings, though never so rigorous on all those,
who through the abatement of Judgments being returned to their possessions,
estates, and grandeur, both in Church and State, return again to their
corruption. If we continue acting such Comedies, God will be sure to act a
severer Tragedy upon us, then ever yet has been acted. Had thou ere this but
turned sin out of thy house by repentance, God would not have turned thee out
of thy house by this fiery Vengeance. That Is the ninth.

The third thing proposed, is to give an account of the Doctrine, why God is
more than ordinary in his Judgments upon a Nation and City; and those I humbly
conceive to be these following.

First, That thereby he may evidence his Sovereignty. If we don't acknowledge
his dominion over us in a way of Reformation, God will make us feel his
dominion over us in a way of desolation. The Sovereignty of God is the Scepter
in his hand; if we don't fall down before it in a submissive and pious
adoration, God will cause it to fall upon us to our dismal ruin and
destruction. Has God taken away thousands, and ten thousands, in the midst of
us? it is no more than what he may: Has God continued his Visitation from City
to County, and from one County to another? it is no more than what he may. Has
God forbished the Sword in his hand, and given it a Commission to devour? It Is
no more than what he may. Has God destroyed our Houses, ruiued our Churches,
turned us out of our Possessions, and levelled our stately Monuments of
antiquity and glory even with the ground? It Is no more than what he may. And
when he has done all this, he may still do more, Ezekiel. 58. two last verses.
Chapter 20. 48. Ezekiel. 30. 8. Oh the sorest Judgments that a poor Place can possibly
lie under, are but the demonstrations of his Prerogative, the Nonesuch of the
World. Alas, we take God every way to be like unto us, but God will evidence
himself to be every way above us. God will not give his Glory to another, but
rather stain the beauty of the whole Creation (how much more of a particular
City) than that there should be any flaw in the least Jewel belonging to the
Crown of Heaven, Isa. 42. 8.

Secondly, That thereby he may destroy the workers of iniquity. He will not
always suffer the earth to bear those who could not bear with him on the
earth. As to these God will empty the earth in a way of destruction, who would
otherwise fill the earth with their abomination. Who are the Caterpillars of a
Nation, if not the contemners of holiness, and practitioners of profaneness?
And it is not every misling rain, but storms and showrs must be their ruin.
It Is not every potion that presently removes the bodies peccant-humours. God as
a wise Physician so tempers his Providential ingredients in the cup of
affliction, as that indeed they shall do the work, Isa. 13. 9. Isa. 31. 2. Chapter
10. 16, 17, 18, 19. Jer. 4. 24, 25. I hope, London, God will do thee good by
this fiery Calamity, when thereby those may be removed, that spiritually are
enemies to thy prosperity. I know in a common calamity the good may be removed,
but it is the bad that indeed shall be destroyed. I am apt to think that the
work of God at present in this and other Nations, is to suffer those no longer
to live in the world, that care not at all for living to the Creator of the
World. Remember, Sirs, and I pray don't forget it, God will here maintain his
own glory, either to the Sinners Conversion, or the Sinners Confusion.

Thirdly, That thereby he may procure to his people safety. God works his
peoples recovery out of sore troubles and miseries; and is so far from undoing
them, as that others shall be undone, that they may not be undone. The same
Cloud of Providence that has darkness on the one, has brightness on the other
side. The showers that destroy the Caterpillars, refresh the dry and parched
Gardens. When Egypt was punished, it was that Israel might be delivered. See
Isa. 51. two last verses. Ezekiel. 28. 23, 24. Nah. 1. ult. Gods people, though
they have lived in sad times, yet have they found the result of those sad times
to be for their advantage; and that God has punished the Inhabitants of the
earth, that they might not be so much harassed by them. God will bring his
peoples settlements out of the greatest dissettlements, and will not think much
to shake Heaven and Earth, that the desire of all flesh may come. Lord, had not
I been undone by this temporal-Fire, I should have been undone by eternal fire.
I hope London, thou will esteem those that are Christians in sincerity, seeing
such sore evils have befallen thee from the God of those Christians. The Fire
that consumes the Dross, makes way for the Golds brightness. It was high time
for the Egyptians to let the Israelites go, when they were upon the point of
being utterly ruined and undone.

Fourthly, That there may be an acknowledgment of his own Glory; the glory of
his greatness in destroying so much, and the glory of his goodness in
destroying no more; the glory of his Majesty in dealing so severely, and the
glory of his Mercy in dealing so favorably. Persons don't observe God in his
ordinary proceedings of Judgment, and therefore he will be more than ordinary
in his judicial proceedings, that he may be observed. The Seas usual keeping
its course don't engage persons admiration, as it is unexpected and unaccustomed
Tides. It Is not the Fire in the Chimney, as on the House top, that makes
persons to look about them. For two at a Mill, the one to be taken, and the
other left! for two in the field, the one to be taken, and the other left! for
several to be in a Family, and so many removed, and thee to be continued! for
thousands to be taken away in a Fight, and thou to be spared! for so many
thousand houses to be destroyed, and thine escape the flames rage and violence!
God had power enough to destroy me and my house; and for both to be preserved!
There could not but be a more than ordinary observance of God in dealing so
favorably with Zoar, when he dealt so severely with Sodom. For any of you, and
your houses to be as so many brands plucked out of the burning. when thousands
are not only scorched, but consumed* Who, oh* who under more than ordinary
experiences of mercy, can otherwise than observe God under more than ordinary
proceedings of severity? Has God destroyed a third part and more of the City
by Fire? why that which remains, and all the Suburbs at the same time might
have been destroyed.

Fifthly, That others may be warned by Gods severity. God would have his
Judgments be advertisements; the Rod of Correction to be a Rod of Instruction;
and every lush to be a lesson. We don't care for coming into that house, that
still has the sent of Fire. Punishments inflicted for sin, are often more
disswasive from sin, than Gods commands on the one hand, and his threatenings on
the other hand. It Is usual for others to be punished, that Princes children may
thereby be warned and reclaimed. God makes some Monuments of his severity, that
thereby others may not be Practitioners of iniquity. What is it that God says
to others by Londons Constagration? Oh have a care of Londons abomination. If
you partake of London, as to its sinning, you shall partake of London as to
it is suffering. Remembered Pet. 2. 6. God by this terrible sound of the Trumpet
alarums others, that they may look about them. God has no small intendments of
mercy to some, in his intendments of misery on others. It Is high time for me to
remove my combustible matter, when my neighbors house is on Fire round about
me. If God has made the City a Elaming Beacon, Oh see and fear, and do no more
so wickedly.

Sixthly, That so a Nation may be reformed, and not meet with utter ruin and
misery. God is so far from delighting in a Nations destruction, as that he
comes again and again in a way of Judgment, in hopes of a timely amendment. God
had rather see a Nation famous for Reformation, than that it should be famous
for desolation. Gods greatest severities as to this are not severities, when
they are only preventive as to that severity, which is utter ruin and misery,
Amos 4. 11. 12. Jer. 6. 29, 30. Ezekiel. 24. 6, 7. It Is true, and alas, who will
not acknowledge that God has dealt severely with London? and yet herein he
deals not severely, in that he may not deal more severely. Who knows but that
Londons destruction improved, may keep off Englands total desolation? God comes
with the Plague, and that don't work; God comes with the Sword, and that don't
work; at last he comes with a Fiery Judgment, that so he may not come with
this, London adieu, and England Farewell, thy house is left desolate unto thee,
and thou art left desolate without an house. Remember, that this Fiery Rod on
thy back, is only that the rope thereby may be kept from thy neck. We complain
of bad times; and why are the times so bad, but that if possibly the times may
not be worse? How many would have been undone to all Eternity, if they had not
been undone on this side Eternity!

Thus much as to this Doctrinal consideration, wherein has been showed what
Gods Judgments are, what commonly are the times of Gods Judgments, and what the
reasons, why God is so much in those Judgments. We come now to the improvement
of it by way of Application.

Application.

Is God more than ordinary sometimes in his Judgments upon a Nation and City?
then I observe for Information,

First, That God is not an approver of sin in a Nation. A Nation may be guilty
of many abominations, but none of all those abominations have Gods approbation.
I, there may be, and is, wickedness, looseness, and profaneness; there may be,
and is, hypocrisy, formality, and Apostasy; and they that think God is taken
with these, are much mistaken as to God. Those Judgments inflicted by God upon
a Nation, are sufficient evidences of his not approving sin in a Nation. Hab.
1. 13. And can not look on iniquity. Jer. 5. 29. Jer. 7. 18, 19, 20. You know
the Father brings the child under the Rod, because he delights not in the
child's wallowing in the mire. Why is so much evil brought upon London, but that
God abhors the evil so much committed in London? It would be hard measure for a
poor place to lie under so many miseries, the Plague, the Sword, Deadness of
Trade, want of employment, and lastly, this dreadful Judgment of Fire, if all
this while God was delighted with its sins. I dare say the greatest quarrel God
has with this Nation is because of its abomination.

Secondly, God then is of an unlimited Power in his proceedings of Judgment.
Judgments upon a Nation are not so few, but they may be more; and they are not
so severe, but they may be more severe. God has been and is still at work, as
to eminent and remarkable Judgments; and if we think he is now at a loss as to
more Judgments, we shall find that God will find more Judgments for us. Time
was that we thought all was well with us, and Oh how sore Judgments have
overtaken us! and if we think that God has now done with us, he has power
enough utterly to ruin and undo us, Levit. 20. 27, 28. Ezekiel. 15. 7. They
shall go from one Fire, and another fire shall devour them. Oh how easily did
God increase Judgments upon Pharaoh, when Pharaoh increased his sin against
God! Who would not fear thee O thou King of Kings, who if thou will can soon
turn Judgments into mercy, and as soon can turn our present sore Judgments
into greater. If London continue its iniquity, I dread to think what will
befall it, notwithstanding what already has overtaken it. You may, and oh who
knows how soon you may lose your lives by another, as you have lost your houses
and ^states by this Judgment?

Thirdly, Sin then is a Nations greatest enemy. You cannot express your selves
sins friend, but you will find it your foe. It Is impossible a Nations Interest
should be established, let its Superstructure be what it will, as long as there
is sin for it is Foundation. Though thou build thy Wall as high as Heaven, said
the Oracle to Phocas, yet sin that lies at the Foundation will one day overturn
them. Have we been Christians? and are we still under the Sword without, and
the Plague within? it is because of sin. Do we live in sad and miserable times?
it is because of sin. Is the City ruined? the Foundations thereof discovered?
and the Streets desolate, without Inhabitants and houses? it is because of sin,
and therefore oh how great an enemy! Jer. 30. 15. Jer. 21. 12, 13, 14. Isa, 9.
18, 19. If we think to procure a Nations happiness by our wickedness, we take
the ready way for a Nations wretchedness. Oh London, thy greatest Enemies have
been within, though too too many without favor thy ruin.

Fourthly, Security then is no ways becoming a Nation. Security may be a
Nations temper, but it is one of the Nations greatest distempers. Ah Christians,
is it for you with the old worldlings to put off the evil day, when you know
not how soon you may be under a deluge of misery? Is it for you with Agag to
say, The bitterness of death is past, when on a sudden you may be hew'n in
pieces, and Butchered? Is it for you with him in the Gospel to say, Soul take
thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years; when alas, the Fire already
has destroyed thy house and goods, and thou know not how soon a bloody
knife may be put to thy throat? Oh the remembrance of Gods more then ordinary
proceedings of Judgment is not to be attended with groundless promisings of
what not to our selves, Ezekiel. 15. 7. Neh. 3. 13, 15. Oh you suffering
Christians, I beseech you, stand to your watch, when too too many watch that
you may not stand. The Lord keep this poor Nation, and us in it, from a spirit
of security, as being never less secure then when most secure, Ezekiel. 39. 6.

Fifthly, The vanity of all Creature confidences. Alas we are apt to lay our
selves at their feet, who when God comes in a way of Judgment, cannot be a place
of safety and refuge to us. I, thou will have the world, come of it what it
will; and when all comes to all, what is it able to do for thee? Thy house
cannot secure thee against an Arrest from heaven, thy riches cannot privilege
thee against the prison of affliction, and the worlds best Cordials and
prescription cannot keep thee from a bed of languishing, Jer. 47. 13, 14. Zeph.
1. 18. Jer. 51, 58. How many in the enjoyment of all have found troubles
overtaking them, and none of all those enjoyments could or have kept those
troubles from them. Alas, Christians, what are become of your Houses, Shops,
Goods, Estates and Warehouses, when you could not keep them from being
destroyed, and they could not keep your houses from being consumed. Forbear O
my Soul, endeavoring after that which never succored thee less, then when
thou stood'st most in need of being succored. It Is enough, O my God, that the
world has been desired so much, and thy self so little, when it is not the
world, but thy self that is most to be desired.

Sixthly, Gracious Souls are persons of more esteem then commonly esteemed.
There are none more trodden under feet then believers* and there are none more
prevailing with God for the keeping off and removal of Judgments then
believers. Who diverted the fierce anger of the Lord from breaking in upon
Israel, but Moses? Who stayed the Plague from raging amongst the people, but
Aaron? Who prevailed with God for the clouds to empty themselves into showers
in the time of drought, but Elias? Who kept the Fire from Jacob; that thereby
he might not be destroyed when he was small, but Amos? Amos 7. 4, 5. Jam. 5.
17, 18. Jer. 15. 1, 2. Job 42. 8. Godliness was never yet an hinderance to a
Nation, though many have been the hinderancers of the Godly in a Nation. A few
more persons of the same size with Lot as to Godliness would have kept Sodom
from being entombed in it is own ashes. I believe that God was in no place more
owned and acknowledged then in the late City; and therefore how great must
needs be it is provocation, when their Relation unto, and all their interest
with God could not keep off it is ruin and desolation! The best counsel that
can be given to a Nation, is to countenance those who have the greatest
interest with God in his Judgments upon a Nation. Oh England, England, were
thou not more beholding to a Company of upright and Sincere Christians then thy
profane and debauched sinners; thou would have been long ere this a Sodom,
and like unto Gomorrah.

The second improvement of this doctrine shall be by way of consolation, to
those who are sufferers through this sore Judgment of Fire upon their houses.
And indeed who stand most in need of comforts, if not those who are without
their comforts? But, alas, suffering Souls, how shall I speak to you, or
wherewithal shall I comfort you for this sore affliction that is laid upon
you? My hearts desire for you all is and shall be, that God would answer your
desire, and in his own time make up all your loss in the midst of all your
sufferings* This cannot but be the result of my bowels yerning with Compassion
toward you. But yet more particularly by way of Comfort, I would leave these
things with you, as so many Cordials to your swooning Spirits.

First, Has God removed from you the worlds comforts? it may be, it is made up
with heavens comforts The meanness of the ground without is made up with the
richness of the Mine within* The meanness of a Christians outward condition is
made up with the richness of a Christians inward condition; Col. 4. 16. And
therefore see Chapter 1. of the said Epistle, 5. v. It Is not unusual with God to
smile upon his with a piece of brown bread, when he frowns upon others in
enjoying their choicest dainties. Well then, thou art now none of the worlds
honored ones, but thou art heavens beloved one; there are crosses without, but
there are comforts within; God denies thee the pleasures of Egypt, but he feeds
thee with milk and honey of Canaan. I hope it the some* and the Lord grant that
all of you may know experimentally, how to reconcile that seeming contradiction
of outward poverty and inward plenty, outward sufferrings and inward solacing.
A Silken Soul under thredbare clothes is better then a thredbare Saul under
Silken garments. It Is enough surely, Friend, that there is comfort within,
though there are not comforts without.

Secondly, Has God destroyed thy house, and taken away thy comforts and
enjoyments, why he has left still some of thy enjoyments and comfort. The
mother will not always give to her babe the breasts to the full, but yet to it is
wants. I, thou art a child, and what is thy desire? Lord, let such a mercy
continue to me; but what faith God, a great deal less will serve thy turn,
and that thou shall not be without. God it may be don't proportion mercy to thy
petition, but still to thy condition, Math. 6. 30. Well then, thou have had
such and such mercies, and they are gone, and what do thou want? Is it daily
bread? he gives it food and raiment? he gives and continues it; in it what may
serves thy turn? Why still he continues it. I, God has removed thy
superfluities, but still he continues thy necessaries. Thou have still thy
daily food and drink, though thou art not served on thy Silver plates, and with
thy Silver bowls. I suppose, Christians, you may do well enough without those
bespotted faces, perriwigg'd heads, long trayling gowns, and those silken
garments; these were but superfluities, and God has continued thy necessaries.

Thirdly, Has God taken away your enjoyments and houses? why he gives you
content in the want of enjoyments. God takes care that you shall not be without
contentation in the removal of the worlds full accommodation, Phil. 4. 11. The
little bird sings as pleasantly in gathering here and there a corn, as others
that are fed to the full. I dare say, the Christian blesses God as heartily at
the meanest board, and coursest commons, as the greatest Epicure at his full
Cups, curions dishes, and downy beds. Does God remove mercies from me? I am
content. Does God lay miseries on me? I am content. Does God feed me with the
crumbs that fall from others table? I am content, Job 1. 21. I pray which is
better, to have a large Estate to an unsatisfied mind, or a satisfied mind to
a mean Estate? Oh it is a great deal better to want enjoyments, and to have
contentment, then to want contentment in the greatest enjoyments.

Fourthly, Has God destroyed thy house, and taken away thy enjoyments? for all
that he will take the care of thee. When is the mothers care drawn out toward
the child, but when it wants those mercies which it had before? God will find
out some way or other to relieve thee, though he don't see good bountifully to
supply thee. Piety has had too too much of the worlds enmity, yet still God
has provided some or other to relieve her in her greatest Indigency. God has
his daughter of Pharaoh for his Moses in the water, his Ebadmilechs for his
Jeremiahs in the dungeon, his Onesipherasses for his Paul and his distressed
Saints and servants, and his Zoars for his Lots in Sodom. See David's expression
Psalm. 23. 1. and let it be your comfort in the lowest condition. If this be not
enough, why remember the Apostles exhortation, suitable enough to your
condition, 1 Peter 1. 7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.
Will you remember, Sirs? and what would I have you remember but this: The worst
of times have not been without the best of Christians, and the best of
Christians have not been without some or other to provide for them, when it
went hardly with them.

Fifthly, Has God destroyed thy house? he might the same time have destroyed
thy soul; has he dealt so severely with thee on earth, he might have dealt
more severely with thee as to Hell; thou might have been in hell, thy Soul
might have been roaring in the place of torments, thou might have been
reserved in chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Oh had it
not been for infinite mercy, thy soul would have flamed in hell, as well as thy
house has been all in a flame. Oh don't complain, but rather comfort thy self
in the greatest severity, that it is not severity in hell. The greatest misery
on this side Hell, cannot but be infinite mercy.

Sixthly, Has God destroyed thy House, and taken away thy enjoyments? why he
has not, neither will he take away himself. How great a loser soever thou art
as to other things, thou art not a loser as to God; and how great a sufferer
soever thou art, thou art not a sufferer as to God, and this God as thine, and
this God to be thine, and that for ever. He that was thy God in Prosperity,
when those mercies were, he will be thy God in adversity, now those mercies are
no more, Psalm. 27. 10. and 89. 31, 32, 33. Rest assured of it, thy God will not
leave thee, and thou have enough, whatsoever is not left thee; that thy God is
still left, and that he will not leave thee. One God in the want of all is
enough, and the enjoyment of all in the want of God is and will be every way
sad enough. What can thou have to comfort thee when thou have not a God? what
can thou have to sadden thee in the want of all, when thou have a God? I have
done with thee thou poor suffering Christian. I am so far of representing thee
under this Calamity a frighted Citizen, as that the Lord knows I would
willingly leave thee a comforted Christian; The Lord of all comfort in his own
time comfort thee.

The Third and last improvement of this Doctrine shall be by way of
Exhortation, and that in these particulars.

First, Sanctify God in all, and in this sore Judgment of Fire upon us. Its
easy and usual to speak-well of God, when he deals well with us, but rare
and hard to extol him when he debaseth, and advance him when he vilifieth us.
Acknowledge God as righteous in his proceedings, when his proceedings are never
so rigorous. Let your apprehensions of God be honorable, when your condition
from God is sad and miserable. It is said of the Turks when cruelly lashed,
that they are compelled to return to the Judge, to kiss his hand, give him
thanks; and pay the Officer that whipped them, and so clear the Judge and Officer
of injustice. My Beloved, as to the unrighteousness of our ways, God expects
that we should be humbled; and as to the rigorousness of his ways, that he
should be acquitted, Isa. 24. 15. L am. 1: 18. Dan. 9. 14. Does the Angel
destroy from one County to another? God is righteous. Does the Sword devour
from one year to another? God is righteous. Am I under want of the choycest
mercies, and a sense of the severest miseries? God is righteous. Is the City
ruined and undone, my house consumed, my Goods burnt, and my Estate lost? Why
God is righteous. It was an holy expression of the suffering Emperor
Mauritius, when his wife and children were slain before his face, Righteous art
thou O Lord, and in very faithfulness have thou afflicted me. Oh remember, That
his Will is the Rule of Justice, and so his actings cannot be charged with any
thing of injustice. Condemn thy self, but acquit thy God.

Secondly, Get your hearts affected with this sore Judgment of God upon us.
Don't put off the Judgments of God, or this place of sore Judgments, with this
Galliolike Spirit, Let look to it who will. Let your eyes be open to see,
wherein Gods Hand has gone out, and accordingly let there be the outgoings of
your heart. Insensible hearts are no ways becoming miserable times. How sad is
it for others to feast while the City flames! and to go abroad with their
garments of joy, whilst the Nation has on her mourning Apparel! Romans 12. 15.
latter part, Weep with those that weep. Zach. 11. 2. Jer. 49. 2, 3. The times I
am confident are not so hard, but persons hearts, alas, toward those times are
harder. Ah Christians, where are your hearts for Gods Judgments in the midst of
Gods Judgments upon your Shops and Houses? Oh get broken hearts for broken
times, and sorrowing hearts for suffering times, and a pitying heart for a
flaming City. Is it nothing unto you that pass by? Behold and see, whether
there be any sorrow like unto mine, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the
day of his fierce anger, Lament. 1. 12. For my part, let him pass for an hard
hearted wretch indeed, who in the day of Londons Calamity can be without any
yearnings of pity. O London, what shall be done for thee, or how shall my heart
be drawn out with compassion toward thee? My Bowels, my Bowels, Oh that my
head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night for the ruin and destruction of the daughter of my people, Jer. 9. 1.

Thirdly, Be submissive unto God under this fore Judgment. Thy mercies are not,
and thy miseries are; oh but be content. God has made sore breacher again and
again upon thee, but be quiet; thy house is burnt, thy Shop destroyed, thy
Trade decayed and lost, I, it may be with many, alas, thou art turned out of a
possession of all; but let there be a sweet acquiescence in the will of God.
It Is not a murmuring and quarrelling, it is not a contradicting and
counteracting of God, No; it was Isreal's sin, the Lord grant it may not be
ours, to quarrel with God, and to be unsubmissive unto God. I am sure the
Churches practice herein is every way commendable, Mic. 7. 9. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord. And therefore 1 Samuel 3. 18. Ely hears such news, as
should make the ears of such as heard it to tingle, and their hearts to
tremble, and yet quietly and calmly he submits unto it. Remember Christians,
That Obedience is due to Gods severest precepts, and patience is your duty
under the sharpest Providence. I confess we never underwent a sorer Judgment
than this of Fire; Oh but for all that there must be a submissiveness unto God.
I, God has laid a Fiery rod on our backs; Oh but don't let us fly in Heavens
face, but rather lay our selves at Heavens feet.

Fourthly, Don't act any thing to increase Gods Judgments. Do what you can to
quench, but not to kindle the Fire; to allay, but not to raise the storm; to
recover this place out of its rubbish, but not that it may be ruined. In a
common Calamity all ought to put to their helping hand; what then should be
done with those that help forward the Calamity? Oh take away the fuel, but
don't add to the fuel. I don't see how in the judgment of sobriety, they
really wish Englands and Londons welfare, that increase the Fuel to increase
the Fire. Oh that God would do us good, that God would take away his Plagues,
that God would make us succesful, that God would build again the desolate
streets in the midst of us. My Beloved, I say so likewise, and God forbid that
any should not cry, Grace, Grace, to such undertakings and undertakers; and yet
those I, those very persons will not leave their Ranting, and Drinking, and
Healthing, and Damming, and Chambering, and Stageplaying. Oh Sirs, Sirs, the
earnestness of our lips must be attended with the religiousness of our lives,
Amos 4. 12. Jer. 8. 6, 13. If we pray that God would do London, we must live
that God may do it good. Oh don't walk in any ways, wherein God will meet with
us, and lay more Calamity upon us. Piety is the only way for our Prosperity,
whereas iniquity will be the only way for our ruin and calamity, Ezekiel. 36. 33.
A little more looseness, a little more remisness, and a little more profaneness,
will make us cry out, when God will say, Why cryest thou for thine afflictions?
thy breaches, sores, and wounds, are incurable, for the multitude of thine
iniquities.

Fifthly, Be much with God for removing his sore Judgments: How can thou
Christian, see trouble upon trouble, and misery upon misery, and calamity upon
calamity, such dreadful Judgments one after another, and not so much as speak a
word to God in reference unto them? Times of more than ordinary indignation and
desolation should be times of more than ordinary supplication. It Is not some
few formal expressions or other that will serve turn upon Gods turning upon us
in eminent ways of Judgment. When should we pour out a Spirit of
supplication, but when God poures out the Vials of his Indignation? How sad is
it to hear persons ranting in Taverns, when they should be upon their knees to
God in their closets! Lam. 2. 18. Let tears run down like a river day and
night. Chap. 8. 48, 49, 50. Ezekiel. 22. 30, 31. I don't see how they can be
Londons real Favorers, that are not so much as it is faithful remembrancers. I
could wish, and the Lord grant, while we endeavor to make a prey one of
another, there may be more of praying with and for one another; For Englands
sake don't you hold your peace, and for Londons sake don't you rest, till the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a
lamp that burns, Isa. 62. 1.

Sixthly, Secure the interest of your Soul with and in God; get God to be yours
in the midst of those Judgments, wherein you cannot say, that any thing is
yours Has God by Fire destroyed thy house, and taken away thy Estate? and have
thou not yet God to be thine? what will thou do? Oh has God poured out the
Vials of his Indignation, and have thou not got God to be thine? what will thou
do? Is God risen out of his Sanctuary to punish the inhabitants of the earth?
and has he severely punished us? and have thou not got God to be thine? what
will thou do? For my part I must say it, and I cannot but say it again, I don't
know what thou will do unless thou have got God to be thine, and that thou art
his, Isa. 10. 3, 27, 5. Psalm. 5. 7. 1. Labor, oh labor and make it your work,
that though your houses be destroyed by Fire on earth, yet that your Souls be
not destroyed by: Fire in hell. If God be none of yours, I don't know what can
be done; but if he be yours, I don't know what can be done undone. This, this
is your maine work; and more to stir you up to this, as the close of all, give
me leave to recommend these following considerations.

First, I don't know any thing that is more your duty then this: you will tell
me it is the world cap and knee; I tell you no, It Is God: you will tell me it is
your shop, and warehouses and merchandising; I tell you, no, it is God: you will
tell me it is getting something, or other these hard times to keep soul and body
together; I tell you no, it is God, and keeping God and your soul together. Amos
5. 6. Luke 21. 36. The greatest security in the world without a God, as yours,
will be found not to be your security. So far as I know my own heart, I would
be faithful to your eternal interest; and if any thing ought to be your work
more then this, God forbid that the same should not be discovered to, and
pressed upon you. It Is a fond thing for Ministers to make so much ado in the
Pulpit concerning a God in Covenant Relation as yours, if not your duty, and
the maine of your duty. W^ secure now adays what not to our selves; and what
do we secure, but what cannot be secure? Methinks I hear poor wretches crying
out, Oh that in Londons Conflagration, when houses lost, and goods lost, and
estate lost, and all lost, I had secured a Covenant Relation.

Secondly, It Is the Concernment of your Souls that you are to secure. It Is the
jewel in the Cabinet, the treasure in the field, the child in the cradle, and
the eternal well-being of your precious Souls. God allows us time enough to
live comfortably in this world, but no time at all to live wretchedly in
another world. God would have the sum and substance of a Christians Spiritual
circumspection to be his Souls salvation, not his Souls destruction. Oh, that
we should be so serious as to trifles, and trifle as to that which is so
serious! Luke 12. 21. Thou fool, this night, etc. Shall I be so serious as to
houses and riches which have been destroyed by Fire, and not as to a soul which
may be burnt with Fire in hell? What folly would it have been for any in the
late fiery calamity to regard his Lumber, and not at all his Jewels, Mat. 16
26. That person must needs come home by weeping Cross, that has seemingly it
may be secured his Estate in houses, but not his Estate in God; the Soul of his
Estate, but not the Estate of his Soul. I pray let it not be said of you,
Christians, that you should be Penny-wise, and Pound-foolish. Be wise unto
sobriety is the Apostles expression; and its the greatest sobriety, yea policy,
to be wise to our Souls safety.

Thirdly, God with the voice of judgment calls upon you as to this. God is
more then ordinary in his judicial proceedings, and so the result of them
should be your spiritual ensurings. God alarums persons by this Fire on earth,
that so they may keep their Souls from that Fire in hell. All will, and alas,
they must say? we live in miserable times: but what says God? Have a care, you
be not miserable with and after those times, Luke 21. 35, 36. Psalm. 57. 1. In
the shadow of thy wings will I take my refuge. Are your houses destroyed, see
your souls be not destroyed; are your riches lost? See you don't lose your
treasure in heaven; are you turned out of all? See you be not turned out by the
God of all: is there so much misery here? See there be nothing of misery
hereafter. Times of prosperity, Sirs, though too too often they influence us
with security, yet the voice of God in times of Calamity is, see that your work
be done, least otherwise you be undone. Oh it is high time, Christians, to look
to the child in the cradle, and the jewels in the Cabinet, when the house is
on Fire. Oh make sure of your God, and never more then when his judgments have
been, and are so sore.

Fourthly, This is that which will secure you in the midst of judgments. It Is
not so much the money in your bags, as grace in your hearts, that will
indemnifie you in the sorest troubles. How often makes God a manifest
difference between those that fear him, and those that fear him not; between
sinners in their rufflings of profaneness, and the Saints in their Garb of
holiness. I confess both the one and the other, have and do often drink out of
the same bitter cup; but then the Saint kisses only the cup in comparison of
the sinner, who must drink the very dregs, Zeph. 2. 3. It may be ye shall be
hid, Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5. Job 5. 19, 20. Gracious Souls are marked by God for
preservation, when loose and debauched sinners for wrath and indignation. Oh
how poor preservatives are all things to this, a Covenant Relation to God! I
don't know any thing that will or can secure you from an arrest of Evil, but
only as you have Heavens protection. If safety is to be had any where on earth,
I may rather hope for it in the place of Gods worship, then in an house of
Goodfellowship. When there was nothing but darkness in Egypt, there was
brightness in Goshen.

Fifthly, This is that which will comfort you in the midst of judgments: You
may drink out of the same bitter cup with others, but this will sweeten it to
you. The clouds of a sad providence may empty themselves into showers, but this
will be a Soul comforting Sunshine to you. The Fire may and has destroyed your
houses with others, but this will be a support to you, 1. Sam. 30. 6. David
encouraged himself in the Lord his God. David with a God as his, could not but
encourage himself, whereas without a God he could not but be discouraged. I
have lost my friends, but I have God to be my friend; I have lost my houses,
but I have a God to be my house; I have lost my riches and all that ever I had,
but I have God to be my riches, and all that ever I can want, 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. Oh how cheerful may
the Soul be in the loss of all, that is not at a loss as to God! Go and be
miserable with a God if thou can, and let others be comfortable without a God
if they can. I had rather choose a Saint in his meanest rags, then a sinner in
his stateliest robes. If a God cannot comfort thee, alas, what will or can
comfort thee! A God as thine cannot but be a Cordial to thee in all thy
swoonings.

Sixthly, Your Souls shall be saved notwithstanding the greatest and sorest
judgments. When judgments break the Cabinet of your bodies, they shall not be
prejudicial to the jewel, your Souls. Those judgments that make way for others
to be damned, they make way for you to be saved. Those judgments that are so
many Sergeants haling others away to a prison, are but so many servitours
convaying you to a Palace, Malach. 3. 16, 17. They shall be mine, says the
Lord. What was a fiery Chariot to E^^ah, when therein he was had away for
heaven, Ps. 73. 24. When judgments have done their work upon you, you shall not
be undone by those Judgments. I, the Fire has destroyed your houses, and a
next may destroy your lives: God this time has put Fire to your houses, and
men through their cruelty the next may put a bloody knife to your throats; but
when your houses, goods, and lives themselves are gone, your souls for all that
shall not be gone, but bound up in the bundle of life. A believer may say to
Judgments, the Plague, the Sword, Famine and Fire, do your work and spare not;
my body can but be resolved into dust, but my soul shall not be sentenced into
hell. I believe that many good men may be removed in a common calamity, but I
don't believe that any good man shall be sentenced into eternal misery. To draw
therefore to an end. It Is salvation work, Christians, and dear Friends, that I
have put you upon; and if any thing would do it without securing your souls
with and in God, I would not trouble you with one word of what has been
delivered. You don't know what evil there will be in the earth; we have lost
our goods and houses, and we may next lose our lives, and the lives of our poor
babes. All that I am earnest for, is only, and I hope you wont blame me for it,
that it may not go ill with you hereafter, how ill soever it has and may still
go with you here. Oh who would not be safe as to heaven, when heaven alone it
is that will be his safety.

And now I have done the whole; and may the blessing of God attend the whole
that has been done, in setting it so upon our hearts, and our hearts upon it,
as that the Judgments that have been, may be removed, this sore fiery Judgment
sanctified, and those that may be, and are still threatened, through mercy,
prevented, that so England may once more be a quiet habitation, and Londons
ruined Foundations again laid, yea, the Topstone thereof crying, Grace, Grace:
Even so Blessed Lord God, and let all thy people heartly and reformedly say,
Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
P. 20. l. 14. r. Justify God. P. 24. l. 24. r. wherein you can be undone.


