A TREATISE OF Excommunication: WHEREIN It Is Fully, Learnedly, and Modestly
demonstrated, THAT There is no Warrant, Precept, or President, either in the
Old or New Testament, for Excommunicating any Persons, or Debarring them the
Sacraments, whilst they make an outward Profession of the true Christian Faith.

Written Originally in Latin, By the famous and pious THOMAS ERASTVS Doctor in
Physic, About the Year 1568.

Brethren, ye have been called unto LIBERTY; only use not Liberty for an
occasion to the Flesh, but by LOVE SERVE one another, Gal. 5. v. 13.

LONDON:Printed for L. Curtis. 1682.

To the Pious READER, AND Such as is studious of Truth, THOMAS ERASTVS a
Physician sends greeting.
LEst any, lighting upon this Treatise, should wonder what Motives or
Provocations made me busy my self in this Controversy about Excommunication,
I shall as Concisely as Truly acquaint the World with the Rise and Occasion of
it. It Is now much about sixteen years since some men have fallen into a kind of
Excommunicating Frenzy (under the specious Title of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and as they contend, sacred in it self, and enjoined the Church by God) and
fain would they have the whole Church tainted with the like; that the manner of
it ( they propose) should be thus: That a select number of Elders should sit in
the name of the whole Church, and judge who were fit and who unfit to be
admitted to the Lords Supper. I could not but wonder to see them consulting of
such matters, at such a time when we had neither fit persons to excommunicate,
or to be excommunicated: for scarce a thirteenth part of the people understood
and approved of the Doctrine of the Reformation which was then but blooming;
the residue were our professed Enemies: so that no man, who had his wits about
him, but must needs see that such a matter must unavoidably introduee dangerous
Divisions among us. And therefore I thought it not then so proper an Enquiry
how some might be shut out of the Church, as how more might be brought in; and
that the best thing we could apply our selves to, would be the propagating
saving Truths. Besides, they who were to be the Supervisors, were not so much
superior to the others, in Age, Experience, Parts, Judgment, Virtue, or
Eminency, that they could manage so weighty a matter with that Port and Dignity
that was requisite. Since therefore I saw that their desires could not have the
labored Effects, without the Churches Ruin and Subversion, I was ever and
anon cautioning them, that they should weigh well what they did, and not rashly
attempt what they might after too late repent. But though as yet I verily
thought that Excommunication had been a thing commanded in the Scriptures, yet
I did not find it commanded after that manner that they proposed: So that since
Christ seemed to me to have left us at large for the manner of it, I set my
thoughts on work what might be the best way and course under our circumstances,
and would be attended with the least Distractions and Inconveniences; which I
did with the closer application and diligence, upon some Reflections that I
had, how fatal and turbulent to Christianity this had formerly proved, and was
still little better, as it was managed.

Whilst I was upon these thoughts, and looked a little back upon what the
Ancients had writ on this subject, I find it weaker in all points than I had
before suspected; so that I could not but begin to doubt of the very thing. My
next resort was to the Schoolmen, among whom I met with as little
satisfaction. Then came I to our Modern Writers, who no whit mended the matter;
nay, I observed that they did most manifestly differ among themselves in some
things, which quickened my diligence in the Enquiry. So I laid by these
Commentators a while, and betook my my self to the Scripture; in the perusal of
which, I marked and noted, with all the exactness I could, what was discrepant
from, and what agreeable unto, the commonly received Opinion. And truly it was
no ordinary assistance to me in this matter, to take a survey with my self of
the state of the Jewish Church and Government: for thus thought I with my self,
God in the 4th Chapter of Deuteronomy. v. 6, 7, 8. bears witness to their Laws, that
there was no Nation that had Statutes and Judgments so righteous, and that for
their Laws sake it should be said of them, Surely this great Nation is a wise
and understanding People: Therefore it seemed necessary with me, that to have a
Church gloriously and wisely modeled, it must make near approaches to the
Judaical Form. But certain it is, that in this Jewish Church things were never
so instituted by God, as that there should be distinct procedures in the
punishing Immoralities, one by the Civil, and another by the Ecclesiastical
power: What hinders then, but that even now too, that that Church which God
has blessed with a Christian Magistracy, may sit down contented under one form
of Government?

I then communicated my thoughts to learned, good, and pious men, so far, as
that I pressed them not to consider the matter slightly and cursorily: for I
could not but deem it very unnecessary that there should be two Heads of the
Visible Church, where the Body is but one; and that their Mandates,
Injunctions, Decretals, and all the Acts of a governing Authority, should be
distinct (as hitherto they have been) so that the Government of one should not
be subject to the Inspection or Control of the other, but both their
Jurisdictions be Chief in their kinds: For such a Church-Senate or Convocation
of select Elders would they in truth have framed, that they should have the
Supreme Right and Power of punishing Vice even in the Magistrates themselves,
but not with corporal punishments, but by prohibiting them the Sacrament, first
privately; and if on this they reformed not, then in a more solemn and public
manner. But my Opinion was (as I always told them) That one Supreme Magistrate
of Gods institution, and of the true Faith, might, and had as good right, now,
to restrain Vice, as heretofore under the Law: And I took me an instance from
Solomon's glorious Reign, which was a kind of Type of the Christian Church's
reigning upon Earth. Now neither under him, nor yet under Moses, the Judges, or
any other the Kings, or when governed by the Optimacy, have we any footsteps
of two so distinct Judicatures over men's actions and manners. Nature (says
Musculus) allows not two absolute and Independent Governments (without any
subordinacy of one to the other) to Lord it over the same people. I must
confess I received great Aids and Improvement of these my Thoughts from the
persons with whom I conferred them: for in some things their Observations
out-went my own; and where they did not, they furnished me many material hints
to mend them by: But still I kept my self quiet from any public Contests in
this Affair, and entered not into any Debates about it where I was not
provoked, and then too I used the utmost moderation in the managing them;
esteeming it as disadvantageous as needless to trouble our Churches with this
Dispute, when it did not yet appear that any body had imposed such a Form of
Discipline upon them. But others who think the relish of Government more sweet
and pleasant than that of Obedience, could not so temper their mouths, but by
all the Arts and Insinuations that they thought might work our most pious
Prince to their designs, they labored (as I afterward understood) to
introduce something very like this into our Churches; and had not other rubs
thwarted them, God knows how far they might have prevailed. Besides, how did
they lie at me all this while? what Dirt did they throw upon me, only for that
they knew how averse I was to their purposes, and that I should not be wanting,
according to my best endeavors, to frustrate them? But this I need not here
enlarge upon.

It happened about the same time, that an Englishman (who was then said to
have left his Country because he could not brook a Surplice and suchlike
Formalities then enjoined) desiring to commence Doctor, proposed in his Theses,
Disputes concerning indifferent matters and religious habits. Now our Divines
would not admit of this man to his Doctorship, for fear of giving distaste to
the English Clergy (though in the latter of his Theses something was proposed
too relating to this matter); but it seems they thought the peace and
tranquillity of our own Church, a trifle not worth the regarding. And therefore
amongst his other Theses this was one, That in every Church that was rightly
instituted, there ought to be a Government or Discipline observed, whereby the
Ministry, in conjunction with Elders for that purpose to be elected, should
have right and authority to excommunicate any vicious Liver, even Princes
themselves. Now though I was not without apprehensions that this Dispute was
not then taken up for nothing, yet I hoped withal that no more would come of it
than of an ordinary Disputation, where the Question is agitated Pro and Con,
not for deciding the matter so much, as to whet and exercise the young
Disputants, and to try how well qualified they are for the Degrees that they
stand Candidates for. I therefore stirred not thither; and indeed other affairs
hindered my being present. And for others, who I saw ready to take up the
Cudgels, I advised them to have a greater regard to the Churches Tranquillity,
than to the Follies of a few; yet some disputed the point with them: But it
might have proved no more than a Disputation of course, had they not called as
well them as me, Profane, Satanical, Devilish Makebates, Enemies to Religion
and Holiness, Fanatics, and what not?

Truly for my self, I can religiously say, it never entered into my thoughts to
set Pen to Paper in this matter, till I both heard and saw with what
intemperateness they comported themselves both publicly and privately; so that
I thought a longer silence but a betraying the Truth. But as I was then more
than ordinarily employed (by reason of the sick Soldiers who returned from
France with Casimire, in the year 1568.) I set down my Thoughts but brokenly,
as in the intervals of my Employ, things from time to time occurred to my mind;
which, when I had amassed a pretty deal (though confusedly and immethodically)
together, I distributed and submitted them to the Censure of others, entreating
them withal, that if they observed any thing false, or but weakly maintained,
they would answer the one, and strengthen the other with better Reasons. And I
hoped to gain this (if nothing else) thereby, that those of contrary Sentiments
would become more calm and moderate upon the perusal of what I had writ, and
not differ from us farther than they had Arguments to bear them out. One of the
two persons (with whom I thought of conferring most particularly) saw and read
three parts of four before the whole was transcribed; and being then asked what
was his Judgment of it, he promised to give it when he should have perused the
whole. But something, I know not what, he said by the by of Leaven, and that he
thought the Consent of the ancient Church was to be very much esteemed of; and,
in fine, some other things did he let fall: whereby 'twas easy for me to make
a Judgment of his Opinion in the case. And I learnt quickly after, that the
very same person had writ a Tract about Excommunication, in maintenance of the
Vulgar Opinion; which made me no longer-doubt what answer I should meet with
from him: for I knew him to be one who was not easily brought to retract what
he had once asserted. Therefore since I had in the latter part of my Book
confuted all his Objections, I presented it whole to another person, who I
thought the best Friend I had in the world: He not only took the Book from me
with disdain and contempt (whether he had an item of it before, I know not) but
he plainly said he should not vouchsafe it a reading; yet I left it with him
for some days, and besought him with all the earnestness and entreaties that I
could, that he would but look it over and give me his Judgment upon it. But I
understood upon good grounds that my Solicitations had been fruitless. I sent
for my Book about twelve days after, that I might get others Opinions upon it.
But because 'twas long, and could not be so soon read over by many persons, I
contracted it into certain Theses or Positions, that I might the better
communicate it into many hands; so that hereby I quickly got the Opinion of the
most eminent German Divines; and others who had refused the reading of it at my
request, were at last thus drawn into it unawares.

But that it might appear to the World that I sought after nothing but the
naked Truth, I prefixed a Preface to it, wherein I requested two things: First,
That all men would be pleased diligently to examine every point, and weigh it
by the Scale of Holy Writ; and if they saw me in an Error, would endeavor to
set me right again, that I might be contributory to setting others to rights: I
promised from the bottom of my heart (God, the Searcher of hearts, is my
Witness) that I would thank him both before God and man, whoever should show me
my Error. And (because I foresaw what after came to pass) my second Request
was, That if they found fault with any thing, that they would so do it, that I
might have a just liberty of explaining my self, and of justly defending any
thing they should undeservedly condemn: for though I had approved my self a
Friend to them in all good turns, I could scarcely expect like measure again,
by what I had before experienced. Nor was I deceived: for the very men whom I
had so fondly conceived to have been my best Friends, turned suddenly my
Enemies, and would not so much as speak to me, though I had never through all
my life injured them in Word or Deed, but always did and still will study to
oblige them: but however, I thankt God that I experienced their Constancy and
good Will to me, rather in a concern of this, than of any other nature. But
restless were they; and since they had vainly attempted by the help of the
Magistrate to call in these Theses out of the hands where they had been
dispersed, they go another way to work, and desired (under the pretext of Laws
which were never yet heard of) that as Divines were not to meddle with the
Opinions and Rights of other Professions, that it might be enacted and
enjoined, That all of other Professions might be restrained from entering into
their Divinity-Schools. Had this been asked threescore years ago, it might have
passed well enough; but how 'twould go down now, let others judge. Are the
Precepts, to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. and 1 John 4. 1. Try the
spirits whether they are of God; and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things; hold
fast that which is good, and the like, Precepts which were given to none but
those who teach Divinity for Hire? I had thought that Christian Divinity had
been a Doctrine common to all men, and was therefore to be taught every where.
But what is it they ask, when they would have us keep from their Schools? Do
they mean as they concern not themselves in any other Faculties? Sure they
would not have us not to hear their Lectures, or that we should not come
thither to learn? Who I* pray, ever forbid them to study the Languages,
Philosophy, Physic, or Law? But if they care not for, or neglect those
Studies, must we do so by Divinity? Did indeed the ignorance of the Scriptures
carry no worse consequence with it, than their ignorance in the other Studies,
we might peradventure complement them upon that point; or they might easily
prevail, if no body must speak against what they enact and determine. This was
a thing that the Romanists indeed, and by a better Right than they, laid claim
to; but I cannot gratify either of them herein, since Christ my Savior has
countermanded me.

Now that, they say, it becomes me not to meddle with matters of Divinity, I
value it not; or that I have not a just regard to my Reputation (as they
suggest) perhaps because I make not a Gain, or am not hired to study the Truth:
for were I paid for my Teaching of Divinity, I should do nothing (as themselves
hold) unsuitable to my Duty and Function. But in truth I desire nothing but to
have the Truth understood, and God's Name glorified, and my self exposed to
shame, rather than the Truth be kept under deck: for Christ has not without
cause said it, Joh. 5. 44. That they cannot believe, who receive Honor one of
another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only.

Therefore when this too fell not out to their minds, and yet they could no
longer smother their Animosities, they began to assail me with dint of
Argument; which upon all occasions they urged not without the severest
Reflections upon me. Now though I heard thereof from several hands, yet, for
Quietness and Peace sake, I easily despised it, hoping to see the day* that
when those first Emotions should be over, and their Passions cool, they might
stand more fair and equally affected to me. But alas, I was no Prophet here
neither; for, for almost five months after, their Hatred run as high as ever:
nor did they give over baiting me and my Writing, partly with Clamor and
Reproach, and partly with I know not what Sophistical Reasonings. Therefore
taking a stricter review of my Theses, which made an hundred before, I
contracted them to Seventy five, and marshalled them in a little better order:
Somethings in them I explained more clearly, and enforced them more strongly.
And in fine, I have made it my business to give as full satisfaction to all
Lovers of Truth, as I could in so little a Treatise.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THis Tract received never (that I heard of) more than one direct Answer, and
that writ by Theodore Beza, in the year 1590, on the behalf of the Geneva
Platform, or Presbyterian way of Excommunicating; which put our Author upon a
farther Reply in Confirmation of the following Theses, (which remains yet
unanswered, and unanswerable, for ought I know): but that Reply being above
four times as long as THIS that is here published; and the main of the
Arguments that he goes upon being hinted here, though not so fully pressed, the
Publication of the other is at present forborne.

A QUESTION OF THE Weightiest Moment, cleared: Whether Excommunication (so far
as it debars those who understand and make profession of the Christian Religion
from the use of the Sacrament, by reason of some sin committed) be of Divine
Institution, or the Invention of Men?
POSITION I. THE name of Excommunication seems to be derived from 1 Cor. cap.
10. and imports an amotion or separation from the Communion; which there, verse.
16. is called the Communion of the Blood of Christ: And in truth,
Excommunication is now defined by almost every body, to be an Exclusion from
the society and communion of the Faithful.

II. Now the company of the Faithful is twofold; the one, Internal and
Spiritual; the other, External or Visible, and Political or Civil. (For, for
that third sort which our Modern Papists have invented, it is neither of it self
a well-fram'd one, nor pertinent to our present purpose.)

III. Now betwixt both these, the difference is at least so great, that there
is no necessity that either should be comprehensive of each other: for as he
may still remain a Member of Christ, who without any just cause is cast out of
the visible Church, or is otherwise constrained to take Covert, and make his
abode among Infidels; so they that pass muster amidst the visible Flock, are
not all the Living Members of Christ. Hence does it follow, that those things
may well be different which unite us to one and not to the other, and separate
us from the one, and yet not from the other.

IV. And indeed we are made the Members of Christ, that is, are joined to the
Internal and Spiritual Fellowship of Christ, and of the Faithful, by that Faith
alone which works by Charity: and it is by Infidelity only that we fall from
this Consortship. And therefore no body can give us admission into this
Society, or shut the doors upon us, but he that can impart to us a lively
Faith, and again withdraw it at his pleasure.

V. Now it is by the Profession of the same Faith, by the Approbation of the
same Doctrine, and in fine, by the promiscuous usage of the same Sacraments,
that we become Consorts and Fellow Members of the External and Visible Church.
He that has these three in him, so long as he remains such, is reckoned for a
Member of the Outward Congregation of the Faithful, albeit he arrives not at
the farther pitch of Internal Fellowship of the Soul and Spirit.

VI. He therefore that is thrust out from External Communion with the Church
(that is, that is excommunicated) is debarred all three, or two, or but one of
them: But now from the two first, to wit, the Confession of Faith, and Assent
to the Christian Doctrine (under which latter I would include hearing of the
Word and Doctrine) no one ought to be prohibited; but rather on the other hand,
the whole World are to be invited, and by all the Allurements and Arts of men,
won and brought into these. There is nothing left then, but that he who is
excommunicated, must and can (of all the forementioned three) be only
prohibited from the participation of the Sacraments: But whether the debarring
of all private Commerce be an unseparable appurtenant of this, or the one may
be without the other, will be an after-consideration. Thus much is certain,
that no other punishment has any thing to do with this Excommunication, as to
the substance of it: for as for other Penalties, they may as well be inflicted
on such as stand not excommunicate, as they may not be inflicted on such as
stand so.

VII. Therefore the Papal Faction, over and besides this Excommunication (which
they call the lesser, and rightly define it by a bare Exclusion from the
Sacraments) do very improperly to add any second, which they call the greater,
and anathema; and define it against express Scripture, by interdiction and
seclusion from Temples, from all private Commerce and Conversation, and from
all lawful Transaction betwixt man and man: for the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
plainly shows, that neither Heathens nor any others were precluded from hearing
or reading the Word of God, or from the Thanksgivings or Prayers of Christians.

VIII. From what has been said, Excommunication is apparently nothing but a
public and solemn Interdiction, as was said before, or Exclusion* from the
Sacraments, and more particularly the Lords Supper (which the Apostle calls
peculiarly (...), Communion) to the end that the Sinners may repent, and be
again readmitted to receive the Sacraments.

IX. Here now the Question arises, viz. Whether any person be to be prohibited
or debarred the use and freedom of the Sacraments, upon the account of any
previous sin acted by him, or for the wickedness of his life, if he himself
desires to take the Sacraments with other Christians? This Question is meant,
of such who profess the same Christian Faith, is ingrafted into the Church by
Baptism, and differs not from her in Doctrinals, (as we said, Sect. 5.) but
fails in point of Morality and a good Life only. The Question is therefore
this: Whether there be any footsteps in Holy Writ, of either Precept or
Example, whereby such persons are either commanded or taught to be debarred
access to the Sacraments?

X. Our Answer is in the Negative, That there is no such; and that rather there
are both Examples and Precepts too, more than once to be met with in the Bible,
of a quite contrary nature: for we have it from Moses, Exodus 23. v. 14. and 34.
v. 23. Number. 9. Deuteronomy. 16. v. 16. that every Male that was circumcised was to
appear before God thrice in the year; that is, in the Feast of Unleavened
Bread, in the Feast of Weeks, and in the Feast of Tabernacles: And the Law
commanded strangers too, Deuteronomy. 9. v. 14. (provided they were circumcised) to
celebrate the Passover with the Jews. The unclean also, Deuteronomy. 16. v. 10. and
13. and those that should be in a Journey afar off, were commanded to eat the
Passover the same day of the second month, and in the same manner with the
Jews. Nay, it is farther added, v. 13. that the man that is clean, and is not in
a Journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover, even the same Soul shall be cut
off from his People. 'Twas therefore the Will and Command of God, that all the
circumcised should celebrate it; and God excluded none from this Sacrament,
(nor indeed from any other Rites, Ceremonies, or Sacrifices) except the Unclean.

XI. In Leviticus several kinds of Sacrifices are enjoined, according to the
difference of the sins which the Criminal was thereby to expiate; whether they
were sins of ignorance and error, or voluntarily and knowingly committed. In
like manner does God, Deuteronomy. 14. v. 23. give a general Command to all, (there is
no exception there of sinners) That they should eat the Tithe of their Corn,
etc. before the Lord in the place which he should choose, that so they might
learn to fear the Lord their God always. Sacraments therefore were to them
Allurements to Piety; and for that reason was no body thrust from them, but
rather was every individual man invited to frequent them.

XII. In very truth, we do not at all read that any one among the Jews was
either by their Priests, Levites, Prophets, Scribes, or Pharisees, prohibited
access to their Sacrifices, Ceremonies, and Sacraments. The Chief Priests and
Pharisees counted Christ and his Apostles bad men enough, but we never find
that they attempted to thrust them from their Sacrifices or Sacraments either
before or after Christ's death; nay, they did not drive out of their Temple, or
from their Ceremonies, so much as a Publican that was a Jew, or any other
circumcised Proselyte, though a bad liver: for they were not to learn, that
this was more than the Law of Moses allowed them to do. Indeed, in Mat. 9. v.
11. they reproved Christ for eating and drinking with Publicans and Sinners;
but at no time or place did they twit him for praying with them in the Temple,
for his frequenting their Sacrifices and other Rites, for his yearly Progress
with them and others of the Rabble to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover and
other Solemnities: And so far were they from any endeavors to put the most
cruel Villains, and most wicked Heretics, the Sadducees, from their Ceremonies
and Communion in Worship, that they even permitted them to climb to the Dignity
of Chief Priests: And yet it is most apparent out of Josephus and the Acts of
the Apostles, what an inveterate hatred they had for one another. Had it
therefore been lawful, they would with open arms have embraced such an occasion
of revenging themselves on their Enemies.

XIII. But farther yet, it was not in their power to keep them from eating the
Passover: for that was not eaten before the Priests, but in their private
houses, as we read Christ to have celebrated his last Passover with his
Disciples. Every man was then a Priest as 'twere, as Philo Judaeus bears
witness, when speaking of the Passover, he tells, That on that Festival every
man throughout the Nation sacrificed for himself, not expecting nor tarrying
for their Priests: for the Law indulged the privilege of Priesthood to the
whole Nation, that on one set day every year they should sacrifice with their
own hands. And Exodus 12. v. 4. 'twas commanded, That if the Household were too
little for the Lamb, that then he and his Neighbor next unto the house should
take it according to the number of the Souls, to the end that the whole might
be eaten. The like seems to have been observed in the matter of Circumcision,
(excepting in this particular, that they were not obliged to circumcise at
Jerusalem only, as they were to celebrate there the Passover:) for I do not
remember that the presence of the Priest was requisite to Circumcision.

XIV. John the Baptist too, who was the forerunner of Christ, did constantly do
the same: for he baptized not only the Pharisees and Sadduces that came unto
him (whose behavior and manners he very well understood, when he publicly
called them a Generation of Vipers) but also the Publicans, and all others that
resorted to him to be baptized, to the intent that they repenting them of their
former evil life, might set about the amending it, and so might flee from the
Wrath to come. It Is scarce probable, that such a man as John was, should admit
of men of such profligate lives, men that impiously, audaciously, and publicly
denied the Resurrection of the Dead, had he not known that the Law forbad not
access to such: for the Judaical Law (as has been already shown) prohibited no
circumcised persons, but the unclean and leprous.

XV. Besides, this Uncleanness was a Legal Ceremony, not any impurity of Life,
or pravity of Manners: for not he who had sinned, or committed any wickedness,
was thereby unclean; but the Unclean were those who touched any dead Corpse,
any Excrements, any person that had an Issue of Blood, or the like. And 'twas
for this cause that the Pharisees would not go into the Judgment-hall, when
they had delivered up Christ to Pilate to be put to death, lest they should be
debarred thereby from eating the Passover. But surely the Mosaical uncleanness
did not so typifie and represent our iniquities, that as they who were thereby
defiled were shut out from the Tabernale, and the company of others: so should
it signify that these sins were to be corrected and punished by withholding
the Sacraments, and by Exclusion from the Visible Church; as appears plainly by
what follows: For,

1. Even whilst Legal Uncleanness was in force, and there were then wicked men
in abundance, yet were not the same punishments appointed for the wicked and
for the unclean. What probability is there then that these Ceremonies should
typifie their punishment, or in any sort signify that Moral Delinquencies
should be thus checked and redressed, when the Ceremonies themselves should be
taken away and canceled?

2. Moses had plainly been inconsistent with himself, had he in fact admitted
them to the Temple and Rituals, whom at the same time he by those Ceremonies
signified that they were to be excluded. For certain it is, that no one was
ever thrust out of the Tabernacle, or from the Congregation, for the pravity of
his Manners, if, as the Law commanded, he had neither touched any dead Body,
nor otherwise in that nature defiled himself. At this rate therefore Moses
should punish those that were but figuratively unclean, and let such as were
unclean in reality go unregarded; (I mean, as to this sort of punishment.)

3. That Legal Impurity affected and tainted the Body alone; whereas wickedness
consists in the Internal actions and operations of the mind: for the cause and
root of all Evil is born with us, and falls not under man's correction, whilst
it puts not forth its fruit; for otherwise must the whole World be
Excommunicate: for we shall not get these spots out of our Soul, whilst we
breathe mortal air. But that other Impurity, which is but a bodily stain, is
punished by being debarred Commerce with others, though there be no other
fruit, no farther evil springing from that uncleanness, nor he that is defiled
has done nothing against the Law: but for the actions and transgressions of
the unclean, they were dealt with at the rate of others transgressions, if the
parties under that defilement did any thing against the Law; and the cleanness
or uncleanness of the sinner neither aggravated nor lessened the moral guilt.

4. Our very Adversaries confess, that not all sorts and sizes of sins are to
be redressed by Excommunication; whereas the Law commands that every
uncleanness be punished by Exclusion from the Tabernacle and public Sacrifices:
so that those could not typifie all sorts of Iniquities.

5. No man that sins unwittingly can be excommunicated; but 'twas usual for men
unwittingly to contract uncleanness, and not only without any blame of theirs,
but to their great grief and trouble. What fault was there in him, who
sleeping, unvoluntarily suffered nocturnal Pollutions? and where the Wife might
unexpectedly fall into that condition which the Law made a Pollution to the
Husband, if he approached her? or by the decease of Children, Wife, or Parents?
or the like, which usually happened? And now it needs not to be proved that
they are only voluntary and spontaneous Crimes, for which persons may be (as
some men think) debarred Access to the Sacraments.

6. A far severer punishment was ordained for him that killed a man against and
without any will or intention of so doing, than a naked seclusion from the
Sacraments for some few weeks or days: If therefore an unpremeditated and
involuntary offense, and by consequence a sin of the lesser die, underwent a
more sharp and bitter chastizement than the foulest Legal Impurities, it is
plain that the punishments for them are not intended to represent the
punishment for Moral Iniquities.

7. It often fell out, that men of the greatest Sanctity and Integrity became
unclean, and were debarred both from entering into the Temple, and from the use
of Sacrifices; whilst on the other hand, men most notoriously wicked had
admission to either, without control: whereas if in the Church of God both
ought to undergo the same punishment, the latter should rather be secluded than
the former.

8. It Is manifest that God did at no time or place absolutely prohibit all
Legal Impurity: for some were to attend the dying persons, some those that were
infected with an unclean disease, some must bury the dead, and in fine, some
must purify the unclean, (by which means they themselves became defiled, v.
Numb. 19.) so that God would not that all Legal Impurities should be avoided:
But God prohibited sins of all kinds, and to all men, and at all times, and
never indulged the perpetrating any wicked action at any time or place whatever.

9. God commands that sin should be restrained by Fire, Sword, Halters,
Stoning, Stripes, Mulcts, Imprisonment, and other penalties of the like nature;
but ordains that the legally unclean should be purified by sprinkling and
washing with water, and the like, Numb 19. v. 17, 18, 19.

10. He that had contracted uncleanness according to the definitions of legal
Pollutions, and died in that state, as for instance, women in their
menstruousness, or men having a Gonorrhea or Leprosy on them, were not for
that enrolled among the wicked, or doomed to damnation: But he that shall so
live, that honest good men shall deem him worthy of Excommunication, cannot be
accounted of otherwise than as a sinful and impious person.

11. Legal Uncleanness took place and were regarded but with one single
People, and there too but for a limited time; whereas sins sprang up every
where, among all Nations, without distinction of place or time. Since then, as
well among all other Nations, as among the Jews themselves, before Legal
Impurities were introduced, sins were both when punished and in the punishing
adjudged sins, it certainly signified something more than the punishment of
flagitious men; which was surely lighter than what was to make satisfaction to
the Will of God.

12. Every person was purified at set-times and places, and by using set and
peculiar Ceremonies, be the party how he would as to his mind; that is, whether
he become unclean with or against his Will: but none stand acquitted from their
sins, but such as heartily repent, and do with as much sincerity as earnestness
desire to grow and be better.

13. Every one was his own judge of his being cleansed (excepting the leprous,
and some few others) and stood not in need of Judges or Elders, who should
judge for them, and pronounce them clean or unclean. Our Opposers have
otherguess Sentiments of the excommunicated: for they put the Decision upon the
judgment of their Elders, not upon the Assertion of the Parties who say they
repent.

14. The Leper, Lev. 13. v. 12, 13. whose Leprosy spread from the crown of the
head to the so^^ of the feet, so that the Leprosy cover all his flesh, and
that the skin of the whole body be all over of a color, was to be pronounced
whole and clean; but he who on the contrary had his skin raw and defiled but in
some one or more parts, was to be accounted unclean. Now in the case of
sinners, it is quite otherwise: for he that wallows over head and ears in sin
(like a Sow all bemir'd) is not an honester man than he who retains some shadow
of Religion, and show of Honesty.

15. The Lepers are not commanded to do any thing on their part toward their
cleansing, but barely to show themselves to the Priest, that he may pronounce
the Plague clean or not clean: But to wicked men the Command is direct, that
themselves amend their lives, and give evidence of a sorrowful and penitent
heart by their good and holy works.

16. Many were made unclean by touching the very things whereby others were
made clean, and while themselves did purify others, v. Numb. 19. but sure no
man deserves to be excommunicated from the means he uses in the healing and
purifying others who are defiled with sin and iniquity: Whereas if you would
have the figure to answer herein, you must grant that all that would recall
others into the ways of Righteousness by Excommunication, are to be
excommunicated themselves.

17. The unclean were not by the Law interdicted all Sacraments: for they were
to observe all the private Rites and Ceremonies of their Country; they were to
keep the Sabbath, and celebrate the Feast of Purification, whereby the fruits
and benefits of Christ's meritorious works were chiefly shadowed or expressed;
and all this at the peril of their lives, vid. Lev. 16. and 23. for they were
not (as I said before) taken for men damned, and of a desperate condition: But
whether in the opinion of our Adversaries the Excommunicate are to be thought
otherwise, it is needless for me to attempt much the proving it.

18. The unclean under the Law did propagate an uncleanness to the clothes,
houses, places, and persons that they touched, or had otherwise to do with; but
wicked men did neither defile the Temple nor any thing else, nor indeed any
other men, unless those others joined with them in the sin. The Temple was not
polluted by bringing in an Adulteress, Numb. 5. v. 19. John 8. v. 11. no more
did the Publican (who in the Parable, Luke 18. v. 9. went up with the Pharisee
into the Temple to pray) defile it by his presence; that Pharisee who thought
him a mighty sinner, compared with himself, yet never thought himself defiled
by his company. When Judas threw down the Traitorous Pieces, the Price of
Blood, in the Temple, we do not read that the Temple was thereby polluted, or
that the Pharisees made any complaint, as to that, who yet would not go into
the Judgment-hall, lest they should be defiled, John 18. v. 28. Whereas were
but a woman in her Menstruousness, or having an Issue of Blood, or any one who
had buried another, or had (though unawares) touched a dead body, been seen in
the Temple, all had been polluted and unclean; nor might they have sacrificed,
or performed any other Worship, till 'twere again purified. In like manner
Judas polluted not that last Paschal-Supper by his detestable acts; which yet
would have been the case, had but he or any other of the Disciples touched any
dead body.

In fine, the uncleanness under the Law, did figure our perverted and corrupt
Nature, which could not be admitted into Heaven, unless washed and purified in
and by the most pure and precious Blood of Christ: for as the Tabernacle
typified Heaven, and the casting out thence signified Damnation, or the
Exclusion from the heavenly Jerusalem; so the cleansing or washings by ordinary
or sanctified Water, prefigured that Purification by the death of Christ. 'Twas
not therefore typical, or figurative of the quality of the Actions, but of the
quality or pravity of our Nature. Nor did Gods Law prefigure how Vice should be
bridled and restrained; (for Moses taught this in clear and express words) but
what should be our State in another life, to wit, in the Kingdom of Heaven,
which the Land of Canaan did shadow to them: All which plainly enough appears
in Rev. 21. v. 27. St. Augustine writing against the Donatists, was of opinion
that it signified the Exclusion of Heretics: But, be it how 'twill, even a
blind man may see, from the many and great differences between the Legal and
Moral Impurities, that the former could not be figurative of the latter, as our
Adversaries contend.

XVI. Though Moses makes none but the forementioned Exception, yet shall I
answer to an Objection, which may be collected out of his words: for
peradventure some one may thus argue, The Jews are by Moses commanded to eat
the Passover without Leaven; which Paul, 1 Cor. 5. v. 8, interprets the
filthiness of the flesh, that is, Moral wickedness: It may therefore seem to
some a very agreeable and likely matter, that the Lords Supper which succeeded
to the Passover, should be celebrated by shutting out malicious and wicked men.

XVII. I answer, first, That it carries little of probability with it, that God
should command a thing in express terras, and again at the same time
figuratively prohibit the self-same thing. God plainly and expressly, and with
reiterated Precepts, commands that every Male (except the unclean, and such as
were in a Journey) should keep the Passover: He never therefore intended to
frighten away some under the figure of the Leaven. There were then plenty
enough of bad men present, that it must be needless to typifie and shadow them
out by Leaven: And the wickedness of men was a thing as obvious to men's senses,
and as much to be taken notice of, as the Leaven that should represent it.
Therefore since no figures are commonly instituted of such things as are at
hand and in view, and which with equal clearness strike the Senses, it is in
vain to seek for any Figure there: How much more where the things figured are
more notorious and common, than the Figures themselves? But besides, Moses does
not command that the Eater of Leaven should be debarred eating the Passover;
but commands him to be slain: Therefore sinners should not so much be kept from
the Lords Supper, as they should be capitally punished. Which is a Consequence
I should be so far from admitting with difficulty, that I rather wish it might
so be: for I desire nothing more, than that the strictest Moral Discipline
might be observed in the Church; but such still as is of Gods appointment, not
of man's invention.

Secondly, The Jews might eat Leaven all the year round, excepting only those
seven days of Unleavened Bread; (which they did commence from the eating of the
Passover.) Now if you would parallel this with the Lords Supper, you must of
necessity grant a liberty for licentious living all the year, provided you
abstained from vice all the time you were celebrating the Lords Supper.

Thirdly, Moses speaks here of the Passover only, not of any other Sacraments;
by Analogy therefore wicked men should only be kept from the Lords Supper,
not from Baptism.

Fourthly, The Apostle makes not the comparison to run betwixt the Feast of the
Jews and the Lords Supper, but betwixt that and our whole course of life; he
says we are unleavened (as men that are washed in the Blood of Christ, and
purged from all Leaven) and therefore, says he, let us keep the Feast, that is,
let us live not with the Leaven of Malice, but with the Unleavened Bread of
Sincerity and Truth. There is a vast difference betwixt Leaven simply so
called, and the Leaven of Malice or Wrath: There is none but knows that in the
second sense it is taken figuratively; and Schoolmen say, that an analogical or
figurative sense proves nothing. This is certain, whatever is meant by Leaven,
Excommunication can never be maintained or justified from it, against Gods
precept.

XVIII. But some may object that Paul speaks here of the Passover; but what, I
pray, makes this to our business? as if this word Passover were put for the
Lords Supper in the New Testament: Christ, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 7. is
our Passover sacrificed or slain for us; not his Supper. The meaning of the
words is this: As the Jews, who only began their Feast of Unleavened Bread
with eating the Lamb, did eat Unleavened Bread all that week after; so should
you, who have begun to believe in Christ, and are purified and become
unleavened through his Blood, you should lead a pure and unspotted life all the
rest of the week, that is, all the days of your life.

XIX. Now that nothing of different nature is to be met with in the other Books
of the Old Testament, may be known and proved, if it were but from this alone,
that the Jews Posterity were to live according to the Laws and Institutions of
Moses; contrary to which they might not by any means institute or enjoin any
thing which related to the Worship of God. Most certainly the good and pious
Judges, Priests, Prophets, and Kings, forced away none from their Sacraments
and Sacrifices, but rather invited all to them with the greater earnestness and
zeal. The story of good King [it should be Hezekiah, I suppose: See 2 Chronicles.
35.] Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. v. 18. is well known, who called together all the
Children of Israel, as well those whom he knew to have sacrificed and burnt
Incense to strange Gods or Devils, as those who for the shortness of the
warning could not be cleansed, 2 Chronicles. 30. v. 19. according to the
purification of the Sanctuary: From whence it is observable, that Sacraments are
Provocations and Allurements to Religion and Piety; and that men grow better
rather by frequenting, than by being robbed of them, provided they are rightly
and faithfully instructed.

XX. Excommunication therefore can never be maintained from the first Chapter
of Isaiah, v. 13. Psalm. 50. v. 8. and many places of like import; where it is
said, that God will have nothing to do with the Sacrifices and Oblations of the
Wicked: for God does in all those places condemn the abuse of them, in that
they thought that they fully performed the Will of God by the mere external
performance, at what rate soever their Soul stood affected. Besides, God
neither commands the Prophet, nor any one else by him, to exclude the Wicked
from the Sacrifices and Rites; but shows that God will not hear them, unless
that withal they amend their lives. Now the external Policy and Government of
the Church stands upon a different foot with the Will of God to usward, as
himself is the Approver or Condemner of our thoughts and actions. In fine, from
the self-same places it may directly and in the same manner be demonstrated,
that none that is a sinner may call upon the Name of the Almighty; nay, that
it is unlawful for such an one so much as to praise or give thanks unto God: and
then 'twill be incumbent on the Priests and Elders to forbid the Wicked all
these; for God has a like aversion to those when they come from wicked men, as
is plain as well from the Texts instanced in, as from places of the like
import. And if this latter carries absurdity in it, no less does the former.

XXI. Neither does that of 1 Esdras, chap. 9. v. 3. 4. make any whit against
us; for that was a matter of Policy, and no ways relating to the Sacraments:
for the Magistracy (not Esdras the Priest alone, though he too was a part of
the Magistracy; for as Josephus bears witness, though they had a Leader, yet
were they governed by the Optimacy or Nobility) set forth a Proclamation, That
whosoever met not at Jerusalem within two or three days, their Cattle should be
seized to the use of the Temple, and they be cast out from them that were of
the Captivity; not from their Sacraments and Sacrifices. But we make it not the
enquiry of this place, whether the Magistrate has a right of punishing so or
so, but whether the Priests had any authority of removing dissolute and bad
Livers from the Sacrifices: Esdras could not do this contrary to the Command of
God. Add to this, that Moses never commanded this penalty (to wit, Exclusion
from Sacraments) to be inflicted on them who married strange women, Deuteronomy. 7. v.
3. And in the 8th Chap. of 1 Esdras, it is shown how he was to proceed against
the Transgressors of the Law in that point, to wit, by Death, Banishment,
Corporal Punishments, Confiscation of Estates, Bonds or Imprisonments. But in
fine, 'twas quite another thing to be thrust out from the company of them who
had returned from the Captivity, and to be shut out from the Temple and
Sacrifices: for it appears from Exodus 1. 2. 21. and Numb. 9. 2. that the
stranger that was circumcised, was admitted to keep the Passover, and then too,
many of those who either had continued in Judea, or who of the Inhabitants had
forsaken the filthiness and abominations of the Gentiles, and became Jewish
Proselytes, did together with all the others, celebrate the Passover, as it is
written at the end of the 6th Chapter of Esdras. These, such as they were, were
not debarred the Sacrifices, Temple, or Ceremonious Rites, though they were not
reckoned among the number of them who returned from Babylon. In like manner did
they remove some of the Priests from their Sacerdotal Function, because they
could not make out their Pedigree; as appears 1 Esdras 2. And from all put
together, it is plainly impossible that Excommunication can be shor'd up or
supported hereby.

XXII. There is yet one Objection left, which some men hug themselves in, and
prize mightily, and that is the casting out of the Synagogues: for to assert
Excommunication the more irrefragably, they quote you what is written in John
9. v. 22. and chapter 12. v. 42. and chapter 16. v. 2. But many and true are the
Answers to this. The word Synagogue sometimes signifies a place; as when Jesus
is said to have entered into and taught in the Synagogue: Sometimes a Convention
or Meeting, whether the same were in the Synagogue it self, or elsewhere; as
when the Pharisees are said to choose the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and the
uppermost Rooms at Feasts, Mark 12. 39. Luke 20. 46. In this latter sense (or
rather in both of them) is it used, Mat. 10. v. 17. and chapter 23. v. 34. where
Christ foretells the scourging of his Followers in the Synagogues; and Mat. 10.
v. 17. Mark 13. v. 9. Luke 12. v. 11. and 21. v. 12. in which places the word
signifies no more than the public place of Judicature, as it is often used for
the same by the Septuagint; as we shall have opportunity to clear hereafter.
But in the last forecited places, Mat. 10. v. 17. and Mark 13. v. 9. (...), and
(...) which we translate Councils and Synagogues, are there put as if they both
signified the same thing: In the other places, after (...), presently follows
(...), Kings and Rulers, as in Luke 21. v. 12. (instead of which the same
Evangelist, chapter 12. v. 11. puts (...), Magistrates and Powers:) So in Mark 13.
v. 9. Mat. 10. v. 17. By comparing these places, it is most plainly
demonstrable, that the Evangelists, or rather Christ, did not (by the words
(...) and (...), Council and Synagogue) understand or mean any thing more than
the Jewish Judicatures which were held before several persons who sat as
Judges, though generally one had the Chair, and something of Superiority; or if
more did act, they did it in the name of one of them. In these Assemblies or
Synagogues those that were found adjudg'd guilty, were buffeted and beaten with
Rods and the like, Mat. 10. 17. and 23. 34. Acts 17. 10. and 26. 11. and 2 Cor.
11. 25. which place may be easily understood by Deuteronomy. 25. 2, 3. Now the casting
out of this kind of Synagogue, was a kind of Political or Civil Ignominy or
Punishment, and so a local banishment as 'twere, as we gather out of Luke 4.
28, 29. which can never be applied to Sacraments, which (except it be that of
Circumcision, and some few others) were celebrated in the Temple (of which
there was but one) and at Jerusalem: And of the same nature does that
punishment seem to be, which we spoke of a little before in our clearing that
of Esdras. There is no body but knows that such Synagogues there were in every
City; therefore whether you take the word in that of John, chapter 10. v. 17. for
the Assembly it self, or for the place where they assembled, it thwarts not our
Opinion any manner of ways: and if at most it were denied to be a Civil
Assembly, yet must it manifestly appertain to religious matters. But I dispute
not here whether he who entertains erroneous Opinions of the true Religion, be
to be excommunicated: for the Pharisees, says John 9. v. 22. agreed, that if
any man did confess that Jesus was Christ, that he should be put out of the
Synagogue. But farther yet, it was matter of Repute and Honor to be of the
Synagogue, as of the other hand 'twas a piece of Reproach to be cast out of it;
as may, methinks, be easily gathered from Joh. 12. 42. where it is said, that
among the Chief Rulers also (of whom perhaps Nichodemus was one) many believed
on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should
be put out of the Synagogue; and the reason is added, v. 43. for they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God. Besides, it appears that even the
circumcised Publicans were not admitted into the Synagogues, in the sense we
now take the word: for the Pharisees would not endure so much as to speak with
them; and one of their Cavils at Christ was, for his familiar converse with
those men. But I cannot imagine, that any one who understands himself, can
affirm that these very Publicans and Sinners were debarred from the Passover,
from the Temple, or from Sacrifices; therefore must they needs be two quite
different things, so to be dissynagogu'd, and to be kept from the Sacraments
and Rites of Gods own institution: which is manifest, as well from what has
been already said, as from Acts 5. v. 42. for the Disciples after they had been
severely lesson'd by the Synagogue, did not yet cease to teach and preach Jesus
Christ daily in the Temple. What a many of Synagogues was Paul put out of? but
the Jews never cast it in his teeth, never accused or condemned him for coming
into the Temple, and for offering there for himself and others. But to close
all this, more may yet be said, could it never so plainly be made out that the
Pharisees counted it one and the same thing to exclude from the Synagogue and
from the Sacraments (which I shall make appear never was, is, or could be
true;) yet they must needs have done this (as well as many other things)
against the express Law of Moses, and then are we obliged not to imitate but
condemn the Pattern: for we are to live up to the Laws, and not to Presidents;
and not walk after any one in his deviations from the Laws of God, unless we
will confound all the Rules and Measures of Right and Wrong: Let us indeed have
an eye to the good Examples of the good, and strive to come after them, but not
after the bad of the bad. I have been so particular (though with all the
brevity I could) on this Argument, because some do mightily hug and applaud
themselves in it, though to the deceiving of themselves as well as others.

XXIII. It Is therefore a most certain unshaken and indisputable truth, that
under the old Testament no man was shut out from Sacraments for Immoralities;
but on the contrary, all the holy Priests, Prophets, Judges, Kings, and at
last, John the Baptist, that most eminent and most holy Forerunner of Christ,
rather sent Invitations to all, good and bad, to come in and keep them
according to the Law, than shut the doors upon them.

XXIV. But now our Sacraments, and those of our Forefathers under the Old
Testament, are (as to the things signified, see the spiritual sense of them)
altogether the same, as Paul, 1 Cor. 10. plainly intimates. And therefore
unless it can appear that the Law of Moses either is abolished or changed in
this point, none has authority to set up a contrary practice.

XXV. For as against the Anabaptists we do well urge as a most effectual
Argument, that since Baptism came in the place of Circumcision, and that Christ
did nowhere forbid the baptizing of Infants, it cannot be less lawful for us to
baptize our Children, than 'twas for the Jews to circumcise theirs; so may we
here argue with equal force, that the Lords Supper succeeded to the eating the
Passover: but Vice and Immoralities were not punished by prohibiting them to
eat the Passover, nor were the Jews on any such account drove from it; but the
Law did rather invite all, of what age or condition soever, especially every
Male, to keep it: Which being not found to be either antiquated nor abolished,
but holding still as to the reason of it, Crimes are no more now to be punished
by denying us the Lords Supper; neither ought any one on this account to be
rejected. But enough has been said with reference to the Old Testament; it is
time we should now come to Christ and his Apostles, that is, to the New
Testament.

XXVI. Now we read not any where that our Lord and Savior Christ did in any
wise interdict any person access unto, or use of the Sacraments; or that he so
much as commanded the Apostles that they should do any thing like it: for
Christ came not into the world to destroy the Law, but to fulfill and perfect
it; therefore when the Law commanded all but the unclean to celebrate the
Passover, Christ would not surely forbid any one.

XXVII. For it is very clear that Christ checked no body for using Sacraments, or
frequenting the Temple and Sacrifices; but only cautioned them to use them
aright, and agreeably to the Will and Law of God: He went into the same Temple
with Pharisees, Sadduces, Publicans, and who not, be they bad, be they good; he
was with them at the same Sacrifices; used all Sacraments promiscuously with
the rest of the people; was baptized of John with the same Baptism as those
wicked ones were.

XXVIII. Upon this account was it that Jesus hindered not Judas his Betrayer
from eating the last Paschal Lamb with him, but he sat down to it with all his
twelve Disciples: not but that there are some who endeavor to prove that Judas
was not present at this new instituted Supper of our Lord (which is an hard, if
not an impossible matter to evince from Sacred Writ) but that he withdrew
before the Institution: yet sure none can have the hardiness to deny that Judas
was according to the Law admitted to the eating the Passover; on which
Concession, our Argument holds firm and unanswerable: for whether he went or
went not out before the Institution of another Supper, (though the latter
carries most of probability in it, and always has been believed by most men)
this still is plain, that he was present and partaker of the first, and was not
openly or expressly forbidden the latter: Neither read we any where that Christ
commanded him to go out, to the end that he might not be a Communicant in his
new- instituted Supper; if therefore he did go out, he did it voluntarily, and
of his own head; neither went he out for any such purpose. But ^he Question
with us is, what Christ, not what Judas did: It Is enough for our purpose, that
Christ never commanded him to withdraw from his Supper.

XXIX. But the common Put-off and Salvo for this matter, is very light and
frivolous; That Judas his Crime was not of a public nature, and that on that
consideration he was not to be put out: for first, he had struck the bargain,
and agreed the price with the Pharisees before, and Christ acquainted his
Disciples with it at that Suppertime; this was an ample Publication by Christ
himself, and should therefore have been the rather made a President and Example
in this matter. But secondly, (whatever this may be) he was at least known to
be a Thief before; and though such an one he were, yet did our Lord commit a
Ministry and office to him, and bestowed on him the power of casting out
Devils, of healing the Sick, and of doing other suchlike Miracles. Lastly,
Christ admitted him as well as the rest of his Disciples to the Celebration of
the Passover, all the whiles he was with him. Is not this proof enough that
Christ had no mind, no intent or desire that flagitious persons should be
punished by debarring them the Sacraments? Sure it is matter of greater moment to
take a wicked man into the Ministry, than to admit such an one to the Supper!
yet we see that Christ did both to Judas.

XXX. It Is farther observable, that at his first Supper the Disciples began to
contend about Greatness and Superiority; yet was none of them shut out thence
on that score: nay, Christ would and commanded that all should drink of the
Cup, Mat. 26. v. 27. which, Mark 14. v. 23. is said to be actually done: (And
as to this business, the reason holds in the Bread as well as Wine.) Now what
can it be believed was the mind and intent of Christ, but to ratify what God
had before commanded by Moses, to wit, ^^t none who were initiated by Baptism,
should be debarred from that public and solemn act of Thanksgiving, who had a
mind to be at it? Whence it appears, that no person is to be thrust from the
Lords Table, who embraces the Doctrine of Christ, and submits to be instructed
by him.

XXXI. Christ does not desire that his Kingdom (I speak of his visible and
external one in this world) should be of a narrower extent among Christians,
than were the boundaries and limits set unto the Jews. As therefore God
commanded that all that were externally circumcised, should participate and
communicate in the same Sacraments and Rites; but that Criminals and other
Transgressors, should by the Sword and other civil Punishments be restrained
and punished: so is it Christ's Will, that all who are baptized into him, all
that profess Christianity, and have a right and sound sense of Religion, should
be admitted to the use of all external Ceremonies and Sacraments; whilst the
Wicked and Criminal fall under the correction of the Magistrate, whether it be
by Death, Exile, Imprisonments, or other the like Penalties. And the Parables
of the Net, Marriage, and Tares, seem to import no less.

XXXII. We find among the Apostles, Paul especially, no fewer nor less plain
and forcible Arguments for our Assertion. First, there are no Footsteps that
the Apostles did either teach or practice such a kind of Excommunication. This
Argument, though it be not so evincing and strong of it self, yet will be made
unanswerable, if we consider that the Apostles all their time kept themselves
to a strict observance of such Laws of Moses which Christ had not abrogated; as
may be gathered out of the 21th and 28th Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles:
for which cause they never did nor would, attempt to put by any one from our
Sacraments (which differ from the Sacraments of their Forefathers, in the
signs and time of signifying only) if he be a professed Christian, and make a
right Confession of that Doctrine: for they neither did nor taught any thing
contrary to the Precepts of Moses, which Christ had not before abrogated, but
kept themselves to as close and strict observance of the Law after his death,
as before; as the chief of the Apostles bears witness in the before-cited
places: for that permission, to live free from the Law of Moses, was to the
Gentiles only, not to the Convert Jews; which ought carefully to be remarked
here, for the sake of what follows. And as to the substance of their Doctrine,
they taught nothing that interfer'd with Moses and the Prophets: for had they
taught any thing dissonant, the Bereans could not have judged it agreeable to
those Scriptures that they searched, Acts 17. v. 11.

XXXIII. But to adventure yet one step farther: Much may be said for the sense
of Moses; (which jumps altogether with ours) but for the contrary Opinion, Paul
affords us not one Argument: for that Apostle, in 1 Cor. 8. v. 7. excludes
neither those who yet retaining some fear and conscience of the Idols, thought
them to be something, nor those proud boasting Gnostics, who in (...), in the
House or Temple of the Idol (at least, in the Room that was set apart for their
solemn and public Idol-Festivals) did promiscuously with the profane and
impious Idolaters, eat of the things offered to Idols: A thing expressly forbid
by Moses, Exodus 34. v. 15. by the Apostles, Acts 15. v. 29. by John, Rev. 2. v.
14. This was a sin as heinous as 'twould be nowadays for a man to dare to be
present and communicate at a Popish Mass; as any one may easily gather out of
the 10th Chapter of that Epistle: for Paul there proves, that such as those do
not less declare themselves by that action to be Communicants, and keep a
Fellowship with Devils, than they testify themselves to be Members of the
mystical Body of Christ by partaking of the Lords Supper.

XXXIV. Again, Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, etc. reasons the matter thus: As (says
he) God spared not in old time such as lusted after evil things, nor Idolaters,
nor Fornicators, nor such as tempted and murmured against Christ; though all of
them were baptized unto Moses in the same Baptism, v. 2. and did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, v. 3, and 4.
so shall he not spare even you too, whoever of you are defiled with like
abominations, though you also all eat in like manner, as did they, of the same
Bread, and drink of the same Cup with the righteous and holy ones. By this it
is seen, first, that the Sacraments of the Jews before Christ, and ours since,
are, as to the internal and heavenly design of them, the very same; else would
the Apostles, Argument be of no force. Secondly, It Is evident that in both
cases many vile and wicked Wretches, and notoriously known and marked for such,
found admittance. Thirdly, It Is also clear, that none were commanded to keep
away (as the Excommunicated nowadays always are:) for the Apostle does not
say that such, whilst such, should be kept from coming; but foretells and
denounces like punishments on them, as befell such sinners of old: Some of whom
Moses with the Levites slew, Exodus 32. v. 28. some God himself destroyed with
Fire and Sword, Serpents and Earthquakes; which was these Corinthians case too:
for, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. v. 30. For this cause many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep; that is, are punished by Disease and Death from God.

XXXV. In the next Chapter ( though St. Paul take notice of Divisions and
Heresies among them, and of some drunken at the Lords Supper, yet) neither are
those Schismatics and Sectaries, those Drunkards, or others of whatsoever
debauched Principles, commanded to be kept from eating it; there is no tittle or
word of any such Interdiction: Yet does he there redress lesser matters, as
that every man should eat at home, if he be hungry. How could he have here
passed over this in silence, had he approved it? had he thought it so necessary
to the Church? But the Apostle well knew that the Law commanded otherwise, and
that the use of Sacraments in the Church was to other purposes than the
punishing of Moral Vices by their deprivation; therefore commands he that every
man examine himself, 1 Cor. 11. 28. the Precept is not, that they should try
and examine one another. Nay, the Apostle there cautions them that they eat
worthily; For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, v. 29. He does not in the least command that unworthy
Communicants should be denied access, but threatens them with sad dooms from
the hand of God. He divides the Eaters into two sorts, according to their
differing Complexions; the worthy, and unworthy ones: he gives no Precept to
either for their not eating, but would that all should eat worthily.

XXXVI. Afterward, in 2 Cor. chapter 12 and 13. he threatens not those (who, 2
Cor. 12. v. 21. after a former admonition had not repented of the Uncleanness,
and Fornication, and Lasciviousness which they had committed) with exclusion
from the Table of the Lord, but, 2 Cor. 13. 10. according to the power and
authority which the Lord had given him, to edification, and not to destruction,
he would not spare, chapter 13. v. 2. and 10. that is, he would proceed with rigor
and severity, according to his extraordinary and Apostolic power; a thing he
often did threaten in his Epistles: But nowhere has he preached this Doctrine
(which is the Question now in hand) That any should be interdicted the
Sacraments; nor has he commanded Presbyters or any others to do it. But had he
been disposed to have this way given check to Wickedness, he would assuredly
have ordained that Sinners should have been kept from Sacraments till they
became reformed in their manners, especially since he had before appointed or
ordained Elders in the same Church, 1 Cor. 6. v. 5. and had corrected the
Abuses, the miss-celebration in the Lords Supper. But perhaps we may have more
to say to this hereafter.

XXXVII. As we find no mention made of Excommunication in the receiving and
celebrating this Sacrament, so neither does any thing of that nature appear in
its Institution; nor indeed has the Scripture taken any notice thereof in her
Explications of the use and ends of Sacraments: Whereas had Sacraments been
given to the Church for this, as well as other ends and purposes, that they
should have been for Penalties upon Offenses and Offenders, some mention must
needs have been of it. The end and designs of this Institution of the Lords
Supper, are, That we may commemorate in the most solemn manner the Death of our
Lord: That we may pay our Homage in a public Recognition and Thankfulness, for
the Deliverance he has purchased for us: That we may remind our selves, and by
our presence bear testimony to others, that we have no other Food of Life, but
a Crucified Savior; no other Drink, but his Blood poured out for us: That we
may declare our selves as well penitent for our past course of Life, as that we
have entered upon thoughts and resolutions of a better; and that we embrace the
Christian Doctrine, are the Members of Christ, belong unto his Church, in which
we desire piously and religiously both to live and die. Has the Scripture
anywhere prohibited any man from performing these things? But, you may perhaps
say, Some men have too frequently relapsed to their former bad courses, and
become not one whit the better. I answer, He that by the aid and impulse of the
Holy Spirit has the thoughts of his heart right at the time of his receiving,
the Scripture turns him not away; but God only knows whether and how long he
will hold on his good purposes and resolutions. It Is our duty to hope always
the best of all men, however we may sometimes be mistaken: nay, we ought to
address our hearty Prayers to God, that he would vouchsafe to strengthen and
confirm both us and them in all true Religion and Virtue. But still the sinner
is to be told of his faults, is to be reprehended, admonished, and advised,
that he may so try himself, that (as the Apostle cautions) he eat and drink not
Damnation to himself.

XXXVIII. Lastly, Whether are the Sacraments (either for the authority of their
Institution, or the intrinsic dignity of their nature) of greater worth than
the Word, that Word of God which Christ preached? or is there more necessity of
the use of those, than of this? None without the Word, can or could be saved;
but who can doubt but that many have been, and yet may be saved, without the
Sacraments, (especially the Lords Supper) provided they are not contemners of
them? The Apostle seems to have thought so too, when he says he was not sent to
baptize, but to preach the Word. Do not almost all men say that the Word is
plain and visible, and sets before our eyes what words signify to our ears?
Why do we therefore make no attempts to shut any out from the Word, but do it
from the Sacraments, especially the Eucharist; and that contrary unto (or at
least much beside the interest of) Gods express Command? Do they say it is
because the Word is for all, but that the Sacraments were instituted only for
Converts to the Word? I know all that, and speak not therefore of Turks and
Pagans, such as never came within the Churches Pale, but of such as God has
called and ingrafted into his Church, such as own the Doctrine, and desire (at
least to all outward appearance) to be worthy partakers of these Sacraments.

XXXIX. Hitherto have I strongly demonstrated, that there is no word or
instance, no footstep or president to be found either of Christ's, or among his
Apostles, of such Chastizements, or rather Restraints and Coertions put upon
wicked men. Since therefore neither the Old nor New Testament has commanded
this sort of punishing, but the clean contrary is often found in both of them,
we may justly think this Excommunication (as far, I mean, as it excludes men
from the use of the Sacraments for improbity of Life, and vitiousness of
Morals) rather an Invention of Man, than any Law of God. It remains therefore,
that we examine what those who oppose us have to say for themselves; and to
convince the World, that all that they say has nothing of proof or force in it.

XL. They tell you of a Precept, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. and in St. Paul's Epistle
they tell you too of an Example or Instance of that kind, 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5.
and 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. We will take them in order; and first for that in Matthew.

XLI. 'Twas not the design of Christ in that Chapter of St. Matthew to set up
any new Model of Government, or form of putting Excommunications in execution,
but to instruct his Disciples how they should avoid giving of fence or scandal
in the matter of righting themselves in private Injuries done them: for since
they who fly presently to the Magistrate to right them (especially where the
Magistrate, as was that the Jews were then under, is an Heathen and profane)
do often give occasion of offense and scandal thereby to the weak. He first
exhorts and advises them, that they rather forgive Injuries, than run to the
Magistrate upon every slight occasion. Thus far does he nothing but call to
their minds that Precept of Moses, Lev. 19. 17. (which Ecclus 19. 13. has a
little more fully paraphrased): After this, he directs, that if they are
necessitated to resort to the Magistrate for redress, that yet they should not
(if they would avoid scandal) accuse their fellow-brethren the Jews, before the
Roman Judicatures, till their own Magistrates failed in doing them Justice. The
like Precept has St. Paul given, 1 Cor. 6. 1, etc. (which place is a kind of
Comment upon this) that is to say, that Christians go not to Law with
Christians before the Unbelievers. This therefore is the true and genuine sense
of this of St. Matthew: If thy Brother (that is a Jew) trespass against thee,
try to make up the matter betwixt your selves alone; but if alone you cannot do
it, try what may be done by the Arbitrament and Mediation of two or three of
your Brethren (the Jews still); and if this way you have not a just
satisfaction and amends made you, tell it to the Church, that is, to the
Sanedrim, to the Magistrate of your own Religion and Nation; and if he refuse
to hear him, if he stand not to the judgment of your own chief Judicatures, you
may without just offense to any man, deal with him as with a Publican or
Heathen that should do you any injury, and whom you cannot implead nor call
before any other Authority but the Roman Tribunals.

XLII. That this is the proper and genuine Interpretation of the place, is
plain and evident from the whole tenor and series of the Discourse, but
especially from the conclusion of it, and from all its circumstances: For,

First, Christ talks not here of any enormous and public Transgressions which
belonged to Religion, and the Laws and Rites of their Nation, for these the
Sanedrim or great Councils of the Jews were to redress; but his discourse is of
private wrongs, which every man had power for himself to remit. One manifest
proof of the truth of what I say, may be, for that all the whole Oration runs
in the singular number: If thy Brother shall trespass (...), against thee, go
and tell him his faults between thee and him alone; and again, tell the Church,
etc. and let him be to thee as an Heathen, etc. So Luke 17. v. 3. If thy
Brother, (...), and v. 4. if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and
seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive
him. We can no ways interpret (...), against thee, here, to be meant against
the Church: For when it is after said, Tell it to the Church, the sense would
be, O Church, tell it to the Church. And again, we can as little interpret it
with thy privity and knowledge: for neither the sense of the words, nor the
nature or circumstances of the discourse, will admit of such an Explication.
For why am I required to tell a man his fault betwixt me and him alone, if I
was but as one privy to his Crime, and that he trespassed not privately and
against me alone? Why should I not rather be enjoined to take in them with me
whom he directly injured, that they and I might reprove him together? But
Christ gives not that scope and liberty to take others with me in my first
Applications to my injuring Brother: And therefore it is plain, Christ speaks of
Injuries done me by my Brother privately. But farther yet, how can the words of
St. Luke [If he turn again to thee, thou shall forgive him] be accommodated to
this sense? Can we say that here, To thee, is put for, Thou being privy and
conscious to the injury done by him? What must then the meaning be of, Thou
shall forgive him? Must we here also say, Thou shall be privy and conscious to
his forgiveness? Did the prodigal son, Luke 15. 11. that sinned against Heaven,
only sin in the sight and privity of Heaven? It Is indeed plain enough in 1
Cor. 8. 12. that we sin against the Brethren, when we do a thing which may
become a Stumbling block to them through their weakness. But this of St.
Matthew is quite of a different nature; and truly the whole frame of this
Discourse, and way of wording it, cannot allow us to expound it of any other
than private wrongs; which every man has power and right in himself to remit
and forgive: And if the Injurer repent him not of his own accord, this is to be
done on the part of the Injured, to bring him to it.

Secondly, This is again proved, for that the Apostles of Christ did not
otherwise understand him; as may be gathered from St. Peter's Question, v. 21.
Whether his seven times forgiving his offending Brother would be enough? Peter
could not be to learn, that he neither could nor ought to pardon an offense
which concerned others, or the whole Church.

Thirdly, The words Unto thee, v. 17. is a farther proof hereof. Christ does
not say, Let him be unto us, or unto others, or unto the Church; but let him be
unto thee as a Publican, unto thee who art or have been the injured man.
Christ, though he address his discourse to all the Apostles equally, yet
commands that the Wrong Doer be held for an Heathen and Publican by him alone
who is the Sufferer thereby; and that too, not till the Church ( that is, the
lawful Magistracy of the Jews in their Sanedrim) had admonished him. Besides,
he speaks not there of things which relate to the whole Church, or to any
number of persons; but which relate to private men.

Fourthly, Christ speaks of such Trespasses which we are obliged to pardon as
often as the Offender says, he repents. And that this Remission and Forgiveness
transacted between two alone, puts an end to the Controversy, appears from
these words, v. 19. Again, I say unto you, If two of you shall agree on earth,
as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my
Father which is in Heaven. But an hanious and public Offense, which concerns
many persons, or perhaps the whole Church, may not be remitted by one alone.
And here we may take notice by the by, of that Adverb again; whereby he
intimates his having spoke before to the same purpose, though in different
words.

Fifthly, Christ speaks of Trespasses and Offenses which the actor of them is
not ashamed of, or which he will not stick frankly to confess and own before
any man. Had he spoke of Crimes of a deeper dye, which concerned many, or the
whole Church, 'twould be in vain to bring him to others that might bear witness
(as it is v. 16.): for such an Action, if 'twere yet private, no Offender would
avow it before witness, which might endanger him. But in all things here
discoursed of, this gradual procedure recommended by Christ, must be observed;
and therefore he speaks of private Injuries, which others have nothing to do
with.

Sixthly, Christ speaks of such Offenses which the Church, he here speaks of,
does not otherwise punish than by admonishing the Offender with bare words: for
'twould be needless to have added, If he hear not the Church, could an open
punishment have redressed the Offense.

Seventhly, The Parable that follows, v. 23. gives a clear proof to this
matter; its conclusion being, that God will not forgive them their Trespasses,
who from their hearts forgive not the Trespasses of a repenting Brother,
without exacting farther pains or penalties upon him. But the Church (as some
of our Adversaries tell us) ought not thus to forgive, but ought to keep them,
at least for a time, from the Sacraments, till they shall have given testimony
of their Repentance to Elders surrogated and appointed for that purpose: So
that such a Church will not seven times a day forgive them that say they
repent, but will see the argument and proof of that Repentance; things which
Christ says not a word of: he requires no farther argument than the Confession
of the Fault; which scarce any man will have occasion to repeat seven times a
day, who has not played the Hypocrite in some, or all, of the former six.

We have, I think, from all this evidently proved, that Christ in this 18th
Chapter of St. Matthew, speaks nothing of Crimes that are to be redressed by
Excommunications, but of light and private Injuries, and the way and means of
making them up and reconciling them; and therefore belongs not to the business
of Excommunication. If indeed we do but well weigh the close of that Chapter,
all doubt from hence must be at an end.

XLIII. He that can and will needs imagine that Christ in this 18th Chapter of
St. Matthew, set up or instituted Excommunication, ought to show in which of
the words it is contained: If he cannot show it any where there comprised, it is
to no purpose to say it is there commanded. But if it be there, it must either
be in these words, v. 17. Tell it unto the Church: or in these, Let him be to
thee as an heathen and a publican: or lastly, in these, v. 18. Whatsoever ye
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc. But I doubt not to prove it
with most unanswerable Arguments, that none of these words comprize any such
matter; and since it can be found in no other, it is lost labor to enquire here
after it.

XLIV. These words of Christ, Tell it unto the Church, prove no more than this,
that he who has been injured by his Brother, and all his endeavors of
reconciliation with him have been ineffectual, may honestly and lawfully
complain of him to the Church, or to the Governors and Rulers of the Church.
And further, that this same Church has a right and authority to reprehend and
admonish the Wrong Doer, that he cease from being so: But no more of power is
here given to the Church, than ( v. 17.) was before given to the one or two
Witnesses, excepting only in this, that the Cause is not to be brought before
the Church without the Witnesses. Is it not therefore a weak way of reasoning,
to say, The Church has power to admonish him that trespasses against his
Brother; therefore has she power to excommunicate him, or to deb^^ him the
Sacrament? But now, some may perhaps urge, that the Church not having a Right
or Authority of punishing the guilty with Death and other corporal punishments,
she is necessitated to have recourse to this way of denying them the Sacrament.
But I answer, Were the Antecedent as true (as indeed from both the old
Testament, from the History of all Ages, from what our own Eyes and Senses tell
us, we are assured it is quite otherwise) no such consequence could be drawn
from it; nor can it be ever proved that these things have any necessary
coherence one with another: The Church has not the power of the Sword, she
cannot kill and slay; therefore may she, must she, drive from the Sacrament
those who own and profess the same Religion, the same saving Faith; she must
drive from that Sacrament that was instituted for, and ought to be open and
common to all that outwardly profess the same Faith.

XLV. If yet our Adversaries think Excommunication to have been instituted in
these other words, Let him be to thee as an heathen man and a publican, I
utterly deny it: Nether can it by any Art or Rhetoric, Persuasion or Argument
whatever, be demonstrated whilst the world stands, that this form of Speech,
Let him be to thee as an heathen man and a publican, should tantamount to this,
Let him be excommunicate, let him be kept from the Sacrament: for even in the
days of Christ, the circumcised Publicans, were they Jews or Gentiles, were not
prohibited the Temple, Sacrifices, Rites, Ceremonies, and Sacraments. And truly
Christ may seem to have joined the Publican with the Heathen, to prevent all
thoughts and suspicion of his here interdicting them such Rites and Sacraments
How could the Publicans by the Jewish Law be shut out from the Temple, and from
worshipping God there, when 'twas not so much as a sin to be a Farmer or
Collector of Taxes and Tribute-money; nor found to be any where prohibited by
God? Sure it is, that Christ nowhere forbad it. When the Publicans asked John
what they must do to be saved, he does not bid them quit their Employments; but
directs them, Luke 3. 13. not to exact more than that which was appointed them.
And, Luke 19. 5. Christ does not order Zacheus (the Chief among the Publicans)
to lay down his Office, nor finds any fault with him on account of his Employ:
and the Publican that, Luke 18. 10. went up into the Temple to pray, and
returned to his house more Justified, in the judgment of Christ, than the
Pharisee; we do not read that he left off being a Publican; nor those others
who, Luke 7. 29. and Luke 15. 7. justified and praised God, and were dear and
intimate with Christ and his Apostles. In short, I say, that the Holy Writ,
that is, God has not at any time or place condemned, or any ways spoke against
Publicans for their very being Publicans, that is, Tax-gatherers; which all
sober men will voluntarily grant me. Upon which Concession, I argue thus: God
in Scripture condemns not a Publican as a Publican. Now whom God condemns not,
he cannot be excommunicated by any Law of God; therefore no Publican could by
the Law of God be prohibited access to the Temple, or to Divine Worship. I
therefore make this conclusion: No Publican could by the Law be condemned or
excommunicated; but Christ commands that he that neglects to hear that Church
which he there speaks of, should be to him as a Publican: therefore he wills,
that he should be to him as a man who was not by the Law of God accursed, that
is, not barely for his being a Publican. And whereas these Excommunication-men
say, that the words, Let him be to thee as a Publican, signify as much as if
he had said, Let him be to thee as a Publican is to the Pharisees; it is both
absurd, false, and impossible: for it is in no sort credible, that Christ in the
same place in which he designed to institute (as our Adversaries will have it)
a thing of that weight and moment, and so beneficial and necessary to the
Church, should or would make the wicked action of most profligate men, the Rule
and Measure for all the World to go by afterward. Besides, it has been
already proved, that no man was ever excommunicated by the Jews, after the rate
that we now talk of Excommunication. And lastly, all the words of Christ are
inconsistent with this their interpretation: for Christ here talks neither of,
nor with the Pharisees, but all is betwixt him and the Disciples, and the
subject of the discourse is of avoiding Scandals; and this is the thing that
Christ says, If the Wrong Doer neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee,
that is, he is to thee, as a Publican; to thee, not to the Pharisees. Moreover,
it is plain that Christ and his Disciples, and other good men, had no hatred for
the Publicans; most certainly they never thought them to deserve
Excommunication, but did daily eat and live with them. And in that Christ joins
the Heathen and Publican together, we must needs acknowledge that Christ speaks
of a matter common to them both: therefore these words, Let him be to thee as a
Publican, must have quite another meaning from these, Let him be to thee as an
excommunicate person. This therefore must be the meaning of the place: If he
neglect to hear the Church, you may (as to this matter) proceed against him
without offense or scandal to any man, as if you had to do with an Heathen man
or a Publican. Now he that had a Controversy with any such, was forced to
submit his Cause to the Roman Magistracy; (which is plain, as to the Heathens
alone: and that 'twas so for the Publicans, may easily appear, for that they
were the sworn Officers of the Romans, even against their own Nation; and for
that also, that they could expect scarce common Justice from the Pharisees and
Chiefs of the Jews, who accounted them the most despicable and profligate of
mankind.) But Christ allowed not this Appeal to the Roman Magistrate against a
Brother-Jew, till he had endeavored a Reconciliation that way which Christ
proposed, and which had before been prescribed them by the Law. St. Paul's
excuse for himself, in the last of the Acts, looks much the same way, to wit,
that he had never appealed unto Caesar had he not been constrained; nor did he
it to accuse the Jews, but defend himself from violence and wrong. The Apostle,
1 Cor. 6. 1. commands, that if any Christian had a matter against another, he
should decide it before the Saints, and not presently go to law before the
unjust: But if a Christian had just cause of Action against an Infidel, what
doubt is there, but that he might prosecute his Right before an Heathen
Magistrate? So if any one did neglect or despise the Sentence, Judgment, and
Admonitions of the Elders of the Church, he that was the Sufferer, the injured
person, might without offense to his Neighbor, appeal unto the Heathen
Magistrate.

XLVI. But we shall handle this matter with the more perspicuity, if we take
into examination what, and of what nature that Church was, which Christ
commanded the injured person to tell it unto: in the clearing of which, I lay
this for the entrance and foundation; which I doubt not but all men will allow
of, and I know none that ever denies it, ( viz.) That Christ speaks of a Church
that was then in being; how could he otherwise have bid them tell it to a
Church which was then nowhere to be found, and of which, and of its nature and
constitution, they as yet heard nothing? Had he designed the raising a new
Church, or new form of Government as yet unknown to the Apostles, he had
delivered them but a very lame Institution, for that he neither told them who
were that Church, nor how, nor of what sort or number of men it was to be made
up of, nor the ways of their judicial proceedings, nor what penalties they
might inflict, and the like: Neither did he speak of all kind of sins, as I
have before proved; and even they who build their Excommunication upon this
Text, are forced themselves to confess as well as we (for they openly own) that
Christ took notice here only of private Trespasses. But whenever Christ made
any new Institution, he omitted nothing that was requisite to its being and
subsistency: here he only says, Tell it unto the Church; and if he neglect to
hear her, he gives the Complainant liberty to look on him as a Publican: here is
no penalty annexed to the Contumacy. St. Luke when he sets down the same
passage, recounts it not with all those particularities as St. Matthew does.
The other two Evangelists make not the least mention of it; who yet would
scarce have passed over a matter of such moment and necessity, had they known
that Christ had then first made any such new Institution. To which we may add,
that the Apostles were all along firmly persuaded that Christ should not die,
or change the Jewish Rites; nor did they here, by word or otherwise, declare
themselves not to understand what Christ here taught them, or show any
forwardness to ask farther after it, or to wonder, as if he had told them an
unusual and unheard of piece of Doctrine. Peter only wondered at this, that he
was required to forgive his Brother so many times together: Surely therefore
they never took these words of Christ to be institutive of a new form of
Government, which they had never dreamt of before, but believed themselves to
be taught (as truly they were) when and for what they might without offense and
scandal, accuse or implead a Brother Jew before an Heathen Magistrate. And at
this day it is rarely seen that Jews go to law with Jews before Christian Judges.

XLVII. But if any ask me whether and how then can this Precept reach all men?
whether it be of farther use than for those alone that live under an
Unchristian Magistracy? my answer is, That the first part of it, of laboring a
Reconciliation before we appeal to the Magistrate, or go to law about the
matter, belongs to all Christians; but the latter is of no force or use, but
where true Professors live under an Unchristian or Antichristian Magistrate.
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. v. 1. and 4. therefore advises the Corinthians to choose out
some among themselves who may judge such Controversies betwixt man and man,
that they GO NOT TO LAW BEFORE THE VNIVST, that is, the Heathen Roman Judges.
Who doubts but that the Corinthians might lawfully have convened a Christian
Brother that had injured them, before the Roman and Gentile Tribunals, if he
had refused to stand to the Determination of those who were chose from among
themselves to judge on such occasions, or if he mended not upon their Sentence?
It Is certain, that St. Paul, when he saw himself hardly pressed by the Jews,
appealed unto Caesar, Acts 25. 11. which, Acts 28. 19. he excuses to those Jews
that lived at Rome. But he that shall carefully compare Lev. 19. with Ecclus
19. and 1 Cor. 6. with this Chapter of St. Matthew, will be able much more
clearly and easily to understand this whole matter, and may observe how well
all hangs together; especially if he diligently note the latter part of
Christ's and of St. Paul's words, which were justly omitted in Moses and
Ecclesiasticus, there being then no occasion for them, for that the Jewish
Nation was not then subject to any foreign Power, as they were in our
Savior's and St. Paul's time to the Roman Empire.

XLVIII. And thus far, as I conceive, all will easily agree that Christ spoke
of a Church which was then in being, I mean, the Church in Judea; but quickly
shall we be divided again in our enquiry what Christ understood by the word
Church: for sometimes it is put for the whole Congregation or Multitude
gathered together; sometimes for the Senate, Council, or Elders, which were its
Governors. Thus find we the Hebrew words to signify a Church, Company, or
Congregation, (as Number. 35. 24, 25. Josh. 20. 6. Psalm. 82. 1. and elsewhere)
which the Septuagint renders by the word (...), a Congregation. Now there are
Arguments of no little weight, to induce us to conclude, that Christ in this
passage of St. Matthew, would not have us understand by the word Church, the
Multitude or Congregation of People, but the Jewish Senate or Council, called
sometimes (...) for, first, it is evident that Christ did not innovate any thing
in the forms of Judicature or Government which were administered agreeable to
the Law; nor did he himself, or permitted his Disciples to do any thing
contrary to what Moses had rightly instituted by Gods command. Now Moses did
ordain, that such Suits and Controversies should be decided not by the
Multitude, but by the Senate or Sanedrim of such and such places; which at
first was held at the Gates of each City, where the Elders sat to judge. Had
Christ thought of introducing any thing here contrary to the Institution of
Moses, his Disciples must needs have been highly moved at it, who were all
their lives strict observers of the Law. Let every man think with himself what
dust and Triumphs the Pharisees would have raised, could they have in truth
fixed so criminal an Action upon him, that he in opposition to the Law of Moses,
had stirred up the People against the Magistrate! what fairer pretext could they
have wished to lay Sedition to his charge, than by proving upon him this
attempt, to set up the People against the Magistrate, contrary to Gods
determination? to commit to them the Examination of Witnesses? to give them a
power to convene whom they would before them? to grant them cognizance of
Gauses, and power of Judicature? Secondly, Christ commanded to tell it unto
that Church, which had power to send for and call before them the party
accused; which might hear the Cause, which might examine Witnesses, (and
therefore he commands us in the second place to take two or three, that the
Fact may be competently proved) and lastly, which might pronounce their
Sentence and Judgment in the case. But every one must know, that these things
could not be done by the Crowd, the Multitude, without choosing some set persons
who might manage and moderate matters. (It must be a very small Congregation, a
very handful of men, who could be able of themselves, without the Elders, to
dispatch such Causes: for which reason some have rightly judged that this
Precept of Christ could not hold well, could be of little or no use, but when
the Church consisted of very few Members.) But now since that they who thus
preside in these Affairs, are in very truth nothing but the Senate, the
Sanedrim, the Sessions of the Elders; it again follows, that Christ commanded
not to tell it unto the Multitude, but to the Council or Sanedrim: and truly in
Christ's time the People had not the power of choosing their Magistracy and
Governors. We must needs therefore by the word Church understand the Jewish
Senate or Council; as it is plain the Disciples did, from what has been already
said. Therefore if the meaning of the Church there, be all the Members of it,
the People; we are then to tell it unto a Church which has right and authority
to make choice of such a Senate or Council as was that of the Jewish Church;
but our Churches have no power to choose such a Council as the Jewish Sanedrim
was: nay, in Christ's time the Jews themselves had not that liberty, as I told
you just now. We might add, that when the Scripture speaks of the Multitude,
it generally uses the words People, Multitude, Children of Israel, or the like
comprehensive words; but when any thing is related to be said or done in the
Synagogues, or in all the Congregation. I need not tell you that this form of
speech is usual at this very day: for we say, we have communicated the matter
to such a Kingdom or State, when we have acquainted only the King, Senate, or
Governing part of such State or Kingdom: We recount how this or that Nation has
rewarded a man, when the Representatives only in such a Diet or Parliament
has been liberal-handed to them. It Is so common a thing to use phrases of this
nature, that it is wonderful so few should have observed it.

But the sum of all is this: Christ altered not the Customs of his time, nor
introduced any Novelties or Changes into their Courts of Judicature, or
Measures and Ways of Judging; nor do his Disciples betray any suspicion of
Innovation or Alteration: and therefore his Command is to acquaint the
Sanedrim, before their denier resort to the Heathen Magistracy.

XLIX. Now, it is evident from Holy Writ, ( as well as other History) that the
Sanedrim was the legal Magistracy of the Jewish Nation, and that in Christ days
they both kept and used the power of the Sword. Many things in the Narratives
of the Passion of Christ, besides other Testimonials, evince as much: They send
armed men to take Jesus; they proceed in examining Witnesses, as the Law
required (at least they pretended so); they command him to be set before them
in Judgment; they delivered him bound to Pilate, after they had first publicly
condemned him: they openly condemn Stephen, and command him to be stoned: they
seize the Apostles, and put them in the common Prison; they cause them to be
beaten, after a general Consult held about them: they give Letters and
authority to Paul to bring any that he found of that way, bound to Jerusalem
for to be punished. The Jews themselves, with the Elders and High Priest, that
is, the Sanedrim, say it in express terms, by their Speaker Tertullus; who
accusing Paul before Foelix, Acts 24. v. 2. adds, v. 6. That they took him, and
would have judged him according to their Law, but that Lysias came upon them,
and with great violence took him away out of their hands. And Acts 23. v. 3.
says Paul to the High Priest, Sit thou to judge me after the Law, and
command me to be smitten contrary to the Law? And afterward, Acts 26. v.
10. Paul confesses before King Agrippa and Festus, that many of the Saints he
shut up in prison, having received authority from the Chief Priests; and when
they were put to death, he gave his voice against them, and punished them often
in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and farther, persecuted
them into strange Cities; still acting under the authority derived from the
High Priests, as when he was going to Damascus by their Commission, v. 12. I
cannot imagine but that Agrippa, and Festus too, knew well enough whether it was
lawful or not for their Council to do so; and sure they would not have
acquitted him in the manner they did, v. 34, and 35. had not the Authority he
had been committed by, been warrantable: for Paul should have offended no less
against Caesar, than against the Pharisees. For he who does an unlawful act by
the permission and command of them who have no right nor authority to permit
and command, transgresses no less than they that command it: but no such thing
is charged upon the Accusers or Accused; but Paul is fully acquitted, as one
that has done nothing worthy of death or of bonds. And had not the Jewish
Sanedrim had this authority and liberty then lest them, Pilate could not have
said to them, Joh. 18. 31. Take ye him, and judge him according to your law:
And when they answer, that it was not lawful for them to put any man to death;
this must be understood either (as St. Augustine interprets it) at the time of
that Festival, for fear of the People, or (as St. Chrysostom expounds it) of
that kind of Death which they desired that Christ should die. With which latter
Opinion, the words of St. John which immediately follow, very well agree, to
wit, That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying
what death he should die. To the same purpose is that of Mat. 26. 55, 56. where
Christ says, I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold
no me; but all this was done, that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be
fulfilled. They took him therefore at a time when, by reason of the Feast then
at hand, and for fear of the People, they could not put him to death: vid. Mat.
26 5. and Mark 14. 2. Since therefore they could not bear that he should live
any longer, and they could not well take his life away themselves, it follows
of course, that he must be delivered into the hands of the Romans; that so all
things which he had, ( Mat. 24.) foretold his Disciples, might be fulfilled; as
the words of St. John intimate, and as Augustine and Chrysostom agree: And
those Cries and Vociferations of the People, Crucify him, crucify him, give
farther Testimony to this Interpretation.

L. By what has been said, the falsity of that Affirmation is apparently
detected, which says, that the Sanedrim had not the power of the Sword, that
is, the authority of Life and Death; and that Stephen was stoned tumultuously
by the Rabble, and not by Decree of the Council. For I think I have proved
beyond all contradiction, that such a Power they had; and for St. Stephen's
case, it is clear, that he was not tumultuously slain, for that Acts 6. 12. he
was solemnly brought and accused before the Council; Witnesses were produced,
though false ones, v. 13. they carried him out of the City; and those
Witnesses, as the Law provides, cast the first stones at him, as may be easily
gathered from their laying down their Clothes at Readiness feet, v. 58. The same
too may be as fully proved out of other Histories: for Josephus in his
fourteenth book of the Antiquity of the Jews ( chapter 12. 16, and 17. according to
the Greek Copies) tells us, That the Romans gave liberty to all Nations, and by
name to the Jews who dwelt in or out of Judea, to use their own Laws in things
relating to Religion, and to live freely according to their own Rites and
Customs. And in that twelfth Chapter he quotes Strabo for his Author, that he
(writing of the City Cyrene) says, they had there a President or Chief Ruler
who heard and decided their Causes, and transacted all affairs, as absolutely
as if they had been an Independent State. That also makes farther for us which
we read, Acts 18. 15. of Gallio the Deputy of Achaia; where he tells them, that
if it be a matter of their Law, they may look to it. The same Josephus, lib.
16. chapter 4, and 5. recounts how Herod had obtained of Agrippa, that the Jews in
Asia might have the freedom of enjoying the Privileges before that time
indulged them by the Romans. I take occasion to remember this, because some
object that Herod destroyed and slew all the Sanedrim, and stripped them of all
Authority; as if none had succeeded those that were killed: How likely is it
that Herod should take from them in Jerusalem that power of judging in matters
relating to Religion, and determining therein according to their Law, who
endeavored to procure and preserve the same to all the other Asiaticks?
Besides, the time of Christ's preaching fell not under Herod or Archelaus, but
under the Government of Pilate: It Is certain that the Jews forced even Pilate
himself to send again out of the City the Roman Standards (which he had caused
to be privately introduced) to prevent the breach of Gods Commands of suffering
any Image in the City. And that they reserved and continued this Power to
themselves, to the very destruction of Jerusalem, may be clearly gathered from
Josephus his Oration to the Besieged; The Romans, says he (in his fifth Book of
the Wars of the Jews, chapter 26.) exact Tribute of us, for that our Forefathers
have a long time been wont to pay it to theirs: If in this you comply, they will
neither sack this our City, nor meddle with our Temple, but leave both you,
your Goods, and Families free, and the free use and enjoyment of your sacred
Laws. Titus himself, after his having taken the City, said almost the very same
to the Jews, lib. 6. chap. 34. Whether therefore we consult the Holy Writ, or
the Jewish History, it is an undoubted truth, that that Sanedrim which Christ
commanded to tell it unto, had the power of the Sword, the power of Life and
Death, especially over those who sinned against their Religion: (for in Civil
matters, and Causes of Right and Wrong, where the Law had not specified the
Punishment, I do not question but that the Romans encroached and usurped, if
not all, yet most of them, to themselves, as is easily discernable out of
History, and may well be conjectured out of Acts 18. v. 12.)

LI. And it is no ways repugnant to what we have said, that in Josephus his
Antiquities of the Jews, some of them tell Albinus, that it was not lawful for
the High Priest to call the Sanedrim or Council, without his leave: For he
there, as an Historian, relates what others did; not that he applauds or
approves of the Fact thereby. Besides, peradventure the High Priest during the
interregnum, that is, whilst Albinus (after the death of Festus) was no his
Journey thither, ought not to summon a Court for a matter of that weight and
moment, till the new Governor confirmed him in that Authority: for he had
procured that James the Lords Brother (who was vulgarly surnamed the Just)
should be put to death; who being a person well beloved by all, many took it
very ill at his hands: for he was but newly got to that Dignity, and not
approved of, or confirmed in it by the Roman Governor. And Eusebius, in the
second of his Ecclesiastical History, chap. 23. tells us, that this High Priest
snatched at this occasion of the interregnum. But what is all this to our
purpose? Was not Archelaus, who was styled King in his Father Herod's last Will
(and that by the Allowance and Gift of Caesar) was he not therefore King,
because he refused the Name and Authority of a King, till he had Caesar's
confirmation for it? And not the Magistrates of some Cities (of which there are
many in Germany) who are subject to some particular Prince, not true and lawful
Magistrates, because on the death of the Prince they are required to pray the
Confirmation of their Privileges from the Successor? But now that the High
Priest had power, after his Confirmation, to convoke the Judges of the
Sanedrim, is clear enough, for that they do not say to Albinus, that this
summoning them was in it self unlawful, but that it ought not to have been done
by him, without the apprebation and privity of Albinus.

LII. It has now been fully and solidly proved, that, Tell it unto the Church,
signifies no more than Tell it unto the Magistrate of thy People (or who is of
the same Religion with thy self) before you implead your Brother in the Heathen
Courts, as St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 5. has incomparably expounded it; where he
commands them for this cause to choose persons out of themselves to judge and
arbitrate their Quarrels. But now who doubts but that this Precept holds not,
where God has blessed us with a pious Christian Magistracy, a Magistracy of
the same Religion with our selves? Indeed St. Augustine, in the second Chapter
of Faith and Works, plainly enough informs us, that he accounted
Excommunication supplied the place and defect of the visible Sword, when the
Church wanted that external aid: for, as he would have it, Moses his punishing
Transgressors with Death, and Phineas his slaying the Adulterers, did typifie
and prefigure the punishing evil men by Degradations and Excommunications; that
is, at such time as the material Sword, the Civil Temporal Power, should be
wanting in the Church. I remember that some Modern Writers hold, that the Jews
had and retained this Custom of Excommunicating, because the Sword was taken
from them; (which I have proved by irrefragable Reason, Argument, and
Testimonies, to be utterly false:) but were it but thus far true, it must
necessarily follow, that there is no occasion for Excommunication in such a
Church which has the Civil Authority of its side: Nor is it required as a
thing obligatory to us, to choose Judges or Arbitrators, other than the lawful
Judicatures of the Land. Be it how it will, nothing can be more certain, than
that the word Church in this passage of Matthew signifies nothing less than a
Church-Senate, a Council of Clergymen or Ecclesiastics, endowed with a
Faculty, a Right or Power to shut out whom they please from the Sacraments.

LIII. Two Objections yet remain: First, How any one can be said to neglect to
hear the Church, if that and the Civil Magistrate, who has the power of the
Sword, are the same thing? Secondly, How that passage of binding and loosing,
Mat. 18. v. 18. suits with this matter? To the first, the Answer is intimated
before, That the Jews had not then power of judging in all matters, but almost
every thing that related not to Religion, belonged to the Roman Judicatures:
And therefore Christ permits, that if any one neglects or contemns the
Authority of the Sanedrim in such matters, the injured person may prosecute his
Right before the Heathen Magistrate; in like manner as if he were to sue an
Heathen or Publican. Besides, many cases may occur, which the Law had not
provided a distinct and proper punishment for, or had not prohibited under any
penalty at all; in which case it may well be, that the Offender may be dismissed
without more ado than a verbal chiding or admonition. Now if the Wrong Doer
does not yet leave wronging him, the party injured may seek farther
satisfaction, and may again and again apply himself to the Church or Magistrate
to punish the other's obstinacy: But though this Answer hold true, yet the
former seems, in my mind, more apposite and suitable to the purpose and design
of Christ, as well as to the several circumstances of time and place, and the
like.

LIVE. To the second, there is as little difficulty in framing it an Answer: for
since the manner of speaking is the same, and almost the self-same words are
here repeated which are used by Christ, Mat. 16. 19. it is necessary that they
signify either the same thing, or something very like it; but in Mat. 16. 19.
to bind and to loose signifies nothing else but to preach the Gospel; whereby
he that believes in it, is loosed from Sin and from Death: and therefore can
signify here no more than the desiring his Brother to leave injuring him, and
rather to become good and affectionate to him; this being a thing acceptable
unto God, and he will surely punish those that break this great Commandment of
Love and Charity. Now he that thus wins upon his Brother by soft advice and
entreaties to forbear wronging him, and urging to him the revealed Will of God,
and what Wrath he has in store for them that thus offend; if his Admonitions
have their effect, he has gained his Brother, that is, he has loosed him: if
they return unsuccessful, he is still bound, the Wrath of God remains upon him,
in like manner as it does upon him who having heard the Word of the Gospel
preached unto him, believes or disbelieves it. But now that we might be ready
and forward to forgive them that repent, Christ labored to persuade us to it
by that most apposite Parable of the Kings taking account of his servants,
which he subjoined to this passage; whereby Christ's meaning and purpose is
mightily cleared, as to the sense we have put upon it before.

LV. I cannot but infinitely wonder, how or why some men do here expound this
binding or loosing by driving men from the Sacraments, and readmitting them
thither again, when throughout the whole Bible these words are never put for
any such matter, and the Apostles have neither by word or otherwise discovered
that they understood Christ in such a sense. There is extant a Precept of
Christ, that if any refused to receive the Gospel, they should depart out of
that house or City, shaking off the dust of their feet against them, Luke 10.
11. Mat. 10. 14. which they put in practice, Acts 13. 25. and 18. 6. But that
they should deny any Sacrament to those that believed the Word, and were
baptized unto Christ, and embraced his Religion and Doctrine, we nowhere find
it either enjoined unto, or practiced by them, as has been before abundantly
and firmly proved. But it may suffice at present to inform the World, that it
can never be made out by Holy Writ, that Binding is put for Excluding Believers
from receiving the Sacrament; or Loosing to signify a Readmission again of him
who had been for his sins and contumacies debarred, and thus to re-engraft him
as 'twere into the Church anew.

LVI. Thus have I firmly and truly proved, that Christ in Mat. 18. 19. treats
not of Exclusion from Sacraments, but of the charitable management and
composure of private Injuries between fellow-brethren, men professing the same
Faith. But others have seen this before, as well as I; as St. Augustine in his
sixteenth Sermon upon St. Matthew; and Theophylact, who (as no body can
otherwise doubt) borrowed this Opinion (as almost all he says besides) from
Chrysostom. Among the more modern Divines, D. Johannes Brentius writes many
things in his Comments upon this Chapter, very agreeable to what we have said.

LVII. It Is now requisite that I should show that the action of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 5. 3, etc. is nothing of kin to this Excommunication. First, That Apostle
appears to have been a strict observer of the Mosaic Law; against which (as he
answers for himself, Acts 25. 8.) he had not at all offended: And, Acts 18. 18.
and 21. v. 24, 26. it appears, that he with other of the Apostles, complied
with the Ceremonies of the Law, and bore the Jews company in keeping them; and
was ill spoken of by the Convert Jews, not for teaching the Gentiles that the
observation of the Law was not required of them, but for teaching the Jews
which were among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, etc. whereas all the believing
Jews that were in Judea, kept and were zealous of the Law, v. 20. But who knows
not that Christ changed not the Law of Moses in that point of celebrating the
Passover, which commands all to come who were circumcised? and therefore
neither does he keep back that incestuous person, nor any other, from
communicating at the Lords Table, who would come and profess the Christian
Faith. As to the Jews, it is a plain case, who would never have suffered such an
Encroachment upon their Law, and their constant inveterate usage to the
contrary: And who can well think that the Gentiles should be in worse
circumstances than they, as to this purpose?

LVIII. But again, if the delivery to Satan was no more than a bare
interdiction from the Sacraments till his repentance, why did Paul excuse
himself to the Corinthians with all that care and niceness? Why did he so near
repent him, as 'twere, of what he had done? (as we read he did, 2 Cor. 2. 4.
and 7. v. 8.) Besides, why were the Corinthians so overwhelmed with grief, if
they already knew this to be the method and practice of the Church in punishing
sinners, and that this was to be a lasting Discipline for all successions of
Ages? they should rather, methinks, have rejoiced that they had such a
President and Pattern given them to walk by for the future. If it were but a
spur to Repentance, and an wholesome and safe Antidote against Damnation, why
did their sorrows run so high? why were they not rather rejoiced? Christ tells
us, that the Angels of God rejoice more over the Conversion of one Sinner, than
over ninety nine just persons. The Corinthians therefore could not have had the
Spirit of Christ in them, had they conceived such mighty sorrow on seeing the
Apostle do this and no more, and barely to recall an erring Brother into the
right way again, and save him from that damnation he was pulling down upon his
own head: But who can be so blind as not to see that the Apostle struck deeper
than this comes to?

Thirdly, What need had the Apostle to write to them, 2 Cor. 7. 8. that he does
not repent, though he did repent? or how indeed could he any ways repent him of
what he had done, if his purpose was to have it put daily in practice every
where, and in all Churches? or if it were but a Temporary Seclusion from the
Sacrament, and at longest but till his repentance?

Fourthly, What occasion was there that the Corinthians should use such earnest
and powerful Intercessions with the Apostle on that Wretch's behalf, if they
knew that upon his repentance he should straitway be admitted into their
Fellowship again? But that they did earnestly entreat for him, it is evident
from the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 2. 10. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive
also: for if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your saeke forgave
I it in the presence of Christ.

Fifthly, We find Paul in that second Chapter, v. 9. excusing himself, that one
of his aims was to know the proof of their Obedience; And in the seventh
Chapter, v. 12. he tells them, he did it that his care for them in the sight of
God, might appear to them. How could he have said or writ thus, if he had
commanded them no greater a matter than that they should trun away such a one
from the Sacrament?

Sixthly, How shall we ever make these words hang together, Ye were made sorry
in a godly manner (or with respect to God) that ye might receive damage by us
in nothing? 2 Cor. 7. 9. He tells them, they suffered no loss, damage, or
detriment by that sorrow of theirs, for that their grief had been prevalent
with him for the pardoning that unhappy Wretch: without this they had received
loss, even the loss of that incestnous person. But pray what loss had it been
to them, if he had been only to be kept from the Sacrament till he repented?

Seventhly, Paul speaks not there of the Lords Supper, but of the whole Life of
a Christian; and therefore his meaning must be, not to put him away from the
Table of the Lord, but from among them, that is, out of the world* that that
little Leaven might not vitiate the whole Mass. This is suitable to the
Apostles phrase, and to the Figure of Leaven; but Excommunication cannot be
easily accommodated either to his or Moses's words.

Eighthly, It must be observed, that he does not say simply, that they
themselves, and they only, when they are gathered together in the Name of the
Lord, or according to Christ's command, should deliver him to Satan, or deprive
him of the Sacrament; but, I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit,
have judged already as though I were present, concerning him that has so done
this deed, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,
and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one
to Satan, etc. Plainly intimating, that the power of our Lord Jesus Christ was
necessary to intervene in this business; and therefore was a matter of greater
moment than a Temporary Amotion from the Sacrament: Besides, he says, that he
himself had already judged (though (perhaps by reason of his absence) he
determined not to do it without them) he does not command the Church that they
by themselves should do this, as if this were purely an Apostolical, not an
Ecclesiastical Power; an authority annexed to the persons of the Apostles, and
not to any Church or other Order or Succession of men: which are considerations
not to be slurr'd over with slight and contempt.

Lastly, We do not any-where read that the Apostle commanded any single person,
or number of men, to deliver any one to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh,
either whilst he lived, or when he should be dead and gone; well knowing, that
this was appropriated to his Apostolic Power, and not to be delegated, not to
be agreeable to any other or less Authority: for as they had the Power of
Healing, so had they that of Wounding too, as appears, Acts 5. 5, 10. and 13.
11. for which reason we read not of any ordained by the Apostles, that are
commanded to exercise this Extraordinary Power. And therefore the Apostle is
ever and anon threatening them with his coming in power; with his being sharp
and severe upon them; with his dealing with them according to the power given
him by God; with his coming to them with a Rod, and the like: and commands to
note those by Epistle that offend. This is not a thing given in charge to the
Elders; that it may be without all controversy, that this Power was granted to
the Apostles, and to none else. Of the same import is that which we read, 1 Timothy 1. 20. of Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom Paul (not the Church, nor the
Presbyters, nor any other persons whatsoever) delivered unto Satan.

LIX. I have hitherto, by way of Argument, and from Circumstances, clearly
evinced, that 'twas a thing of a quite different nature, to deliver to Satan,
and to shut out from the Sacrament. Now proceed I to demonstrate the same truth
from the words themselves, and the propriety, tendency and nature of that whole
passage: for,

First, The Apostle does not say, Why did ye not interdict this incestuous
person the Lords Supper? but why have ye not mourned, 1 Cor. 5. 2. that is, why
have ye not by Mourning and Prayers put up to God, besought that he that has
done this deed, might be taken away from among you, what way God shall best
please? St. Augustine in his third book against Parmen. explains the place to
the same sense; and the same way does he expound what the Apostle, chapter 12. has
written of sorrowing. They also seem to be of St. Augustine's and Truth's side
too, who suppose the Apostle to allude to 1 King. 21. and 9, and 12. From
whence we may conjecture it to have been an ancient Custom among the Jews, to
make inquisition after enormous crimes, by fasting, Prayers, and public
mourning, that the same, when detected, might be brought to condign punishments
as the Law required. Therefore at that time when the Church was destitute of
the Civil Authority, he admonishes them that they ought to address to God that
he would (as might seem best to him) take him out of the way; which was a quite
different thing from that which we call excommunicating a man. But besides, by
what competent Author can it be made out, that (...), To take away from among
men, should be a phrase for debarring a man access to the Sacrament? In
propriety of speech he is said e medio sublatus, to be taken away from among
men, who is any ways killed: for though a banished or exiled person may in some
sense be said to be driven away from among others, yet in propriety of speech,
and as the Greeks commonly use it, it is not so taken by them, at leastwise it is
not to be found in that sense in Holy Writ.

Secondly, But if the Apostles direction here be to have him discommon'd and
thrust out of the Fellowship and Converse of the Faithful, what need was there
of public mourning? he should have been turned over and banished to the
Gentiles. But that is not consistent with that other Clause, That his Soul may
be saved; which ( at least on our Adversaries principles) could never be out of
the pale of the Church. If you say he was only debarred and removed from the
Sacrament and private Commerce, he was not then e medio eorum sublatus; he was
not taken away from among them: for I do not think any man able to make it out,
that the Apostle ordered him to be kept from the Sacrament alone, and from
private Conversation, Familiarity, and Fellowship with them. This then is a
mere addition, a forced sense upon the Apostles words, which cannot be proved
ever to have entered into his thoughts. Truly I think that no man (who is
versed in Scripture, and the most ancient Expositors of it) can doubt, but that
the Apostle borrowed this passage, and the very words that he expresses
himself in, from Deuteronomy. 17. 10. chapter 19. 20. chapter 21. 7. chapter 22. 6, 11. chapter 24. 8.
where Moses puts the words for cutting off the Offender by death, and for
nothing else; and in all the alleged places, Moses keeps to the self-same
words; Whereas in chapter 13. he puts (...) for (...), but both in the same sense.
How is it therefore possible that (...), here should bear such a construction,
viz. to excommunicate, (as Excommunication nowadays signifies?)

Thirdly, The Context seems to prove that this Offender did not persist in that
piece of Wickedness: for in v. 2 and 3. of that fifth Chapter, it is, him that
has done this deed; which shows he had, not that he then did, do it. The
Apostle therefore seems to design the punishing him for the Fact that he had
committed, agreeable to the Command of God, and to the Practice of every good
Magistrate: And indeed when he says, v. 4. That the Spirit may be saved, etc.
he seems to have been informed of his penitence: for how could he otherwise
have written thus of a man who had given no proof how his Soul was touched for
so enormous a Wickedness?

Fourthly, The Apostle tells them, he had determined or judged already to
deliver such an one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Are we to seek for the
signification of the word (...)? In what profane Author, or in what place of
Scripture, has it a different sense from what it is here taken in, of giving,
giving up, delivering, permitting, yielding, and the like? And here we have,
first, the person giving him up, and the person to whom he was so given, and he
that was given: Nay, it is over and above added, why and for what purpose he was
delivered up. And as to the form of speech, it is just as if I should say, I
deliver over my Son to his Master, or I put him into such a Masters hands, for
Instruction, or for Discipline. Who that should hear a man speak so, would not
think that he put his Son into the Masters power, to be instructed or corrected
by him? He that would have instances of this nature, let him turn to 1 Timothy 1.
19. Acts 27. 24. Mat. 5. 25. and chapter 18. 34. and chapter 27. 2. Mark 13. 9. John
19. 16. and that of Mat. 24. 9. they shall deliver you up to be afflicted, is
directly parallel: So Mark 13. 12. the Brother (...) shall deliver up ( or as
we render it, shall betray) the Brother to death. So 2 Pet. 2. 4. speaking of
the Angels that sinned, he says, that God delivered them into chains of
darkness to be reserved unto Judgment. In Job 2. 6. God says unto Satan,
Behold, (...), I have delivered him to thee, or as we render it, he is in thine
hand, only save his life. Do not all these places tell us of a delivering up
to be afflicted, to be killed, to be condemned, and the like? In short, none
shall to the worlds end, be able to show that ever this kind of phrase is used
to signify the excluding one from the Sacrament, unless the destruction of the
Flesh here, and interdicting the Sacrament be the same.

Fifthly, It Is impossible to show that this word, (...) destruction, is any
where in the New Testament put for mortifying the Lusts of the Flesh; but
wherever it is found, it is put for the death of the Soul or Body (whether the
word Flesh be joined with it or not). I might also say, that no extant Greek
Author has used it to that sense that some, as I have said, put upon it; but
we keep to its acceptance in Scripture. The Apostle makes use of it in 1 Thessalonians.
5. 3. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. and in 1 Timothy 6. 9. and the Verbal (...), we read in 1
Cor. 10. 10. as the Participle (...) in Heb. 11. v. 28. and the Compound (...),
Acts 3. 23. taken by that holy Penman out of Deuteronomy. 18. 15. But in all these
places Death and Destruction are thereby signified. The Septuagint do
ordinarily use (...), which Pagninus generally renders exscindo, to cut off, or
slay: it is certain they always mean Death by it. I know that which the Apostle
(...), Romans 8. 13. and (...). Col. 2. 3. and Gal. 5. 12. and 6. 14. are put for
mortification of the Fleshly Lusts. But for (...) and (...), they are not met
with in that sense either in sacred or profane Authors; nor in truth do I
remember my self to have read that (...) in the New Testament is so taken. It Is
therefore a poor Evasion that some frame, supposing Paul here to distinguish
betwixt the affections of the Flesh and the Spirit: Since he here sets the
Destruction of the Flesh, or, which is all one, the Death of the Body, against
the saving of the Soul or Spirit; as both the genuine sense of the words, the
drift and purpose of Paul, the whole series and circumstances of the Discourse,
and the very word (...), to deliver, so unquestionably demonstrate, that any
lover of Truth cannot but sit down satisfied under the proof of it. But,

Sixthly, The following words, That the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, that is, in the day of Judgment, give farther testimony to the
truth of this Interpretation, and are a convincing demonstration, that the
Apostle speaks of this wicked one, as of one whose death was at hand.

Seventhly and lastly, The word (...), 2 Cor. 2. v. 6. (which we translate
Punishment, but ought rather to be rendered Censure) argues he was not expuls'd
from the Sacrament: for in its primitive signification it is put for Chiding,
Censuring, Reproving, or Rebuking, and the like, (as Interpreters commonly
translate it) not for Punishment, Mulct, or Penance. There are yet two more
Reasons left us; the one, That the Interdicting from the Sacrament is nowhere
in Scripture put for or ordained to be Punishment. The other, that the words
themselves plainly show, that it is here put for Chiding or Censure; which not
one single person alone, but many used toward him: for, says St. Paul there,
sufficient for such an one is this (...), this Censure ( not as we read it,
Punishment) which was inflicted of many. He absolves him from nothing but those
Comminations and Threats which many, or peradventure the whole Church, all the
Corinthian Believers, had denounced against him, That he should be delivered
over to Satan, to be by him buffeted, tormented, killed. He had yet therefore
only experienced their Threats: for Paul does not absolve him of part, but of
all that had as yet befallen him; and, as he says, this Censure, these Threats
and Ratlings that had been rounded in his ears, were sufficient. Nay, he
plainly intimates withal, that this was all that was done to him. We read of
this word (...), Mat. 16. 22. chapter 17. 18. chapter 19. 13. chapter 20. 13. and in the
other Evangelists; as also 2 Timothy 4. 2. (where (...) and (...), bear it
company:) In all which places it is put for Reproof and Rebuking, or the like;
but nowhere for Punishment.

LX. But here now it may be asked me, If the incestuous person underwent no more
than this (...), this Censure or Rebuke, how can he be said to have been
delivered unto Satan, to be tormented and slain by him? Some of the ancient
Writers hold, that he was indeed delivered over to be tormented with Diseases,
or the like, and so be gradually brought to destruction; but was released and
absolved aagain by the Apostle, before it had gone so far. If this Answer be
true, I see not but (...) might here signify Punishment, ( as indeed our
Translation has rendered it.) But now though I do not deny but that this is a
passible Interpretation, yet I shall present you another as suitable to the
Apostles words: St. Paul had not resolved to deliver this man to the Devil by
himself alone, but had rather have it done in a full Congregation, when the
whole Body of Believers should be gathered together for that purpose. But when
once the Church saw this deplorable Creature so dejected and overwhelmed with
Sorrow, and that Grief had almost already given him the Death that they
threatened, they reprieved him as 'twere, and deferred pronouncing the Sentence,
till they might learn the Apostles pleasure, whether at their intercession he
would remit the rigor of it, and restore him on his Repentance: which if they
could not prevail with him to do, they threaten they will not longer be wanting
in their Duty. Thus came it to pass that this poor Soul remained for some
months under great Terrors and Agonies of mind, till he had received the joyful
intelligence of Paul's remitting the Punishment. That the matter was managed
much after this rate, may be plainly collected out of that second Epistle to
the Corinthians.

LXI. From what has been already alleged, as well as from what might yet be
urged, it is so clearly and solidly demonstrated, that this delivering up to
Satan was quite another thing from that which we nowadays call
Excommunication, or Suspension from the Sacrament, that sure none but those who
are as defective in understanding, as in love to the Truth, can have the face
to deny it. I said just now, that some ancient Writers expounded this place as
we do: Augustine (whose Testimony I cited before) is one of them; there is
another passage of his in his first Book, upon Christ's Sermon in the Mount,
concurring with us; as does also Athanasius, and after him Chrysostom, and his
Compiler Theophylact.

LXII. Let us now take a short survey of those other places, which our
Opponents fly unto for their own defense. Some lay a stress upon that passage
of St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine:
for hereby they fancy themselves able to squeeze out a proof that there were
some Elders who did not labor in the Word; and on these they bestow another
Office, to wit, that of inspecting and censuring our Manners and Behavior, of
being Observators of our sins and failings, of admonishing the Stubborn and
Refractory, of certifying their fellow-Elders, that is ( say they) the Church;
and lastly, (in conjunction with these) of excommunicating such as hear not (
or obey not) the Church.

LXIII. But we think it evident from the Writings of the Apostles Peter and
Paul, that Ministers, Bishops, and Presbyters or Elders (if Office, Function,
and Ministry be meant by those two last, and not their Age) were all the same
in the Apostles time; and so that there was no Presbyter who was not a Teacher
( or Preacher, as we now call them) that is, who did not labor in the
Doctrine: unless any are desirous to stretch this word to those Judges and
Arbitrators of Suits and Controversies mentioned 1 Cor. 6. 4. (But we talk not
of them at present, since their Duty was of a quite different nature.) This
Opinion of ours, which we think grounded upon apparent truth, has both Hierom
and Ambrose to vouch for it: Hieronym. upon Tit. chap. 1.
only this latter says that Bishops were first nominated out of the Order of
Presbyters. This therefore is the manner of Paul's Discoursing; as if I should
say, I love all Ministers and Pastors, but especially those who with unwearied
Industry, and a constant waking Care and Sedulity, feed the Sheep committed to
their charge. I love all studious persons, but especially those who sit to it
night and day. I do not now by saying thus, say that there are some Pastors who
never feed their Sheep, or some Students who never study; but I suppose thereby
some more diligent than others, though I do not say that any do more than they
ought to do, or than their Function requires of them. That this is the genuine
and true Exposition of the Apostles meaning and words, the subsequent words, v.
18. concerning the reward, proves it: for it is in no sort probable that the
same reward was at any time allotted in the Church to them that did, and to
them that did not teach; for the first should be charged with a double Duty,
and the other with but a single one: yet the Apostle styles them both worthy of
double honor. Besides, the Apostle quotes that passage of the Ox treading out
the Corn, to prove that Sustenance is due to the Ministry: and the Participle
(...) confirms our Exposition; which signifies not barely laboring, but
wearying our selves with labor, or using an extraordinary diligence therein:
And thus is it always taken in the Sea Mat. 11. 28. Luke 5. 5. Joh 4. 6. 1 Cor.
4. 12. Ephesians. 4. 28. 1 Thessalonians 5. 12. which helps mightily to the explaining this.
1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 58. and alibi.
New Testament, where it often occurs. And the Greeks call that (...), which
the Latins call Lassitudo, Weariness: And as (...) and (...) differ, so do
their Verbs.

LXIV. They say withal, that Christ did forbid to cast Pearls before Swine, and
to give things that are holy, unto Dogs. I answer, Christ speaks of them that
despise those Pearls, and tread them under their feet, and turn again and rend
the Donors of them; that is, he speaks of the Enemies of the Gospel, with whom
we have nothing to do in this dispute: for we meddle not with any here, but
Christians, who are rightly principl'd in that Doctrine, and approve the same,
and are desirous to be Partakers of the Sacraments with their
Fellow Christians, though they live not up to that Integrity that others do.
Besides, Christ speaks not there of Sacraments, but of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which ought not to be offered to Dogs and Swine, that is, to such as
refuse and trample it under feet; of which nature is that Parable of the Pearl,
Mat. 13. 45. where Christ likens the Kingdom of Heaven to a Merchant-man who
bought a Pearl of great price; and therefore it makes nothing to our purpose.

LXV. Whereas again they remember us that St. Paul gave it in charge to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 29. That them that sin he should rebuke before all; We deny
not the thing, but deny that it relates to our purpose. I will not muster up
multitudes of Arguments to prove it; this only shall I say, That it is beyond
the wit of man to make it out, that to reprove or rebuke any man before or in
the presence of the Church, is the same thing with forbidding him the
Sacrament. Nay, they that object this, object it to no purpose, unless they can
show it to be the same: Who can prove that the Apostle so much as thought here
of interdicting the Sacrament? Again, the Apostle treats not here of sins that
are committed openly, and in the face of the world, but those that sin (says
he) that is, that persevere and continue in sin, rebuke before all, that
thereby both he that has sinned, and others that saw it, may fear with him,
and do no more wickedly. He puts no distinction here between little and great,
venial and moral sins; much less between public and private sins. To speak
once for all, it is a leaden Objection, and will melt away like wax at the Fire
of Truth, and vanish like the smoke. Besides, St. Paul's words stand in perfect
opposition to this Excommengent: for he commands him that sins to be rebuked
(not to be excommunicated) before all, subjoyning it as a reason, that all may
fear; as if he should say, If he will not repent and mend himself, at least
others shall thereby learn to be and do better. Where by him that sins is not
meant him that has left sinning, or him that had sinned only, but him that
abides and continues to walk in the ways of sin, and repented not after
admonitions and warnings given him: Him, I say, that thus sins, he charges
Timothy to rebuke and reprove before others; he does not give it in charge to
him, to see him excommunicated.

LXVI. Next, say they, the Apostle commands so far to avoid the company of the
Wicked, that he allows not the liberty of making our common Meals with them, 1
Cor. 5. 11. With such an one no not to eat; much less (conclude they) would he
have us eat the Lords Supper with them. But I utterly deny the consequence: for
surely they are of very different import, the prohibition of private
familiarities, and the non-admission to the Sacrament; and the forbidding the
one, is not a denial or disallowance of the other; the former is a Civil or
Political Punishment, the latter Sacred; we have a Command for one, none for
the other; St. Paul explains the end and reason of the former, but we find no
mention of either for the latter: nay, the thing it self is nowhere enjoined,
or so much as the name of Excommunication once heard of in Scripture. And that
one may be without the other, the Pharisees are a pregnant instance; who, that
they might pass with the World for the greater Saints, would not approach the
Publicans, would not eat, drink, or associate with them in the common concerns
of Life. (I cannot at present recollect that I have read of the like Niceness in
any others;) but no man can show me, whilst the World lasts, that these
Publicans were denied admission to the Sacrifices, to the Temple, to the
Passover, or any other Sacraments, provided they were but circumcised, and
turned not Renegades to their Religion. There are at this day some who shut out
all notoriously lewd and dissolute persons out of their company; they will not
live, nor entertain a Conversation with them: which evinces, that this avoiding
their Company, and maintaining no Correspondencies with them, is rather a Civil
than an Ecclesiastical Punishment, and amounts not near to that of delivering
over to Satan, which some will needs have to be Excommunication. The Apostle
directs Good men to shun all Consortship with Ill, that Shame may hasten in
them a Repentance: The Interdiction runs not to the Ill, that they shall not
live among the Good, if any good men would give them admittance. In private
Conversations men talk of all matters indifferently; and if a dissolute Wretch
find by the freedom of his access, that for all his Debaucheries he is as much
made of as ever, not only himself is not amended, but his Company by degrees
endangered: But where a man sees himself avoided, and that all shrink, fly,
and detest his society, he cannot but cast a reflecting thought upon the
occasion, and enter into considerations of a better life, that he be no longer
the Scorn and Contempt of those that before embraced him with all the arms of
Friendship. And therefore as being debarred of private Commerce and
Conversation, frights us from some sorts of Crimes and Uncleanness, so the
indulgence of familiar and fair outward Correspondencies, feeds, pampers, and
encourages us in those bad courses. But these reasons hold not in the receiving
or being denied the Sacrament; for frequent Communicating at that Table, gives
not vigor and nourishment to our Vices at the rate private Communications and
Familiarities do: for in the Churches or Chapels where that is administered, no
vain and worldly things, nothing of private concern, is then transacted, but
the Word of God only is there handled. There, when men shall hear of a Christ
that died for them, of a Christ that invites to that Commemoration, and public
demonstration of our acknowledgments and thankfulness for so great a Benefit,
and that none can be a worthy Communicant, who has not thoroughly and sincerely
examined himself, and that those who thrust themselves in unworthily amongst
his Guests, do but eat and drink damnation to themselves: This will put men,
that intend to approach unto the Lords Table, upon a seriousness of thought,
What is there exhibited; what is his concern in it; what God requires of him,
and how he may for the future so regulate his life, that it may be acceptable
in the sight of God, how debauched soever and villainous it were before. He that
has not these offers, these incitements and invitations, is deprived of these
invitations, grows still the worse, to be sure, no whit the better for it:
which seems to be the reason of Gods instituting and enjoining such multitudes
of Sacrifices, Offerings, Rites and Ceremonies. But for certain the Apostle has
nowhere ordered, that they with whom he would not have good men to hold a
Correspondence, should be also put by or denied the Sacrament. And when in
another place, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. he writes to have them signify that man by
Epistle who walks disorderly; ( for the Marginal translation in our English
Bibles seems to be truest in this place) he does not there set the Elders upon
excommunicating them, or suspending them the Sacrament. All which are evident
proofs of their mistakes, who think Excommunication to have been either here
approved, allowed of, or designed by the Apostle.

LXVII. But to enforce the Objection, they tell us, it is no less unfit that the
Church, the Congregation of the Faithful assembled in the Worship of God,
should be defiled with the Company and Communion of the Wicked; and that it is
therefore consequently necessary that the Evil should in all accounts be served
and kept from the Pious and Good. But I would return them this Answer: There is
no danger that the Wicked should pollute or injure the Good in the use of those
Rites and Ceremonies which are of God's own institution, whilst they take not
after them in their natures, nor learn not their immoralities: for neither the
holy Prophets, Kings, or Judges, nor John the Baptist, nor even Christ himself,
nor yet his Apostles after him, were ever defiled by being present at the same
Worship, at the same Sacrifices, in the same Temple, using the same Rites and
Sacraments with men of the most debauched and profligate lives. Our Savior was
spotless amidst that Generation of Vipers, who were baptized with him by John
in the same Baptism. Judas neither polluted Christ, nor the Apostles, nor the
last Supper of our Lord, by his presence at it, though he was then a known
Thief, and had before laid the Plot for betraying his Master, and had received
the Pay for his pains. Again, the Apostle Paul does not bid us examine one
another in the celebration or receiving of the Lords Supper, and to look about
us whether any of the bystanders, any of our fellow-Communicants, be sinful or
unworthy, be such as may derive any Pollution or Uncleanness to us; but thus
runs his Commandment, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself; himself, he
says, not others.

LXVIII. Hitherto have I effectually and truly proved, that no circumcised
person was ever (before Christ's days) prohibited those Ceremonies and
Sacraments which God by the hand of Moses had ordained amongst them, upon any
delinquency in Morals, or Piety of Life: Nay, I have withal shown, that 'twas
not lawful for any one whomsoever to forbid them; and I have by pregnant
Testimonies from Scripture and Reason, made it out, that neither Christ nor his
Apostles taught or acted contrary. Besides, I think I have demonstrated, that
what our Adversaries offer on their own behalfs, cannot maintain the Opinion
they would build on it. So that now I see not any farther rubs, nothing that
can shock this Conclusion; That that Excommunication which shuts out Christians
from the Sacrament for pure Immoralities, and the Vitiousness of their lives,
was never ordained by God, but is a Figment and Invention of men: for so far is
it from deriving its original from Scripture, that the invention and trick of
it is rather declaimed against and condemned there.

LXIX. If any yet reply, that at this rate we bespatter, we condemn whole
shoals of pious Bishops, who quickly after the Apostles times began this
excommunicating Sinners; I must tell them, it is one thing to speak against an
Opinion, and another against the Assertors or Authors of it. Many in our Age,
of no less Piety than Learning, have examined, have sifted and confuted sundry
ancient (and as I may say) Catholic Errors, Errors that crept early into the
Church: As for instance, the Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, Praying to Saints,
Exorcisms in Baptism, Coelibacy of the Priesthood, Unctions in Baptism and at
the point of Death, Prayers for the Dead, and Satisfaction in the Case how in
question; and yet I know not any man that has it charged on him as a Crime,
barely for that he hereby condemns his Predecessors. If men will needs labor
to enforce this Excommunication upon the Churches, as a Law of Gods
promulgation, I can never be brought to commend it therefore; though at the
same time I cannot but highly praise and approve of their Zeal and good
Intentions, who first gave rise to it: for their aim was hereby to curb the
restiff and unweildy humors of vicious men, since they could not imagine a
more commodious and effectual way of doing it: And very many (as we see even to
this day) walk on in this beaten and public Path, do it because others before
them did it, having never so much as taken it into their considerations,
whether it be a matter that stands with holy Scripture or no.

LXX. I cannot at present say much of the very time when Excommunication had
its first rise; only that toward the latter end of the second Century after
Christ, I meet with something like it then attempted and set up. For above one
hundred and fifty years, I do not find any one suspended, or put by from
receiving the Sacrament, for unholiness of life. They that are fuller versed in
the History and Writings of the Fathers, may perchance speak better and clearer
in this point. They that shall carefully peruse what Socrates in his fifth book
of Eccles. History, chap. 19. has transmitted to us, I verily believe will,
without much difficulty, confess with us that this Custom of Excommunicating
had its first Epoch or Commencement in the Church, about the time of Novatus:
Yet Sozomen, in his seventh book, chap. 16. pretends other causes for its
Institution. Besides which, we read that about the year of the Lord 200. Victor
Bishop of Rome admitted not to the Lords Supper them who refused to forgive
Injuries; but I have observed, that till that time none were denied the
Communion but Heretics, and such as swerved from or renounced the Christian
Faith. But be that how it will, this is both certain and evident, that
Excommunication was first introduced into the Church for the restraint and
punishment of Vice; and afterward when the Church had got the Sword into their
hand, as well as the Keys at their girdle; that is, when the Magistrates, Kings
and Princes, became Christian, and subjected themselves to the Faith; yet did
the Churchmen not let go this power, but continued the exercise of it by their
Bishops: partly, for that the Episcopal Order was then believed to be of Divine
Right; partly, for that they could not but be fond and tenacious of that Power
which made them formidable to Kings and Emperors, and was therefore a morsel
too sweet to be parted with without regret: And they easily wrought others into
a belief of Christ's being the Author and Institutor of it, since themselves had
before so forwardly and so willingly swallowed it. Superstition too, in a
little time, had ascribed so much virtue to the Sacrament, that it gave
strength to the Opinion; for 'twas believed, and publicly owned by their
Writings, that there were some that could not die, till they had been housell'd
and received the Sacrament. Either therefore this Error made men dread
Excommunication, or Excommunication led them into the Error: for how facile a
thing was it to impose upon the Credulity of the illiterate and weak Vulgar,
that Life was annexed to the receiving, and Death to the deprivation of the holy
Sacrament, since the denial of this to a sinner, was the highest and last
Punishment that they saw inflicted on him?

LXXI. But for the Persons that executed and denounced this Excommunication (as
far as our Conjectures can carry us in this affair) they seem to have been at
first such Elders as we read of 1 Cor. 6. 4. (who supplied the place and defect
of Magistracy in the Church) together with the Ministry; but afterward all
this Authority was devolved upon the Bishops, who took cognizance of all Suits,
made up Differences, gave Judgment, and did every thing that related to the
decisions of Right, and distributing Justice betwixt man and man: as we
perceive by the History of those times, and by St. Augustine's complaining of
so much then lying on the Bishops hands of this nature. Ambrose affirms, that
those sort of Elders whose assistance was wont to be made use of in the Church
on all occasions, were in vogue and authority when yet they were destitute of
Bishops. And it appears by the Apostle, that these Elders were to have an
Authority as to that Employment of Judging, as long as the Church should be
under the pressures of an Heathen Magistrate; which gives us to understand,
that as under a Christian Government that Employment would be useless, and was
therefore to cease; so Excommunication (upon supposition that they had
exercised such a thing before) yet should it in a Christian Kingdom cease. For
we must note, that these Elders were instead of Civil Magistrates, and managed
Civil affairs, and were no Ecclesiastical Judicature: (which nowadays is of a
different nature from the Civil) for it is plainly said, that they were to deal
in Suits and Controversies of Law, things relating to this Life and the
Concerns of it.

LXXII. 'Twould make a Volume to recount what advantages the Church did hereby
reap; most certainly they cannot be set out in a small compass: for first, this
Excommunication made men to look for salvation from the Sacrament; for thus
they framed the Argument: The Exclusion from the Sacrament draws down Death and
Damnation ( say they) therefore the Receiving of it gives Life. They scarce
could entertain a doubt of the truth of the Antecedent, whilst they were taught
that this was so dreadful, so Soul-destructive a punishment; and when they
thought themselves, by being shut out from the Sacrament, to fall straight into
the very clutches of the Devil, and be wholly at Satan's mercy: which has made
it thought by some, that they could not die, without being housled, as I said
before. This Error grew and got strength from the many great and long
Penances, the Solemnities of Absolution, and the like; amongst which, none was
more prevalent, than that they would not administer the holy Eucharist to them,
till the very point of Death; and that then they gave it them, 'twas of pure
compassion, that they might not go hence destitute of the Souls necessary food:
for if any (through whatever Accident) was so unfortunate, he was held for a
man damned and lost to all Eternity; as if God would not forgive them their
sins who heartily and sincerely repent, and vouchsafe unto them everlasting
life, unless these Elders should adjudge them qualified for the Lords Supper.
What error is there of a more detestable and fatal consequence? But another
Fruit of this was, that all the World now began to believe that 'twas in the
power of men to shut and open Heaven when and to whom they pleased: and
therefore the younger Theodosius would not eat his Dinner, because having
denied an importunate Monk's Request, he stood excommunicate by him for his
pains; and though the Bishop of Constantinople told the Emperor that the
Excommunication was invalid, yet rest, good man, he could not nor would not,
till the same hand absolved, that had bound him. So Ambrose for eight months
together kept an Elder from Church, from Sermons, and all the acts of public
Worship: It Is true, offended he had, but more pardonably than Ambrose himself,
as any man, that has his eyes in his head, may see upon the perusal of
Nicephorus his History, and the Chronicle of Philip Melancthon. By these steps
has the Roman See encroached upon the Western World, and made Princes, Kings,
and Emperors to lacky to her Lust, and arbitrary sway in pretended Spirituals.
Dyed has been the German Empire in the Gore of hundred thousands that fell a
Sacrifice to this Roman Diana, to excommunicating Popes, and excommunicated
Emperors, Kings, and Princes. Religion she has chopped and changed, mangled and
disfigured, debased and vitiated, at her pleasure; none daring to question her
Canons, dispute her Decretals, or look her Bulls in the face; the whole World
were Caligula's, and durst not show their heads when she sent her Thunder of
Excommunication abroad. The God of Foxes spoken of by Daniel, Dan. 11. 38. (if
we weigh that passage aright) signifies nothing but this Excommunication, or
the Prohibiting men the use of Sacred things, especially the Lords Supper: For
this Excommunication acts a very God in earnest; it is to this day a God of
Forces, a God who has put all things, all the power of Heaven and Hell, under
the Popes feet. And there are not wanting nowadays too, another sort of men
acting upon the same Principles, who would make all Humane Authority and the
Civil Christian Magistrate, truckle to them, and dread their Censures, as far
as the Popes ignorant Votaries do his Bulls. But I hope the time will come,
when this God shall stand exposed and condemned for a false and feigned God,
and be stripped of all its God-like terror and dread, and whatsoever may or has
so long plagued and enslaved the Church. In fine, this Idol Excommunication had
every where such an Ascendant, that 'twas the constant Belief of the World,
that they who by Church Censures and Interdictions from the Sacrament, and
public acts of Worship, were denounced unworthy of eternal Life, were thereby
wholly fallen from divine Grace; as on the other hand, saved must they needs
be, whom the Church received and would have so. Can we hope better terms, or
greater moderation, from our Modern Churchmen, than the World has experienced
in their Predecessors? I fear he that should expect it, would find himself
deceived, and that he has but little weighed what either the Scriptures or
Experience might inform him of.

LXXIII. I see no cause why Christian Rulers should not nowadays do what God
in the Jewish Commonwealth required of the Civil Magistrate: Do we conceit that
we can frame a better Model and Form of Discipline in Church or State, than God
gave to them? since we read in Deuteronomy. 4. that the Nations for this should praise
and admire the People of Israel for their Wisdom and Understanding, evinced by
those Statutes and Judgments which God had given them; yet God never taught
them Excommunication: But the Power of punishing the Debaucheries, and
restraining the looseness and licentiousness of manners, was wholly in the
Magistrate, whose duty 'twas, not only to animadvert on such Crimes by the
Rules that God had in their Law prescribed them; but the management of all the
Externals of Religion, the Disciplinary part and Constitution, was in them. For
'twas not Aaron, but Moses that did this (God still commanding it); and we know
this Jurisdiction was transferred over to Joshua, not to Eleazar; 'twas Joshua
on whom God laid that Injunction of seeing the Israelites circumcised the
second time, and not Eleazar, Josh. 5. 2. and this was to be universal, without
exception of one man; the Bad were to be circumcised as well as the Good; and
Bad there were, without question: And the keeping the Passover then was by him
too directed; nor was any person, that we there read of, excluded from it for
dishonesty of his life. The Ark of God was carried from place to place, as he
gave the word; and in all things relating to Religion, he interposed his
Commands, as may be observed throughout the whole book of Joshua. Eli and
Samuel, who had the charge of Religious as well as Civil affairs, they offered
and administered at the Altar as Priests; but as Judges they managed both Church
and State: for 'twas lawful for the High Priests under the Old Testament, to
meddle with the arts of Government and Secular affairs, as they were the Types
of Christ our King and High Priest: but under the Gospel it is another case, IT
SHALL NOT BE SO WITH YOU, says Christ. See 1 Pet. 5. 3. which is pertinent to
our purpose.

LXXIV. If we go farther to the Kings, the case is no less plain: As to David,
there is none can doubt it, since it appears that he ordered all the Offices and
Charges relating to God's Worship: he that pleases may read, 1 Chronicles. from the
22th to the 27th Chapter. Then for Solomon, (who was a King and no Priest) he
not only built the Temple, but dedicated it. To the same purpose is that
famous relation, 2 Chronicles. 19. of Jehosaphat; which being well considered, gives
great light to the matter in hand. So does that of the good King Hezechia: and
indeed the whole Old Testament witnesses no less. If therefore the State and
Church was founded, instituted, and established upon so much Wisdom; that which
makes the nearest approaches to the Form and Model thereof (as far as the
present circumstances and different state of things will allow) challenges at
least our Praises and Approbation, if not our Imitation* And therefore in
whatever Nation the Civil Magistrate is Christian, Pious, and Orthodox, there is
no need of other persons, who under another name or title should set a
governing us, and call us to account, or punish us for our misdeeds, as if
there were no difference betwixt a Believing and Infidel Prince. But (says D.
Wolfgangus Musculus, in his common places de Magistratu, from whom I have
borrowed and transcribed what I said last) It Is a most pernicious Error, and
big with dangerous Consequence, that so many think no better of a Christian
Magistracy, than of an Heathen one, whose power is to be allowed of no farther
than mere Temporals. If then Believing Governors had authority not only to
interpose in the ordering religious matters, agreeable to Scripture-rules, and
to regulate the Offices and other the Ministerial parts about it, (which is the
reason that Moses commands, that when they should choose them a King, he should
write him a Copy of the Law in a Book, and that to be with him, and he to read
therein all the days of his life) but had also power to punish Vice in the same
manner. It Is a needless fruitless attempt for men to be nowadays contriving
and setting up new Models of Government, which levels Magistrates themselves to
the Rank and Condition of their Subjects: for this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
in point of Manners, has no place of Holy Writ to vouch for it, or set it up:
not but that Civil Governors will do well to advise in all Doctrinals with
those that are learned and have labored in the Word.

LXXV. But now in those Churches whose mishap it is to live under a Profane
Government (as in the Dominions of Turks and Papists) they should make choice
of pious sober persons, who (agreeable to St. Paul's command) might arbitrate
between contesting Members, might take up Quarrels, might do every thing of
that nature; might chide and admonish debauched flagitious men, and such of the
Ministry themselves who walk disorderly: and if this avail not, then might they
punish them, or rather recall them to a better temper, by avoiding their
company, by debarring them of private Commerce, by reprehending them publicly,
or by some suchlike marks of their displeasure: but to thrust them from that
Sacrament which is of God's Institution, when they are minded to come, is more
than any Church or man has a right to do; for none can judge of the Heart but
God alone. It may chance that some sparks of Piety and Remorse may kindle in a
sinners Soul, whilst he sits in the Assembly; which it can be no hurt (nay, may
be greatly good) to cherish, since Religion forbids it not. And how can it be
(I would fain ask) but horrid, absurd, and impious to boot, to turn away any
man from publicly and solemnly paying his Thanks to God, and commemorating the
Death of his Savior, when he finds Impulses from within to do it, and would
fain celebrate it with his fellow-brethren the Church, and declares it is his
hearty desire to be and continue a Member of it, and that he would give public
testimony that his past life is irksom to himself.

APPENDIX.
IT will not be amiss perhaps, by way of Corollary or Supplement, to mention
the Decrees that were made in the year 1523. at the Diet at Norimberg, by all
the Layety of the Imperial States, and were sent to the Bishop of Rome: for
'twill appear by that, that we are not the first who have started this
Question, but that the Divines began to think of it nigh 46 years since. I am
confident no man that is any whit versed in the German Affairs, can believe or
imagine that any such thing should be enacted, but requested by them from the
Bishop of Rome, without the Clergies knowing of it. But that the Authority may
be the more authentic, and the thing clearer, I have been content to compare
the German Copy which was writ at that Diet, with the Latin one sent to the
Pope (and which Matthew. Flac. Illyricus caused to be reprinted at Basil, 1565.
with his Book De Sectis and Dissensionibus Papistarum;) and upon comparing
both, to publish the entire Decree or Act. Therefore among the 100 Grievances
(which were fuller expressed at this Session at Norimberg, than they had two
years before at Worms) this following is the 34th.

Item, Many Christians at Rome, and in other places besides, are by
Archbishops, Bishops, and their Ecclesiastical Judges, excommunicated for Civil
causes, and on a Temporal account; whereby many weak Consciences are disturbed,
and brought to despair: so that upon a moneyscore, and for the transitory
things of this life, and very often, for very trivial causes, are some brought
into danger of perishing Soul and Body too, contrary to the Law and Command of
God, besides the losses they suffer in Estates and Reputation thereby: Whereas
no person ought to be excommunicated, or held for such, unless he be convict of
Heresy, as the Holy Scripture bears witness. And therefore the Lay-states of
the Empire beseech your Pontificial Holiness, that as becomes a godly and
religious Father, you would take away these Grievances of Excommunication at
Rome, or in the Roman Court, and provide that the same be done every where
else, by the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Judges. And lastly,
that your Holiness would command, That no person be excommunicated, or reputed
for such, for any cause whatever, besides the plain and proved Crime of Heresy
in matters relating to Religion; for that no person ought to be separated or
removed from God and his Church, for any Temporal cause or otherwise, or for
any other humane crime, except Infidelity or Heresy. To the same purpose is
that of Joh. Stumpias, in his second Book of his Chronicon Helvet. cap. 29.
where he says, That the Swedish Clergy, about the year 1245. (when Henry
Landgrave of Turing, and after his death, William Earl of Holland, were chosen
by the instigation of the Pope, in opposition to the Emperor Frederick the
second, and Conrade his Son) taught with great constancy, among other things,
That never was there such a Power granted to mortal man under the Sun, to
prohibit Christians Spiritual Duties, and the Worship of God; and therefore did
they continue to say Mass (says he) though the Pope had interdicted them, and
denounced them Excommunicate.

FINIS.

