EPOTOPOLIS.

THE Present State OF BETTY-LAND.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Fox, at the White-Hart, over against St.
Dunstans-Church in Fleet Street; and at the Angel in Westminster Hall, 1684.

THE Present State of BETTY-LAND.
THE Country of Betty-Land is a Continent adjoining to the Isle of Man, having
the Island of Man wholly under its Jurisdiction, it is of so large an Ext^nt,
that it spreads its self through all degrees whatsoever, but the chiefest
degrees whi^^ are known to those that travel are from 16 to 45 both of Southern
and Northern Latitude, they that st^er by the Rules of Compass shall never know
the Dominions of it. The Planet which rules it is Venus, tho some aver that it
lies all within the Tropic of Capricorn, but for that Constellation which is
called Virgo, there are very few of the Inhabitants of this Country can endure
to hear it named: they wonder what that lusty Planet the Sun can have to do
with it.

In this vast Empire of Betty-land there are several very large Provinces, as
the Province of Rutland, wherein stands the Metropolis of the whole Empire
called Pego, the great Province of Bedford, the wide Province of Will-shire,
the Province of Guelderland very little inhabited, the Province of Slavonia,
the Province of Curland, the Province of Maldavia, famous for the great City of
Lipsick, the vast Territory of Croatia, with the Province of Holland, a migh^ty
Tract of land under the Command of Count Horn, with many others too long, to
repeat. There was formerly a certain Promontory or neck of land lying in this
Country, called the Cape of Good Hope, but time has so utterly defaced it that
there is hardly any sign thereof now remaining: The Temperature of the Soil is
as various as you may imagine any Climate to be that lies under so many far
distant Meridians, sometimes so cold (especially when it feels the refreshing
influences of Wealth and Youth decay, that Winter is more kind, nay the very
hearts of the people will be frozen, and a Cart laden with whole Canon may go
over the streams of their former affection, nothing but Ice of Disdain,
hailstones of Malice, and most bitter storms of Reproach: sometimes so hot
again, that a man had better be let down in a basket in at the great hole of
Mount Aetna, than travel in some parts of the Country, but touch it sometimes
and you shall lose a Member; it is worse than the Churchyard in Paris, which
consumes dead Carcases in four and twenty hours, for if a man make a hole in
some part of the mould, and put but an inch of his flesh in, it will raise such
a flame in his body, as would make him think Hell to be upon Earth: to say
truth, the nature of the Soil is very strange, so that if a man do but take a
piece of it in his hand, 'twill cause (as it were) an immediate Delirium, and
make a man fall flat upon his face upon the ground, where if he have not a
care, he may chance to lose a limb, swallowed up in a whirl-pit, not without
the Effusion of the choycest part of the blood: But for Tillage the Soil is so
proper, and so delightful it is to manure, that be it fruitful, or be it
barren, men take the greatest pleasure in the world to plow it and sow it, nay
there are some men that take it for so great a pastime, that they will give
some a ^housand some two thousand pound a year for a little spot in that
Country, not so big as the palm of your hand: Herein it is of a different
nature from all other Soyls, for tho it be fertile enough, yet after you have
sufficiently plowed it and sown it, it requires neither showers nor the dew of
Heaven, nor puts the husbandman to the troublesome Prayers for the alteration
of weather; yet if the husbandman be not very careful to tend it and water it
himself every night, once or twice a ^ight, as they do Marjoram after Sunset,
he will find a great deal of trouble all the year long, tho there be a sort of
Philosophers that understand the nature of the Soil very well, who say that
that kind of Husbandry is very unnatural and very inconvenient for the Soil,
and that it were far better for a provident Husbandman to have 3 or 4 or half a
dozen farms one under another than to spend so much time, toil and labor
altogether in vain, for thereby many times the Crop comes to nothing, and tho
it may be very well got off the ground and seem fair for the time, yet when you
think to have the benefit of it, you shall see it afterward come to nothing,
and moulder away like a rotting Orange: If the Soil be barren, all the dung in
the world will never do it any good, yet the more barren it is, the more will
the Soil cleave and gape for moisture, the sands of Arabia are not so thirsty,
and yet as if there were a kind of witchcraft in the Soil, there are thousands
of Husbandmen so strangely besotted, that when they have happened upon such a
barren spot as this, yet they will not stick to lay out their whole stock upon
it, tho they know it to be all to no purpose, whereby many Husbandmen come to
ruin, not being able to pay their Landlords; if the Soil prove ^fruitful, then
they are as mad again on the other side, then they so overstock it with variety
of Flowers and Colors, so tire out Art with Inventions to beautify nature,
that when winter comes there is hardly a leaf left to cover the ground; as to
the color of the Soil you shall have it very much vary, for in some places you
shall meet with a sandy mould which is generally very rank and very hot in its
temperature, so that it requires the greatest labor of all to manure it,
sometimes you shall light upon a kind of a white Chalk or ma^ly kind of a Soil
not so difficult to manure, and besides the heart of the ground will be soon
eaten out; sometimes you meet with a brown mould which is of two sorts, either
light brown, or dark brown. Husbandmen generally take great delight in manuring
either of these, for the Air is there generally wholesome, and not so much
annoyed with morning and evening Fogs and Vapors as the former, besides that,
the husbandman shall be sure to have his pennyworth out of them, for they will
seldom lie fallow; take which you will, but if you meet with a black Soil, be
sure you take short Leases, and sit at an easy Rent, lest your back pay for
the Tillage, for you must labor there night and day and all little enough: To
tell you the truth, choose which of them you will, it is a cursed expensive
thing to manure any of them all according as the Soil requires, especially in
the Northern parts of the Country, where the generality of the Husbandmen seem
to have forfeited their discretion in this particular, as if the very Air of
the Soil in those parts had a kind of bewitching Charm to deprive 'em of their
senses. These Soyls if they prove very fruitful indeed, shall sometimes bring
you 3 Crops at a time, sometimes 2, but generally 1, a strange sort of Harvest,
for it consists chiefly in Mandrakes, they bring forth both Male and Female,
which are very tender when they appear first above ground, and must be tended
more diligently than Musk-Melons in cold weather, but if they overcome their
first tenderness, they grow as hardy as Bur Docks, and will overrun a Country
like Ierusalem-Artichoaks. These Mandrakes are very much esteemed by the
generality of husbandmen, who do very much lament the loss of their Crop, which
many times miscarries after it is come out of the Earth, for it is very often
blasted and sometimes (through the carelessness of idle huswifes their maid
Servants) swept out of doors, and thrown into houses of Office, where (though
Man's dung be counted the best of all dungs) these Plants will never thrive
afterward; these Husbandmen that delight in Gardens, find many Flowers there
growing very agreeable to the nature of every one of the foregoing Soyls; among
the rest, they bear Batchelors Buttons very familiarly, there is also great
store of Love lies a bleeding, but above all sweet Williams, and Tickle me
quickly are to be found there in great abundance, sometimes (tho very rarely
here and there) you may find some few slips of Patience, flower Gentle, and
Harts-ease, but Rue grows up and down as thick as Grass in Ireland; there are
also great quantities of Time, but the people of the Country slightly esteem it
and make very little use of it. Fowl they have in great plenty, but above all,
the most infinite flights of Wagtailes that ever were seen in any Country in
the world. Beasts they have none but what are horned, except the Hare and
Coney, but these are enough to stock the Country as large as it is, were it as
large again.

There is but one great River to water the whole land, besides two standing
Pools which they can upon any occasion, let out and drown all the Country,
which is the reason they have very little Fish, only some few Maids, but
infinite numbers of Crabs, as for their Carps they are grown so common, they
are hardly worth taking notice of, and indeed there is little need of ^ish, for
the husbandmen being given to labor, have good stomachs and are altogether for
Flesh. the great River is over-look't by a great Mountain which (strange to
tell at some seasons of the year) will swell at such a rate that it is
admirable to behold it, the swelling continues near of a year, and then upon a
sudden it falls as strangely again; the Husbandmen account the swelling of this
Mountain very ominous, for it generally portends a very dear year: they that
have not taken a Lease of their Farms, when they see this Mountain begin to
swell, will run quite away for fear the law should make them stand to their
Bargain^: the whole Country of Betty-land shows you a very fair prospect, which
is yet the more delightful the more naked it lies; it makes the finest
Landskips in the world, if they be taken at the full Extent; and many of your
rich husbandmen will never be without them hanging at their bed sides,
especially they that have no Farms of their own, merely that they may seem to
enjoy what they have not: some there are that so really believe they possess
the substance by the sight of the shadow, that they fall to till and manure the
very Picture with that strength of Imagination, that it is a hundred pounds to
a penny they do not spoil it with their Instruments of Agriculture: others
never so lazy or never so tired before, upon the sight of one of these
Landskips, shall revive again and go as fresh and lusty to their labor as if
they never had been weary: I could wish these Customs were left off of hanging,
these Landskips by the husbandmen's bed sides, for the consequences thereof are
very mischivous, seeing that it causes them to desire and covet one another
Farms with that eagerness, as if they were in open Hostility with the Tenth
Commandment, so that where they cannot get the prospect it self, they will have
a Land skip and occupy one another Estate in conceit: In a word, the prospect
of Betty-land is so grateful, so pleasing to the Eye, that the Country would be
overrun with Inhabitants, had not wise Nature put a stop to that extravagancy
which she foresaw in Man by the badness of the Air, which is universally not so
dilicious in any Region of Betty-land, as it is in Arabia Faelix; for neither
in springtime, which is the time whereof we now discourse, nor in summer time
can the Air be very much commended, especially if the wind be any thing high,
which has made many Men admire why the Poets should be such Liars and
Sycophants to talk as they do; for some have not stuck to affirm that the
Persumes of Betty-land are beyond all the Odors of the East, which how true it
is, I will appeal to the very Noses of the Poets themselves, who I know are as
well skilled in the Country of Betty-land as any Husbandmen in the world; nor
can any body have the confidence to contradict what I say, that shall stay but
a quarter of an hour in any place where the Thrashers have been lately at work.
This was the reason that the Poets would never let the Gods (who were as great
Farmers as ever lived in Betty-land) lie upon any other beds than beds of
Roses, and always persum'd the Air as they went with the richest Odors they
could think of, but in the Winter and Autumn seasons there is no enduring the
Country: The Prospect is not worth one farthing, the ways grow deep and rugged,
the land grows barren; there is little or no pleasure in tilling the ground,
and the unwholsomness of the Air increases, which is very bad for those that
hold their Farms by long leases, yet so severely are some Husbandmen tied by
their Leases, especially in the Northern parts of this Country, that there is
no avoiding them, yet some there are that will for all that, privately hire a
new Farm, perhaps such a one where neither Spade or Dibble entered before, and
then they let the old only lie fallow, wherein if they act cautiously, they may
do well enough; but if the Landlord of the old Farm come to know of it, and sue
upon the Covenant of the old Lease, Heavens bless us! you would think Heaven
an^ Earth were going together, you would swear all the Lapland Witches were
excercising their Sorce^ies in Betty-land, such Storms, such Tempests, such
Thunder, such Lightning, such Apparitions, enough to scare the poor plow-jogger
out of his wits: by and by the Landlady enters upon the new Farm in the Devils
name, tears down all before her, makes such a disfigurement of the Prospect,
and digs up the very surface of the Soil it self with so much indignation,
havoc and destruction, that you would think her to be quite raving mad, yet
there shall be no impeachment of wast against her, so strictly is the
husbandman bound by the Covenants of his Lease and nonsensical Custom of the
Country, at which time if ye chance to tell any of these Landladies of the
Civil Law, they will presently spit in your face.

Having thi^ fair occasion it will not be amiss to take notice by what Tenures
the husbandmen hold their Farms most usually in this Country, some therefore
you must know hold in Tail special; true it is, that there are v^ry few that
hold by this Tenure, yet thos^ few that do, a^e soon weary of it, for it puts
them to very hard duty, and however they have taken a Lease hand over head or
for covetousness of a good Bargain, yet it many times falls out that they meet
with many Encumbrances which they never thought of, several concealed common
sewers, and filthy nusances which they never expected, so that the Landlords
(as they do many times allow the husbandmen considerable sums of money to enter
upon the Premises and to begin the world withal) had better have given the sam^
money for a meaner Soil; and (...) for all this, the conditions of the Lease are
so hard, that the husbandman is obliged to hold it during life, which makes
many of them turn ill husbands: and tho they cannot throw up their Leases, yet
they neglect their Calling and let their Farms lie fallow: whereby all
possibility of Issue or the hopes of any Fruit of his labor becomes Extinct.
Thus a Tail special is not always the most special Tail, and to cut it off
would hazard the destruction of the whole Title, besides that there lies such
an Impeachment of wast against the Husbandman that should do it, that it would
undo him for ever; and therefore it is the Opinion of many, that a Tail General
may be as good as a Tail Special, which tho it be the first Tenure in order in
Betty-land, yet some there are that p^efer a Tail General before it. All men
must confess that a strict property in a Tail Special is a very good thing, but
considering the Inconveniences that do attend it, a general Tail may be
esteemed the better Tenure, as being accompanied with greater Advantages, for
it requires not half the fealty and homage which the other does, neither if the
Husbandman will have a private Farm to himself for his divertisement i^ there
half so much notice taken of it, and therefore they that can brook the freedom
of a Tail General live very happily, and many times acquire large fortunes.

Others there are that holds by Knights Service in the Courtesy of Betty-land,
these are notable Farmers indeed, jolly, brisk fellows that will spend with
ever a Gentleman in the Country of a thousand pound a year, and make them pawn
their Credit and their Substance to boot to bear up with them: these men as
they have the greatest pleasure in the world to manure their Grounds, so they
reap a world of profit by their labor; nay tho the Soil be never so long worn
and out of heart, yet they will make something on it, for they seldom lose their
pains. There are a fort of nice people that would fain disallow these Tenures,
but seeing that they plead the common practice and plead prescription time out
of mind, I know no reason why they may not pass for current: others there are
that hold in Fee simple, a miserable sort of Swains, that are always weeping to
their neighbors, and ^elling sto^ies o^ their hard Barga^ns* (...), they are
tied to (...), besides that, (...) which they enjoy have not^^ng of prospect,
nor are kind for ^illage, the mould being gene^^^ly (...) and rough, and (...)
there is no pleasure in the Tillage: but such hu^bandmen as those a^e no ways
to be pitied, because they submit to their Calamity: others there are which are
always dealing in Reversions and Remainders, a very necessary sort of
husbandmen indeed, for they support the Reputation of many a Farm prejudiced by
being over-occupied, which else would lie upon the Landlords hands; true it is,
they run a very great hazard, but they are generally very poor men, and
therefore seeing there is money to be got e'n let them get it: they are no way
to be discouraged* for they help many a labo^ious husbandman at a dead lift,
and quit them of a great deal of trouble which might otherwise befall them.

Reversions and Remainders are very frequent in this Country, especially where
the husbandmen being Yeomen of the best rank hold either in Capite or in
Frank-Marriage or else are Tenants at Will: These are the bravest f^llows in
the wo^ld, but if the Marke^s run low, then the Crop lies upon (...) hands,
which makes them willi^g to part with their Rever^^ons upon any rate: They make
no more of the Lord of the Manner than of a Jack-a-Lent, and if they be
summoned to Court, they bid the Bailiff kiss their back-sides, yet are they as
industrious as any when they meet with a Farm to their liking; but the truth
on it is, they are great spenders, even as fast as they get it; happy are those
Farms which they manure, for they will spare for no cost to increase their own
content: The mischief on it is, they must have great stocks or else they can
never go through with what they undertake, nor must they have only good
Magazines to spend high, but good store of discretion to boot, or else they may
chance to bring an old house over their heads for all their great substance,
for the world is full of Eyes and Ears, full of prying busybodies and
observers in every Corner; so that a husbandman let him hold by what Tenure he
pleases, cannot be too wary or too cautious. Two Philosophers meeting upon the
Road fell into a Discourse about these three last sorts of Tenures, says one of
them who was a perfect Cynick, I approve none of the three last sort of
Tenures; You are a fool, replied the other, and understand the nature of
Betty-land no more then a horse, the people in that Country are naturally given
to love freedom and liberty, naturally prone to change and variety, and
therefore as long as you may find these Tenures in Littleton, as I am sure you
may, they cannot be bad; can you change the nature of the Soil? no more can you
change the nature of the Husbandmen, for tho you thrust Nature back with a fork
she will push forwards again: if they manure their Farms well, and you see the
fields full and fair and swelling with Grain, if they make them bear their
Crops in season, what is it to you how many Farms they have, how long or how
little they hold them, especially when there are so many gaping after
Reversions; were it in a Country where there are more Farmers then Farms, I
grant you there were some reason for what you say, but every man of reading
knows that Bettyland is a Country where there are ten Farms for one Farmer and
it is great pity that any Farm should lie fallow for want of manu^ing. Now when
one Farmer takes one Farm for pleasure, another for profit, that Farmer takes
two; when another Farmer takes one farm for profit, another for pleasure, and
another upon good liking, he takes three, and so all the Farms come to be
occupied: As for being Tenants at Will, and so leaving their Farms when they
will, it is not a farthing matter, for let one husbandman have a Fa^m to day,
another will take it tomorrow; on the other side, you must consider, that tho a
husbandman have one, two or three Farms to himself, yet there is no Farmer in
Betty-land can enclose his own ground all the year long by the custom of the
Country, but that from Lammas to St. Pauls-tide, it must lie common for the
benefit of his neighbors, which is allowed in Law, and is called common because
of neighborhood: nay more then that, there is hardly a Farm in Betty-land,
where there is not some ground that lies common all the year long; so that if
the poor husbandman had not some private Enclosures to rely to, his case were
the worst case of all the cases in the world: to say truth, there is such a
world of Common in Bettyland, that a husbandman is not to be blamed to get as
much Enclosure as he can: and more than this, when the ground begins once to
lie common, it receives all the Beasts in nature, not excepting Swine, Geese
and Goats, which all other Commons admit not of.

The whole Country of Betty-land lies very low, which is the r^^son that there
is ha^dly a Farm in (...) of it without a Decoy, nor (...) cunning of the
Decoyd^^ks l^ss notorious, for they (...) all other Decoy-ducks that are in the
world in wi^es and subtilty. There is not a Widgeon in in all the Country, but
has a Decoy-duck to wait upon him, and they lay their Trains so cunningly, that
it is impossible to escape them, and as they are very cunning, so they are very
cruel, for they never get a Gull into their Decoy, but they shall pull off all
his feathers: these D^coys are some Natural, some Artificial; there is not a
pin to choose betwixt them, for they are both plaguey devouring things, and
clear all the Country before them, of whatever game they seek after. Orpheus in
his Argonautiques, speaking of a great Decoy-duck in his time (which the people
of Betty-land called by the name of Circe) says that she was so curiously set
out (...). That all men admired her that beheld her, and were so stupisied with
the sight of her g^iety that they could make no resistance against her, sor
says the same Author, (...) -- (...), her golden feathers shone like the
Sunbeams, nor do they cry like other Ducks: for they have most delicate
voices, and can sing far beyond any Nightingales.

There is no Country in the world that has Decoy-ducks like Betty-land, being a
rarity no where else to be ^ound, were there not so many of them, you would
verily take them to be Phenixes: for they are many times burnt in their own
Nests. This Decoy-duck called Circe, had like to have spoiled us two of the
best Stories we have extant: Homers Ulysses, and Virgils Aeneids, for this very
Duck had like to have drawn the two great Hero's of the world, Ulysses and
Aeneas into the Decoys of Betty-land, to the ruin of all the projects of the
very Gods themselves.

There was another Decoy-duck no less famous than the former, which was called
Medea, a damned mischievous Bird, tho for the beaury of her wings said to be
the Suns. Grandchild: for what ever game she gets into her Decoy, she utterly
ruins, and therefore Nicander a great Farmer in Betty-land and the
high-Constables fellow for knowledge of the Country, gives his
fellow-husbandmen very good caution, for says he -- (...) -- If a poor
husbandman come to be decoyed into one of her Decoys. (...) -- (...) -- the
poor Widgon had better a thousand times have fallen into the Poulterers hands.

From these two famous Decoy-ducks, have all the Decoy-ducks in Betty-land
learnt all their wiles and cunning Tricks, and if any thing of nature be
wanting, they have all their kinck-knacks, all their postures, gestures,
trickings and tri^^ings imaginable to help nature; for they know as well as can
be, how weakly those Avenues to the understanding (the Eyes and Ears) are
gua^^^^d, and th^r^fore they chiefly lay their Trains there: if they see a
Widgeon or a Gull pass by, they will spread their Tails like so many Peacocks,
and set the poor silly birds a staring like so many Country Bumpkins at a
Coronation. By and by comes a slight of Dotte^^ls, and then they set up their
throats and sing, and sing and ^ly, and ^ly and sing; so that the foolish Fowl
bewitched with their Quail-pipes, follow their birdcalls to whatever
inconveniences they are minded to carry them into. Some are of that opinion,
that it is an easy thing to avoid these Decoys: but how can that be, when we
find that both Ulysses and Aeneas were forced to have some God or other always
tied to their tails to keep them out of harms way? Some there are indeed, that
by dint of main Prudence escape the danger, but for one of those there are a
thousand others that have nothing but their dear-bought Experience to preserve
them: And for one of those ten thousand more that will suffer themselves to be
decoyed six or seven and twenty times over, till they have not one feather to
cover their tails: for the nature of these Decoys is such, that tho they feed a
simple husbandman (that all the while neglects the manuring of his own Farm)
with such pleasure and content, yet they consume and wast both body and purse
most desperately and insensibly: desperately, because inj^rably; insensibly,
because the s^lly husbandman wallowing in present delight, neither consults or
minds approaching misfortune, yet if a Gull or a Dotterel or a Widgeon have a
mind to be revenged upon a Decoy-duck that has been too cunning for him, there
is a way to do it, by setting another Decoy-duck upon her.

Thus when the Decoy-duck Medea would have decoyed the greatest Farmer in all
Betty-land (even Jupiter himself) Juno who was Jupiters Decoy-duck took her and
wrung off her neck, and surely Juno served her well enough for a proud
Quinstrel as she was, that spent all the morning in laying her Nets, if we may
believe Apollonius Rhodius, another great Farmer in Betty-land who describes
her.

(...). Trimming and pruning her Feathers by the Seaside, that is to say,
sitting before a great looking-Glass in her Smock-sleeves, with her Hair
dishevelled, and her Neck and Breasts bare, expecting the coming of the great
Farmer Jupiter, but Juno prevented them both, as you have heard: and so much
for the Decoys in Betty-land.

For the Antiquity of the Country we need not go far to search it out: no
sooner was there any light delivered to the world by Letters, but the first
discovery that was made, was the discovery of Betty-land: what it was before
may be easily conjectured, but in the time of the Greek and Roman Poets, it was
a flourishing Kingdom even in Heaven it self: containing all that large Tract
which was in Greek called (...): nay, ev^n Caelum it self from whom Heaven was
called Caelum, was a Farmer in that Country, and so great a husband man, so
great and so industrious a Manurer of his Farms, that Orpheus calls him (...):
And by the Latin Poet he is said, -- Faecundis Imbribus
Conjugis in Gremium laetae discendere.
And how he stockt the world with Mandrakes, you may easily read in Hesiod, who
in his Theogony wrote of the Celestial Agriculture, as Markham among us wrote
of Terrestrial Husbandry.

Saturn also was a great Husbandman in the Celestial part of Betty-land, and
because he lived upon his Means, was therefore said to eat his own Children:
But for Jupiter, he was certainly the greatest Husbandman that ^ver was in the
whole World, for he had Farms in both Betty-lands, and was so industrious and
so infatigable in manuring and tilling them, that he left no stone unturned of
which he could make any Advantage: And therefore Aratus who was a kind of an
Almanack-maker to the Celestial Farmers says of him with a great deal of
slattery, -- (...)
-- (...),
so that there was not a public highway, not a marketplace in all the
Country which he left unplow'd: nay the very Sea, the very Rivers and Lakes
were full of his Husbandry; by that you may guess that he l^ft a great stock
behind him. The same Poet seems also to intimate t^^t he was the first Foun^^^
(as (...) as we say Jupiter was the (...) in the world) of (...)-land, as
Nimrod was the first founder of the Babilonish Empire; for says he in the
beginning of his Poem, a Ioveprincipium, Apollonius Rhodius gives us a notable
Character of him. (...)
(...).
He was so great a husbandman that there was never a Farm either in the
Terrestrial or Celestial Betty-land, but he would be thrusting his Spade into
it; to tell the truth, all the Poets Fables concur to show you the Original,
Increase and vast Extent of the Country of Bettyland; such as are the Stories
of Caelum, Jupiter, Saturn, Venus, Priapus, Adonis, Bacchus, Aristius, (and the
rest too long to repeat) all great Husbandmen that kept their plows going day
and night. As t^ the Terrestrial Bettyland, what think you of that most
applanded Farmer Hercules? that so many Ages ago plowed and sowed 50 large
Farms in one night: what havoc, what killing and slaying of the poor Grecians,
what a destruction of unhappy Troy, and all for one unhappy Farm belonging to
that City which Menelaus laid claim to: what think ye of Demosthenes that so
many years since gave for the possession of a small Farm lying ab^ut Athens
only for one night 312 l.? for so Gellius records.

In what a flourishing condition was the Country of Betty-land in the time of
Menander, Aristophanes, Anaereon, Plautus, Terence, Tribullus, Ovid, Martial
and Petronius, who all wrote of the Husbandry and Tillage of their times? In
the Infancy of the world, Priapus had so engrossed all the Farms in the Country
Lampsacus, a fair Territory of Betty-land, by reason of the unusual Activity,
largeness and strength of his Plow, that the Countrymen conspired against him
for monopolizing their Livings: I might insist longer upon the Antiquity of
Betty-land, but that I am apt to believe there is no man so simple to question
it. They may as well deny the Sun, who was no sooner made, but he fell to
tilling and cultivating the vast and most immense Fields of nature, for the
whole Region of Betty-land holds of nature as her chief Sovereign and Empress,
and the Sun as her sole Steward to gather her Quit-Rents, provide Tenants and
let Livings; and therefore if you come to any Farmer in Betty-land, and ask him
how he came to take such affection to the husbandry of that Country, he will
make answer pr^s^ntly, it is natural to him: And for any Soil to bear that S^^d
which is proper for it, that all the world knows to be natural. Now (...) the
force of natures Impulse, I shall say more when I come to the Religion of the
Country; seeing then it is the Impulse of Nature that moves the Husbandmen of
Betty-land to take upon them that Toil and Labor which they undergo night and
day: should they be blamed for what they cannot avoid? for who can blame a Jack
for turning the spit when the weight is on, or a wheel for turning round when a
Dog walks in it? rather there ought a way to be found out for the Encouragement
of these Moylers and Toylers; for tho all men are prone to be drudges in
Betty-land, yet the husbandry of the Country is quite out of order; there is no
method at all observed amongst them, a most wonderful thing that in so vast a
Country and so long continuance, there never yet was found any Region wherein
the Husbandry of Betty-land was so exactly ordered, as in that small part of it
as was once called (...), for it is observed in that part of Bettyland, the
Price of Farms ran always very low; the only way to restore the decay of
Betty-land husbandry; therefore we ^ead of one very ^ich Farmer there, who
bought a very fair Farm in that Count^y for thi^ty change of Rayments, and of
another great Fa^mer that bought a Royal Farm in the same place, for one
hundred fore^^^^^: a very inconsiderable price, considering what poor Farmers
are forced to give now adays. The Druids in the Island of Britannia a very
large part of Betty-land, aimed at this very thing when they Entailed their
Lands upon their Male-Mandrakes, had they Entayl'd their Substance in Money as
well as in Land, they had hit the Mark: It is to be wondered that in a Country
of so much freedom as Betty-land is, and Governed by constitutions so far
different from other Countries, Landlords should be so egregiously led astray
to give such vast Sums of Money to put off their Farms, tho never so f^uitful,
never so flourishing: For the Muck of Po^tions tho it be spread never so thick
upon a Betty-land Farm, avails nothing to the fertility thereof, rather it is
the greatest Inconvenience in the world to a Betty-land Farmer, for he
understanding that there lies a Silver or a Gold Mine in such a Farm, or such
an Hesperian Orchard is laden* with golden Apples, will have at them by hook or
by (...) way to lay those She^ Arguses asleep, and when all comes to all,
neither Orchard nor Farm are agreeable to his mind, or sit for Tillage: nay
many times the ground proves barre^, marshy, unwholsom, ran^, and mou^tainous;
so that there is no profit nor (...) in manu^i^g or dressing it: wh^r^as if
th^se Alluremen^s lay not before the Eyes of the Husbandman, he would choose
the most delightful Prospects, the most f^uitful Soyls: and the sub^stance of
the Country being contracted into the hands of the husbandmen only, would make
the Farmers more able to maintain their husbandry: then you should hear none of
those common complaints of Landlords, by ^eason of their Farms lying upon their
hands; nay you should not see an indifferent Farm in all the Country of
Betty-land lie wast and ruinous for want of Tillage: whereas now how many fair
delicate fruitful Soyls lie fallow? how many beautiful Orchards lie undrest?
because they either want Silver Mines, or are not laden with golden Apples:
Another great discouragement to the Husbandry of Betty-land is this, that the
extreme folly of the husbandmen themselves is not some way restrained; for they
having obtained a rich Farm, dote upon it with so much vanity, that they spend
more labor and cost upon one Farm, then would serve to maintain forty good
Farms in full heart, so that divide a Farmers whole substance in six pa^ts, he
shall wast and consume five parts and an half upon one singl^ Farm, which is a
great cause of the general Impoverishment of the Betty-land Husbandmen. Then
comes a third, and as grievous a discouragement as any; for these Rich Soyls by
reason of their Richness grow ^ank and proud, and the^ the poor husbandman is
so plagued with Weeds, N^ttles, and wild-Ar^ichoaks, that none can imagine it,
but they that feel the trouble: you shall see nothing but the gay Poppies that
kill and burn up his profitable Harvest, and which is worst of all, the poor
Farmer is left without Remedy. For in the Northern parts of Betty-land there is
no help: pull them by the roots he cannot, they are got so deep in the Earth;
let him take a wee^ing-hook in his hand, and the whole Country cries out upon
him, and besides all this, Petronius -- Lex armata seeds circum fera li -- mina
Nuptae.

The Stream ^of the Law runs quite against the Farmers for the Law is so
careful to prevent wast and destruction that it will not admit of gentle
pruning, for fear some o^ the more impatient so^t should thence take an
occasion not only to injure, but confound their Farms.

Having thus given you a description of the (...), it may not be amiss to show
you som^thing of the nature of the Inhabitants. They are generally very
Amorous, or rather universally given to Love; which according to the
interpretation of some of the Sages, is as much as to say Libidinous: for the
Temper of Mandrakes both Male and Female is for the most part both hot and
moist, which are the Principles of Generation; which is the Principal
foundation of all Love, that is to say, of that which is generally reputed to
be Love, which by another name is called Desire, according to that of the Poet.

Nil amor est aliud Veneris quam parca voluptas,
Quae simul expleta est infinita ora Rubor.
For you must know there is no true and real Love in the whole Country of
Betty-land, and therefore there was never any Shepherd in Betty-land that loved
a Shepherdess with that height and true Affection as Shepherds have loved
Shepherds; never had husbandman so much kindness for the richest Farm, the most
beautiful Prospect, the most fruitful and most agreeable Soil in Betty-land, as
Damon had for Pythias, Theseus never had that Affection for Ariadne, as he had
for Pirithous: nor shall the Story of Orpheus stand in my way, tho he sued
Pluto for a Farm that Persephon^ had taken from him. For if Euridice was his
Soul, I cannot blame him that he followed the crowd of his brother Harpers to
Hell when that was departed: but take him how you please, one Swallow makes no
Summer, and the Reason is plain. For the Inhabitants of Betty-land love one
another, not out of any true Affection, but for the hopes of Reward and
self-Satisfaction: which Reward or Satisfaction decaying through Age or
Infirmities, the great Love that was just now, cools in a moment like the (...)
of Venison: And therefore Betty-land. Love is but a hot degree and eager
pursuit after pleasure, which increases sometimes to that height, that both
Shepherds and Shepherdesses seem to be mad; which was the reason that when
Jupiter took away the fair Shepherdess, called Europa, out of Terrestrial
Betty-land, the Poets ^eign'd him to be turned into a Bull, a beast most
^as^ivious and impetuous in the (...) of his Amors. No less did this fury
appear formerly in the female Inhabitants of Betty-land, while Semiramis rages
for the Embraces of her Son, and (...) roars for the Pizzle of a Bull; and no
question but the Temper of that little spot of Ground belonging to the
Shepherdess Massalina, still continues ^^aried tho not ^^tiated tho it ( quinto
and vig^simo Concubitu) had been plowed and harrowed twenty five times in a day
and a night: Could the numberless number of consumed and wasted^ C^lves of the
poor husbandmen speak? Could you ^ut hea^ the Bannings and Cur^ings in
Quevedo's Hell of untimely (...), exhausted and drained with continual Labor;
Could you but behold the many Sacrifices of Lust, the many Martyrdoms of female
pastime? would but your reserved Nurses, Chamber-maids, and Apothecaries but
vouchsafe to open the Cabinets of their Breasts* how many regal Pasts,
incarnating Electuaries, restoring Potions they give in a year; you would (...)
soon be acquainted with the Nature of Betty-land-Love, which is so far from
being true Love, that it is only a continual practice of Surprise. The flames
of Desire like a Candle discovering the ^^cret Paths and Labyrinths which the
Shepherds and shepherdesses of all Sexes, Ages, Degrees, and Humors choose in
pursuit of their Amorous Designs.

Thus we find the Love of the Shepherds in Betty-land, to be more fierce, of
the Shepherde^^^^ to be more constant; how Youth loves wantonly, old Age (...):
They that are poor strive (...) please by Officiousness and continual Duty, the
Rich oblige by Gifts, the middle sort puts their Confidence in Invitations,
Fish-Dinners, and S^ring-Garden-Collations; the Nobler sort of Arcadians in
Masks and Enterludes. In some parts o^ Betty-land you shall find the
ingenious Lover as full of dissimulation as an Egg full of meat, using a kind
of elaborate Courtship; praising the Object of his Affection in high streins of
Madrigals and Eclogues, and preferring her for the fairest in the World, when
he thinks nothing less: if he grow jealous, he observes her as a Cat watches a
Mouse, if he miss her, then he curses her to the pit of Hell: others impatient,
mad, and restless in their Desires; bewail their Flames at the fe^t of their
Goddess, and invoak her Pity; if he enjoys her, he either grows jealous of her,
and kills her, or being thoroughly s^tiated, prostitutes her: but if he despair
of Enjoyment, then no man more crucifies himself, no man seemingly desires to
die with more willingness; as if his Peace were absolutely made in Heaven. The
wanton Lover is all for obs^quious Admiration, for Songs, Jests, and Tales;
Jealousy makes him as melancholy as an old Cat, Despair hurries him to
Revenge, to Scandal and Reproach, and many times to attempt Violence: Enjoyment
makes him despise her easy fondness, and as much desire another. Others are a
long time before they grow warm, but being once enflamed, they spare for no
Cost: Jealousy makes him clutch his Fists, where he misses his Aim he returns
Contempt: Enjoyment causes him to grow cold. Some pretend a world of Kindness,
others dissemble and conceal their Flames to be more beloved then they are: and
some can love without being jealous: some are for a jo^und Humor, not regarding
Beauty; others love a mild, others a Confident Behavior. Some by spending
their time altogether in the sport of Love; others tho late, and when they have
spent their whole Estates, come to their Senses again. With such variety of
Passions does Bettyland-Love transport the Minds of her Inhabitants.

The Shepherds and Shepherdesses are also very great Liars generally throughout
the whole Territory of Betty-land, for they make no more of an Oath, a Vow, or
a Protestation, than a Sussex ^umpkin does of a pudding-Cake in a morning for
his Breakfast. They are used in the Sieges of Betty-land Love to blow up the
fortresses of Chastity, like barrels of Powder in Mines: if the Female have the
handling of them, you shall ^ee a foolish Husbandmans Guinneys fly in the Air
like Opdam and his ships-Company.

As for Matrimony, the true Natives of Betty-land neither Male nor Female do
admire it; for the old Sages of the Country say, Vxorem -- Rosa Cinamomum
veretur,
Quicquid quaeritur optimum videtur.


And indeed the Fetters of Ceremony are utterly disagreeable to the frank humor
of the Inhabitants of this Country, for they being a less sort of People,
reject all Laws of Convenience, when they are repugnant to their own Appetites;
and falsely mistaking the instinct of Nature, for the Law of Nature, as idly cry
out, that the Law of Convenience must submit to the Law of Nature: taking the
instinct or impulse of Nature, which is effrene and ranging, for the Law of
Nature, which is curbing and restraining; which makes use of Laws of
Convenience, to put a Nil ultra to Exorbitance; but like Phleggus in Virgil
preaching in Hell with his dis^^ Iusti^iam moniti, -- what does this grave
Cosmographer do here talking to a company of hair-brained Mad-caps? Epicures,
with Gadb^^s in their Tails? who following the Examples of the greatest
Husbandmen and Huswi^es in the world, as of Hannibal at Capua, Achilles and
Briseis, Caesar and Cleopatra, Hercules and Iole, Ladislaus of Poland, Charles
the VIII. and thousands more, will be never induced to believe that so famous
and so many Husbandmen could err, nor ever be persuaded to swerve from manifold
Examples, epecially Magnis cum subeant animos autoribus.

And therefore a great Author speaking of the chiefest Husbandmen in
Betty-land, casts a Sardonish Smile upon all those that should endeavor to
work a Reformation in that Country, accompting it as ridiculous a Labor, as for
Quakers to attempt to Convert the Pope, for says he -- Tam levia habentur a
Pudeos matrimonii jura, ut prae libito veras uxores repudiant, mutent atque
permutent, filias filiasque tot Nuptiis copulant and recopulant, ut nescire
rogamur ubi verum cohaereat illorum Matrimonium.

However they want not a good Excuse, and say that where Nature is laced too
strait with the Bodise of Convenience, she ought not to be put into ^its, for
want of a little Liberty. And that many times occasion requires that the Law
should be cut, rather than leisurely undone. That the strictness of the Law of
Convenience begets a haughty Usurpation of the meaner Sex over their Superiors,
which is more repugnant than any Convenience can be agreeable to the Law of
Nature: That there is no better way for the husbandmen of Betty-land to curb
that Usurpation, then to show their Usurpers how far they can expand their
Favors. As for that thing called Equality, the Husbandmen of Betty land spurn
it under their feet, and call him Boc^a de porco, that first made mention of
it: for say they, if you weigh in a just Balance* the Majesty of Masculine
Form, the Latitude of his Understanding, the Pre-eminence of his Original, the
Power of his Actual Protection, with the Chiefest Perfections of the Female
Sex; what will become of that hen-peckt En^omium of Equality? They add farther,
That Agrippa for his Treatise de praecellentia foeminei sexus ought to have
made as public a Recantation, as he does for his Books of Occult Philosophy.
If their Admirers object the incomparable Fabricature of that particular part
where human Offspring is concerned, it is no more then if you should ^dmire
that most curious piece of Natures workmanship, the head of a Fly, which is all
the while but the head of a Fly.

Thus you see Opinions were always at war one with another, and it is only the
Clue of understanding, that must lead you through the vast Labyrinths of
national Customs. The native Shepherdesses of Betty-land desire vehemently,
Love but indifferently and very unconstantly: yet whether they Love, or whether
they hate, they will dissemble with the most politic Shepherd that ever was
known in all Arcadia. But where they do Love out of Affection (which is very
seldom) they will venture through fire and water: I have known, said
Eumolphus, when a Shepherd has been cast into Prison for a Crime that deserved
Death; his Partner Shepherdess has workt his Escape, and been condemned in his
stead, as the Law in some part of Betty-land requires. Their Tongues are the
most certain Evidence of perpetual motion, if a thing may be said to move that
never lies still: and the subjects of their Discourse, the highest Secrets in
nature. Such are the Mysteries of combing and shading Hair, of Washes for their
Faces, large Comments upon new Gowns; Censures upon one another Dressing and
Behavior: Punctilio's of Ceremonies when to give the Lip, when the Cheek,
descants upon the warmth or coldness of their Shepherds Affections: when they
grow old, then they will spend their time in telling how handsome they were when
they were young. How many Amintases courted them, and how many poor Shepherds
broke their Hearts for them: but if a Shepherd displease them, they will sing
him such Cromatique descant, will make his Ears tingle; they will ring him such
peals that he had better sit in a Steeple with the noise of six Bells about his
Ears: but on the other side, they are very good natured, for if you do but now
and then, that is, once in a month* or so give them a fine Gown, a rich
Petticoat, a rich Looking-Glass, a rich set of Chairs, or any such Bauble* you
shall win their very Hearts: give them but a Neck-Lace of Pearl, and look how
many Pearls there be upon the string, they shall give you so many kisses for
them; which is a great sign of a tender Disposition. They have an excellent Art
of making of Horns, at which they are very industrious, so that many of them
get very good Livings by it; And as for Astrology, there is none of your
Bookers, or Lillies could ever come near them; for they will tell a Shepherd his
fortune to ^ hairs breadth: to which purpose they will lie an hour together
sometimes upon their backs, considering the motions of the Stars. Many of your
Betty-land Shepherdesses are deeply Learned, for having nothing else to do as
they sit upon the Plains, they are always reading Cassandra, Ibrahim Bassa,
Grand Cyrus, Amadis de Gaul, Hero and Leander, the School of Venu^, and the
rest of these classick Authors; by which they are mightily improved both in
Practice and Discourse. Put them to their shifts and they are the bent in the
world at an Intreague or stratagem. Ah! says the poor Soldier in Petronius that
had neglected his Duty, to comfort a poor Shepherdess that had been bewailing
the death of her dear Melibeus for three weeks together: Here while I have been
spending my time to comfort thee the most distressed Shepherdess in the world,
they have stole the Criminal from the Cross whom I was set to watch, and now
must I be Crucified for him: But she relieved him presently. Rather than so,
quoth she with tears in her Eyes, here take my poor beloved Shepherd and hang
him up in the others place, death makes no distinction of faces. No less witty
was the Shepherdess in Boccace, who loving a Shepherd, yet knowing not how to
let him understand it, went to one of the Priests of Pan, telling him it was
his Duty to rebuke such Shepherds as should attempt the Chastity of any
Shepherdesses in Arcadia, Look here, quoth she, such a Shepherd sent me this
Purse of Gold, but I defy him and his Gold; call him Father and school him
severely. The poor Priest did so, the cunning Shepherd smeling the Rat smiled
to himself, but outwardly promised to d^sist, when the Shepherdess next day
comes again and tells the Paiest, She wondered he would be so neglectful in his
Duty: Why, quoth the Priest, I called him, chid him, and he promised never more
to Molest your quiet. Alas, quoth she, but the last night, he got in over the
Garden, climbes a Fig Tree that grows under my Window, and had got into my
Chamber had I not happily espied him and shut the Casement. The Shepherd was
called again, rebuk't and chid, but you may easily guess at the end of his
sorrow: but you must not think I have a Lords Estate to buy paper enough to set
down all the Stratagems, Devices and Wiles of the S^epherdesses in Betty-land:
And therefore you must apply your self to the Learning of that Country, and
when you have read nothing else for 5 years together, then if demanded you may
perhaps be able to give an Account thereof.

The young Shepherdesses of Betty-land are very studious in Network, Vulcan's
Net was a piece of Bot^hery to their Art* They are made of Glances, Smiles, and
the curling Hair of their own Locks so delicately twisted together, that all
the Skill of Ar^ch^e cannot compare with them: Of these Net-makers the Farmer
Homer makes mention in his Book of Betty-land Agriculture called the Iliads.

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
Then from her Breast her Mantle she unloos'd,
And from her Bosom Charming Arts diffused:
Alluring Glances, Mirth deluding Smiles,
And flattering Speech that Wisdom often beguiles.
The first Net-makers in the world were Venus among the Gods, and Pandora upon
Earth, who tho they were no Nuns* yet their workmanship for Curiosity and
Fineness was far beyond any thing that ever was made in any Nunnery through the
whole Empire of Betty-land. That Box of hers had such a confounded company of
Trinkets in it, that the wo^ld had better have wanted fire, and never tasted
Rostmeat, then to be so punished as it has been, for Prometheus stealing only a
few lighted Charcoal out of Jove's Kitchen (shame for his weak stomach that
could not eat raw Victuals.) For the poor Farmers in Betty-land have rued the
price of hot Ca^dles ever since. But there are a sort of elderly Shepherdess^s
in this Country, which in the Spanish part of Bettyland are called Maquerela's,
that with a force irresistible carry all before them. Their proceedings are
Militant, for they Besiege, Assault, Batter, Mine, and Countermine, and as if
Victory were Entailed upon them, they never fail of Success: Insomuch that
their continual Conquests gave occasion to the Husbandmen of Greek Bettyland to
^ffirm that Cupid had robbed all the Gods of their Arms.

(...)*
(...).
(...).
(...).
Behold poor Gods how they unarmed stand!
Spoiled of their Arms by Love of Betty-land:
Phoebus his Quiver, Jove his Thunder misses;
His Corslet Mars and Helmet pawns for Kisses;
Jove's Son lays down his Club for Nanny-Cock,
And Neptunes Trident yields to Holland Smock:
Bacchus will give his Thyrsis for a Slut,
And Hermes Heels a Wench his wings shall Cut;
The Chaste Diana will not go a Hunting
At the hour appointed when to meet her Bunting:
If thus the Gods to Cupid yield their Arms,
How can weak Mortals think ye escape his Charms?
The most Renowned of these Elderly Shepherdesses was Y^leped Hecate, who after
the Mode of later times (for Fashions like the Spheres have their Circular
Motions) had always a kennel of lap-Dogs at her Tail -- -- (...)
(...).
-- And a^ her Table fed,
A Cry of yelping Shocks eat poor folks bread.
Such is the Efficacy of their Charms, so much Courage in one of their Pos^e^s,
so much warmth in one of their Jellies; such the force of their Persuasion,
that had Ulysses met with one of these Betty-land Shepherdesses of the right
stamp, his poor Shepherdess Penelope might have spun more sheets in Expectation
of him, than ever she was like to make use of. Thus therefore that subtle Man
Ovid describes them, Nec mora miseri tosti jubet hordea Grani,
Mellaque vinique meri cum lacte coagulo passo;
Quique sub hac lateant furtim dulcedine succos
Adjicit, accipimus sacra data Pocula dextra.
Without delay so many Grains of Pearl,
With Rubies mixed she strait presents the Girl;
She showrs sweet Honey and the strongest Wine,
Words may prevail, but if she drinks she is thine.
Lady's must drink no Wine, no Wine cry they;
Yet Lady's sure may drink a draught of Whey.
Has Whey such force? no, something she steals in,
For soon as drank it tickles all the Skin.


They appear in all Colors like Cameleons, in all shapes like she- Proteus's;
not that you are to think that these are of that sort of Shepherdesses, which
the Hu^bandman Homer calls Sirens, but of a far more queint and curious
Ingenuity: for those Sirens seem (...) be a poor kind of Shepherdesses, like
those that were wont to haunt the Plains of Lutiners-Lane and Cole- Yard, by
their ordinary language and impudent beckning to Ulysses as he passed by their
doors, who can otherwise expound the place?

(...). etc.
Here, Chuck Ulysses, here come in and see;
What Pots of jet, what nut-brown Ale have we:
For never Mariner returned on shore,
But he came here to look him out a Whore.
Come in then Joy, and spend thy Pot with us,
We Will sometimes sing a Song, and sometimes buss.
As these words were translated, in comes Eumolpus, views them, and swears
there could be no other Interpretation of the words. To make it out, I will
give you a description of these Syre^s and their Habitations, which exceed the
number of all others in Betty-land, by the progress and experience of my own
Travels: when I was very young, quoth Eumolpus, I fell into the acquaintance of
Eucolpius, and Trimaley, Husbandmen of la^ge Experience, and who had been great
Travelers in the Country of Betty-land, g^owing familiar as one that had
received -- Istum telis Veneris.

It was not long e're I discovered to them the great desire I had to know the
Country of Betty-land, of which I had heard and read so much. They asked me
what substance my friends had left me to bear Expenses, for the Journey would
be tedious and chargeable. I bid them take no care for that, for I had Lands to
^ell, and as long as that lasted there would be no want; telling them withal,
that Knowledge is better than fine Gold. Then, replied Eucolpius, the place
where we now are, is one of the most remarkable Cities in all Betty-land, and
therefore dear Eumolpus, rest thy self assured of the best Assistance I can
befriend thee with: so in the depth of the Winter-quarter within an hour after
daylight shut in we set forward. To remember the several by-ways and turnings
through which we went, it is as impossible as for a man to remember things done
before he was born, at length we came to a good large Habitation, which seemed
like an enchanted Castle: for tho we understood that there were many of the
Inhabitants of Betty-land in the house, yet there was as a deep silence as in a
Temple. We were no sooner entered (for the doors of these houses are seldom
shut, as being haunted with a continual sort of Strangers) but there appeared
to us a young Siren, which put us in mind of that Verse in Ovid, Monstra maris
Syrenes erant. The Sirens were strange Monsters bred out of the froth of the
Sea, or rather Monste^s of the Sea, Seeing that there are none of all
That walk on Land which they can Father call.


She was as black as a Lobster before it is boiled, and instead of hands had
much such kind of Claws, and her head looked like a Gorgons Per^iwig with
Snakes, she looked as if she had been eaten and spewed up again, or as if she
had been one of those upon whom the Venifices of Betty-land were wont to try
their Potions; and yet she had the confidence to invite us to drink of her
Cups. Eumolpus did not much mind her Courtesy, but asked Eucolpius whether that
were not the Cumaean Witch that accompanied Aeneas through Hell: How, replied
Eucolpius, does she look old enough to be a Sybil? yet there are some of the
poor laboring Mechanic Inhabitants of Betty-land, will be glad of ^ worse
than that Siren. With that calling her by her name, Quartilla, said he, where
is Thelxinoe? for so was the old Siren called. She knew his Voice, and streit
appears the Great -- Bellua Leinae -- Horrendum stridens.

A ruinous piece of Antiquity with a Voice as hoarse as if her throat had been
lined with Seal Skins: she had as much flesh below her Chin, as would have
served to have made another Face: she was pufft up like a shoulder of Veal
blown up with a Tobacco-Pipe, yet was her Language as soft as Lambs-Wool to
Eucolpius, who inquired of her, where such and such Sirens were, and how they
did: shall I send for such a one, quoth she? do, cries Eucolpius, Fly, then
cried Thelxinoe, to the deformed Siren that first admitted us, and bid Sylvagia
appear, have her hither. All this while, said Eumolpus, we were in the
common-Room, which put him in mind of that description of the Sirens habitation
in Virgil, Iamque adeo scopulos Syrenum advecta subibat,
Difficiles quondam multorumque o^ssibus albos.
Most dangerous Rocks which mortals never baulk,
Till all the walls grow white with score and Chalk.


But when the little Siren, said he (continuing his relation) was gone forth,
Thelxinoe carried us into her own Apartment, a place not very illustriously
accoutred, nor yet over meanly set forth. There hung against the wall a good
fair Looking-Glass, and in the window were to be seen two dirty Combs* the most
peculiar Utensils belonging to a Siren. The Bed (which was the best thing in
the Room, as being a piece of Furniture of which they make the greatest use in
Betty-land,) lay as if it had b^^n but lately tumbled, which Eucolpius
perceiving, quoth he, smiling upon Thelxinoe, who was here last? There, quoth
she, who do think, but my Ulysses and I? your Ulysses quoth he, who is that?
for Eucolpius knew that she had had no Husbandman to manure her ground for many
years together, only day-Labourers that wrought at so much an hour. But she to
stop Eucolpius's mouth, in a great rage demanded of him what sort of Liquor he
would have, and immediately fetched in half a dozen Bottles of Stepony, a most
bewitching Juice, which as soon as the Bottles were loose, flew up with so much
violence against the Ceeling, as if they had bid defiance to the Clouds, such a
shower of spirited water rained upward against the course of nature: so that a
whole Bottle scarce yielded enough to wet the bottom of a Glass, yet would the
Siren not ba^e a farthing of her price, which was a round shilling for every
Bottle. After that she brought in six more Bottles, which behaved themselves
after the same rude manner* Eucolpius who well knew the Effects of the Sirens
Charms, called for the tamer Juice of Barley, over which, said Eucolpius, after
we had continued till it was very late, enchanted with the pleasant Discourses
of the Sirens, on a sudden we heard a great noise in the room over head as if
the Sky had been falling. Two Shepherds of Betty-land belike had been there for
several hours together, with each two Sirens in the^^ Company, where they had
drank so long of the Sirens bewitching Liquor, that they were even almost (...)
into swine. Then, said Eumolpius, I began to call to mind those other Lines of
Virgil.

Hinc exaudiri Gemitus iraque leonum,
Vinola recusantum, at sera sub nocte rudentum,
Setegerique sues atque in presepibus ursi
Se vice --
Then shrieks of Bum-kickt Iades were loudly heard,
And late at night the damning Hectors roar,
To see the Constables with Chains prepared,
Now worse than Swine that were but Beasts before.
For like to this, cried Eucolpius, was the noise which we heard above stairs:
the Sirens squeak'd and cried out murder, and help, and help, and murder. The
Shepherds ranted and tore, seeing that they had lost their Money, and that the
Sirens had bewitched it out of their Pockets. In this hurly burly ^p runs
Thelxinoe with all her Spells, when we, said Eumolpus, seeing so fair an
opportunity, and considering the charge of our stay, took an occasion to march
out of doors, and quit our selves of our extravagant Expense: but Eumolpus
whose blood was up, not being willing to give over the Chase of what he (...)
out with so much eagerness to hunt for, desired Eucolpius to bear him Company,
in the search of some other Adventure. It was now late, cold and a hard Frost,
but these hardships were easily over come by the brightness of Cynthia's Beams,
that made the night almost as clear as day. Being thus therefore got safe from
Thelxinoe's Habitation, Eucolpius thought it convenient to steer his Course a
quite contrary way: nor had we gone far, when in the midst of the street cried
Eucolpius, look yo^der, where that Silvadgia whom we sent for so long since
comes now to m^et us: have at her by guess, quoth Eumolpus, and so accosting
her, Whither so fast, quoth he, fair Nymph? there needed not many Complements,
Eumolpus takes her by one Hand, and Eucolpius by the other, and so said
Eumolpus, we marched hand in hand in a full rank for a while uninterrupted. But
Oh the fickle state of fortune sbeing come to the corner of one street, who
should pop upon us undiscovered from the corner of the next turning, but one of
the Princes of that night with all his Bilboe's? It was time to let go the hold
of prohibited goods, so near a strict Examination. Silvadgia that like a Mouse
knew every hole and cranny thereabouts, so suddenly got out of sight, that she
seemed rather to vanish than fly, but said Eumolpus, Eucolpius and I were
forced to stand the brunt. The Nocturnal Prince had he been Pluto himself,
could not have pretended more Majesty -- Plurima mento
Canities inculta jacent, stant lumina flamma,
Sordidus ex humeris nodo dependet Amiclus.
Like Bristles of a Hog his grisled Beard,
O're-ran his face with roapy-Ale besmeared:
Full grim he looked and for a farther note,
About his shoulders an old rusty Coat.
We finding our selves in the clutches of such a Cerberus, who was still
threatening ^o show us the full Extent of his Power* and to send us to the house
of Radamanthus, of which houses there are many in Betty-land, or else there
would be no living.

Gnosius hic Radamanthus habet durissima regna,
Castigatque, audetque, dolet, subigitque fateri,
Quae quis apud superos furta letatus inani,
Distulit in seram commissa pericula mortem.
Here City Marshal shows his cruel Power
On piteous Vagabands and wanting Whore,
For bellies-Crime, and what the pocket lacks,
His bloody whip-cord claws their Crimson backs:
He scourges first, examins next, for Law
They none deserve whom Law could never awe:
And hearing various Crimes at last confessed,
Becomes himself the subtler Knave at last.
Upon these Considerations it was thought fit to use gentle means and
Sugar-Sops, for Eumolpus had learnt that there was nothing so frequently used
as sweet Wine in the Sacrifices accustomed to the Furies, according to that of
Callimachus.

(...)
(...).
All hours they loyter safe; and never fail,
Who Watchmen twelve pence give to buy sweet Ale.
By the practice of which Instruction, said Eumolpus, we that were just going
to the Pound* were at the intercession of those dulcified Sons of Horror (one
of whom swore to the deep pit of Darkness that he knew Eucolpius, and knew him
to be a very Civil Gentleman, when tho he had never seen him in his life) with
an Extortion of much Acknowledgment for so great a favor, let at liberty. This
storm was no sooner over, but the hazard was forgot, and a new Ramble concluded
on; at length under the Conduct of Eucolpius we came both into a by-Street, but
there was such a general silence in the Habitations of the Sirens, as if all
the lower world had been listening after news in the upper. O quoth Eucolpius!
the Inhabitants of these parts are as laborious Husbandmen as any be in
Betty-land: They work day and night, and therefore no wonder they sleep so fast
now they are at it. At length coming to a certain Habitation, where the staple
of the door was not driven close to the wall, Eumolpus made a shift to get in
his hand and put back the Lock, we were no sooner entered and began to extol the
kindness of Fortune, but the very same way-Wood of the night that had
prosecuted us before, followed us close at the heels, and seeing us lawful
prize, began to give order for a second seizure: But Eucolpius knowing the
danger of a second Attachment, bidding Eumolpus follow his example with his
Sword in his hand, being well seconded by Eumolpus, soon forced a way through
the slender Opposition of those decrepit Mirmydons, and being got without the
reach of their rusty Weapons they never slackned their paces, which was a good
swift Career, till they were got out of the Dominions of that nocturnal
Bugbear. By and by making a halt to take both breath and advise together, now,
said Eucolpius, let us return to the sam^ place from whence we last came: for
this Lord of Mis-rule having now gone his Rounds, and made his visits of
Enquiry, will be sure to come no more there. For a right bred Siren has a way
of Charming these Officers of Justice and keeping them from wandering at all
hours, and to say truth, there are few of these nocturnal Cerberus's that will
bark at a Sirens Habitation, unless he be very hungry indeed, and have not been
fed for a great while. With this Resolution, said Eumolpus, we tackt about, and
ski^ting through a little spot of Betty-land called Lincolns- Inn-fields, we
observed almost at every Gate of those wealthy Husbandmens Habitations, a poor
laboring man, and a servant Shepherdess talking together. They were generally
very serious and private in their Discourse, tho it were now near two of the
Clock in the morning, but by what we overheard, Betty-land- Love was the main
thing they drove at, for sometimes we could hear the Shepherdess cry Sunday in
the afternoon; by and by the poor labourer protested the reality of his
Affection: another was telling a long story of the Transactions in that
habitation; another was complaining that her Farm had been Tilled and Manured;
that Harvest was at hand, and therefore desired the poor labourer to take some
care where to inn the Crop. And another was delivering to her friends Candles,
cold Meat, and other bundles of stuff, which she had purloyned and made up, in
as little room as might be; bidding her friend be sure to return by such a
night again: certainly, said Eumolpus to Eucolpius, these husbandmen live here
in very great security, that they let their Gates stand open in such a desert
place as this: O replied Eucolpius! these Husbandmen tho they be rich, yet they
have so many thieves within doors, that they never fear those without: for they
within doors will preserve their Masters substance from those without, that it
may fall into their own hands. Having observed these passages we jog'd on,
meeting none upon the Road, but now and then one, now and then a couple of rude
laboring fellows with stout Cudgels in their hands, looking as if they would
eat us. These were the very dregs of all Betty-land that take the greatest
pains, and run through the greatest hazards in the world to maintain themselves
in Idleness. Coming to the Sirens Habitation we unlockt the Gate as we had done
before, and then barring it again, went directly into a Room where there was a
small fire, but no other light, nor any sound of any thing living in all the
Habitation: down sat Eucolpius, down sat Eumolpus, right against the door of
the room expecting what would happen, when on a sudden we heard 3 or 4 Sirens
laughing and toying together to make toward the backdoor of the Habitation.
The foremost poping into the Room, and seeing the glittering of Eumolpus's Coat
(which was richly lac't) by the re^lection of the fire, flew back again ready
to break her Neck, crying out, the Devil, the Devil, but Eumolpus
compassionately following her, and gently bespeaking her soon rid her of fears,
leading her by the hand into the room, whom the rest of the Sirens followed. We
called for more fire and Lamps that we might see one another, and after that
for such Liquors as the Habitation would afford: As for the Sirens themselves,
they were not the most Amiable that ever were seen, which made us mind our
Liquor rather than any other of their Temptations. Their Voices were none of
the sweetest, yet for a forced put they might have served, had we not been kept
waking by another Accident. For in the height of our mirth in comes an ordinary
Betty-land Farmer, who by his Familiarity seemed to claim a kind of propriety
in the whole Habitation: we saw he would be one of the Company, and therefore
we invited him. He had taken a large doze of the Sirens Charms, which made his
Tongue as nimble as a new oiled Jack: Between Eucolpius and him past many
Discourses, among the rest, there was one Question stated by the Farmer,
Whether if one Farmer should rob another, it were better to bind him, or kill
him to prevent discovery? Heaven protect us! cried Eumolpus to himself, if this
be the Country of Betty-land, surely, quoth he, the people thereof are mere
Salvages, however the Argument went on. Eucolpius who when he began to be
intoxicated with the Sirens Liquor was very devout, being for Mercy, the Farmer
all for Murder, this made Eumolpus stand upon his Guard and to have a vigilant
Eye upon the Sirens, and to hasten the complete Charming of the Farmer, which
was at length so effectually performed by Eucolpius and Eumolpus together, that
he fell into a profound sleep: in which condition after he had lain a while, he
was at length roused by the Sirens and hurried to his Sty like a Swine: After
his departure the Sirens vanished, and Eumolpus and Eucolpius remained alone,
who early in the morning leaving the Gates of the Habitation open, and the
Sirens fast asleep, went their ways to seek out more secure ^efreshments. Thus
you see the meaner sort of the Inhabitants of Betty-land, are a very wicked
sort of people, being no great admirers of Law or Government: for all Pleasure
is expensive, and they wanting the support of Extravagance, will oftentimes in
their necessity take it by violence from one another, sometimes in the street,
sometimes in the highway; nay, sometimes they will enter one another Castles
by main force, and rifle, and what they get they spend all upon their Sirens
with whom they live in a kind of Community. I remember, said Eucolpius, a
Husbandman in Betty-land that had his Castle entered, and much of his substance
taken away; who thereupon resolving to go in pursuit of the Labourer that had
so spoiled him ^f his goods, sent for me to assist him: we for our better
security took with us one of the great Rulers of the night, and with him a
certain day-Labourer, who pretends to know all the habitations of the Sirens.
The more to be wondered at, as being in one of the greatest Cities in all
Betty-land, and thus accompanied we began our progress one night in the most
dead time of all; I dare say, said Eucolpius, we entered above a hundred several
Habitations of a hundred several Sirens, taking a view of every room in every
one of them, where it was not a little pleasant to see what feat kind of
Enormities night conceals. We found the Husbandmen and the Sirens generally in
bed and asleep together, for the hardness of their Labor made them sleep
without Opiates: In some Beds 3 Sirens and one Husbandman, in another place 3
Husbandmen and one Siren; at another Habitation one Husbandman and 2 Sirens, in
another 2 Husbandmen and one Siren, in another two Husbandmen and two Sirens
all together: in another 3 Sirens and two Husbandmen, in another 3 Husbandmen
and two Sirens. Eucolpius that had never seen so strange a mixture of
Familiarity before, began to doubt whether this were not some Art of Solon's
Commonwealth, for, said he, there was as much Athenian Liberty as ever that
great Lawgiver could possibly allow. The day-Labourer who was with us, whether
he knew them all or no, I cannot tell, said Eucolpius, but he pretended to do
so, and pulling aside the head-Geer of one, and the hair of another: quoth he,
this is Dol such a one, and this is Kate such a one, and this is Nan such a
one: as if he had been showing us the Tombs at Westminster with a white staff
in his hand. And I believe had the night been a week long, we had had variety
of these O^j^cts. Eucolpius when he came home told Eumolpus of his Adventure,
who lamented nothing more than his misfortune of missing Eucolpius's Company;
that night however it made him restless for new discoveries, which they
resolved to prosecute the night following. The Sun had now withdrawn himself
and it was within an hour of night when Eucolpius and I, said Eumolpus, entering
into one of the Gaming-Houses of the Sirens, went up into a private Apartment,
calling to the chief Siren to bring us a Bowl of her most charming Liquor; she
that brought it was no sooner sat down by us, but she began to talk of these
Persons who were the Chiefest Husbandmen in Betty-land in their time, at so
familiar rate that we wondered how she came by so great an Acquaintance among
the Nobler sort of Husbandmen, being such an ordinary Siren her self: for she
can divison upon their Descents and Pedigrees, as if she had been bred in the
College of Heralds. While we were thus taken up with Enchantments of her
Discourse, a strange lumbring noise invaded our Ears from the stairs which led
into our Apartment: The Siren when she heard it, flew out of the Room with the
swiftness of a shooting-Star, clapping the door fast after her: But we, said
Eumolpus, big with Curiosity had a longing desire to know the reason of so much
Clutter. By and by, peeping through the door, we perceived an old Farmer of
Betty-land coming up upon four Legs two Natural and two Artificial (a pair of
wooden Crutches) with which he did so knock and bepestle the Boards, that a
Horse with 4 Iron shoes would have been thought to have walked upon Velvet
after him, so weak and so decrepit, so old, so worn out with the Labor of that
Country, that no greater pain could be imagined, than the pain which he seemed
to endure in his Engine-like^ motion: with much ado at length he got to the
inside of a Table, and sat him down with his back against the Wainscot,
opposite to the Chimny: Surely, said Eumolpus, were the seven Wise Men of
Greece now alive, it would puzzle their Understanding to know the strange and
hidden desire of this old Farmer. I warrant, quoth Eucolpius, this old Farmer
had been an industrious workman in his time, and now to see a fertile spot of
ground, to behold a pleasing Prospect, is as delightful to him as the Tillage
it self was formerly. Age unfit for Action will delight it self in the Memory
of what in Youth it has pe^form'd, whether we were addicted to Acts of Honesty
or of Villainy, Repetition sooths the Fancy, and dandles it with the remembrance
of what a drooping performer has done: so settling to our peeping Crannies, we
observed a young Siren come into the Room with two sable Pots of Enchanting
Liquor in her hands, which she set down before him. The old Farmer drank not so
lamely as he went, but freely; and made the Siren quaff her own Liquor as
freely as himself: she had a Brow as black as a new Beaver, and her Cheeks were
as ruddy as the Vermilion^ Edges of a new Book. In a short while betaking her
self to the Chimny, she stood bolt upright, and having the Signal given, (as
they draw the Curtain up from before the Scenes of a Theater) she drew the
Curtain gently up that was before it, and showed the Prospect of a very fair
Garden-plot of Maidenhair, not green as in other Countries, but growing like a
kind of black Fern, or rather a spot of Ground looking like a sieve of black
Cherries, ^overed over with the tops of russet Fennel. The Fields about were
imbroidered over with white Dasies and yellow Pissabeds: but the old Farmer who
neither cared for Innocence, and had been sufficiently plagued with Jealousy,
and consequently could endure neither of those Colors, caused her to d^ub her
hands with the Soot of the Chimny, to dissigure the whole prospect of those
more pleasant Colors, not permitting her to leave any thing but what was black
within the Horizon of his View. Then he pleased his aged Eyes with beholding
the whole, commending what he thought fit to be commended, and reading a
Lecture of Betty-land Husbandry, over every part, till satiated with the
Prospect and his Discourse, the Curtain again was let down, and the Siren sent
away for more Enchanting Liquor to requite her kindness* certainly, said
Eumolpus, the Fancy of this Farmer was the most Ext^avagant that was ever
known. There is some Reason for it, said Eucolpius, for Betty-land Love as it
ent^ed first into the Eye, so at last goes out of the Eye. The Eye is the
Chariot wherein the Fancy Rides, surveying past contents, and if that be
strong and juvenile, it will employ the Body in something of its former
concerns, how impotent, how unwieldly soever: for Reason, you must know, is not
at all permitted to be so much as named in Betty-land, where it is Death to
make use of it: And where the Husbandmen and Huswifes are guided only by
Passion, and follow only the persuasions of Appetite.

Again, as there is no Reason, so there is no Wisdom in Betty-land: they seldom
hear of it from one end of the Country to the other^ or if they chance to hear
the least sound of it, they count it as fatal as the Romans did to hear* the
Ravens croak upon the left hand: like the young People of Betty-land, that when
the Bells ring to the Temple, run to the Sirens Habitations at Islington,
believing that the Bells are hung in the City to ring them into the Country.
Should this Farmer have been so impotent again, he would not have been a Rush
the wiser, and therefore it is no wonder his predominating Superiors direct and
govern him as they please themselves. Eucolpius having thus said, Eumolpus and
he took their way toward a small part of Betty-land, near the Temple of St.
Buttolphs-Aldgate, where upon the first call, he was let into a f^ir Habitation
belonging to one of those Elderly Sirens called Maquerelas. The Apartments were
fair and well adorned, through one of which, as we passed, said Eumolpus, we
saw a Table spread and furnished as if it had been for the Supper of Trimalcio
in Petronius: being come into our own Retirement, we asked the Siren, what
Ulysses was to be Entertained there that night? she answered with a Smile, but
told Eucolpius more familiarly, that we should have a sight of the pastime in
due season, ^eeing there was none but himself and one whom she saw to be his
peculiar Friend; tho with a most ^olemn Proviso of Secrecy enjoined. In the
mean time, we called for a Siren or two, which were immediately called up,
Charming enough; we had no sooner drank a Cup or two of the Sirens Liquo^s, but
one of them began to fall into the rehearsal of her Misfortunes, that she was
the Daughter of one of the Priests of Pan (for the most common Huswives of
Betty-land ^eign themselves to be either the Daughters, Sisters, or Huswifes of
the Priests of Pan, thereby to gain the greater pity of their Sufferings:) that
she had been driven out of doors by the Shepherd, whom of all others in the
Country she loved most entirely. The other cursed a noble Husbandman of
Betty-land, for being untrue to her; or else -- for a deep Sigh sti^led the
rest, but both of them concluded in, What would you give them? That they were
no common Sirens, but seeing us Civil Shepherds, if we pleased to come to their
Habitations, we should not find them to be Mercenary. But offe^ offer to lay
your Lips to theirs, they were presently according to the Fashion of the
Country, begging either for Scarfs, or Gloves, though at the same time they
bragged of Wardrobes richer than those of Lucullus: We that believed not a word
they said, easily condol'd with them, and promised Mountains; for there is
nothing more practicable in Betty-land than lying and dissembling, Two gifts
that a Husbandman of that Country can no more be without, than without his
Plow. In fine, these two Sirens were ^orced to leave us, being called away by
the Siren Government, for it appeared that the Shepherd was entered, at whose
Devotion the Habitation and all within it were, being at all the Expense for
his peculiar Fancy; by and by, the Alarm of an uncouth noise, called us to our
peeping-holes of Observation; from whence we discovered in the great corner
Room, where we saw the Table spread as we first came along, a very fair
Collation of Costly Viands, the most part Fowl. About the Table sat some half
a dozen Brisk Sirens, sitting almost as they were pictured (saving that they
had other Instruments to use than Combs and Looking-Glasses) for their lower
parts were hid by the Table, as they had been under water; but from the Wast
upward, they were to be seen quite naked, as in vulgar Signs. All this while we
missed the Shepherd, and wondered he should neglect the sight of such fair
Prospects as these were, but by and by we discovered him by the noise he made
under the Table upon all four, picking up the Bones which the Sirens threw
down, yelping and snarling like an Izeland Cur, and biting at the Legs and
Shins of that Siren which threw him down his desired Food. This violent humor
continued all along the time of Supper, said Eumolpus, to his Astonishment,
which made him think the Mysteries of Isis to be a Bauble, and the carrying
Betty-land Ploughs in public Procession upon sticks by the Female Bacchides,
to be a May Game: and yet they appeared to be altogether, but a kind of family
Betty-land -Love, (and there are few Families without a Cur) for there was no
more harm done, but after Supper every Siren seemed to vanish as they pleased
themselves: Look ye, said Eucolpius, now you have beheld something more strange
than what you saw before. Certainly, said Eumolpus, the Gods that only smiled
to see Mars and Venus so entangled as they did, would have laughed themselves
out of their Immortality, to have seen this Extravagant Divertisement. Think
you, said Eucolpius, this Shepherd can give any Reason for this? Surely no
other, replied Eumolpus, than that of the Poet: Quid non constricta spectatis
front Cutanes,
Damnatisque novae simplicitatis opus?
Ipse pater very doctus Epicurus in Art
Iussit, and hanc vitam dixit habere tales.
What ail ye, froward Cinicks, thus to stare,
Condemning what I act, because it is rare:
Wise Epicure thus taught, lose no Delight,
For time has heels and nimbly takes his Flight:
Dear Life whose shoes are made of running Leather,
Shall I not use thee? wherefore came I hither?


From thence at a later hour, said Eumolpus, we passed to see the Public
Academies and Shools of the Country, where we found them altogether for
Justing, and Tournaments, and Running of the Ring: but in this particular, as
captious one among another, as Church-Wardens-Wives; for it not being the
Custom of the Country, for Shepherds to Just one with another, but only
Shepherds with Shepherdesses, and Shepherdesses with Shepherds: the Shepherds
will never Just unless the Shepherdesses will provide Rings, nor the
Shepherdesses can ever be brought to run a-Tilt, unless the Shepherds provide
Lances. However if the Parties stand upon it, there seldom happens any great
Quarrel about that Punctilio. These Academies stand open all night long, and
there are some so accustomed to these Exercises, that they will hit the Ma^k as
well by night as by day. They had in these Academies other so^ts of Games, at
which they played long, as In and In, amd All Fours, but one thing we never
perceived before, that when they went to play at Ruff, they put out all the
Honors.

The Noble sort of Sirens are of a Disposition very various from these, for
they being better stockt with Wealth, carry on higher Designs, which they will
bring about what ever it cost them, or perish in the Enterprise: They are very
subtle, and not only make use of all sorts of Deceits and Stratagems already
discovered, but add daily of their own. They are very much addicted to
Enchantments, and very skilful in making Amorous Medicaments. They that would
understand the Nature of these Shepherdesses, may read the Stories of
Messaline, whom there was none that exceeded in all the Country of Betty-land;
of Lunia and Lucilla, who both Enchanted their own Shepherds to death* for the
desire of others whom they loved better: Semiramis out of a desire of Empire,
and for the Love of her own Son, caused her Husbandman to be slain: How dear
the mistake of Guc^ovir (when her Husband tickled her in the Neck with his
Riding-Rod) cost the poor King for his accidental Discovery, is not unknown to
them that have been conversant in the Saxon parts of Betty-land. The Cruelty of
Ione of Naples, the cunning Stratagems of Don Olympia, and the Intreagues of
Don Christiana, are still fresh in Memory. Nor had the Druyd Reynall found such
copious matter to compile his Book of Celestial Revenge, had it not been for
the Effects of Betty-land-Love. The Nature of which is so strange, that it
shall in the view of the same Horizon on this side the Hedge shower down
nothing but Malice, Hatred, and dismal Contrivances: while on the other side
the Hedge, at the same time you shall perceive nothing but the Sunshine of
Sweetness and Caresses.

The Country of Betty-land has had formerly good Benefactors, who did very much
add to the Glory and Increase of its Fame. The first of those was Solon, the
great Athenian Lawgiver, and by the Oracle of Apollo accounted one of the
Seven Wisemen of Greece, who was the first that made it his public Care to
provide Sirens for the Shepherds of that Country. The first that dedicated a
Temple to Venus, the Universal Goddess of Betty-land out of the Games of
prostituted Sirens, and so great an Esteem the Grecian part of Betty-land had
for those Sirens, that when Xerxes invaded Greece, the Corinthian being the
most polite of all the Country, were ordered to make public Supplication for
the safety of Greece; so honored and so Rich grew the Sirens among the
Ephesians, that they built several Temples in that City. The Corinthians also
gave them that Respect, that when they were to supplicate Venus in any m^tter
of Importance, the peculiar charge of their Prayers was committed to their
Sirens. Aristotle also thought them worthy of Divine Honors, when he made the
same Offering, and used the same Ceremonies to the Cyren Hernia, as were
usually observed to Ceres of Eleasine. Venus being the first Siren, was
therefore counted a Goddess, from whose Example it grew in Custom among the
Cyprians, that the young Shepherdesses did always (before they stuck close to
any Shepherd) prostitute themselves on the Se^-shore, thereby to pick up a
Dowry acceptable to their peculiar Sh^pherds. And the Babyloni^ns by the Report
of Herodo^us when they had consumed their Farms, were wont to compel their
Daughters to turn Sirens for the future Maintenance of them and themselves.
Aspacia was a great Benefactor to Betty-land, for she filled all Greece with
Sirens, and for the Love of her, and for the Injury which the Megareans did
(...) in taking some of her young Sirens from her, Pericles began that fatal
and lasting Peloponnesian War. Heliogabulus was a very great Benefactor, for he
had all Conveniences belonging to Betty-land-Love in his own House: He gave to
all the Roman Matrons that would turn Sirens, not only Immunity, but Impunity.
Caesar was so great a Benefactor, that he was called the Male for all Females:
Rhodope also the great Friend and Companion of Aesop, that made the Fables, got
so much Wealth by the occupation of a Siren, that she built a Pyramid accounted
the third wonder of the World: And Flora left the Empire of Rome her Heir. Of
later times Pope Sixtus was a very great Benefactor to Betty-land, who built a
most Noble Habitation for Sirens at Rome; nor are his Successors less kind, by
whom they are still indulged, only paying a Iulio a week to the Church, and it
is a good Subsistence to the Priests of Pan in that Country, to have an
Allotment out of the Bordelli, to make up the defects of other Endowments. As
for Example, A Curate-ship worth twenty Crowns. A Priory worth 40 Ducats, and 3
Sirens in the Bordelli at 20 Iulio's a week. Nor are the Venetians less
munificent Benefactors, from whom they have all Immunity desirable, nor are the
Sirens less grateful in returning considerable Incomes to the Commonwealth, for
they being the Bulworks of Christendom are allowed all ways imaginable to
support their urgent and unavoidable Necessities. Plato was also a great
Benefactor to Betty-land, for his Laws were for a Community of Shepherdesses,
among whose followers we may reckon the Nicolaitan Heretics, who to avoid the
St^ipes of that Fury, Jealousy, thought it more Convenient that the Huswifes
of their Country should be prostituted. Thus we see how Betty-land-Love has
bewitched and charmed the wisest Husbandman in all Ages. There is a strange
Venom in it, and it follows Success and Plenty with a strange Rage, of both
which, he that is the absolute Master shall have much ado to keep out of the
Tanpits of Betty-land-Love, a very great Mischief, no question, in regard tha^
the Chiefest Venuses will not permit their dearest Aeneas's to fall into, if by
all the Guards of Neptune and his blew Eyed Host they can protect them both.
The Vermin which most annoy the Agriculture most used in Betty-land, are your
Sr. Rogers, or Hypocritical Devotists, and those other p^stilent Animals called
Nurses, Mother Midnights, and Empericks, with Skins as smooth as Beaver, but
black, as that Markham of Betty-land (called Cornelius Agrippa) notably
observes, there are few Traps or Gins that can ensnare them, your Sr. Rogers
are so like Civet-Cats, that the Husbandmen of Betty-land cannot distinguish
one from another, so that the Husbandmen let them come upon their Land,
thinking to retrieve the benefit of their Odoriferous and Precious Excrements,
but these Sr. Rogers being the more subtle Animals, and great lovers of sweet
Herbs, do more often come upon their Land and defile it: To say truth, where
these Sr. Rogers have a design of Mischief, there are no Pales, no Fences, no
Hedges, no Ditches that can keep them out, no Locks, no Bolts are strong enough
to barricado a door against them. Nay the very Casements of the Shepherdesses
hearts will fly open, if they do but give the least wink, they Charm the very
Souls of the Betty-land Shepherdesses, pretending to have Radamanthus's Whip in
their pockets, for the disobedient, and such a mess of Celestial Suckets in a
Lawn Handcherchief for them that consent; so that the poor Creatures are forced
to yield themselves up wholly to their disposul, besides the Reverence of their
Exnmples, a violent Argument to batter the weak Fort of Female Reason, for most
Females believe that the Priests of Pan are so Holy, that they cannot err: And
therefore in the Papistical. Parts of Betty-land, how many windfalls has the
Hurricane of Confession blown down? you may sometimes s^e the whole Country
almost strewn over with them, such is the heat of a well grounded Opinion,
that it melts a Betty-land Female like Wax, and then comes the Sr. Roger, and
claps his Impr^ssion upon her, what Shephe^d can deny his Shepherdess when he
asks her, and she replies, she is going to a Lecture? What Shepherd can deny 40
or 50 l. at a time, when she cries it is to pay her Sr. Roger? This brings your
Sr. Rogers to their white Caps and their Neck-Handkerchiefs, but who can avoid
it? for there is no prevailing against the force of Betty-land- Love, your
Mother-Midnights are like those little Vermin called Millepedes, or Hog-lice,
for they will crawl from one place to another, so unweariedly and so swiftly
upon all Occasions, that you would swear they had a thousand Legs apiece. They
have such an Awe on the Spirits of the poor Shepherdesses in Betty-land, that
whatever they say, the others believe with more Reverence than the Legend of
the Sybils. There is such a familiar and inward Commerce of Secrecy between
these Mother-Midnights and Betty-land Shepherdesses, that the latter are easily
drawn to give their Appetite a Diversion where they can trust with so much
Confidence, not to yield were to mistrust, and to mistrust were to break off
the Communion of Secrecy. And they Conjecture not amiss, that believe that many
a Mother-Midnight is the more cheerfully obeyed by the Shepherdesses of
Betty-land, for the supply of secret Communication, there being as much
pleasure to sit privately over a Makeroon and a Taster of Sack, repeating past
delights with the Accidents and Appurtenances, as in the Enjoyment it self; for
what can be nearer to Enjoyment, than to tell the very Actions, Passions, and
Expressions of the Shepherd in the very Extacy of Fruition so frequently door,
that unless it be done, there is not that Love and Kindness thought to be
between each other? These Arcanums and Mysteries of Discourse, being the Seals
and Testimonies of their Friendship.

Your Empericks, tho they have smooth Skins like Beavers, yet they have cursed
sharp Claws, if they cannot get over, they will dig under the Pales: and when
once they are got in, they will Earth themselves like Foxes, so that there is
no getting them out again. The Shepherdesses of Betty-land are many times
forced to trust them with very great secrets, which when they come to the
knowledge of, they take the boldness to do what they list: These are the
Caterpillars that destroy the Verdure and Beauty of Betty-land, these are the
Moss and Canker that hinder the Orchards of Betty-land from bearing. And being
admitted into the society of Secrecy, destroy the Fe^tili^y of Betty-land, by
teaching the Shepherdesses how to shun the pains of Harvest, and yet enjoy all
the full content of the Pleasure of Tillage, the Truth whereof is confirmed by
that wise Husbandman Lucretius, Idque sui causa consuerunt schorta moveri,
Ne complerentur crebro gravidaeque jacerent,
Et simul ipsa vires Venus and concinnior esset.


How did that Noble Shepherdess Livia handle her poor Shepherd Drusus, by that
villainous cunning of the Emperick Eademus? How did Messalina lie in Common, and
bring poor Claudius's Farm to Ruin, by the private help of Vestius Valentius, a
most snbtle Caterpiller of an Emperick? But as for Nurses and Chamber-Maids,
they like busy Emmets or Pismires, make their Nests in all parts of the
Country. They are like the Pigeons bred up in the Eastern parts of the World,
to convey Intelligence to Towns besieged and foreign Countries, for do but
give them an Amorous Pullet in Charge, and they shall convey it through all the
Ambushments, Snares, Traps, Gins, and Co^trivances laid to catch them, as if
they were invisible: whose true Use, Nature and Property, you may better see in
Don Pedro de Lopez, an Inhabitant in that part of Betty land called Portugal,
having with a curious Eye observed such Persons as he judged fitting to enjoy
his Person, at length placed his Affection upon a Shepherdess in that Country
named Cleandra, who was easily persuaded by his Wealth to yield her self wholly
to his disposal: Among the rest of this Shepherds Acquaintance, was one
Lysarchus, whom Cleandra no sooner saw, but she judged him worth to bear a part
in that Kindness which she showed her own Shepherd. Lysarchus percieving how
things stood, resolved with all Secrecy to manage his Affairs. De Lopez with
jealous Eyes beheld the more than usual Familiarity between Lysarchus and
Cleandra, and resolves to find out the truth: whereupon he feigned a Journey to
some other part of the Country, pretending Occasions that would stay himfor
some time, but returning privately the same night, found Lysarchus and Cleandra
together, in the most forbidden place by Friendship in the whole World; such
was the injured Shepherds Amazement then, that he would have slain them both
presently, but upon the retreat of his Passion, minding to give them both some
time of preparation, wished for his Boy to fetch him one of the Priests of Pan,
intending after he had fitted them to Sacrifice them both to that Deity, being
the only horned God which the Poets mention.

But to the Application of the Story, this Shepherd had an old Nurse, who had
been a notable Siren in her time: who hearing the Passion of De Lopez, and the
Charge which he gave the Boy: Gets up, follows the Boy over the Plains, bids
him go privately home to sleep, for she would fetch the Priest of Pan her self,
which the Boy tired with keeping his Masters Sheep, readily obeyed; so coming
to a Priest, she borrows the Habits of his Profession, returning she put them
on, and coming back to the Shepherds Cottage, she found the Shepherd with the
Instruments of Death in his hand, walking in a furious manner in the next
Apartment where Lysarchus and Cleandra lay asleep. The Shepherd perceiving her
enter, mistaking her in Disguise for the Priest, bid her go in, awake them
both, and prepare them for Sacrifice. The Nurse answered him, That she would
not dispute the Justice of his Revenge, only entreated him not to disturb them
till her Return, so entering into the Chamber, she found the two Inhabitants of
Betty-land Embracing one another after the Fashion of the Country: she awaked
them, and acquainted them of the Shepherds Return, what he had seen, his Fury
and Intention: which so surpised them, that it almost deprived them of their
Senses. But, quoth the Nurse, hear the way that I propose both to deceive and
satisfy the Shepherd. Here, quoth she, to Lysarchus, take this Habit, and put
it on, and then you may adventure out, for the shepherd will mistake you for
the Priest, which I Counterfeit. Up gets Lysarchus, while the Nurse laid her
self in the same place; as he went forth the Shepherd met him, and only asked
him if he had done what he was sent for? who replied, he had performed his
Pleasure: the Shepherd then entering into Cleandra's Apartment, False
Shepherdess, quoth he, behold him here whom you have wronged, I hope you are
sufficiently prepared for Sacrifice. To which, she faintly answered, Alas! dear
shepherd, first let me know my Crime, before I receive my Punishment. Can you
be Innocent, quoth he, and yet admit strange Cattle into my Enclosure? Oh dire
mistake, quoth she! and then uncovering the Nurses Face, see here the strange
Heiser that Grazes in your Meadow, in your Absence I only took my Nurse a-field
with me to bear me Company. At these words the Shepherd stood amazed with Joy
and Grief; with Grief, to have unjustly suspected her; with Joy, to find
himself mistaken: which immediately caused him to Embrace her, and to promise
her for the future, never to harbor an ill Thought of her. So subtle are these
Betty-land Nurses in promoting and concealing Bettyland- Love, and deceiving
the poor Shepherds; for as they are generally very great Thieves themselves, so
they never value the robbing their Masters Fruit, the breaking of his Hedges,
and what strange Cattle seed upon his Tillage: The people of Betty-land,
especially the better sort, spend much of their time in the Fields and Gardens,
which by some of the meaner Sheph^rds, are kept beautified and trimmed, for the
public Receipt and Entertainment of all comers. There also you may have
Collations of all sorts, and several Varieties of delightful Liquors, but so
excessively dear, as if Betty-land- Love and Expense were both born Twins. And
it is most certainly averred, that the Son of Neptune and Father of Orion,
Entertained three of the greatest Gods then in being, at less Charge than a
Shepherd can entertain 3 Shepherdesses in one of these Gardens. For such is the
potent Virtue of Rhenish-Wine and Sugar for Commotion, that tho the
Shepherdesses rose but 2 hours before from a plentiful Meal, yet you shall see
them fall upon the Junkets of these places with so much fresh Fury, and devour
with so much Greediness, as if they had never eaten before, or that they were
not to feed again in half a year after: To ask the price of anything herein
this place, or to question the Bill when it is brought up, is a Crime as
inexpiable as the Gods to swear by Stix, and to be perjured; for Betty-land is
at a perfect Antipathy with all manner of Frugality, and the Shepherdesses
(like the Husbandmen of Egypt that guess at the Fertility of the Year by the
overflowing of Nile) make their chief Conject^res what manner of Lives they
shall lead, when married to their Shepherds, by the overslowing Prodigality of
the Shepherds Pockets in these places, so that unless a Shepherd comes very
well provided into one of these Gardens, he shall find himself so intreagu'd in
a Reckoning, that instead of an Hesperian Garden, or the Thessalonian Tempe, he
finds himself in one of the Labyrinths of Minos, out of which he shall not be
able to find the way, till he has pawned to the owner his Faith and Honor to
make amends to morrow. This, if it be discovered among the Shepherdesses, into
what a F^yer it puts the poor Shepherd, what Shifts, what Excuses, he is forced
to pump for and borrow from his wrackt Invention. But the Shepherdesses laugh
and whisper, and are glad of the Occasion, for they are sure now he must make
them 3 or 4 Treatments more to secure his Credit: Eumolpus coming one day into
one of these Gardens, observed a melancholy Shepherd walking by himself, with
so flow a pace, as if it had been his business to measure the ground, or that
he had been studying for Sonnets: his Physiognomy showed much of self-Conceit,
and ^uch of Discontent, as a place where all others displayed a geneneral
Jollity of Humor in their Faces, his Singularity made Eumolpus resolved to
attaque him, who made several turns Cheek by Jole with him, expecting the time
when he would unlock the Cabinet of his Lips: but finding him very frugal of
his words, Sir, quoth he, I have seldom come into a pleasanter Garden, nor in
pleasanter Weather, at which words the sad Shepherd taking his Right Elbow in
his left Palm, and picking his Nose with his Thumb, Yes, quoth he, the place is
pleasant enough to such young Gallants as you, that have Money enough. Is Money
then the Cause, said Eumolpus, that the Leaves look so green? that the Birds
are so merry? or that the Sun shines so bright? No, quoth he, but it is the Money
in the Shepherd's Pockets that make the Shepherdess^s look so wantonly, Pluto
and Cerberus take them all for me, and the Eumenides claw their Buttocks, as
some of them have clawed my Pockets. I have been as great a haunter of these
Gardens, as the best of them all, and when all was a going, I cried, Sera est
in fundo Parsimonia, and that cursed Proverb has left me never a Groat in my
Purse. But I am come here to Imprint the Disdain of my Folly the deeper into my
Breast by the sight of those places where my Folly bewitched me: Nothing vexes
me, but that I have spent my Fortune upon Petticoats, and in adoring such a
sort of Goddesses, that are the most peccant in the World, especially as to
that abominable Sin of Ingratitude. Ask them but only to let you have a Child,
as the Gods gave Hiaereus for his loving Entertainment, and they plead so many
Inconveniences, as if there were no Mandrakes or Savine in the Country, for
they generally reserve those Favors, for those that are less bountiful, in that
only kind that they believe it too severe that a poor Shepherd should empty two
Purses at one time. Eumolpus to gain a further discovery from his inward
Dissatisfaction, invited the sad Shepherd to drink a Bottle of Wine in an
adjoining A^bor, where the distance of the ^eaves afforded Casements sufficient
to take a view of all that passed by. First came along a brisk young Shepherd,
so gay and so be-ribon'd, that he seemed to have a Nose-Gay (of all the Flowers
then flourishing) upon his Cod-piece, his Breeches looked as if they had been
beset with Tulips, as if what they covered concealed the same Spring and lively
Vigor as the Earth that produced the natural Colors: he spoke in Raptures, for
he disdained the very Sun that gliss'ned upon his Carnations in comparison of
those Suns which were by and by to devour his Tarts. If a Nightingale chanced
to Warble, O Madam! quoth he, this is Incomparable, but nothing to the divine
Melody of your Charming Voice; his officious hand carried the Shepherdesses
Fan, and sometimes he cooled himself, and sometimes her, and when he took it
from her Lips, he breathed out nothing but Sighs, that Arabia Faelix had lost
all her Odors: The Shepherdesses that Graced his Company were like so many
Iris's, full as Gay, and altogether as full of Tongue, laughing and smiling
they threw their heads about, as if they had been willing they should have
fallen from their Shoulders, to have been taken up like their Gloves; so merry
and so wanton, as if they had never known a melancholy Thought; so far from
s^eming to have never been in Love, that they seemed to be the Controllers of
Love himself. The sad Shepherd, at their approach made them a most Reverend
Obeisance, which they as mildly returned, calling him by his name, but they
were no sooner past, but he laid violent hands upon his own Hair, with such a
passion, as if he would have pulled off as much as would have made a Scourge to
have driven them out of the Alley. These Shepherdesses, quoth he, I know very
well, and they know me, and good Reason they have; for, quoth he -- casting a
grim look after them -- but let that pass. These are they that are called by
the names of Precious Ones, because of their Youth and Beauty, and their civil
Easiness to receive the Caress of a Treatment. They go for great Fortunes,
quoth he, but if the Shepherds their Fathers could put them off with those
Clothes, the Devil of a Rag more would they give them. Could there be but one
found among them that had but a Portion really half as large as her Swallow, I
fear I should go to my old trade again, and strive to undo one Tailor more than
I have done: By and by came another Shepherd with a gang of another so^t of
Shepherdesses, they were as glorious as the former, but not so young as they,
nor altogether so Handsome, they seemed to move in a dancing posture, and now
and then they would sing half a dozen Notes of a new Air: in their Discourse
they seemed to hold Arguments, and to talk upon Themes of Love; whatever they
said, it was not for the Shepherd to reply, but only to listen, bow, and smile,
and make a nod upon me of those that said nothing. However the sad Shepherd
struck to them as they passed along, but when they were gone, these are they,
quoth he, that are called the Ravishing Ones. They are Witty, but seldom Rich,
which makes them the more easy of Access: They look High, and their chief
Expectation is, when a wealthy Shepherd will fall into the Trap of their
Admiration, they gull, and are gulled, for the Shepherds that obtain them,
never think of marrying till they are upon their last Legs. In short, as it is
their chiefest Aim, so they make more Rapes upon the Purse, than upon the
Heart. By and by another Shepherd, with a little small Shepher^^ his hand, no
taller than the wastband of his Breeches, so that he looked like the Fellow with
his Brother growing out of his side, you would not think how she prinkt it and
prankt it, and peer'd up in the Shepherd's Face, she was always for looking
back upon those that passed by her taller than her self. The main of her
Discourse was, no I Will sweat, no I vow, no -- Pish -- The sad Sh^pherd put off
his Hat to her, as well as to the rest, for which he received a Courtesy with
her Chin in her Neck. There Is one of the Mi^cing Mi^i^^ quoth he, she is Rich,
but her Wit and her Wast are both of a size. The next that followed, were 3
strapping Shepherdesses, Elderly in years, they sang and giggled; and showed a
large sto^k of Con^idence, they had no Shepherd to attend them, yet they were
s^luted by many, with your humble Servant Lady's. The sad Shepherd little
regarded them, for, quoth he, these are the Evaporated Ones, they are almost
out of date, yet sing prick-Song without Book, and discourse upon all Subjects
without fear or wit, tho they bear no ^alice to any person, if you will be so
credulous as to believe what they say. Toward the Evening, and just upon
Sunset, we heard a couple of Chariots stop at the Garden-Gate, and strait in
marched a Crew of Shepherds and Shepherdesses, the Shepherds huffing and
dinging, the Shepherdesses flanting and ranting; Juno's with Ganimedes bearing
their Trains, they did so lowt and stare, that they cleared all before them,
their Talk was loud, and presently the Husbandman that owned the Garden was
called for, who came creeping and cringing to receive their Commands. These
presently enquired what Rarities he had ready, who presently returned them a
Banquet of hard Names, that would have puzzled the Master of Paul's School, or
the Art of Memory it self. Have you any Champignions, cries one of the
Shepherds? yes and it please you, cry's the Husbandman, dressed a-la-mode de
France cried the Shepherd? Yes, and it like your Honor, quoth the Husbandman,
for I hate the damned English way of dressing Champignions, for the Devil
Damme, Madam, quoth he, if they don't make me sick. The sad Shepherd made his
Obeisance to them, as they passed along, but they little regarded him. These,
quoth he, are the most ungrateful Shepherdesses of all living, for when you
have spent all your Estate and all your Marrow to boot on them, they think they
have received nothing but their due. The Reason why they appear in the Dark is,
because they fly the Sun, as the other avoid the Rain, the Sun annoys their
Faces, more than Rain the others habits. For these are they who are called
Besmeared Ones, Varnish-Daubers, to whom Phoebus is a great Enemy, whilst
Plaisterers and Red-Painters, with whom when a Man converses, he talks to that
which is not. He believes that such a one speaks to him, when there is no such
thing, no wonder no Painter can draw them right, when they draw themselves so
wrong, nor is it a wonder they should so much forget themselves, that in a
short time are not able to know their own Faces when they meet them in their
Looking-Glasses. The poor Shepherds seem to be accompanied only with the
beloved Statues of their own making, enlivened by the kindness of the Gods and
their own importunate Prayers. Time ploughs up their Faces, but they fill up
the Furrows so thick, that when they are dead, they look like mere pieces of
Plaster of Paris. They retired to their Collation, and we stayed their return,
when they were gone we thought it time to go too, ^o marching out we met the
husbandman of the house coming from the Gate muttering and swearing to himself.
What cause of so much wrath, quoth the sad Shepherd; to whom the husbandmam
cha^ing and fretting returned, quoth he, These Gay Shepherdesses ye saw last,
have devoured above three Pounds, and the hu^^ing Shepherd that Treated them
had no Money, but has sent me with a Note to his Grocer to take it out in
Tobacco. This is my Comfort, that if the Grocer be wise we may chance to make
the Fool pay six for his three: There Is no trusting without Pro^it, Nature will
have it so, we were born to get, and they to spend. They say, quoth the sad
Shepherd, the Garden of Eden is no where to be found, what if it be not, were I
an Antiquary, trust me, if I would wast one quarter of a sheet about in, for
here is a Garden as like it as can be imagined, here is the knowledge of Good
and Evil, here is the Forbidden-Fruit, here is the Tempter and the Tempted.
There is only the difference that in the first Eden the Serpent was too Cunning
for the Woman, here the Women are too Cunning for the Serpents. Jupiter defend
me! how these empty -skull'd Shepherds will boast to morrow at their Ordinary,
of the Honor they had to keep Company with these painted Images, all the Table
shall ring of the Favor she did him to let him kiss her Hand, to tell him this
or the other Story: Nor is this Career to be stopped till some Cynical Shepherd
stands up and swears he had rather keep company with a Kitchen-Wench, than a
painted Shepherdess: upon this they go together by the Ears, and it looks like
the Contest between the Greek and Roman Church, whether Images or no Images, so
long as there is no other harm done, it is not unpleasant to see one carry his
Arm in a Scarf, another with a black piece of Sarcenet upon his Knuckles. Paris
had never more Right to Helena, nor Perseus to Andromeda, than they believe
themselves to have right to the vindicated Shepherdess. If they prick one
another upon Putney- Heath, or in Barn-Elm- Fields, it is not half a penny
matter, it does but wast the unruly Red, that would turn to unruly white, so
long as no person falls a Sacrifice to the fucus'd Diety.

Could Man but view from some remoter Sphere,
The idle businesses of Mankind here;
With how much Industry some Men contrive;
Scarce to keep any but themselves alive:
With how much Pains and Sweat some Men design,
To wast their Fathers Care in Dice and Wine.
Whilst others on a Nose or Eye shall spend.
A whole years Thri^t before an hour can end;
They Would swear that time were now grown prodigal,
Of his own hours, and Fate more lavish call:
To give so long a Life to foolish Men,
To spend in ore and ore the same again.
And would not Bartholin now laugh to hear,
Ye say such Souls as these Immortal were!
Souls that no better seek nor better know,
But are content with Pleasures only show.
Immortal Souls know more, if we guess right,
And Body's must be changed to clear the sight:
But tho the Body's changed there is none that say
The Soul shall e're be changed at any day:
Then only earthly Mixtures must Compose,
Such Frames where such mean Satisfaction grows.
The Education of the Shepherdesses and Huswifes in Betty-land, is most
preposterous and contrary to the Politic Rules of all other Governments. The
better sort are generally bred up in the Imagina^y Castles and Towers of
Acrisius, called Boarding-Schools, kept by a certain sort of she-Creatures that
will pretend to be whatever you will have them to be: say they shall be
she-Draggons, and they shall be such, if you would have them to be the Arguses,
they shall persuade ye that they are such, and rather than excuse themselves
for not having so many Eyes as he had, they shall allow you sixscore to the
hundred. And withal to magnify the security of their Vigilance, that the very
Sun it self shall not dare to peep through the Glass whilst they are in the
Room. If you will have them to be she- Centaurs, she- Centaurs they shall be,
of which there appears not a little probability, for in these places it is,
that the young Shepherdesses first learn the Art of Horsemanship and
Horse-play, first riding o^e another, and then in a short time after, riding
quite away with some Shepherds or other, to the great Consolation of their
Parents. For you must know, that Jupiter is Lord of the Ascendent in all these
Houses, and his golden Showers will go through the very pores of the Tiles.
There are Appurtenances belonging to those Houses of Female Instruction.
Imprimis, Dancing-Masters, a certain sort of Cattle, to which the young
Shepherdesses give more Adoration, than the Egyptian to their Cow Isis. Mere
Apes, and the worst of Apes, as being French Apes, herein unfortunate that
there never was any foolery invented yet, so impertinent and unnecessary in the
world as the foolery of Dancing, herein fortunate, that the Age is so
unfortunate to be their Apes. Yet the young Shepherdesses endeavor to imitate
them, and the old ones are so mad as to let them, but then they rue it, when
they find the young Huswifes have been dancing so long that they can hardly go,
for the weight of their Bellies. This is the Art that first witches them to
kick up their heels by the powerful Charms of gesticular and obscene Motion, by
the Opportunities of palming, kissing, and treading upon the Toe, and striking
while the Iron is hot, which is the Reason that the good natured Souls cannot
refuse to dance a Coranto with the Dancing Master himself. I know said Eumolpus
in one small place of Education, two Families of 3 Sisters apiece totally laid
common, by the Ins^nuations of this Art, and one more of another Family, which
me thought was pity, for 'twas all the old Shepherd^ss had. Not unlikely, said
Eucolpius, but more than that, how many Antic Dancers whose Clothes have been
made straight to their Limbs, have been sent far off the Stage by great
Shepherdesses to allay the strength of Imagination. They have a Musician too,
of whom they learn half a dozen Lessons on Virginals, and 3 or 4 sing-Songs by
Rote. A little Music goes a great way with them, only to make a Caterwauling
noise, when their Parents come to see them, and to show they do not give their
Money for nothing. Besides all this, they learn very dexterously to play the
little Thieves for their Bellies, to Junket in corners, which they practice
afterward to the no small Expense of their Espousers, but for any Documents of
Modesty, Chastity, good Huswifery, or well ordering of a Family, it is not
required by their Parents, that they should be much (if any thing at all)
instructed therein, which is the reason that as soon as they come out of these
places, they presently travel into Betty-land, and never more return into their
own Country.

The people of Betty-land are subject to several Diseases, both of Mind and
Body, perticularly among the Females, there is one Disease that universally
Rages, called Furor Vterinus, the Stories of Io and Pasiphae very plainly
demonstrate the Rage of this Distemper. The first of which was in such a
Condition, that she run lowing up and down like a Cow for Cure, and the latter
for the remedy of her Malady, was forced to make use of a Bull. Two odd kinds
of Receipts you will say, but you know the Rule in Physic, a desperate Disease
must have a desperate Cure. To say there is any absolute Cure for this Disease
is a folly, for there is nothing cures it but death, yet the heat and present
fury of the Distemper is often allayed by the Application of proper Pessaries,
of which there must be prepared Variety still at hand, and those hourly made
use of, or else they signify nothing, of this Di^temper Virgil thus speaks;
Hic Aredelis amor tauri suppostaque furto,
Pasiphae mistumque genus prolesque deformis,
Minotaurus inest Veneris monumenta nefandae.
The Bull thus lowed, and for the sport full fed
Into the Straw Pasiphae creeps to Bed,
Thence'a mixed Off spring, strange prodigious Fools,
Men, Men in all parts, else (...) foreheads Bulls:
For Minotaurs and Cuckolds are the same,
Witness both the Conception and the Name.
Fie, Lipsius, Fie, to read all Virgil over,
And not perceive whence Cuckolds came before.


There is a Distemper among the Shepherds called Priapismus, which if it meet
with this Furor Vterinus, will hold it pretty tack. It is a kind of Giant-like
Distemper, that lifts its head most stiffly against Furor Vterinus, as having a
perfect Animosity against it: If they happen to run-counter, the Combat is
fierce and endures long, many times as long as either Shepherd or Shepherdess
can crawl or breath, but without any satisfaction of their Revenge. And
therefore the best way is for them to let one another alone; this Furor
Vterinus is that which make the Poet Euripides cry out, (...). Heavens bless
us! how are Mortals Tennis-ball'd,
With this grand Mischief Amorous Fury called.
This is that which distracts the whole Region of Betty-land, the Boule feau of
domestic Discord and public Havoc. This is that which bankrupts the Gentry,
and hurries the poor Merchant and Tradesmen headlong into the Sanctuary of the
Fleet and King's- Bench. The profusion of Habit, the Prodigality of Diet, the
wast of Visits, the Consumption of Entertainments. Thence Hippolitus in
Euripides falls into such a high Passion that he Exclaims, (...), etc.
O Jupiter! what cause of thy so cruel Hate,
That thou did Women thus for Man create?
If 'twere thy Aim to propagate Mankind,
The Female way ought not to have been designed.
But men into thy Temples should have brought,
Or Brass, or Steel, or Gold more purely wrought,
That could not thou have changed, and then might we
Have lived in Peace from Female Fury fr^e.


Some of the Effects of this Furor Vterinus happens to be as Comical as the
other is Tragical, while some poor Shepherds are found locked up in Trunks,
others whelmed under kneading-Troughs, and there kept till their own
Shepherdesses are sent for, to receive the same kindnesses over their Backs,
which they had done to their Neighbors.

There are also several Frenzies in Betty-land, the chiefest whereof is known
by the name of being in Love, so that you shall hardly read a Romance wherein
the Prime Hero of all does not wast himself to Skin and Bones for the Love of
some fair Shepherdess o^ other, what a deal of white Paper has been wasted, to
tell you in what sad Condition Demetrius was in, how his Cheeks grew pale, his
Eyes grew hollow, how he fell from his meat like a Hen troubled with the Pip,
what a Fever he had, how he revived at the sight of her, and all for the Love
of his Mother-inLaw: Nay, and the old doting Shepherd his Father was forced to
quit the pleasure of his old Age to save the young Fop his Son, O most
unparalled Success of a Betty-land-Frenzy! They that put Teresius upon
Interrogatories whether he enjoyed most satisfaction as a Man or a Woman, might
as well have put the question to this young Shepherdess, which she liked best,
the Father or the Son. Worse luck had Phaedra, who was so mad as to hang
herself for the Love of her Son-inLaw Hippolitus. Worse luck had Dido, who was
so mad as to burn herself. Worse luck had Echo, to kill her self* for the Love
of Narcissus, but a more conceited Fool was Narcissus to kill himself for Love
of his own shadow.

The same Frenzy possessed Thisbe, Hero and Parthenia, for the Loss of Pyramus,
Leander and Argalus, there is scarce a Book in all Betty-land, where some or
other have not been forced to quench the heat of their Frenzies, even to the
extinction of Life it self. If you ask the Cure, I can tell you none, bu^ the
Remedies already mentioned, that is to say, Ropes, Rivers, Fires and Precipices.

Sterility and Frigidity are two great Distempers in Betty-land, but they do
more pester and trouble the Country than annoy it. Sterility causes great
Murmuring, and Frigidity causes great Heart-burning. And the sport is to hear
them lay the fault one upon another, there being few or none that are willing
to confess where the fault lies. Away goes the Shepherdess to her Neighbors for
Information, you, quoth she, have all of ye such pretty little young Shepherds
and Shepherdesses, and I can have none, which is the great^st Torment to me in
the world; upon this complaint, many deep questions are put, so freely
answered* that there is not a Secret in Nature concealed. Many times there is a
Writ of Enquiry in the case, and all things are concluded to be safe and well:
Then is the poor Shepherds Back agreed to be the weaker, and yet the whole
burden and weight of miscarriage is laid upon it. It would tire Hercules
himself to undergo the labor, which he is now put upon, however the better* to
enable the poor Shepherd to dig and sow in his Parsly-Bed, Physicians of all
Sorts, Ages and Sexes are consulted with, certainly the most gainful and
delightful part of their Practice; to sit with an allowed Familiarity by a Fair
Shepherdess half unready in a morning, passing away the time so pleasantly, at
the p^etty sport of Questions and Answers, ^^moving, so tickling, that they
would kindle a fire in the frozen Breast of a Hermit. They prescribe the Time,
the Preparation, the Post^re, Manner and Order of Action, and must have an
Account, question by question, whether every Lesson were punctually obs^rved.
Then having received a large Reward, you cannot imagine with what a solemn
Countenance and merry Heart they take their leave, for which they so cram ye
with Electuaries of Diasatyrion and Diacorum, so benoynt ye with Oil of
Euphorb. so feast you with candied Eringoes, Pisstacho's, pickled Periwinkles,
Cock-Iellies and sweet Wine, that were not the poor Shepherds forced to empty
as well as fill, Heaven only knows to what a Strength and Fatness they would
arrive. And truly they work strange Cures sometimes. Others there are, that
from Gun-Smiths, Farryers and Cobblers, having got a few idle Receipts against
Barrenness and Sterility, get such a Fame in Betty-land presently, that their
Halls are crowded all the morning long with Nurses coming for half
Crown-Glasses, and for this they have a Poundage according to the Custom that
they bring. Ask some of these great Paracelsus's why they add the Virtues of
curing Sterility and Frigidity to a simple Pill which they know has no such
Efficacy: O they cry! that is the Cummin-Loaf that takes with the Female
Pigeons, but when all is done, he gives the most pleasing Physic that
whispers in a Shepherdesses Ears, Change Vostre Vit Madam, and who can dispute
the License which a Delphian Oracle gives. But the grand Senior Disease of all
that domineers and rages in every corner of Betty-land, is a Distemper that has
as many Names and Titles, as the Great Turk himself, his Praenomen is morbus,
his Cognomen's are like the Train of a Pleni-Potentiary Ambassadors Coach,
Neapolitanus, Hispanicus, Gallicus, Americanus, Mexicanus, Venereus, Lues
Venerea, Gonorrhea simplex, Gonorrhea Faetida, in English the Pox. These 3
Capital Letters wast more Printers-Ink, than all the whole Alphabet besides; a
man cannot draw to make water, but they are always in his Eye bragging and
vapouring what they can do if he have occasion. This Monsieur Pox, and the
Devil, like your Sergeant and Yeomen, upon the least Choler and Indignation are
at every turn (by the Shepherds of Betty-land) bid to go take and apprehend
whoever they be that offend them, and they are two such nimble Pursivants, that
it is the general opinion that few or none escape one or to other.

Most faithful Shepherds, it is not to be believed, that this Distemper is of so
modern an Extraction, such an upstart destroyer of Mankind as it is generally
taken to be, for in the first place we read of Dejanira's Shirt, which as the
Fable tells ye she sent to Hercules, which being set on fire by the heat of his
Body, burnt him to death. All which in verity was nothing but a most virulent
Clap, which that Confounded Whore gave the greatest Hero in the World in his
old Age, better had it been for Betty-land that that Strumpet had been burnt a
hundred years before, for the Example of that great Hero has so bewitched the
Hectors of our Age, that they never think themselves like Hercules, till they
have been calcined in Dejanira's Smock. Aged Aeson was so improvident, as to
get a Clap in his old Age, but his Daughter Medea so well sweat him in her
Cornelius's Tub, that she recovered him, which gave an occasion to the Poets to
feign, that she boiled him so long till she renewed hi Age. And Valerius
Maximus tells you a Story of young Clodius Pulcher, who being a dissolute young
Shepherd, and wholly dedicating himself to the Embraces of a Common and
Infamous Siren: Erubescendo mortis genere Consumptus fuit, died a Death which
was a shame to rehearse, for says he, Abdomine avide devorato saede and
sordide Intemperantiae spiritum reddidit. The lower parts of his Belly being
all eaten away, he yielded his Life to the conquest of most nasty and sordid
Intemperance.

The fury of t^is Distemper is anciently set forth by the Greek Poet Nicander
in his Alexiphar^aca, w^o lived in the time of Attalus the last King of
Pergamus, (...),
(...)
(...).
For if the vigor of Meclean Fury but once
Begins to parch the Marrow of the Bones,
Woe worth the Man that finds not Surgeon out
And if he scapes the first, takes to'ther bout,
When wasted with inexorable Pains,
He moans the Anguish spread through all his Veins:
Oh cruel Pleasure that we buy so dear,
For one hours sport to plague a Man a year.


Surely, said Eucolpius, to pass through the several Hospitals, where the Cures
of this Distemper are performed, is a Journey more pleasant than that of Aeneas
into Hell, to see a poor Shepherd with his Head and Chops mu^^led up like Bevis
of Southampton in his Helmet, laid all along upon the side of his Couch, like
the Statue of Thamesis pouring out a River from the Urn of his Mouth. To hear
the strange Noises and hollow Sounds, that others make having lost the O^gans
of Speech, how they curse and ban the Artist for not having made their new
Noses according to Directions, for having made a new Pallat more like the Roof
of an Oven than to be put into the Mouth of a Gentleman. Go a little further
and you shall hear another ^uming against the cause of his Misfortune, a plague
of all Religious Sirens -- had she not told me, she had been one of Baxter's
H^arers, she should have been damned ere I would have meddled with her. How I
came by this sad Accident, cry's another, Heaven knows! for I have not laid
with any but my own Sh^pherdess this half year, but he is soon taken up short
by his fellow in Affliction -- Hell take your Shepherdess for me, for I had to
do with her but a week since and she gave me this. A huge mountainous Shepherd,
Grave and Elderly, had been clawed off by a little diminutive Pigmy, and he
sat in his Indian-Gown, with a blew Satin-Cap, Laced and Bordered with a Rich
Point, comforting himself up with Hall's Meditations, Shakespeare, and Foxe's
Book of Martyrs, and giving wholesome Advice to all that came to s^e him. O my
dear Friends and Companions! quoth he, have a care of Sirens, little
approaching to a door fast locked ye might discover through the Keyhole, a poor
Shepherdess disconsolately creeping about the Room, lamenting and sighing to
her self, and at length he^ving a Glass of Liquor to her Mouth, which went down
with so many sour Faces and with so much reluctance, that it seemed to be
neither Hippocras nor burnt-Claret. Are these the sweets of Love, quoth she?
The Pleasures of my Youth have sour Sauce, for I am undone and never shall be
my own Woman again. But the old Nurse that was with her, cried, Have patience
and all will be well in due time, '^was his Ignorance, and you must pardon one
another. Pardon me, quoth the other, what am I guilty of? Alas! I begged as for
an Alms to tell me the truth, and he still cried, it was a Strein, that he got
it at playing at Leap-frog, I pityed him, I nursed him, and plaistered him,
till it was come to that I could almost look in at his Mouth quite through the
nape of his Neck, then too late I discovered my Error and his Untruth. The
Distemper is so general, that a Man cannot shrink up his Nose in any Company,
for the shooting of a Corn against wet weather, but they ask ye -- what h^, you
have got 'em. Now as there are many Philosophers that have largely treated of
Valor and Fortitude, many that have made Essays upon Patience, but none of
these make any mention of those that so boldly and magnanimously Adventure Life
and Limbs in the Combats of Venus. He that looses a Limb in Battle reaps
Honor, and Scars beget* Renown. But let a Venerial Furioso with a Colly-Flower
upon his Forehead Encounter Bacchus himself never so briskly, his Nose which by
this means he is for^'t to purchase of pure Gold is not so much esteemed as the
others wooden Leg, no man calls them Hero's but Fools. And therefore Heroules
is not brought in mad by the Poets* for having the Disease, but because he was
such a^ Fool to get it, 'twas a swinger, and he died on it. But because Hercules
the Hector of the World died on it, that is no Argument that the Hectors of
Bet^y-land should run such terrible R^^qu^s for the fag end of Hercules his
Fame. Therefore Nessus the Centaur, who gave Dejanira her Doze, gave the better
Advice, who being sl^in by Hercules for vitiating his Mistress upon his
deathbed left Dejanira this Legacy. Give, quoth he, the same Clap to Hercules
that I have given you, and I Will secure you, he shall never love Sirens more.
The effect of which Counsel was good, and doubtless to be followed rather than
the Example of Hercules, most fit for those that accidentally commit an Error
to take warning by in time. But they that try the Experiments for the
Experiments sake, deserves no better end than Hercules had; but what Remedies?
Remedies! more than there are Atoms playing in the Summer-Sun-Beams.

A Distemper that opposes the Generation of Man, to set up and advance its own
generative faculty.

For it has produced and daily procreates such multitudes of Vermin and
strange Monsters, that the sultry Bogs of Africa never produced the like.
French Quacks, Italian Mountebanks, German Operators, English Empericks,
Experienced Hunters, Universal Pillmakers, Paracelsians, Chimists, Hermetical
Astrologers, Compounders, Confounders, Projectors, Dissectors, Injectors. These
made such an Alarm in the world, that the Curats, Parish-Clerks, and Sextons,
nay the whole Prerogative Office was in an up-roar, and all joining together,
drew up a Remonstrance, which they presented to Death. One of the Curates in a
formal set-Speech, informed his meagre Majesty of the danger he was in, how
many new Pills, Potions, Waters, Elixirs, Spirits of Salt, Lozinges, and
Chimical Extractions these Enemies of his had invented to his Destruction. To
commiserate the Ruin of so many Families that lived by Dust to Dust,
Grave-digging, Bell-tolling, Chancel-ground, middle-Isle-ground, and
Belfry-ground. To pity the decay of the Civil-Law, should they lose the Probat
of Wills: On the other side, the people of Betty-land finding that they were
now to be immortal, fell to all manner of Debauchery, Gluttonizing, Drinking,
Whoring, to the height of all Excess, laying all care of Health aside, as
altogether needless and frivolous, encountering Claps and Pox with that
boldness, as if they had done it in defiance of Death, making Lampoons against
that poor. Miscreant, as if he had not been worthy to wipe their Shoes. As for
Old Time with his Scyth, they bid him go to Harvest-work, and labor hard in the
Summer, lest he is starved in the Winter; some ask^ him why he did not make
friends to get into the Charterhouse.

Death and Time too were not a little troubled to hear these things, and
therefore to understand the truth of their Practices, they resolved to take a
turn or two about the Town. The main Obstacle was to get into Moorfields, where
the chief heads of the Rebellion lived, for fear of the Prentices. But time
being the master of Opportunity, bid him leave that to his Care: so coming into
the Street, they beheld to their no small Astonishment, all the Posts, all the
dead Walls, all the Posterns, all the Arches so be-plaistered, so be-smear'd
with Bills and printed Papers bidding open defiance against them, as if the
Bricks and Stone would sink under their several burdens with the Support and
Enablement of these potent Sear-Cloths. By and by comes a Fellow with a Brush
and pot of Past, and his Arms full of Quarto's, and giving Death such a
shoulder, as had almost thrown him into the Kennel, claps up another brisk
Challenge in the very teeth of him; Death let him go as he came, for he did not
like his Company, and when he was gone fell to Reading. In the first place, No
Cure no Money, Cheek by Jowl by that stood, At the Gun in Moorfields lives one
that never fails. Much ado had Time to keep Death from striking his Dart into
his own Breast, at the sight of th^se two confident pi^ces of Mortality. But
when he lift up his Eyes, and spied the Three Infallible Cures. Dii and Pluto
guard me, quoth Death, Three Infallible Cures, Then woe is me poor Death! I
never knew my self till now, a whole Crown for one quarter of Brandy, for these
bold Mortals have almost broke my Heart. But time the subtler of the two, gave
him kind words of Comfort, assuring him that he doubted not but in a short time
to let these Boasters find how vainly they contested with so great a Prince as
he was. But as public as they are abroad, they pr^t^nd the greatest Secrecy
imagi^able at their own Habitations. For the People of Betty-land whatever
Revel-Rout they make when they get this Distemper, yet when they find
themselves tainted, are the most cautious that can be to let their Friends,
Relations, or Acquaintance know it. They sneak into the Habitations of the
Sirens with their Cloaks over their No^es, pop out again when they see the
Street clear, but within doors are ashamed of no Extravagance, for pleasure is
a kind of drunkenness that makes men mad, puts all the Senses and Pastions upon
the stretch of duty, and when the heat is over, lays them tired and ^anguid to
sleep, leaving none but the usual Sentinels upon the Guard, Suspicion, Fear,
and Repentance.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Thomas Fox at the White-Hart ^ver against St.
Dunstans-Church in Fleet Street, and at the Angel in Westminster Hall.
THe History of the Grecian War, by Th^y^dides, and Englisht by Mr. Hobbs of
Malmsbury, Folio.

The History of the Life, Reign and Death of Edward 2d. King of England, and
Lord of Ireland with therise and fall of his great Favorits Gaveston and the
Spencers, Fol.

Cowels Interpreter a new Law Dictionary, fol.

Daltons Office of Sheri^^s, fol.

Daltons Country Justice, Folio.

Boccaces Tales, folio.

The Trial and Condemnation of Stephen College at Oxford for High Treason, with
his last Speech at the place of Execution f^ sti^^ht.

The Papers and Speeches of the late Lord Russel, Cap. Walcot, John Rowse and
Will. Hone at the place of Execution, fol. stitcht.

An Examination of the state of the Case of the Earl of Danby, ^.

An Account of the state of his Majesty's Revenue, as it was left by the Earl
of Danby at Lady Day, 1679. in a Letter to a friend occasioned by his Lordships
answer to an Examination of the state of the Case of the Earl of Danby, by the
Honorable Sr. Robert Howard, ^ol. stitcht.

The Examination of Edward Fitsharris Esquire taken before Sr. Robert Cla^ton, and
Sr. Geo. Treby, published by the order of the House of Commons, fol. stitcht.

A true Account of the whole proceedings betwixt his Grace the Duke of Ormond
and the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Anglesey late Lord Privy Seal, before
the King and Council, and the said Earls Letter of the 2d. of August to his
Majesty on that occasion. With a Letter of the now Lord Bishop of Winchester to
the said Earl of the means to keep out Popery, and the only effectual expedient
to hinder the growth thereof, and to secure both the Church of England, and the
Presbyterian Party, f. st.

A seasonable Address to both Hous^s of Parliament concerning the Succession,
the fears of Popery and Arbitrary Government, by a true Protestant and hearty
lover of his Country, quar. stitcht.

The Bishop of Herefords Legacy to his Diocese, being Sermons against Popery
and a Treatise on the Sacrament; quart.

Mr Whitehals Answer to Mr. Hobbs's Civil Wars of England, Octavo.

Cottoni Posthuma, or diverse choice pieces of that Renowned Antiquary* Sr.
Robert Cotton Bar. Oct.

Romes Tradition, the Law and Gospels Destruction, being a sober defense of the
Church of England from the Faction of the Romanists: with short historical
Observations on the Actions and Policies of the Popes of Rome in 2 parts, by
Geo. Topham Rector of Baston and Prebendary of Lincoln, Oct.

Grammatical Drollery by Captain Hicks, Octav.

Hobbs's Tripos in 3 Discourses. The first, Human Nature, or the fundamental
Elements of Policy. The second de Corpore politico, or the Elements of Law
moral and politic: as of the Law of Nature, Oaths, Covenants, several kinds of
Go-vernment with the changes and Revolu^ions of them. The third of Liberty and
Necessity, wherein all Controversy concerning Predestination, Election,
Free Will, Grace, Merits, Reprobation is fully decided and cleared the 3
Edition, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, Octavo.

Mr. Hunts Argument for the Bishops Right of judging in capital Cases in
Parliament, Oct.

The Lord Hollis's Remains, being a second Letter to a friend concerning the
Judicature of the Bishops in Parliament in Vindication of what he wrote in his
first, and in answer to a Book Entitled The Rights of the Bishops to judge in
Capital Cases of Parliament cleared, and also to the Grand Question, etc. To
which is added Considerations in answer to the learned Author of the Grand
Question, etc. by another hand: and reflections upon some passages in Mr. Hunts
Argument upon that Subject, by a third, Oct.

An answer to Dolman alias Parsons upon the Succession, written by S. John
Hayward Knight, and Dr. of Laws, Octav.

The Ramble, an Anti-Heroick Poem, together with some Terrestrial Hymns and
carnal Ejaculations by Alexander Ratcliff of Grayes-Inn Esquire. Octav.

Europe a slave, unless England break her Chains, discovering the grand Designs
of the French popish Party in England for several years. The 2d. Edition,
Twelves.

The Roman Historian; or compendious History of the Lives, signal Enterprises
and Deaths of all the Roman Emperors from Julius Caesar to Leopold the first
now Reigning, together with an exact Succession of all the Popes to this
present time, Illustrated with the Sculptures of the Caesar's in Copper Plates,
and Englisht from the Original Italian, by a Person of Quality in Twelves.

French Intreagues, or the History of their delusory Promises since the
Pirenaean Treaty, written in French at Cologne, and now made English, Twelves.

Sr. Walter Rawley's Remains, Twel.


