DIALOGUE BETWIXT A Conformist and a Nonconformist* Concerning the Lawfulness
of Private Meetings In the time of the Public Ordinances, and of going to
them: AND ALSO, Some Directions how to Profit by Hearing, designed chiefly for
the benefit of the People of S. M. Magdalen's and Redriff.

Published by N. E. for common benefit.

Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them; for they that
are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple,

Romans 16. 17. Be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive,

Ephesians. 4. 14. Printed in the Year, 1668.

The Dialogue.
Conformist. Neighbor I am glad to see you, you have not been lately at
Church, I hope you have not forsaken it.


Nonconformist. I go constantly to hear a precious man that preaches hard-by
in private, whither I would fain have you go, I wish so well to your soul.


C. I thank you, but you know we are not so well skilled, but Scholars can
preach dangerous errors to us, and we not discern them; how dare you trust your
self to be guided and taught by a stranger? and why do you forsake our own
Minister who has subscribed to the Articles of our Religion?


N. C. Truly I don't conceive it my duty to hear him, but that I am free to
hear where I please.


C. Is our Minister bound to preach? if so, sure some body is bound to hear
him; and I know none more bound to hear him than you and I, for God by his
providence has set him over us, and you know we were ready and glad to receive
him. St. Paul you know was Apostle and Minister to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.
15. and chap. 9. 2. and when they forsook him, though they followed good men,
Apollo and Peter, yet he blames them for it, 1 Cor. 3. 3. Besides by the Laws
of the Land we are appointed and enjoined to worship God at our own Parish
Churches, and 1 Pet. 2. 13. We must submit to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake: Do not we blame those Ministers that are Non-resident and leave
their people? and why is it not as much a fault in the people to leave their
Minister?


N. C. I must confess you have given me some reason why I ought rather to hear
at our own Parish Church than elsewhere, but yet I think I have very good
reason why I have lest it.


C. Have you any just exceptions against the life or Doctrine of our Minister?


N. C. No, I have not, but though he be not scandalous, yet there are many of
the Clergy are.


C. That Is no reason why you should leave him, but rather encourage and love
him because he is sober; but suppose he were scandalous in his life, this would
not be a sufficient reason presently to leave him.


N. C. No! why?


C. First we ought modestly and meekly to advise him to live well, if this
would not do, then we ought to complain of him to his Superiors that they may
admonish him; if this would not do, we are to make use of the Law whereby
scandalous and erroneous Ministers may be suspended till they reform; and if
any people have bad Ministers, it is their own fault, and great sin if they
don't take this course with them, and till we have done our duty we cannot be
excusable in leaving a scandalous Minister.


N. C. But what? must we hear and receive Sacraments, etc. in the mean time
from such a man?


C. Yes, for I judge the Ordinances of God if rightly and duly administered by
him, are not the worse for the wickedness of the man that dispenses them; for
they are Gods Ordinances and not man's, and their excellency and efficacy come
from God, and not from the righteousness of any man that dispenses them, so
that if we will duly make use of them, his wickedness cannot hinder us from
benefit by them: we must take Christ's advice Do as they say, and not as they do.


N. C. But why do the Bishops suffer such men to come into Livings, and why
don't they eject them when in?


C. The Patron has a right to Present, and if the Bishops will not admit he will
force him by a Quare impedit: and the Bishop cannot suspend them when in, unless
first he know it, and be informed of it; and secondly unless it be proved and
prosecuted; for the Bishop cannot be Judge and accuser both, and therefore the
Churchwardens are sworn to Present such; if therefore they be not prosecuted,
the fault is not in the Bishop but people. Neighbor I heartily wish we did
more cover the nakedness of some few of the Clergy, and if they would not be
reclaimed, that they were prosecuted in a legal way, and not by Invectives and
envious reflections lay the fault of some few upon the whole.


N. C. I must acknowledge I cannot accuse our Minister, but the reasons why I go
from him, are, first because the Common Prayer is read at his Church, secondly
because I can profit more by another man that preaches in private.


C. In answer to your first reason, I remember you have gone to hear at the
Church though the Common Prayer was read there, at least you were wont to come
in after it was done; why is it more unlawful for you to come now than it was
then? If you scruple at Common Prayer, why do you not join with us in the rest?
Besides, how many of you will hear it at a Christning? Do the sweet Meats and
Wine make it more lawful at that time than it is at another*


N. C. It is Mass, it is Porridge, it is Bibble babble, it is Willworship, it is
Superstition, and shall I come to hear where it is?


C. I pray be not angry, but hear me meekly.

1. They are good prayers made to the true God in the Name of Jesus Christ, and
I cannot account it less than a kind of Blasphemy, and an high breach of the
third Commandment to deride and scorn them; it is true, Elijah mocked at the
prayers of Baals Priests, but 'twas because they prayed to a false God, but is
it not horrible wickedness for those that own the true God, to deride those
prayers that are made to him?

2. There is some part of the Bible in the Mass, is it e're a whit the worse
for being there? no more are good prayers the worse for being in the Mass.

3. Why is not your way more Will Worship than ours? wherein you have more your
own Will, and inventions than we have? your Minister invents what prayers, and
what way of Administering the Sacraments he pleases, and this he will do,
though more wise, pious, and learned men have made better; and King, Lords, and
Commons, and the Convocation have advised and enjoined the use of them; has
not he high conceits of himself? much of confidence and will in his worship?
and little of modesty, that thinks himself wiser and his own inventions, better
than these? is not yours Will Worship?

4. I have been taught, that Superstition cannot be in a prayer or any external
thing, but that it is in our minds, it being an evil apprehension of God; and so
those that are against Common Prayer may be as guilty of Superstition as they
that use it.

5. I pray tell me, and speak your conscience, do you not think that if you
should heartily join with the Minister in it, if you should use the Confessions
with true repentance for sin, the Petitions with sincere desires for those good
things they mention, and the thanks givings with love and praises to God in
your soul; this would not be more pleasing to God than turning your back upon
it, and scoffing at it?


N. C. But they are such cold and formal prayers, that I cannot lift up my heart
in the use of them.


C. Surely you are highly mistaken, to think that good prayers can be formal,
or make you cold and dead in praying them?

1. To pray by a form is lawful and good, else why would our Savior have left
us a form? why do we use Psalms? do you not use a form for a Grace at Meals?
are not extempory prayers forms to the hearers, for the hearers must no more
vary from them, least they be guilty of wandering thoughts, than we from the
Common Prayer? and some must use a form in their Families, or not pray at all,
they having not good and ready inventions.

2. I always thought evil formality in prayer consisted not in a form of words,
but in a lazy formal temper of mind, so th t if you be not serious in using
Common or other prayers, it is you that are formal, and not the prayers.

3. Besides I find, and me thinks it is reasonable, that those words whose form
and Emphasis I have considered of and apprehended before, should at the using
of them most readily (when I have not time to meditate) and most powerfully
affect my heart by the way of my judgment; and that extempory inventions do
most usually but raise the affections by the force of the fancy, as Poets,
Musicians, etc. find by experience.

4. I cannot believe that bate inventing and affectionate using of new words
every time we pray, is praying by the Spirit, but certainly to pray by the
Spirit, is to exercise Charity, Humility, Faith, Repentance, and the rest of
the Graces of the Holy Spirit in our hearts in prayer, and seeing words are but
to express our minds, and that those Graces in out hearts may be expressed by a
form of words; I see not why he that prays by a form, may not at least as well
pray by or wish the Spirit as others.


N. C. Truly friend, I find I cannot twice a day invent a new form fit to be
prayed in my Family, and therefore do most usually use a form of words, which I
see my Children and Servants better understand than extemporary prayers. But
that which makes some of the Non-conformists think Common Prayer unlawful, is
the Imposition of it.


C. Though I think out Governors may impose lawful things, yet it not much
concerns us to dispute that, but whether we are to obey them or not; and for
this I would fain understand, how that which was lawful for me to do before
imposed, should by being imposed become unlawful; or when are we more bound to
obey Magistrates than when they command lawful things? Seeing their commands
which are about lawful things take away only the liberty of our actions, but
not the liberty of our consciences, which is properly Christian liberty; the
former is a due to our lawful Superiors, the latter only a tribute to God;
therefore the French Protestant Church, and the Dutch, and all the Reformed
Churches have Forms which they use in Public.


N. C. But there are some things in the Common Prayer that are unlawful, and
you have no Scripture for them.


C. I suppose you mean the Ceremonies, Surplice, Cross, and Kneeling, which
have been enough disputed by others; all that I will answer to you is, that I
must confess there is no express Scripture for them, and yet I don't count them
unlawful.


N. C. No! why, I pray is it lawful for us to do any thing in the Worship of
God that we have not Scripture for?


C. Yes, for though there be no Scripture for them, yet there is none against
them, and nothing is sin but what is forbidden, and if you account them
unlawful when there is no Scripture against them, you are righteous overmuch,
and add to Gods word.


N. C. Say you so! I don't remember any plain place of Scripture against them,
but will think on one against the next time we meet.


C. Do I pray, and think how small a condescension these would be in you over
the things strangled and blood enjoined to be forborne, Acts 15. 29. And St.
Paul's causing Timothy to be circumcised, were.


N. C. But friend, do you not see how all that are godly hate the Common
Prayer, and the Bishops, and hear in private, and is not this enough to induce
you and I to do so too?


C. I pray ask your Minister whether there was any other Government in the
Church then Bishops from the Apostles times, till Mr. Calvin's, who lived about
a hundred years ago? I know you quarrel at our Bishops greatness, but that
alters not their Office, and shall thy eye be evil because the King's and his
Predecessors has been good to them? is it any evil in thee to accept what is
given thee? I do believe that many that are against them are truly godly, but I
do not count it any part of their piety, but their great mistake; and when I
consider that St. Paul says Charity is the chiefest grace, I am afraid there
are too few of them truly godly, because they are so full of scoffing, railing,
envy, and bitterness against Bishops: and although our Savior enjoins us* to
love and do good, to bless and pray for those that are our enemies, yet they
pray against their supposed enemies, and it is said, will fast and pray whole
days to beseech God to curse them. Oh horrid! the Devil would do thus too, but
that he knows it is to no purpose. Christians are enjoined to pray for Heathen
Governors, and do they act like Christians that pray against Christian
Governors? Besides, I never could like their calling themselves and their party
the godly, it savours more of Pharisaical Pride, than Modesty and Humility.


N. C. But can you think that a people that pray, and fast, and hear so much
are not the best?


C. Who prayed and fasted more than the Pharisees? and than Cromwell and his
Companions? indeed Neighbor methinks there is more of Christianity in a modest
obedience to Superiors, in justice and charity to our Neighbors, than in
praying whole days, fasting twice a week, Lectures and Meetings every day.


N. C. O Sir* me thinks you now are full of (...) and (...) to despise
godliness.


C. I do not observe my self to be in a Passion, hear my reasons, and if they
be not good i will conclude I am mistaken. God forbid I should despise praying,
hearing, etc. they are our duties, and especially the public, at being public
acknowledgments that God is the Governor of the world; but yet I would not
over*value them, for they are but means to a good life, and are no further
acceptable to God than as they tend to make us live well, and is not the end to
be preferred above the means? And is it not a great error to make mere praying,
and hearing, and to be affected in them our and? who is the best Christian, he
that prays, etc. most? or that lives best?


N. C. But they are most likely to get grace and to live best that pray, etc.
most*


C. I am not of your mind.


N. C. How! who are more likely to get grace than they?


C. They that strive most to get what they pray for, and to do what they hear,
for our designs in attending upon God in his Ordinances, should not be to
change God (who is unchangeable) but our selves by Gods grace, which is not
done by mere begging for grace, but by resolutions and endeavors to live well.
We must not go to God as if he were perverse or hard hearted, and must be
overcome with a great many importunities, persuasions, and arguments; for he
is a kind and loving Father, and no sooner does he see us repentant and
resolved to live well, but he hears and answers us, so that he that most
endeavors to subdue his lusts, and to exercise a good conscience is the best
man, and most likely to get grace; but to place our Religion in external
devotions, smells too rank of Popery and Superstition, though we are never so
frequent and so affected in them.


N. C. But do you not observe how many there are that worship God in private?


C. What is more fickle than the multitude, who are tossed up and down with
every wind of Doctrine? and we know that old Eve is too much in us all,
especially in the Women, we long most to taste forbidden fruit. When many of
these men that preach in private had liberty to preach in public, they had
very few to hear them.


N. C. But have not the Puritans been always accounted the godly of the Land?


C. Yes, by themselves and their own party; and I have very worthy thoughts for
the old Puritans, who as Mr. Clark and others tell us, did most dillgently
attend upon the public Ordinances, and did most devoutly and reverently join
in the Common Prayers, and would take care to be at the beginning of them, and
did only scruple some of the Ceremonies: But how come you now to differ so much
from them?


N. C. Because we have more light than they had.


C. I don't believe it: it is true, there is more preaching, talking, and
disputing about the niceties and circumstances of Religion, but fewer now know
and mind the essentials of Religion contained in the Creed, Lords Prayer, and
ten Commandments: the best evidence of the light of this age are the works of
it, sure I am there is not now an hundredth part so much Love and Charity, so
much Honesty and Faithfulness, so much Temperance and Sobriety, so much Modesty
and Humility, so much of Simplicity and Plainness, so much of Reverence for
Superiors, as there was before our unhappy Civil Wars, from which times of
liberty we may date the debauching of the Nation. Light is not the cause of
deeds of darkness.


N. C. Well friend, I see you will be for your Mumpsimus still; what say you to
my other reason against hearing in public Churches?


C. Neighbor, I do pray you, nay admonish you in the Name of God to have more
reverence for the worship of the Great God. You are too near of kin to the
Monsters of the other end of the Town that scoff at all Religion, only you
pretend to do it in zeal for Religion: but this wont excuse the Devil, that he
pretends to be an Angel of light. Was not your other reason this, that you can
profit most in private?


N. C. Yes, and ought I not to go where I can profit most?


C. If you must go where you think you can profit most, then if you can find
another that you can profit by more than Mr. J. you must leave Mr. J. and go to
him.


N. C. Yes.


C. Well, and there may be the same reason to leave the next, and so the next,
till you come to the best of all* and if every one do thus, what undecent
Levity and Confusion will there be? But suppose he that you think you can
profit most by should go into India? if it be your duty to hear where you think
you can profit most, it is your duty to follow him, seeing it is not impossible.
Certainly Neighbor it is our duty to hear where God has placed us, and the
less means we have, the less will God require of us, and we must endeavor to
improve our selves by our own diligence, and may with reason expect more of
profit than those that gad or hear better preachers in private; for those that
disobey Governors, and cause divisions, that they may worship in private when
they may worship in public, do like the Israelites, who disobeyed God that
they might have fat cattle to offer up in sacrifice to him; and therefore are
not so likely to profit by the Ordinance, as those that worship in public, Who
do no evil that good may come on it. To obey Superiors is to obey God, and to
obey is better than sacrifice, but the sacrifice of the wicked is an
Abomination to the Lord, 2 Prove. 15. 8.

But let me be informed from you what you mean by profiting, are you taught any
truth needful for your souls that is not taught in publik?


N. C. Not that I can remember.


C. But I can tell you of some truths we hear in public, that your private
preachers, though they know and believe them, dare not or will not preach to
you.


N. C. Which are they* certainly they are conscientious men, and would not be
men*pleasers.


C. First, I am afraid they scarce dare preach upon the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, and ten Commandments, least their hearers should think them low and
mean things.

2. They will not tell you that you ought to keep to your own Parish Churches,
though they believe you ought; for when they preached in public, then they
taught that Doctrine, and petitioned against Coventicles.

3. They dare not tell you that the Common Prayer is lawful, and that you ought
to be sincere in the hearing of it.


N. C. But what reason have you that any of them think it lawful?


C. Because most of them have confessed it, and they scruple only one or more of
the Ceremonies; besides, he that you go to hear, viz. Mr. J. was a Curate under
a Minister in the Country since the King came in, and read the Common Prayer
for him. Yet now --

4. They will not tell you that you ought to obey Superiors, and not speak evil
of Dignities Temporal or Spiritual, though the Scriptures speaks expressly that
the Elders that labor in the word, i. e. that are Ministers of the Gospel,
that rule well should have double honor. But how many I will not say invent
evil reports, but rejoice at them, and envy their fame and repute?

5. They dare not tell you that you ought not to make divisions or schisms in
the Church, and you know well enough why they dare not preach these truths.


N. C. Enough of this, there are better things for them to preach of.


C. Methinks these are things of great concernment: A Drunkard, an
Whore-monger, a Swearer, does a great deal less harm in Church and State, than
he that breaks the fifth Commandment, or causes divisions.


N. C. Our Governors cause divisions, by imposing things against men's
consciences.


C. Did you ever know any confess themselves to be the causers of division,
though they were? yet sometimes you forget your selves, and confess it when you
call your selves the Brethren of the separation. 2. You cannot except against
matters of faith, only Discipline and Government, i. e. in plain word you would
not be ruled, but would be rulers. 3. All Reformed Churches take to themselves
a power of imposing indifferent things, the French Protestants appoint the
posture of standing at the Lords Supper, and will not give it to any that sit:
the Dutch impose sitting, and will not give it to any that stand, and shall
they have power to appoint standing or sitting, and not we kneeling? You know
God appointed the Passover to be taken standing, yet the Jews afterward altered
this posture, and commanded sitting or leaning, and our Savior obeyed them,
and did eat the Passover sitting or leaning. The Jews appointed Holy*days that
God never appointed, as the Feast of Dedication, no where mentioned but in the
Maccabees, and yet Christ observes this Feast; John 10. But what need I say
more? the Presbyterians appointed the Ceremony of holding up the hand at the
taking the Covenant, and an Oath is a piece of worship to God: and yet they
will say somewhat that they make you believe they are persecuted for their
consciences.


N. C. So they are, were ever so many Ministers so strangely driven from their
places?


C. I do think Governors ought to enact such Laws as they in their consciences
think best for the Nation, and such particular persons as cannot submit to those
Laws, must be contented to suffer, and yet not count it persecution; For
persecution is when men suffer for being Righteous, our governors aimed at
peace, and not at punishing of them for their consciences, or for being
righteous; for they may be as good Christians as they will as to their faith
and manners, they may be as humble as meek, as just, as self-denying as they
will; they may worship God after their own way, in their own families, and
never be punished for it; and besides, have sufficient opportunities of
worshipping God in public. The great contest is, who shall rule and govern the
Church, they, or the King and Parliament, whose model or way shall take place;
and if all will not submit to them it is persecution. Is this the same case with
Christ's and the Apostles? they were persecuted for preaching the Gospel,
because the then Governors would not have had Christian Religion preached at
all, but our Governors not only suffer those that will submit to be ruled by
them to preach the Gospel, but encourage them, and therefore we see as good
preaching here abouts as ever there was.


N. C. But friend, we have quite forgot our main business; we were inquiring
what profit I got in private more than in public: I told you, I did not
remember any truths preached there that were not in public; but i will tell you
that he whom I hear is a most rowsing, awakening Preacher, that stirs me up and
quickens me, so that methinks I find a great deal of God going along with his
preaching.


C. If you please, we may consider of the benefit you mean under these Heads.
1. Either your affections are raised. 2. Or your heart and life made better.


N. C. Can I think I ought not to go where my affections are most raised.


C. I pray let me ask you some questions; seeing our affections are raised
either by our judgments or our fancies, tell me which way you think he raises
yours?


N. C. I hope it is by my judgment, for he gives us reasons for the Doctrines.


C. Can you remember the particular arguments or reasons that so awakened you
the last time? had they any thing extraordinary in them?


N. C. No, I cannot remember what particularly it was that had that power over
me.


C. It Is strange! that which we are so much affec^ed with, we are not apt to
forget: But tell me, what power has it had upon you since? for if our
affections are raised by the way of our judgments, I observe those truths will
hang in our minds like weights or byasses, drawing our souls, and subduing our
hearts and lives to them. I pray speak sincerely, do you find any such
over-powering sense of any truth continue in your mind afterward?


N. C. I must if I will speak truth, say I do not; only a kind of liking to the
man, and longing to hear him again.


C. I pray tell me, has he not a very loud voice, sweet tone, a pretty smiling
contenance, a vehement and earnest delivery, and active posture of body, is not
his Sermon filled with a great many pitiful words, as poor soul, poor sinner, a
great many expostulations, exclamations, oh's and ah's and groans intermixed?
have not you a great opinion of him for his godliness, and love, and compassion
to him, because a Nonconformist?


N. C. All this I must confess.


C. Do you think that the same Sermon or a better, if delivered from a
Conformist, or a grave man, whose voice is lower and is not so affectionate,
would please and affect you so much?


N. C. I must acknowledge I think it would not, what do you gather from hence?


C. That your affections are raised by the way of your fancy* and that you are
much mistaken to call this profit, for it is but pleasure, and if you go only to
be thus affected, you have the same ends in going to hear a Sermon, that others
have in going to a Comedy, or walk in the fields, viz. their pleasure and
delight.


N. C. This may be true, but however this may be a good way to have good
wrought upon the heart and life.


C. I will not limit God, but will tell you that St. Paul seemed in his
preaching to shun this art, 1 Cor. 2. 1. I came not to you with excellency of
speech or wisdom, v. 4. but my speech and preaching was not with enticing words
of men's wisdom; that the things of Christian Religion might be preached in their
own native power and plainness, and St. Aug. chides himself for delighting so
much in the singing of Psalms, observing that his heart went a whoring too much
after the pleasure of the Music and delights of his fancy in it.


N. C. But our Minister sometimes looks on his notes, and if he be not very
affectionate, I am dull, and ready to fall asleep.


C. If he looks on his notes, it is a sign he has considered well beforehand
what to say to you; you must not be a patient and expect to be roused, but you
must rowse your self* and you must by meditating on the truths you hear, raise
your affections to them; that heat that is raised within by the exercise of our
own faculties is natural, and abundantly better than that which comes from an
external fire, that is ready to scorch you. But I pray observe the different
tempers of men, some are more judicious, others more affectionate, and some
have louder voices than others, and if either of these be a sufficient cause
for separation, we seem to blame God that he has not made all men alike.


N. C. But those that preach in private, have been and are instruments of
converting many?


C. The praise and glory be given to God if they are, but pray tell me what you
call conversion, I hope you mean more than a being made a Nonconformist? or so
affected in hearing as was spoke of before? what real change is made in them?


N. C. Those that were profane are made sober.


C. I am glad to hear it, and do heartily wish it be not a mere change from one
sin to another. I remember the Jews said of John the Baptist, because he came
neither eating nor drinking he had a Devil, but of Christ because he came
eating and drinking he was gluttonous, etc. though they wrongly applied it, yet
their rule was this, that those that only resrain'd from gluttony and
drunkenness, had Devils, i. e. envy, pride, hypocrisy, and such lusts within
them. Let me ask you therefore, are they not hugely affected to the
Non-conformists way? do they not angrily (or as they call it, zealously)
condemn all that are not of their way? would they not count it a kind of
Apostasy and backsliding from grace for any to forsake private meetings, and
receive the Supper in public?


N. C. Why do you ask? it may be it is so.


C. Because, if so, I am afraid it is only a conversion to the Non-conformists,
and not to God? for in true conversion, humility and charity are the chief
graces wrought in us, and I am apt to think where such judging is, where such
railing, censoriousness, and bitterness is against civil or spiritual
Superiors, there is more of the Devil than the true spirit of Christianity, and
I doubt it is a change from the lusts of the flesh to the works of the Devil;
it is a change wrought by some external weight (as motion in a Clock) and does
not proceed from a principle of life.


N. C. Come, come, I am afraid you speak this out of envy, as being unwilling
to acknowledge that any good is done by the Non-conformists.


C. I do most solemnly profess I speak my judgment, and shall heartily rejoice
that good is done by any; some may preach Christ out of envy, some out of
covetousness, others out of pride, to get followers and a name; and God, who is
not tied or beholden to means, may do good by these, and yet this no excuse at
all to these teacher's faults, nor have we reason from hence to think the
better of them (but of God) or to be followers of them, for we must not do evil
that good may come on it.


N. C. You seem to be very tart, and therefore will I not put you upon speaking
much more upon this theme, but I find by experience I cannot profit so much by
our own Minister as by him I heat in private, I mean, as to my heart and life.


C. If I have any gaul in my heart, I wish I knew my self better, for I do not
discern it, but God willing I shall more search my heart, and shall desire you
calmly to consider of what I said. As to your profiting, I would ask, is not
that by the spirit of God? I mean, is not the spirit the Author of real grace
in the heart, and piety in the life?


N. C. Yes, I believe it is; what then?


C. Is it more in the power of a Nonconformist Minister to give grace than a
Conformist?


N. C, No, but in those waters we find the spirit most moving, must we not
frequent most there?


C. I must deny that which you suppose to be true, viz. that God's spirit does
ordinarily go along more with one man's preaching than another, if both are
Orthodox and honest.


N. C. I pray tell me, how then it comes to pass that one man converteth more
than another does?


C. I answer, that it is not ordinarily, because one Minister is more godly than
another, or a better preacher than another, but because some are better hearers
than others; some do less resist and more close with the spirit than others do,
and I dare from my own experience say, that the reason why you don't profit by
your own Minister is your own fault only; for as God is not tied to place, so
neither to this or that man, or to his parts or preaching. And if you would
take some advice given to me, you would know how to profit by every man, as I
thank God I do by our own Minister.


N. C. Do me that kindness for my souls sake, and you gain me; for I desire to
profit by hearing, and if I can do that by our own Minister, i will not forsake
him.


C. I will therefore Neighbor open my heart to you, and tell you I was once in
your condition, I thought to be affected with a Sermon, was profiting by it,
and you know we are most apt to be affected with novelties, and therefore I had
an itching ear, and seldom could be pleased with one man long, and I did above
all most loath and despise my own Minister as being stale to me, God forgive me
for it, for I was highly pleased with him at first, at last I began to reflect
upon my self, and to consider what good I had got by all these preachers: I
found that having got the name of a Professor, I abhorred to be guilty of any
outward enormity, and was very forward to dispute and talk of Religion, and was
usually very much affected in hearing and praying, and I used to complain of a
naughty heart, and of the withdrawings of God if I were not so; and I really
thought my self in one of the highest forms of Religion; but upon searching my
heart, and strictly observing my self, I found I had most abominable vices
reigning in my soul, particularly pride, covetousness, envy, and malice,
censoriousness, disobedience to Superiors, and the like, then I knew that my
Religion was artificial, void of inward life, and I was astonished and
affrighted at my sad condition; I went to our Minister, whom I was convinced
God had set over me to instruct me, and that therefore I was most likely to
have direction from God by him, I told him my condition, and asked him what I
should do to profit by the word? He most compassionately entertained me, though
I had so slighted him and most gravely advised me.

1. That I would lay aside all pride and conceitedness, for God resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble; want of doing this has been a great
reason why you have not profited by the word; for you have not come with any
design to learn from the Minister, but to be a judge whether he preaches well
or not; you have not come as a Disciple to a Master, or as a child to a Father
to be instructed; but you looked on the Minister not as Gods Ambassador, and in
Christ's stead, but as one to act a part, and say a lesson, and that his only
end was to commend himself or please you, and therefore you used in hearing to
observe whether you were pleased or not; and after hearing did not consider
what you had been taught, and what was your duty to do, but only did either
commend or discommend the Preacher, was it not thus? I told him I must
acknowledge it was so, you must, proceeded he, lay aside this, the Pharisees
were most unreachable by Christ, because so conceited of their Knowledge and
Piety, they heard not to learn, but to judge, but the lower valleys are most
refresht and made fruitful by rain's from Heaven. Therefore be sensible* that
the Minister is Gods Ambassador, that the plainest truths are of greatest
concernment, and therefore most to be taught by your Minister and learnt by
you, consider them most, and be not ambitious after high speculations, and
never reckon that you have learnt any truth enough, till you find it has
subdued you into obedience to it. I resolved to take his advice, and prayed him
to go on.

2. A second advice I would give you, quoth he* is that you do not hear merely
to be efected and pleased, but make this the end both of your praying and
hearing to live better; so that when you hear the Minister speak against sin,
employ not your self to hear how he will acquit himself what notions, stories,
gingles, phrases or elegancies he has, but raise up thy hatred against that
sin by all the evil he tells thee there is in it, and take and follow his
advice how to resist and stand against it; what ever duty thou hear him
preach of, let the reasons be brings to convince thee, it is thy duty, make thee
resolve to practice it, and follow the directions and helps he gives thee: Thou
must hear thy Minister, not as we hear Music, only to be pleased, but as a
sick man does a Physician; in order to do what he is advised for his health.
And not striving to practice what we hear, is the reason why the word no more
profits; for, said he, the spirit of God works upon us by us, and then only
are we most likely to have the helps of Gods spirit, when we are endeavoring
to do duties enjoined* there are two great benefits of the spirit, Light and
Strength. 1. Light and conviction of our judgments and consciences, this we may
expect in hearing and praying, but yet not unless we duly give up our minds to
be taught by the spirit of God. The second is strength to do duties, and this
the spirit gives us ordinarily, not in bare hearing and praying, but in doing
those duties we heard and prayed for grace to do, so that we are as the widows
cruise of oil then we have increase from God when pouring out, then more
Talents given, when we improve what we have: so that thou must not hear and
pray, and then wait till the spirit gives thee strength; but as soon as thou
have heard what thou art to do, up and be doing, work out by salvation, for
then, and not till then will God work in thee and help thee; do thus, and I
make no question but thou will profit by the word. Sir, said I, I must confess
I have been defective in this, for I usually first expected impulses and a kind
of force offered to my soul to do duties, and thought it in vain to attempt
conquering a lust till I were so furnished, but you tell me I must first be
striving e^se I can expect assistance, and that in striving strength most
ordinarily comes. Have you any thing else you would advise me to?

3. Yes; said he, I would not have you live in any known sin, for that will
estrange Gods holy spirit from you; and I do earnestly advise you that you
would nor trouble your head with the disputes of this age, which you cannot
understand neither is it needful, they being about trifles; for whilst your
thoughts and zeal are laid out about Ceremonies, Discipline, etc. by the
cunning of the Devil you become careless of, and and heartless in your main
concerns; for trees that abound in Suckers are seldom fruitful. Had not you
spent your time a great deal better in endeavoring to give God your heart in
Common Prayer, than in wrangling against it, which insensibly raises
bitterness of spirit? had it not been better to have learned to love, and as
far as you could confcientiously to have obeyed your civil and spiritual
Fathers and Governors, than to rail and rage against them, and scorn them? is
there not more of Christianity in hiding our Brothers infirmities, than in
insulting over them? is it not a great deal better for you to mind* judgment,
mercy, and faith, than to distract your thoughts with Mint, Annice, and Cummin?
I pray, said he, most affectionately with tears in his eyes, pity the poor
Church that is wounded and torn in pieces, and no longer fill your head with
those stories and complaints which the discontents of men suggest to you, but
let this be your great care to be good and to live well; And if you join to
these things most hearty and fervent prayers to God for his blessing, who will
most freely give his holy spirit to them that ask, I dare warrant that you will
profit by attending upon the word.

I did resolve to do as he had advised me, and though I found it at first
difficult and another kind of work than I had bin used to, yet I find now it
was the best advice that ever I had, and now can profit by any preacher that
does but preach truth; because I do not concern my self so much with, who the
man is, what party, or way he is of, what affections or elegancies he has in
is Sermon, as with the truths he taught, and what God by him commands me to do,
and so I presently set upon practicing of it, and I find that God is ready to
help the diligent. But I must tell you I benefit by no man so much as our own
Minister, who I observe preaches always, not that which may most please us and
commend himself, as strangers are apt to do, especially those that live by the
Benevolence of the people, but that which will do us most good; and now I am no
more inclinable to go from our own Church, than a temperate abstemious man is
to go to feasts, who though he may now and then go with a friend, yet is
quickly weary of it, and chooses for constancy to feed at home.


N. C. I hope I may get good by what you have told me, I will consider of it,
and acquaint you with more of my mind hereafter.


C. I pray Neighbor do, and lay aside prejudice which is utterly unteachable,
and think not your self perfect in knowledge, which is a great fault of the
Non-conformists; how peremptorily will they blame Governors, as if Parliament
and Counsel were but fools to them, and the Common people will so confidently
decide Controversies, that they condemn all as unchristian that are not of
their mind, and all that are, are ipso facto, the Saints and the Godly. I pray
also consider how good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to live together
in unity; therefore St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1, 10. Beseeches us in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that we speak the same things, and that there be no
divisions among us, but that we be perfectly joined together in the same mind,
and in the same judgment; it seems they began to separate then, for St. Paul
was the Minister and Apostle of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4. 15. and chap. 9. 2.
but many of the Corinthians divided from him, and some followed Apollo, others
Cephas or Peter, 1 Cor. 1. 12. though this was out of zeal, and as good designs
as you can have, probably, because Apollo was an excellent Preacher, and Peter
a zealous man, yet he calls them carnal for it, 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. I pray consider
how great prejudice divisions do the Gospel, nothing makes any so unwilling to
be a Member of any Society as their quarrels, and this certainly is a grand
remora to the Heathen's turning Christians, because we no better agree among
our selves, hence St. Paul, Phil. 2. 2, 3. says fulfill ye my joy, that ye be
like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind, let
nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let
each, esteem other better than themselves. The Papists boast of the great
harvest they have by our divisions, for the great argument they use is this,
you see how the Protestants are divided, but we are all of one mind; had you as
much zeal for the credit of Christian Religion and the Protestant cause, as you
have for your own Party, you would not do thus; how great uncharitablness have
you to us that will not worship God with us, but converse with us as if we were
Heathens and Publicans? were we not bound by the command of God to obey
Superiors, and to submit to Governors, we would rather comply what we could
with you, than that such a breach should continue, but seeing we are bound, and
may not wound our consciences, and you are free to return, yea, have the same
obligation upon you to h^^r in public that we have, the schism must lie at
your doors; and what may be the end of it I dread to think, but will tell you
that such divisions were the seeds of our late bloody civil wars, and though
you may intend no such thing, yet you see how it followed upon them; and for
Gods sake take heed of contributing any thing to it by cherishing such
separations, least our own or our Children's blood be spilt in a second war,
and then it may be you will repent of your folly when it is too late. It is sad
there is so much Whoredom, Drunkenness, and Swearing, but these in themselves
tend not half so much to the ruin of a Nation, as Divisions, Schisms, and
Separations; for Parties and Sects are as fuel, and discontents are as fire,
and there wants nothing but some mischievous hand to lay them together, and to
blow them up into a flame, most civil wars are thus raised. I pray God prevent
my fears, and change yours and every such man's heart, that we may modestly and
meekly submit to Governors, and live in love, and unity, and peace one with
another, and the God of peace will be with us. Amen.


FINIS.

