THE ETERNAL GOSPEL Once more Testified unto and Vindicated. Against the
Ignorance, or Malice of the Bishops and Teachers of the now Church of England.

This Book proving against their Doctrine, That the Holy Ghost is not ceased,
but is still given to all the Faithful, and to some in the same measure as the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ had it: Also at the occasion of a late Sermon
preached at the Visitation of the Bishop of London, by the Vicar of West-ham,
that Miracles and other gifts and works of the Holy Ghost, are not ceased in
the Church; and that the School-Learning helps no man to understand Scripture,
and the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, nor the knowledge of Nature: where,
by the way, the true cause of the so much perplexed and famous Phoenomenon,
taken for a Weather-glass, is by Experiments cleared and demonstrated, against
the Hypothesis of the New Virtuosi.

John 5.44. -- 12.43. Luke 7.35. How can they believe who seek for the honor
of one another, and love the praise of men more than that which comes from God?
But wisdom is justified (or known) of all her Children.

LONDON: Printed for Allen Banks, and are to be sold by most Booksellers in
London. 1681.

HAving received this Book from the Author, in order to its Printing; I do
hereby appoint Allen Banks to print the same. Witness my Hand,

HENRY SCARLOT.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS JAMES Duke of YORK.
Patroni valiant. Ecquis proteggere Verum,
Luci aut optatae fautor adesse potest?
Qui Lux, qui Verum est; qui Verum in saecula servat,
I liber; ille tuus nempe Patronus erit.
THis is not therefore, Great Sir, to beg your Patronage for this Book, nor for
my self: but rather to direct you to the Light of salvation, Luke 1.17. and to
make it shine to you, 2 Cor. 4.4. lest you lose here your Earthly, and after
your Heavenly Kingdom, for lack of knowledge, Hos. 4.6. for though I seem angry
with some men for Religion, I am so far from hating a man for his Religion,
that I look upon him, as he whom the Son of man came to save, Mat. 18.11. a fit
object of my love and charity; and as a wounded man, who needs me (that am
neither Priest, Minister, nor Levite) for his Friend, Luke 10.30, 37. and
Physician, Mat. 9.12. And therefore I am so much farther from being concerned
against Your Highness for yours, with the Epidemical distemper, though it wants
not a President in Scripture, 2 Kings 3.13, 14. that Your Highness is one of
the powers of this Land, whom I am bound to honor, and that for the Oath of
God, Romans 13.1, 2. Eccl. 8.2. and that looking upon you not only as a wounded,
but as such wounded man, who (though fallen unhappily into the hands of those
Thieves, John 10.1. -- 20.21, 22. that are stripping Your Highness both of the
Triple Earthly Crown you might else enjoy one day, and of your chiefest Kingly
Heavenly Prerogative, the Holy Unction, whereby Christ makes all those Kings
indeed, Prove. 16.32. -- 25.28. that do obey his commands, Rev. 1.6. Exodus 19.5,
6.) may not only recover; but be a great instrument to promote Gods Spiritual
Kingdom; and therefore as such, Dan. 12.3. deserve one the first Thrones and
Crowns among the twelve Tribes of Israel in Heaven, Luke 13.30. -- 7.43, 47. I
tender your safety more than that of any man: wishing with all my heart that,
like the Samaritan, I might pour Oil and Wine into your Highness's wounds, set
you on my Beast, bring you to an Inn, your Throne; and thence to an everlasting
Kingdom, where may your Highness reign for evermore. Amen.

But how can I do this, except you own and believe that you are wounded and
sick? and how can you believe it, except you come to know it? and how shall you
come to know, except one does show it you, and except you attend to the things
that shall be showed? Act. 16.14 Romans 10.14, 15, 17. If you will be pleased
therefore to peruse this Book, it shows you, and you may easily gather from it,
that all men generally, Christians as well as Gentiles, are by birth bruised
and sick, Genesis 3.15. Romans 3.23. -- 1. Cor. 11.7. that the way to recover from
the said sickness and bruise, and to become whole again as to the Kingdom of
God, which is in the Holy Ghost; Romans 14.17. being by the said new birth of the
Holy Ghost, who is then renewed within them, Tit. 3.5. all men must, to be
saved, be thus regenerated, and receive the Holy Ghost therefore as well and as
much as the Primitive Christians: and that the said renewing or new birth of
the Spirit, being a reformation: to the same Image of God Adam was created to;
which does consist in knowledge, Coloss. 3.10. as well as in righteousness,
Ephesians. 4.24. (the Spirit of the Father that does create us anew to his Image
and likeness, teaching all things, John 14.26. -- 16.13. 1 John 2.20, 27. 1
Cor. 2.10. as well as he is the power of Christ, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.8. Gods arm
revealed to us, and the blood of the Lamb whereby sin is overcome, and
righteousness fulfilled, Rev. 12.11.) is inconsistent therefore with a
despondent relying on other men, for what we are to know, to believe and to
practice; and is not attained to by a change or conversion from Popery, for
instance, to another Religion, which knows Christ as much after the flesh, 2
Cor. 5.16. worships the Father as little in spirit and truth, John 4.24. a^^
grieves the Holy Spirit no less than the Popish Church: and which under the
pretense of Reforming, makes a Schism, which is a far greater sin than to bear
with some few erroneous opinions: but by a true conversion from sin to
righteousness, by knocking and by waiting at the posts of Wisdoms doors, Prove.
8.34. Jam. 1.5. by perusing daily, and keeping diligently the precepts of that
wisdom contained in the Scriptures, and in vitam and lucem assurgendo our
selves. For such conversion, is to know me, says the Lord, Jer. 22.16. -- 9.3.
and such knowledge of God is, says Christ, John 17.3. life Eternal. Verily,
such knowledge, and not an implicit Faith, is both Salvation it self, and the
cause of Temporal and Worldly felicity! for when a man meditates daily in the
Law of God, and observes to do according to all the words that are written
therein, he makes his way prosperous and successful in all things, Josh. 1.8.
Deuteronomy. 28.1, to 14. and when his ways please the Lord, even the worst Enemies he
has are at peace with him, Prove. 16.7.

But, Sir, as such knowledge is our summum bonum, both in this and the next
World; so extremum malum est non recognoscere Deum in the said manner: for
though God for a great while winketh at this ignorance; Act. 17.30. yet he will
be known at last, and felt, specially of those that either forget to know, or
having the means offered to know him, do neglect them: see Judge. 2.10, 11, 14.
And the Egyptians shall know when I stretch forth my hand, that I am ^he Lord,
says he, Exodus 7.5. and whether men will or no they shall give glory to God, 1 Samuel 6.5. and acknowledge that their breath and their ways are in his hand,
Dan. 5.23. that he rules in the kingdom of men, v. 21. -- 4.25, 32. and that no
Evil, whether against a Nation, or against a man only, Job 24.29. is done and
sent but by him, Amos 3.6. Read the Scriptures, and see there how all those
Kings that followed the way of Jeroboam, (knew God no better than he) and their
People for their sake, were severely punished: and how Manasseb, having paid
dear for his ignorance, came to understand at last, and know that the Lord was
God, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12, 13. and thereupon was restored again from Captivity to
a flourishing State, and a glorious Kingdom. Nay, the most prosperous King that
ever was, Solomon, found true by experience, that when a Prince forgets God,
and goes a whoring after another Worship of God than that which is agreeable to
that in Spirit and truth, Judge. 2.17. then his anger waxes hot, and he does
deliver him into his Enemies hands, and stirs up not only Adversaries
against him, 1 Kings 11.8, 9, 10, 14, 23. but also his own Subjects, who lift
their hands against him, v. 26. -- 12.18. whilst those whom he trusted to, help
him not, but forsake him, 2 Chronicles. 11.4. for this thing is done of me, and
neither understanding, strength nor counsel against me, can avail you, says
the Lord, Prove. 21.30. In vain is safety hoped for from the hills, and from the
abundance of strong holds, Jer. 3.23. In vain are Garrisons kept, and a new
Army raised, for all will work together to the destruction of those that know
and believe not God, Romans 8.28.

At the presence of the Ark the waters of Jordan were divided and heapt up; the
walls of Jericho fell down, and the heart of all the Kings of the Canaanites
melted before Israel, whilst they believed in God, Josh. 5.1. Judge. 2.7. but
when they had forgot him, at the presence of the Ark, they whose heart melted
before, receive vigor and courage; and Israel that shouted is overcome and
smitten, 1 Samuel 4.5, 7, 9. and that when they fled to it, as to their Anchora
sacra, or their sure refuge. And because men of the World are very unwilling to
acknowledge that it is the immediate hand of God, the first time they are
smitten, and attribute the cause to some fault or accident; as the men of
Benhadad when they had been defeated, 1 Kings 20.23. who said, their Gods being
Gods of the hills, have given them this advantage in the hills, but if we fight
with them in the plain, or the Valleys, we shall be stronger than they;
therefore God, to make them know that it is he that does it, brings (as upon
Benhadad) upon them the second time an entire destruction.

Sir, There is no greater sin laid to the charge of a Prince, (who is born in,
and pretends to the Covenant of God) than that of his ignorance and
ungratefulness to God; which is properly the sin and way of Jeroboam, who
thought by establishing in his Kingdom a worship altogether repugnant to the
true worship of God, 1 Kings 12.28. John 4.24. to preserve it for himself and
for his Posterity, but lost it, and destroyed his Posterity by it. The same
thing got Gideon by the Ephod which he made; for it became (says Esdras, Judge.
8.27.) such snare unto his house, that his threescore and ten Sons were all at
once caught in it, chapter 9.5. and such an evil Spirit of misunderstanding (as is
now between your Highness, and the English People) was sent between his
Bastard, and those who had chose him King, v. 23. that they carried it not far,
but were soon after so fast entangled in the same snare, that they utterly cut
off and destroyed one another. By the revolts of Subjects, the Princes sins
against God are commonly punished: and nothing makes Princes more potent and
absolute, than when they themselves serve God, their King and Master, in Truth.

Do so then; rise from darkness to light; convert your self, Sir, to the true
God of all flesh; and when you are converted, set up a strong purpose to
promote his Spiritual Kingdom, with all your power: and those very Enemies that
would not have you to reign over them, shall be your Friends: and shall, as
they did before at your former return, meet you with Acclamations, and become
your dutiful Subjects; and continue such as long as you continue dutiful to
your Maker. God give you understanding that you may serve him and live: as it
was the prayer of a wise King for himself, Psalm. 119.34, 144. so it shall be
mine for you: and that the Earth may be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Isa.
11.9. under you, if you outlive and succeed his Majesty.

The Reader is desired, before he reads this Book, to correct it as follows:
viz.
Page 4. l. 13. for and the old, read and that the old. Page 31. l. 18. for and
I cannot pray, read and I can pray. Page 32. l. 8. for avails, read availing.
Page 38. l. 1, for impudientes, read impedientes. Page 49. l. 6. for mirarles,
read miracles. Page 104. l. 20. for these, read this. Page 106. l. 9. for
undestand, read understand. Page 108. l. 5. for also the Column is very low,
read also though the Column is as low. Page 108. l. 7, 8, 9. for whereas the Air
flowing then laterally has no such pressure upon the Stagnum as it would in
still weather, if it had any at all: read, yet the Air flowing then laterally
ought to have no pressure on the Stagnum: which I prove, etc. Page 108. l. 24,
for the Air would likewise abate, read the Air ought likewise to lose. Page
108. l. 26. for of the descent, read all the descent: Page 117. l. 23. for
disjoyns the Fluids, read divides the Fluid. Page 124. l. 8. for casc read
case. Page 126. l. 25. for in D C A, read in D C E. Page 149. l. 18. for said
an Author, read says a Modern Author. Page 212. l. 6. for hem, read him.
THE ETERNAL GOSPEL Once more Testified unto, and Vindicated, etc.
GOD forbid that I should revile or censure the least of the Ministers of God,
Mat. 18.10. (as some will with the Vicar of West-ham, page 22. be apt to say I
do) for then I could not but fear some such punishment as fell upon those
Children who reviled Elisha, 2 Kings 2.25. But God forbid also that I should
look upon some men as God's Ministers, because they count themselves such, Job
32.21, 22. for then I must needs be sitting in the same shadow of death,
(ignorance of God, John 17.3.) and in danger to lie down at last in the same
sorrow, Isa. 50.11. as they that know God only by hearsay, and worship him, in
shows, with their mouth and lips. The means to avoid mistakes in this, is the
discerning and trying of the Spirits: which being a faculty, that St. John
takes for granted all those he writ his first general Epistle to, that is, all
true Believers, have already, or may have, chap. 4.1. (and they being made by
Christ, Priests, etc. Revel. 1.6. -- 5.10. may pretend to the Priests right to
discern and to pronounce what is clean, and what unclean, Levit. 13.17, 23.) I
hope, by the mercy of God, it belongs to me. And therefore I hope, that if
after having tried and found that some men have not in them the Spirit of
Christ, and showed sufficient reasons and very good grounds for it, I pronounce
them to be none of the Ministers of God, I shall not go for a Reviler of such.

And truly I have tried and found, that not only some few men among Christians
have not the Spirit of Christ, but that so many are the false seducing Spirits
gone abroad into the World, 1 John 4.1. to deny that Christ comes to men
whilst yet in the flesh, which Spirits are not of God, v. 3. and to speak, as
St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 4.2. their lies in Hypocrisy: that the true Doctrine of
Christ, and the two Witnesses that do testify of him, seem like to be
overcome, Revel. 11.7. nay to be killed by them; nothing but their carcasses,
the dead letter of Scripture, and a dead ineffectual notion of the Holy Ghost,
seeming now left unburied, lying in the Streets of the Spiritual Sodom, that
is, the present Christian Churches, v. 8. For what else is allowed them, and
dispensed among their Members by their own Prophets? for instance, by the
Author of a late Sermon preached at the Visitation of the Bishop of London, and
by all them that approve, hold and teach the same Doctrine? who are come to
that height of insolence in denying the power and existence of God's Spirit in
his Church, in changing the truth of God concerning it into lies, holding in
unrighteousness that which may be known of it, Romans 1.18, 19, 25. that I think
it high time for them who make mention of the Lord, not to keep silence, Isa.
62.6. but with the Rod of their mouth to smite all these Seducers by whom
offenses do come, that the simple may beware, and learn to come without them to
the knowledge of the truth, Prove. 19.25.

For my part I declare, that reading the said Sermon my Spirit was so stirred
up, Acts 17.16. that, having (like Flihu, Job 32.11.) given ear to their
reasons whilst they searched out what to say, and waited a good while for an
answer to them from some wiser than my self, I could hold no longer; and seeing
none appeared to convince them of falsehood, I thought it my duty to do it my
self, lest they should think that they are the people, v. 13. -- 12.2. and lest
error should triumph over Christian light and truth. Though indeed as a Novice
I might have been afraid to proffer my opinion, v. 6. against so many grave,
learned and Right Reverend Fathers in God, (so called) had I not, as well as
Elihu, v. 9. (after having thought, like him, that Days should speak, and the
old standing Professors should teach wisdom, v. 7.) found that the famous
Doctors are not always the wisest, and that these Aged Fathers are not they
that understand the Art of discerning best: For note, It was but a little that
I had passed from the Watchmen of the City, says the Soul in the Canticle 3.4.
but I found my wishes: That is, so soon as we pass from the Watchmen, or leave
them, and not whilst we spend the time in consulting and seeking to learn of
them, as v. 3. our Soul comes to attain to that which it longs after, its own
summum bonum, the knowledge of God and Christ, John 17.3. for it is the gift of
God, the Watchmen cannot give it, since they seldom enter in themselves, and
keep from others the key of truth and knowledge, Luke 11.52. But on the
contrary, that they may, as St. Paul says, Gal. 4.17. though they exclude
others, be by them affected, cried up, followed after, endeavor (as for
instance, this Preacher) to suppress it. Whence they that rely on them, that
seek for truth at their mouth, that dig for it in their works, (Nemo dat quod
non habet) find nothing but vain knowledge, and that their bellies are fed, as
Job says, with the East wind. But besides, having also found out, like Elihu,
v. 8. that there is a Spirit in man, and that the inspiration of the Almighty
is that which gives him understanding, without respect to his Age, or to his
Humane Learning; and believing that the mouth and wisdom promised Luke 21.15.
Mat. 10.20. which all the Adversaries are not able to resist, is given in time
of need, why should I be afraid to give my testimony, and to stand against them
all for the truth of the Gospel.

Therefore though I am neither a Prophet nor Prophet's Son, Amos 7.14. (not so
much as a Graduate in the Schools and High places of your Watchmen and
Prophets) but a poor obscure Tradesman, who am not so much as known among any
Christian Sects, and am tied, and supported, to none, and by none of them;
though briars and thorns be with me, and I dwell among Scorpions, Ezekiel. 2.6.
yet, worthy Master Vicar, I am so far from being dismayed at your, and your
Bishop's supercilious looks, that I will make bold here, with the help of God's
Spirit, not only to answer you in very different terms from those, who, seeking
for praise and applause from other men, endeavor to please all men, and take
care to displease none; but to try both your Spirit, and of your Lords
Spiritual, (who by their approbation of your Doctrine of Spirits, give me cause
enough to think that they are of the same mind) and to judge and to pronounce
(call it never so much pragmatical censuring, reviling of dignities, and
rebelling against them) that the reason and the cause why you discourse so
strangely concerning the Spirit of God, is because you are very great strangers
to it; and mere natural men still, who being not able therefore to discern the
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. are much less able to teach others what belongs to
them. Let your reason be never so well improved at your Seminaries of Learning,
and be you never so much guided by the clue of it, (they are your words, page
15.) yet, except you be born again of the Holy Ghost, you are without God's
Kingdom, John 3.5. Romans 14.17. and therefore the mysteries thereof are nothing
to you but mere Aenigma's, Mark 4.11. and you can be nothing but blind leaders
of the blind people that hear you.

There is a Spirit in man: And without being Quaker, Enthusiast or Fanatic,
(and suppose I were one, must men reject truth, because they or the Quakers
teach it?) I say, that God's Spirit, which inspires man with all knowledge and
understanding, is given to all Christians, 1 Cor. 12.7. to guide them into all
truth; so that fearching by the Light of this Spirit, even the deep and hidden
things of God, chapter 2. 10. Romans 1.20. and growing in grace by it, they may Note
that the English. Translation of this place of 1 John 2.20. which reads you
shall know all things, is false, for the Greek word (...), signifies not, you
shall know, but having known* you know still: for (...) is used instead of the
Present Tense, as the Latin Verb N^vi.
know, John 14.26. 1 John 2.20, 27. and do all things, Mark 9.23. Phil. 4.13.
and thus being taught of God, John 6.45. need not that any man teach them.

But the Question is, Whether this (...), or Unction, the Holy Ghost, be given
to all true Believers, or good Christians, as unto the Apostles: For that it is
given to them all in some measure, their very name (...), (in English, anointed
ones, and being made Kings and Priests, Revel. 1.6. -- 5.10. they must needs be
anointed) shows, and that they partake of the true Oil of gladness with the
Messiah, or Christ, called so (...), by reason that he had not the Spirit, like
the other anointed ones, by measure, John 3.34. Hebr. 1.9. for both Christ and
Messiah signify the anointed: and not the Faithful only, but all men, Jews and
Gentiles, partake of the Holy Ghost, a certain portion of it being distributed
to every man living, and allowed to all mankind, as appears,

1. Because Christ, by the Light of his Spirit, enlightneth every man that
comes into the World, John 1.9. and not the Faithful only.

2. Then, from the spiraculum breathed into man's nostrils, Genesis 2.7. being
still, since Adam lost the Holy Ghost by his Fall, to the days of Solomon, and
likewise in our days, the Lamp of the Lord in man, Prove. 20.27.

3. Next, from the reason given by him who is perfect in knowledge, the most
wise God, Genesis 9.6. why man should not shed man's blood, to wit, because he is
made after the image of God: which shows that man had not yet quite lost the
image of God, (for if he had, this reason had ceased at the same time, and as
being of no force, God had not made use of it) therefore has some of it still,
for we find no where that since Noah's time he has lost it. And this Image
consisting in the Spirit of promise, (for by the receipt of it men are,
according to the promise made to Abraham, of their being restored or renewed to
the same Image of God Adam had, which all are fallen short from, Romans 3.23.
(God's promise to Abraham being but the same as that which he had made to Adam
presently after his loss, Genesis 3.15. which, what is it else but a bruising of
what made him creep, a rising from the beastly dark state he was fallen into,
and so a recovery from his said sickness and loss?) created a new (says Paul,
Ephesians. 4.24. Colos. 3.10.) after the image of God, Acts 2.33, 38, 39. Tit. 3.5,
6. Heb. 11.39, 40.) since man has still some portion of the said Image left
him, he has likewise some relics of the said Holy Spirit which forms and
constitutes it: as from the words renewing, and newness of the Spirit,
frequently used by Paul (as Romans 7.6. -- 12.2. Tit. 3 5.) upon this account,
may further be understood.

4. Again, The kingdom of God being like unto a man traveling from his Estate
into some remote Country, who delivered to his Servants his goods, or good
gifts, Mat. 25.14. that is, the Holy Spirit, (confer Mat. 7.11. with Luke
11.13) it follows that God gives his Spirit to all mankind, (for all men are
God's Servants, the being Lord and Master) and the Holy Ghost is (says Paul
alluding to this, 1 Cor. 12.7.) given to every man, to trade, use and improve
him for his own best advantage.

5. Lastly, The Kingdom of God (which is within man, Luke 17.21.) being like
leaven put into meal, Mat. 13.33. a thing of the same nature, but so heavy of
it self, that it must be fermented with Leaven to become Bread; it appears
that, though all men have with Adam lost some part, and (note well) come short
only, Romans 3.23. of the whole Image of God, 1 Cor. 11.7. yet all men, (some
more, some less) and not only those few that are born of the Spirit, have still
remaining in them some old ruinous fragments, or a certain smoking Flax which
is of the same nature as the Spirit of promise, which renews and reforms man,
but which was not given till Christ was glorified, John 7.39. Quicquid in
hominibus (says the thrice great and learned Author of the Pymander) videt and
audit, verbum Domini, that is to say, is from the Word of wisdom, or Spirit of
the great God, 1 Cor. 12.8.

Neither do any of the Christian Sects, I know of, deny the said allowance of
the Spirit to themselves, though some exclude other men, such as the Jews and
Heathen: And Master Vicar himself is so far from denying and arguing against
it, that he makes it his business by a new distinction of an extraordinary and
ordinary Spirit, to show that though the former is ceased, as he disputes, yet
the Christian Church always receives and has the latter of the two continued.
His words are these, page 6. viz. The Apostles extraordinary Spirit continued
more or less about 400 years in God's Church, and men wrought Miracles, and
thereby convinced Gainsayers, though about that time they were not so numerous
and plentiful as they were before; and the reason was, because there was no
such need of them, and a little after they ceased: For when the occasion and
reason of working Miracles ceased, as Kings proving Nursing-Fathers to the
Church, the Gospel being a National Religion in most Countries, then God in his
wisdom suspended that great and mighty power wherewith he had accompanied good
men before: Therefore men are now to look for no other Spirit but what is
necessary for their needs, as they are Christians. Having said, page 4. that
the Primitive Christians stood in need as Apostles of their extraordinary
Spirit, upon the account of both the Jews and Gentiles, there being great
reason that such as were the immediate Instruments of so great an undertaking
as making void a Law, to wit, the Law of Moses, which had been settled by God,
and convincing the prejudiced Gentiles of the truth of their persons, as well
as of their doctrine, should have a proportionable commission and strength to
do it with. Alas! (adds he, page 5.) had it not been for this, the Gospel would
have been nipp'd in its first budding forth; and it would have been a downright
impossibility for so great a part of the World to have been imposed upon, by
such a company of illiterate persons, as the Apostles, before the descent of
the Holy Ghost, were. Can you imagine that such learned men as Dionysius, and
other persons brought up in the Schools at Athens, who well understood the
principles and connection of things, would have submitted to the pretenses of
such bold and rude persons, who could show no reason at all, beyond their own
consident assertions, for what they said? No, it was impossible; and by the way
this one thing shows the great necessity of humane Learning, and is a
sufficient confutation of all those Enthusiasts who do revile it; to wit, that
what the Apostles wanted of it upon the score of Education, God supplied by
Miracle. But for their extraordinary Spirit, it is a plain case, because we
daily experience it, that it is ceased, and that no man can now pretend to it;
for he that pretends to the same Spirit the Apostles had, must do the same
things, or else he is mighty vain, and argues his understanding to be much
impaired.

Now judge ye who is more vain than this Vicar, who denies Scripture, and the
experience of several sober, learned, pious, godly men, who have been
Eyewitnesses, and testify and relate the Miracles wrought upon some faithful
believing men, since his four hundred years, as shall be showed hereafter.
Judge also whether his own experience can teach him, that the said Spirit is
ceased: For the gift of Miracles being but one of many belonging to that
Spirit, and all the gifts being not given to every one of those that truly
believe, but one or two gifts to each, as in page -- appears; he must needs be
acquainted with all the true Believers that live all the World over, to say
that his Experience, and that of his acquaintance, (who are as well informed as
himself, of what passes daily among the faithful) shows him that none of them
can at present pretend to it: when the Prophet Elijah (who was as noted a man,
I hope, as the Vicar) knew not one of the seven thousand faithful men who lived
in his time in Israel, 1 Kings 19.14, 18. and they that can do these things, do
not seek to show themselves and to be known openly, John 5.44. -- 7.4, 6. Luke
8.56. But though they did, and wrought some Miracles every day in the sight of
all the World, yet they that say that Miracles are ceased so long ago, would
believe them no sooner than their fellow Pharisees, who though blasphemous
enough to ascribe the glory of them to Beelzebub, were not so silly as to
pretend that they were ceased.

Then, observe from his own words, that what God by Miracle supplied of Humane
Learning, being wanted upon the score of Education, might by Education have
been got without Miracle: and so what need was there God should supply by
Miracle, what he might have had and done plentifully without it? For there
lived at the time that Christ chose the Apostles, many other men, who had by
their Education got Humane Learning enough to hold out an Argument against the
learned Heathen. And St. Paul, who had enough, Acts 22.3. needed not, I
presume, (to supply his want of it) receive the same fullness of Spirit as the
other twelve: yet he received it, and that with as extraordinary circumstance
as all the rest, Acts 9.17, 18. 2 Cor. 11.5. -- 12.4. Gal. 2.6, 8. Besides, the
necessity of Humane Learning (Logic, Metaphysick, etc.) to convince Dionysius
and other learned Gentiles, whose conviction the Vicar said before was the hard
task that required such an extraordinary Spirit, implys that Humane Learning
was the means the Apostles made use of to convince them, contrary to 1 Cor.
2.6, 8. Col. 2.8. Mat. 11.25. And if so, may not they that are now great
Masters in it, (although by Education) and say they make use of it, (as the
Divines of these times against their Adversaries) pretend to do the same
things, and to have therefore the same Spirit the Apostles had? Verhum sat
sapienti; this being but by the way to give the sober Reader a hint of what the
Learning of those wise men will produce, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20. And they have ill
luck, who whilst they seek for honor and praise for their Learning and Wisdom,
not only get no credit, but forfeit, by what they were in great hopes to
procure some, that which they were looked upon to have already gotten.

But O that they were as wise and learned as they pretend, and as they would
seem to be! for then they might do some good, and had saved me the trouble of
declaring now for them; that the Apostles Spirit continues still in the Church,
that all men have the same right, and as good pretenses to the extraordinary
Spirit the Apostles had, as the Apostles themselves; and that they may now have
it, and, if they will make use of the same means they used, Acts 1.14. -- 2.1.
-- 15.7, 8. John 14.23. Luke 18.1. receive it, and be filled with it, as much
as they were. For the gift of that Spirit, (if we will but take Christ's word,
and solemn promise for it, Mark 16.17. John 14.12.) wait upon the Church of
God, all them that believe in him, of any nation and tongue, and of any
profession, Acts 10.35, 44, 46. and that, not for about 400 years only, but
until now, at present, and to the end of the World, Mat. 28.20. for, that I may
not leave them comfortless, says Christ, John 14.18, 23. I will come (by what
can comfort, refresh, and give life and joy, ( viz. by my Spirit) v. 26. --
6.63. Jam. 2.26. Acts 3.19, 20.) and make my abode with them, or within them,
(for the Church being the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 4.12. he must like
the Soul in man, dwell in the Members that make the said body) for ever, John
14.16, 13. and, to you and your children, and to as many as God shall ever
call, says Peter, Act. 2.38, 39. the promise of the same blessing (to wit, the
receipt of the same Holy Spirit, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4, 8. Genesis 22.18. Gal.
3.14.) belongs. And, says he further, Act. 10.47. -- 11.15. not only (...) and
(...), but (...), that is, as he confirms it, chapter 15.8. according to the same
measure as we the first have received the Holy Ghost, you may receive, be
filled with him, and have him likewise; (Which words show that St. Peter did
not arrogate either to himself, or to the rest of his fellow Apostles, the
extraordinary Spirit ascribed to them: viz. a more peculiar gift, and a greater
share of God's Spirit than all other true Believers have, or may have; and that
he did not then dream of being more infallible than they be, and of his Church,
and Church-mens prerogatives: as men do before they have received the Holy
Ghost, witness Mark 9.38. conferred with Luk 24.49. Numb. 11.28, 29.) And so,
from these words of Christ and Peter, that it appears that the Apostles Spirit,
or the same Spirit they had, never cease in the Church, nor in any National
Religion, Sect, or party, until it cease to be the Church and the Flock of
Christ: for then, not only the gift of Miracles, (to which, and to their skill
in Humane Learning got without Education, he seems chiefly to confine the
Apostolical gift) but all other gifts also, which do infallibly wait upon that
of the Spirit, (such as wisdom and knowledge, 1 Cor. 12.8.) are removed and
taken away from that Sect, in God's wrath, Revel. 2.5. (rather than wisdom, as
the wise Vicar, measuring it by his own shallow brains and dull fancy, as shall
be showed in its place, says God did suspend the same) that Church becomes
desolate, and remains according to the Prophecy of Daniel 9.27. and the
construction thereof by St. Matthew 24.15. and St. Luke 21.20. compassed
(instead of Christ's presence by the Holy Ghost) with abominable armies and
companies of Churchmen.

Only, as there are diverse administrations and gifts of the same Divine Spirit,
1 Cor 12.4, 6. such as wisdom and knowledge, faith, healing, miracles, tongues,
prophecy, and discerning of Spirits; which are not all to be found in one
member, or Paul is much mistaken, v. 6, 29, 30. so, I must here further declare
for Master Vicar, and all his fellow Watchmen, that though one man does not do
all the same operations that all the Apostles did, yet if he does some of them,
he may pretend to the same Spirit the Apostles had: for if the ear shall say,
because I am not the eye, I am not of the body, is it not of it therefore? v.
16. that is, if he that has but the discerning of Spirits, should say because
I am not a Teacher or a Prophet, I have none of the same extraordinary Spirit
as the Prophets have, has he not therefore been made to drink of the same
Spirit? v. 13. for if the whole spiritual body were prophecy, where were the
gift of knowledge and discerning of Spirits? v. 17. and if they were all
Prophets, or all workers of Miracles, where were the several members, and
operations that constitute or make up the said spiritual body? v. 19. Thus, do
I from St. Paul speak here for Master Vicar; and will yet further instance St.
Paul, (a chief Apostle, Gal. 2.6, 7.) during the time of whose preaching and
stay at Antioch, arrived certain Prophets, one of which did prophecy that
there should be a great dearth or famine throughout the World, Act. 11.26, 27,
28. to whom the Disciples, who were doubtless directed by Paul and by Barnabas,
gave credit; and Paul himself, though he had a greater gift of the Spirit, did
not say or object that he wondered that his inferior should have this thing
revealed to him, when he knew nothing of it. And elsewhere that same Prophet
foretold Paul, what Paul himself foresaw not in his own case, Act. 21.10. (or
he had (what he did not) foreseen that he had been set at liberty, if he had
not appealed to Caesar, Act. 25.26. -- 26.31, 32.) to wit, that he should be
taken at Jerusalem: and, thus says the Holy Ghost, said then that certain
Prophet, (for so the Scripture calls him) chapter 21.11. Whence I ask the Vicar,
since St. Paul could pretend to as good a share at least of the same holy
Spirit, as that certain Prophet did, why did not the Holy Ghost reveal the same
things to him? Because, though he had knowledge, and understood mysteries, as
he was an Apostle, yet he was not a Prophet; for, are all Prophets, says he, 1
Cor. 12.29, 30. are all workers of Miracles? as all are not Apostles, v. 28. so
I cannot work all the said other gifts in me: it being God alone that does work
them all (and note) in all, and not in one man, v. 6. Likewise I ask, if he
that has the gift to discern the Spirit of the Vicar, and some portion of
knowledge, has not the gift of Miracles, has he not therefore the same Spirit
as the Apostles? But what say you, Vicar, to what Paul himself does style yet a
more excellent way than Miracles and Prophecy, and the best of the said gifts,
viz. Charity? v. 31. -- 13.2. is that ceased in your Church? I dare say you are
not willing to acknowledge it: and so like the Chief Priests, Mat. 21.25, 26.
you are hedged in on both sides: for if you say that this more extraordinary
gift is not ceased in the Church, neither, by your Argument, are the other
gifts also, which are counted by St. Paul not so excellent as this, ceased, as
you teach, from it: and if you say that it is ceased there, then judge whether
you are still a faithful Church: for do they believe in Christ that omit one of
the first and chiefest of his precepts, Mat. 22.39. John 13.34. 1 John 3.11.
and take quite another way than that which he has showed them?

And this last, your Argument, that he must do the same things who pretends to
the same Spirit the Apostles had, proves further, or you must yield that it is
of no force and validity at all, (which dilemma, as likewise the other, your
great Learning could not foresee, and prevent your being now put to them) for
the Apostles were sent to do, what? Signs and Miracles? No sure; but to preach,
and win or gain Souls, by teaching them the way to their conversion, 1 Cor.
9.19. Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15. This they did in all places, but preached in many
places, nay they convinced many, and Dionysius himself, and established
Churches, without working of Miracles, as may be seen by their Acts: and their
Miracles were not always wrought to convince the gainsayers of the Faith,
(which you say was the reason and the occasion of them) since they wrought them
sometimes in their private Meetings by night, amongst the faithful, as for
instance, at Troas, Act. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. Now you will grant that it is
incumbent upon the Church to preach, exhort and win Souls, 2 Timothy 4.12. and you
pretend you do it: so that if you do it not, you are not a faithful Church, but
burthensom hypocrites, and inutilia hujus pondera terrae; and if you do it, you
do the works of the Apostles; therefore, by your Argument, have the same Spirit
they had, and so it is not ceased; but it is your Argument that cease to be
in force, if that can be said to cease, which had never any true existence, but
in a false and erroneous fancy. He that wins Souls is wise, Prove. 11.30.
Dan. 12.3. wisdom is by Paul, counted the first gift of the Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.8, 31. If therefore you win some Souls, (as it is pretended that some of
your number do, or else what reason is there why you should be imposed upon a
Christian Nation as necessary to them?) have you not a greater gift of the
Spirit than Miracles, which are, according to Paul, v. 29. but the fourth in
order? and do you not do a greater thing than Miracles, and so as great a thing
as any of the Apostles? He that has as much faith as a grain of Mustard Seed,
may do all wonders, Mat. 17.20. and yet, witness Paul, 1 Cor. 13.2. he is
nothing. And there is a greater need of the best gift, Charity, and a greater
strength of Faith requisite to do like Paul, (that he might help to save some)
to become all things to all, 1 Cor. 9.22. to be contented to be needy, hungry,
despised, Phil. 4.12. and seeing a way filled up with nothing but misery and
crosses every where, most freely to enter it; and to bury one self alive to all
worldly joy, (as Christ teaches we must do, if we will be believers, Mat.
16.24, 25.) and thus to overcome the whole World and its power, 1 John 5.4.
John 16.33. Coloss. 2.15. than to suspend or infringe some particular
circumstance in its order, by doing some such thing above its natural course,
as the swimming of Iron: the Spirits forcing their way again through the Optic
Nerves, (when they are stopped, or withered) to bring the blind to their sight:
and the wholesome virtue, that issues Mark 5.30. from the healthful body of a
faithful man, (whose mind and will is by his strength of Faith so stirred up,
and so much bent and intent upon the poor sick man's cure, that they make his
own Spirits in the height of his zeal (like as in another man's passion of
anger or lust, they fly to the place proper to exercise, for instance, lust
withal, and run from thence toward the object of it) go forth from him, as it
were confertim, toward the sick, 2 Samuel 13.39.) working its own simile; and,
by prevailing on the spirit of infirmity, Luke 13.11. setting to rights in the
sick his distempered Spirits, which were by the said Evil Spirit of infirmity
disordered, and enraged.

As for instance, (to give the Reader some imperfect hint of what difference
there is between the Faith requisite to work all other Miracles but that of
man's conversion, and the Faith necessary to work in another man such change as
conversion) suppose me a Believer, I know that the virtue or (...) of God is
not far from any man, for in him we live and move, Act. 17.27, 28. and lo, he
goes by me though I perceive him not. Job 9.11. and is it not he that fills
the whole world with his presence, Jer. 23.24. This I see being sick; to wit,
how this Energy (which is the Spirit of God, Genesis 1.2. his arm, and his
organum, quo agitantur omnes in hoc mundo species, and quo summus artifex ad
suam machinam potissimum utitur) passes to and fro, pervades, and conveys the
breath of life through every one of us. At this Aspect, I say, what is the
reason, O Lord, that this thy all sufficient and never-ceasing virtue, John
5.17. is suspended and withheld from my languishing body? Because I have
sinned, Jer. 5.25. Job 33.27. but I humble my self, and knowing thy goodness
well, I trust that as thou art he that thus chastisest me, so thou art able
alone to help and deliver me: O send forth thy Spirit again, Psalm. 104.30. help
mine unbelief; say the word, and presently he is gracious to me; he opens his
hand again, and lets go the influence of his virtue, that was bound, and frozen
up as it were, in respect of me, so that it could not vivifie me: I am renewed
in a trice, my flesh becomes again fresher than that of a child, Job 33.25.
Psalm. 103.5. and according to my faith I find it done to me, Mat. 8.13. --
9.29. So, if a Serpent, a Bear, or other hurtful creatures should set and
fasten on me, I having the Author of my life before mine eyes, Heb. 11.6. and
believing steadfastly that none of my hairs does fall to the ground without his
leave, and that these have no power to hurt me, except it be given to them from
above, John 19.11. I should not be afraid, Psalm. 23.4. but should say, thy will
be done; thy gohdness gave me my life, and from thy goodness alone I look for
the safety and preservation thereof. In this Faith I am sure that no deadly
thing could hurt me, Mar^ 16.18. and dare say that, like Daniel, I could stop
the mouths of Lions, Heb. 11.33. bea^ back the flames; like Paul, Act. 28.5.
shak^ off a Vicar, with all the poisonous spite i^ his long train of Bishops:
and through this Faith in the name, or power of our Christ any man, as well as
John and Peter, Act. 13.16. can do all sorts of great wonders in the World,
Phil. 4.13. except the greatest of all viz. another conversion: for (as for
man's conversion) the same degree of Faith and of Spirit will not serve to work
and accomplish it; because the Soul of man being a Divine creature, a radius
emaned from God in Eternity, and more excellent therefore than the Earthly
body, or any part of the World, it is harder a great deal to work an alteration
in it, than in the body, or in the Water and Air: and this same alteration
being a new creation (as the Scripture witnesses) of a corrupted creature, and
that has naturally a strong averseness from it, and a bent and propension
quite opposite to God's will, it is a greater Miracle than the creation it self
of the World, and of Adam; which brought on their side no such opposition to
God's will, and requires therefore the power of God himself; and so that a man
should make himself one with God, to have the power to effect it: which union
with God is not attained to by the same degree of Faith, and of Works, as that
which can cure the sick, and overturn a mountain, for one grain of Faith does
this; whereas it is by keeping the works of Christ to the end, overcoming seven
times, that men come to that union, Rev. 2.26. -- 3.21.

Behold I see a Soul in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, Act. 8.23.
(that is, in the fiery, fretful and anxious state, or the wrathful principle,
wherein are all natural unregenerated men) and bound with three dreadful
chains; first, of the anger of God; secondly, of the corrupt, vain, earthly and
mortal flesh, full of evil desires, which are hatred against God, Romans 8.7.
lastly, of the desire and attempts of the Devil, to blow and kindle in the Soul
all its evil properties; to keep it in God's anger, and to turn always its will
so much the further from God, and to throw it from the Truth of God, into
Vanity, viz. Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Anger, and all Lusts; and I wish
heartily that I could any way, and by all means do it good. But though my
fervor of zeal and contention of Spirit, would thrust even a Mountain from its
place to another, as being but a pondus iners, and no way active, endeavoring
against me but by a dead and passive quality, gravitation; yet it cannot stir
the Soul from its state and position, neither is it sharp enough to penetrate
even to the dividing asunder of the Spirit of the Soul, and of the joints and
marrow, Heb. 4.12. to cast the Soul into the great gulf, Luke 16.26. of grief
and of despair, which lies between her own natural state or principle, and the
new principle or state of Light and of Conversion, much less to bring it over
the same safe and entire; because it must be willing and co-work to its own
help, but will do neither of them, Mat. 23.37. and though I set my will as
fully as it can be upon the thing purposed, and lift up my mind as high as it
can rise and extend, and even beyond its source or mother, Eternity; and in
fine, stretch out my Soul to such incredible size, as to be greater than all
things within ubiquity; yet because a Soul is not to be reduced by force, and
taken by a strong hand into the Kingdom of God, (or else the Almighty power and
wisdom of God, needed not to have dyed to reduce men under it; and that is not
the Kingdom of God where he reigns by force, but where men yield obedience and
subjection to his will, out of love for his goodness, and freely give him up
all power, honor, and glory) I cannot for all this transport prevail upon it;
but, like the stronger man, Luke 11.22. I may thereby prevail over the strong
armed man (the Devil) that keeps his house, v. 21. and take from him his
armor, (his fiery darts) and having cast him out of his strong hold, loose the
Soul which he had bound before, Mat. 18.18. and taken captive, as St. Paul
says, at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. and I can^^^ pray to God to appease his fierce
wrath by his great fountain of love, (Jesus, his own heart, and Light) to
cleave the Rocks, and to shake the Earth as when Christ dyed; and to shake
Heaven also, Heb. 12.26. Luke 22.44. as it is certainly done in every
conversion: (for the powers that are in Heaven must be shaken, before the sign
of the Son of man, the bright morning Star, 2 Pet. 1.19. Rev. 3.28. -- 22.16.
appears in the contrite Souls, (which are the clouds of Heaven, Luke 17.21.)
with his light and great glory, Mat. 24.29, 30. Mark 13.26. Luke 21.26, 27. and
then to send down his Light of Life to convince the Soul, and to give it
strength to turn away from its vanity, Act. 3.26. Now the effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man, availet^ much, as says James 5.16. the prayer of
such Faith as this may convert a Soul, v. 15. procure it some light and grace;
which when a man sees it come to pass, he may boldly say, thy sins are forgiven
thee.

Whence, by the way, Conversion being so great a miracle, and so much above the
strength of humane capacity; first, how insignificant is all the humane
Learning toward effecting of it? (what the Vicar, mistaking Conviction for
Conversion, and confounding them, says both were done by humane Learning in
the Areopagite, for they were not only convinced, as the Jews were, by
arguments and reasons, Act. 18.28. but believed, which implys conversion; and
the Vicar ascribes, without distinction, their belief to the humane Learning of
Paul, and the rest.) and secondly, if some men convert still in our days, as it
is believed and confessed on all hands, with what truth can the Vicar and his
fellow Churchmen say that all Miracles are ceased? with none: Faith, the
victory that overcomes the World, 1 John 5.4. being still able to force God,
Luke 18.4. Mark 11.12. to do all the things needful toward a man's conversion;
to make of a man, a God, Luk 6.40. John 17.21. Rev. 3.21. and to bring the
Believers through all things imaginable, but impossibilities, Phil. 4.13. Mark
9.23.

But what Faith? that of your Church, and of your Lords Spiritual, who do Lord
it over the heritage of the true and only Lord and Master, contrary to his
doctrine? 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.5. Mat. 20.27, 28. -- 23.8. No truly,
Master Vicar, for a Believer is he that keeps the Precepts of Christ, and shows
his Faith by his Works, like the Primitive Christians, Act. 19.18. who
confessing their errors and sins past, did forsake them, Mat. 3.6. Prove. 28.13.
like Zacheus, Luke 19.8. and others, who parted with what they did value above
any thing, Act. 2.45. -- 19.19. before they believed Christ's doctrine: which
teaches, (and that very peremptorily, Mat. 24.35.) that he who leaves not
Houses and Lands for the Gospels sake, Mark 10.29. that hates not Wife and
Children, and even his very life, John 12.25. is not worthy of the name of a
Christian believer, Mat. 10.37. and which commands us to sell what we have, to
give the poor, Luke 12.33. to invite the poor, and lame, and blind to the
feasts we make, chapter 14.33. to seek the kingdom of God: and to take no thought
for what we shall eat and drink, and be clothed with, in time to come, Mat.
6.33, 31. These thoughts being not the thoughts of Christians, (who believe,
(1.) That God knows that they need all these things, and when they need them.
(2.) That God having out of his nature (which is to act, and do always good,
for it is summum bonum) bestowed already upon them life and body, a far greater
gift than food and raiment, will without doubt, because he never changes,
supply out of the same goodness, the rest of their wants, and give them the
lesser gift, which he does allow even to the Fowls and to the Grass, creatures
which are not so much worth his care as Believers. (3.) That all their taking
thought and care, can add nothing to their state and condition, and cannot make
so much as one of their hairs white or black. (4.) That God is now as able as
ever he was to afford all things to them, Heb. 11.6. and therefore rely on God
for all their necessaries:) but being the thoughts of the Gentiles, Mat. 6.32.
and natural men, who know not these things of God, though they feel his great
goodness, Act. 17.27. Mat. 5.45. and therefore dare not rely upon him for any
thing. A Believer is he that understanding perfectly wherein lies his chiefest
good, or the most happy state of bliss he is capable of, and being convinced
that all these tribulations are the only way and means that can lead him into
it, Act. 14.22. is notwithstanding the same, so transported and taken with the
thoughts and hope of it, that resolving upon them, he takes up the cross of
Christ, 1 John 3.3. like a stout Champion, and does enter the Lists against
them, by parting with all he has to buy this hidden treasure, Mat. 13.44. and
without so much as saluting his acquaintance, Luke 9.6-10.14. he runs blindfold
Gal. 1.16. from his Wife, Children, Parents, and himself, (by leaving, as much
as is possible, his eyes, and his hands, that is, denying the lusts which are
incident to them, behind him) to sight, and seek to get with less distraction,
Mat. 5.29, 30. the said beloved treasure, Prove. 2.4. Mat. 6.21, 33. which he is
in pursuit of, and has still before his eyes.

But to do as the Bishops, who seek for praise and applause, preach, and do
most of their works to be regarded of men; who, like the Rich man in Luke
12.18. hoard up against the morrow, and plead for it from St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5.8.
(as though St. Paul's doctrine contradicted that of Christ, Mat. 6.31, 32. and
as though his meaning were that men must work to be rich; and not rather that
they should work with their hands, as he did, Act. 18.3. for their own and
Families subsistence from day to day, Luke 11.3. his words having reference to
widows (speaking of them before and after this verse) which were to serve
tables, Act. 6.1, 2. that is take care to buy and dress Victuals; and whose
office it was not to provide the means or the money for to procure them, since
they were themselves to be provided for, as it may be gathered out of
Scripture: and his said words ought therefore to be thus interpreted, viz. But
if some of them (widows) (...), that is, takes no care, (...), of her own,
(...), chiefly or at least, (...), of those of her house, that is, who dwell in
the house with her, but minds her pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.6. as most of our London
Huswives, instead of continuing in prayer both night and day, v. 5. she has
denied the faith, that teaches us mutual love and care for one another:
whereas the Bishops do thus cunningly translate and fit the same for their own
purpose, viz. But if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of
his own house, he has denied the faith: But what faith? the Bishops faith in
the God Mammon they serve, Luke 16.13. and whom they say they can serve
together with the true God, blowing, like the covetous Pharisees, their nose
(for note the Greek word imports so much, v. 14.) at whoever does, like Christ,
deny that they can do it, v. 13. thus to justify themselves, v. 15. making
themselves wiser than Christ; and his perfect Laws, those wholesome commands of
God, void by this their tradition:) to do then as these Bishops, who are
carried about in pomp, like Shows, or pompae, (quae nullius per se sunt
actionis compotes, caeteros vero mole sua impudientes) in their Chariots and
Coaches, with Footboys in Liveries, with long Gowns and soft raiments, and all
other fine Trappings, (which things they that wear, shall not (as being
effeminate, the Text says (...), see Mat. 11.8.) enter the kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9. who, instead of being contented with what is set before them, Luke
10.8. that is, with some allowance willingly made sufficient to maintain them,
go from house to house, v. 7. that is, get from their first Benefice into
another fatter, nay keep both at the same time, and still gape for a better;
who (whereas Christ's followers have not where to lay their heads, Luke 9.57,
58.) have rich and large Palaces, where they keep a continual feast like the
feast of a King. 1 Samuel 25.36. for persons of Quality, and their Friends, as
Nabal did: but when a poor man comes for relief, as David did, you are a
Stranger to me, many Servants now a days run away from their Masters, v. 10.
where is your Certificate? you are some idle Fellow, and why don't you go to
work? is all the comfort he finds; or stand thou there in the Hall (or sit
under my footstool, Jam. 2.3.) until I have dined, is the greatest favor that
he can expect of them: who, when they have got some men into their Inquisition,
that is, their Spiriting Court, (which may be so called from Spiriting of
Money, and making many poor man's Purse light, and Spirits heavy) condemn all,
but inflict no punishment but on the Purse of their Patients, who are those
they presume to have money; and that on no better proof, than the bare
information of some Whore upon Record: whereas Christ would not condemn the
Whore, John 8.11. though she was taken in flagranti delicto, v. 3. for who has
made me a judge (says he to some, Luke 12.14.) over you in the kingdom of this
World? John 18.36. But Bishops will be the first Judges in order therein, nay
will sit as such upon those that are its proper Judges, the Temporal Lords:
they will be Lords and Masters, Mat. 23.8. and that not only Worldly or
Temporal, as the rest, but Spiritual Lords also; (a brave business, if they
could tell how to have dominion over the Spirits of men: what abomination is a
Lord Bishop in Christ's Church!) O that my Body could but keep as far from the
reach of their Lordships and Masterships, as my Soul and Spirit are! for I
should be as safe from the effects of the kindness they shall have for me, as
they may be from any future invective from me, in containing themselves within
the bounds prescribed to all Lordship in this World, like all the other sober
and modest Temporal Lords. I say, that to do as the Bishops, all the said
things, is not to believe in Christ: for do they believe in one, who act
point blank contrary to what he shows and prescribes; and show by their fruits
or works, that they are far from good trees, and that they have perverted the
righteous ways of the Lord? May. 7.16. Therefore it is no wonder if Miracles,
and such other gifts or fruits of the Spirit, are ceased from among them; nay
it were a great wonder if they should still wait on such: for how can the Slave
of sin, who is taken captive by the devil at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. and has
not strength to shake off the yoke his evil passions have both subjugated, and
keep him still under with, have power to overcome and command evil Spirits,
Fire, Water, and the Winds, hurtful Beasts, and deadly things? and why should
these obey him, when they see not that in him to which they owe obedience, to
wit, the Image of God; and whilst the Nations that War against the Spirit in
man, Revel. 2.26. Gal. 5.17, 19, 20. deny him all allegiance, are not only
revolted, but continue absolute Masters of his mind and will?

But what sign do thou show thy self, will some say to me? John 2.18. art
thou greater than all these famous Doctors of the Church, John 4.12. that thou
thus take upon thee to tax and find fault with them, as though they made of
the house of prayer a Marketplace, of God's Word a mere Story, of his Wisdom
great Nonsense, and of his Religion or Worship a Pageantry? I answer, that
they are famous according as they lift up hammers and axes to break the Church
of God down, Psalm 74.5, 6. that I am, I confess, more brutish than any man,
Prove. 30.2. 1 Timothy 1.15. pretend not to work Miracles; but though I could do
it, yet I could not show them any sign at their request, because of their
unbelief, Mat. 13.58 and because it is not done but according to the faith of
him that seeks a sign, chapter 8.3. -- 9.29. Signs being besides to wait only on
them that believe, Mark 16.17. and to follow their belief of the Word, to
confirm it, v. 20. the word confirming, used by Mark, importing some kind of
precedent believing, for there must be some belief, before we can suppose a
need of confirmation; and so the adulterous and perverse generation may seek
long enough for signs, and yet have none given them, but the sign of a Prophet:
which what it is, let them that read understand, if they can, and what I mean
by it: for truly when men have an evil prejudiced eye, like the old seekers of
signs and lack some understanding to pass a righteous judgment, and to discern
the Spirit of a man by his knowledge, and to believe at his words, John 4.41.
uttered by God's Spirit Act. 2.4. neither would they believe if one arose from
the dead, Luke 16.31. and did work all the wonders they should require of him
This is plain from the hardness of heart of the Egyptians, Exodus 7.11, 12.
from the blindness of the Jews, John 10.24, 25, 26. -- 12.37. and from the
blasphemous madness of the Pharisees, Mat. 12.24. notwithstanding the wonders
they saw by Moses and Christ. And it is evident from the stupidity wherewith
this adulterous and wicked generation has beheld the Prodigies which have of
late appeared, that they would look upon the wonders of Moses and Christ, if
one did now show and work some of them in their presence, with the same
indifference; that is, behold and wonder, Act. 13.41. and believe them
supposed, or false, lying and insignificant wonders: (for who considers and
looks upon the said Prodigies as the sad presagers of his approaching ruin?)
and would no more lay the same to heart, make good use of them, desist from
their ill courses, repent and mend thereupon, than Jeroboam who saw his Altar
rent in pieces, and his own hand dried up, and afterward restored, yet
returned not from his evil way, that he might be destroyed from off the Earth,
1 Kings 13.33, 34. 1 Samuel 2.25. as are all those Kings likewise, who walk in
his ways, that is, who forget that the most high rules in the kingdom of men,
Dan. 4.25. and is he that gave them one not only when they had none, but when
all the policy, friends, power and interest they had could procure them none;
and who, as though their own hand had done this great thing for them, trust to
their wit and cunning for the preservation of it in their Family, 1 Kings
12.26, 27. and think, by forsaking the Author of their greatness, and of their
life and being, in setting up a Calvish worship of God in Bethel, that is, a
Lip-worship, bodily Ceremonies, and outward Formalities, and Shows in the House
of God, they strengthen themselves mainly, and secure to themselves the quiet
possession of their Kingdom for ever, against all future revolts: But the God
against whom there is no counsel and wit, Prove. 21.30. and who judges in the
earth, Psalm. 58.11. laughs at their wise contrivance, and warns them by
Prodigies that his hand is stretched out, and ready to strike at them; and
tells them before he strikes, 1 Kings 16.2, 3. For as much as I exalted thee
out of the dust, and made thee Prince over my people, and thou have walked in
the way of Jeroboam, and have made my people to sin, and given them great
offense; behold I take away thee and thy posterity, and I will make thy house
like that of Jeroboam: which God, who turns the hearts of Princes as he
pleases, avert in his great mercy, from some Princes in the World. And
therefore should the wisdom of God ( quae nihil agit frustra, as is confessed,
and does not show her wonders to gratify the humor of unbelieving scorners,
Prove. 3.34. but the wishes and prayers of some lowly, humble and meek, as those
of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.22, 7, 8. of Gideon, Judge. 6.17, 37, 39. and others that
believed what she said, and to make known God's power and his name throughout
the earth, Exodus 9.16. John 9.3.) work Miracles at the demand of such
unbelieving and perverse generation, it were to their destruction, ^uk. 11.50.
which the goodness and patience of God, and the love they that believe have for
their Neighbor, keep God, and the believers Spirit from bringing to pass, and
from executing yet Judgment upon a Nation. For which cause, Christ, who was
come to save, not to destroy men, Luke 9.56. being the dumb Lamb of God, that
did not strive, nor open his mouth and utter his voice, Mat. 12.19. Act. 8.32.
like Moses, Numb. 16.15. and Elijah, 2 Kings 1.10, 12. went always away from
such, as Mat. 16.4. -- 21.17. Mark 8.13. lest by their too long tempting and
playing the fool with God, his holy Spirit had been so grieved and provoked, as
to stir up the principle of wrath to devour them.

From whence observe, that the end and occasion of Miracles, is not the
conviction of the gainsayers of the Faith, (as our worthy Vicar not only takes
for granted, but urges the scarceness of gainsayers, by the Gospel becoming a
National Religion in most Countries, for an argument of the cessation of all
Miracles) seeing they are wrought, first, to confirm the believing of the Word,
to establish and encourage believers to continue in the Faith, when they have
once received it: and secondly, to punish the scorners and opposers; them that
seek to turn away those that are prepared for Salvation, from the Faith; them
that blaspheme the Name of God, and that contribute to the dishonor of it, as
from Elymas, Act. 13.8, 10. the two Captains of fifty, 2 Kings 1.10, 12.
Gehazi, chapter 5.22. Ananias and Saphira, may be learned. Thirdly, that the power,
or name, and glory of God, may be declared and known among men throughout the
Earth: To which it may be added, that they serve to keep in awe many men, Act.
2.43. as Gamaliel, chapter 5.39. from fighting, or declaring for them that fight
against God.

And truly, because Miracles have often been, are, and shall still be done by
deceivers, Exodus 7.11, 22. -- 8.7. Mark 13.22. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Revel. 13.13. they
are no full evidence of a true mission from God, nor convincing proofs of the
truth of the doctrine set forth by him that shows a wonder, and works some
Miracles for it, (though the Vicar says they are, page 6.) For not only we are
not, if we believe Christ's advice, Mark 13.21. to believe what he teaches,
but we are to judge of his mission, and of the virtue whereby he works his
Miracles, by the doctrine he preaches; and to set our reason, and the
knowledge which we should have of God's will and commands, above the authority
of all his signs and wonders, Deuteronomy. 13.3. and if his doctrine be found (like
that of Master Vicar) contrary to the Divine, contained in the Scriptures, he
was, for all his Miracles, by the Law of Moses, before Christ came to save what
was lost, to be put to death, v. 5. And indeed it were better for false
teachers to be hanged, or cast into the Sea with a stone tied to their neck,
Luke 17.1. than they should give such offense, as that the Vicar's Sermon has
given to many men: for when at the Judgment day one shall accuse the other,
that he has caused him to err, and curse him for the evil doings he has
committed, this shall then excuse himself upon his next Superior, and the
Superior upon the Supreme Authority, and the Supreme Power upon his false
Counselors; who, having no other plea, shall cast the fault of all these upon
their wicked Teachers, who have kept them in darkness; and instead of reproving
their courses, to bring them to a righteous and godly life, have for some
Preferments sake soothed them up in their sins; then shall the blood of all
these be required at their hands, Ezekiel. 33.6. Deuteronomy. 27.18. and this great
burden shall lay so heavy on their shoulders, that it were better for them to
have been cut off betimes, than to have lived to give the least of those that
shall thus complain, cause of offenses. And in further evidence that signs are
not to convince the gainsayers of the Faith, we do not find any where in
Scripture, that any man who was not beforehand prepared and inclined, (like the
Proconsul Sergius, Act. 13.7.) was convinced thereupon: for, as for them which
John says 2.23. believed in the name of Christ, seeing the miracle which he
had done in Cana, it appears from what he says in the following verses, 24,25.
of Christ not thinking it fit to commit himself to them, knowing what faith was
in them; that their faith was such as that of Simon, who believed and wondered
(Act. 13.41.) beholding the mirarles which were done, chapter 8.13. but believed
not like them, v. 12. who it is said believed at the preaching of Philip, v.
17. for his heart was, says Peter, v. 21, 23. not right in the sight of God,
and he was still in the dark, austere and anxious source, or the gall of
bitterness; far from a true faith in Christ, that brings man off of that state.
And such as that of the people of Lystra, and of Derbe, who after they had seen
the impotent man cured, and taken Paul for a God on the account of this sign,
chapter 14.11, 13. stoned him nevertheless, v. 19. what no man would do that has
the least grain of Faith in him: so, though the Barbarians of Maltha said that
St. Paul was a God, chapter 28.6. honored him, and loaded him and the men with
him, with necessaries, v. 10. yet there is not one word said of any that
believed at the several great things which he did there before them, v. 5, 8, 9.

But without this, it is sure that Christ coming to save man, salva and integra
humana creatura, (as St. Peter witnesses, and as the words of Christ in Luke
9.56. may be expounded; and he saves by reforming and restoring men unto their
first state of perfection; for it being very good, Genesis 1.31. he needs not add,
or change it:) he must use some other means than Miracles to convince them: for
though a man could believe the words of Christ to be true, because he should
have seen him do some wonders and Miracles; yet not understanding the ground
and reason thereof, his faith were but implicit, he were not yet convinced,
and should still be in the dark, and an imperfect humane creature, Coloss.
3.10. which if saved, such were not saved entire: and therefore whilst man is
such, Christ does not take him hoodwink into his kingdom of Light; but first,
(the humane creature consisting chiefly of these three Essential faculties,
Intellectus, Voluntas, and Animus, seu vires and potestas agendi; and the
perfect state, wisdom, or summum bonum thereof, of these three well rectified)
God works, to make man perfect, upon his understanding, 1 John 5.20.
enlightening his mind by his Spirit, and prompting him with reasons fit to
convince him, and to make him know himself, that is, find out and perceive that
it is as he teaches, and that he speaks true indeed, John 4.42. Then, when the
understanding is perfectly reformed, man mistakes no more bonum apparens for
the true good, but apprehends wherein his summum bonum does consist: and Lux
intelligendi being the most perfect Law, volendi and agendi, as soon as he
perceives this, he will naturally bend his will and desire toward the same,
and choose it: and that done, with all the strength of his courage and virtue,
which, without the help of the power from on high that does enable him, is
quite helpless, he will avoid and abstain from that which keeps him from it,
Act. 3.26. and follow, embrace and use all the means to compass it: and thus
may become perfect, and come to be saved whole, or received entirely reformed
to his first state, whilst others see and wonder, Act. 13.41. and are left,
Luke 17.36, 37. in a broken and imperfect condition, though Christ should have
wrought all his Miracles before them, John 12.37. Truly if blessed are they
that have not seen, yet believe, John 21.29. (because intelligere being ipsum
credere, and there being no belief of what is not understood, they that believe
things without seeing them done beforehand, show that they understand the
possibility thereof, and have more understanding, and therefore are more
blessed than those that must see the same before they can believe them) they
that would see some Miracles wrought before they believe, will remain under the
curse of God, and in unbelief. And from these things, I think, it is clear and
manifest, that Miracles convince no man; and that there is no need of visible
and outward signs for the conversion of the gainsayers and unfaithful, but of
the sign of the Son of man, the Light of his Star, coming imperceptibly, and
shining like the Lightning, Mat. 24.27. in those dark clouds of heaven, v. 30.

And certainly if Miracles were (as the Vicar says) the reason of conviction,
and if there was great reason that such as were the instruments of so great an
undertaking in the first Age of the Church, before the Gospel was a National
Religion, and whilst many gainsayers were yet to be convinced, should have a
proportionable strength of faith to do it with; there is now in its old Age as
great a need of Miracles, and of as great strength of Faith and Spirit, as
there was then: First, on the account of the gainsayers of all parties, not
only Turks, and Papists, who are fallen from the Faith, and from the purity of
Christ's Gospel and Doctrine; and are, by reason of the prejudice they have
therefore against the true followers and teachers of a Doctrine which they have
departed from, harder to be convinced, and to be brought back again to the
obedience of it; but Protestants, who deny the same, whilst they profess it:
Secondly, on the account of the self-conceited blindness of all Christian
Sects; for they pretend all to see, John 9.41. to know, and understand best
Christ, and the oracles of God, Romans 3.2. we are the strictest Sect of
Christians, say most of them, we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us,
Jer. 8.8. we are of Christ, Mat. 24.5. and lo, he is amongst us, Mark 13.21.
and thou wast altogether (would they say to Christ himself, Luke 10.16. if he
came to preach over again the same things he did, and to make them sensible of
their neglect of the same, and practices against it) born in sins, or ignorant,
(for that phrase imports so much) and do thou think to teach us, John 9.34.
who are our selves the best Doctors of his purest Church? we know too well the
meaning of Scripture to believe thee; and we may choose to credit even an Angel
of God, if he came down from Heaven to confirm what thou teach. These are
doctrines of Devils, and it is very probable (says the Reverend Vicar, page
11. lin. 12.) that some worse Sect than that of the Quakers, if a worse can
come in their room, will ere long (what if this were a Caiaphas prophecy? John
11.51.) be at the doors, and disturb the minds of credulous people. Therefore
is that party (I speak this for instance) which calls another, whose doctrine
may for all that be far better than its own, the worse Sect of all Christians,
like to believe by its means, and to receive from it, even the plain truth it
self, without they see some Miracles, and the same power of Faith as the
foresaid instruments (to wit, the Apostles) had; whilst, like the proud
Pharisees, they thank God that their doctrine, and their way is not like this?
Luke 18.11. No sure, but rather to be, like the self-conceited Jews, Romans 11.7,
11. made more blind than the Gentiles; and per consequent the conversion of all
such, (whom I take to be far from converted Christians) is a more difficult
work, and so needs the same, if not a greater Spirit and strength, than that
which the Gentiles wanted in the Apostles. Greater abomination of the
desolation cannot be found in the Church, than when being made altogether
desolate, (that is, brought to the most opposite state to that which
constitutes a Christian Church) it yet abominably calls it self, and will be
counted the true Church of Christ!

But I hear some again (of that blessed crew, doubtless, whom no reason without
sense can convince and satisfy) saying, though we grant all this, yet the
Apostles wrought Miracles, spoke new Languages, and Prophesied; therefore
though you cannot do it your self, yet if their Spirit is not ceased, and
seeing these signs wait upon the gift of it to some of the believers, show us
who does now any of those signs, or has done them within the twelve last Ages,
(and up comes Master Vicar with a scrap of his Learning, Dic quibus in terris,
and eris mihi magnus Apollo,
Opera jam sanctus tam grandia spiritus edat?)
as Miracles and Prophecy, the great attestation of any truth whatsoever, page
3. and per consequent of the truth of the Spirit of the Apostles being
continued ever since 1200 years to God's Church? For we daily experience that
none of the pretenders to their Spirit do the same: And we may assert (says
he, page 6.) that they ceased soon after the said fourth Century,
notwithstanding the boasts of the Church of Rome; who indeed instead of
confirming men in the Christian Religion by their pretended Miracles, do, if
men be considerate, rather expose it to their scorn and censure, so ridiculous
are the stories they tell, and upon such slight and pitiful ground do they
pretend their Miracles are wrought.

And here I must confess that the Vicar and his crew have caught the Bear by
the tail: for so, notwithstanding the boasts of another Church, and of what
one, whom he will call, as well as the Quakers, one of the worst of Christians,
can say and show against him, he may still as boldly assert that they are
ceased, and find pretenses enough to defend his assertion. But though what he
says of the Miracles of the Roman Church, is too true of most of them, yet
have there been all that time no Believers among them? and have none of the
signs mentioned Mark 16.17. waited upon some of them? this is a bold assertion,
and a very hard thing for Master Vicar to prove: chiefly, if we consider that
Christ by foretelling us that some false Prophets should rise, and show great
signs and wonders, Mark 13.13. grants that (seeing even those whose coming is
after the working of Satan, says Paul, have power to work Miracles) some of
the true Believers living among the Papists, have done, since that Prophecy,
some of those many Miracles which are related of them; and may now (if it were
so, and though the Vicar could prove, that they never did any) do some wonders;
it being prophesied of time to come, without any restriction to the sour first
Ages, Mark 13.13. and of what should come to pass after the Gospel had been
published in all Countries, v. 10. then in respect to all men, v. 37. and per
consequent, to all times till the Worlds end. And if not only those false
Prophets who work their wonders by the help of the Devil, but the Nigromancer
also, who acts by the strength alone of humane nature, can effect wonderful
things; as by retiring but for one moment within himself, and setting very
strongly his will upon a thing, though at a great distance from him, introduce
and bring to pass his desire upon it, or at least stamp upon it such mark or
impression, as the longing Mother does upon the fruit in her womb; as appears
plain by Balaam cursing or bewitching by Enchantments whom he would, Numb.
22.6. -- 24.1. except God by a special providence prevented him, Josh. 24.10.
Numb. 23.23. why should the same power be denied to faithful men, though they
live among the Turks, or are reputed Papists? especially being more Masters of
their own Passions, than such natural men as a Nigromancer is; and their minds
more abstracted from all lower things, because their conversation is in the
heaven above. But to do all parties right, it must needs be confessed that some
of the Romish Saints, as Bruno, Lopez, and such, have by their fruits or their
works, as by denying themselves, and dying to all the World, and to all the
comfort they did enjoy of this life, to follow ever after their Savior under
the cross; wandering in deserts, mountains, and dens, Heb. 11.38. without taking
thought how they should subsist and live; showed us that they did truly and
really believe in Christ: and so we have no reason to think but that he met
them, Isa. 64.5. Act. 10.35. made them know of his doctrine, John 7.17. and
granted that some wonders were, according to his promise Mark 16.17. wrought by
their hands, Act. 5.12. This, and let Master Vicar think what he will
otherwise, though I have not seen it, I believe, and honor their name; and
make no question but that many such are now living up and down the World,
which, as unworthy of them, knows little or nothing of it. And if I can but die
the death of those righteous men, to live as they have lived, I shall no way
envy Master Vicars, nor any of his Bishops Paradise. So much for the Roman
Church.

Now, as for the Protestant, they being as good Christians, and as true
Believers at least as the Papists are, I know no reason why they should not
see, and have seen, as well as the Papists, since their departing from them,
which is near 200 years, some of the same gifts of the Holy Ghost among
themselves, if they are not yet ceased; except for want of the same degree of
Spirit and Faith, as those had which have wrough^ wonders among the Papists:
for though i^ be confessed that their Doctrine is bette^ than that of the Roman
Church, and tha^ their Notion therefore or Opinion is better, yet neither a
Notional, or an Historica^ Faith, nor crying with our mouth and lips, Lord,
Lord, we know thee, Hos. 8.2. Mat. 7.21. -- 15.8. (for the Devils know the same
as those, and believe, and tremble) but doing the will of God, making men true
Believers; it does not follow from thence that they have more, or even so much
Faith as some of those Holy men who have wrought wonders among the Papiste.
Alas, how can they believe, though they cry Lord, or sing it with Organs, never
so long, whose heart is set upon all vanities under the Sun! and how can they
work Miracles, that deny those works of Faith which make men true Believers,
such as dying wholly to all the lusts of the flesh, and all worldly-mindedness,
and that believe and assert that all Miracles are ceased? But when the
Protestant Church has yielded such Believers, as some of the Romish Saints
have been, the same signs also have then waited upon them, and have been seen
and heard of those that say they are ceased; though by reason of their
blindness and hardness of heart, they have in seeing seen them no more than the
Jews, who saw and wondered, were in amaze, looking upon the wonders Christ and
the Apostles did, as a Cow upon the new and painted door of her Stall. As for
instance, they have seen the Maid of Bohemia, Kotterus, Drabicius, whose
Prophesies are extant, and the unparalled ever since the Apostles Jacob Behm,
the Apostle of this last Age of the Church, who has, as the other three,
appeared to all Europe in Person and by his Books, which are in most of the
European Languages: First, the Maid of Bohemia, by purifying her heart by
Faith, prophesied of what should come to pass afterward, falling into Trances,
like Abraham, Genesis 15.12. and Balaam, Numb. 24.4. and gave signs several times
when certain things should happen, and at what time the next Trance or Fit
should come upon her. Kotterus was a Leatherdresser of Silesia, who, when he
had prophesied, and set down his prophesies, and given them to be put in Latin
to Comenius, gave him this sign, viz. that his Library should be burnt down, if
he refused or neglected to do it; which upon Comenius neglecting to execute,
came accordingly to pass by a fire from Heaven. Drabicius, who lately got the
Crown of Martyrdom in Hungary, by the hands of the most inhumane
Anti-Jesu-Jesuits, prophesied, which is a gift and work, or operation of the
Holy Ghost, better and more excellent than that of Healing and of Miracles, 1
Cor. 12.28, 31. but because the Jesuits kept him Prisoner for it, we know not
what signs he did, and it may be he did none, because of the unbelief of all
the unfaithful crew that had some access to him. And as for the Teutonick
Philosopher Jacob Behm, who, being brought up at first a Cow-keeper or
Herdsman, and after a Shoemaker and Cobbler in a Village, showed himself a
Prodigy of all wisdom and knowledge; what wonders had he not done, had he met
with fit objects, I mean with Believers whose Faith had reached into, and
joined it self with his? But that some were wrought by his Faith, is a plain
case, if his being supplied with all manner of Learning, without Education, and
the help of any Books, but of a Dutch Bible only, is a Miracle, according to
the Vicar's assertion: for what deep Mystery, what great Arcanum is there in
Natural, and Moral, and Divine Philosophy, which he has not been perfectly
acquainted with, without the study of Books? as to the single-ey'd Readers of
his admirable and inestimable Works, it manifestly appears; notwithstanding
that it is at first sight a hard matter to apprehend his meaning: and not so
hard neither, but to them in whom the God of this world does blind the mind,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel (which Jacob Behm has of late most
lively set out, and cleared from the dark mist which the ignorance of men had
offuscated it with) should shine to them, as Paul says, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. The
difficulties they meet with in perusing his Works, proceeding not from his
style, but from the depth of the things, and from the Readers themselves, who
(as mere natural men) receive not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
but (as some of their first fellow disciples objected before to Christ, John
6.59.) say, this is an hard saying: and go back, walk no more, or have no more
to do, with him, v. 66. Then, as for new Languages, if he did not speak them
all, he spoke and understood that which (like the Apostles new Language) was
understood among all Nations and Tongues, viz. the Language of Nature: for note
that the Apostles gave but one voice for each word, or did not utter each word,
they spoke, in the several dialects of those Nations which heard Peter's first
Sermon, Act. 2.9, 14. yet were understood of all, as if they had spoken to each
in their own Language, v. 11. And that he spoke this Language, and had really
the knowledge of occult Philosophy, his Explication of most of the hard names
in the Bible, and in other Writings of some truly learned men; his Mysterium
Magnum; his Answer to the 40 Questions of Dr. Walter, about the Soul, and her
state, in this life, and after it; his Signatura Rerum, or his reading at first
sight when he came into a Field, the most occult properties and virtues of any
Plants, by their outward Signature, though he had never before seen, or read,
or heard of them; and in a word, all his Works, with King Charles the First
(whom you will grant, I hope, to have been as competent a Judge, as any Divine
of the Episcopal Church) witness to some part of them, that if the Author
thereof was not brought up a Scholar, the Holy Ghost was in him; and his Books,
nil humani sonabant, every where betokening and declaring the most abstruse and
divine wisdom that ever he read; do sufficiently demonstrate to sober minds.
And though some of your Doctors may speak Hebrew far better, and be more ready
than he at Sceva, Hiphil, Phiel, and at finding of your Roots, (as wisely
established for such, as the Holy Ghost taken away from Christ's Church) yet
without Lexicon, Grammar, Talmud, and Targum, he went so far beyond them, that
none of the best of them have ever so much as once dreamed of one word of the
most sublime and divine sense which he has discovered in almost every word of
the Book of Genesis. And if you had been pleased but to consult him a little
about the meaning of some Hebrew words, as for instance, what means the
Scripture by the word Meroz, Judge. 5.23. you had never written, nor suffered to
be printed so much Nonsense about it. Curse Meroz, who can that be in the true
sense of Scripture, (which is every where Figurative, and besides in this place
Prophetical) but the Bishops, and all such Shepherds whom God is against? Ezekiel.
34.10. for that being (like Meroz) some of the men set apart among the
Christian Churches, to help the Spirit of God to fight against the Nations, and
the powers of darkness which War against him in man, Gal. 5.17, 19. and oppress
the people of God, and lead him away captive, as Judge. 5.12. is said: (for
Meroz was a Town of Galilee, and belonging to the Tribe of Naphtali, which with
that of Zeb^lon was by the Prophetess appointed in Israel to fight against
Jabin the King of the Canaanites, Judge. 4.6. -- 5.18. and so typifies a part of
those which are chosen from the body of the Church, to set upon the Prince of
this World, and his Host in us:) they, instead of thus helping the Lord against
these mighty, not only go not about, either for their own private, or public
good of their people, to oppose their invasion, but freely become their Slaves,
and betray into the hands of those Enemies of God, Romans 8.7. their Flocks, by
suffering them to walk and to run with them in the will of the Gentiles, to
wit, Pride, and Drunkenness, excess in Clothes, Patching, Plays, Revellings,
etc. 1 Pet. 4.4. which Lusts go uncontrolled: nay instead of exhorting the
Magistrate to suppress the Schools of Vice in this Land, viz. all lewd and
Play Houses; these dumb Dogs that cannot bark, but for praise, honor, and
gain, Isa. 56.10, 11. discourage, by barking at those that find fault with
them, (as by applying to them on a Temporal account the curse of Meroz,
appears) those few that would go and fight the said Enemies of God. Besides, as
Meroz is not mentioned in the portions divided to the twelve Tribes, Josh.
19.32, to 40. among the Cities named throughout the inheritance of the people
of Israel, and yet was a Town of one of the Tribes of Israel; so it ought to be
applied to those that are in the Church, and yet are not of the true Church of
Christ, have neither part nor lot in the Holy Ghost, Act. 8.21. the true
inheritance of Saints, and Land of promise, Romans 14.17. and whose names are not
set down or written among the true Israel in Heaven. And who should these be
but those who have not the Holy Ghost, and deny the gift of it; and yet, like
Simon Magus, would gladly make sale of it; as from their Ordination for money,
is manifest. These four were Protestants, viz. of the Lutherans and Valdenses
Profession.

That the other Protestant parties have also seen some of the same wonders and
signs done by the power of Faith, upon some among themselves, it is no hard
thing to give several instances of, and even out of some of their own
Martyrologies: But because they that read them may observe the same themselves,
and to avoid, as much as I can prolixity, out of many instances which are come
to my knowledge in many parts of Europe, I will give only two, which occur and
have been seen in England, not so long time ago but that several sufficient eye
witnesses of the one are still living, and ready to attest it; as the other is
likewise by the testimony of great many judicious and learned spectators of the
same, now deceased.

The first instance is of a blind man that received his sight; who being a
Labourer, by name Robert Lancaster, of Castleacre a Town in the County of
Norfolk, had lost one eye by a Thorn, and the other by a Stubble in binding
sheaves in Harvest. He was at least five years without the least sight, and all
that time earned his living with bunching of Flax and Hemp, being led by his
Son, or an Apprentice he had, from one Town to another. He was a constant
hearer of the Word; and one Sunday about 30 years ago, being at Church, where
hearing that part of the Gospel read or expounded, which we find in the 9th. of
John, v. 6, 7. viz. that Christ spat on the ground, made clay, and spread it
upon the eyes of the man born blind, and sent him to wash his eyes in the Pool
of Siloam, which done, he came thence seeing: God, it seems, who opens men's
ears in adversity, by dreams, visions of the night, or by an interpreter, and
one among a thousand, to show man his uprightness, that is, the way which he
may become righteous and just by, Job 33.15, 16, 23. opened his heart to attend
to the things that were spoken, Act. 16.14. and to believe that God being as
able and ready as ever to help all those who, trusting to his goodness, call
earnestly upon him, the same thing might then be done by him as well as before;
and in this confidence, as soon as he came from Church, he caused his Wife to
get some clay from the wall of his Cottage, and tempering it with his own
spittle, anointed his eyes, and then desired to be led to a Spring which is in
a place not far from thence, called Broad Meadow, where washing his eyes, he
did presently receive some sight; and washing a second time, he had a very good
sight for all his life afterward, which was about eight years; and used for a
great part of that time Threshing, in his, and other Towns round about. All
this is certainly affirmed by several yet living in the same Town, who knew
Lancaster before and since his recovery; by the Son of him that was then
Minister of that Town, who lives now in Snedsham not far from Castleacre, his
name is William Turner; by Philip Pagraff of Little Appleton, in Norfolk
likewise; Thomas Boot, a Silk-weaver, who dwells now in Goat-Alley, by the
Artillery-Ground; Mrs. Mary Gold, dwelling in the Haberdashers-Hall; and by
Lancaster's own Son, (who lives within five miles of the said Castleacre) and
Daughter, who is married within three miles of London. And this Relation comes
from the present Minister of the said Castleacre, Mr. William Briggs, who
though a sound Episcopal man, has sent it in writing to one of my acquaintance.

The other instance is of one Briggs, a North-Country man, of a competent
Estate; which is observable, (1.) for his falling into Trances; (2.) for his
great Faith, whereby he overcame the Tempter, and cast him out, or at least,
far from himself, when in the fiery trial (which goes usually before an
unfeigned conversion) he did (as he never fails to do on such occasion) assault
him with all the might and the wiles he has at hand, to make the despairing
Soul fall under his temptation; (3.) for the (...), and strangeness of his
disease; and (4.) for his cure and recovery, without the help of all other
means, than of a strong Faith in Christ. This same Briggs was a Lawyer of the
Temple, a godly man, about 30 years of age, and contemporary to Fox the Author
of the English Martyrology: His case, and all that passed between the Tempter
and him all the time of his Trances, is in truth so remarkable, that, as it
induced then, many pious learned men, both Physicians and Divines, (who
resorted to his House all that while every day, to hear the things which he
spoke) to put it in writing; so it induces me to give it at large, as they
have left it, to the public; that they may see in seeing, and believe the
extraordinary working of the Holy Ghost in good men, to convert them, as well
now as heretofore: and so referring my self for the particulars thereof to
their Memorial, that shall be, God willing, printed within a short time; I will
give over here the discourse of the power of Faith, and of the faithful working
Miracles to this day, to follow the main design of this, the demonstration of
the Apostles Spirit continuing in Christ's Church as long as the World endures.

To which end, the distinction of an extraordinary and ordinary Spirit, set up
by Master Vicar, is to be considered of; and we are to understand that, though
the Apostles had the extraordinary Spirit he ascribes to them, whereby they
wrought Miracles; yet it is properly such (that is, extraordinary) in respect
only of the Spirit of Lip-Christian-Bishops, and natural men; for the
extraordinary circumstances it came and sat with on the Apostles, does not
make it to be the more extraordinary: neither did it presently (though it
introduced them into the kingdom of Light, and opened unto them the principle
and the center of all wisdom and knowledge; whence the language of nature, and
the wonderful works of God, were at the same time understood and seen of them)
show and reveal unto them what they should believe and teach in any doubtful
cases, for the time they were to live; but respective to that of true Christian
believers, it is but ordinary: for says Peter again, Act. 15.9. the Lord put
no difference between us and them, (meaning those he had said v. 7. believed)
but he that knows the hearts (and therefore when men believe) bears them
witness of their faith, by giving the Holy Ghost to them even as to us, v. 7,
8. Whence follows, that (since God bears witness to them that believe, by
giving the Holy Ghost to them, even as he did to the greatest Apostles) all the
faithful are sealed, as Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.3. -- 4.30. with the
Spirit of promise, when they believe; and with an equal portion, when they
believe equally. Thus, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether Apostles, Teachers, or
any men, provided they be believers indeed, being all made to partake, or drink
of one and the same extraordinary Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. which is further
confirmed, Act. 11.17. by Peter pleading that God gave the Gentiles the like
gift as he had done unto him: what he durst not have pleaded, if there had been
between the Apostles and the converted Gentiles Spirit such difference as the
Bishops imagine: for had there been any such difference in their Spirits, they
that contended with him, as grudging and repining that the Gentiles should
enjoy the same privilege they did, had given him some answer, (which we do not
read they did) and not glorified God for it, as we read they did, v. 18. But
truly this distinction of an ordinary and extraordinary Spirit among believers,
being yet unknown with them, they freely acquiesced: and it being neither found
nor grounded upon Scripture, which, on the contrary, asserteth the unity and
the identity of Spirit, and speaks no where but of one and the same Spirit all
the Church over: we are rather to adhere, like them, to St. Peter's words,
denying this difference, than to the newer doctrine of the Episcopal Church,
which, to the withstanding of God, Act. 11.17. stands stoutly for it.

And that you may the better judge and understand your selves, whether the said
difference ought to be admitted of; it will not be amiss to consider the
working of the Apostles Spirit, and how much the Apostles themselves ascribed
to it; for most of the Lip-Christians attribute so much to it, and have such
strange conceits of it, (as for instance, they who say that it is ceased) that
they are kept blind thereby from knowing when they see him; and from perceiving
when he does manifest himself, that it is he whom they see, and his virtue
which appears: all which might be prevented, and what we ought to think clearly
seen and perceived, if in reading we had ears to understand what is said of it
in many places: as for instance, out of the 13. chapter of the Acts, v. 52. it
is plain and obvious, that Paul, as chief Apostle, Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. and the
disciples of Antioch, were filled with the Holy Ghost: and from the 15.
chapter, that upon some new-comers teaching against the doctrine which no doubt
Paul had preached to them, when they believed, chapter 13.39. and was still present
with them to make it out, as he did, chapter 15.2. yet they (the said disciples)
notwithstanding their being filled with the Holy Ghost, not only knew not
themselves, how to decide the question, but refused to believe to Paul and to
Barnabas, (a certain argument that they thought no better of them, than of the
said new-comers, and that notwithstanding Paul's extraordinary gift, they
thought him not infallible:) and sent them to know the mind of the other
Apostles that were at Jerusalem. But (what is more observable) in an Article of
so great a consequence as this was, Gal. 5.2. Peter and the rest of the
Apostles, and the Elders, when they came to hear of it, were themselves at a
great loss; for they met all together to consider, dispute of, and resolve in
this matter, v. 6, 7. and after much disputing pro and con, Peter stood up, and
giving a good reason against the thing in question, which reason, after that
Paul and Barnabas had spoken, being confirmed by James with some addition to
it, it pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, who gave their
assent to it, and sent accordingly Letters by some other men, besides Paul and
Barnabas, to the faithful of Antioch. And says James, my sentence is, v. 19.
which sentence or opinion being the result of their disputation and consult, is
in v. 28. ascribed with one accord, v. 25. by them to the Holy Ghost, as to him
that guided them into this truth by his help; and the convincing reasons
suggested and gathered from the said disputations, are looked upon as his work,
1 Cor. 14.37. -- 7.25, 40. Now here, first, no immediate afflatus inspires
them, and reveals to any of them what they should believe; secondly, they take
some time, and meet together with one accord, (not to write an Apostolical
decree) but to consult together; and lastly, by disputing, seeking and
examining, they come at last to agree, and to resolve upon the best-grounded
opinion: which is that all true Christians, with the ordinary Spirit of our
Vicar, may lawfully pretend to.

Again, the Spirit in Paul, says Luke, Act. 17.16. (...), as he saw the excess
of Idolatry in Athens: that is, he had not a mean and ordinary impulse and
paroxysme upon him. Well, and what was the effect of this fit or paroxysme? did
it make him work Miracles; and, like the man of God, 1 Kings 13.5. rend their
Altars, and throw down their Images at his word? or did then the Spirit reveal
some new thing to him? Truly no; he disputed daily in the Synagogue, and in the
Market, out of that which he knew already; and by reasons which his light and
knowledge suggested him were like to work upon them, he showed them their
ignorance of God, which raised in some a mind to know him better. And the sum
of the reasons he orged to them was, that the God whom they did worship out of
their excess of zeal, without knowing him, was he that made the whole World,
and could not per consequent be confined to their Temples; that he having made
also all things in Heaven and Earth, and giving to all creatures life and
breath, we have from him, and in him our being, and so are all his offspring,
as they had even been taught by some of their learned men, viz. Aratus, and
others; and therefore ought not to think that the Deity is like unto things far
worse than we, such as Gold and Silver are, whereof their Idols were made: that
their reason told them it was not fit to remain in that state of ignorance; but
besides this, he showed them a further necessity to learn the knowledge of God,
(which being Life eternal, John 17.3. implys good works, righteousness, and
holiness, without which no man shall ever see him, Heb. 12.14.) which was that
being to dye, they were after this life upon a day appointed, to give an
account of their evil works, to him that God had made Judge of all the World,
and declared to be such by the power he gave him to overcome temptation, to
fulfill all righteousness, and so to rise from the death, Romans 1.4. no man ever
arose from before him, nor since his time, but by him, and by his gift. To
which reasons (note not fetched from any Humane Learning, against what the Vicar
argues so groundlesly for; for what necessity is there of Mathematics, Logic,
and Metaphysick, to convince men that they are a more excellent creature than
Gold, or Silver, or Stones?) Dionysius, Damaris, and some others submitted: and
this effect of the said impulse of the Holy Ghost in St. Paul, or other Saints,
is no more than what some men whom I know now living, have done upon the same
occasion in Italy.

And indeed, we find no where that the Spirit, which was mighty in the
Apostles, Gal. 2.8. was such blind afflatus as would immediately, and without
previous knowledge, suggest and dictate to them the things which they spoke and
did: But rather that it was a renewing of their minds, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 4 23.
by a new Light, which lighting again their smoking Candle, made them capable
to see and to discover by it, all that which, standing before in the dark, did
then plainly present it self to their view, so that they might have given a
full description of it. As when the bright shining of a Candle gives light to
some men in a dark place, Luke 11.36. 2 Pet. 1.19. they perceive on a sudden
what they could not see before, though it stood round about them; and can find
out by its meant, if they carry it with them, what lies hidden in the most
hidden corners of the room: so, the Day Star arising in the hearts of those
disciples, rendered clear and manifest to them what they could not see, and what
was not to be seen without it, though with the help of all the Humane Learning:
witness, besides St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. the Vicar against himself, in the
place he cites page 10. out of Hales Golden Remains, saying, that what the
Spirit did give them the knowledge of, were great and high mysteries, which had
never entered yet in the heart of any man. The gift of the Apostles was the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, says Paul himself, Tit. 3.5. now as the word
renewing implys an existency of some decayed, spoiled thing, that receives a
new supply of what it lost and lacked; so, the renewing of the Holy Ghost does
signify a recovery of it, and a restoration to the same Image of God breathed
into man's nostrils, when the Lord created him, Genesis 1.27. -- 2.7. which
consisting in knowledge, Coloss. 3.10. they needed no more than he another
immediate blind afflatus, to know all things; that is, all they saw, and were
to think, to speak, and to do: (for the word thing, being said of all that
which dicitur, and cogitatur, and est, the knowledge of all things-promised,
John 14.26. implys so much.) And that Adam needed no other new revelation or
inspiration, than that of his own native knowledge to understand perfectly the
nature of what he saw, etc. appears from that God brought all the Beasts to
him, to see what he would name them, Genesis 2.19. (and not to teach him their
names) and from that whatsoever he called every Beast, that was, says Moses,
the name thereof: God, who had before given names to other things, Genesis 1.5, 8,
10. seeing these were right and good, and that he had not only a right notion
of the things, but that what definition and judgment he made of them, was so
much according to truth, so perfect, and so congruous to their nature, that
nothing was found amiss therein, he confirmed them: and that was the name
thereof, as if God had given it. Therefore when the Apostles were by the Holy
Ghost renewed in light and knowledge, they knew all things, like Adam, without
new revelation; with this difference only, that whereas Adam had the perfect
knowledge of all, from the very first moment after he was created, (for then he
was very good, Genesis 1.31.) the Apostles, whilst in the body of this death, Romans
7.24. and till that which is perfect (to wit, the perfect state of Adam in body
and soul, Ephesians. 4.13.) is come, knew and saw all things in part, and but as
through a glass, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12. neither came all that they knew to them at
the first moment after their new creation, or new birth of the Spirit, John
3.5. but by degrees; for, says Paul, 2 Cor. 4.16. their inward man was
renewed, and perfected, day by day: the morning, and the day star going before
them further and further, until it came and stood over where lies the young
child, or Truth new found, Mat. 2.9. so guided their minds from one consequence
to another, as from the lowermost link, through the whole intermediate
concatenation, unto the higher end of the Chain, yet in no great space of time,
that in following it close, by seeking and by knocking, (for he who will that
it should be opened to him, must knock, Luke 11.10. and rise early and watch at
the posts of wisdoms door, Prove. 8.17, 34. and traffic with his talent, but
never keep it laid up) they did climb up by degrees into all wisdom and truth;
came to some knowledge in all the most hidden things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and
so did stand in no need of a sudden immediate impulse and inspiration, to
declare and speak of them when they saw an occasion: (...), he will lead you in
the way, John 16.13. now leading one in the way, implys that he walks himself,
and neither is carried to, nor the things which he is led into, brought unto
him. And the Son of God, says 1 John 5.20. has given us (...), (note, he
says not (...), that is, the understanding it self, but (...), that is, novum
lumen in mente, a discerning faculty) that we may, by consulting, judging, and
examining, discern to (...): where the conjunction (...), or, in English, that
we may, shows that the said enquiring and discerning faculty is the way and the
means which the Holy Ghost brought St. John and the Apostles to know (...),
Truth by. Also, it is plain from hence, that the gift of the Son of God, the
Holy Spirit, bestowed on the Apostles, is first an understanding enlightened and
rectified; to which they were left, even in the midst of their Visions, to
gather from what they saw, what they were to do and teach, Act. 16.10. --
10.15, 28.

Whereas the ancient Prophets under the Old Testament, with whom the true
Unction, the Comforter or Spirit, made no such constant abode, as Christ
promised it would with those that should keep his words thenceforth, or believe
in him, John 14.16, 23. had not the same (...), or Light constantly shining in
their minds, to direct them upon all occurrences: but the word of the Lord came
to them, and his Spirit upon them, by intervals. God was not yet Emmanuel, the
Tabernacle of the Lord was yet sometimes taken down, Isa. 33.20. and his
Oracle, or his Word, the Verbum Domini, that is, his intellectus, voluntas,
posse, actus, (nam, cum omnisciens and omnipotens Deus neque consilio, neque
voce utatur, scire, velle, agere is still but one thing in him, to wit, his
Verbum, or Christ, who is therefore called the wisdom of the Father, by which
he knows and wills; and the arm and the power of the Lord, John 12.38, 41. 1
Cor. 1.24. by which he can, acts, creates, and makes all things, Heb. 1.2. and
saves all them that believe) did not as yet dwell in men, John 14.17. 1 Cor.
6.19. for they did not receive the promise of the Father, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4,
5, 8. till Christ was glorified, John 7.37. -- 16.7. Therefore the ancient
Seers had not the Oracle in them to consult with at all times, like Christians,
whom God speaks to in these last days by his Son, Heb. 1.2. who is the true
Mercy-seat, or Propitiatorium, Romans 3.25. found between the Cherubims, ( viz.
the Angelical Souls, which have Heaven within them, Luke 17.21. Phil. 3.20.)
from whence God gives his Oracles ever since his first coming or appearance in
the flesh. But the Angel of God, Christ, Genesis 48.16. -- 18.1, 10, 13, 16, 17.
Mal. 3.1. made himself known and spoke to them, (1.) in Visions and Dreams,
Numb. 12.6. Genesis 31.11. Dan. 7.1, 2. (2.) or spoke to them by a voice from
above the Mercy-seat, between the two Cherubims, as the Lord did with Moses,
Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89. -- 9.8, 9. whence to the Testimony, says Isaiah, 8.20.
Numb. 17.4. (because that it was then hidden under the Mercy-seat in the Ark,
Exodus 25.16, 21. Heb. 9.4.) to enquire for counsel at the Lords mouth by Vrim,
Numb. 27.21. Josh. 9.14. Isa. 30.2. Exodus 28.30, 28. 1 Samuel 30.7, 8. (3.) or
the Lord did put his word in their mouth, and in their ears, Numb. 22.38. --
23.16. 1 Samuel 9.15. Jer. 1.9. Ezekiel. 5.14. Isa. 6.7. -- 49.2. (not in their
understandings, as by the new Covenant, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.7, 8, 13.) (4.) or
they were, as Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.21. transported, (...), by some sudden
rapture of the Spirit upon them, Numb. 11.26. 1 Samuel 10.6. -- 19.20, to 24. 2
Kings 3.15. 1 Chronicles. 12.18. (5.) or received their Visions falling into
Trances, like Abraham, Genesis 15.12. Balaam, Numb. 24.4. Ezechiel, chapter 2.12. --
8.3. and some others, Dan. 10.8, 9. And they were called Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9.
because that for the most part they saw what they were to say and to do,
represented and described in their Trance, Exodus 25.9. Heb. 8.5. thus having
their eyes open, to see the Visions of the Almighty, whilst their body was dead
and bereft of sense. But the Apostles of Christ, being one degree higher,
understood not by, but from their Visions, (when they had some) by means of
their (...), what they were to do and speak: and fell not into Trances, which
were accompanied with pain, horror and darkness, Genesis 15.12. Dan. 10.8. when
they had any Visions; but being in the Spirit often of their own accord, Revel.
1.10. they were in such Ecstasies caught up into Paradise, Romans 14.17. there to
hear and see, without weakness, anguish and horror, the unspeakable words and
Visions they received, 2 Cor. 12.4. Whence, if according to Christ, John 20.29.
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, (because
intelligere being ipsum credere, he that can without seeing understand what
other men cannot understand, and so believe without they see it, is blessed
with a better enlightened understanding, as has been showed already) the
Apostles were blessed with a greater share of that which gives men
understanding, and were therefore greater than the said Seers and Prophets. And
hence comes that John, till whom the Law and the Prophets were, Luke 16.16.
though the greatest among all them that are born of women, was the least, says
Christ, Mat. 11.11, 12, 13. among all them that are born of God, John 1.13. or
the least in the kingdom of God; which, as it began but from the time John
lived, Luke 16.16 so it did not include him: for the Holy Ghost being given but
after that Christ ascended to his Father, John dying before was not entirely in
God's kingdom, Romans 14.17. and had not the Apostles (...) dwelling in him; as
appears from his doubting whether Christ was the true Messiah that was to come,
Luke 7.19. (for they that have it know that, 1 John 5.20.) and so he was but
one and the last of the old Prophets. But notwithstanding this great
Prerogative which all the Apostles had above them, they were but men of the
like passions and infirmities with them, and with other men, Act. 14.15. as
appears by Act. 15.39. and by Peter compelling the Gentiles to do those things,
Gal. 2.14. which he himself condemned.

Alas! ( per Antithesin to Master Vicar's alas, which I have mentioned before
out of his 5th. page) lumen patiebantur and tenebras interdum, to wit, when
they did but slack the hand over the body, Mat. 25.13. Romans 6.6. -- 8.13, 23. 1
Cor. 9.27. Jam. 3.2. and had it been but for their extraordinary Spirit and
Humane Learning, Dionysius and Damaris had no more cleaved to them, than those
that heard the same things that they heard, and yet mocked, Act. 17.33. for
what is Peter and Paul but the Ministers by whom Dionysius, Damaris, and the
others believed? and that how? not as Paul's extraordinary Spirit prevailed,
but as, even as God gave to some of them the grace to believe, 1 Cor. 3.4, 5.

Quaere. Seeing Damaris is mentioned together with learned Dionysius,
preferably to the men that believed at the same time, Act. 17.34. and submitted
with him to the School-learned reasons, which (as it follows from what the
Vicar says, page 5.) Paul was necessitated to make use of at that time to
convince Dionysius; was not the said Damaris a very learned woman, and brought
up in the Greek Schools? or else was Dionysius become so much a Changeling,
that Paul had no greater need of Learning to convince him, than to convince a
woman? Luke, mentioning with a man of great Learning, a woman before any of the
rest, seems to hint at the latter: and Christ saying that we must become like
little children, to come into his Kingdom, Mat. 18.3. and Paul, that the wise
worldlings must become fools to be wise, 1 Cor. 3 18. because not many wise men
after the flesh are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. and God hides from such wise men his
mysteries, Mat. 11.25. it is plain that the learned Athenian was become so
woman-like, that the Bishops must look out elsewhere for another proof of the
great necessity of Learning to convince him; and for another better confutation
of those Sects, which they say do revile it.

Alas! had it been but for the pretended supplement of it in the Apostles, the
Gospel had been nipped in its very budding forth; the preaching of the Gospel
had convinced no more men than it does now amongst us; the World had continued
to be imposed upon, like the people of Samaria, Act. 8.9, 10. and in general
all they that heard the Word, had mocked! Is it wisely done therefore of the
Lords Bishops to use, or suffer to be used a falsehood in a Pulpit with out
check and correction, as an argument of the great necessity of the thing so
falsely supposed, viz. School-learning in Preachers, to reduce unbelievers to
the obedience of Christ? especially when Paul asserts flat and plain, that he
made no use at all of it; God having chosen, says he, 1 Cor. 1.27. the foolish
things of this world, to confound the wise, (whereof you have an instance in
me) and he preached not with wisdom of words, (the Humane Learning of the
Vicar, which he calls somewhere else, a vain deceit, Col. 2.8.) lest the Cross
of Christ, says he, v. 17. should be made of none effect: for it is to the
Cross that the powers of the World (among which Humane Learning and wisdom is
not the least) are nailed; and by the Cross, by self-conceited wise men
resolving to become fools, (which is a great cross to them) are the proud
worldly wiselings, with their imaginations and high conceits, overcome, 2 Cor.
10.5. Col. 2.14, 15. Nay, it is altogether injurious to the power which works
effectually in the hearts of all converts, Gal. 2.8. to call to help the wisdom
of man and the School-learning in the preaching of the Word: and therefore the
Apostles spoke not with enticing words of man's wisdom, v. 4. but planted and
watered, or preached always with all plainness of speech and simplicity;
committing the success to him that gives the increase, and trusting to his
Spirit, not to their own industry, the work of man's conversion from sin to
righteousness, the means and the way to which, is all that all Preachers ought
to treat of in their Sermons. And for all this their plainness, weakness, and
infirmities, they seldom preached in vain: and they had better success than our
Lords with all their great wisdom that comes to naught, 1 Cor. 2.6. Also, for
all their want of Logic and Metaphysick, they did not doubt, as having, says
Paul, 1 Cor. 7.40. obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, but that they had
the Spirit of God that directed them; that what they designed was purposed in
that Spirit, Act. 19.21. and would have Christians to know that what they spoke
or wrote as their judgment or sentence, was the command of the Lord, 1 Cor.
7.25. -- 14.37.

And here, had I but time enough, I could run down the Bishops so very low,
that they would be glad to make of their Sleeves a Moses vail, if they knew
what they know not, Zeph. 3.5. and were not so confident, Prove. 14.16. For the
fear of God being not only the beginning and instruction of wisdom, Prove. 1.7.
-- 15.33. but also wisdom it self, Job 28.28. and a whole treasure of it, Isa.
33.6. is not learning the Greek Tongue, Logic, and Metaphy sick, and such like
excluded from the means to get wisdom? for what can they contribute and add
unto that which yields a whole treasure of wisdom? If a man asks wisdom in
faith, God will give it him, Jam. 1.5, 6. God will give him his good gift; the
wisdom of the Father, that is, the Spirit of Truth, Luke 11.13. to guide him
into all Truth: For if any man will do Gods will, John 7.17. keep the words of
Christ, chapter 14.23. he and the Father will come to him, by the Holy Ghost,
whereby he shall not only know of the doctrine of Christ, but know all things,
and all Truth, both Divine and Natural; the word all comprehending omnia
scibilia, specially (...), John 3.12. or the knowledge of nature, as done
before our eyes. For such an understanding have all they that keep Gods words,
Psalm. 111.10. that they come of themselves to know and understand more than all
their wisest Teachers, Psalm. 119.99, 100, 104. and in a word, the Scriptures
proclaim almost nothing more than that men grow in knowledge, as fast, and by
the same means only as they grow in grace; (to wit, knocking, and praying, Jam.
1.5. rising early, and watching at the posts of wisdoms doors, Prove. 8.34.
which exclude Inspiration, or the blind afflatus of our Enthusiasts, which I
allow not of (no more than Master Vicar) even in the Apostles:) by knowledge is
man saved, Isa. 53.11. Luke 1.77. 2 Pet. 1.2. by knowledge is the kingdom of
God formed within us, Luke 17.21. Col. 1.12. -- 3.10. Act. 26.18. whence some
promises of it are to feed men with knowledge, Jer. 3.15. and so, since man is
saved by knowledge, and salvation never comes but by the fear of God, grace and
holiness, the way to obtain knowledge is the same as that whereby man comes
unto salvation, which is not by learning Latin, Greek, and Aristotle; and by
reading the Critics, Schoolmen, and Commentators. And St. Paul is persuaded
that the believing Romans were filled with all knowledge, without going to
Athens, Romans 15.14. Where is therefore any room left here for the
School-learning? and how mainly are the poor Enthusiasts confuted from a
concatenation of silly suppositions, and refuted by Scripture? as first, that
the Learned men among the Greeks and Gentiles, were convinced by the means and
help of Humane Learning; secondly, that it was given to the Apostles by a
pretended Miracle; and thirdly, that there is therefore a great need of it: but
what to do, the Bishops should do very well to tell; for now that the Gospel is
a National Religion, and Kings prove Nursing-fathers to them in particular,
what greater occasion have they of this effect of the extraordinary Spirit of
the Apostles, than of that which they say is ceased so many years since? and it
is very probable, though they will not burn their Books upon the same account
as the Primitive Christians, Act. 19.18, 19. that upon the same account as the
fat Roman Clergy, they will lay them all aside; and, as soon as they perceive
with how little inconvenience they may save themselves the trouble of reading
and of studying, suffer all Humane Learning to cease among them likewise, if
they have not already made a good step toward it: for to be well versed in the
History of what the Scripture says and teaches, is part of Humane Learning,
and of their own profession; of which part or History it appears manifestly
from what is said hitherto, that they are ill informed; or very full of malice,
if whilst they know better things, they not only conceal them, but teach
falsehood in their stead.

And since that, contrary to the practice of true Christians, who burned their
learned Books, Act. 19.19. they preach so much for Learning, what Learning have
they themselves; and what great knowledge have they thereby attained unto,
above illiterate men? I am sure I have not met in any of their Works, with any
new thing found out by them worth the writing: nor (because I am not well
versed in their Writings, as perusing very few of them, and very seldom) have I
met one among many of their admirers, whom I have strictly enquired from, if
they could indicate in all their Works any of their inventions and discoveries
useful to mankind, and worth their while, and the charges they were at for
translating and printing, who could, though they know well what their Books
contain, show me one. But I have met in those few I have perused, several
particular instances of their weakness; and in general, nothing but what (if
well confronted with the Books of the Ancient) does betray their ignorance of
what the wise Ancient knew, and the petulant itching they have to show their
nonsense, in writing absurdly of things, though they were before truly and
discreetly declared by the Ancient.

For instance, (that this may not be counted gratis dictum) in one of the best
piece of their most famous Doctor for Human^ Learning, Wallis, concerning
Gravitation read before the learned Assembly of Gresh^mists, November 1674. and
printed afte^ three months mature deliberation of the^^ Council, by order of
the Lord Brounker who was at that time their President, in the 32. and in some
other pages, I meet wit^ these tokens of their deep reach and wisdom; the
first, as the best reason and argument they can urge to defend their opinion of
a descent and pressure of the Atmospher^ equal to that of a Mercurial Column 3^
inches deep, being the cause of Fluids rising in a closed Pipe, and in the
Siphon an^ Pump; against that of the Ancient, tha^ they rise in the said Pipe
by the Fuga vacui is thus descanted upon; (viz.) If Fuga vacu^ were the cause
of Mercury, Water, and oth^^ Fluids rising in a closed Tube, Pump, or Siphon,
then it ought to hold, and to mak^ them rise to any height whatever. A P^^^
(for instance) must draw Water an hundr^^ foot high, and a Siphon convey Water
and oth^^ Fluids over the highest Mountains: and (...) Ancients did not doubt,
adds the Reveren^ Doctor, but that it would be found so; and it was a
surprising discovery, and wholly unexpected, when it was first found out by
experience, about the last Century, that Water could not thus be drawn higher
than about four or five and thirty foot: which Experiment alone did evidently
evince, that the supposed Fuga vacui was not of an infinite, but of a
determinate strength: which put Galilaeo upon the Enquiry, whether it were not
from some other cause than Fuga vacui, that it would be drawn so high, but not
higher: and he happily lighted on the Hypothesis of the Countergravitation of
the incumbent Air. And had the Ancients therefore, been aware of what we find,
that the Air has (though but small) a positive gravity, they would not I
presume, says he, have troubled themselves with a Fuga vacui; but said
roundly, that the Air by its weight and gravity, descending upon Fluids,
presses up so much of them into a void Tube or Pipe, as is equivalent to its
greater height and bulk, etc.

To which I say roundly, that I presume so too, had they besides found what the
said learned Company finds, that is, taken for granted, or presumed with it,
that the Air

has a descent in the consistence of Air; and that Fuga vacui implys, that the
vacuum is causa efficiens per se, that sucks and draws up the Fluids into it
self, and sustains them in the Pipe, Siphon, or Pump, etc. (as from the said
Argument, concluding that the greater amplitude of the vacuum ought to make the
Column rise higher, and extend unto any height along with it, and printed by
their order, and with their approbation, it is plain that they and their Doctor
take it in this sense:) for then doubtless they would not have doubted, (as
certainly they did, though our Sages who are little acquainted with what they
knew, deny it) but that it would have been so. But (whether happily or
unhappily for them, let the sober Reader judge) none of them found what these
find, that is, did presume with them, that the Fuga vacui implys that a vacuum
fugit se, and sucks and pulls to supply and fill it self: and likewise an
absolute prevention of the vacuum; for, as by Fuga ma^^ it was not meant in
their days, that evil i^ to eschew, or shun and abhor it self, but tha^ some
other thing is to avoid and abhor it so by Fuga vacui it was not understood
then but that some other thing likewise than the vacuum, is that which does
endeavor the supplying of the same, to prevent and avoid it. Then, as by the
Fuga of Run-aways in old times, it was not known that all those who run away
saved themselves, and obtained the end which they fled for, that is to say,
prevented being taken; so, those good men did not know that this Fuga, or
active endeavor of that thing which would avoid the vacuum, must make the
thing in motion, fugere ad extremum, bring it ad summitatem usque of the empty
space, though it were never so high: and implys an end of the said endeavor
and motion, (that is to say, Finis, (...)) equal unto Finis, (...); ad quem
actio fertur, ( viz. a total repletion of the vacuous empty space) also implys
an opus far above the force of the agens and operation, which is in all
vacuums, great or small, always the same; and proportioned, not to the force of
the said agens, but to the thing against which the agens imploys its force, (
viz. a greater repletion of a greater vacuum.) But if all Fugitives had saved
themselves by their flight, and if one could leap higher sub dio, under the
Sky, than under the roof of some high Church, or Westminster Hall; for the Sky
being higher, and yielding therefore more space to leap under, than the roof
(for the Doctor's argument that Fluids must rise unto any height, according to
the void space that they rise in, without regard to the force they rise by, is
the same thing) they might perhaps have lighted upon as sublime notions, and
drawn conclusions from then as Categorically as this excellent Doctor, whose
mind soars so high above common ordinary sense, Prove. 17.24. as to imagine the
flight to be in the thing fled from; and the action in the most passive thing
in the whole World. Which conceits, I confess, are secrets the wise Ancients
have never been aware of, and the discovery thereof the great improvements
reserved for our times, and worthy of the wisdom of our modern Sages! There is
a time for all things: old wit goes out of fashion, as well as the Lawyers
French; and so does Truth, when it comes to the age of doting people! Happy
was Galilaeo to broach a Notion which is and lasts so long alamode; to
influence so many with that which is surprising to all them that know something
of the wondrous works of God, Job 37.16. Prove. 20.23. for his being surprised
at it, when he first saw it; and to make use of his great headpiece so
successfully, as to discover that the Fuga vacui is not of any infinite
strength, (for who knew before his time that there is no such space in the
circumscribed and finite place of the World, as would need an infinite rising
of Fluid Bodies (which are yet of a far less extent than the World it self) to
supply its vacancy; that is, an infinite space; and an infinite sphere of
activity of things?) and so cannot be the cause of the finite height of the
Column of Fluid Bodies: and as to gather from hence, what the wise Sons of
Nature, and Nature her self never knew to have a being, or exist, before his
time, viz. a descent of the Air upon us, equal in weight to that of a Mercurial
cylinder about 30 or 31 inches deep; whilst it remains Air, that is, an aerial,
or uncondensed vapor; which would make a weight equal to that of one Tun and
half of Lead upon our breasts, when we lie on our backs.

The truth is, that the Ancients never thought of such things, and were not so
diligent in the enquiry thereof, as some are in our Age, (who staring at every
trifle or toy that they meet with, as being puzzled with it, make a great
wonder of it, and trouble other men with their strange conceits concerning it,
crying them up for a great augmentation of knowledge) and yet knew as well as
they, without the use of that which is called a Weather-glass, viz. by hot and
cold weather, all that such Weather-glass shows, to wit, when the Air is
rarefied or condensed. And though they have not treated ex prosesso in one
place of the Fuga vacui, and of its limited strength, yet it may be gathered by
piecemeal out of their Books, that they were not ignorant of Fluids rising to
their usual height, and no higher; nor of their respective Columns falling and
rising afterward by heat and cold: and that they understood well that these
their solution of heavy Fluids rising into spaces void of Air, to wit, Fuga
vacui, implys so much and no less. For they were men of good sense, and good
sense shows that Fuga vacui signifies first, the end for which Fluids rise, to
wit, a prevention of a vacuum by them: secondly, a prevention as far as the
said Fluids are permitted to ascend; which they knew to be no more than the
weight of that Fluid Body, in whose stead they come to supply the space left
and derelicted by it, amounts to; that is, as much as a cylinder of Air,
commensurate unto that of the succeeding Fluid, would weigh were it condensed
into as close a texture, as the said succeeding Fluid Body consists of; but
weights not, because it is an uncondensed vapor: and lastly, a further rising
of the said Columns after they have subsided, unto their usual station, to wit,
when the Air which is in the void space above them, (though it be pumped out
never so long, and as clean as frequent immersing, and filling the Pipe again
after the subsiding of the Column, can do it) becomes by cold weather more
condensed than it was when the Pipe was immersed; and thereby cease to fill
that space so much as it did, and to keep the cylinder from rising to such
height, as the proportion of weight which it is not to exceed does allow of and
permit. And, as for the falling again of the same Column, it being but a
ceasing of the cause it did rise by, that is, of the condensing and contraction
of the Air; and an easy consequence of the Fuga vacui, ( viz. the vacuum
prevented by another Body than that of the cylinder, that is, by that of the
Air, extending it self further in warm, than in cold weather, and so taking up
again that part of the space it had, by its condensation, yielded up to the
Column) they could not but understand it well, though without seeing and making
trial of it: and understand well also from hence, that since the Column rises
up and falls again by the Airs alternative contraction and extension, (as by
applying successively to the space which is above the Column, a Candle lighted,
and a wet Sponge or a piece of Ice, this making the Column to rise, and that to
subside, it will presently appear) this Phoenomenon serves but to show hot and
cold weather: and is no such improvement therefore as our Sages would make of
it, if they could, that is, a new Instrument to foretell all the various
constitutions of the Air, and changes of the weather; but a bare Thermometer,
an old trivial invention, which our great Improvers have at last with much ado
happily lighted upon, in this our learned Age.

And that they cannot make such an Instrument, that is, a true Weather-glass of
it, appears first, from that they have bestowed much time and labor upon it
these twenty years, with no better success, that is, without improving or
making their invention fitter for use, than it was when they first went about
it: and next, from the consequence which flows necessarily from their own
Hypothesis, and the use they make of it to solve the Phoenomenon; by which
(besides that it is against both reason and sense) they can never give a true
and distinct account of the Phoenomenon, nor therefore bring it thereby into
the use they pretend it serves for. For first, (to begin by what flows from
their Hypothesis) they gather (and it follows) from thence, page 32. that when
the Air is lightest, the Column subsides lowest; and when it is most heavy, the
Column rises highest: whereas daily experience teaches contrary to this, that
in settled clear weather, the Air being then lightest, the Column rises
higher, than in dull rainy weather, and sinks to its lowest station in rainy
weather, when the Atmosphere being most thick and full of vapors, which
crouding and condensing in it, should make it heavier, and press up the Column
with greater force, and raise it therefore higher than it was, if the Airs
counter pressure were the cause of its rising: In windy weather also the Column
is very low, and many times lower at that time than when it rains; whereas the
Air, flowing then laterally, has no such pressure upon the stagnum as it would
in still weather, if it had any at all. Which I prove by filling a Porridge-pot
with Water, and holding and tossing it by the handle, so that by its swinging
forwards and backwards, both the Water may be set in motion, and its motion be
determinated in latus; then fetching with the hand a whole turn, that is,
describing vertically with the Pot a circle or ring, whereby when the Pot is up
at the Zenith of the circle, its mouth be turned downwards; for then none of
the Water running down out of the Pot, this experiment alone will evidently
evince that the Water losing thus by its motion in latus, its fall and pressure
downwards; the Air would likewise abate (by the lateral motion it has in windy
weather) of the descent and pressure it is supposed to have. Secondly, though
the Column does not fall so low in the Winter, as in the Summer, nor rises so
high in the Summer, as in the Winter, (for it never rises to one and thirty
inches, but in cold frosty weather, because then both the outward, and the
inward Air (which is in the void space of the Pipe) is most of all condensed)
yet they make no distinction of Seasons in their Index: but in Winter and
Summer they ascribe the highest place (at one and thirty inches) to clear,
settled, fair weather, and the lower to rainy, cloudy, and windy weather; when
the Column marks between the same weather in the two foresaid different
Seasons, (as settled fair in Winter, and settled fair in Summer) above an inch
difference. A likely way to improve, and bring the Phoenomenon to serve for a
Weatherglass! for the usefulness of which happy invention of theirs, and for
the truth of these few remarks and trials of mine, I appeal to the single-eyed
and impartial Judgment of all those who have the said Instrument in their
houses: whilst by another easy trial, of no greater charge than of a sealed
glass Tube somewhat wider and longer than the ordinary one, I clear all
objections, scruples and controversies; and show more true things at once, than
all the Experiments they have made these hundred years with a world of apparat,
have taught them to discover.

The Experiment is this: having filled a glass Tube or Pipe, closed at one end,
of about six foot in length, with Water up to the brim; and therein immersed
another smaller empty glass Tube, eight inches long, nipt likewise, with its
open end or orifice downwards; it (being thick of glass, and so, specifically,
that is to say, bulk for bulk, heavier than so much Water) sunk to the bottom
of the Water in the longer Pipe; yet not so swiftly, but that I could discern
how fast the Water got into it: And (whereas when it began to sink, being then
but just immersed under water, scarce the sixth part of one inch of water was
seen in it) there was, by that time it had descended to the bottom, more than
one inch of water (that came in at the lower open end) lodged in it, near its
mouth or orifice: because of the greater depth and pressure of the water upon
it at the bottom, than when it began to sink; which by compressing closer the
Air that took up its whole cavity, or filled it full when it was first
immersed, made room for so much water as the said inch to get in. Then, taking
out the short Pipe, and filling up, as before, the longer one with water, I
immersed again the same short Pipe into it, but with the orifice or open end
uppermost: and stopping at the same time the mouth of the longer one close with
the palm of my hand, I inverted both Pipes so nimbly, that before the shorter
could descend at all, and the water fall in it, its mouth was turned downwards,
and it was at the bottom of the Column of water, and so had all the same depth
of the Column upon it, as it had before, when more than the said inch of water
was seen and lodged therein. And yet, though it had the same depth of water
upon it, there was not the same pressure at that time against the Air, (which
it held when immersed) as when the orifice of the long Pipe stood open: for all
the while it was stopped, no more water got, or was received into this Pipe, than
what had got into it, whilst I inverted it, which was not above the sixth or
eighth part of an inch: because the pressure of the water was, for want of Air
to supply the place it had left void above at the top, if from thence it had
moved downwards, suspended and lost. The same thing happened also, when the
shorter Pipe, being made somewhat thinner of glass, was light enough not to
sink, but to float in the water, and to rise from the bottom thereof toward
the surface, when immersed, as was said, with the orifice upwards; and the long
Pipe nimbly stopped and inverted thereupon: for it rose, and in rising the
pressure of the water, which ought to have been greater when the whole depth of
the Column was upon the Pipe, than when but part of the same, by the Pipe
rising higher and higher, lay upon it, was no whit diminished, as it was not
increased; or never the greater for this shorter Pipe being, when the longer
one was overturned under all at the bottom.

Which easy Experiment convincingly demonstrates, First, that the Column is
not pressed up and sustained by any gravitation and counterpressure of the
Atmosphere, (as the Sages, in further token of their great wisdom, teach and
maintain) since that, when the Air is kept from coming at it, by the Pipe being
sealed above, and stopped very close below, we see the pressure of the water
suspended and stopped: which could not be if the Air were the thing that does
bear up and hold to its equipoize the Column, by a counterforce equivalent to
it. For here there was no Air left between my hand and the Pipe, whose Spring
may be pretended (as in the Experiment described in the 35th. page of the said
piece of Wallis) to bear it up: and though there were such thing as the said
supposed Spring of the Sages in this case, yet it being said but just
equivalent to a whole Column of water, (whereof the whole pressure is likewise
suspended, as may be tried in a Tube 40 foot long) it could but just bear it
up, (as did that part of my hand, which by inverting the Pipe, both the Pipe,
and the Column within it, rested upon) and not make it move upwards, (as it
must do to defeat the contrary motion, viz. the descent or pressure downwards
which the water has; there being no other way but this one to prevent it, as
we see done in this case;) for there is a greater force required to give to
things heavy a motion upwards, (as to sling up a Stone for instance) than that
which (as being but equivalent (...) it) is but just capable to bear and
sustai^ them up. Now bearing it up is not enought^ suspend and take away its
pressure upon the short Pipe E.A. (see p. 118.) and the Air inch^ded within it;
for heavy things lose nothin^ of their gravitation and pressure upon the Scale,
and Fulcrum they rest upon, for the^^ being born up either to an equipoize,
(...) above their equipoize, or sustained prom^nent never so high above ground
by the^^ own, or bearers height; as the Bisho^ would find out by their own
experienc^ if they carried as heavy burdens as the^^ Sedan-men, and all other
Porters, do.

Secondly, it demonstrates that the C^lumn rises by the Fuga vacui: since its
d^scent and pressure is suspended all the ti^^ that the Air (it succeeds to, to
fill and su^ply its place) is kept out from coming (...) and so from relieving
it. For were the C^lumn only sustained by that part of my ha^^ it rested upon,
it would not lose its press^^ upon it, and against the Air within the Pipe A.E.
because it must, to lose it, ^^ceive a motion upwards, which the fo^^ that does
but just bear it up cannot give heavy things losing nothing of their weight,
for being born or carried, as I said: and there being no other force foreign to
the Column, and no other reason, that we can see or think of, put to it, to
give it him, but that of the vacuum; which being a passive thing, can neither
draw to it self, nor keep it suspended from the top, as some fancy grave and
wise Antiquity, that had her eyes in her head, Eccl. 2.14. not at the ends of
the Earth, like our modern Sages, Prove. 17.24. meant by Fuga vacui: it follows
that the Column does move upwards of it self, not by the vacuum, but by a
propension to succeed into the room of the displaced Fluid, lest there should
be in the World (which is a Plenitudo) a chasma or disjunction; that is, as the
Ancients spoke, by a Fuga vacui: and continues by the same reason in that
endeavor whilst the displaced Fluid is not permitted to fill, or resume the
place it left.

Thirdly, it demonstrates that the so much agitated and denied (against reason,
and without Experiments by our modern Sages, though they proffer some for it,
but which show quid pro quo, that is, quite another thing than what they infer
from thence) non-gravitation of Fluids upon themselves, and upon Bodies
heavier, and as heavy as themselves, is not destroyed, and quite out of doors,
(as they teach it is, page 11, 18. for another good token of their deep
understanding) but stands good nevertheless: as appears from that the weight
and pressure of the Column of water was not downward upon the said Pipe A. E.
but upward against its mouth, and the Base of the Column of Air included
therein, the Air being thrust upwards, and the Pipe raised with i^ from the
bottom to the top: which would not be (neither could any immersed Body ever
rise up and emerge at a great depth o^ water) if the incumbent Column
gravitated upon it; for a greater depth having (...) greater pressure upon the
thing that is immersed, it can but cause it to sink the deepe^ and so much the
faster, the deeper it com^ From which non-gravitation it is that the indolence
of a man under water proceed and not from being pressed there uniform^ and
equally, on all sides, as (for anoth^^ token of wisdom) their most famous
Doct^^ for Mathematics has happily discover^^ and does declare and assert,
page 24. notwithstanding that himself had said a little before, in his relation
of the Experimen^ of Gratrix, that, he having contrived a new way of taking
breath at a great depth under water, through long Pipes reaching to the top of
it, found his breast (as being then the lowermost part, or the Base of his
sinking body) so compressed there, (to wit, by the said pressure upwards of the
water against it) that he could not well draw breath: a certain proof that he
was not uniformly pressed, specially if this pressing (which is the further
reason he gives for his assertion) by causing no luxation of parts, is the
cause that the man suffers no sense of pain. And besides, this uniform pressing
serves to establish the said non-gravitation of Fluids upon themselves, by
reason that it implys a pressure downwards, equal unto their pressure upwards;
which pressure upwards being confessedly none at all, when there is nothing
that sinks in and disjoyns the Fluids, their pressure downwards is none, if it
be equal to it* and so when Fluid Bodies have none but their own Body within
and among themselves, they have no gravitation downwards, wards, and per
consequent gravitate not on themselves.

Fourthly, it demonstrates that Fluids do not reduce themselves unto a level,
or an horizontal plain, (when contained, as this same prominence of water is,
within solid Tubes or Pipes, so as that they cannot flow laterally to do it) by
the way which the Doctor has as wisely as the rest (for another certain mark
of his great skill and wisdom) found out and showed page 5. viz. labeled
woodcut diagram of water pipe by direct depression, or by pressing down what is
under A. and by pressing up that which is under B. For since we se^ the
pressure of the Column of water within the long Pipe C. A. to return (in
attempting to reduce it self to a level) upwards, against both the mouth of the
Pipe A. E. and the Base of the Colum^ of Air included therein, (...) does not
press down what (...) under it, and under A; and indeed cannon do it, for so,
it would, if it were reducing it self to a level in the Ocean, or some other
deep water, displace and outweigh a bulk much more heavy than it self. And if
the same Column should (in reducing it self actually to a level, by running out
of the Pipe) press down what is under A. and up what is under B. it would again
(specially if the Pipe were immersed deeper under the water, than it were held
prominent above its superficy) fall into the very same, or greater,
inconvenience, of outweighing A. and B. bulks much heavier than it self.
Therefore, a greater wisdom than that of these Improvers of the knowledge of
Nature, has found those prominences of Fluids another way to return to the
level of the adjacent Fluid: to wit, by passing by it between the Pipe, and the
bulks A. B. over the surface, from A. to B. and to D. as appears by the sinking
of a Mercurial Column (when the Pipe is open at the top, or upper end) which
rises close by the Pipe, betwixt it and the stagnum, spouting up as high
without as it is within the Pipe, above the surface or the level of the said
stagnum: And by pouring some water into the same open Pipe, after that the
whole Column of Mercury is sunk down; for this water does not press upwards the
whole, nor part of the said stagnant Mercury, nor penetrate and run through the
same up to its surface, but thrusting it aside, as the sinking Column did, it
passes by over it, and covers the whole surface, rising visibly close by the
said Pipe, and no where else; which would not be, if it did press up what is
under B. Also from this way of the Column rising up agai^^ per acclive, from
the mouth of the Pipe to B. and D. it follows vice versa, that the preminences
at D. B. return into the cavity which the Pipe or any sinking Body make^ at A.
through the same way per declive from D. B. to A. and further upwards, raising,
o^ endeavoring to raise up the said Body toward the superficy, and by such an
endeavor pressing upwards against it, and not downwards upon it: And this, not
only when it stands out above the surface, (a^ does the immersed Pipe) but also
when (...) is covered all over, and at a great depth under water: (which I
suppose to be the Flui^ it then sinks in) for there because by sinking it
displaceth and presses away from under it self some part of the same water,
which part (by reason that it cannot outweigh, as was said, the heavier bulks
A. and B. and that dimens^onum non datur pene^ratio, and that water admits of
no compression, as the Air) meeting with no other space or room to lodge it
self in, than the last deserted by the said sinking Body, must needs rise up,
on all sides of the Body, into it; and that close by the Body, (as being the
thing that does press it upwards, by sinking and pressing down into it) and
form an Arch over it; and thereby defend, first, its surface from the pressure
of the incumbent Column: secondly, its flanks or sides from a lateral pressure,
both of B. and of the said Column descending from C. through B. to press up
again against the mouth or Base A. keeping off the said Column (by rising
immediately close by the Body, and so (by this interposition) from washing of
from touching the said flanks thereof themselves: thus rising by it one way,
whilst the Column descends further off another way, both giving each other way,
and flowing by each other without an inconvenience: as in the Hellespont, where
two contrary currents may be seen at the same time flowing constantly without
impeding one another; one from the Black Sea along one shore or side of the
Straights, and the other toward it along the opposite shore.

And lastly, it demonstrates the lightness or levity of the Air: seeing the Air
included in the short Pipe not only ascends it self, but rises with such
weight of the glass upon it self, as would sink without the Air, as being bulk
for bulk heavier than so much water. And that this Air rises not by the
heavier water thrusting and pressing it up, (as the modern Sages say, page 24.)
out of the lowermost place, the following trial evinceth manifestly; viz. when
the Pipe being full of Mercury or Water, and hanging down by a String, is left
open to the Air, by removing the Finger the mouth of it is stopped with; for then
the Air rusheth in the Pipe with such impetus, as throws upwards both the Pipe
and the cylinder therein, and makes the Pipe to leap up one foot higher, more
or less, than the place it rested at before its orifice was opened, as I have
said, which would not be if the Air were pressed up by heavier Fluids sinking
into it: for then it would only shift places, (as the water does which you cast
Stones, or other sinking materials into) and so just rise and no more, and no
higher than the place at which the Pipe rested, and from which the cylinder
therein did begin to sink: whereas not only it shifts places, as the water
does, but thrusts upwards both the Pipe, and the cylinder therein; with the
weight besides which the incumbent Column of Air is said to have upon it. And
though the Air and other heavier vapors rise sometimes by the descent of other
heavier Bodies into them, yet they rise more frequently without it: for how
could else thick clouds, smoke and vapors rise, that have nothing above them
but the Air, which, as lighter, cannot press down into them; and that are
besides coarser, thicker, and more condensed when they begin to rise, than when
they are got higher: as by the rectifying of Ardent Spirits appears? And as for
the experience which the Sages chiefly ground their Hypothesis upon in their
29. page, of Air compressed into a less room, which they have found on the
balance to have some small weight and gravitation; it proving nothing but that
Air compressed gravitates, and not that it gravitates in its own ordinary
natural constitution, it does make nothing for them, and against its levity.
For to serve their turn, it must gravitate such as it is, without any
compression: because by this compression it being condensed into a closer
texture rhan it has naturally, it acquires a degree of specific gravity;
which, I am so far from denying in such casc, that I have said it would be as
heavy as water and other heavier Fluids, if it were by any means made as dense
and as compact, or reduced into as close a texture or parts, or consistence as
they have. But as it is confessed that the Air acquires some weight by
condensation, so on the other hand no sober man will deny, that, since those
heavier Fluids, viz. Spirits, Oil, and Water, and Mercury sublimate it self,
lose by their being turned into a vapor, though not so thin as the Air, their
actual gravitation all the time they continue so near of kin to the Air, which
is but a thin vapor, that is, all the time they are ascending or subliming,
and kept rarefied by heat; it (that is to say, the Air) does, by returning unto
its usual constitution, lose also that small degree of acquired gravity, and
has none (sensible at least) all the time it continues to be it self, I mean
an aerial, subtle, and uncondensed vapor: as this Experiment of the Sages
rather proves and confirms, than otherwise; for it appears plain by it, that
the Air which had, after compression, some gravity, was found to have none
before, though it was the same Air, and in the same quantity: and thereby they
show rather quid pro quo, another thing than they intended to prove, that is,
that the cylinder in our Phoenomenon, is not sustained at all by the Airs
counterpressure, seeing it has none in its natural constitution; than that the
Air in its said natural constitution has none of the levity which I ascribe to
it. And which the Doctor confutes by such extraordinary Masterpiece of
School-learning, which he apprehends to be so great inconveniences, and cogent
proofs against it, that I must beg the help of some Mathematician to remove
them; and therefore,

Help Ticho; lend your shoulders Atlas; and Archimedes your Engine; your great
Engine; to remove out of its place a Herculean Pillar, a huge and mighty
Mountain, which is a non plus ultra to a Mathematician most famous in our Age,
who (perhaps the gravity which I thought might exist before in his head only,
being come down to his heels) can neither climb up the same, nor see for it
what Figure has the World which he lives in; and therefore thinks it is made
like a Cone, or Pyramid: For (says he, page 28.) if levity be the positive
Principle of the Air rising upwards, and if this motion upwards of the Air be
natural, it must be either an averseness from the Center, as the terminus a
quo, or a propension to some other place, as the terminus ad quem: If they say
the former, says he, it is true that then B. ought to labeled diagram
corresponding to surrounding text move from C. in perpendicular lines, as C. B.
A. etc. But if they say that it is an affectation of some higher place, as
suppose A. while B. is just between C. and A. the motion ('it is true) would be
in the perpendicular C.B.A. (as the straightest way thither) but if it were any
where else, as at D. then its motion to A. would not be in D. C. A. the
perpendicular, but in D. A. an oblique line: which is contrary to all
Experience.

And to your Argument likewise, or the consequence that flows necessarily and
naturally from it; for from the premises it concludes naturally, (not what you
infer from it) but that which is according to sense and experience; viz. that
B. being at D. should go to E. not to A. if the cause of its rising be a
propension to the higher place, as terminus ad quem of its motion: because A.
is not higher than E; for if it were so, the line C. B. A. would be longer than
the line C. E. which is contrary to sense, and to the Principles themselves, of
what you pretend to be Master, viz. Mathematics; which teach that all the
right lines drawn from the center of a Circle, as suppose A.E.F. to its own
circumference, are equal among themselves; and per consequent D. needs not to
go toward A. to attain the higher place; but ought to go straight to E. as
being as high as A. and the next higher place to D. as just over it: except you
show some reason (to make your Argument rational, and more plausible) why the
smoke of a Candle, for instance, burning upon the floor at one end of the long
Gallery in Oxford, ought to black the cieling thereof (which you know to be
flat and equally distant from the floor every where) at the other further end,
rather than at the same end where it burns, over it self: or show that the
point A. of the Worlds circumference, is higher than E. or F. And then, when
you have showed this, change (to make your consequence flow necessarily from
the premises) one of the terms of the Argument, saying, for and instead of the
higher place, (as it says) the highest point in that place: for if the higher
place, not the highest point therein, be terminus ad quem of the natural motion
and propension of the Air, you may with as much reason, infer a motion of D.
to F. as to the place A. since A. is nothing higher than F. and neither of them
higher in the Sphere than E: E. A. F. being all three equidistant from the
Spheres center C. and equally therefore the higher place both of C. and of B.
and D. whilst they are at, and begin to move and to rise from C: whereas if you
will allow of some order in the World, and that it is a (...), and omnium rerum
ordo and distributio, as Aristotle defines it, wherein both place and motion is
distinct and orderly, not uncertain and confuse, you should with much more
reason, (and to prevent two greater inconveniences than yours) infer a motion
of B. to A. and of D. to E. and so of all that rises from the center, to those
points of the Spheres circumference, which make its Zenith, that is, are just
vertical to it, than of D. in an oblique and circular line to A. or to any
other point or part of the higher place. The great inconveniences of D. and so
of all that which moves from the center C. not rising directly and vertically
to E. or the place just over them: but to some particular point A. as the
higher place; were first, that all the vapors and refluences rising from the
Earth, would go thither; and so reciprocally must come down again from thence
in circular oblique lines, and then the Rain would not fall directly, but
obliquely: also no influences and Rain would come from about all that part of
Heaven which were opposite to A. Secondly, you make thereby one point highest
in the World: which point higher than the rest, being not found in a Sphere,
but in a Conical Figure or a Pyramid, you make a Pyramid of the World; which is
so great and rare a discovery, that none but such famous Doctor for skill in
Nonsense, could ever so readily have made, and thought upon it.

Another famous Author in the Episcopal Church, who for his much Learning, and
making of many Books in Babylonical Divinity, and knowledge, deserves to be a
Bishop, or at least to be named with the Bishops and Vicars, the incomparable
Boil, among others his many vexations of Learned men, which he calls
Experiments, has given us, to confirm our Sages opinion of a descent and
countergravitation of the Air, one of very large glass Bubbles, sealed
Hermetically, hung at one end of a Beam, and justly counterpoized with a
Metalline counterpoize at the other: which, suspended at a frame, shows not all
the various changes of the Air, (says he) that were conspicuous in another
Weather-glass, which he had placed by it; yet confirms ad oculum that the
falling and rising of the Mercury, depends upon the varying weight of the
Atmosphere, and shows that the Air has weight, since in this statical
Weather-glass (for so he calls these so counterpoized Bubbles) it cannot be
pretended that a Fuga vacui, or a Funiculus is the cause of the changes which
he observed therein: for I had the pleasure (says he) to see the Bubbles
sometimes in an Aequilibrium with the counterpoize, and sometimes, when the
Atmosphere was high, (he means thereby less heavy) preponderate so manifestly
that, the Beam being gently stirred, the Cock would play altogether on that
side at which the Bubbles were hung; and at other times, (when the Air was
heavier) that which was at the first but the counterpoize, would preponderate,
and, upon the motion of the Beam, make the Cock vibrate altogether on its side;
with so much of pretty sport or satisfaction to so grave and honorable Author,
that I am very loath to go about to spoil it; lest I should at one time excitare
crabrones in too great a number and multitude against me.

However getting never the more Enemies for it, I will venture to say that it
appears not clearly to my dull apprehension, that because Fuga vacui cannot be
counted the cause of the various changes he saw in his statical Baroscope, or
Weather-glass, the weight of the Air therefore ought to be the cause of it;
chiefly if the Beam must be stirred, (as he confesses it was, though gently,
adds he, as though this gentle stirring were nothing to such Beam) to make the
Cock play on this or that side of the Ansa: because I can assign another cause,
as likely at least as either of them, to wit, the condensation and the
rarefaction of the Air by heat and cold. For, even according to one
Hydrostatical Law, which this Author owns and makes mention of in the same page
from which I have taken the things I cite of him, (which Law, as he calls it,
is, if the medium wherein two Bodies of equal weight, but unequal bulk, are
weighed, be more dense than another; (such as Water, for instance, which is
more dense than the Air) the greater Body being specifically lighter, and
finding more resistance because of its greater bulk, than the lesser and more
compact, as the counterpoize; will lose more of its own weight, or be more
easily born up, or buoyed up therein, than in the thinner medium: but if the
same medium be thinner than another, or than it was it self before, and at
other times, as the Air which is thinner than Water, and at some times more
rarefied than before; then the bigger Body, ceasing to be sustained by the
former resistance, will sink lower than before, and so outweigh the lesser) the
condensed Air being thicker, resists better than when it is more rarefied, and
so bears up the large Bubbles better and higher therefore than their lesser
counterpoize: so that this rising and fall of his Bubbles, confirms rather the
condensation and the rarefaction of the Air, than any such weight thereof as
that he asc^ibes to it. For though, as I confess, the thickness of a medium is
an argument it has a greater specific weight, than has a thinner medium:
yet, as it is most certain that vapors have no descent and gravitation, before
they condense into a much closer texture than the Air has at any time with us,
though they are not without their positive weight all that while; so we ought
not in reason, for the Air being somewhat more dense than it was before, and
however much thinner than is vaporized Oil, Water, or Mercury, ascribe to it
that sensible descent and gravitation which this learned Author, and other
Sages plead for: Who should show that the rising and fall of the Bubbles, comes
from the greater or lesser descent of the Atmosphere upon and round about them,
before they take it thus for granted; and then likewise show further how, and
wherefore it comes to pass that the Air, when it is become somewhat heavier
than it was before, does not gravitate and press upon the larger Body with so
much the greater force, by how much the greater Atmospherical Column incumbent
upon the same is more increased in weight, than that which is incumbent upon
the lesser Body; and so, instead of causing the Bubbles to rise higher, (as the
Author says he had the pleasure to see plainly) cause them to over-bear their
Metalline counterpoize, and to fall down much lower than they were before the
Airs increase of gravitation: as from the observation of this diligent Author,
who being told of a Mist, sent to see whether the Bubbles were buoyed up by the
greater heaviness the Air had then, but did not learn that they were, it may be
conjectured they did; and if they did not, but kept in the same station, it is
however enough to invalidate the consequence he draws from his Hydrostatical
Law; for thereby in moist weather, as in misty and foggy, the Air being then
heavier than before, they ought to rise.

Great improvements may be made of this, adds the same Author: as First, that
instead of a Brass or Leaden counterpoize, rich men may get one of Gold:
Secondly, that if the same counterpoize be made of Prass or of Lead, it will be
less subject to rust, than Iron: Thirdly, if this Instrument be placed in a
small frame, like a square Lanthorn, with glass windows about it, it will be
more free from dust. To which accommodations diverse others (much like them) may
be, says he, suggested; and so this Experiment, and the like, much improved by
a consideration of the nature of the thing. Which having therefore taken into
consideration, I humbly suggest that these Experiments, being (1.) de Bullis
amplissimis, (2.) and ab amplissimo authore BVLLA facta, (3.) and considered in
themselves, deserve in my opinion the glorious Latin Title of Ter Bullatae
(that is, most magnificent) Nugae. A rare invention indeed, and like to do much
service, which can neither go alone; nor, when moved and stirred, show, as he
does not deny, so much as the Mercurial Weather-glass, which is it self but a
very imperfect and unuseful invention!

Thus, these Sages on one side, and the Vicars and other Churchmen on the
other side, concur and run together blindfold to heap up a deal of Nonsense
and confusion, and to feed the stupid World with ignorance and untruth. And yet
(which is worse than this) whilst they are thus pulling down the Sanctuary of
Truth, to build their new Babel with, they are as famous for it as those were
in Ancient times, that brought to light, and found out many useful inventions;
and go for great Improvers of all Learning and Knowledge: and this Age is
looked upon as the time of restauring all the Arts and Sciences; when, I dare
say, it it is the fagg end of all Ages, wherein the Reformators being not
reformed themselves to Truth and Knowledge, and even not to so much as common
sense and reason, Arts and Learning under them are like to flourish backwards;
and the World to find backwards the North-west Passage to them, by the skill of
such seekers as these are, who not only lose the things they seek after, but
the invention others had already made of them; and themselves too, by bringing
themselves, in seeking of them, into more difficulties than the things admitted
of before they took them in hand. O fortunatam natam, atque Reformatam horum
sapientum societate Scholam, ubi qui cum majori apparatu delirant Coryphaei
censentur. And this, because no body stands up to contradict them: and that
they standing in awe and fear of one another, (for not knowing the Truth, they
are not made free by it John 8.32.) dare not speak out their mind freely, with
authority, Mat. 7.29. but, like the Scribes, ( that receive honor of one
another, yet pretend the public good) with some dependence always upon their
fellow Watchmen. Propter ignorantiam Anima subjugatur: the Soul of ignorant men
must despondently submit to fawning and complaisance, (what a wise man needs
not do) that they may pass for Learned: and so, quem admodum scabunt mutua
muli, pass by each others Errors, and admire and applaud the Works of one
another, that theirs reciprocally may be passed by, and go in the World
uncontrolled: whence, as one wave does follow, and is followed it self of
another wave, and this again of another wave; they follow one another, and
proceed from one newfound non-sensical position, to a thousand of that kind;
concurring all together in raising a whole building of the like materials upon
it, as I said. For what a vast collection might be made out of all their
voluminous Writings, not only in general of all the absurdities that are
contained therein, but in particular of those written upon one subject; as, for
instance, this pretended Weather-glass. Whereas, (except some few knacks Boil
has bought of other men) I know not, and have not (though I have enquired)
learned that any new thing worth the Printing is set forth and contained in
their Works; or any material Truth is to be found in the great many Writings
and Books that go under Boyle's name, which he has not rather defaced, than
any way made out and illustrated; whereof some ingenious men whom I am
aquainted with, could give instances enough, were it worth their while and
mine. But if while they run on thus blindfold, and without control in these
their foolish conceits and vain imaginations, Romans 1.21, 22. they did not
detain the Truth of God in unrighteousness, v. 18. not only in changing into a
lie and falsehood, what is seen and understood, v. 20. concerning his invisible
power from on high, that is, his invisible Spirit, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4, 8. and
depriving man of what makes him the Image of God, and to know more than the
beasts, Job. 35.11. but also in devising new Errors to oppose Truth, whenever
it breaks out of the holes wherein by the subtilty of the Devil, and man's
despondency of mind, it is kept buried; I would still hold my peace, and suffer
them to go on without check and correction. But since, though their opinions
have been fully refuted, they do still, as I said, out of the pride of their
heart, and of the lust of their evil prejudiced eye, continue to study how to
make some sleeveless answer; and call the Author himself of Truth, who is
clearly seen, being understood from his working in the Believers, the Agent of
the Devil, page 10 and his Doctrine, a Doctrine of Devils, page 11. instead of
putting off their Pharisaical eye, to acknowledge their Errors, to convert, and
learn to come to the knowledge of the Truth, Prove. 28.13. 2 Timothy 3.7. I will
not keep silence, Isa. 62.6. but blow the Trumpet aloud, Ezekiel. 33.3, 6. and
proclaim to the World their malice, their ignorance, their pride, their
hypocrisy.

Do you think, though you cover your transgressions as Adam, Job 31.33. you
Shepherds that feed the Flock with Nonsense, not with Knowledge, you Watchmen
speakers of lies, though you pretend otherwise, page 19. that you shall escape
Scot-free, to give out still that your selves are the great power of God, Act.
8.9, 10. and that I shall spare you, and pay you the honor due to the
Ministers of God? No, no, I will smite you that the simple may beware, Prove.
19.9, 25. I will, though but a worm prepared for this purpose, Jonah 4.7. smite
the gourd in whose shadow you sit now so pleasantly; make the top of your
Carmel, your pride and fame, to wither: and removing from you your
Fig-tree-leaves covering, and plucking off of your backs the Cloak that
Doctoratus and making of many Books hide your ignorance under, I will make all
the World spectators and witnesses of your shame and nakedness. Ere long your
day, and the day of your Visitation will come, Micah 7.4. and at the great day
Rome, Mecca, and the Indies shall be more tolerably dealt with, than you and
your Church, Mat. 8.11, 12. Mark 12.40. When the Lord roareth from Zion, and
utters his voice from Jerusalem, (his Church) the habitation of the Shepherds
and Watchmen does mourn, and is desolate, Amos 1.2.

But, to conclude the discourse concerning the Weather-glass, before I go
further, I judge it convenient to add to what has been said of the cause of
the Column rising to its usual height, this more exact account, and further
reason of it: to wit, that the World, being a coherent Plenitude, and omnium
corporum ordo and distributio, (whence it is called Mundus) admits of no
vacuum, and its parts of no chasma within, and between themselves; and not only
its said parts (such as the Earth, the Water, and the Air) stand in a due
proportion to each other, as Solomon witnesses, Eccles. 42.25. but all other
things likewise are distributed therein in order, that is, by weight, by
number, rule, and measure, Prove. 20.10. (without which its fine order cannot be
long preserved) from whence, a certain portion of space has been measured, and
a certain proportion of weight assigned to each in their common receptacle and
lodging, the place of all created Bodies, the World; which proportion they
cannot extend beyond or exceed, without an inconvenience repugnant to their
order, and to the perfect wisdom of their Almighty Maker: and so the Air (as
being one of the most bulky Bodies and parts of this World) cannot reach beyond
the space, nor exceed the pondus molis allowed unto it, nor stretch it self in
one place, except part thereof does shrink and condense in another; nor move
from its place, except another Body makes room, and either part of it self, or
some other next Fluid follows and succeeds to it: much less can the next Fluid
go beyond it in these things, whilst it is ascending like it, to be its Vicar;
that is, exceed the pondus molis which the Air should have, if it were
condensed into as close a texture as it (the next Fluid) has; and extend
beyond the space which is allowed to the Air: as it would, if what rises of it
to succeed and to supply the place of the Air, that is, the Column thereof,
should rise to a greater height than that it usually has: for then it would
have more weight, and (if rarefied into as loose and thin a texture and
consistence as the Air) not only take up more room than comes to the share and
proportion of the Air, but extend beyond the bounds set to the Sphere of the
Air, and with it, to all other more dense and heavy Bodies: which were more
inconvenient than such inconsiderable vacuum and disjunction, as that which can
be by all the skill and power of man introduced in the World. And therefore,
though the World is a coherent Plenitude, which admits naturally of neither
vacuity, nor chasma or solution of its continuity; yet, such vacuum being a far
less inconvenience than were the rising of the Column higher than it does, the
discreet ordo mundi, which is a Law thereunto, will rather admit of it, as the
less, than of the worse; and so, to avoid the worse, it suffers the Column to
rise in due proportion to the weight of the Fluid whereof it is a Vicar; and
provides at the same time, that the derelicted space shall not be absolutely
empty, but only in part; by causing the Air, which is pent up between the
Column and the Pipe, to rarefie and to dilate it self so as to supply in part
the said derelicted space: (for, note well that when the Pipe is filled with
Mercury, the Air is not all driven out of it, but some small bubbles thereof
remain included between the Mercury and the Pipe, which may be seen by distinct
spots round about, and from the top to the Base of the Mercurial Column; and
which, when the Column sinks, subside not along with it, but enter in the void
space as fast as the Mercury that pent them against the Pipe leaves it void by
subsiding.) And as a greater void space has a circumference greater than a
lesser space, and so yields, ratione suarum diametrorum, more place for the
Mercury to pent up more bubbles of Air against it than the lesser, so it is
supplied as much: and needs not per consequent (if it were able to draw) draw
more, and make the Column rise higher, in proportion to its greater height or
depth; as our modern Sages have in their great School-wisdom argued that it
ought to do: affirming that the Ancients were so dull and so silly as to think
it would do so; and as not to be aware of some weight and gravity in the Air
when compressed: though some of the Ancients have showed them that not only
they well knew the contrary, but, even without the help of their long kenning
Spectacles, saw as far again as they; viz. the aequipondium of Fluids in
ascensu, or whilst they are ascending, as the Mercurial Column has before been
showed to do, and their mutual succeeding and relieving each other per
necessitatem Divinam; which is a great secret, to our Divine. And to this
purpose, says one, who being but a Heathen, knew God better than they do, to
their shame, Hippocrates in libr. de Diaeta; Lex Divina omnia in hoc mundo
cohibet, divina and humana sursum and deorsum vicissim distribuens; commeant
and transmoventur illa huc, and haec illuc, and omni quidem tempore; illa
horum, haec vero illorum res peragunt, and quae quidem faciunt nesciunt, quae
vero faciunt scire videntur; and quae quidem vident non cognoseunt, and tamen
haec omnia necessitate divina contingunt, and quae volunt and quae nolunt;
illis autem huc, his vero illuc commeantibus and invicem commixtis, fatalem
suam sortem quodque complet, Divina namque men's edocuit, sua opera imitari,
licet quae imitantur ignorent. And one of the old Divines, after he had
observed the ballancing of the clouds, the wonderful works of him that is
perfect in knowledge, Psalm. 104.9. Job 37.16. and the proportion God's works
stand in against each other, Eccl. 42.25. teaches our Reverend a more dutiful
Lesson, Psalm. 104.24.

O Seigneur Dieu, que tes oeuvres diverse
Sont merveilleux, par le monde univers!
O que tu as tout fait par grand' sagesse!
La terre en est pleine, and de ta largess.
Which wisdom the wise Worldlings, who see not (...), much less (...), John
3.12. cannot see and justify, Mat. 11.19. 1 Cor. 2.8. and so give glory for
it, like David, who understood it well, Psalm. 92.5. to the most wise God, Romans
1.21. They that regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands, Isa. 5.12. do scarce think that his wisdom, which has
dispensed all things by weight, number and measure, and made all things to
stand in order and proportion, is so palpable and visible in particular effects
and vulgar Phoenomena, as that the rising of the Column no higher than to its
ordinary station, should be referred to it.

Having seen how far your great School-learning has brought you on your way
toward the knowledge of what is done upon Earth, as it were before your eyes;
and it appearing also from what has been said before, that it brings you no
further toward the believing and knowledge of what Christ calls (...), that
is, true Christian Divinity: it were not amiss to see and examine how much
good, Metaphysick and Logic, and the like parts of your School-breeding has
done, and does you toward the Preaching of Christ. But, lest this discourse
should swell to a greater bulk, than that I at first intended, I do referr this
to the consideration of all rational Teachers, and all true Authors of Books,
appealing even to Boil, and to Wallis himself, and Stillingfleet, and others
University-Pillars, and great Princes of their Sect, for the use they make of
them, and for the good these do them in composing their Sermons and Books of
Divinity. And affirm, that if they had tarried to write, until their skill in
Metaphysics had supplied them with method and matter enough for it, and not
altogether made use of Commentaries, and of their own natural parts, sense and
reason, and wit, they had not yet to this hour finished one single-sheet. Nay,
if the best Logicians, when they dispute in the Schools, and have emptied their
Quiver of the Syllogisms they had prepared in their Study, did not, laying by
their rules, flee for help to common sense, and to what their Experience and
their Reason suggests them, they could scarce make up the hour which they are
to dispute in; and much less make a whole Book, that would take up two or three
days time, or more, to read it; by those their rules of Logic, which, among
all the Scholars I have seen, and asked, no man was the better for toward the
apprehending and the deciding of any controverted truth, when, from the
contemplative part of his tedious Learning, he passed to the practice: thus
being ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. Besides, what use can you make of what is so defective, that it is
not only slighted, but quite rejected by some of the greatest Masters of your
School-learning? as for instance, by Ramus and his Tribe, by Telesius,
Campanella, Verancius, the Lord Bacon, and others, who do utterly condemn
Aristotle's Metaphysics, tanquam farraginem quandam and massam inconditam
doctrinae ex Theologia Naturali and Physicae part de anima congestam, and
sublimitate quadam Sermonis turgentem, says the Lord Bacon; and that, ex
contrariis sententiis contexta, and tam obscuris tenebris obruta sit, ut nec
Daedalus quispiam ejus methodum reperire possit, says Verancius; adding,
excutiamus ergo ex mentibus nostris hanc male conceptam, ut quae nusquam est,
chimaeram. The like may be said of your Logic, and a Logica libera nos Domine,
says Austin: And for Ethics, such as they are taught by you, and practiced
amongst you, such is the advantage and benefit got thereby, that all illiterate
men may rather say, the Lord have mercy upon the Masters and Scholars that
study them, than wish for the benefit they think to receive by them. Verily,
said an Author, the doctrine of the Schoolmen has allayed and perverted even
the desire of knowledge which God has planted in man; and the many
distinctions and divisions translated from thence to Divinity, has set all
Christendom on fire, violated the peace of many Kingdoms, and occasioned more
Sects or parties in Religion, than there are opinions and Sects in Philosophy.
Which is the good it has done, and is like to do, so long as it

shall be preached for, and so much encouraged. The erecting and founding of
all Universities and Colleges for Learning, is from a Heathen principle; and
begun in Christendom at the decay, and for want of the true knowledge of God.

Now this, and the like wisdom to that of our Sages, being all the advantage
that the School and Scholarship of those who are looked upon as great Masters
in Learning, affords us, and produces; what good are we to expect from the
same for our selves? And since they are forced to lay aside their Learning, and
to apply themselves to the use of common sense, and of natural reason in
debating and handling a Philosophical and Divinity matter, what reason has any
man of sense, though illiterate, to despond of his own strength, and to rely
upon them, because they are Scholars, and have taken their Degrees in the
University, for the right understanding of what he is to believe, and for the
explication of any place of Scripture? And since they who own themselves to be
capacitated for Preaching with nothing else, or very little more than the said
Humane Learning, make little or no use of it in composing their Sermons and
Books of Divinity, (for stuffing of a Sermon with the various readings of some
original word, and the diverse opinions of the Authors on a Text, as some of
their Learned do, ministering rather questions, scruples and controversies, than
a satisfactory and godly edifying, 1 Timothy 1.4. which is found in the bare
exposition and knowledge of the meaning of the Text, is not of any use toward
sound Gospel-preaching, and so, is not a use made of it toward true Preaching)
what reason have they to think that the Apostles of Christ, who they grant had
somewhat else than the said ordinary Spirit and Humane Learning, have been
necessitated to use it in their Preaching?

Alas, it is not by much Learning, and by reading more learned Books than
another, that we know better than he Christ, and the sense of Scripture! And
though we be, like St. Paul, and like Nicodemus, Masters in literature, brought
up in Divinity, skilled in the Law, and Gospel, (for Paul being well versed in
the controversies of his time, and very deep engaged against Christians, Act.
22.4. -- 26.9. cannot rationally be supposed more ignorant of the
Gospel-doctrine, before he was converted, than all the Lip-Christians are) yet,
until it pleases God to reveal his Son in us, as in him, Gal. 1.16. we are as
far as he was to seek in the true meaning of the said doctrine of Christ, and
as much in the dark, as to his saving knowledge: until it be given us to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, a Turk, a Jew, a Heathen that can read
the Old and New Testament, and we Christians, understand Christ all alike, Mat.
13.11. until he that has the key of David opens Scriptures, no man, says he,
Rev. 3.7. opens them: till the Son of God does come, and give us
understanding to know him by, 1 John 5.20. the Scriptures speak unto us in
Parables, Mark 4.11. and are not capable alone, without the other witness that
testifies of Christ, John 15.26. to suggest us any true and real knowledge of
him: till the Comforter does bring whatsoever Christ has said unto our
remembrance, John 14.26. we neither see in seeing, nor understand in reading,
what we read concerning him, Act. 8.30, 31. The Scriptures are unto us a
Parable every where, Jo. 16.25. and like an imperfect Tale, and full of
contradictions, 1 Cor. 2.14. which we believe no better (though the
Lip-Christians persuade themselves to the contrary) than the Turks, the Jews,
the Heathen, and all those Sects which we count erroneous, and the worst of all
Christians, Mat. 13.13. And the Scriptures are to us like the Book of the Law,
lost in the days of Amon and Josiah, 2 Kings 22.8. historice understood and
believed; but neither their full contents, nor the depth of their meaning,
better known than they were then: for as the Jews did not think but that the
Law was fully known, and duly satisfied by the few Ceremonies and Shows
performed all those days wherein the Book was not found, and what it contained
perused and considered of, yet after they had found it, and read it
attentively, they perceived otherwise, v. 11. so we fancy that we are (by
learning some few notions out of our Catechism, and hearing a Chapter read, and
a Sermon preached or repeated now and then) well informed of the drift and true
meaning of Scripture, and are fully instructed and made wise to Salvation: but
when we begin once to mind what we read of them, in hearing to understand, and
in seeing to perceive what we hear and see therein, our eyes, which like those
of the blind man of Bethsaida, Mark 8.22. did first but spy out or see some few
things confusedly, v. 24, are restored, v. 25. and we do then become sensible
indeed of our past ignorance, when we find in the Field of Scripture the hidden
treasure, Mat. 13.44. the old things of the Vicar, page 9. (which yet are all
new to us when we come to perceive them, thus being both new and old, v. 52.)
which our eyes, like Agars, Genesis 21.19. were held from seeing before, though we
had read the same place over and over often, learned without-book, and have of
it a full remembrance. He that has ears to hear, or understand, let him hear;
needed not to have been said, and proclaimed so often, if the sense were plain
to all, and all the men that can hear and understand, were capable to
understand the meaning of what the Scripture says there. Many great Prophets
and Kings have desired to hear what the disciples of Christ hear, and have not
heard it, says Christ, Luke 10.24. and shall they that are not made Kings and
Priests with the Unction of Christ, the only Master, perceive and understand
it? God manifest in the flesh, is without controversy so great and deep
mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. that none but the Spirit of God, which searches all
things, 1 Cor. 2.10. can justify, that is, know and acknowledge this wisdom
hidden in a mystery, which none of the Princes of this world did ever know: but
those only whose Faith does stand in the power of God, v. 5, 7, 8. and that
are, like St. Stephen, Act. 6.8. -- 7.55. perfect and full of Spirit. Eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man conceived this hidden wisdom of God,
which the Angels themselves desire to pry into, 1 Pet. 1.12. but God reveals
them unto the faithful by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. I will get me unto the great
men, and speak with them, (says Jeremy for all times, chapter 5.5) for they have
known the way and the judgment of the Lord; but they have altogether broken the
yoke, burst the bonds; they steal every one my word from his neighbors books,
chapter 23.30. and seek honor and applause; so that they cannot believe, and the
knowledge of Christ is not manifest to them, John 14.21, 23. and so they cannot
make it manifest to other men, as I have said before. The true and the only way
to have it manifested, is to become humble and meek, Luke 18 17. Mat. 18.3. and
to be born of water with the tears of repentance, John 1.31. -- 3.5. Luke 3.3.
confessing and forsaking the sins past, Prove. 28.13. like Zacheus, Luke 19.8.
and then doing righteousness, we shall be accepted of with God, like Cornelius,
Act. 10.35, 44. God will love us, John 14.23. and meet us, Isa. 64.5. and make
himself manifest (by the understanding he will give us, 1 John 5.20.) unto us:
whilst he is neither known nor perceived of the world, John 14.22. The meek
will he guide in judgment, and the meek, or lowly in heart, will he teach his
way, Psalm. 25.9.

Verily, the first entrance, or initiation into the mysteries of the kingdom of
Heaven, begins at the singleness of eye and humility usual to a little child,
who is not self-conceited, nor pre-possess'd with any prejudice and opinions,
but receives what he is taught, and endeavors both to learn and to understand
it well, without murmuring at it, and arguing against it, and deriding his
Teachers, as the proud Pharisees did: for as by Pride Adam fell from knowledge
and righteousness, (which two the Image of God, or the Heavenly kingdom, does,
says St. Paul, Ephesians. 4.24. Coloss. 3.10. consist in) so by Pride men continue
fallen, (think to be as Gods, taking upon themselves to judge both good and
evil, Genesis 3.5. not owning their ignorance) and do not embrace the contrary way
to Pride, which is the beginning of their rising up again. And as all men are
fallen short of the Image of God, Romans 3.23. 1 Cor. 11.7. and are all guilty of
pride, prejudice and self-conceit; as it may be gathered from the aversion all
men, the highest and the lowest, from the most learned Doctor, to the silliest
Country child, show against all other Sects, and against the Traditions which
they do not hold themselves, as not to hear Truth it self, if one of a
dissenting party from them show it them; being fully persuaded (though without
ever so much as calling into question whether it be so or not) that they are in
the right way, and that all wander out of the right way but themselves; so, all
that will be saved, or rise again from the fall, or death Adam died of, above
900 years before his temporal death, Genesis 2.17. -- 5.5. must come in through
this entry, I mean through singleness of heart, and humility. For did any of
the proud Pharisees believe in Christ, John 7.48. whilst the more humble
vulgar, that pretends to no learning, heard him gladly, says St. Mark 12.37.
and received him readily, Luke 19.6. The poor and humble vulgar is nearer the
kingdom of God, than the most learned, Mat. 5.3. by the mouth of Babes Gods
praise is still perfected, Mat. 21.16. Blessed be thy Name, O Lord, that thou
do reveal thy Truth, to none but such as receive the same like little Babes,
Mat. 11.25. Certainly Pride, and the School-learning which puffs up with Pride,
1 Cor. 8.1. is, and ever was the cause of general and private, Jewish, Romish,
and English Protestant Apostasy. Out of pride, Angels and man fell from Heaven
into Hell, (which is in outer darkness, whereas the inheritance of Saints in
the light, Coloss. 1.12. within, Luke 17.21. does begin from a single eye, Mat.
6.22.) and out of pride, Clergymen are the first in all Ages, and among all
parties, that reject, and make others reject the counsel of God: and it is to
be observed, that upon this same account the Clergy is the Author, and has
ever been Author of all the persecutions that have been for Religion, Act.
13.8, 44, 45. Lam. 4.13. as it was typified, by Levi slaying Hamor and Shechem,
with all their men, on no other pretense but, why should he deal with our
Sister (that is, our Church) as though she were a Harlot? Genesis 34.31. Which the
Protestant Levi, brother in iniquity to the old Christian Levi, that is, the
Popish Clergy, is upon the same account as ready to act likewise, that is, to
slay any man that makes so bold as to show that their Church is a Harlot, and
to speak against that which ever made the Priests heart glad, Judge. 18.18, 20.
Indeed not immediately, no more than Levi their type; but like the Pharisees,
(who did not set upon Christ at first sight to destroy him, whence the people
thought him mad when he did (because he knew the hearts of the Pharisees, and
foresaw what the pride thereof would drive them into, John 2.25.) tax them for
it long before they went about to do it, John 7.19, 20.) by degrees, as by
calling him first the worst of Christians, the Agent of the Devil, a Fool, an
Enthusiast, and (if they cannot answer what he says) a Blasphemer, a
Beelzebub, Mat. 10.25. and at last, persecute him openly: which is what I look
for at their hands, when they know me.

Neither is the said knowledge of Christ, and how to preach him, to be learned
out of Books, as from the testimony of the Word of Prophecy, from the relation
of Paul, Luke, Matthew, or from reasons or arguments drawn from thence by one
man for another; but as in the dark only: they serving us but until the bright
and the morning Star, and the Sun of Righteousness, the holy Spirit of Christ,
that testifies of him, John 15.26. -- 5.32. and that teaches men all things,
dawns and shines in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. for when that Sun is risen upon
earthly-minded Souls, they enter into Zoar, Genesis 19.23. (the turning of the
Anger, and the beginning of the Love of God shed in their hearts, by the Spirit
of knowledge, Romans 5.5.) knowing Christ then, not because of the words of other
men, but by reason that themselves have also within themselves the same teacher
others had; which by enlightening their minds, does persuade and convince them,
by the same reasons he did suggest to those other men, that he is indeed the
Christ and the Savior of the World, John 4.24. Otherwise unto this day, when
Christ, or Moses is read, a vail is upon their hearts, which is not taken away
but by a true conversion unto the Lord, the Spirit; by the which we are changed
from glory and from knowledge, to glory and to knowledge, into the glorious
Image of God in knowledge, Coloss. 3.10. 2 Cor. 3.15, 16, 17, 18. and if the
Scripture be true, no man comes to the knowledge of the Son, but he to whom the
Son will reveal himself, Luke 10.22. John 10: 30. -- 14.9. The Revelation of
Christ, (or the knowledge of Christ to be revealed to man) is written unto the
seven true Churches only, that is, to the only true members of the Church of
Christ, and sealed with seven seals, Rev. 1.1. -- 5.1. No man in heaven or
earth but the Lamb, who has and sends the seven Spirits of God, whereby he
does make us Priests, that we need no more be taught of Priests, being taught
of God, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.34: can open or look therein, Rev. 3.7. Surely, the
knowledge of Christ puzzleth the Angels themselves, 1 Pet. 1.12. much more men
who are born like the dull Colt of a wild Ass, Job 11.12. and dwell in houses
of clay, chapter 4.19. and who having never seen the Father at any time, John 1.18.
1 Timothy 6.16. (for the world has not known him, John 17.25.) cannot see, or
know the Son: for he that has seen the Son, does know the Father also, chapter
14.7, 9. So that no natural man, (such as all the Sons of Adam are by nature)
as he never saw or knew the invisible Father of all things, the Deity; can see,
that is, know the Son who is invisible also, from the bare testimony of the
holy men of God: but the spiritual man only, which is born of God, and able
therefore, John 6.46. to search even the deep things of God, knows the Father
and his Son, and understands this hidden wisdom, the knowledge of them; which
is a great foolishness, but indeed a great secret, to the Schoolmen, and other
learned Princes of this world, 1 Cor. 2.14. John 14.7. flesh and blood, or all
the skill and learning carnal men have, cannot make known unto them the Son of
the living God, Mat. 16.17. but the Father: witness those whom the Lord spoke
these words to, viz. the Apostles themselves: who, though they were taught of
him, for when they were alone he expounded unto them all things, which
concerned the mysteries of his kingdom, Mark 4.11, 34. yet not only for some
time after they had been with him, Mark 7.18. but even when they had heard all
that which he was to preach and teach them by word of mouth, John 16.12. --
17.4. that is, after that he was risen again from the dead, far from
understanding it, they understood not so much as that the Scriptures foretold
or meant any thing of it, Luke 24.25, 45. John 20.9. until their understandings
were opened by Christ breathing the Holy Ghost upon them, v. 22. And much less
therefore can we, who are not only as blind and dull as the Apostles were
before their second birth, but never conversed with, and never were taught of
Christ, but of such ignorant men as we are; understand Christ, the Gospel of
his kingdom, and what the Scripture teaches, better than the Apostles, before
the eyes of our dark minds or understandings are enlightened, as theirs were, by
the Spirit of wisdom and of revelation for the acknowledgement of Christ,
Ephesians. 1.17, 18.

This is worth observation: and because this very thing was denied by Esquire
Boil, and some such other learned Scribblers of Divinity, I think it not amiss
to observe yet further, that, although the Apostles had seen Christ still the
winds and waves, cause the Fig Tree to wither, and twice multiply the bread,
yet they were so slow of heart to understand or believe, Luke 24.25. that not
only they could not do the least sign in his name, but did not believe him
able, without taking thought or care for the bread that perishes, and for the
leaven thereof, Mat. 16.11. to preserve them from starving: and that he calls
them faithless, v. 8. Mark 9.19. using these expressions almost on all
occasions, viz. how is it ye have no faith? Mark 4.40. Are ye also, like the
world, so without understanding? chapter 7, 18. Mat. 15.16. perceive ye not yet,
neither understand? Mat. 8.17. how is it that ye do not yet understand? v.21.
-- 9.32. and are so sensual and gross, that you savor not the things of God,
but the things of men? Mat. 16.23. From whence, if they that heard his doctrine
out of his own mouth, that were constant beholders of his wonders and miracles,
and were to be, what they did become since, great and chief men among the true
believers, could understand no better (until they had received the gift of the
holy Ghost) the things which they saw and heard; what reason have we to think,
that they who are born, nay bred at the Universities, like the Colt of a wild
Ass, Job 11.12. do believe and understand the same things better than they,
when they can no more than they, Mark 9.19. do the least Christian virtue; and
relish the things of God, so much as to deny their vile passions in the least,
Mat. 16.24. and leave, upon the account of his promise, Mark 10.30. Houses,
Lands, Country, Parents and Children for his sake, and the Gospels? for who
among the present Preachers of the English Church, does leave and venture even
the uncertain hope he has of a mean settlement here, to go and preach the
Gospel, not in Turkey, or in Spain, (as Tillotson does object to some that
dissent from him) but in Carolina, Virginia, and New Jersey; where they may do
it without danger, and find more hearers ready prepared for them, and willing
to allow something for their subsistence, than some of those great many who
flock from all parts of the Country to London, as the best Marketplace to make
merchandise of their Sermons, and Souls of men in, Rev. 18.13. Gal. 4.17. do
meet with in many years. And if for saying these things, some of them should
say to me, as the Lawyers said to Christ, Luke 11.45. thou reproachest us also:
let them show me by their deeds, Act. 19.18. how much they believe better than
the said spectators of Christ his works of wonders, John 10.38. that they need
not to take thought for what they shall eat or drink, and that Christ would be
as good as his word, if they did but seek first the kingdom of God, Mat. 6.31,
33. for God is no accepter of persons, and of parties: and whoever does those
things, is no more excusable than they whom my discourse is chiefly intended
against. Nay let them show me that Sect, which is not as ready as those
Beholders of Christ, Mark 9.38. to forbid true believers to show by their acts
of Faith that they do truly believe, except they follow, that is, become of one
Sect with them, and receive from them the same token and name of the Beast,
Rev. 13.16, 17.

Therefore this understanding, knowledge and belief on Christ, being not
obtained by the strength of wit and learning, nor from the Scriptures alone,
even when preached by Christ himself to the Apostles, but by the help of the
light of the holy Spirit of God, which is his free gift, Mat. 13.11. John 6.65.
how say the Vicar and Hales, that all Preachers have a great necessity of
Learning; and that otherwise than out of the Apostles and other holy men's
Books, the Spirit speaks not to men?

Now (to return to the main subject in hand) it appears from the manner of
working of the extraordinary Spirit in the Apostles, that all Christian
believers do feel the same in themselves; and that it is no more than what they
may pretend to, even the Bishops themselves, or Vicars being Judges: for they
say, page 13. that whenever any man experiences the genuine operation of the
ordinary Spirit under the Gospel, he finds a vast alteration in the state of
his mind, his apprehensions of things are far different from their former
selves, when he was under the command of lust and prejudice; he then better
sees the nature of things, and those several excellencies that are in them: he
pitches upon objects which are every way more agreeable to the delights, as
well as necessities of his Soul, than the husks he formerly fed upon: and page
9. they say, that its business is to enlighten our dark faculties, whereby we
may see the beauty and excellency of those divine objects that are proposed to
our understandings, to strengthen our good purposes for an holy life, and to
excite our affections to a love agreeable, etc. So that even from this same
description of the working of the said ordinary Spirit, by Master Vicar, (which
makes it almost the same as that which I have showed was seen in the Apostles)
it follows, that the same extraordinary Spirit the Apostles had, is found in
all Believers; and that therefore in respect of them that believe in Christ, it
is but ordinary: and so, that the distinction of an ordinary and extraordinary
Spirit among Believers, as not grounded in Scripture, is erroneous and false:
and an old Sophism hammered, even from the time of 1 John 4.3. in the shop of
Antichrist, who denies the coming of Christ by the Holy Ghost, to us whilst yet
in the fiesh: binding the strong influence of it in the believers, or limiting
its power to the measure of his own Spirit, which is not so great, v. 4. giving
out that any but the same he has, is ceased: and thus by reducing the mighty
Spirit some have, to the level of his own mean ordinary Spirit, does (to the
withstanding of the kingdom of Heaven, Act. 11.17. which is in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 14.17. that he may preserve his own Earthly kingdom, which consists in
mere beastly affections, and a brutish ignorance) what he can to keep from men
the knowledge of their most excellent Prerogative: thereby to make them sit
still contented, and without sense of their base despondency, in the shadow of
that death all men dye of with Adam, from the very first moment of their life,
until the time of their regeneration. O that Christians were but left to their
reason and Scripture in matters of Religion! for who is he, though never so
careless of his future and eternal happiness, that would not be glad, and
strive with all his power and might to obtain the gift of that which shows and
teaches all things, if he knew he might have it? But woe be to you Doctors,
who, notwithstanding your fair pretense to the contrary, page 11. do your
endeavor to keep (by imposing upon them your Doctrines and Traditions) from
men the key of knowledge, Deuteronomy. 27.18. and would scarce have allowed them any
such distinction, were not the existence of Gods Spirit in the Church so
plainly taught in Scripture, that you dare not deny it! But yet a little while,
and you will not stick to say, that both your ordinary and extraordinary
Spirits are wholly ceased; if the two witnesses of God, ( viz. the Holy Ghost
that testifies of him, John 15.26. -- 5 32. and the cloud of witnesses, both
recorded in Scriptures; and not recorded, to wit, those that have been and are
still since the same were written) having already prophesied out near their
time of 1260 years, hidden under their sackcloth, do not prevent you quickly,
by standing upon their feet, and killing the beast that has so long made War
against them, killed and overcome them; that the kingdoms of this world may at
last become the Lords, Rev 11.15. Obad. 21.

Pray, had not the Jewish Church such Spirit as you say, page 7. is continued
to Christians, viz. sufficiently helpful to them, suitable to their
necessities, and to what God required of them in order to be partakers of his
blessings? and did they not understand as much of their Religion, and of the
Messiah, as you of yours, and of him? that is, (witness the place above cited
out of Hales, viz. that otherwise than out of the Apostles books, the Spirit
speaks not to you) as much as was related out of the Law, and of the ancient
Prophets Books to them? and so, what does the Spirit you pretend to, amount to?
what greater privilege have Christians than they by it? what signifies
Christ's coming, and their being anointed thereby for his Kings and Priests;
dignities granted but to few men in the Jewish Church? what signifies the
promise which God made, that all Nations should be blessed by the said coming
of the Messiah? and in short, what signifies the Prophecy in your Text? In the
last days I will pour my Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your daughters
shall prophecy, (viz. by it) Act. 2.17, 18. Now were the Apostles days more the
last days than ours? and were only they and their children meant here by all
flesh? or else are as many meant, according to St. Peter, v. 39. as the Lord
shall ever call unto the end of the World?

And to see which of Peter, or your Church, is in the right; that is, which
explication, his or yours, is Orthodox: will you be pleased, my Lords, to be
tried here by your Peers; (for you will grant, I hope, that the Bishops of
Antioch, Jerusalem, etc. were as good men as you are; and that we may as well
say, my Lord Paul, my Lord Peter. my Lord St. John, and St. James, Bishop,
Archbishop, Primate, Patriarch, and Cardinal, and Pope, (except you grudge them
the same honor the Papists allow them, who say Peter was one, and chief
amongst them) as say, my Lord of London, Henry the Right Reverend Father in
God, to no man) and to allow of their sentence out of Scripture Law, as well as
Peter himself, and other Apostles did? Act. 15.19, 15, 22, 28. Hoping which, I
say first, that St. John by applying the promises of Christ concerning the Holy
Ghost teaching all things, etc. John 14.26, 16, 13. to all those he wrote to,
(all Christians generally) 1 John 2.20, 27. shows that they do not belong to
the Apostles only, (as Hales, and you out of him, page 10. lin. 20. seem to
take it for granted) but to all them that believe in Christ, who should, as he
says, John 7.39. receive the holy Spirit after Christ was glorified, which
should make the knowledge of all things to rise and spring (like wells of
living waters flowing out of their belly) from their heart within themselves.
And it is most evident that these Promises of Christ were meant to all his
disciples, that is, all that learn of him, since he did speak to them all, as
appears by John 15.8. and by his new commandment given them at the same time,
chapter 13.34. -- 15.12. which no Christian will deny but that it does belong to
all the disciples of Christ, and not to some few of them: and since Christ
himself declares, Mark 13 3, 37. that what he spoke to Peter, and James, and
John, and Andrew, was spoken unto all the Servants of the Son of man, v. 34.
and all them that are to watch. And we find accordingly, that not only some few
great Believers in some Churches, but that all the Believers, and the whole
Christian Churches received the Holy Ghost.

And first, to begin at the visible descent thereof, and with the first
Christian Church: The Apostles were no more than twelve in number, and yet
hundred and twenty disciples received the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost,
Act. 1.14, 15. for, as in the 14th. verse, they were all with one accord, and
chapter 2.4. all the very same disciples were filled with the Holy Ghost. Besides,
v. 14, 15. Peter with the eleven standing up, lift up his voice, and said,
these are not drunken; meaning some others, besides the eleven that standing,
and saying the same with him, could not say these of themselves, to wit, as
many as some had said were full of new wine, v. 13. that is, as many as they
heard speak with new Languages; which were not the twelve only, as appears by
chapter 10.46. -- 19.6. Again, chapter 2.38. repent, says he, to the whole multitude
of Jews that were come together to see them, v. 6. and you shall receive also
the gift of the ^oly Ghost; out of which three thousand souls were baptized, v.
41. with Spirit, according to his promise, as appears from that they did
continue with one accord, and gladness, and singleness of heart, v. 46. in the
fellowship of the Apostles themselves, v. 42. which fellowship they could not
have, but by the unity of the same Spirit with them, 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. ^phes.
4.3, 4. 1 John 1.6, 7. Again, repent ye, says he, Act. 3.19. to another
Assembly, (whereof see verse. 11.) that your sins be blot^ed out, when the times
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord shall come, and he shall send you
Jesus Christ the Comforter, (as he does call him elsewhere) to refresh and to
fill you with the joy, John 15.11. and strength, rising from his true power of
life. Next, both the men and women of the Town of Samaria, received the Holy
Ghost, Act. 8.12, 16, 17. Then all the Churches throughout Judea and Galilee,
walking in the comfort and strength of the Holy Ghost, (whom they must have had
therefore) had rest and were multiplied, chapter 9.31.

Afterward, the gift of the Holy Ghost was poured out upon the Gentiles
likewise, Act. 10.45. as upon Cornelius, and his near Friends and Kindred, v.
24. and all them that heard the Word, v. 44. who magnified God, and spoke with
new languages, as well as the Apostles, v. 46. (here note well, that St. Peter
applys chapter 11.16. the promise of Christ, mentioned Act. 1.5. to those at whose
occasion he spoke, viz. to the Gentiles, chapter 11.1, 17. to confirm what he says
in chapter 15.9. that no such difference as that of ordinary and extraordinary
Spirit was put between them; and to show that it belongs to all the present
Churches of Christians, if (besides that they were Gentiles heretofore, when
the Gospel was brought into their Native Countries) they may pretend to as much
privilege as the Gentiles; as they do all, and to more.) And by course all
their Churches of Antioch, chapter 13.52. of Ephesus, chapter 19.6. Ephesians. 2.17, 18,
19. and 3.6. and 5.18. of Galatia, Gal. 3.2, 3, 5, 14. and 4.6, 7. and 5.5, 16,
25. Corinthus, 1 Cor. 6.11, 19. 2 Cor. 11.4. Rome, chapter 5.5. and 8.10, 11, 23.
Philippi, chapter 3.3. Colossus, chapter 1.8. and 3.10. and of Thessalonica, 1 These.
1.5. and 5.19, 20. 2 These. 2.13. received the Holy Ghost. And in fine, the holy
Ghost being the blessing that was promised in Abraham, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4, 8.
and 2.33, 38, 39. and 7.17. and 13.32, 33. Romans 4.13. Gal. 3.14, 29. Heb. 9.15.
and 10.36. and 11.39. to all Nations, Genesis 12.3. Romans 4.16. Ephesians. 3.6. whence
St. Paul calls him the Holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. all their Churches
in all Nations and places, if they were believing Churches, received it
likewise, although the Scriptures give us no further account of it: and so
might our Churches partake of the same blessing, if they would but believe as
gladly as the Gentiles did; specially seeing the Son of man comes to save all
men, Mat. 18.11. and to save them, as Paul says, Tit. 3.5. by regenerating,
and restoring unto them, what they do all come short of at their birth, Romans
3.23. the Holy Ghost, John 3.3, 5. coming himself unto as many as will keep his
words, John 14.23. as being himself the same with the Comforting Spirit, v. 18.
(by which being conceived, Luke 1.35. according to our Creed, in them; but
brought forth by them, Gal. 4.19. Rev. 12.5 they become his Mother therefore,
Luke 8.21. and so he becomes by this means the Son of man:) so that, though the
whole Scripture afforded no instances at all of the Holy Ghost being given to
other men besides the Apostles; the said promises of Christ coming to bless,
and to save all Nations, in turning them away from iniquity, Act. 3.26. by his
power from on high, Luke 24.49. and of his coming to as many as will keep his
word by the Spirit, etc. are enough to show that if any man will obey him;
though he be no Apostle, he shall receive the same gift.

But, besides these passages, so many other places of Scripture witness the
same, that it is a wonder to me how the great Divines, with all their Humane
Learning, in seeing perceive it not: and so much the greater wonder, that after
they have been told of it so often, they (whilst they believe Scripture, as
they say) believe not this: But their heart is waxed gross; and their eyes they
have closed, lest they should see and convert, Mat. 13.15. Some of the other
places are, The heavenly Father of all men will give to them the Holy Ghost,
much sooner than any Father will give good gifts unto his Children, Luke 11.13.
To as many as receive (or believe on, John 7.39.) Christ, he gives the right to
become the Sons of God, chapter 1.12, 13. to be born anew by the said quickening
Spirit, chapter 3.5. and 6.63. and no man ascending up to heaven, except the Son of
man that came down from thence, chapter 3.13. all the Saints must receive him,
before they ascend thither: And they are all baptized by one Spirit into one
body, (the Spirit of life that moves the feet or the tail of any living
creature, being the same Animal Spirit that actuates the head, and moves all
the other parts or members of his body) and made all to drink into one (not
therefore into two, extraordinary and ordinary) Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. And I
would not have you, brethren, ignorant, v. 1. that the manifestation of that
Spirit is given unto every man, v. 7. that believes, (as follows from v. 8.)
And the Holy Ghost was sent down from heaven, at the time that the Gospel was
preached to all those whom St. Peter wrote his Epistles to, 1 Pet. 1.12. which
preaching of the Gospel, and mission of the Spirit therefore, have been since
the first mission of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, to as many as have
believed upon hearing the Gospel preached to them. And, it being impossible for
those who were enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and of the
powers of the world to come, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, if they
shall fall away, to be renewed again into repentance, says Paul, Heb. 6.4, 5,
6. it appears from these his words, that he took it for granted that some
other, besides himself and the Apostles, received not only the Vicars ordinary
gift, but such as brought with it the powers of the world to come; and that, in
this very life: seeing there is no place left for repentance after it. And if
the Spirits of God are sent into all the Earth, Rev. 5.6. it must not be
understood of the first Christians alone, for the first Christians were not all
the Earth; and by the Earth, is meant the natural man, who is from the Earth,
earthly, Luke 18.8. John 3.31. 1 Cor. 15.47. (whence to go the way of all the
Earth, is a Scripture phrase used instead of to dye) for the Spirits of God are
not sent into the ground. Also the Prophecies of the Evangelical blessings, by
the Holy Ghost, include all, and except none: all thy children shall be taught
of the Lord, says Isaiah 54.13. and they shall all know me from the least to
the greatest, Jer. 31.34. (which cannot be but by means of the Holy Ghost,
says Paul, 1 Cor. 12.3.) the Nations shall bless themselves, and also glory in
him, chapter 4.2. The strangers, says Ezechiel in his new Jerusalem, chapter 47.22,
23. (that is to say, the Gentiles) shall have an inheritance among the Tribes
of Jacob. And the remnant, says Micah 5.4. (not some few of that remnant)
shall return, and stand, and seed in the strength, or the power, in the name
and majesty of the Lord, and shall abide. And in the latter days, the children
of Israel, none excepted, shall return, and fear (or serve) the Lord, and David
(or Christ, Ezech. 34.24.) their King, Hos. 3 5. which cannot be, but by the
power the Holy Ghost gives. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests, and
an holy Nation, said Moses, Exodus 19.6. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. to wit, by the true
Unction, whereof that of Exodus 30.23, 30. to anoint the Priests withal, was
but a type and figure. And the type of the true blood of the Lamb, the blood of
Beasts, being forbidden to both the people and Priests equally, shows that all
the Christian people may eat of the antitype, (Christ's vivifying and
health-restoring Spirit, John 6.55, 63. Mal. 4.2.) equally with their chief
Priests, the Apostles and Prophets. And to you that fear my Name shall the Sun
of Righteousness rise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. And if Christ does
give his flesh, which is the bread from Heaven, (not therefore his Humane flesh
which he had from the Virgin, John 3.6. and 8.23. Romans 8.6.) the true and the
living bread, the inspiration of God, Genesis 2.7. for the life of the whole
world, John 6.33, 50, 51. the whole world may eat of it: and all they that will
live indeed for ever by him, must actually and really, as well as the Apostles,
eat and drink, or feed on him, v. 53, 55, 57, 58. And if he saved St. Paul, and
those he meant ( were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise when they
believed, Ephesians. 1.13.) by the renewing of the Image of God within them, Tit.
3.5. how can any believing man be saved otherwise, since that Salvation is
still the same, and by the same means, that is, through the Holy Ghost? Romans
14.17. and that no man can enter into the kingdom of God, that is, live in
righteousness, and receive the peace and joy passing all understanding, which
God does reward it with, except he be born of the Spirit that enables him? John
3.5. Rev. 12.11. The body of man cannot live out its animal life, without
natural Spirits, Jam. 2.26. and shall the internal man be made to live for ever
an uninterrupted life, without the Eternal Spirit of God that gave him Nischmat
chajim, breath of lives, Genesis 2.7. and not of one single life, as the
Translator turns it: from whence he does not, says Christ, live by earthly
bread alone, Mat. 4.4. but by the bread from Heaven, Verbum ab ore Dei, the
comforting, refreshing and vivifying Spirit: which is the Fathers house, into
which Christ receives men; as appears by his saying, that he would come again
to receive them to himself, to the place he should be in, John 14.2, 3. for he
coming again to them by the Comforter, v. 18. and the gift thereof being the
result of his coming, and the only performance and effect of his promise, (that
he would bring them into the same place he should be in) it must also be (since
Christ cannot lie) the thing and place he promised to be in, and to receive
them into: and this place also being (by the account which he gave to Thomas,
whither he went to prepare a place for them, v. 6.) with the Father; it follows
from thence, that the Holy Ghost is likewise the Fathers house, and the Heaven
within us, Luke 17.21. where Christ is in the Father, and we in him, John
14.20. where he is, v. 3. and 17.24. and where all are together one with the
Father and Christ, chapter 17.21.

From all which it most clearly and manifestly appears, that the Holy Ghost is
given to all the faithful: and the distinction of the Vicar in the gift of it,
to wit, his ordinary and extraordinary gift, appearing no where at all; the
Scriptures speaking but of one sort of Spirit given; nay teaching that God
being no respecter of persons, Act. 10.34. puts no such difference at all
between believers, chapter 15.9. in every Nation he that works righteousness
being accepted with him, chapter 10.35. and receiving his good gift, Mat. 7.11.
Luke 11.13. even as the Apostles, Act. 10.47. and 15.8. can any impartial man
that has his eyes in his head* Eccl. 2.14. not see this; and deny that the
Lords Bishops having been fairly tried and condemned by as good men as their
Peers, and having had as good Law as the Statutes or Canons of Scripture could
afford them, the gift of the Holy Ghost continues still in Gods Church; and say
that it is ceased, and that no man, ever since 400 years after the times of the
Apostles, has right to pretend to it? But if some still contend for their
ordinary Spirit, (thus holding such Gospel as the Saints have not preached,
Gal. 1.8) let them have it in Gods name, Rev. 22.11. for so, instead of being
reformed to the Image of God that created man, (not after two Images, to wit,
an ordinary and extraordinary one, for God being always the same, has but one
Image) they must remain deformed; and they can have but a mean Salvation
accordingly: because Salvation being in and through the Holy Ghost, as was said
out of Romans 14.17. he that has but a mean and ordinary share of it, has but
an ordinary power to do good works with, and so has but a mean and ordinary
righteousness; and God rendering unto men but according to their works, the
peace and joy, or the bliss (which Salvation consists in) that they do receive
from thence, cannot therefore be but mean, and very ordinary: like unto the old
third state, or Limbus; a reward fit for our Right Reverend Fathers in God; to
be it.

And here I had left them, and finished my discourse, but that hearing some of
them a Limbo Patrum crying, alas we did not know that these things were meant
of this life, but thought that the promises made to all the believers,
concerning the gift of the Spirit conferred on them, were to begin upon the
dissolution of their flesh: neither did we understand any thing of a second
coming of Christ in Spirit, to men, for their Salvation; but took his second
coming to be in Judgment only, at the sound of the last Trump, when he comes
with his Angels to judge the quick and the dead! I think it convenient to show
likewise that it is in this life, before men dye, that the gift of the Spirit
is conferred upon them: and secondly, that when the Holy Ghost is sent, or
comes, it is the second coming of Christ, Christ comes then himself; that I may
both fully discharge the task I have taken upon me this day, and leave them
without excuse that are detained, and that keep others in the Limbus of such
gross ignorance.

But first, (to prevent mistakes) I desire the Reader to take notice, that I
have said nothing tending to establish the doctrine or opinion of an equality
of Spirit among believers; as though every member of Christ's m^stical body, or
every believer, had an equal share or part of Spirit with those that are
instead of eyes, ears, and of the other senses to it. No, I have from St. Paul,
1 Cor. 12. and in some other places of the foregoing pages, inferred the
contrary: and I only assert, that the Holy Ghost being given to all the
faithful, even in the same manner as unto the Apostles, they may by knocking,
asking, praying, and by watching so as to purify themselves, 1 John 3.3. from
that which defiles man, Mark 7.21, 22, 23. serve God in such holiness, and
walk in such righteousness before him, Luke 1.74, 75. as to obtain as great a
portion and gift thereof, as the Apostles. And this grounded, besides the
instances we have of it, Act. 10.35, 46. -- 19.6. upon the promises of Christ,
Mat. 19.28. Rev. 3.21. that they which shall follow him in the regeneration,
and overcome the seventh time, that is to say, to the end, shall sit with him
in his Throne, as well as the Apostles; shall partake as much as they of Gods
own divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. shall be one with God himself, John 17.21. or
transibit in Deum, as the Right Reverend Doctor Trismegistus said. For note
that, though Christ's promise makes mention but of twelve Thrones, it extends
nevertheless further than to the twelve men who were then speaking with him: as
appears first, from the words themselves of the said promise, which are, you
that follow me, or that shall follow me in the regeneration; and not, you my
Apostles that have followed me, as the Translator mistakes; (for none of the
Apostles had as yet followed Christ in the regeneration, but were still to do
it then; being not till afterward, when Christ was glorified, born again of
the Spirit, John 7.39.) and which show that the promise belongs to the Apostles
upon condition only; (for pray, shall Judas sit with the rest upon a Throne?)
and so to you Lords Bishops, if you will but dye to your Lordships
worldly-mindedness, to follow in the new birth your Lord, and to them likewise
that have and shall accomplish and perform that condition: and this appears
secondly, from the forementioned place of Rev. 3.21. which says, not Peter and
James, and the other Apostles, but he that overcomes, shall sit with me in my
Throne, and so does confirm this sense: And thirdly, from that Christ would not
promise any of them the first seats in his Kingdom; but they shall have them,
says he, Mat. 20.23. for whom such reward is prepared of my Father, as he who
knows which of all mankind shall deserve it best. Verily I dare say, that as
many as shall wade through the red Sea of their blood, Luk 22.44. and the other
deep waters of tribulations with Christ, Act. 14.22. shall sit with him on
twelve Thrones, that is, get the brightest Crown of glory, or highest state
among the twelve Tribes; that is, among the whole multitude, or the complete
number of the Israel of God. And though this is not meant of, nor attainable in
this life, yet Salvation being in and through the Holy Ghost, Romans 14 17. and
being rendered to man but according to his works, which he has done in this
life, an adequate proportion, or supply of the Spirit proportionable unto his
degree of future glory, and capable to procure it, is required in this life,
and must be got before death. Besides, not Peter and the other. Apostles only,
but whoever is righteous, shall shine as the Firmament; and if any man should
turn more men to righteousness, than the greatest Apostles, he should shine
brighter than they, as the Sun above the Stars in the kingdom of Heaven, Dan.
12.3. Mat. 13.43. But because all Believers do not purify themselves to that
degree of brightness or holiness that some do, therefore in the Fathers house
(which is the Holy Ghost, as I have showed before) there be several mansions,
John 14.2. distinguishable from the state and the proportion of Faith the
faithful shall be found with; and not distinguished by any place assigned, or
state beforehand decreed for them, as Babel teaches: so that any righteous
man that will live by Faith indeed, in going from Faith to Faith, mounting up
with wings as Eagles, and never being weary of knocking, asking, watching, and
of waiting on the Lord, Isa. 40.31. Psalm. 84.7. may not only press into Zion,
the kingdom of God, Luke 16.16. but take by force even the highest seat that is
in it; as, I doubt not, many have done since the Apostles, and shall do to the
Worlds end.

That the Holy Ghost is sent and given during this life, or whilst we are in
the flesh, and before we taste of death, to them that prepare themselves for
Salvation, it appears from John 14.23. Rev. 3.20. where, if we open the door,
hear Christ's voice, and keep his Word, (which is done during this life) Christ
will come by his Spirit, and make his abode with us. Behold I come quickly, had
not been repeated three diverse times in the last chapter of all the Scriptures,
Rev. 22.7, 12, 20. if that coming were meant of Christ's coming in Judgment; for
that, being deferred already near a third part of the age of the World, that
is, near two thousand years, is far from a quick coming; and so it is another
coming by the Holy Ghost which St. John meant in that place. And the
regeneration, or new birth of the Spirit, John 3.3, 5, 8. is performed here
upon Earth, v. 12. And verily (does Christ say, Mat. 16.28. Mark 9.1. Luke
9.27.) there be some here standing by, which are not to taste of death till
they see the Son of man come in his kingdom; that is, as Mark and Luke explain
it, the kingdom of God come with the power of the Spirit, Act. 1.8. Luk: 24.49.
Which saying could not be true, had it not been fulfilled on the day of
Pentecost in many of the disciples, that stood by when Christ spoke it, by
their receiving power after that the Holy Ghost was come and sat upon them,
Act. 1.8. -- 2.3, 4. for all they which stood by Christ when he spoke these
words, are dead so long ago, and therefore so long before his coming to
receive, and deliver the kingdom to the Father, viz. at the end of the World,
Luke 19.15. 1 Cor. 15.24. that no man can think but that since they did see the
kingdom of God before they dyed; the said coming of the Son of man in his said
kingdom is before they, and other disciples of Christ, taste of death: and not
when all men are dead. Whence John that does not tarry till the day of Judgment
comes, tarried till God's kingdom came, John 21.22. for he, having received the
revelation of Christ (the Holy Ghost, John 15.26. -- 14.26. Luke 17.30.) not
only upon that day with the rest, but more particularly, than some of them
afterward in the Island of Patmos, Rev. 1.1, 9. did not dye until he had seen
the whole kingdom of Christ even in its full power; having seen in the Spirit
the holy Jerusalem, having the glory of God, v. 10. -- 21.10, 11. And upon the
same account, Verily, says Christ again, Mat. 24.34. to all them that follow
him; Mark 13.37. this generation (which lasts no longer than a man's life) shall
not pass, till all these things (to wit, the coming of Christ in the dark and
clouded Souls, Luke 21.27. of the Heaven within us, with power and great glory,
Mat. 24.30.) be thoroughly fulfilled. And, Verily you shall not have gone over
(in your flight to avoid persecution, to which men are exposed here only before
they dye) the Cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come. And, I will not
henceforth drink of the fruit of the Vine, until the kingdom of God shall come,
Luke 22.18. or, as says Mat. 26.29. till I drink it with you new in my Fathers
kingdom; which he did with some of them, Luke 24.43. both before and after that
they were by the Holy Ghost come in the kingdom of God, drinking it new
together, John 7.39. -- 6.57, he himself drinking of it in Gods kingdom all the
while, I mean as well before as after they were in it; as being he that did
still accomplish all righteousness, overcome all the kingdoms of the World, and
of the Flesh, Mat. 4.8. John 16.33. by dying himself to them, and thus
remaining himself under the kingdom of God, and purchasing by this means and
delivering to God the whole power and kingdom, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. which he could
not do but by drinking of the Holy Ghost, and living by the Father, of his
power from above. Then if the kingdom of God is within us, like a seed growing
into a great Tree, and like a little Leven working in us till we come unto the
measure of the stature of the perfect man, the Son of man Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
4.13. and like a hidden treasure, which we must, to purchase it, sell all we
have in the World, Mat. 13.44. Luke 14.33. then is this kingdom of God (which
is the same thing as the coming of Christ, as appears from Mat. 16.28. Mark
9.1. Luke 9.27. Romans 14.17. 1 Cor. 4.20. conferred together) before we are
grown unto the measure of that stature, even in this very life, and before we
part with it, and with all the things we do enjoy, whilst we enjoy it. God has
saved us, says Paul, whilst he was yet in the flesh, 2 Timothy 1.9. and that by
renewing, or sending the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. and received ye the Spirit,
says he to the Galatians, 3.2. who therefore had received it before they read
his Letter, which was sent them in this world: and in a word, as all the
Primitive true believers received the Holy Ghost in this world during this
life, so must all believers now, since they are to receive it even in the same
manner, as I have fully showed, receive it before they taste of death: Every
Spirit that confesses not that Christ comes to us whilst in the flesh, being
that Spirit of Antichrist gone into the Wo^ld, whereof see 1 John 4.1, 3. for
truly (though flesh and blood inherits not the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.
because till we have escaped the corruption which is in the World through lust,
we cannot, says 2 Pet. 1.4. partake of Divinity, put on the new man which is (
created after God, Ephesians. 4.24. and of a divine nature) in the flesh we are
saved; in the flesh is the kingdom of God attained unto: although not with all
its full glory and Prerogatives, Ephesians. 1.14.

Now, that when the Holy Ghost is sent, or comes unto men, it is Christ that
comes himself, it appears from what Paul says, 2 Cor. 3.17. 1 Cor. 8.6. that
the Lord is that Spirit. And to see the days, or the coming of the Son of man,
is to have him revealed, compare Mat. 24.27, 37. Luke 17.22. with v. 30. which
revelation is by the coming of the Spirit that does testify of him, John
15.26. -- 16.14. Gal. 1 16. Also, to see the kingdom of God coming with power,
Mark 9.1. Luke 9.27 that is, as Luke says elsewhere, with the power from
above, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.8. 1 Cor. 4.20. Romans 14.17. is to see the Son of man
himself come in his kingdom, Mat. 16.28. And, I will pray (says Christ to his
disciples, John 14.17.) the Father, and he shall give you Another Comforter,
even the Spirit of Truth, who dwells with you now, (that is, whilst I am yet
dwelling with you in the flesh) and shall be, or dwell in you, (when I am
glorified, John 7.39. -- 16.7. Ephesians. 4.8.) And, I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come, v. 18. and I will come again, v. 28. that the other
Comforter may dwell with you for ever, v. 16. Where Christ saying Another
Comforter, and I come not to leave you comfortless, it appears in the first
place that he reckons himself the same with the Comforter, or Spirit that was
to come. And secondly, by saying that the other Comforter, which was to be and
to dwell in them for ever after, dwelt with them, and they knew him at the time
he spoke these words, he shows that he is himself the same with that Comforter;
for that it was he only, of all them that dwelt with them, who was able to
comfort them, having the fullness of the comforting Spirit in him, Coloss. 1.19.
-- 2.9. John 3.34. and did really comfort or rejoice them by his presence, chapter
16.5, 6. -- 14.1, 2. But more intelligibly, chapter 16.22. he declares himself the
same with the comforting Spirit; ye now, says he, have sorrow, but I will see
you again, and your heart shall rejoice; your sorrow shall be turned into that
joy thereupon, v. 20. which no man takes from you. And again, v. 16. -- 14.19.
yet a little while, says he, and you shall not see me, and again a little
while and you shall see me, because I go to the Father, but the World sees me
no more; viz. when you see me again, or when I make my self manifest to you, v.
22. because it cannot receive and see and know the Spirit of Truth, v. 17. --
1.5. Where note, that from that the World sees Christ no more afterward, from
his first disappearance at his passion and burial; whilst the Apostles see him
again, and that by reason that he went to the Father, it is evident that this
was not fulfilled upon his apparitions to them after his resurrection; for then
he was not as yet ascended to the Father, chapter 20.17. and the World might see
him then as well as the disciples did, seeing that he was palpable to Thomas
his hands and fingers, v. 25. and visible to the eyes of the disciples that
were traveling to Emaus, Luke 24.15. even whilst their eyes were as much held
from knowing him, as those of the World, v. 16, 25, 31. who might therefore see
him talk with them, and sit at meat in the house, v. 30. so that this seeing
him again, and especially because he should go away, must needs be meant of
that sight they had on Pentecost day, Act. 2.11, 17. of the comforting Spirit
that showed them plainly of the Father, John 16.25. and of him therefore, chapter
14.9. and that except Christ's body went away, was not to come, chapter 16.7. Then,
the other Comforter that dwelt at that time with them, being to abide and stay
with them for ever after, chapter 14.16. this seeing of Christ again ought not to
be understood of the short transitory abode which he made with them between his
resurrection, and his ascension to God: specially he being not yet another
Comforter, for he was not glorified with the glory which he had when he
vivified all things, John 17.5. Heb. 1.2. until some days afterward; which it
was necessary a Comforter, that is, one that gives life, strength and virtue,
and refreshment to all things, (note Christ is the living bread, see John
6.51.) should have, John 16.7. and so he was still but the same that dwelt with
them before he was crucified. Moreover, I will give to him that overcomes,
says he that is alive for ever, Rev. 2.28. the morning Star, or the light of
the Spirit arising in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. and he is the morning Star
himself, chapter 22.16, 20. and comes quickly to his Bride the Soul of man, which
was void of her own form, to wit, the Image of God, to impregnate or inform,
and make her conceive, and breed and bring forth the Son of man; who is the
Image of God, Heb. 1.3. and is formed within us, Gal. 4.19. being by the Holy
Ghost conceived, then born of the Virgin, a pure and chaste Soul; thus Christ
being himself, and effecting now himself what was, at the creation of man, done
by the Holy Spirit breathed into man, Genesis 1.27. -- 2.7. whence Christ calls
the works and fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. his own works, Rev. 2.26. and
thereby making himself the same with the Holy Ghost. What Peter confirms,
saying, Act. 3.19, 20. when the times of refreshing shall come from the Lords
presence, and he sends you Jesus Christ, understand to refresh them, or to be
their comforter. In fine, if we do allow that it is no robbery in the only Son
of God, to make himself equal with God, Philip. 2.6. who is a Spirit, John
4.24. we cannot without robbing him of his Divinity, Coloss. 1.19. -- 2.9. and
his Spiritual nature, John 3.34. say that he is not the same, and have a
different notion and knowledge of him than of the Holy Spirit: specially since
he sits now on the right hand of power, in the Majesty on high, or is glorified
again with the glory which he had with God before the World was, John 17.5. and
before he took the Seed of Abraham upon him. As the Father has sent me, and in
the same manner as I live by the Father, (which is done spritually) so he that
will live by me, must eat me and receive me. Heaven (the heavenly Souls, and
not the material Heavens that shall pass away, and that cannot contain him, 1
Kings 8.27.) is that which must receive him, and where he dwells, (like the Sun
in and through the Vegetables, and the Soul in and through all the members of
the body) until the time that all things shall be restored again into the
glorious freedom that they had before they fell under the bondage and the curse
of corruption, Act. 3.21. Romans 8.21.

How absurd it is to think that the Son of any man, or any thing born of flesh
and blood, as Christ's body was, John 1.14. can sit in that Majesty which
belongs to God alone, as Christ does, Heb. 1.3. when flesh and blood does not
so much as come in that glory, 1 Cor. 15.50. far from sitting therein in the
highest place! And to know after the flesh him that saves us from the flesh;
obtaining us eternal redemption from the body, Heb. 9.12. Romans 8.23. -- 7.24.
when we must not henceforth know him so! 2 Cor. 5.16. And to worship the Image
of the Father of all Spirits in the flesh, John 4.24. when he is no more to be
by us dealt with in the flesh! John 20.17. and says that the flesh of man,
otherwise his humane flesh profits nothing to man, John 6.63. but his own
true flesh and blood, which he had ab aeterno, and came down in tempore from
his stillness and rest (his Heaven) to be the bread of life unto all the World!
v. 51. and which is the Holy Ghost, whereby he that eats the same shall live;
how? even as Christ himself lives by the Father, v. 57. which cannot be by
eating and drinking of flesh and blood: and much less by transmuting his flesh
in bread to eat it; for bread is eaten only by the flesh, and quickneth but the
fleshly body alone, v. 63. By transmuting, I say, of flesh and blood into
bread, and not of bread into flesh, (as some, who heaping nonsense upon their
deep ignorance of God, do, by the excess of blind zeal, which usually men have
for idolatry, most blasphemously and ridiculously hold, Romans 1.22, 23, 25, 28.)
for as long as we neither see, smell, nor taste any flesh, but still bread as
well after as before the pretended miracle of transmutation, it cannot be a
change of bread into flesh, but of flesh into that which remains bread; if so
be that a change of substances were effected, as nothing but their bare word
appears for the proof of it: for the Scripture, though this thing deserves
better than many others to be observed, takes not the least notice, and makes
no mention of it: Secondly, they cannot show a necessity for it, but rather
contrariwise; for what reason is there that our flesh which is death, Romans 8.6.
and can never be saved, 1 Cor. 15.50. and even must he destroyed, 1 Cor. 6.13.
and that makes imperfect, Gal. 3.3. and therefore cannot be made perfect, John
17.23. 1 Cor. 13.10. that is, very good, as man when first created, Genesis 1.31.
should be fed and nourished with what gives eternal life, the flesh and the
blood of Christ; and that this should be therefore turned into common bread,
for our flesh to feed on: And thirdly, no body yet having ever seen any flesh
and blood to become bread, and that the Communion-bread was once flesh and
blood before this strange transubstantiation, the miracle pretended to do it is
invisible, and if it be invisible, it is therefore no miracle: for all miracles
are wrought to be seen, that God may show his power, and that his name may be
declared thereby among men throughout the Earth, Exodus 9.16. John 9.3. and
before the water was turned into blood or wine, Lots wife in Salt, etc. the
water was by some tasted and seen, and the flesh of the body of Lots wife was
seen and felt. Brother, art thou not a fool to stand for that which is both
nonsensical, and to no purpose, contrived without reason or necessity, nay
repugnant to the end it was instituted for, viz. the breaking of the flesh, 1
Cor. 11.26. and the communicating to Christ's spiritual body, chapter 10.16. which
is done in becoming spiritual men our selves: and a very wicked fool to
persecute another, because he will not be as great a fool as thy self? I say,
that he who eats of this flesh, shall live by it; and shall by this flesh and
blood ( the power of our Christ, and from on high, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.8.) be
quickened, and so strengthened that he shall overcome the accuser, or Tempter
that tempted Eve, Rev. 12.11. I mean shall bruise the head of the flesh that
creeps and makes our Souls to creep with it, Genesis 3.15. like Serpents, v. 14.
to cleave unto this vile Earth, Psalm. 119.25. and to sink down from God into
Hell it self.

Philip, he that has seen me, has seen the Father also, John 14.7, 9. for the
Son is his express Image, and represents him, Heb. 1.3. John 1.18. And can
therefore the Son of the invisible God, who is a Spirit, says he, that Son who
dwells in the light no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.16. in the bosom, in the
throne of the most infinite God, John 1.18. Rev. 3.21. be like unto flesh and
blood? and sit there, and come therence, Rev. 3.20. to make us sit there also
in the same bodily shape he lived with in the flesh? what, and if you shall see
the Son of man ascend up, says he, John 6.62. where he was before, how can you
then think he shall have flesh and blood about him, since when he was there
before, he had neither flesh and blood, nor humane shape and body, John 5.37.
Deuteronomy. 4.12. how can the flesh and blood I had then about me, (which is not my
flesh and blood, John 8.23. but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. which I took
upon Earth, in the womb of one of his daughters, that I might dye therein to
deliver you from it, v. 14, 15. Romans 8.6.) be the true bread from heaven, and
the meat and drink indeed that makes you live for ever? John 6.32, 33, 38, 41,
50, 54, 55, 58. Truly if I had still a body of flesh and blood, I could not
quicken you: and the words that I speak being Spirit, v. 63. how can you take
them in a carnal sense? but if you understood them, and knew me, saw my glory,
John 17.24. whereof that in Mat. 17.2. was but a very weak beam, that body of
flesh and blood which you so much dote upon, would vanish out of your sight,
Luke 24.31. Heb. 10.20. 2 Cor. 3.14. and then you would understand that I am
risen indeed, Luke 24.34. from such body of death, Romans 7.24. and by rising
from it, or being no more in it, made the fitter author of your eternal
salvation, Heb. 5.9. that is, more able to help you, and fitter to strengthen
you, John 16.7. both against the said body, and him that tempts you by it, 2
Cor. 5.1, 4, 6. by the power I have, in rising unto glory obtained of an
endless life, Heb. 2.18. -- 7.16. whereby you may rule over the tumultuous
Nations, the lusts that war in your flesh; and come out of their bondage into
the glorious freedom of the Sons of God, v. 15. Rev. 2.26, 27. which is rising
from the dead, and entering in the kingdom of God, or your Salvation. O you
house of Israel, both Jews and all Christian Sects, come on now, for the time
past ought to have sufficed you, open your eyes, and at last walk in the light
of the Lord, Isa. 2.5. Ephesians. 5.8. sit no longer in darkness and in your shadow
of death, otherwise under the thick umbraculum which your flesh darkneth and
deads your Souls with: learn to know me in Spirit and in truth, according to
mine own essence and nature; and look no more upon me as your Antecessors, John
6.42. and as the Mahometans, and even as you your selves have done, and do to
this hour, John 14.7. for the Jews look for nothing but worldly and temporal
blessings for their flesh from Christ, to wit, to live in plenty, glory and
prosperity in this life under his reign, as when Solomon reigned, 1 Kings 4.20,
21, 24, 25. taking accordingly what the Prophets say of the Spiritual kingdom
of the Messiah literally, as Isa. 55.10. and therefore they thought of a
visible appearance of Gods kingdom in the days of Christ, Luke 17.20. -- 19.11.
And the Turks expect to have all fleshly lusts satisfied by the mediation of
their Prophet Mahomet, when he comes with God, say they, to save his true
Musulmans, or them that truly believe in him, and to judge the World. So that
Christians, believing that they shall be one day saved with their flesh and
blood, 2 Cor. 5.6. that their Salvation was once performed and perfected in the
flesh by Christ as man, by his becoming a man, and by dying in the flesh, (when
by his incarnation and death, without ascending, and coming in the Spirit,
there is no body saved, John 3.5, 13. -- 16.7.) and that the second coming of
Christ will be seen of all, appear with observation to the eyes of all the
World, Luke 17.20. look on him with the same eyes, and in the same manner as
both the Jews and the Turks, have no higher thoughts of his kingdom than the
others have, know him still as the man of sorrows, humiliated; not as sitting
from the time of his humiliation on the right hand of power, and coming with
great glory, though he tells them so himself, Mat. 26.64. Mark 14.62. and
concurring thus with them, in a temporal, worldly, and carnal knowledge of him,
they do not only bring back his Spiritual knowledge and worship, introduced by
him and the Apostles, to the old bodily and ceremonial worship of God in the
Jewish Church: but even to a creature worship, Romans 1.25, 23. and, like the
Heathen, changing the truth of their God into that which he is not, (the shape
or Image of man) they set up an Idol made like unto flesh and blood, (the
fleshly conceits of him) in the holy place (their heart:) thus, instead of
knowing God, as a Spirit, in Spirit; destroying his Spiritual knowledge, and
establishing a knowledge after the flesh; and also, per consequent, a worship
accordingly, (a downright idolatry) for Lux intelligendi being in mankind the
Lex volendi and agendi, man wills and acts but according to his knowledge,
worships God as he knows him, and quia ignoti boni nulla cupido, lusts for no
more than that which he conceives and knows of him; to wit, a bodily, temporal
and carnal good: and so continues to be such as he was at his birth, that is,
carnally minded: and this carnal mind being enmity against his God, Romans 8.7.
Jam. 4.4. man, in revolting to it, or siding with that party which is in war
against God, he commits adultery (that is, falsehood) against God, Luke 16.13,
18. with the great whore (worldly lusts, and all carnal-mindedness) that makes
all people of the Earth drink of her fornications, Rev. 17.2. -- 18.3. And by
tasting, like Adam, and drinking continually of this Lethean liquour, (worldly
lusts, carnal pleasures) he at last so forgets, and remains ignorant of God,
that he falls insensibly under the Antichristian abominable kingdom of
darkness, that makes the Church of Christ on Earth desolate; and all the
present world to pay the homage is due to the heavenly divine invisible and
spiritual power, to the earthly Beast, Rev. 13.7, 8. or, to that which makes
men like Beasts, whose knowledge and thoughts are confined unto what they see,
(the earthly creatures) and cannot rise up so high as to know spiritual Beings,
and their Creator, Job 35.10, 11. that is, spiritual darkness: whence proceed
the manifold errors which each Sect respects, submits and burns incense to: and
for the which they stand up even against truth it self: doing all that they
condemn in others, that is, run mad, some more some less palpably, after their
more or less refined idolatry. He that has ears to hear let him hear, and keep
himself from all such Image Worship, 1 John 5.22. for at this very pass all men
stick, here stands and falls the faithfulness of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. Mat.
19.22. for, as I said before, cum ignoti boni nulla nobis cupido, quae novimus
haec sola cupimus, prosequimur, and iis adhaerentes atque aequiescentes, si
sint falsa bona, a vero bono sumus eo magis remoti, Luke 16.13. -- 12.34. 1
John 21.15. My Brethren, Jews and Christians, the times of ignorance and
darkness are over now, Act. 14 16. -- 17.30. Romans 13.12. The second house of
the Lord, whereof John 14.2. -- 4.21, 23. is higher, Ezra 6.3. 1 Reg. 6.2. and
not so much for a show, Ezra 3.12. as the former. And the Body of Moses, a type
of the Messiah, as being Mediator betwixt God and Israel, of the former
Covenant, and in things which were but types of the kingdom of Christ, was not
found after his death; no man knows his sepulcher to this day, God buried him,
Deuteronomy. 34.6. in a valley of Moab, (in the low creeping conceits bastard
Christians have of Christ) over against Bethpeor, (the houses of worship where
stiff-necked Israel falls to commit whoredom, falsehood, and idolatry, Numb. 25
1, 3, 18.) to show the true Israel that they should not commit whoredom and
idolatry, with the body of the true Mediator Jesus Christ; but have far
sublimer and higher conceits of his Spiritual and Eternal kingdom, than other
men have, Coloss. 3.1, 2.

But is not Christ become man, (may some object unto me) did not he take upon
him our flesh, was he not made like unto us his Brethren; tempted in all points
like we, Heb. 2.17. -- 4.15. and even subject to death, and the Mediator still
between the sinner and God? why therefore should we know him no more in his
flesh and blood? Because St. Paul teaches so, 2 Cor. 5.16. and God, adds he,
v. 19. was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; which words imply that
the reconciliation was once made for all mankind, and they may receive the use
and the benefit of it, if they come to God by the past sufferances of Christ,
as well as if he were yet in the body of this flesh. And as it is appointed
unto all men to dye once, Christ, to bear their sins, needed to offer himself
but once: and (note well) he does appear the second time without sin, unto them
that obey hem, Heb. 5.9. to perfect their salvation, chapter 9.27, 28. so that
having once offered his undefiled body, as the Lamb without blemish, a ransom
for all the World, both for them that were before and that shall be after him,
he needs not take a body often, v. 25. and dying no more, needs not keep it any
more: and also, since he is now in the Majesty of God, and is glorified again
with the glory which he had with God before the World was, John 17.5. the flesh
that is a burden which mankind does groan under, 2 Cor. 5 4. and made Christ
here upon earth uncomely and despised, Isa. 53.2, 3. though supposed to be made
since never so glorious, yet remaining flesh and blood, cannot consist, says
St. Paul, 1 Cor 15.50, 52. with that glorious, infinite, and wonderful Majesty.
Therefore the Children of the resurrection shall, says Christ, Luke 20.36. be
equal to the Angels, that they may partake of Christ's glory, and sit in his
Throne: and what place can an earthly body be but upon Earth? Besides, it is
expedient, says he, that I depart, John 16.7. for if I depart not, the
Comforter will not come: now how is he gone away from the Earth, if he has
still his earthly body with him? and how can he go away, but by putting that
off which confined him to a place, since he made and fills the world; as well
as he did after he had appeared unto Abraham, Genesis 18.2, 16, 22. -- 19.1.
compared with 18.15, 13, 17, 33. see chapter 14.17, 18. Heb. 7.1, 3, 8. and to some
others, as to Jacob, Genesis 48.16. and the rest? And, to conclude, since he comes
invisibly to save man, and is God dwelling in man, or Emmanuel, Mat. 1.23. it
follows that he has put off the flesh which he had once about him, for he
cannot come or dwell in the Believers with it, without being felt and seen.

FINIS.

