I Have perused this Tract or Disceptation entitled The Use of the Lords
Prayer; and approving it to be learned and judicious, sound and Orthodox, I
license it to be printed and published.

John Downame.

THE USE OF THE LORDS PRAYER, MAINTAINED Against the Objections of the
Innovators of these times, By JOHN DESPAGNE Minister of the holy Gospel.

Englished by C. M. D. M.

LUKE XI. When you pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth, for Richard Whitaker, at the Kings Arms in
Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PHILIP Earl of Pembrook and
Montgomery, Baron of Shurland, Lord of Cardiffe, Par, Ros of Kendal, Marmyon,
and Saint Quintin, Knight of the Order of the Garter, etc.
MY LORD,
THis piece is the Abridgement of two Sermons which I lately made upon this
subject in our French Congregation assembled in your house. I was requested by
one of the most eminent and most ancient Doctors of the Church of England, and
by some of my ordinary hearers, to publish it: Not but that this Argument might
have been handled by others more powerfully then by my self, but for other
reasons. I have assayed to join brevity with the Truth, knowing that you love
both the one and the other: For to whom ought I rather to present it then to
you, MY LORD, to whom all our Assembly, and my self in particular, are so
greatly and continually obliged? When we pray for PHILIP Earl of Pembrook, our
hearts say, LORD, he loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue. In
effect, the Ark of God wanted a veil for a covering, and you have lodged it in
a house built of Cedars.

Accept, MY LORD, that in these lines I publish your charity toward us; and
the LORD prolong your days, and power upon you and your Illustrious Family his
most precious influences.

THE USE OF THE LORDS PARYER, MAINTAINED Against the Objections of the
Innovators of these times.
THe same Spirit which cast the man possessed sometimes into the fire, and
sometimes into the water, assays to drive us from one superstition to another.
The Church of Rome, in all the acts of her devotions, affects a continual
iteration of the Lords Prayer, out of an opinion that the words, or the number
of their repetitions, carry some secret virtue. Many at this day are fallen
into a superstition quite contrary, shunning the words of this Prayer as a
dangerous rock, or a stone of stumbling: Some others who dare not flatly
condemn the Use of this Prayer, make nevertheless a scruple to pronounce it
ordinarily, desiring rather to pass it by with silence; so that this Prayer is
found banished from Families and public Assemblies where it was wont to
resound: This Candle which was set on the Candlestick to give light to all them
of the house, is at this day buried under a bushel. If there were none but
Heretics, or Unbeleevers, who attempt to forbid it, we might tax them with
irreverence and contempt toward Jesus Christ: but because these people make
profession to be otherwise Orthodox, one is not moved at this novelty, although
that heretofore we abhorred it as prodigious.

That we may see then the business in question, We are not so literal that we
condemn every other form of Prayer, or that we admit not of other words; but
men may use other Prayers, and not omit this. It is a bold attempt to blot out
the memory of such a Prayer. A Prayer used to this present time by all the
Churches of God, ancient and modern, throughout all the Universal World. A
Prayer dictated by the supreme Wisdom of that great and eternal Mediator, who
presents our Prayers to God, and who perfectly knows his Fathers mind. The
most complete Prayer that can be made, summing up all the lawful requests which
can be imagined. A Prayer which is the Epitome, the Miror, and the Rule of all
others. A Prayer which in its wonderful brevity includes so great a plenty and
variety of matters, as if it would cause a Camel to pass through a needl's
eye. A Prayer which contains more Histories and more Mysteries then words. A
Prayer in sum the most Methodical, the most Emphatical, the most Divine that
can be framed: For all the parts of this Prayer cohere with an admirable
Symetrie: All of it is exactly made, in measure and proportion: All of it is
full of torches which enlighten each other: One Petition relates to another:
And these same men confess, That neither all the wits of the Earth, nor all
the Angels of Heaven, were ever capable to dictate the like.

Did Jesus Christ then dictate this Prayer to the end we should not use it at
all? On the contrary, he says unto us, Pray thus, Our Father which art in
Heaven. To this, they answer that Jesus Christ commands us to pray thus, that
is to say, in the same sense, but not in the same words. Be it so. But then he
says ( Luke 11.) When you pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
Forbids he to pray in the same words? Because he teaches us to say Our Father
etc. may we conclude that we ought not to say it? It advantageth not to allege
that if this were a Command, we ought always to say this Prayer, and never any
other. This is as if one should say, it is not commanded to pray to God,
because it is said, Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. As if we ought to do
nothing else but pray unto God. But suppose that this is no Command, and that
Jesus Christ has not enjoined always to pronounce this Prayer: neither has
he forbad to say it often, much less never.

The pretense is nothing, that it suffices to express the sense and meaning
of Jesus Christ in this Prayer, although we express not his words: For that we
may express his meaning, must we suppress his words? Or can we better
express the sense and meaning of Jesus Christ, then by the very words of Jesus
Christ himself?

What have they then to say against the common Use of this Prayer? Certainly
Either is not lawful, Or it is not necessary, Or it is not expedient.


Let us view these in order. Is it then unlawful to utter this Prayer? This
cannot be said. It shall be no more allowed to read it; but two places of
Scripture are to be raced, wherein it is found, Matthew. 6. Luke. 11. Nor does it
help at all to say that many abuse of it. This is the Argument wherewith our
Adversaries forbid the people the Scriptures. If Satan himself has uttered
them; if the Enchanters should employ the Psalms and terms of the Gospel, must
we therefore refrain from uttering them? If it is unlawful to speak them
superstitiously, shall it be unlawful to pronounce them piously? And if it be
permitted in Prayer to use our own words, shall it be forbidden to use the
words of Jesus Christ, which are the Rule of ours?

It is lawful then; but (say they) it is not necessary. I answer: Grant that it
is in no ways necessary to pronounce this Prayer, is it necessary to omit it?
If it is indifferent to pronounce it or omit it, ought we for an indifferency
to bring a difference in the Church? to affect a novelty? to break an Universal
Order? and to raise scruples in men's consciences? But besides, there are
degrees of indifferency as well as of necessity. Will they say that the Use or
omitting of this Prayer are in the same rank of indifferency, as the use or
abstinence from certain meats? Certainly that which serves for edification, is
not at all indifferent. Will they say then, that the words of Jesus Christ
serve not for edification? Although they dare not say it expressly,
nevertheless they say as much; for they maintain that it is not expedient to
pronounce them. This is the knot of the Question, and all the Dispute is
brought to this Point.

Wherefore then is it not expedient to say this Prayer in the very words
wherein Jesus Christ did dictate it? What great inconveniences arise thence?
What loss to Gods Glory? What hinderance to the salvation of men's souls? What
ruin to the building of the Church?

Thereupon they allege, That we must not be tied to words. That there is
danger to idolize the words in pronouncing them so often. That the attention
that is given to the syllables, ties up the spirit, and diverts the thoughts.
That this frequent pronunciation is a vain repetition condemned by Jesus Christ
himself. That this Prayer does not sufficiently particularize all the
necessities which ought to be expressed. That it is couched in diverse words by
the two Evangelists, which have written it, to show that we ought not to heed
the words wherein it is comprised. That the Apostles themselves never said it.
That many cannot say it but to their condemnation, because it obliges every
one to beg forgiveness of his sins, on condition of pardoning his enemies.
That it suits not with a man that is ready to die, because he has no much need
to say, Give us our bread. That it was not given to serve for a Prayer, but
only to be a Pattern and Rule of Prayer. And that besides, in their ordinary
Prayers they comprehend all the substance thereof, though in different words.


A general answer to these Objections.
TO all this I will first oppose a general answer, which shall overthrow the
greatest part of their Objections. These men cannot deny, which is most
manifest, that sometimes God has prescribed several Forms of Prayer and other
actions usual in the Church, to the end that they should be pronounced word by
word. Such was the Form of the Blessing which the Priests usually pronounced
over the people in the very words which are read in the sixth Chapter of the
Book of Numbers. Such was the Form of Thanksgiving prescribed in the offering
of the first fruits, Deuteronomy. 26. Such was the Form of the Protestation and Prayer
dictated in express words to them which came to pay their triennial tithes,
Deuteronomy. 26. Such was the Form of Prayers which Moses commonly used when the Ark
was set forwards, or when it rested, Numb. 10. 35, 36. Such was the Form of
Prayers, or Thanksgiving, which they sung daily in the Church; for, were not
the Psalms for the most part Prayers or Thanksgivings? and were they not
pronounced and sung usually? I forbear to say, that every company of Singers
was expressly tied to certain Psalms, as if it were to one task, as it appears
by their titles. The Psalm 92. was sung every Sabbath, as we read in the
frontispice thereof. Consider here why God would dictate Prayers in form of
verses, if it were not to the end that they should be pronounced word by word?
For it is well known that it is a difficult thing to change the words of a line
which is tied to measures and fallings of the Art of Poetry. Nay, more: For we
have diverse Psalms wherein God would have us observe even the very letters of
the Alphabet. The 25 Psalm which is a Prayer, and comes near in substance to
the Lords Prayer, begins almost every one of its verses according to the Order
of the Hebrew Alphabet. The 34. 111. 112. and the 119. are of the same
structure; this last notably in each of his eights, answering eight times to
the number and order of the 22 letters. Every one acknowledges that by this
Method God would ease man's memory, to the end that the most forgetful might
easily retain the words of the holy verses, whose beginnings were ranked in the
form of A. B. C. Did he mean then that we should neglect the words thereof,
since he would they should be punctually pronounced even to the very least
letter? I might say also that there are Psalms, as the 118. and the 134. which
express a Dialogue betwixt the Priests and the people. This interchangeable
discourse, consisting in a reciprocal communication of the one with the other,
could not be kept without an exact observation of words, wherewith they
answered each other. But besides, in the Reformation of the Church, which the
good King Hezekiah procured when there was question made of the re-establishing
the holy Liturgy, the Levites were commanded to praise the Lord with the words
of David and Asaph, that is to say, to pronounce or sing the very words of the
Psalms, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. It appears also that in the Celebration of the
Passover, there was the Form of a Song, which was always used at this
Solemnity. And Jesus Christ himself at the end of this Action, when he prepared
himself for Death, made no difficulty to pronounce it, and would that his
Disciples should pronounce it with him, Matthew. 26.

If these people who condemn at this day the Use of the Lords Prayer, had lived
in those days, they would have censured the Wisdom of God for having
prescribed Forms of Prayers, and for having bound the Church to pronounce them
word by word: For the same reasons which they bring against the Use of this
Prayer, the same inconveniences which they find here, the same evasions by
which they decline and shun the pronunciation thereof; all these may be
alleged against all the Forms of Prayers, Blessings, and Thanksgivings which
God had imposed upon his own people. Could not one have said, That one ought
not to tie himself to the words of these Forms, and that it suffices to speak
in the same sense? and That the spirit ought not to be limited? That by amusing
themselves at the words, good thoughts are lost? That these are continual
repetitions? That these set Prayers express not all that ought to be said?
That there is danger lest they should be converted to Idols? and in sum, That
it was expedient to suppress the Use thereof? This is a strange thing that God
never foresaw these inconveniences!

I am amazed that these people have not also abolished the ordinary singing of
Psalms; for if their maxim be worth any thing, it is as bad to pronounce them
as to pronounce the Lords Prayer. If one ought not to tie himself to the words
of this Prayer, Why to the words of the Psalms? If we ought not to bind up the
spirit, Is it more bound up by the words of this Prayer, then by the words of a
Psalm? If the words of this Prayer divert the thoughts of him that prays,
Shall not the singing of a Psalm astonish them? If we ought not to rehearse
this Prayer, if it does not particularize all the occurrences, if there be
danger to idolize the words, May not one say as much of any Psalm whatsoever?
Nay, more: For we sing many Psalms which concerns us not so much, or wherein we
have not so much interest as in the Lords Prayer. In them we pronounce some
Prayers appointed expressly for the Jewish Church, upon occurrences past, and
which never at any time befall us. There we have requests, imprecations,
reasonings, complaints, which were Divine in David's mouth; but they are more
disputable in our mouths then the Lords Prayer is. Why then does this Prayer
more stick in our stomachs then those which are in the Psalms? Add hereunto
that the Psalms as we sing them in our vulgar tongues, are composed of words
added by the humane industry of our Poets: So that this work, though most
excellent, is not always so Divine as the Lords Prayer. Why then is it more
inconvenient to pronounce the very words of Jesus Christ, then to sing those
that men have introduced? Furthermore, Since that instead of the Lords Prayer
we find it more to the purpose to have Prayers after our own fashion, or
framed according unto occasions; Why instead of Psalms do we not daily compose
Songs altogether new, to sing them in the Church? Is this for want of Poetical
capacity that we are constrained to keep a perpetual Form of Psalms? And if it
be for edification to pronounce them and rehearse them in the very words, Why
is not also the Lords Prayer, which is the Abridgement of all the Prayers
contained within the Psalms?

But I have more to say upon every one of their Objections, which now we must
examine in particular.

OBJECTION I.
They allege in the first place, That we ought not to tie our selves to words.

Answer.
1. THis Maxim taken universally and without any distinction, is false and
pernicious. If this is to be received, we ought not to read the Bible; for in
reading thereof, we must tie our selves to the very Scripture-words. We must
not translate it; for in a translation we ought as much as is possible to suit
precisely to the very original words. A Paraphrase is never so certain, and the
change of one word sometimes changes the whole sens^. In the holy History, must
we not needs keep the very names of places and persons? In the Law are we not
bound to take heed to the least Iota, yea to the very least Point?

2. But the Objection is doubtful; For if they understand that we are not so
tied to the very words of this Prayer, that it may not be permitted us to use
any other; this is that which we say with them. But if they mean under the
shadow of this liberty, that we must neglect or suppress the words of this
Prayer; this is that we argue with them. For, because Jesus Christ permits us
to use our own words, must we bury his? Because our own words are allowed to
pass, must we cut down the words of the holy Ghost? But on the contrary; If
ours are good, how much more those which he has dictated to us? So far ought
we to be from shunning the language of God, that on the contrary, we ought as
much as may be to make it familiar and common. And would to God we were so well
versed therein that we might have it continually in our mouths.

OBJECTION II.
But here they observe unto us a great danger, That in making so great esteem
of the words of this Prayer, it is to be feared that in the end we may make
thereof an Idol.

Answer.
1. THis is a strange Paradox, that the words of this Prayer which teach us to
shun Idolatry, should be suspected by us as capable to make us commit Idolatry:
For this Prayer teaches us to call on none but Our Father which art in Heaven;
and to attribute neither Power, nor Kingdom, nor Glory, but to him alone. Will
not these men say too, That we are in danger to become Idolaters of the second
Commandment of the Decalogue, if we pronounce it very often? Shall we make an
Idol of that Commandment, which forbids Idols? Certainly the Church of Rome is
not become idolatrous for having too often pronounced the words of this
Commandment, but rather for having neglected them when they concealed them from
the people.

2. But may not any one become an Idolater of the words which are pronounced in
Baptism? Must we not pass them over also with silence to shun Idolatry? Is not
the same danger found in the words of the Lords Supper, This is my Body? The
greatest Idolatry which is in the World, is founded upon these words ill
understood. May we then abstain from pronouncing them? Nay, Ought we not also
to pronounce them always and as often as we rehearse the Institution of the
Lords Supper? I will say more. The very Name of God is idolized by the Jews,
saying, That the pronunciation thereof can work all the greatest miracles even
to the removing of mountains: Must their superstition hinder us from the
pronouncing of the Name of God? or may we impose every day on God some new
Name, lest his ordinary Name being very often expressed should at last become an
Idol?

3. Moreover, The same danger they find in the Lords Prayer, may be found in
every other Prayer: For may not any one idolize the words or the form, though
it be new? Know we not that man's spirit is so prone to adore novelties? Must we
then abstain wholly from praying to God, to shun all danger of Idolatry?

OBJECTION III.
Now follows an Objection wherein these men attempt to make Jesus Christ speak
against himself: For, say they, He has condemned vain repetitions in Prayer.
Now the ordinary Use of the Lords Prayer is a perpetual rehearsal.

Answer.
1. REad the sixth of S. Matthew, the seventh and following verses, you shall
find there that Jesus Christ dictated this Prayer for the shunning of vain
repetitions: Use not (says he) vain repetitions, but pray thus, Our Father etc.
Shall we say that that is a vain repetition which is given us as a remedy
against vain repetitions? Would Jesus Christ heal one malady by another like
it, or drive out one Devil to bring in another in the room?

2. Jesus Christ has not condemned all repetitions in general. Did not he
himself, to wit in his agony, repeat even three times, the very same evening,
the very same words, Abba Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me?
In one and the same Psalm, which is the 136. so many verses so many times this
clause, The mercy of God endures for ever: The same words are there pronounced
26 times.

3. What repetitions then are there found forbidden? Those which are vain. Vain
they are when one thinks that their multiplication carries some virtue. Vain
also if there be want of understanding, of affection, or of Faith. But the
repetition of a Prayer animated always with the same Spirit which ought to act
in this exercise, can never be vain: As on the contrary, a Prayer destitute of
this Spirit, shall not cease to be vain, though it be pronounced but once.
Besides, if it be permitted to repeat the same thoughts which I have already
had, why may I not rehearse them in the very same words wherein I have already
expressed them? There may be as much vanity in reiterating the sighs every
moment, as many now adays have made a fashion of it, as to repeat the words of
Jesus Christ.

4. Moreover, I marvel that these men make profession that they so much hate
repetitions, seeing the greatest part of their Prayers is built on nothing but
repetitions. A repetition consists not only in rehearsing the same words, but
also in rehearsing the same thing, though in different terms. Is not this a
rehearsal when a man having named dirt, comes a little after to name it mud? or
after he has spoken of a Sword, he comes to speak of a Rapier? Their
Synonyma's and Periphrases, wherewith their Prayers are wholly stuffed, are they
not so many repetitions?

5. We may observe hereupon, that this passage which they object against us,
Matt. 6. 7. forbids not only vain repetitions, but also multitude of words.
Wherefore do not these men apprehend that there may be as much vanity in the
length of their Prayers, wherein they spend as much time as would suffice for a
good Sermon, as in saying once the Lords Prayer? Or is the tediousness of
their Prayers more contrary to vain babbling then the brevity of this?

It may be they will ask, How many times we may pronounce it in a day, or in an
hour? But this is all one as if they should ask, How many times ought we to
pray to God? For we are enjoined to pray without ceasing. Not that God requires
of us a continual act; but nevertheless, it ought to be frequent. Besides, the
worth of our Prayers lies not in the number, nor in the measure, but in the
weight.

OBJECTION IV.
Behold another Objection. The words of him which prays, must second his
thoughts; but it will come to pass that one being attentive to the words of
the Lords Prayer, his good thoughts will straggle, and his spirit shall be
diverted.

Answer.
1. IT is false, and a very strange thing to say, that the words of Jesus
Christ divert good thoughts. If they well understood this Prayer, they would
never speak in this manner. Can we have better thoughts in Prayer, then those
which are included in the words of this Prayer?

2. It is false, and cannot be said without blasphemy, that they make the
spirit wander. On the contrary, they guide the spirit. Can we better rank our
thoughts then by making them march according to the Order traced by Jesus
Christ himself?

3. It is false and abominable, that the words by which we receive the Spirit
of God, distract the spirit of man; for this Prayer is a parcel of that
Doctrine of Faith by which we receive the holy Ghost. Galat. 3. 2.

4. Are these men so full of good thoughts, that having spent whole hours in
venting their conceptions as they would, that they cannot bestow three or four
minutes on the Lords Prayer?

5. But if we ought to abstain from the words thereof, under color that they
do not always meet with those thoughts which may come upon us in the act of
Prayer; I demand of these men, When any one of them makes a Prayer in public,
whether he be assured that all the thoughts of his Auditors just meet always
and at such a point, with his own, or with the words by the which he expresses
them? It should be very hard for him in a great Assembly, to find one man that
has so perfect a concurrence with him. Is there not then the same danger, lest
the words of his Prayer should divert the good thoughts of them that hear him?
Or is there more disturbance in hearing a Prayer dictated by Jesus Christ,
whereunto we have already prepared and conformed our thoughts, then to hear one
of a man whose thoughts prevent and oftentimes stifle ours?

OBJECTION V.
This same shall serve for an answer to another reason which they allege. T he
spirit, say they, ought to be free, and we ought not to shut it up in the bonds
of a Form.

Answer.
1. MUst the spirit of man, that it might be free, be without Rule? Or is it
inslaved if it pronounce the Lords Prayer? God grant we have always the
liberty to pronounce it!

2. This Prayer is indeed short in words; but in substance, it is of so great
extent, that it comprehends the Heaven and the Earth, the present and all ages
to come. Is the spirit of these men so vast that this Prayer cannot contain it?

3. Or if it be captivity to hear this Prayer pronounced, Is the spirit of the
hearers more captived in hearing the Prayer of Jesus Christ, or in hearing the
Prayer of another?

OBJECTION VI.
Thereupon they say, This Prayer does not sufficiently particularize; it
expresses not our necessities but in terms very general: but we ought,
according to occurrences, to express the particularities every one by its own
proper name.

Answer.
1. THese men fear (it seems) lest God should not well understand, unless they
showed him with the finger, and unless they deciphered out unto him
particularly all their petty necessities. And verily, under color of
particularizing, many instead of presenting their Prayers to God, seem to give
him instructions. Many also expressing particularities, express their
impertinences. And many too, thinking they desire an Egg, desire a Scorpion.
Certainly, it is often necessary to particularize; but there needs great
discretion, whereof all are not capable. General requests, as those of the
Lords Prayer, are as the Stars, which have their station certain, and their
motion regular. But when we come to particulars, then one descends as it were
to the Elementary region, where all things are various and turbulent, and where
one shall meet with a perpetual conflict of reasons as waves driven with
contrary winds.

2. Moreover, If a man would undertake to name all the favors which are
necessary or expedient for him, he shall never end his Prayer. Is there any man
that can particularize all the things which are requisite either for his being,
or for his wel^being? all the kinds of temptations? all the depths of Satan?
all his own offenses? Who is he that knows his transgressions? Psalm. 19. And
besides, all the necessities of the Universal Church, and of every Member
thereof? What supplement must we then make to our Prayers, to the end they
should not be defective? Certainly, we must necessarily come to general terms
which comprehend implicitly all particularities: As, after we have specified
such and such sins, and being not able to make a full enumeration of all
others, Must we not say in general, Forgive us our trespasses? I retort then
the Argument. Since it is impossible for us to frame any Prayer which
particularizeth all things, we ought necessarily to use a Prayer which in its
generalities contains all particulars.

OBJECTION VII.
But, say they, we read not that the Apostles ever pronounced it.

Answer.
1. THis reason is not concluding. A negative Argument, concerning a fact which
is not of the essence of Faith, is not drawn out of Scripture. We read not in
the History that the Jews ever celebrated the year of Jubilee, one of the
greatest Points of the Ceremonial Law; yet without doubt they did celebrate it,
otherwise it is certain God would have censured them for an omission so
reprovable. We read not that the Apostles ever baptized in the Name of the
three Divine Persons named in their Commission; Shall we say then that they did
not baptize in this form?

2. I say rather that Jesus Christ did dictate to them this Form of Prayer;
therefore they used it. Is it credible that having desired to have a Form of
Prayer, and Jesus Christ having dictated unto them this word by word, that they
never pronounced it?

3. And if it were not so; the Apostles were endowed with a Spirit which guided
them in their Prayers, as well as in their Doctrine. But, have we the same
infallible Spirit which dictated to them such Prayers? Are we certain that we
fail no more then they, neither in the Matter nor in the Form?

OBJECTION VIII.
After this they ask us a Question. This Prayer, say they, is found written in
two Books of the New Testament (to wit S. Matt. 6. S. Luke 11.) but with
diversity of terms; and which is more, the one of these Evangelists omits that
which the other has written: How then ought we to pronounce it? either by that
which is expressed in S. Matthew, or that which is couched by S Luke? All this
shows that the meaning of Jesus Christ was not that the words of this Prayer
should be observed.

Answer.
1. IF this Argument might take place, When we celebrate the Lords Supper, we
must never pronounce the words which Jesus Christ spoke in that Action; for
they are related diversely in four diverse Books of the Scripture; so that one of
the Evangelists which registered them, has not these words, Do this in
remembrance of me. Must we then in this Action wholly omit the words of Jesus
Christ, under color of the diversity which we find there? S. Paul did not so
understand it; When he shows the Corinthians the form wherein they ought to
celebrate the Lords Supper, he rehearses expressly the very words that Jesus
Christ uttered in the institution of this Sacrament according as he had
received them of him, 1 Cor. 11.

2. This is a wrong Conclusion, that we ought not to take heed to the words,
under pretense of the difference which we find there. On the contrary, whereas
God repeats the same thing in diverse words, by so much the more ought we to
mark them; for this difference tends to the clearing of one word by another. So
when one of the Evangelists says, Remit us our debts; the other expounds it by
saying, Forgive us our trespasses. It is indifferent to take the one or the
other of these two expressions: both these two were dictated by Jesus Christ.
Must we make the difficulty so great in choosing? Or must we suppress both
these two, because Jesus Christ has dictated both these two?

3. To this that they allege, That one of the Evangelists has not this
clause, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. it is easy to answer. This is as if we
should say, We ought not to celebrate the Lords Supper, because one of the
Evangelists, to wit, S. John, speaks not of it. If they find not this clause
in S. Luke, must they necessarily pass it over with silence, although it is
found in S. Matthew? Or ought we upon this occasion to omit all this Prayer,
although it be not found in both these Evangelists? We have diverse Psalms which
contain but one and the same subject; as the 14. and the 53. are but the
self-same thing: notwithstanding there is in one a clause which is not in the
other. Must we suppress them both?

OBJECTION IX.
There are some which strive against the Use of this Prayer, for an absurdity
which they think is found in it. We desire therein our daily bread: But, say
they, a man which is ready to die (as he which is in an agony on his deathbed,
or he which is on the Scaffold, and looks for nothing but the fatal stroke)
must he also ask for bread? Is it to any purpose for him to demand a thing
whereof he has no more need, and which is no more of any use for him?

Answer.
I Have diverse answers to give thereupon.

1. If this Request were convenient but for them which are assured to live, no
man could ever say it; For those very men which are in perfect health and
safety, yet nevertheless are not certain to live one moment. So that Jesus
Christ has taught us to ask a thing which we ought never to demand.

2. As there is no man which is assured to live a day, so there is none that
knows whether this day shall be his last. Many touch the gates of death, which
enter not so soon in. Although then a man shall be and see himself very near to
go out of the World; nevertheless since that he is ignorant of the time of his
departure, must he boldly renounce bread and Gods liberality, which is the
Doner thereof, as though he was assured he should never have need of it?

3. When I ask my bread, this is always under condition, In case that I have
yet any need thereof; In case that my days may be yet prolonged upon Earth,
and not otherwise. Is there any impertinence in this Request? Or ought we not
always thus to speak?

4. It is well known that this Petition is not restrained to nourishment. In
naming bread, I presuppose all that which is necessary for my life, the very
air and breathing. May I not demand them for the time which I have to live,
though indeed it were but for one very moment, to the end I might glorify God?

5. Grant that he which is dying has no more need to ask bread; has he no
need to say, Forgive us our trespasses, and, Lead us not into temptation?

6. Jesus Christ would not that a man should ask bread for himself alone; but
he commands us also to ask bread for others, in saying, Give us. If then a man
which is ready to dye, cannot or will not ask bread for himself; does Charity
forbid him to ask for those that shall survive, and to pray for posterity?

7. And finally, Because that sick men dying, or those which are upon the
gibbet, have no more need of bread, May we conclude all others ought to abstain
from asking it? By the same reason they ought to abstain from eating.

OBJECTION X.
Many also make a scruple to pronounce this Prayer, because it obliges them to
say that they forgive them that have trespassed against them. Now a man has
not always a meaning to pardon. This pretense is specious; for if I have
thoughts of revenge, with what forehead can I say I forgive? But make I not my
self more guilty in saying so? Nay this clause contains an imprecation which I
make against my self, to wit, that if I pardon not, I do not ask pardon. Hence
it comes to pass that many of them which have charge of praying in Public,
abstain from this Prayer, for fear that some of the bystanders which pray with
them, should be found to lie to God.

Answer.
1. THere is indeed much to be said upon the Question. If a man which feels in
himself any motion of hatred, must suspend the Use of this Prayer: I say
hereupon, If he may not use this Prayer, he may not use any other. In so much,
that to forbid a man the Lords Prayer upon this occasion, is to forbid him
wholly to pray to God in what form soever. This consequence is manifest by many
reasons. First of all, he cannot make a good Prayer, if it be not agreeable (at
least in substance) to the Lords Prayer. Now this Prayer then binds one to say,
that he forgives his enemies; so that if he says it not in the same words, it
behooves him notwithstanding that he speaks in the same sense. Besides, can he
make any Prayer without asking forgiveness of his sins? And seeing that this
remission is not promised him but upon condition to pardon, can he desire it
otherwise? For if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will I forgive
you yours, Matthew. 6. 15. Nay indeed, he cannot ask any thing else of God
without he be disposed to forgive. If he brings an offering to the Altar, he
ought first to reconcile himself to his Brother; otherwise all his offerings,
all his supplications, are of no worth. Add to this, that no man can make a
Prayer without protesting that he will obey God; for in desiring God that he
will fulfill our will, we promise that we will perform His. We ought also to
desire that his Will may be done. Now this is one Point of the Will of God,
that we pardon them which have offended us. I say then, that i^ rancour forbids
a man to pronounce the Lords Prayer; the same reason forbids him to pray to God
at all. Behold to what the opinion of these men comes; for their Argument
forbids not only the Lords Prayer, but also all those which they themselves
are accustomed to make.

2. Let us see now the obstacles which are found here. He, say they, who
instead of forgiving, burns with revenge, he which has a soul drowned in his
gall, and filled with implacable wrath, can he pronounce this Prayer? To this,
I answer, that we mean not here them which are wholly possessed with a spirit of
revenge, and that have no intention to forsake their malice; but the Question
is of them who through infirmity, find a difficulty to forgive, and feel in
themselves a combat of the flesh with the spirit. If I be then in this estate,
may I say Forgive me my trespasses, seeing I have scarce power to say that I
forgive them that have offended me? I answer also, Amongst the trespasses
whereof I ask pardon, I count this, The difficulty which I have to pardon. I
desire pardon for this, that it is hard for me to give pardon: And I desire
this grace that I may pardon. This clause comes then to this sense; Forgive me,
as I pray that thou would give me the grace to be able to forgive. Is there
any man that can stumble at this? Is there also any Christian that ought not
thus to speak? It suffices not to allege, that these things are very
different, to say that we forgive, and to say that we desire power to forgive:
For he that desires sincerely to have power to be able to forgive, has already
begun to forgive. If that this forgiveness proceeds not yet from a heart
perfectly appeased, shall we defer to pray to God until we become perfect?
until that we love perfectly our neighbor, that is to say, until we have
accomplished all the Law?

3. But after all this, suppose that it is not lawful for a man to say this
Prayer whilst he is, though but a little, angry? Is it then forbid to say it
after that there is no spark of wrath, and that his heart is entirely cleansed
from hatred? If he is not in case to pronounce it at one time, must he abstain
then from it for ever? And besides, for some particular men who have the spirit
of revenge, and may not say this Prayer, Must all the Body of the Church be
forbidden it? Must the passions of some men serve for a Rule to all? Finally,
Is this well done by him that prays in Public, to sit himself rather to the
malice of men, then to the Rule of Jesus Christ?

OBJECTION XI.
For to excuse themselves they allege and object altogether, That in their
ordinary Prayers, they comprehend the whole substance of this; That they make
thereof a Paraphrase which is the very same thing in effect, although that they
pronounce not the very same periods of it.

Answer.
1. BY this reckoning, they say not formally, We forgive them which have
trespassed against us: but they say it in substance. Is it then more
inconvenient to say it in the very words of Jesus Christ, then to say it in
words equivalent? And likewise all the rest of the Lords Prayer: For since they
confess that we must express all the meaning thereof, is it forbidden to
express the words thereof?

2. On the contrary, when a Question is of paraphrasing a passage, it behooveth
to pronounce it word by word, to the end one may see if the paraphrase agrees
with the Text. Since then they paraphrase the Lords Prayer, Why do they not
pronounce it, to the end that men may see whether the paraphrase answers the
word^ of Jesus Christ?

3. But furthermore, Are their paraphrases of the same weight as the words of
our Lord? Is a paraphrase of the Scripture as authentic as the Scripture it
self? The words of the Lords Prayer are Canonical; for they are a part of the
Scripture: But these men dare not maintain that their Prayers, or the words
thereof, are Canonical: for can a Prayer composed by a man serve for an
infallible Rule for his hearers. In the Apocryphal Books are found excellent
Prayers, either in their substance, or in regard of their expressions; Why make
we not so great an estimate of them, as of those that are contained in the
Canonical Books? For, although they were conceived and framed by godly and
understanding men, nevertheless they come not from the holy Ghost, in the same
quality, perfection, and authority, as th^se which are written by the hands of
the Prophets, whereunto also we dare not compare ours, much less also to that
which Jesus Christ has dictated.

It is not enough to object That by this reckoning we ought never to say any
other Prayer then this; For this is as if one should say, It is not permitted
to paraphrase the Scripture, because our paraphrases or interpretations are
never so authentic as the Scripture it self. We may paraphrase the Lords
Prayer with other Prayers; but it is not forbidden under the shadow of our
Paraphrases to pronounce it in its own words.

OBJECTION XII.
I come now to their last Objection, wherein they believe they display a great
subtilty. The words of this Prayer, say they, were dictated to be the Pattern
of our Prayers, but not to serve for a Prayer.

Answer.
1. THis is but a sophistry, and a vain subterfuge. Cannot these words be a
Prayer and the Model of Prayer? Cannot a building serve for a Model to another
building? Are these things incompatible?

2. Note that Jesus Christ says not, Ask your Father, That his Name may be
sanctified, That he give you your bread, etc. Nay, behold how he speaks: Say,
Our Father which art in Heaven. Say, Hallowed be thy Name. Say, Give us our
bread. Say, Forgive us. Say, Deliver us, etc. Are not these the terms and the
form of a Prayer? Can one better and more expressly put in ones mouth ones own
words? Or did Jesus Christ, when he ordained us to say them, mean the quite
contrary, to wit, that we ought not to say them?

3. But suppose that they were only given us for a Pattern, and not for a
Prayer; These men confess that in praying I ought always to have this Pattern
in my mind: If I ought to have it in my mind, Why shall I not have it in my
mouth?

4. If they will not pronounce it as a Prayer, Why do they not pronounce it at
least as a Pattern, or Form? When they shall say, Jesus Christ the Son has
taught us to say to thee, Our Father which art in Heaven* etc. are they afraid
to lie in saying so? or do they fear that this truth is not well spoken?

5. I say, It is need that the people should be continually instructed to pray
well. Now it is without Controversy, that it is impossible to make any good
Prayer, if it agree not, at least in substance, with this Form of Jesus Christ.
Is it not then expedient that the people hear often this Form, to the end that
they may see to what Rule they ought to conform their Prayers? We tax the
Church of Rome for that she pronounces not to the people the second
Commandment of the Decalogue; because that this silence hinders very many from
acknowledging the Idolatry which they commit. Will not the suppression of this
Form cause the people, especially as many poor souls who neither can nor know
how to read the Scriptures, to forget in the end this Prayer, and know no more
the Rule which ought to be kept in praying to God? In effect, these men do as
much as they can, to cause the memory of it to be lost.

To come to an end, Mark also here the difference which is betwixt the Prayers
which are of our own making, and the Lords Prayer. There may be said as much as
between the Tabernacle and the Pattern which God made Moses see upon the
Mountain. The Pattern was Celestial, framed immediately by the hand of God: The
Tabernacle was Earthly, and made by the hand of man. The Lords Prayer is all
Celestial and Divine: Ours are, in part, from man's industry; for we have not
the spirit in perfection. This fabric of our spirit is always humane and
imperfect: but the Pattern is always Divine and perfect. There is no man so
knowing, so religious, who is not subject to fail in the making of his
Prayers. They are subject to imperfection, to excess, to disorders, to many
irregularities. We are not without error in this business. We are herein
perpetually wanting; either in omitting, or being over-brief in one point,
overtedious in another; or in raising our thoughts out of their rank. But in
saying the Lords Prayer, I am sure I cannot fail to speak well, that I omit
nothing, that I speak nothing superfluous, that I am not extravagant, that
there is no rashness in my words. After then that I have framed a Prayer
according to that which is possible for me, I consider the defects thereof; and
to repair them, I use this which I know is altogether perfect. Nay, I say, that
after I have presented a Prayer of my own fashion, I ought to desire of God
that he would help the defects thereof; and to these ends I present unto him
this which his Son has taught me. Is this proceeding impertinent? Is there any
thing in it why we should reject the Use of this Prayer?

I conclude then, We ought to pronounce it. We ought, because Jesus Christ has
put it in our mouths. We ought, because that this is the Abridgement of all
other Prayers. We ought, because this is the Rule and Star which ought to guide
us in praying to God. We ought, to reform the defects which are in all our
other Prayers. We ought, because that it is Universal, for all persons, for all
matters, at all times, in all places. This is a Prayer which all the Churches
of the World pronounce: and this is a great consolation to me, that I shall
keep my part in this great consort. This is a Prayer which I can say in
prosperity, in adversity; in Peace, in War; in health, in sickness; in life,
in death: the young man and the old, the rich and poor, the King and Shepherd,
may pronounce it together.

Is not this a strange thing, that the words of Jesus Christ should become
suspected by us? If our Fathers, who have suffered so much to have the liberty
of pronouncing this Prayer in a language that may be understood, which had so
much care to teach us to the end that we should have it always in our mouths,
should rise at this day from their graves, and should see that we attempt to
forget this Prayer; With what reproaches would they not cover us? But, which is
more, behold Jesus Christ himself who bids you pronounce it. Whom will you
obey; either him, or them who strive to persuade you the contrary? Fear not,
fear not to pronounce the words of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ who dictated them
to you shall be your Warrant toward God, and shall avouch your words, since
they are his own. Carry them always in your hearts and upon your lips. ^
adjure you, my Brethren, by the reverence which you bear to Jesus Christ, by
the esteem which ye ought to make of his words, by the charity which he has
testified to us in teaching us this Prayer, by the ^nterest which you have to
well-praying, and by the Peace and Joy of the Church; suffer not any man to
snatch from you this precious Jewel, which was given you from the hand of the
Son of God. And God grant, in mercy, that with one and the same voice, we
always address our selves to Our Father which is in Heaven; for to him
belongs the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

