Essex's Excellency: OR THE Gallantry of the Freeholders of that County.
Being a short Account of the Brave British Behavior of those Worthy
Freeholders, in the Choice of their Knights to serve in the next Parliament.
Together with The Truly Noble LORD GRAY His SPEECH at the Close of their
Choice.
Published by an Eyewitness of their most Noble Courage for the Example of
their Neighboring Counties.
AS Long Parliaments have been heretofore the great mischief and ruin of the
Freeborn English man's Liberty, which this Nation in general began to he very
sensible of, by the abundant Evils that had like to have befallen the good
people of England, even almost to the overthrow of all Propriety and
Privileges, as well as Religion, which the All-wise God, out of pity to this
Nation, has how at last put an end unto, by an unexpected hand of Providence:
So did there lately seem to threaten as great an Evil by burdening the Counties
with the Choice of too frequent Parliaments; and the Cause of this Fear did not
arise in the hearts of wise men without some Cause; for Drinking and Revelling,
being grown into both Fashion and Custom in many places of this Kingdom, both
Buroughs and Counties, as necessary Qualifications to make a wise
Representative, Gentlemen indeed, those that are really such in their sober
deportment and carriage, began to grow weary; though they could not but see,
that nothing but utter destruction must at last most certainly swallow up both
them and their Posterity, in some short time, in case persons were Chosen; as
only obtained their Elections by Drinking and Feasting the Country. For wise
men well know that such excessive Charges was so unreasonable a thing to be
born by any honest person, that has no other end than his Countries good, that
it could not but be imagined long since that those persons that got such their
Elections by those ways and means, had another end in it, and designed
repayment again in a private and unjust way out of the peoples pockets, by
selling their Votes at a dear rate for the raising of money, and in other
matters of great moment.

Nay, some persons, and not a few, to the eternal Infamy of both them that
paid, and them that received such wages of unrighteousness, were grown to that
excess after they were sent up Members to the late Long Parliament, that they
received yearly more money for selling their Country, than it cost them to be
so elected; so that at last to be once got a Parliament man, was grown a sure
way both of profit and honor, though purchased out of the poor peoples hearts
blood; for those men to have good places, or large Pensions, would and did as
easily part with their Countries Liberty, and the Peoples Freedom and Right, as
well as their money; and, which may easily appear, if we consider their
domineering over their Equals, and despising Law, and longing for Seats in the
late Long Parliament, to be continued to them and their Heirs for ever.

But not to trouble you further with their ill Proceedings at this time, since
we have yet room for hopes that we shall have once more an English Parliament
that will look into such miscarriages, and give a due reward to such Offenders
in the late Long Parliament, who either for Places or Pensions, sold their
Votes and their Country at a cheaper rate than Esau did his birthright.

But as to the Gallantry and Nobleness of diverse of the Gentry of Essex, as
well as the whole body of the Freeholders, there take this short Narrative; The
Writ being directed for the Choice of two Knights for the Shire, Tuesday last,
the 12th. of this Inslant August was appointed the Day, being the first
County Court; And whereas Sir Eliab Harvey, and Colonel Mildmay were former
Members in the last good Parliament. Colonel Mildmay did sometime before the
Day of Election intimate to Sir Eliab Harvey his intentions to stand to be one
of the Knights of the Shire; and that as they had been both chosen before, he
believed the Country would now do the like freely; but though the Colonels
Interest in the County was looked upon by all to be that which brought them
both to be so easily Elected before; yet Sir Eliab (as is believed) trusting
either to his own Interest, or the Interest of the Duke of Albemarle. and some
other of the Gentry. did absolutely refuse to join himself with Colonel
Mildmay; but on the contrary, was resolved to sland alone, that now his
Interest with the Duke, and some of the Gentry, and Sir Thomas Middleton, was
sufficient not only to be Chosen Knights of the Shire himself; but also wholly
to lay aside and disappoint the Colonel of his intentions; and in effect under
hand to oppose his Election, which was thought to be more easily done, because
the Colonel, like the old Englishman, was resolved not to be at any cost or
charges in the obtaining his Election, thinking, as indeed it is a burden
sufficient to serve their Country as their Member, and not vainly to throw away
his Estate, as well as his labor to be their Servant too; for that his Noble
Spirit well knew, that he that served his Country faithfully, deserved the
Thanks of his Country, without spending his Estate to be Chosen: but some were
not idle all this time, since the Dissolution of the last Parliament, to
reproach, vilify and abuse that Worthy Person, Colonel Mildmay; yet the sum
of all their malice could reach no higher, after all, but to reproach him for a
Phanatick, a name too common in the mouths of our half Protestants, and so
little understood by them; but too too grateful to the Papists, by which they
have most maliciously branded every sober person in England with that name;
nay, a man can hardly pass through the Streets with sobriety in his face, but
he is branded for a Phanatick; and by some that would make us believe they are
Protestants themselves; but if Phanatick does denote a mad man, as I have
understood it always did, till within the compass of twenty years last past,
then I am sure it is as false an aspersion cast on that Worthy Person, as that
was which was cast upon the Apostles, that they were madmen for Preaching the
Resurrection from the dead, and Judgment Day to come; but let such, whoever
they are, know, it is a thousand times more honorable to be called by them
Phanaticks than good Christians, a thing I fear they are very little acquainted
with more than the Name: But there we leave them where they most delight, and
proceed to tell you, that some of the Tribe of Levi both before and at this
Election were very zealous, against this worrthy person Coll. Mildmay; for one
of them standing by a Papist, that Voted against the Colonel, cried, well
done, he did not doubt but that they should agree well enough in the main,
though not in all points. Some sent their Paperpellet to all their
Neighborhood, and especially to their own Club of the Long Robe, and did
encourage and threaten them upon their obedience to their Diocessian, that they
should not fail, but make all the Interest possibly they could, that Colonel
Mildmay might not be Chosen, but all hands for Sir Thomas Middleton, whom they
knew would never fail their Cause, nor their Church, which was all those
Gallions cared for, no matter what became of their Country; it was the
Liberties and Sauciness of the Laymen they hated; and they must be brought
into blind obedience to them, and pin their Faith on their sleeves, or else all
was undone, and the King and Country lost; this was their cry and exhortation;
and my Lord Duke supposing his Interest in the Country to be made greater by
slanding up against Colonel Mildmay, with all his power and might, both in his
person and friends, engages all against the Colonel, and musters up all to
come and give their Vote for Middleton against Mildmay.

But the day being come, the Roads were every where filled round Chelmsford
with vast numbers of Gentry and Freeholders, the night before there not being
room enough in that Town for Lodging, and in the Morning by Seven of the clock
Coll. Mildmay came from his house to the place near the Hopground, with about
1000 Gentlemen and Freeholders, where met him my Lord Shandish with about 1000
more, all on horse back, crying out* A Mildmay, a Mildmay, with many vollies of
Acclamations; presently after the ever noble and renowned Lord Gray met the
Colonel in a most sumptuous habit, with his led Horses in rich Trappings, and
about 2000 Horse attending him; then the Lord Gray with the Colonel began to
march into the Town, where they were met with near 2000 Horse more, and so
passing through the Towm into the Field in very good order, with their mouths
loudly hollowing for A Mildmay only, and crying out. God bless my Lord Gray,
they there rested for about an hour, while they drew up in a posture to be
viewed, and being then all got together, was not esteemed less than 6000 men.
Not long after came into the Town Sir Thomas Middleton, with about 150 or 200
Horsemen, and my Lord Duke and Sir Eliab Harvey with about 400 men more,
accounting their Servants and Attendants; and Sir Eliab came into the Field
near to Coll. Mildmay: but the Colonels men being angry that Sir Eliab should
espouse another interest, and not join with the Colonel, resolved unanimously
as one man, that they would only give one Voice for the Colonel, and Reserve
the other for such a person as the Colonel should please to nominate to them
himself: which being resolved, the Colonel with his company drew out of the
Field to the Townhouse, and riding several times about it, with an incredible
shout for a Mildmay, a Mildmay, that scarce the like was ever seen at any
Election; and the hour being come for the Writ to be read, the Colonel goes to
the Town Hall, and being told the High Sheriff was ready, made a short Speech
to the people to this effect.

Gentlemen and Friends, since I see you judge me worthy to serve you as a
Member in this next Parliament, I promise you, according to the best of my
understanding, faithfully to discharge that trust you so unanimously intend to
repose in me; and since you judge me a fit Person, I hope you may give some
credit to my recommendation of another Person to join with me in that Service,
which I shall name with your leave, and if you approve of, and judge him worthy
also, though he be not here, yet he may soon be sent for to come among you: To
which all the People gave a great shout, and cried, Name him, name him; which
then the Colonel did, and told them, John Lomott Honeywood, Esquire; a Person of a
very good Estate in this County, was in his Judgment a very honest and worthy
Person, and one that he did verily believe would serve them faithfully: Which
the people liking, immediately with a great shout cried, Send for him, a
Honeywood, and a Mildmay, and none else; and so the word being given out among
the Freeholders, and the Colonel with them surrounding the Marketplaces two
or three times, that the people might be all informed of the second person,
every man at last (which was within the compass of half an hour) cried out as
much a Honeywood as a Mildmay; and Mr. Honeywood being come up to the Company,
he and the Colonel, with Sir Eliab Harvey, and Sir Thomas Middleton went into
Court, where the Sheriff was ready, and the Noble Lord Gray did the Colonel
and Mr. Honeywood the Honor to enter into the Court with them, to see matters
fairly carried, which otherwise might not have been: The Duke of Albemarle on
the other side, and some of the Gentry were pleased to be in Court also; and
the Writ being read about Ten of the clock at the High Sheriffs command, who in
all the occurrences of the whole action carried himself like a worthy
Gentleman, and did endeavor as much as could be to prevent any disorders in
the Election: The Writ being read, and demand being made who they would choose
for their Knights of the Shire, was immediately answered by the whole people
with loud cries. A Mildmay, a Mildmay, and no Courtier nor Pensioner; and then
silence being made again, and demanded who they would have for the other
person, they did as unanimously cry out, A Honeywood, a Honeywood, a good
Protestant; and it could hardly be perceived, that any there present of the
Electors were of an other mind, or took so much as notice of Sir Eliab Harvey,
or Sir Thomas Middleton, (except their Servants, and those that came along with
the Duke, and his Attendants) but notwithstanding the great inequality both in
the Field and the place of Elections, as it is before expressed, yet Sir Eliab
Harvey and Sir Thomas Middleton demanded the Poll; and before the beginning of
the Poll. Sir Eliab Harvey was pleased to tell the people, that Coll. Mildmay
had broke his promise with him; but in what, was not then understood, otherwise
than it was suspected he meant, that Coll. Mildmay ought not to have joined
with any other Person but him, but the Colonel giving ear to what was said by
him* declared to the people, That he never was in the least guilty of leaving
Sir Eliabs interest, or designing so to do, or under any promise to join with
him whatsoever; for that it was so far from any such thing* that he told him;
Sir Eliab, I wonder you should charge me thus, when you know the contrary* that
I did desire you to stand with me, and to join interests together, to save the
Country Trouble and Charges; and you absolutely denied it, and always returned
me answer, You must not, nor would not join with any: Which words of the
Colonel were attested in the Court to be true, by a very worthy Gentleman,
that averred to his knowledge, the Colonel had ^ought to Sir Eliab, and was
absolutely denied.

These words passing* the Poll was begun, and each Person that stood had his
Clark to take the Poll, which began about Eleven a clock that day, where was
such excessive thronging of the Freeholders, being eager to be polled; that
the Court was fain to adjourn several times that day to ease themselves; the
tumult being great, and the Countrymen fearing some trick might be put upon
them, would not leave the place at no rate, crying out. It was a shame that any
Gentleman should offer to stand a Poll at so vast a disproportion, since the
whole Country was for Mildmay and Honeywood, and wondered that Sir Eliab
Harvey, and Sir Thomas Middleton, and the Duke* would oppose the Country, who
was all but as one man; but Sir Eliab Harvey in reply to Coll. Mildmay then
told the people, That now he did declare he would join with Sir Tho. Middleton;
but after a little space, when he was informed that Coll. Mildmay had never
joined with any man till he came to the place of Election, and saw him join
with Sir Thomas Middleton, then Sir Eliab Harvey very worthily told the people,
he would not at all concern himself in joining with any man whatsoever. And no
sooner was the Poll begun, but some persons that would be thought both to be
Gentlemen, and the wisest Justices in the County, in opposition, and as it then
should seem to warrant no other than to breed a disturbance, first on the Bench
gave Coll. Mildmay and his party very reviling Language, as pitiful
inconsiderable Phanaticks, and the like, and such words as only befitted a
railing person in his Pulpit* or a drunken Goddamme, telling them they had none
but a company of Clowns, and that the Colonel had never a Gentleman among
them, nor any person that was a Gentleman would offer to set up such persons to
be Parliament Men, and the like: which proceedings did enrage the Freeholders,
and made them cry out, they were better men than themselves; and all their
abuses and tricks could not persuade nor affright them from standing up for
their Countries good; and then told them, None but Papists and Half-Protestants
would abuse such men. But those of Sir Thomas Middleton's party, and such
especially as polled for him, were not content with giving ill language of the
basest sort, but upon the Bench did all they could to make disturbances, by
violences offered to the Colonels person, one of them having the Impudence
(who calls himself a Knight) to take him by the Hair or the Nose, to provoke
the Colonel to strike, that so there might be a quarrel, so as to make a
disturbance and evacuate the Election, or at least prolong the Poll, which was
aimed at on purpose to tire out the Countrey-people, it being Harvest-time, and
also they hoping, that they bearing their own cost and charges, would send them
home the sooner; so that by delaying the Poll, they might at last be in some
equality with the Colonel, and when the Colonel well answered that Person,
and they saw that would not do, and that the Noble Lord Gray began now to be
sensible of their abuses and designs, the next thing they undertook, was to
quarrel with the Lord Gray himself; but the person that did that being a Peer,
and the Noble Lord Gray vindicating his Honor with that Peer, and giving him
an answer suitable to a Challenge said to be sent him. I shall not further
repeat that matter: But when that would not do their work neither, then some of
the Justices of the Peace (as they pretended themselves) for the promoting
their cause, fell upon the Clark that took the Poll for Coll. Mildmay, and a
wrathful Fellow, to show his kindness to his Friend the Duke, and the other
persons that stood against the Colonel, in his abundant Wisdom, Justice and
Manhood, assaulted the said Clark, and struck him several times, upon pretense
the Clark did not do his duty by standing bare to his Worship, though then the
Court was shut, (and the Sheriff not there, which only made the Court) and
committed the person into custody for calling the Clergymen Priests; although
he could not but well know, it is a Title they all own, and would fain be
termed such; and the Clark must be carried to Prison, and the Books he had
taken the Poll in must by all means be taken from him, which was indeed thought
to be the design of the quarrel, to get the Books from him: Then a worthy
person which did only intimate his mislike of these things, by interposing
himself, was abused. But these proceedings, though very prejudicial to the
persons that bore them, yet were no advantage to their own party, for the
worthy Freeholders were the more incensed against them; And if the Wisdom of
my Lord Gray, the Sheriff and the Colonel, had not been great, these
proceedings might have caused great mischiefs; but the Contrymen were so
sensible of the brave courage and gallantry of my Lord Gray that no sooner was
he, the Colonel and Mr. Honeywood leaving the Court to go to their Lodgings at
all times, but they all as one man, attended them with great shouts, crying,
God bless my Lord Gray for standing for the Contrymen; and then crying out,
A Mildmay, a Honeywood: but when the other party went from the Court, there was
silence enough. Thus the Poll continued from Tuesday about Eleven a clock till
about nine on the Friday following: where in all that whole time the
Freeholders Zeal was so great. that they never abated of their Courage* and
like Noble English men, worthy Eternal Honor, lay in Town at their own cost
and charges, and scorned to put their Members to two pence charge; but diverse
of them did help and assist one another, and with that willingness and
cheerfulness, that it is beyond expression, which other Counties having so good
an Example, I hope will take pattern by, and scorn to be treated by the Members
they choose, but will bear their own charges, and not discourage honest men,
which would serve them, were it not for the excessive charges, as well as
burden.

These worthy Freeholders would often say, That it was the high way to make men
Pensioners and Knaves, to put them to charges to be Chosen; and so constant
were these men in their resolutions of Choosing those worthy Gentlemen, that
they would call out to the Court often times when they were so thronged, and
almost stifled to death, That they would not be tired out notwithstanding the
discouragements they met with sometimes from the Court in preferring other
persons that came in fresh to be Polled before them. And they would often say,
if we stay this month we will not be tired out, and other times cried out most
bitterly in the Streets against the Pensioners in the late Long Parliament,
that had almost sold them for slaves: And at other times when they were told
they would lose their Corn on the ground if they stayed longer, they made this
bold Answer, That they would rather trust God with ^^eir Corn, than trust the
Devil to chusetheir Parliament Men. For that they did now clearly see that all
was at stake, and that they had too long pinned their Faith on other persons
sleeves; with a multitude of such other hearty expressions, too tedious here to
be related.

But on Friday morning, about seven of the Clock, no person almost appearing to
Poll against the Colonel, and Proclamation being made three times, that all
persons should come in to Poll, or else the Poll would be shut up; about eight
of the Clock all being Polled that appeared, the Poll was shut, and the Court
adjourned till One that day, till the Books were cast up, which was done by
that time, in presence of diverse persons appointed by the Sheriff to see the
same fairly done; but the Duke, with Sir Thomas Middleton, and Sir Eliab Harvey
withdrawing from the Court after the Poll was shut up, it was thought fit to
send to them to be present at the casting up of the same; but Sir Eliab Harvey
immediately left the Town, and Sir Thomas Middleton did not appear himself, but
sent a person to inspect the Poll; but no sooner was the Poll closed, but news
was brought there were about 500 came to the Town on purpose to be Polled for
Colonel Mildmay and Honeywood, and many hundreds more that day came in for
that purpose. It was given out over night that the Poll would be continued
several days longer, and so diverse persons went home and returned as occasion
offered; but the Poll being call up, was found to be one thousand five hundred
ninety two for Coll Mildmay, 1517 for Mr Honeywood, six hundred sixty nine, for
Sir Eliab Harvey, 754 for Sir Thomas Middleton, among which were some persons
that were convicted Papists, and above 200 of the Tribe of Levi some of which,
to the dishonor of their Profession behaved themselves, to say no worse of
them, not like sober men, there being so much good Liquor in the Town, and the
generosity of those they took part with, being too much abused by them: But
notwithstanding the two Knights men; were nobly kept and entertained, and no
manner of Entertainment given by the other side; yet the difference was so
great, and would have been as much more, had the Poll continued longer; but the
Poll continued for the two Knights to the last man.

But the Sheriff returning to the Court at the time according to custom,
proclaimed Colonel Mildmay, and Mr. Honeywood duly Elected, and then
Indentures were sealed in Court; after which the Lord Gray calling to the
Freeholders in a very handsome Speech to this effect delivered himself.

Gentlemen, your zeal you have shown for your Liberties; and the Countries good
at this Election, and your gallant Carriage and Behavior, is never enough
sufficiently to be commended; and that which more highly commends you, besides
the pains you have taken in attending the hardships that have been put on you,
is that you have born your own Charges of this Election your selves, and have
not been chargeable to the Gentlemen you have Chosen, but have wisely
considered; that such as make it a Trade to bear the Counties Charge, and feast
them to be Chosen, do fetch the same out of the Country men's pockets another
way, which tends to the ruin of your Estates and Liberties: And I hope this
good President will be imitated by our Neighboring Counties; therefore I shall
say no more to you at this time, but wish you still to continue your Zeal and
Courage for the maintaining your Liberties, and the Protestant Religion.

At which the Freeholders gave a great shout, crying out, God bless your
Honor, and all good Englishmen that will stand up for the Peoples Liberties;
and then the Knights in two Chairs were carried round the Town, and brought to
their Lodgings with an innumerable company of people shouting and crying. A
Mildmay and Honeywood; which being done, my Lord Gray and the Sheriff dined at
the Collonel's Chamber, with some other of his friends, and the People attended
on Horseback to wait on my Lord Gray and the Colonel, and Mr. Honeywood out
of Town, which was done about five of the clock, with near five hundred Horse;
But I must not forget to relate one Passage which was committed by a person
that was against the Colonel, and one that called himself a Gentleman,) that
while my Lord Gray and the rest were at Dinner, a little before they were
taking Horse to go out of Town, a poor Countryman going along the Streets, by
the Door where the Opposites lodged, and crying out, A Mildmay and Honeywood,
he seeing the Country-man's Zeal, knocked him down, and broke the Country-man's
Leg, and afterward fled to the Inn for shelter; but the Country-man's friends
acquainted the Lord Gray and the Colonel with the action, they immediately
ordered the person that did the fact to be seized, which was done, and he
committed to Goal, and ordered the poor man to be carefully looked after; which
ill Action ought not to be laid to the charge of any but malicious persons; and
indeed so much of malice did appear by the words and actions of those that
Polled against the Colonel, that a sober man would blush to hear; and among
the rest was given out, That no Gentleman, or like a Gentleman, would appear on
the Collonel's side, which was so notoriously false, that by the very. Book
wherein their names were entered, can testify there were as many Gentlemen of
Estates, and men of quality appeared for the Colonel, as they had, and rather
more, except Clergy, my Lord Howard, my Lord Gray, with Sir Eliab Harvey
himself, and diverse other Lords and Gentlemen, making up the numbers of
Freeholders on the Collonel's side.

This being the true Account, though not dressed up in Terms of Art, or varnished
with a florid style, is hoped will be acceptable to those honest Freeholders;
and when other Countries shall see the brave Courage and Wisdom of this County
of Essex, in the Choice of two such worthy Men, in spite of all Opposition,
that they will imitate their Pattern, and no more suffer themselves to be
feasted, and drunk out of their reason, which is the reason that Ill men are
too often Representatives in Parliament, which never designed by their
Entertainments given to the County, but to be doubly and trebly reimburst out
of their Electors pockets, which way does inevitably endanger the Loss and
Liberty of the whole Nation in general.

And now good Countrymen, do but consider nothing can so soon enslave you and
your Posterity, as the Choice of ill Members in Parliament; for to have your
Throats cut in the face of Law, is a thousand times worse than the the Force of
Arms; and assure your selves, they are worse than the Papists, or at least no
better, that would go about to persuade you to submit to any thing short of
your just Rights and Liberties.

FINIS.

