The Copy of a LETTER Sent from his Excellency, ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX: to Mr.
PYM, A Member of the House of Commons. Also an Order for the printing of Sr
Edw. Nicholas his Letter, His Majesty's Secretary, to Sir Will. Boswell his
Majesty's Resident with the States of the united Provinces, whereby the
notorious falsities of that Letter may appear to the world, and how as well
foreign States as the good people of this Kingdom are misled and abused by
the false informations of the wicked and malignant Counselors that are about
his Majesty. Read the Marginall Notes. Together with the true Relation of the
passages at Sherbourn-Hill, which have relation to the aforesaid Letters.

ORdered by the COMMONS, That this be forthwith Printed and published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by L. N. for E. Husbands and J. Franck and are to be sold at
their shops in the Middle Temple, and next door to the King's Head in
Fleet Street. 1642.

A Copy of a Letter sent from his Excellency ROBERT Earl of Essex, to Mr.
PYM, a Member of the House of Commons.
Mr. PYM,
YOu will find in Master Secretary Nicholas Letters, what strange fictions
they make concerning this Army, (it is true they did plunder those that were
thought Malignant or Papists) but since my coming down, I heard not the least
complaint that way, I have been in many armies; but never saw any quieter, or
freer of disorder. All that I know one soldier (a great many being about him),
called to me as I was at Sir Philip Stapletons window in the market place, and
told me he had not his 5.^. I presently called him up, called for a sergeant,
he presently fell upon his knees and asked pardon; at one of the Ports a
company being at the guard that wanted a Captain, demanded of me his
Leivetenant might be Captain* I presently commanded him to follow me, which he
did, fell upon his knees and asked pardon. They have the Articles read, the
Advocate saying at the end, God bless the King and Parliament; they cried God
bless the Parliament: I never saw any drunk since my coming hither. And I am
as confident as I can be of any worldly thing, if they be paid it will be ^
brave army, I confess there is a defect in some Regiments of the Foot
officers; the Foot have a general muster this day.

R. ESSEX.


Sir Edw: Nicholas his Letter to Sir William Boswell.
SIr, I wrote to you on Monday before our coming away from Nottingham, to
acknowledge the receipt of yours of the eleventh Current, and to give you part
of the news we had then.

On Tuesday His Majesty marched with his Banner from Nottingham, with five
hundred horse and five Regiments of Foot; and twelve pieces of Artillery: The
Trained bands met him at about seven miles hence, five hundred whereof offered
themselves to attend his Majesty: And being received are billetted with the
Army, and the rest are disarmed. Being arrived here His Majesty understood the
news of a second blow given to the E^rle of Bedford, by the Lord The falsitie
of this Relation is referred to be discovered by the relation of the truth of
that proceeding subscribed by the Earl of Bedford and other officers that were
present at the action, where the shameful defeat the Marquess of Hartfords
forces suffered by a very few of my Lord of Bedfords is truly declared.
Marquess Hertfords forces, whereof two hundred horses and three hundred
dragoones, were sent in pursuit of him; and about Yevell met with about a like
number. Sir William Balfoures son in a bravado rode out single from his troop,
brandishing his sword, as if he would dare somebody to combat with him:
Whereof Colonel Lunsford giving notice to young Stowell, telling him there was
honor for him, He straight made up: Balfoure discharged his Pistols at some
distance, but Stowell reserved his till he might be surer of his mark: Which
he did so well, that he fired the others Buffe at his breast; and with a quick
blow with his sword, When this narration was read concerning Captain Balfour,
the Speaker informed that Captain Balfour that morning was with him to sign a
warrant for Posthorses for him to ride toward Sherbourn, and this Relation is
so far from truth that young Stowell ran away* and Captain Balfour returned
after he had chased him victoriously.
made an end of the Duel and his Adversary, and so returned to his Troop full
of the Honor he went for. In the encounter of the two horse-bodies; the
Marquess lost fifteen men, and the Earl above an hundred, to whose
assistance a body of two thousand Foot appearing, the Marquess his forces
retreated in very good order.

Sir John Byron with as many Scholars as could get horses, and arms has left
Oxford by his Majesty's directions, and is marched to Worcester, where he is to
expect the Kings Orders. Mean while the Universitie is discharged, and each
man has provided for himself.

His Majesty removes hence to morrow to Vxester, whither the Artillery, and
Train with eight hundred Dragoones, and some Foot advanced yesternight, and
more of our horse and foot are following this day. Whither we shall bend our
Course from thence, we shall know there, His Majesty now giving out his gifts
but overnight. I shall not now trouble you more, than that our Army is in very
good heart, and the Earl of Essex his men are very mutinous, saying still that
they are all fellow traitors; insomuch as he stirrs not with them out of
Northampton. I hear the Parliament has now lately received a ship or two
laden with Arms from Holland, for which I am very sorry; that so ill a Cause
should have any countenance, from so near Allies. I am sorry now to hear that
Portsmouth is rendered. I am

Derby 15. Septembris. 1642. Sir, Your affectionate friend and servant. Edw:
Nicholas.


A Relation of the Actions of the PARLIAMENTS Forces, under the Command of the
Earl of Bedford, General of the Horse, against those which came from
Sherbourn unto Babel-hill, near unto Yerrell, upon Wednesday the seventh of
this instant Sept. 1642.
UPon Tuesday the sixth of September, the Parliaments Forces did rise from
before Sherbourn, and went that night unto Yerrell, a Town being four miles
distant from Sherbourn; where we lay on Wednesday to refresh our selves, upon
which day it pleased God to give us a great taste of his goodness, to the
great shame and loss of the enemy: About two of the clock in the afternoon
there appeared a great body of their horse and foot upon a great hill within a
little mile of the Town called Babel-hill, and so was it truly to them a Babel
of Confusion. Upon which we presently put our selves in Array as well as we
could, to make good all the out-wayes, and guard the Magazine, which to do we
found but very few men, and more Pikemen than Musketeers, for the Musketeers
found themselves to be most employed upon all occasions, and therefore they
principally shifted away, and we sent out to that side where the enemy
appeared, three Troops of horse, and some Musquettiers, they standing still at
the top of the hill, braving of us, and calling us Rogues and Roundheads, our
men went up the hill to charge them, Captain Aiscogh one way, Captain Tomson
another way a little after him, and Captain Balfour a third, and our
Musketeers after as fast as we could; Aiscogh came up to them first, and
charged one of the Troops through and through, and charged the second, but then
was glad to wheel about; by that time Tomson came in to him, and upon the sight
of him all the enemies horse began to shog a little, and our two Troops coming
to charge, they turned and ran away, disbanded and routed, and ours followed
upon the execution, and killed many of them, they think about eighteen or
twenty, some very well habited, who seemed to be persons of quality, and their
foot who had played upon our horse and foot coming up the hill, were left to
our mercy, our foot and horse killing them, and they running away like dogs* He
that commanded them was one Bamfield a Sergeant Major, who is taken prisoner,
and with him about a score of his common Soldiers, the rest that commanded the
foot are believed to be slain; amongst them one Hussy a Captain, for his
Commission was found in his Pocket, himself clad in plush, Balfours troop was
forced to fetch a great compass, for it is a very high hill, and ill way, who
could not come in soon enough; if the night had not come on and a very dark
one, we had made a great execution amongst them, for their whole strength of
horse was there, five or six Troops and most of their foot, Sir Ralph Hopton
was there with his Troop, Captain Digby, and Sir Francis Hawley with theirs,
and the Lord Paulet, Sir John Paulet, Sir John Stowell, Sir Thomas Lunsford,
Colonel Asburneham, Sir John Barteley, Colonel Lawdy, and Lieutenant Colonel
Lunsford were there: we do verily believe that some of them are come short of
home, for they came in the night before the Moon rose with lanthorns and
candles, and fetched away the bodies of them of quality, we only found the
next morning twenty or thirty of our men; there were but five lost in all, and
a very few, not above three hurt, all (but one) of the slain, are of Captain
Aiscoghs Troop, who has showed himself a very valiant young man; We desire to
know what must be done with the prisoners, whom, till we receive order, we will
take care shall be safely kept: Thus it has pleased the good God of Heaven,
who is the great God of Battles to bless us, whose name we cannot
sufficiently magnify for his goodness to us, bringing on the Enemy in their
great jollity and strength, to be so shamefully defeated by an handful of us,
and those who were tired out with extraordinary sufferance of watching and
cold; Blessed be his Name for it.

FINIS.
This was extracted out of a Letter sent to the Parliament from Dorchester, the
tenth of September, Signed by Bedford, Denzill Hollis, John Northcot, George
Chudley, Walter Earl, Thomas Wroth, Alexander Popham, Charles Essex, William
Strode, Io. Pine, Cle. Walker, Hugh Rogers, To. Hartin.


