THE Established Test, In order to the Security of HIS MAJESTY'S Sacred Person,
AND GOVERNMENT, AND THE Protestant Religion.

AGAINST The Malicious Attempts and Treasonable Machinations of ROME.

Nemo sibi nascitur,
Partim Patriae, etc.
IMPRIMATVR Jan. 3. 1679.

Geo. Thorp. Rmo. in C. P. and D.

Guilielm. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

London, Printed by T. N. for Jonathan Edwin, at the three Roses in
Ludgate Street, 1679.

THE Established Test.
WHAT a Tempest should we have had, if this Black Italian Cloud had broken over
our Heads? Never was Hurricane so double charged, with Death and Destruction:
It would certainly have Rained Fire and Faggots, and all Instruments of
Cruelty, upon the Innocent Heads of Poor Protestants. But GOD have the Praise,
That we are in hopes to see it not only Blow over, but that the Storm is likely
to fall upon the Heads that raised it. Some of these treacherous Dealers, who
have dealt so very treacherously with us, are already fallen into the Pit which
they had dug for Others, and are ensnared in the mischievous Works of their
own Hands; and it is to be hoped for the Rest, That their violent dealing will
fall upon their own Heads; for He who is Truth it self, in whom we trust, whose
we are, and whom we serve, has assured us, That Wicked and Bloodthirsty Men,
shall not live out half their Days; for he who is the God of all Mercy, abhors
the cruel and decoitful Man.

In a Concern of so common and universal Nearness, I cannot conceive any Person
so little or inconsiderable in a Nation, but since he must participate and have
a share in the common Happiness or Misfortunes that shall happen; he must also
have a Right, if not a Duty, to endeavor to do what service he can to the
Public: Every Man's Oar may, and ought to be in the Boat, to preserve her from
sinking; and though possibly I may value my endeavors in this little Scrole, as
cheap as any can desire, yet the good Intention of it being the only thing that
can give it a Recommendation, that may also procure it Pardon; and if it be
demanded why I write? it is answered, Not to increase the Crowd of Pamphlets,
which at such Times fly about the Streets like Chaff before the Wind; so that
one is obliged to take some Pains to find the Wheat; which some able and
industrious Hands have winnowed from the Dross; but it is perfectly out of
Charity, and for the Information of such who will not be at a greater Charge
than such a Trifle. And therefore I do not pretend to Instruct the great
Managers of the Affairs of State; or to meddle with the Needle and Compass of
the Public Bottom; it is dangerous meddling with the Helm of State, even
sometimes for the Public Pilots; I am no Dictator of Politics, or Pretender
to give Unerring Rules for our future Settlement, or present Security; but a
Plain, Honest, Well-meaning Englishman, who heartily Honor my Prince, Love my
Church, and Wish well to my fellow Subjects.

And to manifest that I am so, I will endeavor in short to show to those of my
own Sphere, the common Danger under which we lie, whilst we are infested with
these concealled Semenaries and Jesuits; the probable Way to Detect and
Discover them, notwithstanding their Protean Faculties of Dissimulation,
Perjury, and Putting on so many Shapes; and the great Interest that every Man
has, to do his utmost, to clear the Nation of such Secret Scorpions, as Poison
both Men's Souls and Bodies.

It is in vain for us to hope to be free from Earthquakes and Convulsions of
State so long as these Men of Tempestuous Principles are continually making
their Fireworks in our very Intrals; the Papacy is fitly resembled by the
dreadful Aetna, or Vesuvius, which take Trace sometimes with the neighboring
Plains for many Years; but when the sulphurious Mass of their Intrals, is
recruited, then do they break out in horrid Flames, to the terror of the
Country round for many Leagues; which they ruin and cover with barren Pamites
and Ashes; thus will the Romanists when one of their Plots is dicovered and
prevented, give us a little breathing; not out of any Charity to us, or Remorse
in their own Consciences, but to make us more secure till another Design is
ripe for Execution: We have often through Gods goodness escaped their
treacherous Mines, even when they were ready to Play; but who is able to say,
We shall always be saved by Miracles? if the Red Sea be divided for our sakes,
we must walk through it; if we will escape to a Shore or Safety, something we
must do, and endeavor to promote our own Peace, Safety, and Security.

It cannot be doubted, but the Roman Dragon has been and ever will be
industrious and vigilant to regain this Hesperian Garden of England, which in
times past was wont to yield him such Plenty of Golden Fruit, that one of the
Popes was used to say, That England was Putens inexhaustus, A Spring of
Treasure, which could never be drawn dry; and if the Italian Gulf, which they
Term the Apostolic Chamber could not do it, he had some reason to say as he
did. We need not give our selves much pain, to trace this Leviathan the crooked
Serpent, in all his windings and turnings, by which he has endeavored, to wrap
and embrace us again in his painted, but mortal Folds: There has past no
Princes Reign since the Reformation, but what has been plagued with the
pernicious Counsels, or mischeivous Stratagems of these Sons of Matchiavel: and
they have all ways been endeavoring either by open Cruelty, or secret
Conspiracies, to re-establish the Roman Tyranny among us.

To these inveterate Enemies of our Peace, were our Ancestors obliged for all
the Treasons and the Wars of Queen Elizabeth's Reign: Catena, who writ the Life
of Pope Pius the Fifth, gives a full Narrative of the secret Counsels of that
Pope and the King of Spain, and attributes all those consequent Troubles in
England and Ireland, to the warm Zeal of that Pope, to restore us to the
Catholic Faith. To these we owe, that most barbarous, hellish, and detestable
Design of the Gunpowder Treason, in the beginning of King James his Reign over
England.

But that upon which they had grounded so much confidence, and which they
intended should be one deciding Blow for all, proving an Abortive Monster; and
the long-fancied Monarchy of the West, to which the ambitious Spaniard had made
so many years court in vain, coming to decline into a mighty Nothing; and that
Nation having little left of all their aspiring Graspings after Empire, besides
the Pride that too commonly attends it; there was a necessity of changing the
measures of their Policy.

For Spain being by the help of the Inquisition, the Cruelties of the Duke d'
Alva, and the Assistance of the English, dismembered of so great a Strength as
the seven Maritine Provinces of the Neatherlands; and the fatal Eighty Eight
having clipped her Pinions of Power at Sea; Portugal revolting to the Family of
Braganza; they judged, that even Hope of Assistance from so crazie, maimed, and
disjointed a Crown, was a vain Impossibility. France was full of Civil Broils,
occasioned by the Pretensions of the House of Guise, and the Princes of the
Blood to the Regency, during the Minority of Francis the Second, and Charles
the Ninth; and in danger of becoming totally Hugonot it self, had not the
Bloody Vespers of St. Bartholomew in the Year 1572. by the Parisian Massacre,
as they thought, let out the most dangerous and Feavourish Protestant Blood in
the Body; and after that, had it not been rescued from that danger in the Head,
by the more than Roman, the Roman Catholic courages of Clement and Ravilliac,
by whose Assassinating Hands the Two Henry's, the Third and Fourth fell; so
that little hope of help was to be expected from that Quarter, to regain
England to Obedience to the Catholic Faith of Rome. Germany was at too great
a distance, and too much Lutheran, and composed of too many jarring and
perpetually jealous Interests, to expect any Succor from Ratisbonne; nor was
it well able to defend it self from the furious Shock of the Warlike Gustavus
King of Sweden; who in probability had he lived any considerable time, would
have made good the Anagram of his Name, and changed it to Augustus.

These Circumstances of Affairs, and the posture in which Europe then stood,
obliged the Sons of limping Loyola, to put off the Lions Skin, and begin to
play the Fox; and to try if Art, and Artifice would not repair what their
unsuccessful Treasons and improsperous Arms had in vain attempted. And now the
After-game they had to play for so great a Stake, was to be managed with their
most refined Skill: from henceforward Divide and Impera must be the Word; the
secret Spring that must move the mighty Machine, by which they were to complete
our overthrow. All their Arts were used to sow Dissentions, Sects, Schisms,
Fears and Jealousies among us; and by pretending a danger and fear of Popery,
really to make the way easy to introduce it. The first crop which they reaped,
and the early Earnest of their future Harvest, was the loss of the Palatinate,
by which the Protestant Interest in Germany sustained a most dangerous Blow,
and the Catholic received a considerable accession both of Power and
Proselytes: for by this time, they had so infected England with Fears and
Jealousies, that King James could not get a Parliament to part with a Penny of
Money for the Relief of his Son-in-Law the Elector, unless he would pawn his
Crown and Prerogative for it. Nor could his Successor King Charles do any thing
toward Resetling that unfortunate Prince in his rightful Inheritance; nor in
conclusion to preserve his own.

Flusht with this lucky Hit, and the succeeding loss of Rochel, they now
resolve closely to follow the Blow, and pursue their point; and by making the
Popish Party in England appear good and loyal Subjects, zealous for the Crown,
and opposite to the Factious of the several Sects, they were resolved by this
one Artifice to ruin the Heretics, by their own Divisions: for by this means
the Papists began to appear quiet and innocent, and not only so, but Loyal
Subjects and Friends to the Crown: this they knew would disarm the Penal Laws
in force against them, of their usual severity; and that would at once increase
the number of their own Proselytes, and that of Dissenters too; and whilst many
were recalled whom the fear of Persecution had staggered from the Romish
Religion, the Indulgence which was shown them, gave such Apprehensions and
Alarms of the growth and fear of Popery, that it augmented the number of
Dissenters, and gave a colorable pretext to the Factions and Disloyal among
them to manage their Designs with the greater facility.

For this unmerited Clemency of our Princes, naturally tender of the Lives and
Fortunes of their Subjects, so long as they saw no appearance from them, but of
Innocence, Kindness and Loyalty; they constantly perverted to this ungrateful
use, secretly to instill a Jealousy into the Minds of their Protestant
Subjects, of their dis-affection to the Protestant Religion: insinuating that
the Suspension of the Penal Laws in force against Roman Catholics, was the
effect of the Princes inclination to Popery. Now the Court was certainly making
a tack toward the Coast of Italy, and it would not be long before they came to
an Anchor in Tyber: for what could make it more clear and manifest, than the
Kindness, as well as Indulgence which was shown to those of that Persuasion?
This deadly Poison, thus sweetened and gilded over, went down with the
Querulous and Credulous Multitude of dissenting Protestants, and was not a
little forwarded by those Factious and Discontented Promoters of the late
Rebellion, as the most serviceable Engine, to batter down both the Crown and
the Church. What unconceiveable pleasure was it now for these concealed
Romanists, to stand behind the Scene, and prompt both Parties, to Act the
bloody Tragedy which they had composed? Without all doubt, this intoxicating
Jealousy, made great Numbers of innocent and undeserving Persons stagger into
the other Extreme; and the extraordinary fears and cry of Popery, drive Men so
far from that, that at last by the violence of the increasing Storm, they threw
overboard all their Loyalty, and in a manner all Religion.

Had not that great Man Archbishop Laud, been one of the Jonahs that was first
heaved over the Decks to allay the Tempest, we had certainly had then a full
discovery of the whole Design; as most fully appears by the Letters now lately
Printed of Sir William Boswell, The ground Design of the Papists in the Reign
of King Charles the First, etc.
the English Ambassador in Holland, to the Archbishop, Andreas ab Habernfeilds,
the Archbishops to the King, and his Majesty's Answer; together with a
particular of the whole Design of the Papists, who are therein by Name
mentioned, to ruin the King and Archbishop, and with them the Church and State
by Civil Wars, which were begun by their contrivance in Scotland. But it was
too much the Interest both of the Papists and Rebels, to suppress those Papers,
and the further discovery of those Designs by his hasty death; for had he lived
to complete the Discovery, all the After-game of both Parties, had been
counter-plotted; and though possibly the Rebels knew nothing of the Design till
after his death, and that his Papers fell into their hands; yet, then they were
too far imbarqued in the Civil Wars, to sound a Retreat, and to proclaim
themselves Murderers, for taking away the Archbishop as a Papist, whose
Innocence would thereby have been fully vindicated, and their Guilt made
notorious, to the ruin of all their Esteem with the People, and the utter
confusion of their Ambitious Design of Sovereignty, and erecting a Commonwealth
upon the Ruins of the Monarchy.

So that nothing can be more clear and evident than this; That from the subtle
Practices of the Jesuits, those Diversities in Opinion, and Differences in
Practice among Protestants, received their Encouragement, if not their Rise and
Original: and while every new Sect pretended still to outdo others in the
Purity of Reformation, and a further escape from the Superstition of the Romish
Babylon, they were all made Instrumental to undo the Protestant Religion; and a
thorough Reformation became the Apple of Contention between the Prince and the
People: the King was accused of favoring Popery, and designing to introduce
it; and with it, Arbitrary Tyranny, the Natural Child of that Religion, because
he would not comply with the Zealous Fury of some Popular Spirits, to throw
down the Hierarchy of the Church; which is one of the Fundamental Pillars of
our Government. The other by their disobedience to the known and Established
Laws of Church and State, became guilty of Disloyalty, and were not without
just cause suspected of Dangerous and Treasonable Designs against the Royal
Person and Government, which they did endeavor to conceal under the specious
pretenses, and taking shows of Zeal against Popery, and eager forwardness to
promote the pretended Reformation.

Thus did these subtle Foxes, like Sampsons, while their Heads looked several
ways, carry those Firebrands between their Tails, with which they set us all at
last into a Flame; continually fanning with their pestilent Breath, those
Jealousies and mutual Animosities, between the Sovereign and his Subjects, till
they had reduced three of the most potent and flourishing Kingdoms in Europe
into Ashes, and had filled us with Blood and Confusion. Thus far they had
succeeded in their Enterprise, that they had absolutely ruined the Monarchy,
and pulled down the old Cathedral, without Establishing, or so much as ever
intending, so far as any body could conjecture, any Church at all; and while in
Policy they tolerated all Religions, they fairly opened a way for us to have
none at all; and which was the thing the Jesuits aimed at, to work us from our
own Divisions to destroy one another, and at last, either by Force or Policy,
to reduce us to the Unity of the Roman Church: And doubtless they were in hopes
in a little time to have accomplished this great Design; when unexpected
Providence, what by the Peoples general weariness of the Tyranny of those many
Governments, and by the Loyalty of the Remainders of the Church of England,
whom no Cruelty nor Oppression could remove from their firm Principles of
Allegiance; brought back with the general Joy of the People, their long Desire,
our Banished Sovereign, Restoring Him miraculously to a Peaceful Throne; and
with Him, Restoring to these Languishing Nations their Ancient Government and
Laws, their long-wanted Liberty, and Religion.

Now were the Roman Conspirators at a loss again, seeing their hopes defeated,
and their expectations gone; and therefore encouraged by former Successes and
Experience, they begun to play their old Lessons over again; and we had
scarcely taken breath after our violent Revolutions, when they began again to
trouble our calm Waters, that so they might fish with more advantage: But by
the Loy^lty of the Parliament, and Vigilance of the Ministers of State, that
being like to prove a Work of too long time for Men of so much impatience; and
though they had made so great a progress as to raise some Disorders in
Scotland, for which two of them were under the disguise of Presbyterians
executed there; yet the generality of the English were too sensible of the
goodness of their present Condition, and sufficiently instructed in the
Calamities of a late Civil War, to enter into a second; and above all, this
great City manifesting upon all occasions great Testimonies of their Loyalty
and Fidelity to His Majesty and the Government, they were forced upon new* and
more precipitate Counsels.

How they have managed their Affairs, and with what cruelty they had laid their
Designs, is by the Goodness of God already in a great measure, and it is to be
hoped will be fully discovered; it was in short a Design against His Majesty's
Sacred Person, and the Government, our Laws, Lives, Liberties, and the
Protestant Religion; a Design as universally laid, as it was to have been
tragically executed: The present Race of our Kings, were either to have been
wholly extirpated, or become vile Tributaries to the Triple Mitre. One would
think it impossible that such barbarous and savage Actions should proceed from
any of Human Race; or that there would be found any, who have so far lost the
Native Generosity of Englishmen, which in the Times of the Papal Monarchy,
durst bid defiance to his Encroachments, as to prostitute the Imperial Crown of
these Realms to Vassallage and Slavery.

A stolen smile will part from me, to think how all this while these Purblind
Conspirators could not see how short an Enjoyment they, and their great Three
Crowned Master, must have had of the bloody Spoils of England. There is a
certain great Neighbor of theirs, who has told a Pope, That he does not value
his Witness the Column erected at Rome in disgrace of the Pope, for a Petty
Aff^ont offered his Ambassador t^ere.
Holiness at a Farthing; and who would certainly have made the Moral of old
Aesop's Fable good upon them; the Lion, Fox, and Bear, had made a Hunting
Match; the Fox and Bear, Subtilty and Cruelty took the Prey; but the Lion, as
most powerful, challenged it wholly for himself, and had it without a Murmur
from his fellow Hunters, who were glad at that rate to compound with his armed
Paws, for the security of their own Skins.

I cannot believe, but that the whole World will entertain this discovery with
Horror; and though the Jesuits will with the greatest Effrontery deny, or
mitigate it, yet certainly their Religion will receive the Blow which they
intended for ours: for who that is not resolved to quit Hum^nity it self, can
believe that Religion to be true, which is to be propagated with Treasons,
Murders of the most Purple-dye, violation of all that is Sacred in Human
Society, Law, Justice, Equity, the most Solemn Oaths, Promises, and Covenants?
Who can believe the Pope the Successor of St. Peter in Faith and Doctrine, when
he shall under his most Authentic Hand and Seal, Absolve the Subjects of any
Prince from their Natural, Civil, and Religious Allegiance to their Lawful
Sovereign; when he shall grant Pardons to whosoever shall Murder him, and
dispense with all the Oaths that have been, or can be taken, to secure the
Royal Person, or the Government by Law established? Nero that Monster of
Nature, from whom he claims a Succession at least of Practice, set Rome on
fire, slew his Friends, made Cruelty his divertisement, and became a Parricide
out of Curiosity, Ripping up his Mothers Belly, that he might see the Nest that
had brought that Viper into the World. Flaming London is a witness that the
second Rome can equal, if not exceed the First; and the Pope scorns to come
behind Nero, since he can Command, Authorize, and Pardon the Murder of those
who are the common Parents of our Country; and more than that, who wear the
Sacred Character of the Eternal Majesty, being Gods to Men, though but Men to
GOD.

How God Almighty does and will resent this Affront and Indignity put upon him
by this Usupation upon Heaven and Earth, is in some measure visible already;
and it is to be hoped, will yet be more, to the Shame and Confusion of such
pretended Catholic Religion, but real Atheism, and most Diabolical Impiety;
and how far the rest of the Crowned Heads of Europe, will by this example
become sensible of their own danger, and the common injury herein offered to
all the Royal Masters of the Universe I cannot tell, but Cum proximus Ardet
Vtalegon; When their Neighbors House is threatened to be fired over his Head, it
is time for them ^o look about them: No Prince can live in security, so long as
there is Poison, Pistol, or Poniard in the hands of such Desperadoes, as not
valuing their own are, for the Interest of the Catholic Religion, Masters of
other Men's Lives; so long as the Pope may for Heresy Arraign, Condemn,
Excommunicate, Depose, and Deprive Sovereign Kings in the Consistory, and Arm
both their own, and the Subjects of Foreign Nations against them; gives his
Benediction, with Rewards and Promises both of Heaven and Earth, to take away
the lives of the Heirs, that so he may seize upon the Inheritance; and so long
as he challenges to himself the boundless Prerogative of being the Sole and
Supreme Judge of what is Heresy, and by virtue of that ^ower, may define
whatsoever is contrary to his Grandeur and Interest, to be that damnable and
Capital Sin.

But this is not our Concern, our Neighbors may do as they shall please
themselves, and Nurse this Mitre till it shall devour the Crown; we have
something nearer home to employ our thoughts, considerations, and most
industrious endeavors upon; and with that Charity which begins at home, to take
care how we may secure our selves.

That all Degrees, Ranks and Conditions of Men, are possessed with a real
detestation and abhorrence of such a villainous design, there can be no reason
to make a doubt; their own Interest will oblige them to it; had the Net of this
great Roman Fisherman been drawn up upon us, all had been Fish that had come to
the Net, all would have been involved in the common Calamity; for had the
Mischief been formed into perfect Monster, had it come to its growth and
strength, all Sorts and Degrees of Men, without difference or distinction, who
would not have abandoned the Protestant Religion, and submitted to the Roman
Yoke, must have fallen as Sacrifices if not to their Religion, yet to that
Policy which necessarily attends Cruelty and Usurpation, the Deities which now
the Romans worship. Nor could these ambitious Zealots, have ever believed their
unjust Dominion sufficiently secured from the danger of future Relapses, but by
the entire destruction of all those, whom they could not trust, or might either
suspect or fear, and by seizing their Estates, to enable themselves with Force
and Arbitrary Power and Tyranny to take away the Liberties and Opportunities of
opposing them, from such as they must permit to survive the general Massacre;
that so they might be out of fear from those whom they intended to make, and
treat like Slaves.

Had the Royal Oak fallen under their treacherous designs, what favor or
mercy, could either the lofty Cedars, or the humble Shrubs and Plebeians of the
Wood have expected from their hands? They who were grown so hardened in
Mischief, to attempt first upon the Scepter, would never in their Consciences
have scrupled at the Sheephook: They who could not blush to shed the Blood of
the Sovereign, would never have disputed to let out whole Rivers of the
Subjects.

If this had been the Project of a few Zealous Recluses, or managed by the hot
Brains of some Shaven Heads; or had it been the undertaking of some few
Discontented Laics, there might have been some color of excuse for the
Religion in general, there being ill Men of all Religions, and even among those
who profess the Truest: When there were but Twelve Apostles, one of them was a
Devil, a Traitor, and covetous Murderer: But when He, who styles himself the
Vicar of Christ, the Successor of St. Peter and St. Paul, the Infallible Head
of the Catholic Church, who cannot Err from the True Faith, the Supreme Judge
of Controversies, the Keeper of the Keys of Heaven and Earth, Hell and
Purgatory, when he shall be the Principal Instigator, Promoter and Encourager
of Murder, Usurpation, Treason, and Rebellion, sure no Man can believe, but
that either the Faith of Rome is not the Catholic Faith, or that the Church
of Rome, if this be her Faith, is no true part of the Catholic Church. For if
we may Judge of the Tree by the Fruits, such horrid and infamous Practices,
seem to make the Pope appear, the Successor of Iscariot, who betrayed his
Master to be Crucified, rather then of St. Peter, who was himself Crucified for
Planting and Propagating the Faith of Christ by Rules of Meekness, Tenderness,
Love to all Men, and particular obedience to Kings as Supreme, and to
Magistrates as Gods Vicegerents and Ministers of Justice upon Earth; and
indeed, whoever shall consider these Actions of the Pope and the Jesuits, will
think them to be expected only from the fierce Cannibals of the West Indies,
who have neither Morality, Law, nor Religion; and not from those who style
themselves the Pillar and Ground of Truth, the only Professors of the true
Faith and Religion.

It is certainly therefore the interest of every Man who is not a Papist, and I
doubt not the wishes and desires of all Men, to be secured from the attempts of
such inhumane and cruel Men, who would make no more difficulty to cut the
Throat of a Heretic Protestant, than to dash out the Brains of a Mad Dog; and
above all the rest of England, it is the more particular concern of this great
and populous City of London to be secured from them: Her-present Glory may be a
sad Testimony of their infamous Treachery, and hellish Malice; Her Beauty is
raised upon those Ashes to which they had reduced her, one of them confessed
and died for it; and in which we have reason to think they designed to bury her
for ever: the damp, that he put upon her in her present Trade, which is
deservedly the general complaint, is from their Practices; and that insecurity
in which we live to fall into the hands of these merciless Assassinates, makes
Men's lives uneasy, their days unquiet, and their nights tedious, and both
expensive, beyond the proportion of their present Trade, whilst they are
obliged by such strong and constant Guards, to purchase their security at the
expense of their Money, Time and Health.

That His Most Sacred Majesty, and the Honorable Houses of Parliament are
Assiduous and Intent, both to discover and punish the Authors of these Treasons
and Mischiefs, is obvious to all Men; that they will take all the care that
mortal Men can do, both to secure us for the present, and establish us for the
future upon the best Foundations of a lasting Safety, no person can doubt: But
when they have done their part to the utmost; when they have wound up their
Justice and their Counsels to the highest pitch of Wisdom; when they have made
the Fence of the Laws impregnable in all appearance; yet unless every Subject
in his Place, will contribute something toward the common Security, these
pernicious Foxes will either lurk undiscovered among us, or creep through and
escape the hands of Justice, though it pursue them never so closely.

For if we can suppose the strongest Bonds of Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy,
Tests, Abrenunciations, Declarations, or what Human Wisdom can devise; let the
words be as plain and perspicuous as the Beams of Day; let all the care
imaginable be taken to obviate them in their Equivocations, Mental Reservations
and Evasions; let them declare that they believe that the Pope has no Power to
Absolve them; or that such Oaths are not null and void from the beginning,
because there was not Bona fides ab initio: All this will not be sufficient;
for the most Criminal among the Papists will be the least scrupulous of any
Oath that shall be tendered to them; nor will think this Perjury, or if it be,
will they therefore decline it, so long as they are beforehand armed with an
Antidote from Rome, which can expel all the Poison and the danger of such
Oaths, and not only so, but render them meritorious, as being part of the
Persecution which they suffer from Heretics, in defense of the Catholic
Religion; and they who fear the Pope more than God, and believe that he has
power to remit all Sins of this Nature, if they esteem them Sins, will think
themselves secure from the stroke of Divine Vengeance due to perjured Heads;
and which is all they have to look too, they imagine themselves hereby sure to
escape the danger and severity of Human Laws.

And thus eluding the Trial and Discrimination of an Oath, they will securely
enjoy their Lives and Liberties, and remain Masters of all the Opportunities of
still contriving, and managing their mischievous Counsels, and Treasonable
Attempts: For this we are to assure our selves, that so long as they can escape
the danger of punishment, they will never give over the Enterprise. And though
God Almighty may not permit them to run to the full extent of their Malice,
which terminates in nothing short of our utter Ruin, the Subversion of the
Government, and Extirpation of the very Name and Religion of the Protestants;
yet will they give us many Disturbances as to our Peace and Quiet, and be able
to do us many private Mischiefs, both at home and abroad: for they are a
Generation of Men too learnedly malicious, and too well acquainted with the
Italian Genius of Matchiavel, and Caesar Borgia, not to be able to do us all
possible Injuries; and they are too inveterate not to be feared at all times;
but more especially when they either flatter us, or seem asleep, and not to
regard us. Manet alta mente repostum; The hatred and animosity which they bear
us, is successive and eternal; the Quarrel is Immortal, and made an Intail like
that of Hannibals against Rome; the old rigid Carthaginian his Father swore him
before the Altars of his Country Gods, that he should be perpetuus Romani
nominis Osor, and to espouse an Eternal hatred of the very Roman Name; nor need
we much doubt but they have taken the same Oath before their Altars, to hate
the Name of Protestant. Not all the Clemency, Indulgence, or Humanity that can
be shown them, is capable of taming this bequeathed Fierceness against us; and
let poor Protestants treat them with all the Christian meekness, temper, and
compassion, as becomes the noble profession of their innocent and Heavenly
Religion; they will upon the first opportunity, repay them with the blackest
ingratitude, and most incompassionate Cruelty; two Crimes, which cannot be
outdone by all the Vices of Nature and of Hell.

That these men have been the great Masters who have improved all our
Dissentions, few judicious and observing People have for many years doubted,
and it is now apparent from the Voluntary Confession, of those who have had
sufficient Reason to know Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedow.
and whoever Considers how much it was their Interest to dash us one against
another and so to break us in pieces, and what large advantages they have made
of our mutual discords; to what Extremities by this single Artifice they had
reduced us; while with our own Swords, we did all we could, and almost all they
could desire of us to undo our selves, and ruin both the Reputation and
Protestant Cause it self; I say, whoever will bring these things together, will
be easily induced to believe, that they have been the prime Actors in, as well
as contrivers of our Divisions. Thus did we give them opportunity to enter
among us with security; and while, as the late dying Archbishop Laud in his
Speech upon the Scaffold prophetically observed, the Cry of Veniunt Romani the
Romans are coming in upon us, went among a Credulous and abused People, these
very Romans whom we so much feared, under other names came in reality upon us,
and had almost taken away our Place, etc. Nation. Thus did we furnish them with
Convenience and Arguments to gain Proselytes to their boasted Unity, while they
in return, furnished us with mutual Animosities, Jealousies, and Arms to destroy
our selves.

Nor is this the only fruit which they have already reaped, and do hope still
to reap from those Seeds of Discord which they have sown, and so industriously
cultivated among us: Here likewise they post themselves as in a wood, and lie
in Ambuscade, ready to annoy us; and in the mean time remain secure from being
attaqued themselves, or so much as known or discovered; and being able to
transform themselves into any shape, like Highwaymen who have committed Murder
and Robbery, it is but turning the Coat and changing the Peruque, and they face
and laugh at the Hue and Cry which does pursue them.

How dangerous their Company is in this Town, several tragical Examples have
lately convinced us; nor can we be secure from Fire, Sword, and Poison, so long
as these Mortal Enemies Lodge within us. Now it is morally impossible, and they
know it, and for that very purpose have been so very industrious to promote our
divisions, I say it is impossible so long as those continue, either to discover
them, or get quit of them; since when they find themselves closely hunted by
the Laws, they will undoubtedly Herd with some Sect or other and so Escape.

His Majesty by his Proclamation has commanded all Papists who are not
Householders, Travelers, etc. to depart from this his Imperial City: but who
believes that there are not great numbers of them, and Jesuits and Priests
especially still in Town? and in probability, those who are most guilty, and
most desperate: for here in the Crowd they think themselves secure, which they
could not hope to be in the Country, where the Jealous peasants, not acquainted
with any but their fellow Cottagers, are all in an uproar at the sight of a
strange face, and read Firebals and Treason in his very Countenance; and
therefore will not fail to carry him before his Worship the next Justice of the
Peace; and the Justice for his own security is bound to secure such persons as
appear suspicious, unless they can give a very good account ot themselves.
Whereas here in Town, a Priest or Jesuit takes a Lodging at a Quakers, can thou
and thee, and yea and nay, as well as the best of them; goes to the Silent
meeting with his Landlord, and it may be upon occasion, if the Spirit moves, he
can disgorge himself against the Priests of Baal, the Hirelings; the burden of
Tithes, the uselesness of humane Learning, he can talk of the light within him,
and the witness of God, and vilify the Scriptures as a dead and carnal Letter;
and such Common-places of discourse as are grateful to the People; and so he
passes for one of their Friends.

Our Jesuit incognito passing thus under the Masque of a Sectary, the
Constables of the Parish, as is their duty, and pursuant to the public Orders
for the Common security, come to my Neighbor the Quakers to know what Lodgers
he has in his house; he straight informs them such a person, and gives in the
false name by which he goes; they inquire what he is? he tells them he is one
of their Friends who has lodged there so long; the Officers it may be only in
drollery tell him they suspect he is a Priest of the Roman Church; Nay verily
that he is sure he is not, for he hates the Beast and the Scarlet Whore, he has
heard him say so, in the Meeting. Well! the Lodger himself, it may be if
within, is so confident as to face the Officers, who tell him he must take the
Oath of Obedience; Nay, replies he, Friends, I cannot swear, the light within
me witnesses to the truth, which says, Swear not at all, but let your Yea be
Yea, and Nay Nay, and begins an Harangue against all Oaths. The Officers
imposed upon as well as the Good man of the House, by the fineness of the
stratagem, leave him, only entering his borrowed name in the List, without
suspicion that he is a Papist, and much less, a Priest or Jesuit. Thus does he
escape Scot-free, and is at liberty; and when in a place remote from his
quarter, he rendezvouzes with his fellow adventurers in Masquerade, they laugh
at all the World; and in despite of all Laws and the strictest search, as if
they had King Gyges his enchanted Ring, they walk invisible and secure; and
want neither freedom, nor opportunity, to contrive, carry on, and execute their
horrible designs, of firing our City; assassinating such as are active in
opposing them; endangering as much as ever the Royal Person, the Government,
and Religion.

I do not particularize in this Sect, as the only shelter or secure harbor for
these Popish Conspirators, though it may be, their esteeming all Oaths
unlawful, their deriding and disusing the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
their Contempt of the Scripture, their state of perfection in this life, and
several other of their Tenets, so agreeable to the Romish Doctrines and designs,
qualify them more then many others to be deceived by the Jesuits, and are more
proper to afford them shelter and security.

Not that this will excuse any other Sects from the same danger; and I see no
reason why we should not suspect, that several stickling Itinerant Teachers,
who travel as Apostles among the Independents, Anabaptists, etc. may not as
well be Jesuits under these disguises, as those two Executed in Scotland, who
went under the Notion and Character of Presbyterians; who yet, as Mr, Oats has
deposed, had their Commissions to Preach Sedition and Rebellion, from the
Rector of the English College of Jesuits at Doway, and he from the Pope.

The is no question but a Jesuit can put on any dress of Religion, to serve the
Interest of the Catholic Cause, and will not scruple to take up the patronage
even of the good old Cause, and appear an eager Separatist in any shape, the
better to accomodate himself with a Capacity of promoting our Ruin by our
dissentions and divisions: this gives him a certain opportunity to unhinge
people from their Allegiance to the Crown and Obedience to the Established
Order and Government of the Church, the two butts against which he levels all
the arrows of his poisoned quiver: and all the while he seems so fierce against
Popery, and Ceremonies, he gains one point more of the Compass by which he
sails, which it is pass undiscovered, and under that disguise to help to blow
up the Coals of misunderstandings, Jealousies, and Animosities, between the
King and his Subjects; with which at last he hopes to set them into a blaze,
and to warm his own hands at the fire which shall consume them.

And to further this design, it is to be known that a Jesuit can be of any
quality, Trade or profession, a Gentleman, a Merchant, a Lawyer, a Solicitor, a
what you please: for the Romish Janissaries are the tribute Children of all
Europe, of the most pregnant Genius and universal Capacity that can be gleaned
up in any Schools; and these besides their Learning in which they are trained
up suitably to their Inclinations, are also instructed in all such arts, as may
accomplish them, and render them agreeable in conversation to all sorts of
people; and in order to their being serviceable to their Concealment. Who would
have believed Mr Price, Steward to my Lord Marquess of Worcester to have been
such an eminent Jesuit, as to merit the Character of one of the most ingenious
and wisest men in orders in the World? in all companies he passed for an
ingenious man and a Virtuoso, and I have heard a worthy Gentleman and famous
Lawyer say, he thought he was one of the ablest Solicitors in England; but he,
as well as others were, I dare be confident far from suspecting him to be what
he is now charged with, or the wise man upon whom the Conspirators so much
relied for his Counsels and Conduct of their late Hellish Conjuration? and in
such a crowd of people of all sorts as inhabit this Spacious City, and over
grown Suburbs, how easy a thing is it for great numbers of them to settle
themselves as Inhabitants, especially the secular Jesuits, who apply themselves
to Civil affairs, as Factors and Merchants Trading to Foreign parts? and how
impossible is it to discover them to be what they are, detestable Conspirators
who maintain a secret Correspondence with all Courts of the Roman Religion to
our prejudice, and principally with the Court of Rome, so long as they
publicly own themselves to be of some sect or other, and pass under the
Characters of Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, or any thing but of the
Church of England: for that is their mortal hatred; that, is what they do above
all things covet to destroy; as being the frontier and Bastion of the
Protestant Religion: and could they entirely ruin that, which is the thing
they labor for night and day, with all the application imaginable, velis and
remis, tooth and nail, and for the accomplishment of which great work they
transform themselves into secure these various disguises, they make themselves
secure of the Rest; whom they would play at one another, till they worried and
devour themselves; and at last, fall an easy Conquest to the Roman Mitre.

Whoever he was that writ that discovery made to the late King and Archbishop
Land, he assures us that of the four Orders, of Ecclesiastics, Politics,
Seculars, and Intelligencers, scarcely all Italy, Spain, and France, afforded
so great a number of Jesuits, as the City of London then did, and that there
were more than fifty Scottish Jesuits then, who had conspired against the King
and Government, by raising a Civil War among us: and we have no reason to
believe that their numbers are lessened, when their conveniences are
increased. Under these disguises they do more effectually carry on their wicked
designs of keeping up and increasing our disorders and divisions; for it is the
close Cabal that does the mischief; and poisons the Common people of any Sect
with principles of disloyalty and faction; when they are under the Rose then do
they vomit out all they can to enrage people against the Government both in
Church and Stale: whereas the public discourses of most dissenters, either out
of Ingenuity or fear of punishment, are managed with more Caution, and less
violence.

I am not so vain as to believe, that these Truths or at least dangerous
probabilities should gain entire Credit even with those whom they do so nearly
concern; I am but too sensible that the impressions which some men have
received into their minds, are so firmly rivetted into their belief, that they
will not be persuaded to abandon them, though that be they only probable way to
establish their own, and the Common safety and security of our Nation, one may
almost with the same ease remove Black Heath, as persuade some people that they
are secretly managed by Romish Priests and Jesuits; that they are accessory to
the dangers of introducing Popery; or that they secure them from discovery, and
that punishment which in the opinion of all men they have justly merited.

But certainly they who wish well to their Native Country; to the public peace
and security of the Nation; to their own lives, Liberty, Property, or
Posterity; if they will act according to the natural principle of
self-preservation, or the Dictates either of Law, Reason, or Religion, must do
it these two ways.

Either first, they must contribute all they can actively, toward the
discovery of these dangerous Conspirators; by all lawful ways and means.

Or secondly, if that comes not within their power or knowledge to effect, they
must do all they can not to obstruct their discovery, or be accessory to their
Concealment; and they ought with the same Caution to avoid the sheltring, or
even unwilling securing of them from the hands of Justice, as they would avoid
the Common mischiefs, dangers, and Calamities, which they and the whole Nation,
may fear from them, or suffer for want of such a discovery.

Now how willing soever any people may be to pursue at once their duty and
great Interest, by the first, yet in regard it will be difficult, hazzardous,
and uncertain how they shall succeed; and the notorious cunning and
dissimulation of these Malefactors protecting them, not only from vulgar
discovery, but many times from the most Cri^ical, and piercing Eyes of the
wisest Statesmen; there can therefore be nothing left for all true and honest
Englishmen and real Protestants, but to clear themselves; and by such a
Touchstone as will certainly distinguish, the Papist and Jesuit from the
Protestant, to vindicate themselves and discover the other.

It may be some persons will think me very Consident in offering such a
Shibboleth as may certainly detect these Ephraimites, if all Protestants would
make use of it: but I am not sollicitous what any persons may think: if it be
such an easy Expedient as will do the work, so effectually, that the Enemies
of our Peace, Religion, and Country, cannot avoid being discovered by it; and
if it be such a Method as all true Protestants may and ought to make use of; it
will be the opinion of the best and wisest men, and that is only valuable, that
they who refuse such a Test and way of Trial, must, either be Accomplices and
Confederates with Papists and Jesuits; or however accessory to all the
Mischiefs which may happen, by their obstructing and frustrating such a
Discovery.

It has before been intimated, and is notoriously observable by all people, how
they do, and may elude all Oaths which may be offered them as a way of
discrimination; for the greatest Criminals, having the greatest concern to lie
concealed, will not scruple in their extreme danger and necessity, any or all
the Oaths that can be framed or offered them to take: and being before hand
armed by dispensations and pardons from their Omnipotent Pope, they will
consult their own safety and the good of the Catholic Cause, without fear of
swearing, or forswearing themselves; so that such Oaths will prove but Cobwebs
to take the lesser Flies; while the Wasps and Hornets who carry the sting and
the poison will break through them and escape.

Nay, possibly, they would not scruple to join with us in our Public Service
and Solemn Worship, which as much as some people account Popish and
Superstitious, the Papists do detest and abhor; Nor would they refuse to hear
Sermons in our Churches; though so long as there are so many Meetings of
several sects they will be secured from those hardships too: for it is but
joining themselves to some of those of the Separation, and they both avoid that
way of Trial, and are more able successfully to prosecute their great design of
overthrowing the Established Government both Civil and Ecclesiastical.

But that which they abhor, and esteem so damnable and deadly a sin as cannot
be capable of any Dispensation, Pardon, or Indulgence, is to Communicate with
Protestants, whom they believe and esteem the greatest Heretics, that ever
were in the World; both in respect of their disowning Transubstantiation, and
because we are all under the Popes Curse and Censure of Excommunication. This
is that which will in all probability distinguish the Papist and Jesuit from
the true Protestant; for whatever they may be allowed to do to secure
themselves in other particulars, they will never, so far as we yet know, be
compelled by us, or allowed by their Superiors to partake with us in the Holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

I do not speak this to oppose any way of Public proceedings against them by
Oaths or Tests declaring their believing that there is no Transubstantiation of
the Elements of Bread and Wine at or afer the Consecration of them in the Lords
Supper, etc. if their Consciences can swallow and digest Perjury, much good may
it do them; I am assured it can do us no injury, but will certainly render them
obnoxious to that Vengeance which must and will infallibly fall upon perjured
heads, and how sudden or severe that will be, let them look to it, for it
nearly concerns them, whatever they may think. What I offer, is only in a
private way, and to private persons, that they, in their sphere may be
assistant to the Public Ministers of Justice, and of State in the discovery of
these dangerous and cunning sort of Men; and thereby contributing what lies in
our power, to our own particular and the general security of his Most Sacred
Majesty (whom God long preserve!) the Government, our Lives, Liberties, Laws,
properties, Religion, and Posterity, from the outrages, violences, treasons and
Conspiracies of these our inveterate and mortal Enemies.

And certainly would all people be persuaded to be Unanimous in this duty of
coming three times at the least in every Year to celebrate and publicly
receive the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and an account taken of all
such as refuse and absent themselves; it would be impossible upon strict
enquiry into their manner of life and other Circumstances, and especially
tendering it to them on some Lords day next after such their Examination, that
they should escape being discovered.

One would think, that the proposal, were so rational so easy and so
Religious, that none but the very Criminals themselves, or their Accessories
and Confederates should refuse this way of Trial and discrimination; nor is it
possible for any impartial person to consider and deliberate of it, but he must
in his Judgment accuse such as shall refuse it, as manifest favorers of
Papists and Jesuits. The Law Esteems all such as aid, conceal, and comfort
Traitors, or protect them from discovery, to be Traitors themselves: and though
they may plead for themselves that they do not know them that are such, and
that may free them from the Penalties and danger of the Laws of Men; yet this
Ignorance being perfectly voluntary, and proceeding from their wilful neglect
of the way and means they had to detect them, it will not excuse any persons in
foro Conscientiae, before God and their own Consciences, from being guilty, not
only of the Murders and mischiefs that have already happened, but of whatsoever
may or shall happen hereafter, for or by reason of their escaping undiscovered:
the true Maxim, qui non probibet cum po^^st, jubet, will infallibly lie against
them at the great day of accounts: He who has a possibility of preventing a
Mischief, and either neglects or refuses to do it, most certainly in the sight
of God the Righteous Judge, is guilty of it.

I cannot tell what arguments to make choice of, in such a Crowd of them as
come thronging into my mind, to persuade people to be willing and ready to
perform a duty they owe to God and Man, in order to the securing our Peace and
Religion, in their private Capacities, as well as the Government is, to do all
that can be done or devised in order to it: but however in short I will offer
these following, as to me appearing most pressing and considerable: and if any
other person can suggest more or more proper Motives it will become them,
considering the present necessity, in charity to themselves and the Public of
offer them to the view and consideration of the people of these Nations.

First therefore I heartily wish that all people would consider with
themselves, that what I offer is no Innovation; here is nothing proposed to
them or imposed on them, but what the wisdom of our Ancestors, and of King
James, esteemed one of the wisest Princes in the World, with the advice of his
Parliament thought fit to pass into a Law; and I hope that very Name will
oblige people to believe the owe a duty of obedience to it: all the difference
seems to be this, that when that Statute was made, all Protestants in general
received the holy Sacrament, and only the Papists were they who refused to do
it; whereas now it is to be feared through the industry of the Jesuits among
us, many who call themselves Protestants will refuse it as well as Papists:
however to show the duty and the advantage of it, especially were it a little
accommodated to our present Circumstances, and because it does not lie in the
way of every person to consult the Statute at large, I will faithfully set down
so much of it as concerns our present Case and purpose.

Tertio Jacobi cap. 4. An Act for the better discovering and repressing Popish
Recusants.
Forasmuch as it is found by daily Experience that many his Majesty's Subjects,
that adhere in their hearts to the Popish Religion, by the Infection drawn from
thence, and by the wicked and devilish counsel of Jesuits, Seminaries, and
other like persons, dangerous to the Church and State, are so far perverted in
the point of their loyalty and due Allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, and the
Crown of England, as they are ready to entertain and execute any treasonable
Conspiracies and practices, as evidently appears by that more then barbarous
and horrible attempt to have blown up with Gunpowder the King, Queen, Prince,
Lords and Commons in the House of Parliament assembled, tending to the utter
subversion of the whole State, lately undertaken by the Instigation of Jesuits
and Seminaries, and in advancement of their Religion, by their Scholars taught
and instructed by them to that purpose, which attempt by the only goodness of
Almighty God was discovered and defeated: and whereas diverse persons Observe
that they judged all such as would not receive the Sacrament, to be Popishly
affected.
popishly affected do nevertheless, to cover and hide their false hearts and
with more sufety to attend the opportunities to execute their mischievous
designs, repair sometimes to Church, to avoid the Penalty of the Laws in that
behalf provided.

For the better discovery therefore of such persons, and their evil affections
to the Kings Majesty and the State of this Realm, to the end that being known
their evil purposes may be better prevented, Be it enacted by the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That every
popish Recusant convicted or hereafter to be convicted, which heretofore has
conformed him or her self, or which shall hereafter conform him or her self,
and repair to the Church, and continue there during the time of Divine Service,
according to the Laws and Statutes in that behalf made and provided shall
within the first Year next after the end of this Session of Parliament, or
within the first year after that he or she shall after this Session of
Parliament so conform him or her self and repair to the Church as aforesaid,
and after the first Year, once in every Year at the least, receive the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the Church of that parish where he or she
shall most usually abide, or be within the said Year, wherein by the true
meaning of this Statue he or she ought to receive.

And if there be no such parish Church, then in the Church next adjoining to
the place of his or her most usual abode. The forfeiture for the first year
twenty pounds, for the second Year forty pounds, and for every Year after
threescore pounds. And the Officers are therein by rewards encouraged to
present the Monthly absence of all Recusants from the Church; and for default
of performing their duty are to be fined, as in the Statute more largly appears.

Were this Statute with a little variation fitted for our Circumstances, and
duly put in Execution, it would be impossible but that all Recusants must in a
small time be detected; and by consequence those dangerous Jesuits and
Seminaries, whose whole design is to contrive, plot and execute, their horrible
Treasons against both Church and State: and unless people can be brought to
comply with their own Interest as well as duty, the Excellent Method of that
Law will be wholly impracticable; and it will be impossible to effect or attain
the end, for which it was so wisely intended: for so long as such numbers of
people who call themselves Protestants, shall wilfully absent themselves from
their Parish Churches, under the show of Religion; and by their Example so many
who have no Religion at all, but perfectly out of Idleness, looseness and
debauchery, shall stay at home, or do worse abroad; these Traitors and
Conspirators will expect and find Security, by pretending to be dissenters: and
so long as there are so many who never regard any Laws of God or Men, Civil or
Ecclesiastical which enjoin them to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
these will also pass undiscovered among the throng: for it is all one to a
Jesuit, whether he pass for a separatist, Libertine, or Atheist, so long as he
believes himself a good Catholic; and so long as thereby he has the
opportunity of concealment, and thereby to prosecute the main Affair of
propagating the Popish interest and Religion, by the Ruin of Protestants and
Protestant Religion.

And therefore, in the second place, I wish that all people would seriously
reflect with themselves at whose door the guilt will lie if by their means
mischief either public or private overtake us? If the glorious Light of the
Gospel, the Lamp of Eternal Truth should come to be extinguished by the
Superstitious darkness of Rome; if by the Subversion of England, the whole
Protestant Cause should suffer and be ruined, as in all probability, if that
Bullwork were blown up, it must; or however suffer a persecution as Sharp and
cruel, as all those ten of the Primitive ages put together; the Pagans being
nothing so ingenious and wittily Cruel as the Jesuits: if Millions of souls
should by a false Religion come to perish Everlastingly: if our streets and
fields should blush with the blood of Massacred Protestants, our houses be
reduced to ashes, and our miserable posterity, with such as should survive the
Common Rage and desolation, should be made and sold for bondslaves: certainly
there must be a strict account given to Almighty God by whose default all this
came to pass? he gives us the means of securing our selves and if we neglect,
the fault and guilt will be wholly theirs who do obstruct it; our blood will be
upon their heads who hear the Trumpet and see the Sword coming and are so far
from taking or giving the All-arm, that they join with ours and their own
Enemies, if they be not secret Papists, and put a Sword into their hands to
slay us: when God to whom vengeance belongs, shall make Inquisition for blood
he will not forget the cry of the poor; he will not forget those who have been
the occasions, no more then those who were the Actors of cruelty; and how it is
possible for those who obstruct the discovery of Popish Priests and Jesuits,
not to be in the sight of God and men guilty of all the Miseries and mischiefs
which may be occasioned by their concealment, I must protest my self to be
utterly ignorant.

If there can be found any persons so incredulous as not to be apprehensive of
these dangers from them, and who may that way think to evade the necessity that
lies upon them to contribute their utmost toward this Discovery: I will in
short endeavor to convince them from Former Examples. Let the horrible
Massacre in France be remembered, in which according to the Relation even of
Popish Historians, there perished near a hundred thousand Protestants of all
Ages, Sexes and Conditions: among which, twenty Lords of Eminency, twelve
hundred Gentlemen, persons of great Condition in the City of Paris, besides
what fell in other places: The subtle Contrivance and deep dissimulation with
which it was managed, and the Exquisite and ingenious Cruelty with which it was
Executed, may sufficiently Instruct us, what we are to trust to, from such
Murderers, as glory in what is the shame and reproach of humane Nature, and
render the most propitious and merciful Divinity, a cruel and sanguinary Being,
while they pretend to please and do him acceptable service by such bloody
sacrifices, as even heathens generally by the light of mere nature thought he
abhorred: and who encourage one another in mischief, as if the Heavenly
Paradise, were an Aceldama, and to be purchac'd with the price of blood: making
such actions of ^orror and Cruelty as even exceed belief, meritorious
performances capable to enrol them in the Catalogue of their Calender Saints:
though we know none shall ascend the holy Hill, but they who have clean hands
as well as a pure heart.

If this were not sufficient to convince us at the expense of our neighbors,
that which comes nearer to us, is the Rebellion and Massacre of the English
Protestants in Ireland; the fatal Flambeau, which kindled our English Flames;
the Cruelties which were then exercised are beyond Expression and belief, three
hundred thousand souls perished by most, cruel deaths, according to
computation, and God only knows how many more, who could never be brought into
account: and both in this and the Parisian Massacre how many of those who
escaped the barbarous Rage of these merciless Butchers, perished afterward
with cold, hunger, nakedness, and all the hardships that attend the miserable
Condition to which they were exposed? Whither to fly they knew not, but
generally to the Woods and Forests, nor there, how to supply the necessities
of Nature, having nothing left them but their lives, and no way of securing
those long from the importunities of Cold and Famine; thus did they languish
out a few miserable hours till faint and weary, they became a prey to the
Wolves, or fell into the paws of the Tories, the less merciful beasts of the
two. How many mournful and desolate Widows, how many distressed and miserable
Orphans were then exposed to all the miseries of lif^, before they knew what it
was to live, and compelled to suffer all Extremities before they had done good
or evil? Oh Injustice and uncomiserating Cruelty! Oh more then brutish
Inhumanity!

And if the Romish Religion, command, encourage and reward such execrable
barbarity, to be exercised upon the Innocent, what kind of Revenge can we
imagine will they nor invent for those, who dare oppose them? what torments,
what lingering and retail deaths would they think enough for such grand
Heretics as have slain their Apostles, whom they have employed to convert us
to the Catholic Faith? Suetonius reports of Tiberius Caesar, one of the Popes
predecessors in the Roman throne, that he was a person so extraordinary cruel,
that when a condemned person made it his importunate request that he might be
dispatched quickly, he gave him this bitter Sarcasm in answer, Nondum tecum
redii in gr^tiam, No Sir, by your favor, you and I are not yet come to be such
good friends. Certainly not only Romulus, but Rome her self, her Kings,
Emperors and Popes have been nursed by Wolves; for sure the breasts of any
thing that has humane shape, must instill sentiments more tender and
compassionate.

There is not the most guilty head, that shall suffer deserved Death for this
Execrable Conspiracy, but will be esteemed a Saint and Martyr in the Romish
Church. Their great St. Thomas of Canterbury, so famous for his Shrine and
Miracles, and the infamous Prayers made to him, as a Rival of the Son of God,
who was by the account we have of Him in our History, as ungrateful a Rebel to
his Prince as can be imagined, may abundantly satisfy us in that particular:
and if ever they come to reckon with us for such precious blood; it may be
easily conjectured, at what rate we must pay for those Canonizations: let us be
assured that a thousand fold would not be looked upon as a Compensation for the
lives of such, as though we justly think Monsters, they believe to be Miracles
of men while they lived, and would persuade their blind Votaries, that their
very shrines can do* Miracles after their Death. The Pope and his Ministers of
Cruelty will never be so far reconciled to any Protestants that shall come
within their power as to let them die at once; but would be as gracious to them
as Caligula another Heathen Pope or Emperor was to such as by his Tyranny were
condemned to die; and that as the Historian relates was, that he was used to
command them to be so executed ut se sentirent mori. He would not have them
lose their lives by Legerdemain and a slight of hand, but they must die by
inches, and be sensible of every slow degree of approaching death.

What pen can describe the terrible dresses of uncommon deaths which would be
invented for us? What tongue is able to express its ghastly shapes, and the new
fashioned garments of Cruelty, or the rage of prevailing Popery? What heart can
think of them, and of suffering them without the extremest horror? If death in
his mildest and most natural appearance be so dreadful, as to deserve the title
of the most terrible of all Terribles, what must he be when he is accompanied
with all the Inventions of Tyranny? Who that saw them, or that heard the sad
Relation, can remember London in her raging Flames without astonishment? who
can think upon her dismal Ruins and ashes without amazement? how did all faces
gather blackness? how were they pained? what tremblings of heart at the flying
Rumors of a Massacre then intended? What horror, Confusion and astonishment
would lay hold upon us, if we should see our Enemies break in upon us like an
overflowing fire; a fire devouring before them, and behind them a flame
burning, the land as the Garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate
wilderness? and no possibility of Escaping, but they who fled from the fire
must fall upon the glittering Sword; they who escaped the drawn sword; must
perish by Famine: and is it possible there should be any persons who will not
contribute all they can to prevent these, which are not only imaginary, but
real dangers?

Can it be looked upon as a thing so indifferent, that people should run all
these hazzards, that a whole Nation should lie at Stake and perish, rather then
they will abate a foolish scruple, or a rigid opinion to preserve them; rather
then go to the places dedicated to the service of God and receive the holy
Sacrament, thereby to dec are their own Innocence, and detect the Authors of
our danger, the Enemies of our Peace and Safety? Sure it is much easier to
kneel at the holy Table, out of Reverence, not adoration, of the Bread and
Wine; then to have the choice either to kneel and adore a Consecrated Wafer, or
to kneel at a Stake in Smithfield? Is it not far better to wash our hands in
innocence, and offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving; then to be guilty
of the blood of so many as should suffer by our being accessory to the
accomplishment of the Traitorous designs of the Jesuits; and Sacrifice a Nation
and many succeeding generations, many people of other Nations to the Romish
cruelty, merely out of obstinacy to our own prejudices, and it may be Fancies,
which these very Jesuits and Seminaries have put in our heads? Certainly all
those who would not be thought, and in the Eye of the Law Esteemed Recusants
and Papists, ought not to make the least scruple to use this or any other
lawful and necessary expedient, that shall by the public Wisdom be thought
necessary for our common preservation: Nor will it be satisfactory that they
shall in words disown the Church of Rome, and declaim against it, or disavow
all Confederacy or Complotting with the Papists: the arrantest Jesuit in
England will do this upon occasion, to save his own life and endanger ours: and
if they hinder the building up of the Walls of our Jerusalem, what does it
signify how much they either say they do, or hate the Church of Rome, since
whether they conspire with the Papists, or not, if they assist them in
accomplishing their intended Design of Ruining the Protestant Religion, it is
the same thing? only with this difference, that what the one party does with
Design, the other does with their folly.

And though men should not value their Estates, Lives, or Liberties, which some
people seem willing to part with, rather then assist the Government, manifest
their own innocence and detect the guilty, by endeavoring to promote the
Common Security; yet one would think that which they call their Religion and
Conscience, should oblige them to submit to this or any other way of Trial and
discrimination: they may hope for indulgence from Protestants though of
differing opinions, but they must not hope for the least crumbs of Indulgence or
favor from Papists; not all the services they have done them will be remembered
with the least gratitude or tenderness; no consideration of tender Consciences
is able to soften those hearts who are more obdurate then Marble and Adamant,
and as Charles the Ninth of France, in whose Reign the Massacre of Paris was
executed, said to the Prince of Conde, Mass, Death, or the Bastile, so would
they say to all Protestants, whether Dissenters or others, Turn, or burn. For
unless they be secret Papists, which no body can tell but they are, if they
will not submit to a way of Trial, and unless they resolve to be open and
professed ones, upon the first opportunity; they cannot expect any favor or
Clemency from prevailing Popery; it is stream so rapid and violent, that it
drowns all that will not swim down the furious torrent; and should that
inundation break our banks, all Protestants must either make Shipwreck of their
Lives and Fortunes, or of their Faith and a good Conscience, for they would
verify their rule to a letter, Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, No safety in any
sense is with them to be found, expected, or so much as hoped for, out of the
Ark of their Church. For though the Church of England, as that which stands the
main pillar of Truth, be what they chiefly hate, and endeavor to ruin; yet in
the fall thereof they would certainly crush all other Pretenders to Reformation
of what names or distinction soever.

In extraordinary Cases of such impendent danger, people do not use to be so
critically scrupulous, whatever they may be at other times; but every man's fear
is his own Pope, and can grant dispensations for matters of greater scruple
then this can be: if any persons can think themselves secure or out of danger,
not only at this time, but at all times, so long as England is infested with
such Wolves and Tigers, it must be such people as either have no Religion, and
so care not what is uppermost, but like empty clouds can ride upon any wind,
and change into any form; or such as desire the Romish Religion may again
prevail and be established in these Nations; or else such as are not sensible
that the Doctrines and Practice of that Church teach and authorize, Sedition,
Rebellion, Murder, and the utter extirpation of all Heretics, by all or any
ways or methods whatsoever.

To convince people of this, there is nothing more clear and evident, not only
from the Writings of private Doctors among them, but from several Bulls of
former Popes, and from the Decrees of their Councils, which would be too long
here to insert, and are already notoriously known to all learned men; and for
those who want either opportunity or ability to peruse their Writings, they may
read enough in the Bloody Rubricks of their Actions to convince them of the
reality as well as greatness of their danger, nor need they seek for Foreign
Examples, who will not credit those before given; our own Country, and this
City Renowned over all the habitable World, will afford the most unlettered
People instances more then enough, both of former times, and yet fresh and
bleeding date; Smithfield will never forget the cruel Bonfires of Queen Mary's
short life and Reign; and what treatment our Fathers were to have received from
the Invincible Armada of Eighty Eight, had it proved more then an unluckly
boast, the whips, chains, shackles, knives, daggers, and other Instruments of
cruelty with which, and Savage Butchers that Navy made the Ocean groan, are
certainly able to instruct the dullest, or the weakest capacities. Nor are the
Jesuits grown more mild or gentle by the f equent disappointments, which our
merciful and gracious God had in compassion to us given them; but rather more
furious and exasperated: and since Heaven refuses to favor their Treasons,
they have made a Covenant with Hell, and an agreement with Death to take their
part. I will not repeat the confident, and beyond all former things audacious
Murders, which they have committed, even since the discovery of their intended
Conspiracy; there is not a child in the Streets but can give a Narrative of the
Tragedy: so unrelenting and incorrigible are they even when the Rod of God is
upon them, and so blinded with the rage of cruelty and revenge, that they will
not see that the hand of God is gone out against them; and what would they do
then, should God permit them to ride in triumph over our heads? certainly their
proud waters would have gone even over our soul, they would have swallowed us
up quick when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. And whenever the bottom
of this dark design shall be opened; when these chambers of Death and
habitations of Cruelty shall be exposed to the light of the Sun, which it is to
be hoped a little time will do; the whole World shall be witness, that there is
little reason to doubt a syllable of what I have written.

There is but one thing more which at present I would propose to the
Consideration of People, and especially those of this City, which is justly
celebrated as the most noble Emporium or Mart of the World.

That our greatness, strength and power, our Riches and trade, and in a word,
the well-being plenty and prosperity, as well as the Peace of our Nation, does
in the greatest measure depend upon our Maritine strength, there will not be
found any who can deny. That this strength at Sea, depends upon the
encouragement and support of Traffic and Navigation will likewise be agreed on
all hands. That it is therefore and ought to be the design of every good
Subject and Citizen as well as it is of the King and Government, to promote
these, will by an undeniable Consequence follow from these premises.

How invidiously all our Neighbors, especially those of the Roman Religion,
look upon this great power of our Nation at Sea; and how ungrateful that
Universal Traffic which we maintain throughout the World is to them, is
easily to be observed by their endeavoring to come in with us for a share:
they know little of the affairs of France, who do not take notice how
industrious that Monarch and his great Ministers of State, and particularly
Monsieur Colbert are, to encourage and extend the arms of their Foreign Trade,
and to discourage all besides the Natives of France, and how Considerable
within this few years they have have themselves in comparison of former times;
and whoever shall view the Ports of Thoulon, Marseilles, Breast, Rochel, etc.
And see them proud with their stately Castles of Wood, heretofore strangers to
the Tides of France: whosoever shall withal reflect upon the actions of Tobago in
the West Indies, and Palermo in Sicily, where the Here de Ruyter, who had saved
Holland from the power of England fell under the rising Arms of France: he that
will bring these propositions together, shall be able to draw a Demonstrative
conclusion from them, that France, will in a few Years struggle hard for the
Dominion and Sovereignty of the Seas.

Nor will they make any Scruple, if Interest did not animate them to it, upon
the account, or at least the pretense of Religion, to disturb and weaken us
Heretics, in our Trade, and Navigation, especially in the Levant, where by
the Commodiousness of their Ports, they will have all the advantages to do it:
and if once they come not to dread our power, or be able to grapple with us in
the Streights, and make themselves Masters of that important place of strength
and situation Tangier, they will either totally exclude us if they can, or
however come in with us for the greatest share of the Commerce of the
Mediterranean; and if they shall gain their point so far, as to cut off one
Limb of our Traffic, our Navigation and by consequence our Power at Sea, will
by degrees decline apace: and what we lose, they will certainly gain; and if
they arrive to that degree, to ride Admirals of the Ocean, of necessity we
shall be permitted only to truckle under them, and shall have just so much
trade, as we steal, or they are not able to manage.

Now the most probable way that can be proposed to ruin our Traffic and
Navigation, and thereby to secure and increase their own; is to discourage
Foreign Merchants, and oblige them to withdraw their Effects, and to starve
ours for want of Trade: for by this means they will in a few Years be able to
give new Laws of An Island in France, where the first Maritine Laws were made.
Oleron to the Seas. The ready way to Effect this, is to keep us in continual
broyls among our selves: for what a damp must it of necessity give to all
Merchants, both English and Foreigners to be in such an insecure Condition,
that they must have not only the hazards and damages of Winds and Seas, Rocks
and Pirates to venture upon, but that they must be every moment in fear of
suffering Shipwreck on the shore? The Change I doubt not is sufficiently
sensible of this truth at present; and if one sees a full morning Change, it is
more to barter news, then to drive bargains; and that trade brings in no
Customs to the Crown, nor Riches to the Nation; and so long as we cannot be
secure, but that by the treachery of these Jesuits and Seminaries, our City may
again be reduced to ashes, our persons secretly murdered, that we know not who
to trust, nay the Royal Person and Government destroyed in a moment, and men's
Estates given to the ravage of the Murderers, what encouragement can Merchants
have to trade? so long as there are so many poisonous Spiders laying their
cunning nets and toils to take and destroy them: what courage can the Innocent
and industrious Bees have to gather Honey for the Common Hive?

Besides it is worth our Consideration, how defenseless so great an Island as
this is, and how liable to Foreign Invasions, and Depredations, if either their
own Shiping and Naval power decays, or does not exceed or at least equal that
of our Neighbors: and should any of them grow so potent at Sea, as either out
of Ambition, or Zeal to propagate the Catholic Religion to attempt an
invasion upon us; how dangerous is it to have a party within ready to join with
them, to complete a Conquest upon our Ruin?

Assuredly, so long as there are so many Seminaries and Jesuits among us, they
will constantly be gaining Proselytes among us to their own Church, and making
factions and divisions in ours: whereas were we clear of them, we might hope in
time the number of Papists would decrease, and certainly many of the more
simple and innocent Papists, startled with the blackness of this horrid
treason, or for fear of the penal Laws, will return to their Allegiance and
duty; and many more would, if they were not buoyed up by the imaginary dangers
with which their Priests affright them, or encouraged by the meritoriousness of
that obstinacy, in which they do all they can to confirm them: But so long as
the Romish party can by our Divisions shelter their Priests from discovery and
the just punishment of the Laws, they will not only be confirmed in their
pertinacy, but they will be always ready to receive such impressions of
disloyalty from them, and upon occasion to throw off, not only all duty and
Allegiance to their Sovereign, but all morality, and even humanity it self, in
defense, and for the promoting of the Catholic Interest: and so long as we
have so many sorts of Protestant Dissenters, who will not submit to any certain
way of Discovering who are Jesuits, and who are not; we must certainly be
contented, whether we will or no, to have these Amorites and Jebusites in our
Land, as Goads in our sides, and thorns in our Eyes: we must sit down with our
fears and dangers, and only have the feeble power to know and lament our
misery, but not to help it.

To conclude, If either our Lives, our Liberties, our Religion, our Interest,
our Duty or our Danger, the glory of our Nation, or the natural affection we
owe to our Posterity, have any power or Influence upon the people of these
Nations, to be unanimous in detecting the Authors of our present fears, or
future apprehensions; they all call aloud upon every man, to use all lawful
ways and means to clear themselves from the dreadful guilt of being Accessories
and Confederates to our own, and the ruin of the Reformed Apostolic and truly
Christian Religion; and if nothing of all this will move the hearts of men to
compassionate themselves, God have compassion upon us! And if we must suffer,
permit us to fall into his hands, for his mercies are great; let us not fall
into the hands of Men, and of all Mankind, not into the hands of these Wicked
and Blood-thirsty Men, whose Tender Mercies are Cruelty it self.

Exurgat Deus, dissipentur inimici. FINIS.

