LICENSED,

Rob. Midgley.
Febr. 27. 1691.
THE FALSEHOOD OF Human Virtue. A MORAL ESSAY.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Child in St. Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.XCI.

THE PREFACE.
MAN naturally becomes his own Flatterer, and being sensible that all other
Animals are overcome, either by his Wit or Strength, easily enclines to despise
those Beings as inferior, and arrogates to himself the Empire of this small
spot of Earth.

And though constantly put in mind of his Defects, by the Weakness and
Narrowness of his Senses, and consequently of his Understanding, by the
irregularity of his Inclinations, the Disorder of his Passions, and innumerable
Inconveniences to which he is subject, nevertheless, assuming a false Bravery
he affects to seem above these Things, and to appear self-sufficient.

With the counterfeit Wings of immaginary Virtue, he soars toward Heaven, and
pretends to partake of the Divine Nature; notwithstanding that the Spring and
first Motion, even of the best of his Actions, as the subsequent Treatise fully
proves, is nothing but Pride, Self-love, and Interest.

Wherefore, with all due Gratitude, it is fit to acknowledge the Grace and
Favor, whereby Almighty Providence has been pleased to communicate those
Precepts and Commands which alone lead to Happiness and Perfection, which are
so admirably expressed in the Great Example of that Divine Person, who came
both to Instruct, and to Save, Mankind.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF Prudence. Page 1

CHAP. II. Of Sincerity. 24

CHAP. III. Of Friendship. 34

CHAP. IV. Of Confidence. p. 73

CHAP. V. Of Complaisance. 81

CHAP. VI. Of Civility. 89

CHAP. VII. Of Officious Virtue. 95

CHAP. VIII. Of Clemency. 99

CHAP. IX. Of Mildness. 119

CHAP. X. Of Affability. p. 156

CHAP. XI. Of Commisseration. 161

CHAP. XII. Of Generosity. 176

CHAP. XIII. Of Politeness. 187

CHAP. XIV. Of Humility. 193

CHAP. XV. Of Liberality. p. 200

CHAP. XVI. Of Magnificence. 214

CHAP. XVII. Of Justice. 224

CHAP. XVIII. Of Integrity, or the Honesty of Men* 234

CHAP. XIX. Of Loyalty of Subjects toward their Sovereign. 245

The Reader is desired to pardon the Fault of the Printer, in misnumbring the
CHAPTERS, the next being

CHAP. XXVII. Of Fidelity in keeping a Secret. p. 274

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Acknowledgment of Gratitude. 282

THE FALSEHOOD OF Human Virtue.
CHAP. I. PRVDENCE.
AMong all the Works of God, there is not any one Greater, or more worthy
Admiration, then Man himself. For when we enumerate his different Qualities and
Perfections, it seems that the Skill and Art of Divine Providence, that sports
it self in the world, would epitomize it self in him; and that to show the
choicest of its Invention, it has been pleased to form a Creature from a
mixture and assemblage of what ever was extraordinary in all other Creatures.
So that if we consider the principal parts that compose him, we cannot
sufficiently admire that secret and most inward Union which we perceive in him
of two Natures so opposite one to another; and yet at the same time we cannot
conceive, how that Terrestial and Corporeal matter, which is so incapable to
obey the orders of Reason, should so perspicuously apprehend, and so readily
execute her Commands in Man.

But all these particular advantages are inferior to his Birth; wherein God, as
I may so say, has Crowned him with his own hands, and has given him an absolute
Empire over all other Creatures, wholly subjected under his Dominion. In a
word, the Heavens roll about for his sake,

The Air, the Land and Seas
Strive all to please,
Contending which for Splendor, not for N^ed,
With choicest Viands shall his Table spread.
To this same Royal Supremacy God has also added another much more
considerable, and more excellent. For he has made Man the Arbiter of his own
Destiny, the Lord and Sovereign of all his Actions; so that, whereas all other
Creatures move blindly to their Ends, and have their Inclinations determined,
Man performs all his Actions with knowledge, and by his own proper election,
disposing of himself. Which illustrious prerogative raises him to that degree,
that it likens him to God, and gives him a share of that Providence with which
God governs the World. Nor can we deny, but that this is one of the most
exalted, and the most sublime of all his Privileges: Yet on the other side, we
are obliged to acknowledge, that it may also prove fatal to him, and may be the
cause as well of his Ruin as his Felicity. For Man being so near to himself,
and so remote from Sovereign Good, it is much more easy for him to seek his
Happiness in Himself, and to enjoy a Benefit that is so near at hand, and to
which his Heart is naturally inclined, then to raise himself to the possession
of God, from whom he is separated by such immensity of space. Besides, his Mind
is covered with a veil of Sense, which is the reason that ofttimes he looses
the prospect of real Good, and mistakes Pleasure, Wealth, and Honor, which are
but the Shadows of real Felicity, for the Thing it self.

At this time of imminent danger, Prudence offers her self, steddily to direct
his footsteps, to show him the only Mark at which he ought to aim, and the
Object where he can only meet with repose, and the accomplishment of all his
wishes. This important function, which is only proper to Prudence, is
sufficient to advance it infinitely above all other Virtues, and makes it seem
to us as the very Eye of the Soul. For tho all the Virtues are highly valuable
in nature, excellent in their effects, and admirable in the variety of their
offices; yet must we all agree, that they would every one be blind, wandering
and uncertain, were not Prudence their Guide; did she not discover the true End
which they ought to propose to themselves, and mark out the way which can only
lead 'em to it.

To say truth, Prudence is as it were a foreign Understanding, that fortifies
and brings to perfection the natural Understanding of Man; it is to her that all
particular men are beholding for the wisdom of their Conduct; all well ordered
Families, and all well regulated Cities, for their Policy. It Is she that
sitting in the Soul of Kings as in her Throne, presides in all their Councils,
and pronounces those Oracles that cause the Glory and the Felicity of Kingdoms.
Lastly, it is she that ranging abroad in their Armies, renders the most savage
and impetuous Dispositions capable of Discipline, establishes Order in the room
of Confusion, and teaches Valor the secret of being attended with Victory.

These wonderful and innumerable effects of Prudence, have gained her those
great Encomiums which the Historians, Poets, and Philosophers give her, and
have caused her to be reverenced by the wise Men in all Ages as a Deity.
Insomuch, that as the Persians adore the Sun, because it appears to Sense to be
the visible Creator and Cherisher of all that grows in Nature; so the wise Men
have attributed to Prudence a kind of Religious worship, as seeming to them to
be the visible Cause of all the happy Events of Human Life. It Is our Ignorance,
says a certain Poet, which makes us imagine, that blind Chance governs all
Human Affairs. It Is our mistake, o Fortune, that has placed Thee in Heaven,
which has made us believe, that thy capricious Decrees regulate our Actions:

Wh^re Prudence Reigns, no Deity
From that same Breast can absent be.
Prudence deprives thee of thy Power, and destroys thee of thy Divinity; it is
she alone that has the power to make us happy; and her Laws alone, observed or
violated, are the causes of our Good or Evil Destiny.

Nothing so clearly shows us the ridiculous vanity of men, as that same
pleasure which they take to be undeceived from popular Opinions; and yet at the
same time they are undeceived, to deceive themselves after another manner. For
certainly it is a great absurdity, to refer all Events to a Cause so irregular
and blind as Fortune. But on the other side, it is as great an error to look
upon Prudence as the insallible source of our Happiness, and the prosperity of
Families, Commonwealths, and Empires; as we shall show in due place.

To make it therefore eviden^, That the good Opinion which Men have of Prudence
is ill grounded, we need no more then to examine the Nature of Men without
prejudice, and consider that it is always full of distrust, timorousness, and
uncertainty; which proceeds from the obscurity and inconstancy of the matter.
For she has to do with Men, whose Hearts are impenetrable, and who are
continually subject to change, through the lightness of their humor, through the
succession of their passions, and the diversity of their interests. So that as
Heraclitus assured us, that he could have no natural Knowledge, because the
Object of the Sciences ought to be constant, but that Nature was in a perpetual
motion, still gliding along like a stream, where we can never consider the
water, because it passes away before we can well look upon it; so we may affirm
in like manner, that Prudence can assure her self of nothing; seeing that Man
is never in the same posture, but varies in his Disposition and Affections through
an infinite number of Causes both internal and external.

I admire with the rest of the world, the ways that Aristotle has discovered to
facilitate persuasion by rousing the pasons that are predominant in men. In a
word, it frequently happens, that Submissions will move the most inhuman and
cruel to Pity and Compassion; that with Menaces we force the Timorous to yield;
and that with Money we obtain our desires from persons uninteressed. But I
cannot see, how Prudence can safely make use of these, no more then upon the
Avarice of one in whom desire of Revenge upon his Enemy may be more powerful,
at the very time that I promise my self to corrupt him with the offer of a
large Sum.

But a Person of vast Natural parts, who is of great experience, and who is
otherways Learned, and completely read in History, Shall not he act with
security? Yes; if he meet with subjects and occasions altogether like to those
which he has seen or observed in History. But it is as rarely possible to meet
with this Resemblance as to find out two Men of the same Complexion and
Features. It Is no true Consequence in Physic, that a Medicine that has been
given with success to that Choleric person will cure another. For Choler, says
Galen, is not only different from all other Humors, but varies also from it
self. And this difficulty to encounter subjects and occasions altogether alike,
is the reason that Prudence and Physic are much indebted to Hazard; and that
Prudent Men and wise and wary Physicians proceed with so much caution, and take
so much care before they determine. How did uncertainties fill the Soul of
Alexander with restless trouble and inquietude, the Night before the Battle of
Arbela? So that we cannot imagine a greater confusion at Sea between contending
Surges and mountainous Billows, when agitated by tempestuous Winds, then in the
Breast and Soul of Alexander, where so many various thoughts and passions at
that time strugled together.

It is clear then, that Human Prudence is erroneous and uncertain, and that
there is no secure reliance upon it for any true success or prosperity. But it
is not enough to have shown, that it is unprositable, we must also prove it to
be hurtful. Which is a Truth we may be easily convinced of, after we have freed
our selves of all manner of prejudice; if then we do but examine, whether
Prudence does not frequently do much mischief, with her circumspection, her
scruples, and her cautions. How many has she not perplexed? How many grand
Affairs has she not caused to miscarry? How many Families has she not undone?
How many great Fortunes have been made; how many Treaties have been
advantageously concluded; how many Victories won, contrary to the Rules of
Prudence? The Battle which Alexander won, not far from the Banks of Granicus,
which made way for all his succeeding Renown, was it not looked upon by the
Romans as a piece of Rashness, that deserved to be severely punished? And that
River which, as I may so say, was the Cradle of his Glory, might it not as well
have proved his Tomb? It is impossible for us to have other persuasions then
these, when we remember, that the Enterprise of Lucullus against Tigranes
attended with Victory and the Defeat of an hundred thousand men, was
nevertheless both censured and blamed at Rome; when we remember, I say, that
the Equity of that grave and judicious People did not think it a thing fit to
applaud the daring Temerity of the General of an Army, because it had
prosper'd; nor to approve a Success that had advanced the Glory of the Empire,
since it was from a Cause that might have been its Ruin. If you would see an
Example of a Battle lost through the Councels of Military Prudence, and after all
the care imaginable taken to secure the Victory, cast but an eye upon the
Battle of Poitiers, and there behold King John inexorable, and haughtily
refusing to the Prince of Wales the Peace which he sought with so much
earnestness, and upon Conditions so advantageous; Doubtless, the Assurances
which the King then had of Victory, were both probable and rational: For he
found himself at the Head of four and fifty thousand Men, accompanied with his
four Sons, the Duke of Orleans his Brother, two Marshals of France, five and
twenty Dukes, Counts, and Great Lords, and all the Nobility of France; yet
notwithstanding all this Force, he was defeated and taken Prisoner by the
Prince; so weak at that time that he had scarce Ten thousand fighting men in
the Field, and those so ill provided with Victuals, that they had but for one
day a scant remainder left; and so far advanced into the heart of the Kingdom,
that to all outward appearance it was impossible for him to retreat. The
Battles thus gained and lost contrary to all probable Expectation afford us
frequent occasions to observe, that there is not in that same judgment which
men make of Human Actions, a merit and solidity sufficient to weigh down the
Balance; but that it is only their Success that has the power to advance their
Fame. In a word, a Great Personage in their Opinion, is not He who is endued
with all the Qualities of such an one, tho he perform upon all occasions what
ever becomes a Great Person; but they delay to form their judgments till
Fortune has declared her self. And then it is, that they debase a Wise and
Valiant Captain below the Vulgar sort, and extol a Successful Rash Commander
for an Illustrious General.

But this is that which deserves our Admiration, that after all the Earth has
resounded with the noise of the Achievements of Famous Captains, and that all
the World has applauded to Heaven Wonders of their Valor and their Prudence,
God himself by the mouth of one of his Prophets thus instructs us, Learn where
is Wisdom, learn where is Valor. Giving us thereby to understand, that it is
only to his Wisdom and his Sovereign Power that all the Effects of their Valor
and Prudence belong; and that the Force and Industry of men, avail no farther
then it is His pleasure they should be serviceable. So that we may say to all
these glorious Conquerors: It never would have been within your Power to subdue
the Universe, had it not been Bequeathed ye from above. You are only the
Ministers to execute the severe Decrees of Gods Just^ce; and the Arms which he
makes use of to punish the haughty Rebellion of Men. It is he, says the
Scripture, who dispensing Fear as well as Victory, confounds with ov^rsights
and errors all your Enemies, and overturns whatever opposes your March. It is
he that delivers your Adversaries into your hands, and revenges at length the
public Violation of his Laws by the Ruin and utter Extirpation of your Opposers.

-- Verum Inclementia Divum
Has evertit opes, sternitque a Culmine Trojam.
The loss of the Battle of Pharsalia is a convincing proof of the Truth of
this. Pompey had beaten Caesar at Dyrrachum; he had two great Armies in the
Field; his Navy so strong, that it was supposed invincible. His Army at Land,
much more numerous then Cesars. His Cavalry the Flower of all the Roman Gentry,
consisting of seven thousand Horse, whereas Caesar had no more then five
thousand. His Infantry five and forty thousand strong; Caesar's but two and
twenty. Pompey abounded with Money and Provision; he had the Sea his Friend;
all the Ports, all the strong Places, freedom to range every where, and the
whole Country for his Retreat.

On the other side, all the Cities shut their Gates against Caesar; he was
reduced to that necessity, and in that dire want of Provisions, that he was
forced to dislodge his Camp every day to find Victuals for his Men.

Pompey's Army was encouraged by their Number, and the Grandeur of their Party.
For all the Senators, all that were Illustrious by Descent, famous for their
Merit, or considerable for their Power, had sided with Pompey. Insomuch, that
Rome seemed to be removed to the Plains of Pharsalia, and Pompey's Pavillion
looked like the Senate House. More then all this, the Kings and Princes in
Alliance with the Romans had all taken his part, Caesar so abandoned, that the
Commanders and Officers of the Army which he brought out of Spain, daily
deserted him. Lastly, Pompey seemed to be animated by the Justice of his Cause,
which encouraged him to hope for the Protection of Heaven; besides, that he had
the Prayers and good wishes of all the People. Whereas, Caesar was the object
of the Curses and Hatred of all the World, as being looked upon as the odious
Oppressor of the public Liberty. However, notwithstanding all these Advantages
Pompey lost the Battle, and that after such an ignominious manner, that when we
compare what he did, to what he ought to have done, to what other great
Captains do, and to what himself had done, we hardly know him again, but are
forced to seek in Pompey for Pompey the Great. For had he been the Great
Pompey, Would he have taken a Fright at the very first Disorder of his Army?
Would he have despaired as soon as ever he saw his Cavalry give ground? Or
instead of putting a stop (with his Sword in his hand) to those that fled, as
Caesar did at the Battle of Dyrrachum, Would he have retired to his Tent, and
sat down there, without speaking so much as one word, as if he had been
immovable, astonished, and Tunder-struck? Why did we not behold him in the
midst of his Troops, like Alexander at the Battle of Arbela, when the Chariots
of Darius, armed with Sythes, had broken and much endammag'd his Cavalry,
encouraging his Captains and Soldiers, rallying their disordered Ranks,
returning first himself to the Charge, renewing the Fight by his Words and his
Example too, and doing the Duty as well of a private Soldier as of a Commander?
Why did he not fight on to the last, and receive whole flights of Arrows through
his Breast, like Epaminondas at the Battle of Mantinea, that if Valor could
not overcome and force his Destiny, it might at least have served him to save
his Honor. Doubtless he would not have failed in any of these Attempts; nay,
he would have acted magnanimously in every one, had he been still himself. But
he was no more the same Great Pompey, who at the Age of Four and twenty years
Vanquished Domitius, with the Slaughter of twenty thousand of his men; and who
in forty days reconquer'd Africa. This is no longer that Captain under whose
Conduct the Roman Arms had been Victorious during so long a series of Years;
and who, by the incredible number of his Achievements, had extended the Limits
of the Empire, in Africa and Europe, as far as the Ocean; and in Asia, to the
Provinces lying upon the Hyrcanean and Red Sea. This is a Person heartless,
without judgment, careless of Glory; a slothful Spectator, and ignominious of
the Ruin of his own Army; who when he saw the Victor enter his Camp, quitted
his very Armor, and shifting himself into a Habit agreeable to his bad
Fortune, betook himself to his Heels.

True it is, that Caesar blamed Pompey for commanding his foremost Ranks to stay
and receive the first Charge of the Enemies; and attributed to that part of
Pomp^y's Orders the Loss of the Battle. For, says he, a Great Captain ought
never to deprive himself of the Advantages of the first Attacks, which are
usually most vehement and vigorous.

But the Justice of this Accusation does not so clearly appear: For if it be
such an advantage to Assail the foremost Ranks, as Caesar alleges, it may be
deemed as well no less a piece of Policy to ward off the first Blows, and then
to fall in upon the Enemy, when their first fury is almost spent. He also
censures Pompey for several other oversights, through that Ignorance of his, which
only acknowledged Human Causes to be the Causes of Human Events.

But the sudden change of Pompey's Fortunes, raises our Contemplations much
higher, and instructs us more sublimely, That that same Dread which seized his
Heart, where Fear never entered before, was a Divine Terror, a stroke from the
Hand of the most Omnipotent, who frequently smites in this manner, to teach
Great Captains, and Admirers of their Achievements, that Prosperity and their
Victories are only the Effects of those Councels and that Courage which He
inspires into their Breasts; and that He, having the sole disposal of their
Hearts in his Hands, bereaves 'em of their Strength and Resolution when he
pleases; and when it is his pleasure to ruin and deliver them into their
Enemy's hands, he has no more to do, but to withdraw his Assistance; and then
the Valor, the Puissance, and the Industry of Men drop to the ground of
themselves, as having lost their only support. There is no King, says the
Oracle of the Holy Ghost, who is saved by the multitude of an Host. A mighty
Man is not delivered by his Strength. And that same Managed Horse, in which a
Warrior puts his Confidence, after many trials of Courage, and being preserved
by the Generous Breast, shall fail him at last in his most pressing
Necessities. If then the discouragement which frequently happens to the most
famous Captains, be an evident Demonstration that God is the Arbiter and
sovereign Disposer of the Success in War, the confusion and sudden eclipse of
their transcending parts, is a much more palpable proof. For we find, that in
the midst of all those means that are in their power to reestablish their
Affairs, they have neither the Wit nor the Invention to make use of any one.
Which blindness and oversight was apparent through the whole Conduct of Pompey:
For when he might have ruined Caesar without the hazard of a Battle, and when
he had at command so many means to prevent his own loss, or to have recovered
and repaired the loss sustained, he had not the understanding to make use of
any one.

God is terrible, says the Sacred Writings, chiefly to the Kings of the Earth;
whenever he pleases, he deprives them of their Understanding, and then they
dream of making themselves formidable by the Puissance of their Arms, by the
Number of their Chariots, by the Magnificence and Grandeur of their Equipage;
but he that sits in Heaven, derides their Projects, makes Himself more
formidable then they, and with a Word of his Indignation, dashes 'em to pieces,
like Pots of Clay.

Behold the Conduct which God observed in respect of Darius. This haughty
Monarch was fully persuaded, that the innumerable Number of his People, the
immense Riches which the Conjunction of two Empires furnished him withal,
rendered his Puissance invincible. He looked upon Alexander as a rash and
inconsiderate young man, a kind of Knight Adventure; and he had commanded his
Guards to fetch him to Court both Fettered and Manacl'd. Nor did the Loss of
the Battle of Issus diminish his Pride, nor had as yet made him change his
Language; choosing rather to impute his Loss to his own Mistake, for Assailing
the Enemy in the narrow Passages of the Cilician Mountains, then to Alexander's
Valor; and assured himself of Victory, could he but draw the Grecians down
into the Plain. But he had no sooner covered the Plains of Arbela with his Army
of eight hundred thousand Men, when Alexander, whom God made use of to humble
the Pride of that presumptuous Monarch, utterly defeated his numerous Host with
a handful of Men, slew a hundred thousand of the Persians, and totally ruined
in one day the most flourishing Empire in the World.

This Example alone may suffice to convince Mankind, that the Advantages of
Encamping, the ranging of Battalia's, the Multitude and Resolution of the
Soldiers, and the Experience of the Generals, are not the only secure means for
obtaining Victory; of which God alone is the sole Disposer; and who having at
his own command the two contending Parties, delivers up the one into the hands
of the other, as he pleases himself. Least the Victors, says the Lord, should
be so blinded by their own vanity, to attribute to the Strength of their own
Arms; and not to Me, the gaining of Conquest; and lest they should fondly
believe, that when they have vanquished their Enemies, it was some other Power
then the Strength of my Sword, that threw 'em to the Ground, or other then my
Terrors that discouraged their Hearts. I give that Confidence to one single Man
to pursue a Thousand, and so two or three to put ten Thousand to flight.

The Name of the Lord of Hosts, which God so frequently assumes to himself in
Holy Scripture, wonderfully confirms all this to be a Truth. For since we
cannot without Impiety believe, that he takes upon him any Name unjustly or
undeservedly, it behooves us to be strongly persuaded, that while he declares
himself the Lord of Hosts, He it is that is the Author of Victory to whom he
pleases, and that he regulates the Successes of War according to the Laws of
his Justice and Wisdom. So that however men may attribute all Events in War,
both extraordinary and surprising, to Chance and Fortune, which they look upon
as the blind Cause of all accidents both sudden and unexpected; yet both the
one and the other are false judgments which the mistakes of men has brought
forth; those Adventures seeming strange and odd, in regard of our Ignorance,
not in respect of Gods Providence, which governs all those Events and banishes
all manner of hazard from the World. I shall conclude with the words of the
learned Boethius, That the Care of Providence is so wise and universal, that it
leaves nothing to the rash Power of Fortune.

CHAP. II. SINCERITY.
THere is not any Virtue which we may be tempted to believe more truly a Virtue
then Sincerity; for there is not any that has more beautiful appearance. It is
the most amiable and the most beneficial of all the Virtues that serve to bind
and uphold Society. It Is the foundation of Trust and Assurance; it is the repose
and security of intercourse. Without her we are of all particular and private
Discourses as so many Traps and Snares; all the Designs which others
communicate to us, we look upon as obstacles to our own; and all men with whom
we converse as Enemies that may surprise us. Without her we converse and
discourse together with as much fear as those who travel by Night upon the
brink of Precipices.

The real Cause of that Esteem which we have for Human Virtues proceeds from
this, that we only consider their Functions; that is to say, that variety of
Duties which men are enjoined to discharge; and because they never examine what
those Ends are which they propose when they acquit themselves of those several
Devoirs. Tho without the knowledge of those Ends, it is impossible judgment of
their Virtues. When we see a Man, says St. Austin, that never encroaches upon
his Neighbor's Lands, and perpetually careful how he offers any prejudice to
his Goods or Person, at first we are apt to think this man just. But we change
our opinion, when we apprehend that this man abstains from invading his
Neighbors Estate for fear only of being prosecuted at Law, and lest he should
consume his own in defending what he has violently taken from another.

It is not so with a person of Sincerity. We give him that title so long as we
find him to be cordial and open-hearted, and that we may depend upon his word,
because it is not in his power to disguise his thoughts. But when we have
sounded him and perceive that he makes use of his Sincerity as a Veil to cover
his Designs, and that his frankness is only a means to obtain his ends, our
Idea's of the same person are then quite different.

But what are the ends, or what the prospect of a Sincere man. The first is to
oblige his Friends, and all those with whom he has any familiarity or dealing,
to discourse sincerely with him, to conceal nothing from him, to the end he may
understand the truth of their sentiments, their inclinations, and their
affairs; as also to know the truth of what passes abroad, as accidents and
stories the most secret and most full of curiosity; so that Curiosity is here
the principal Cause of his Sincerity. Now in regard that this was the second
Passion that sprung up in the heart of man, and that it succeeded next to that
of inordinate Self-love, and had a considerable hare in his fall, doubtless
this passion cannot but be extremely violent; and tho her violence be unknown
because not obvious to the sense, yet is it easy to perceive it by that eager
desire which hurries us to gadd after Novelties, Shows, and new Acquaintance;
especially where we hear of Wit and Beauty, or any thing of extraordinary
parts. Let us apply this to our purpose, and let us say, that we may discover
Curiosity to be a violent Passion, by our violent listening after public and
private News, and by the pleasure which we take in hearing it; which is so
great, that it is the most delightful employment of our Lives; insomuch, that
this pleasure se^ms to be not only the divertisement, but the very nourishment
of our thoughts; for we grow melancholy when we are in places barren of Tales
and Stories, or if being retired into the Country our Friends in Town or at
Court are negligent or forgetful to send us the weekly occurrences. We need not
wonder then, if men that now adays live such a Life of Passion, labor with so
much earnestness to gratify a Passion so lively and vehement as Curiosity; and
that there are so many who make use of Sincerity as a Bait to allure their
Friends to open their Hearts, and trust 'em with what is most proper for their
satisfaction.

We shall better apprehend, that there are several persons that are Sincere out
of a respect to themselves, and to feed their Curiosity, when we consider, that
most parts of Friendships are deceitful, and that the frequent ruptures
(proceeding from the cold correspondencies which persons frank and open-hearted
find in their Friends) arise from hence, that they did not receive that Benefit
from their Amity which they expected. I mean, that we are not absolutely
offended that the Sincerity of our Friends is not equal to ours, but that their
want of Sincerity deprives us of the knowledge of their Sentiments, their
Designs, and their private Intelligences.

The second pretense to Sincerity is upon this account, that men may tell 'em
the Truth; which they desire not so much out of a Love of Truth, or any
aversion to error or falsehood, but fearing the ignomy of being Deceived. For
man at his first Creation reverenced Truth of that respect which he bore to
God, and that he might live under Divine direction; and avoiding Error that
lead him astray. But now he admires Truth for another reason, because it is an
ornament to his mind, and suitable to his excellence above other Creatures, and
hates Error and Delusion only because they are ignominious. Now we are sensible
of this shame, when believing that we have for a long time enjoyed the
friendship and confidence of such and such persons, we at length come to
discover that we are abused, that they have all along disguised their
Friendship, and concealed from us their most important affairs.

In the third place men of Sincerity pretend to remove from themselves all
suspicion of double dealing and knavery. For in regard they find, that Knavery
ruins irreparably their Reputation, they conceive an extraordinary aversion to
it, and look upon Sincerity as a Virtue proper to make 'em esteemed, and to fix
'em upon the Basis of true Honesty. They also hope to acquire the good will of
all the world, by their frankness of proceeding, and by the sincerity of their
words. Nor are they deceived, for upon the same score that they shun Falsehood
and Dissimulation, they love and seek after persons of Sincerity; they also
desire their preferment, and gladly serve 'em upon all occasions. For this is
one thing which men of Sincerity aim at; as not being satisfied that their
Sincerity begets them the esteem and friendship of men, unless they may be also
serviceable to 'em in their particular affairs.

Lastly, we make a profession of Sincerity to the end that others may have a
firm belief in us, and may give credit to our words. For nothing flatters our
Vanity so much, as that Authority which our Words have acquired through the good
opinion which men have of our Sincerity. So that it is the principal endeavor
men of Sincerity propose that are unbiased. And when they are nicely
Ambitious, it is their only aim.

We find at Court, even amongst those who are most addicted to Intrigue,
several that counterfit a sincere aspect, which they strive to make appear as
natural as possibly they can, accommodating likewise to the sincerity of their
Looks the tone of their Voice and gesture of their Body. They affect a free and
open Countenance, and a genuine Behavior, to gain Credit among those with whom
they have to deal. This sort of formal Sincerity we find in Chief Ministers of
State, in Ambassadors, in men of Business, and generally in public Persons. And
so long as they are dextrous at it, it serves 'em to conceal their Designs, and
is the reason that men believe and put a confidence in them; and it sets them
at liberty to follow their Inclinations and their Interests contrary to their
Oaths and Engagements, out of confidence that whatever they do will be always
well interpreted.

There is one sort of Sincerity that proceeds from the force of Self-love. This
we meet with in persons downright and of mean capacities, who upon all
occasions display the reality of their thoughts, not having the power nor the
address to conceal them. So that whereas men of parts so speak and behave
themselves, that they seem not to value their own Interests; these persons who
enjoy nothing but what is natural, presently disclose the Interest that opens
their Lips and sets 'em at work, in regard the violence of their Self-love
discovers and betrays 'em.

Besides these sorts of Sincerity, there is one sort more that follows the
temper of the Body, which may be termed Natural Sincerity. For there are
Virtues of Temperament (says Aristotle), that is, Dispositions and Inclinations
to exercise certain Virtues. For as there are some persons born Courageous,
others Chaste, so there are others naturally Sincere, and such as put a real
force upon themselves when they are constrained to dissemble. There are others
altogether opposite to these, who can never away with frank and free discourse,
but take a peculiar delight in practicing Dissimulation. This kind of
Disposition have I observed in several Persons, and particularly in some Women,
who tho very Loyal to their Husbands, yet were not at all Sincere to them.

Sincerity then is an opening of the Heart, or a politic frankness that serves
us to gain the esteem and friendship of Honest men; or a fear to be accounted a
Cheat; or a natural inclination to speak what a man thinks; or a nice ambition
that men should set an implicit value upon our words. Among the counterfit
Sincere, Sincerity is a refined piece of Knavery, and in them the sincere
aspect is the least sincere.

But Christian and virtuous Sincerity is not the effect of any Interest or
Passion, not so much as of that Passion to be thought Sincere, and they that
practice it pretend to aim at nothing more then Obedience to God, who forbids
Dissimulation and double dealing; but to uphold union and a good correspondence
among Men.

CHAP. III. FRIENDSHIP.
FRiendship is a rational Inclination, which abides in the person that gave it
Birth. It Is the original of all the Happiness that is to be tasted in Life. Who
can think Life it self alive, said the ancient Poet Ennius, without the sweet
enjoyment of Friendship? Who can live without Friends, says Aristotle, tho he
enjoyed all other Felicities? If some Deity, says Cicero, should place us in a
solitude, the most delightful and abounding in plenty, upon this hard
condition, that we should have no Communication with any person whatsoever,
would it not be impossible to lead a Life so ungrateful and wearisome? which
proceeds from hence, that Man having an invincible inclination to expand
himself beyond the bounds of any Confinement, becomes a troubte and burden to
himself when he cannot gratify his passions by imparting them to others. Now
in a Desert he would be deprived of that Consolation; nay he could not reap
that benefit by Society it self; even they who live together in the same place,
would live as it were in a Desert in the midst of Company, if their Hearts were
not united, or that there were not an Internal tie and association one among
another; which is the reason that Friendship, which causes the union of Hearts,
is so highly valued and sought for by all the World.

But this high price of Friendship, does not consist in the sole delight, in a
strict and settled Correspondence between two Friends. There is yet a higher
value to be set upon it, says Aristotle, because it is extremely beneficial.
For it is profitable, says he, to all Ages and all Conditions. To Princes and
Great Men, it is serviceable in the discharge of that Obligation, which chiefly
belongs to their Quality, and to share some part of their wealth to those whom
they honor with their Favor. She assists with her prudent Counsels those that
are in Prosperity; and teaches 'em that great Secret how to avoid Envy. Poverty
and all Calamities of Life look upon her as their Sanctuary. She moderates the
transports of Youth by her wholesome Admonitions. She succors and comforrs old
age; and they that are in^ the vigor of their years reap considerable
advantages from her aid For a man that has solid and virtuous Friends gains
from their experiences, and fortifies himself by their example in the exercise
of Virtue.

Neither does Friendship confine her self to the profit and advantage of
particular persons; she assumes to her self the establishing and raising of
whole Families, and prides her self in being the source and original of the
Grandeur and ^elicity of Empires. For which reason the most prudent
Legislators, as Aristotle has observed, have taken more particular care to
instruct their people how to preserve perpetual Friendship one among another,
then to enact severe Laws to prevent the violation of Justice. For they saw
well, than Friendship might surmount Justice; but that it was very improbable
for Justice to overtop Friendship. In a word, wherever Concord reigns (which
is the general Friendship of Fellow-Citizens) there is no need to fear the
punishments of Injury and Injustice; for Friends will never wrong one another,
but rathermutually study each others advantage. There is no need, I say, to
fear that any Citizen will encroach upon his Neighbors Estate, which
Friendship has made his own; or that he will wound their reputation that is
common with his own. The Concord of Citizens one among another is a powerful
tie, which will not suffer any Interest to make a division; nor is the most
rigorous Justice so sure a tie for the upholding and preserving of Order, as
mutual Friendship.

It is not so with Justice; which not having any predominance over the Heart of
man, therefore cannot so dispose it that it shall never desire to do an Injury.
Nay, tho its authority be never so great, it cannot punish the Crimes of all
sorts of People. For which reason Ana^harsis laughed at Solon's design, when he
gave him a sight of the Laws which he had made for the Commonwealth of A^hens:
Think thou, said he, to curb with so weak a Rein the Malice and Violence of
Men? Know not, that Laws are like the Spiders Web, that catch the Flies,
which the Hornets quickly snap asunder? Thus the Torments ordained for the
punishment of Crimes, are for those persons that are miserable and without
support, but the wealthy generally escape the rigor of the Law. Which is a
Truth so well supported and confirmed by all the reason and experience of the
world, that we cannot sufficiently applaud Aristotle, where he says, That
Justice was introduced into Republics to supply and repair the defects and
failings of Friedship.

Let us now discourse of the Inclinations of Friendship, and consider how they
are contrary to those of Flattery. The latter treacherous, mean, and by ass'd,
always creeps to Favor and Grandeur. The other Noble and Generous, loves the
miserable, and signalizes it self in misfortunes. She is kind to persons
abandoned, comforts and chears up the Heart oppresst with cares and secret
anguish. And we should do her wrong not to place among the Virtues a Quality
which comprehends and includes them all in one. Nor must we forget, that it was
she who wrought those Miracles which Antiquity has consecrated to her Memory;
that has famed Greece for persons obstinately resolved to dye one for another;
and celebrated Rome for Women abandoning their Lives that they might be
inseparably united to their Husbands.

We must acknowledge in good earnest, that there can nothing be more noble then
what men say, and what they think concerning Friendship; only we could wish
that it were real. But what is too true on the other side is this, that all the
motions of Nature are Circular; they who have narrowly observed the Actions of
men, assure us, that the momotions of his Will are the same; and that he is so
fixed and devoted to himself, that every time he goes beyond himself to assist
his Friends in their most pressing necessities, he returns to himself by some
private way; And therefore, whatever men believe or imagine, that he serves
another to be served himself; that he procures the settlement of others, to
secure his own, or at least to reap the honor of his several Kindnesses. "All
sorts of Friendship, says Aristotle, are like so many Rivulets, that take their
rise from the Spring of Self-love. So that that same Friendship which seems to
us most pure, is but the seeking of some advantages which we hope to obtain by
that kindness which we do to others. True it is, that it is a neat and dextrous
way of seeking, and that of all the pretenses of Self-love, that of Friendship
is the most honest, and that which most genteelly covers its farther
intentions. For among all the various Disguises that man makes use of to
succeed in the world, there is none so honorable, as when he strives and
labors to appear a zealous and faithful Friend. And therefore we need not
wonder if it be chiefly at the Court, where affected Friendship exposes it
self; that there she erects her Theater, and puts on all her gaudy Habiliments;
And lastly, that there she acts her Masterpieces, and recites her smoothest
and most affectionate parts; since it is there that they who take that course
to attain their ends, make the greatest advantages and obtain the highest
preferments.

But if there be no true Friendship, wherefore is it, that Ministers of State
and Favorites of Kings and Princes are so zealous to serve their absent and
disgraced Friends? This Objection has taken deep root in the Breasts of most
Men, and it is so much the more necessary to be answered, because the Reply
will discover a kind of Mystery. I say then* that the good Offices which for
the absent, and their diligence to make their advantages of favorable
Conjunctures, are so far from being done out of pure kindness, that on the
contrary they are the mee^ effects of Interests. A great Minister of State
testifies his Zeal for his absent Friend, and presses continually that he may
be recalled home. 1. Because his ^riend having assisted him to obtain the
Di^nity he enjoys, that Minister had lost his Reputation, had he not given his
Friend that public mark of his acknowledgment. 2. He does it for fear lest the
King should have a bad Opinion of him, as having frequently thus considered
with himself; What would the King think of me, should I be silent, and do
nothing for him, who ha^ don so much for me? 3. He has a design that his Friend
should be yet more united to his Interest. 4. He is afraid of his Enmity,
should he return, and he not be concerned in procuring it. 5. He has this
prospect of the future, that so long as he had shown himself cordial to his
Friend, he should find the like that would bestir themselves in his behalf,
should it be his turn to fall into disgrace. And this is a certain
Demonstration of what I assert, That a true crafty Courtier is never zealous
for his absent Friends, but when he believes the King has still some remaining
tenderness for 'em, but he never troubles himself for those that have utterly
and irreparably lost the good Opinion of the Prince, and are irrecoverably
fallen into his displeasure. With this sort of absent Friends, they soon break
off all manner of Correspondence, and raze 'em from their remembrance, as if
they never had been in the World, more miserable then the dead, who leave
behind 'em many times those Friends that wish 'em alive again, that they might
bestow upon 'em Employments and Offices, which they have at their disposal: Men
being generally so courteous, so human and generous, that they are always ready
to bestow their Favors upon those that are not in a condition to accept of
their Kindness.

After all that has been said, no Man will think it an irrational Astonishment,
that so sublime an Intellect, as that of Cicero, should follow all the Vulgar
Opinions, concerning this subject of Friendship; and that of all the true
Arguments that prove there is not any true and unbiased Friendship, not one
should be able to open his Eyes.

It Is strange, says Cicero, That seeing there are so many Millions of Men, all
strictly bound by the same tie of nature, we shall hardly throughout the whole
extent of the Earth, find two real Friends. But this can be no wonder to those
who apprehend that Man is a Prisoner to himself, and that self-love is a kind
of Waiter that attends him every time he stirs abroad, and brings him home
again: For it is apparent, that Man being in such a condition is not capable of
Friendship; seeing that by the means of Friendship, he ought to enter into his
Friend, and remain in the person* whom he loves. It Is a shame, says Cicero,
That a Command, an Employment, Money or Reputation, should have the power to
ruin the most friendly contracted Friendships, and that two Men so strongly
united and rivited together, should so easily become Rivals. And indeed it is
no way proper, that a Man who wishes his Friend as well or better then himself,
should be afflicted at the increase of his Wealth or Honor; nevertheless, it
creates those Jealousies that rend his very Heart, and maugre all the violence
which he uses to himself, they appear in his Countenance. And therefore it is
false, that he wishes his Friend those advantages of Honor and Preferment, out
of any sentiment of sincerity, as a votary for his Welfare. And this reason
alone should be enough to dissipate that same darkness which blinds the World;
force it to acknowledge, that Man is only amorous of himself. I cannot endure,
says the same Author, That Men should make love to grow from Business and
Interest, and that they ascribe so mean a birth to a quality so exalted; for
what have I to do with Scipio, or wherein can I be serviceable to him? I shall
answer his Question with another; For I would fain know, whether there be no
more then one thing of which a man stands in need, whether it be not as
necessary for him to acquire Honor, as to heap up Riches; and whether all
things which he does not enjoy, and which are proper to satisfy his natural
inclinations, are not so many Indigencies? But what are these wants and these
interests that destroy those amities, which to us seem so sincere? that we
shall see in due place: in the mean time, Cicero must give us leave to assure
him (with Plato,) That Friendship had its birth from Indigence.

To this we may add, That of all the Errors which Cicero has maintained upon
this Subject, that is the absurdest which undertakes to prove, That Freindship
not only equals the Fortunes of Friends, by laying their Estates in common, but
also levels our Sentiments for them, with those that we have for our selves.
Insomuch, says he, That the Name of Friendship perishes, if the Affection for
our Friends be not: as sincere, as great, as strong, and as tender, as that
which we bear to our selves: Whence it comes to pass, that we call a Friend our
Other Self, and that we say, that two Persons linked together in Friendship,
have but one Heart and one Will.

But whatever these Proverbs signify, certain it is, says Aristotle, That
there is nothing comes near the Friendship which we have for our selves; and
that it is both the beginning and the end of that which we have for others:
therefore where a Man shares his Estate with his Friend, where he surrenders to
him the Employment which he enjoys, where he gives him all the Honor that they
have acquired together, upon the same occasion; when he retires and leaves to
his Friend the entire Glory of an Illustrous Achievement: all these Acts, says
the Philosopher, proceed from hence, that Man is still first a Friend to
himself. For he does all these things with a real intent, that they should
return to himself, since they all redound to his Satisfaction and his Honor.

But how comes it to pass, that so many persons believe they serve their
Friends, out of pure and sincere Love, and that they do not perceive, that they
seek themselves in the Services which they render 'em? I answer, That we do not
perceive what we do for our selves, in what we do for others, because that the
most part of the time, the motives that engage us to act, ly concealed in our
Breasts; and we rather choose to persuade our selves, that we act generously
and bravely, then to study the knowledge of our selves, or to inform our selves
of our secret intentions. For should we be taken up with these Cares, and
frequently examine our own Hearts, they would soon discover the secret Springs
that move us and govern our Actions, when we also be most regardless of
Self-Interest, and would Demonstrate to us, that there is nothing so profitable
or delightful to us, or that flatters our ostentation so much, as the very
thing we seek for, when it seems to us, that we seek nothing at all.

We must therefore acknowledge that Cicero had the true Idea of Friendship, and
that he has given a most exact Definition of it, where he says, Than Friendship
is the perfect Union of two virtuous Persons; and That it is an Affection
reciprocal, constant, sincere and unbiased: and we would willingly have
subscribed to his Opinion, if instead of saying, This is Friendship, he had
said, This is that which Friendship ought to be. He also spoke much better then
he thought he had, when he affirms Friendship to be a Divine Virtue, since it
is no where to be found, but among men truly Divine; I mean among true
Christians. For the Freindship which they profess one to another, having its
Original from God, who always acts sincerely for the good of his Creatures,
obliges 'em to procure the Advantages of their Friends, without any respect to
themselves.

As for the Arguments he brings to prove, that Men are capable of a real
Friendship, they are extremely weak: But the most sinewy is this. We find, says
he, That Virtue is amiable by our natural inclinations: For if a sane
Constitution pleases us, if Riches and Honor have their allurements, how is it
possible but that we should be smitten with Beauty and charms of Virtue? She it
is that gives Life to Freindship, and renders her powerful and indissoluble;
two virtuous persons no sooner cast an Eye one upon another, but they conceive
a reciprocal Affection, so that there is no other ground of their Amity but
their Merit; and as for Profit and Pleasure, which have no share in the
production, they are only the pleasing fruits of the happy Conjunction.

This is a specious Argument, and dazles those that only slightly examine it.
But they who more seriously pry into it, may easily discover the Falacy: For
it is apparent to all the World, that if there be no real Freindship, but what
is founded upon Virtue, it is impossible that Virtue should stand when the
Foundation is demolished, that is to say, if there be no sincere Virtue, which
is the work of this Treatise to Demonstrate.

Add to this, that tho we should suppose there were Virtues real and sincere,
yet would it not follow, that they were beloved for themselves, so long as it
is so apparent, that no man tries Virtue, but only for his own interest; nor is
it the uprightness of the Law which makes him love the just; but he has
therefore a kindness for just persons, because they offer no violence either to
his Estate or Honor. Besides that, we are to observe, That the most excellent
Virtue, and most proper to beget Esteem and Honor, for those who enjoy those
perfections of endowment, more frequenly awaken our Jealousy and our Envy.

We shall see that Seneca is not much more to be admired then Cicero, when we
hear him recount the wonders of Friendship. Friendship, says he, is so pure a
thing, That neither the expectation of Wealth, nor ambition of Honor, nor
prospect of any sort of Interest, contributes to its Birth. Wherefore then do
we seek to make Friends? I would make Friends, to give 'em a share of my
Estate, to accompany 'em in Exile, to suffer with 'em, the utmost rigor of
their Misfortune: and I would make Friends to dye for 'em, if there were
occasion.

Now I would beg of those that have never so little knowledge of the Heart of
Man, if ever Friendship of this nature had beginning there, and whether it be
possible for a man to raise the Platform of such a Friendship, for the sake of
which he would ardently desire to despoil himself of his Estate, to sacrifice
his Life, and take upon himself the ponderous weight of another man's
Calamities. In good earnest, he must have a great tenderness for self-delusion,
who admits such a Dream or Vision as this, for real Truth. And that which must
convince us, That there never was any such Friendship in nature, but that it is
only a Chimera residing in the Imagination; is this, That if we should put the
Question to Seneca, where any Friends are to be found, and where not; he would
answer, That they crowd in throngs after Persons in Prosperity, but that there
is not one to be seen near the Cells of the Disastrous.

This same Truth, sufficient of it self to have defaced in Seneca's Thoughts,
those amiable Ideas of the Purity and Excellency of Friendship which he had
fancied to himself, deserves to be supported with some Examples. Among which,
that of Queen Margaret is very Remarkable; She tells us, in her Memoirs, That
being Arrested in her Appartment, as they carried her cross the Court of the
Lovre; they, who the day before, thought themselves happy, if she but
vouchsafed to cast a look upon 'em, no sooner perceived her, but they turned
their backs upon her. And that which Strada relates of Charles the Fifth is no
less Remarkable. He tells us how strangely that Emperor was Astonished, when
entering into Spain, after he had made an absolute Resignation of his Empire,
and all his other Dominions, he perceived, by the small number of persons of
Quality that came to meet him, That how Glorious soever the Person of a Prince
may seem, it is not that, but the flourishing Condition of their Fortune, which
Courtiers adore. And then it was, says the Historian, that Charles himself was
deeply sensible, what it was to be a Prince, without either Sov'raignty or
Title, and that he saw himself stripped like a naked Man.

Thus we have seen the Errors of Cicero and Seneca, touching Friendship; yet as
absurd as they were, they are not to be compared with those of Montaigne; who,
tho a person of so much Sense and Solidity, has discoursed of Friendship like
one in Delirium: And the reason why he has so grossly mistaken upon this
Subject; is, the great Affection which he has for gay Imaginations, lofty and
extraordinary Fancies; especially, when he finds in those Imaginations, that
there is any thing that flatters him, and which makes for his Advantage. And
hence it is, That after he has laughed at all those Ties and Obligations
between several Persons; to which, he says, men give so rashly the name of
Friendship, he maintains, That there are not only real Friendships, but such
Friendships where Men forget all thoughts of Service and Kindness for all
others, but only the Party beloved; where they so entirely abandon themselves
to their Affection, that they do not reserve to themselves, so much as the
disposal of their own Will: His words are these.

Among us men, there is not any footsteps, of Friendship to be seen. All those
sorts of Friendship, which Profit, Pleasure, Public or Private Business, have
begot and cherished, cannot be said to be Friendships, in regard they intermix
another End, another Cause and Benefit then themselves. Perfect Amity is
indissoluble, every man surrenders himself up so entirely to his Friend, that
there remains nothing for him to bestow elsewhere. He is perplexed that he has
not several Souls and several Wills, that he might dispose of all to his
Friend. This Friendship possesses the Soul, and governs her with an absolute
Sovereignty: this Friendship which must be only and singular, defaces all other
Obligations. The Secret which I have sworn not to discover to any other, I may
without Perjury communicate to him, who is not another person, but my self: My
Friendship with Stephen Boeotia, has no other Idea but it self, and has only
reference and relation to my self. It hales and draggs away my Will to plunge
and lose it self in the Will of my Friend, and then searches his whole Will, it
hales it back again to plunge and lose it self in mine, with an equal thirst
and concurrence. In this sort of Friendship, every thing lies common, Will,
Thoughts, Wives, Children, Honors and Estate. Then speaking in the same place
concerning Blosius, the friend of Gracchus, who vowed he would have fired the
Temple, had his Friend desired it; They, says he, who condemn the words of
Blosius as Seditious, do not well understand the Mystery of Friendship: for
they were greater Friends one to another, then to their fellow-Citizens, or to
their Country.

Can there be imagined a stranger blindness then this, to confound Friendship
with Love, and to ascribe to a virtuous Inclination, the Injustices and
Transportments of Passions the most violent? For then it is the part of Love to
devote a man entirely to the person whom he loves, and to make him forget his
Duty to God, his King, his Parents, and his Friends: for such is the fury of
this Passion that it transverses Reason, whose proper office it is, to mark out
to every man, and oblige him to the observance of all his Duties. This is the
Employment of Reason so long as she raigns in the Body, and she is no less
careful to preserve Man so steady, in the observation of Devoirs, that she
never suffers him to violate the least particular; or that he should be wanting
in his performances to God, to acquit himself of his Affection to the best or
most faithful of his Friends; tho he were beholding to him for his Life it
self. And therefore what Montaigne affirms: That Frieuship has a Privilege to
dispense with all Laws, and to render us innocently Impious, Sacrilegious and
Infidels; is equally contradictory, both to Reason and Religion, which is
apparent from hence, that the Pagan Theoligie teaches no such Doctrine, but
rather the contrary, that we never ought to injure Piety, under pretense of
satisfying the strictest Obligations of Friendship.

As for that other Assertion of Montaigne, That the Secret which he has sworn
never to reveal to another, he may without Perjury communicate to his Friend,
who is not another but himself: it needs no answer, for what shall we say to a
man, who by a childish piece of subtilty, and a pretty Equivocation, pretends
to justify Perjury, and the violation of plighted Troth.

Nor is it a less shame for that Author to extol to the Skies, those Roman
Ladies, who choose rather to kill themselves and dye with their Husbands, then
to survive and follow 'em hereafter; more especially the Wi^e of the Consul,
Cecinna Poetus, who to rescue her Husband from the Torments that were provided
for him, and to encourage him to be his own Executioner after she had Stabbed
her own Breast, presented him the Weapon, all bloody as it was, with these
Words, Here Poetus, take it, it has done me no harm. I say it was not
honorable in Montagne to attribute the effects of ambition to conjugal
Friendship, as one that did not percieve, in the courageous Resolutions of
Poetus and Seneca's Wives, to dye with their Husbands, that immoderate desire
of Praise wherewith the Romans were always inflamed: according to the Character
which Virgil has given of 'em.

Laudumque immensa Cupido. Rather it behooved him to have given the same
judgment of Arria, as the younger Pliny did, from whom he had the Story. Arria,
said he, the Wife of Cecinna Poctus, taking the Dagger to kill her self, giving
her self the Stabb, had before her Eyes, the perpetuity of her Honor: And this
is the general Reason of these sorts of Deaths, which we call Illustrious; for
which some other particular Causes, are always also alleged. As the usual
additional Reason, of these Ladies Selfmurder, beside their vanity to
Immortalize themselves, was their dread of being exposed to the indignities of
an inhuman Tyrant, abandoned to his own Lusts. This same Dread it was that had
a share in the Death of Arria; for she had reason to fear, lest the Emperor
Claudius, so enraged as he was against those who had taken part with
Scriboniances, should put her Husband to some cruel Death, and there make some
further attempt upon her Honor. And it is as visible rhat Paulina had the same
jealousies; for no sooner had Seneca her Husband received orders to dye, but
she offered to be his Companion in Death, and cut her own Veins at the same
time that he opened his: Yet when Nero had assured her, that he had no enmity
against her, but that he had a high value for her Virtue, and the Grandeur of
her Descent, she suffered her Wounds to be bound up, and her Conjugal Amity
permitted her to live.

The Opinion of the World, says Tacitus was, That Paulina was desirous to have
shared with her Husband, the Honor of a Death so magnanimously undergon, so
long as she thought Nero's resentment would not stop there, but when the Tyrant
had assured her, and that she hoped for better usage at his Hands then she
expected, she easily surrendered to the persuasions of those that exhorted her
to live.

But Montaigns greatest shame is, That hardy Ignorance which emboldens him to
reprove those that condemn the expressions of Blosius, who vowed he would have
burnt the Capitol, had his Friend Gracchus desired it. These words which seem
to him so wonderful, are however censured by Cicero, as the Expressions of a
Villain: and to the end it may appear to have been deservedly done, I will
confirm those words, with what Brutus said to the Romans. Tarquinus Collatinus,
my Colleague in the Consulship, is my intimate Friend; but because the name of
Tarquin is detested by you all, and for that it might raise a just suspicion of
me, I advise ye to Depose him from the Consulship. If therefore we are oblg'd
to Sacrifice the Particular Interests to the Public good; which, according to
Aristotle, is a Celestial Good, what are we not obliged to do for the sake of
God, or how can we believe, that human Considerations, should be more
predominant, then our Reverence of his Temples? so that indeed it is a hard
matter to apprehend, how a man in his Wits could imagine, that perfect
Friendship was an engagement to commit any Crime, and justify the Act.
Friendship, says Cicero, is a bad excuse for Miscarriages: for the first Law
that it imposes upon Persons, when first united, is neither to require or act
any thing to wound the justice of the Laws. Common sense would have taught
Montaign this sound Doctrine, had he not affected a particular Philosophy by
himself; or, rather had not his Judgment been perverted by his Vanity: and
indeed it appears, That all his Hyperbolical, yet weak and sickly Discourse
concerning Friendship, proceeded from hence, that he had an i^ching desire to
let the World know what rare Qualities he was endowed withal, and that he was
capable of a sort of Friendship not to be paralleled by any Example.

True it is, That although it be impossible that his Friendship with Stephen of
Boetia, should be such as he represents it; nevertheless, we find and agree,
that it was no common Amity, but such a one, that we may do him justice, as
ought to be ranked with that of Pliny the younger, and Corellius, or Cicero and
Scipio; that is, among those Friendships that are contracted without any design
to advantage our Estates, and which is not to be found, but among persons of
Worth and Merit, whom the Vulgar believe to be unbiased. However, they are not
so; in regard there is no greater profit, or which they whose Interests are
nice and delicate, more passionately desire, than what men of surpassing parts
(when linked together in Friendship) reap from the conversation of each other.
For that which engages 'em in this sort of Friendship, is the eager desire
which they have to be esteemed by a person, whom all the World admire, and to
find in a Friend a competent judge of his Worth. I have lost Corellius, said
Pliny the younger, and I bemoan his loss, for the love of my self, as having
lost a worthy Testimony of my Life and Conversation. Scipio, said Cicero, was
touched with that Love which I had for Virtue, and I was an admirer of his.
Therefore to define aright the Friendship of two men, both endued with
extraordinary Qualities; it is a certain League which they make one with
another reciprocally to observe whatever is valuable in each, and to esteem
each other according to their deserts.

Ordinary Friendships are civil intercourses, of which we expect to make
several Advantages, correspondent to our different pretensions, or to say
better, to our different Passions: So that our Passions are the visible causes
of all the Friendships which we contract. Seeing then our desire of Wealth, is
a Passion most vigorous and impatient; and that there are a number of people,
who have either no Estates at all, or not sufficient to support their Quality:
hence it comes to pass, that Interest is the occasion of all our ties and
Friendships; hence it comes to pass, that men fast'n themselves upon Kings,
their Favorites and Ministers, make use of all manner of advantages, and take
upon 'em all manner of shapes, to persuade them into a belief, how much they
are devoted to their Service. This is the reason that men crow'd in heaps to
the Courts and Palaces of great Personages, as men run to the Public Springs;
for according to the saying of Euripides, When the Earth is parched with
Drowth, then it most earnestly covets Rain.

The Passion of pleasure associates and links young People together; and
because they do not always find it in one place, by reason of the several
obstacles which they meet with, and for that they frequently take distaste, and
grow weary, they often change Friends, as Aristotle has observed.

There is also a concealed Ambition, which is a third cause of Friendship. This
we meet with in a sort of people, who devote all their time, and make it their
sole business to attend upon some person in high Employment, whose favor and
approbation renders 'em considerable in the World.

There is another sort of Ambition more easy to be discovered, and more common,
which engages several people to signalize themselves in all the affairs of
their Friends, on pupose to make a noise in the World, and to put a value upon
their Friendship.

But Men are not only deluded by their Passions, which are the occasion many
times, that they consider themselves, and secretly seek their own profit, when
they think to serve their Friends, after a manner seemingly* altogether void of
Interest. They are also absurd by their dispositions, and the qualities of
their temper, which some mistake for real Inclinations and Qualities of
Friendship. For the Cholerie, who act altogether violently, imagine, that when
they defend their Enemies, with so much heat, it is their zeal which inflames
their friendship, whereas it is their natural warmth and impetuosity that
chaffs and transports 'em. The Melancholic believe they love th^se whom they
affect, merely out of a capricious and obstinate choice. Women mistake the
softness of their Complexion, for the tenderness of their Friendship. The
Sanguine persuade themselves to be more then ordinary Friends, by reason they
are naturally of a caressing and pleasant humor, which always enclines 'em to
an obliging Conversation in Society, and a readiness to do kindnesses. Hence it
is, that men can never agree upon the Subject of Friendship, and that they form
so many different Idea's of it: For in regard that most people derive it from
their temperament, and has its Birth from the particular humor that
predominates in the person, it is impossible that all men should conceive and
be sensible of Friendship after one and the same manner.

Hence it is, that the Choleric, whose Friendship, is fiery and full of
transport, torment themselves, cry out and make a noise upon the misfortunes of
their Friends: whereas they who are of soft and mild disposition, in the Comedy
of Friendship, act only the part of Lamentation and Complaint, and sometimes
think it sufficient to testify their grief, by the sadness of their
Countenances and their Silence. And for the same reason it is, That these two
sorts of Friends, disprove and accuse one another; the mild and peacable Friend
not being able to apprehend, how Friendship should consist in making a noise,
and the impetuous no way approving a still and quiet Amity.

There are some Friendships which Men contract, only to obtain others, more
profitable and advantageous, or to preserve or re-kindle those that begin to
grow old; for the World is so judicious, and governs it self so strongly by
reason, that they who desire success in their designs, are constrained to raise
themselves as it were, by certain Engines, and to maintain their ground by all
sorts of Artifices: and the way which the honester sort have recourse, is to
fix themselves with the one, by means of others, and dexterously to make it
known, that they are the Confidents of such a Princess, or that they have
access to such and such persons of Quality, that they may have admission to the
Chief Ministers of State.

Here we must add to what has been already said, that men are not only false
when they assure us, that they love their Friends with a true Sincerity, or
feign to love those for whom they have no affection; but also when they would
make the world believe, that they have a great number of Friends. Which I take
upon me to affirm, because there are a sort of people who being suffered at
Court, yet neither valued nor beloved, are still vaunting the great number of
their Friends; so that when any person of Quality dies, they make a show of
being deeply afflicted, and bewail their loss.

Before I finish this Discourse, it behooves me to answer an objection that
seems to carry somewhat of weight. I mean that proof of Friendship so
remarkable in Pylades and Orestes, Damon and Pythias, so obstinately resolved
to lay down their Lives the one for the other.

We shall not go about to lessen this proof, as we might do, by alleging the
uncertainty of these examples, of which the first is no where supported by the
testimony of any Historian: Nor shall I urge, the rareness of the example, that
we meet with only these two; in regard we may well grant, that there has been a
person in the world who offered to lay down his Life, nay more that he suffered
Death for his Friend, without departing from our first Assertion, That there is
no sincere and cordial Amity. For we still maintain, that a man may seem to lay
down his own to preserve his Friend's Life, and yet that he suffers rather for
his own Honor; that is, to purchase to himself a kind of Glory, which is to
him so much the more charming, as being an act to be talked of altogether rare
and singular. There are some people, says Aristotle, who rather choose to
perform one noble and generous Act, then many that are frequent and usual. Such
are they who choose to dye for their Friends. Now if it be a difficult thing to
apprehend how a man can possibly resolve to suffer Death, and consent to his
own destruction, for the love of himself, we need no more then call to mind
several who and have killed themselves to be recorded by Posterity for men of
unparalled courage and resolution. We may also consider, that this difficulty
of conceiving such a Resolv'dness in Man, proceeds from hence, that we frame
our argument of a sick person, as if we were discoursing of a person in sound
health. For Ambition being one of the most violent Distempers in men, we must
know, that it is able to alter his Condition, to deprave his Appetite, and make
him more desirous of that immortal Honor that attends a Great Action, then of
long Life.

And by the same rule we are to judge of that noble proof of so great and so
unusual a piece of Friendship which Socrates gave to Alcibiades, when he
surrendered to him the Honor of the Victory which he won in Macedon. And we
may believe, upon good grounds, that Socrates foresaw, that Honor which he
gave to Alcibiad^s would return to him with a much brighter luster; and that
his nice and delicate Ambition would better relish the Merit of a great Action
which was without example, then the Honor of winning a Battle.

Let us then with Aristotle, resolve our Friendships into Self-Love, as to
their proper original; that it is rivited in the hearts of all men; and that
the difference between ordinary Friendships and those between persons of Worth
is only this, that they are more refined and concealed in the one, and more
visible and unpolished in the other. Let us acknowledge and sincerely c^n^ess,
that when we resolve to do some particular act of kindness for our best Friend,
it proceeds from a thought, that upon some occasion which we foresee, we shall
have need of him; or that he will be more careful in displeasing us, or more
diligent to keep us Company. Let us confess, I say, that these motives, and
some others of the same nature, present themselves to our minds, and share in
all our designs and resolutions to oblige those that we respect and love. But
if after all that we have thus demonstratively discoursed upon this subject,
there be any persons who flatter themselves, that their sentiments are more
sincere then those of other men, and that their Friendship is exempt from all
sort of Interest, we desire them but to reflect upon the Accidents that happen
to most men in the course of Human Life, and then how undeniably they prove,
that there is no sincere or real Friendship; Not only our Misfortunes and our
Business render them unfaithful, and discover to us what they are, but we also
find by woeful experience, that the saying of Socrates was not without reason,
when he affirmed, That a Man is never more at a loss then when he is obliged to
give an account of his Friends.

Therefore true and solid Friendship is nothing else but that same Charity
which unites two persons together to assist each other in the Service of God
and maintaining his Glory. If Cicero believed there were very few Friendships
clear from Interest, we may with much more reason aver, that there are fewer
Christian Amities; or rather, that they are so rare that we can hardly find one
in an Age. And I am the more positive in this assertion, because that tho they
seem frequent enough in the imagination of those that make a profession of
Piety, yet the greatest part of such people too easily persuade themselves that
their Friendships are grounded upon Virtue, when they are only grounded upon
Nature, and receive their Birth from Human Sympathies and corresponding
Tempers. But most assuredly we shall be astonished when the Day of the Lord
shall come, and the luster of his grand Appearance shall disperse the night and
darkness from the Hearts of Men, and discover the secret foundations of
Friendship, which Men now esteem so Holy, and maintain in so profound a repose.
The Heavens, says Job, which seem to be so clear and full of Brightness, are
not pure in the sight of God, nor are the Stars themselves without Sports. And
therefore the reason we have to fear, that Men seek after human satisfactions
in virtuous Friendships, is this, because they who are looked upon by the
greatest part of the world as Holy Men, have very few Friends,
Correspondencies, or Interests; and for that they cannot approve in most people
of worth their particular obligations to Women; believing that the person that
binds himself to a Woman, and devotes all his Services to her, how regular
soever he may be in his Life and Conversation, is altogether swayed by some
secret Ambition, if it be not of the number of those that are cherished by
Diligence and Confidence.

Could we discover what lies concealed in the folds of man's heart, we should
find in the breast of the most prudent and pious, sentiments altogether strange
and surprising. We should find a great number of Amors turned into Friendship;
others into Zeal for the good of the Soul; others covered with a pretense of
Kindred; we should find Amors intermixed with Ambition, and several other
sorts of such like Amors, which we could easily discover, were it proper to
dive into that subject.

CHAP. IV. CONFIDENCE.
HE that should deprive a man of all the Kindnesses which he receives from his
Imagination, and should only leave him those which he really enjoyed, would
render him miserable the greatest part of his time, or would at least abridg
him of a confiderable share of his Felicity. They who doubt of the truth of
this, let them but pursue him through the whole course of his Life; and they
shall find him frequently pensive in the midst of Wealth and Graudeur; which
are the Felicities which he passionately desires, and which he labors after
with so much care and trouble, and therefore they are only his Conceits and his
Visions that occasion his Happiness and chiefest Delight.

What greater proof of this can we desire then what may be drawn from a sort of
people which we see at Court, who pride themselves in nothing more then in
being the Confidents of Princes and of Ministers of State, and all that make a
figure in the World; and who are transported with joy every time they bethink
themselves, that persons of this Rank and that Quality, have picked 'em out of
a great number of other persons, and made choice of them to be the Trustees of
their Secrets; And this Confidence swells up their Hearts, because they look
upon it as an undeniable proof of their Merit, and as a mark of the Friendship
and Esteem which those Grandees have for them. Nevertheless it is most certain,
that those Grandees that put their Confidence in them, have no design to oblige
them by their Confidence, but only that either weakness, pleasure, vanity, or
necessity are the real causes of that Reliance.

Necessity is the visible cause of the great Reliances wherewith the person
confided in believe themselves honored; and such a man has but little reason
to think himself happy therein, or to have a just occasion of boasting. But the
general causes of Reliance are, the fear of disquieting and grieving our
selves, the allurements of Novelty, and our natural proneness to Communication.
And these causes dispose us in such a manner to open our hearts and rely one
upon another, that the smallest occasions are many times the most inevitable
snares to those who are reckoned in the number of the wisest and most reserved.
Insomuch, that two or three days travel together, or a short converse in the
Country, have a strange power to open their Lips, and disclose the secrets of
their Hearts.

There is a sort of Confidence, of which the cause seems to be altogether
strange, and wherein the persons themselves confiding have no share: But to
give the Idea of it, we must observe, that there are a sort of people who have
the Gift to make others Talk. This is a particular Talent, and sufficient to
introduce a man into Court, and to prefer him to the good Opinion of persons of
the best Quality. But they who have this, and are unprovided of all the rest,
are forced to take a great deal of pains, and yet are frequently nonplus'd and
put to the foyl. For in regard that they are not endowed with Qualities
agreeable, and that they are not able to gain the goodwill and favor of
persons of high Condition to whom they make their Addresses, they are
constrained to employ their utmost industry, and to make use of all manner of
artifices and devices to insinuate themselves into their Confidence. So that
whereas other persons that are in good esteem and acceptable whenever they
come, think it sufficient to make their Visits at convenient times; The others
never stir from their Houses, follow 'em, observe 'em and attend 'em all day
long, to take the advantage of every moment that they find 'em alone; and by
all the obsequious Oratory both of Looks and Gesture to oblige the Grandee to
vouchsafe 'em a word of his mouth. And this is the first Act of the Comedy.
After which they begin several general discourses, to engage the Grandee to
speak. But if none of those trains will take, then it is that they fall upon
subjects wherein they know the Great Personage to be concerned; as the Disgrace
of his Enemies, and the Fall of those great Officers who have obstructed his
Fortunes at Court; or some other piece of news that he believes will nearly
concern him; and then he opens his Heart, and perhaps talks more then he would
have done at another time. Therefore they have no reason to look upon
themselves as men of any great Importance; for it is not out of a desire to
please them, or to do justice to their merit, that they are thus entrusted with
the secret thoughts of great men, but only to discharge themselves of their
present cares or transports of joy, which they cannot contain within
themselves: So that they never make any reckoning of the secrecy of such
people but for their private occasions.

True it is, those great Personages are kind to the people in whom they repose
such a Confidence, out of respect to the necessity which they have of them; but
they value them no farther then they have occasion for their seeming fidelity;
And therefore there are no sorts of Confidents that men manage with more care,
then such as may become their Accusers, or injure their reputation, or put a
stop to their affairs. Which is apparent from hence, that bad Subjects who have
been designing against the Government, have always born a respect for those to
whom they have been forced to communicate their Intrigues, and that they are
much more kind to their Domestics where they have been constrained to hold
their secret Meetings, and who have testimonies of their private Conferences:
Therefore says Juvenal, Quis nunc diligitur nisi Cons^ius, and cui fervens
Aestuat accultis animus, semperque tacendis?
Carus erit Verri, qui Verrem tempore quo vult
Accusare potest.
So that if the Causes of Dependencies procure contempt and disesteem, the very
Subject of these Reliances must be much more contemptible. For what is it that
men talk with so much caution, and recommend to the Bosom of their Confident,
but certain vain stories which the world calls Affairs? What is it that men
that have the best intelligence are so impatient to communicate to their most
intimate Friends? Either that there has been a new Quarrel between two prime
Ministers that have always had a peek one at another; That a Courtier who
expected some great Preferment at Court, would be strangely surprised to hear,
that the King had declared himself in favor of another person; That there has
been a discovery made of a Ladies Intrigue, who was always looked upon as a
person of great virtue and reserv'dness. Can there be any thing more frivolous
then such stories as these, or less able to satisfy the curiosity, I will not
say of a Christian, but of a person never so meanly capacitated?

But if those Trusts which we repose in men are to be blamed, because they are
frivolous and dangerous, what shall we think of the false Confidences and
Reliances of those that are engaged in the Intrigues of Courts, reciprocally to
discover or conceal their Designs; to raise in one another Distrusts of their
best Friends, wherein they have no other aim but to deceive each other?

The only Confidence therefore most worthy of applause, is that when laying all
Trifles aside, we discourse of that which is only profitable for our Salvation;
and instead of deriding and sporting at the miscarriages and defaults of
others, we humbly acknowledge our own, and study real Reformation and Amendment.

CHAP. V. COMPLAISANCE.
THey who consider complaisant Persons, how they seem to forget themselves, on
purpose to sympathize with the humors of other men, make use of Complaisance
as a powerful Argument to show the falsehood of that Maxim, That Self-Love is
the Fountain of all Virtues purely Human. For, say they, how can Complaisance
derive it is original from Self-Love that rises out of its Destruction, and as
it were Built upon its Ruins? But after serious Consideration we shall find,
that although Complaisance appears so opposite to the inclinations of Self-Love,
and seems to sacrifice it every hour, yet she serves it with an entire
Fidelity, and is more beneficial to it than all the most excelling parts and
rarest qualities of men. Complaisance is a Quality very common and ordinary;
yet very proper to bring about the designs of the most Ambitious; in so much
that frequently it proves a most apparent piece of Fraud, and yet always
pleasing and agreeable; a Snare which all the world perceives, and yet catches
the most ^^fin'd and subtle Politicians. So that we may say to Complaisance
what the Marshal D'Ancre said to one of his Flatterers,

Tu m' aduli, ma tu mi paci,
Thou Flatters, yet thou Pleases me.
But the Complaisance which Men always observe to great Personages, in never
opposing their Wills; but humouring 'em without contradiction, is a Flattery in
Action much more delicate and pleasing then that of Words; For they who conform
themselves to all the humors of the person observed, seem perpetually to
encourage 'em, andpprove whatever they say or do. Which sort of Complaisance in
time brings great effects to pass; as being that which seems to hold a
correspondence with Self-Love, and to apprehend its real Intentions that we
should please her in all things.

There is also a Politic and Preventive sort of Complaisance; which I call so,
in regard that by means of this preventive Complaisance we approve the
sentiments of those whom we desire to please, before they have declared their
thoughts; which we meet with in persons grown old in Court Services, and that
are also men of piercing and judicious understandings. Which being joined with
their experience, give 'em a quick apprehension how the Prince, his Favorite,
or his prime Minister are inclined upon all occasions and affairs that present
themselves; so that they can easily foresee and divine where their
determinations will stop; which they no sooner dived into, but they presently
propound the very way which they forsee he intends to take; which pleases him
beyond all the praises and commendations that could have been attributed to
him. This clear-sighted Complaisance is of so high a value, and so beneficial,
that when it is in absolute perfection, it is sufficient of it self to make a
complete Courtier, and to advance his Fortune above his expectations or his
very wishes.

There is another sort of Complaisance, generally very displeasing, of which
they that make a profession speak well of all sorts of people, and excuse the
proceedings and actions of men for which no excuse can be given. This sort of
Complaisant persons signalize themselves when they extenuate the saults of
their Friends. And some of them will carry their Complaisance to that degree,
that they cannot endure that any great Personage for whom they have an esteem
should fail of any Quality, not so much as of those that are no way necessary
for so great a Man, and which are many times as little becoming their Grandeur
and Condition. There was formerly one of these Complaisants at Court, a very
honest Gentleman, but so great an Admirer of a certain Nobleman (whose Valor
was no way inferior to that of the most celebrated Captains in ancient times)
that he could not endure to have him denied to have an excellent Voice, a
Quality so little conducing to the Ornament of a great Commander, that it is
rather in the number of those that might redound to his injury, especially when
overvalu'd for it. Art not thou ashamed to Sing so well, said Philip to
Alexander?

There is another sort of Complaisance which is both unworthy and criminal;
When certain vicious persons are so devoted to their Friends, and persons on
whom they depend, that they applaud whatever they do, and are always ready to
act whatever they command; with this difference however, that some of them
excuse the unjust humors of their Friends, their Masters or Superiors, because
it is not in their power to resist them; whereas others make it their whole
business to encourage them in all manner of Violences and Injustice, and
sacrifice their Honor and their Consciences to those from whom they hope to
receive Kindnesses.

There is another sort of Complacence that is not only a trouble but a torment
to a man; which we meet with in several people, who sticking like Burs to some
great Lord, follow him like his shadow, and pry so narrowly into his very
intentions, that they be able to forestall him, and not leave him to himself in
any thing; that is, that would have the objects of their Respects to be without
action or motion, like that of Idols, only that they should be thought to be
complaisant and agreeable by being troublesome.

There is also an honest sort of Complaisance in those who prese^ve their
Digni^y, and are not always complaisant; in regard their Affections not being
entirely enslaved, they cannot consent to constrain and betray their own
sentiments; or rather many times because the quickness of their parts is such,
that they sind how Complaisance loses all its virtue so soon as it is
discovered, which it can never be, unless it be too profuse in officiousness.

There is yet another sort of Complaisant persons altogether opposite to those
already mentioned, who will stoop to a thousand base actions to compass their
ends; they will take upon 'em the meanest errands and lowest Offices that a
great Person will vouchsafe to require at their Hands, even to perform the Duty
of Servants and Lacqueys. This sort of Complaisance, that deserves only the
reward of contempt, is not always unprofitable however; for tho they are
despised by those that employ them, yet they fail not sometime to partake of
their Favors.

By what has been said, it is easy to see' that Interest is the Soul of
Complaisance' and that it disposes of a man so absolutely, that let him be
never so proud and haughty, it makes him the cringing Adorer and Slave of
Greatness and Splendor. But tho it be the most usual, yet it is not the only
cause of Complaisance; for there are some Complaisant persons, who pretend to
no more then to be estenm'd and respected in the Society where they live; and
others merely to gratify their natural humor and inclination. Which l^^ter
sort of Complaisance is the most (...) and secure; the rest all change
according to the fortune that attends the object. He that lately cring'd before
a Favorite, when he finds him declining, makes no more reckoning of him, but
treats him then like another man. He that studied to please those persons that
made up the Society of which he was a Member, leaves them and knows them no
longer, when the allurement of a Novelty has carried him into another. So that
there are none who are of a humor truly Complaisant, but those who are always
so.

All Human Complacency is without merit, or vicious in its original. Only
Christian Complacency is truly virtuous: First, because it is only through the
motions of Charity that Christians withstand that almost invincible proneness
to follow their own Will, to act according to the sense and judgment of others.
And secondly, because that among all the marks of their mutual Complacency,
there never was any one that contradicted in the least the Law of God.

CHAP. VI. CIVILITY.
THE Jurisdiction of Justice is confined within those narrow limits, that tho
she be supreme and renders her self formidable by those punishments which she
prepares for those that dare presume to violate her Laws, she is not able
nevertheless to terrify the wicked, nor prevent the irregularities of men, in
regard the Crimes which they conceal in their Breasts, and those that never
come to knowledge escape her Rigor; and for that there are a million of Errors
committed every day which come not within the compass of the Law. Virtue has a
jurisdiction of a far larger extent: For besides that wicked contrivances are
no sooner conceived in the Soul, but she punishes them by the remorse of
Conscience; she generally regulates all the external actions of Man in such a
manner, that she will not suffer any one in the least contrary to Reason.

And thus we see, that perfect Virtue is not only contented to furnish man with
the knowledge and sentiments of what he is to do in the particular exercise of
a regular Life in private; but she instructs him how to d^mean himself also in
respect of others. She also teaches him to know the particular obligations
wherein he is bound by the Tie of Society; such as are those of observing the
Rules of Justice in Commerce: And also those which men believe to be less
important, such are the obligations upon all men living together, to honor and
mutually to esteem one another.

It Is to the exercise of these Duti^^ that Virtue incites us under the name of
Civility. It Is true, that Christian Ver^ue obliges us by motives much ^ore
solid and exalted then are those that Human Virtue proposes to us. For she
instructs us, that since God has appointed Men to live together in Society, and
that he himself has assembled them together; it is his pleasure, that they
should reverence the League that unites them together by his Command; and that
they should carefully avoid all those occasions that usually cause the breaches
of it. And therefore it is, that he so often in the Sacred Writings recommends
the preservation of Concord one among another, to do no Injury, to bear one
with another, to Love one another, and to be always ready to pay mutual Honor
and Civility, without expecting Retaliation. For the frequent violation of
these Precepts is the most usual source of Hatred and Quarrels. The reason is,
because that men through the violence of Self-Love desire always to live free
from Injury, and look upon it as a mischief insupportable to be Contemned or
Disrespected: Insomuch, that if they be not Visited, if Men refuse to Salute
'em, or to speak to them with Respect and Esteem, they grow presently angry and
incensed against those that so treat them with scorn and indifferency; And this
same impatience transforming it self into aversion, estranges and dis-unites
the affections of Men.

As for those motives that govern those who discharge the Duties of Civility
out of designs purely Human, which rules the chiefest part of persons of
Quality, is no other then a desire to be accounted such as have been virtuously
educated, that they are men of Breeding and polished Behavior. Therefore it is
that they inform themselves with so much curiosity of the Birth and Qualities
of every person, tho never so little known, to the end they may not mistake in
paying those Civilities that are proportionable to their Condition and their
Merit.

Among the rest of Men, Civility is sometimes a fear of being otherwise looked
upon as savage Brutes, or men incapable of Discipline; but more frequently, it
is fear of prejudice occasioned by Incivility. For as we gain the Hearts of
those with whom we converse, by testifying a value for their persons; so we
provoke and irritate their ill will by slighting their Company. Hence it comes
to pass, that we find so many men irregular in their Manners, unjust and
unfaithful, yet very exact in the exercise of Civility; because they perceive
that men transgress against Civility with less impunity then they that offend
against the Laws of Temperance, Fidelity, and Justice. For seeing that amongst
all the offenses committed against the Persons of Men, there is not one which
he more keenly resents then that of Contempt; he conceives such a mortal
aversion against those that pay him not those Honors which the common Custom
of the world requires, that it is impossible for him to have any favorable
sentiments for those people. So that whenever he is constrained to allow them
those praises which he cannot refuse their persons, he always intermixes some
malignant character of their failings.

Vanity has also a great share in the Civility of Women: For they are overjoyed
to be obliged to visit their Friends, and congratulate their prosperity upon
any occasion; hoping there to meet with store of Company, where they may
display their Beauty, the Riches of their Habit, and exactness of their Dress.

Lastly, Custom and want of Employment contribute much to the Civility of most
people. Idleness, because that having nothing to do, they are glad to go a
visiting where they may spend their time with some satisfaction. Custom,
because it draws after it all the world; and for that an infinite number of
people go whither their obligations engage 'em, not as being led and guided by
the persuasion of Reason, but to go where they see others go before.

Hence it is easy to conclude, that persons civil, honest, and careful, which
we find so obliging, whom we commend, and in whom the World is so well
satisfied, seek only themselves and their own satisfaction in all that they
pretend to do to oblige others, and by consequence, that Civility which has no
other principles then those which actuate the generality of the world, is a
deceitful Virtue.

CHAP. VII. OFFICIOVS VERTVE.
I Cannot endure, said Zeno, those Philosophers that place a swarm of Virtues
in the Soul; for since we do not divide the sound Disposition of the Body to
make several sorts of Health, why should we make several Virtues of the good
Disposition of the Soul.

This Philosopher would have been much more offended had he known all the
Virtues which Interest has made; or had he observed, that in all the numerous
Families in the world, especially those of Great Personages, there are several
persons that exercise a certain Virtue of a particular Nature, which we may
call Officious Virtue. For they do visibly perplex themselves to have a share
in the repose of their Confidence, they only pretend to be near their Persons
for their Servants, to excuse their Faults, and commend their faithful Services.

But tho these persons that enjoy the Favor of Great Men, seem no way desirous
to make any other use of their Favor, but only to render it beneficial to
their Servants; yet are they not without three very great concealed pretenses:
The first is, to stifle the Envy that always attends upon such as are in
prosperity; which is a frivolous design, and without any ground. For there is
nothing so difficult as to cure those that are tormented with that passion; so
that all we can do is to prevent their open murmuring and venting their
displeasure. For all Advancements kindle and provoke Envy, and when she is once
raised, let the conduct of Favorites be never so prudent and obliging, it is
never able to appease it.

Their second pretense is, they are paid in the same instances of Civility.
Which is a very idle pretense, and prooceeds from the little knowledge which
they have of the Inclinations of man. For there is a natural malignity which
can never be rooted out of the heart; which is the reason that he cannot be
disposed to be really favorable and kind to those that use him well. So that
if men are so opposite one to another, we labor in vain to engage any to be
sincere to our Interests. For by what art can a person who stands right in the
good opinion of his Prince, so order and manage the Dispositions of all his
Dependants, that they shall every one support him, when they find an
opportunity to advance themselves to his prejudice?

But the principal and most usual pretention is, for the procuring of mutual
Favors, to serve them with the same zeal when their own concernments come upon
the stage. For they who have the Favor of great Men, generally propose by
others the scope of their desires, to sound and discover their dispositions, or
because their Modesty will not permit them to speak boldly for themselves. But
this last pretense is no less frivolous then the rest; since there is nothing
more apparent then that we are generally abused when we rely upon the
acknowledgment of men: For when an occasion presents it self, by which they
hope to reap the recompense of their good offices, they find themselves
deserted, or that the persons obliged only serve 'em by way of requital, coldly
and carelessly. Then they make bitter complaints, and load with reproaches the
persons that have so shamefully failed 'em. But while they thus reproach their
ingratitude, they are not aware how they betray themselves, and show that they
are not of a Disposition apt to do kindness; in regard they that are truly so,
find their recompense and their satisfaction in the care which they take of
others, and never think of gaining by the kindnesses they do.

There are none then but only true Christians who sincerely desire their
Neighbors advantages, and who for his sake only embrace all occasions to serve
him in his affairs. In regard that Charity that rules in their hearts, takes
from 'em those evil inclinations which they have inherited from Adam; and for
that God creates in 'em new Inclinations, which obliges them to do all the
Kindnesses they can for others, without expecting any return to themselves.

CHAP. VIII. CLEMENCY.
DEath, says Aristotle, is the most terrible of all Miseries, because it
destroys Life; and in destroying that, it ruins the foundations of the
enjoyments of Man, and deprives him of all manner of Felicity. The Stoics and
and Epicureans condemn this Opinion, not apprehending why they should place
Death in the number of Miseries that puts an end to all our Sufferings, as the
Haven and Sanctuary of the Miserable. Plato rises higher then they; Death, says
he, can never be a Mischief: For Man, what harm befalls him when the Soul
leaves him? Moreover, how can Death be terrible to Man; Death, that is the only
Original of his Happiness, which he cannot enjoy so long as he continues
chained and fettered to the Body.

Then again, if we are desirous to know what that Mischief is which we have
most reason to fear, he answers, that there is no Mischief more formidable then
Ignorance: For, says he, Ignorance is the Corruption of all the good Qualities
in Man, we may deservedly call it the Death of the Soul. For as the Life of the
Soul consists in acting with parts and understanding, it is apparent that when
Ignorance blinds her, she is disabled from governing and regulating her own
motions and the exterior actions of Man according to the orders of Reason; that
is, it hinders man from living Rationally, and such a Life as is most proper to
his extraction.

And among all the Virtues that ado^n the Soul, none adds more Splendor to it
then Clemency, which arises from the universal detestation we have of Cruelty,
imprinting in our minds a fair Idea of its contrary. For who does not abhor
Sylla for his horrid Inhumanities committed in Rome, and loath the memory of
Nero for the murder of his Mother, his Wife, and his Tutor? On the other side,
we are ready to adore Titus, when we call to mind the protestation that he made
to the Gods in Jerusalem, That he was Innocent of the Blood that had been spilt
in the Siege of that City. And when we remember his Clemency toward his
Brother; for after he had discovered the Conspiracy of Domitius against his
Life, he continued him in the same Honors, and the share which he had before
in the Government; and with Tears requested the Conspirators to be Friends with
him. But if we desire a true knowledge of Clemency, we must not consider the
Luster which Cruelty gives it, nor as she is in thoughts and sentiments of
those on whom she bestows her Favors; nor judge of her by what she appears to
be; for she is in in the number of the most glittering Virtues. We must behold
her as she is in her self, and weigh the reasons that deservedly incline us to
question, Whether she be a real Virtue or no.

The first reason is, That those Princes who are by Historians applauded for
their Clemency never exercised it but upon particular occasions, or at most
only during some part of their Reign. Now true Virtue carries an equality with
it: There must, s^ys Aristotle* be a long series of Virtuous Actions to make a
man Virtuous. We do not find this equality in the Clemency of Julius Caesar,
Augustus, or Alexander the Great, there not being one of all the three that
persever'd in his Clemency. Which is visible in the conduct of Alexander: For
when he subdued the Province of the Cosseans, Why was not he satisfied with the
punishment of those who had made some resistance, why did he not pardon the
Women and Children, but put all to the Sword? The same may be said of Julius
Caesar, and Augustus, both the one and the other having showed themselves cruel
upon several occasions where they ought to have exercised their Clemency.

The second proof which shows us clearly the Falsehood of Human Clemency, is
drawn from hence, that we find it coupl'd with Cruelty in the same persons
already mentioned. Which makes it clearly evident, that when they performed
those acts of Clemency, their inclinations and sentiments did not approve their
present Lenity; and that they did not carry in their Souls that Goodness which
always inclines us to Mildness and Indulgence; seeing that sort of Goodness is
incompatible and inconsistent with the severity and rigor of Cruelty. Caesar's
Cruelty appeared by the murder of a great number of the Roman Pretors and
Consuls which he put to Death in Africa, and by that of Cosconius and Galba,
who were murdered by his Soldiers in the midst of Rome, by his Order, or at
least with his Consent. The Cruelty of Augustus was apparent in the horrible
Butchery of near three hundred Senators and two thousand Knights. That of
Alexander in the Deaths of Clitus, Callisthenes, Philotas, and Parmenio; and by
the unworthy massacre of those faithful and stout Defenders of the Free-Cities,
who after they had surrenderd one City upon the Faith of Articles agreed and
signed to, were inhumanly murdered by his Soldiers. How then is it possible to
imagine that Real and Virtuous Clemency should abide in such cruel and bloody
Souls?

How, will some say, are the inhuman acts of these renowned men, infa^lible
proofs that they never had been Merciful? Could they not have been Merciful,
and after that become Cruel? This is the Language of Plutarch, Quintus Curtius,
and the most Historians, who after they have ascribed several Virtues to the
persons whose Lives they write, from certain Actions evidently Virtuous, when
afterward they find the same persons liable to Vices opposite to those Virtues
which they applauded in 'em, they would persuade the World that those Vices
proceed from the change of their Manners, and not from their Natural
Dispositions. But if I may speak my own sentiments, I must needs affirm it
difficult to believ^* that any men naturally Mild become Cruel, or that others
being born Cruel become Gentle and Humane: For our Inclinations are so fixed to
the Constitution of our Being, that we may as well change the one as the other.
True it is, there is a kind of alteration in our Temperament, and that when the
Blood is cool we are not so vehement and furious, as in the heat and
impetuosity of Youth; but that this change is sufficiently prevalent entirely
to destroy our Inclinations, or that the coolness of our Blood extinguishes our
predominant passions, is that which I could never yet observe. On the other
side, I have met with persons who at the Age of Fourscore were as choleric and
violent, others as false and cunning and malicious as they were at five and
twenty or thirty. I have also observed, that tho the fear of being counted
ridiculous be so powerful over all men, who have sense and understanding, yet
we see persons of great Wit, who when they come to be stricken in years, and
find themselves disabled by Age, yet cannot forbear their juvenile Gallantries.
In a word, it is my opinion, that neither Age, nor Exhortation, nor Promises;
nor Punishments, that can correct our wicked Inclinations, when they are
natural; for then the^ withstand all things, except the God of Nature.

That which persuades people to the con^^ary is this, because they believe that
when the inclinations are wearied, or repulsed for a time, they are quite
destroyed. Which is the reason that some erroneously mistake Cruelty tired for
true Clemency. Augustus, said Seneca, who after so many Murders and
Proscriptions, gave Cinna his Life, did that act of Clemency, that people might
believe him Merciful: For my part, I know not how to call that person Merciful,
who is weary of being Cruel. Others imagine, that persons who leave the Court
are cured of Ambition, when it may be only the discontents of Repulses and
Disappointments. Others applaud for his Liberality a man that is profuse in his
Expenses, not knowing that his Vanity restrains and curbs his Avarice.
Moreover, many people are deceived, when they persuade themselves, that a man
has not the same Inclinations, when they see his Inclinations do not tend to
the same object; not considering, for example, that Avarice is the reason that
we addict our selves to Gaming, and that we leave it off.

Besides these reasons to prove the error of that opinion, that men change
their Inclinations, and of Mild become Cruel, there is one much more
considerable, that is, that most people acknowledge nothing to be Cruelty but
that natural Cruelty which produced those Monsters of Men, every day drunk with
Human Blood, such as Herod, Nero, and Domitian; and for that they do not
perceive* that Ambition is Furious and Cruel, and that men possessed with that
Fury, are always ready to commit all manner of Excesses and Violences upon all
those they believe to be obstacles to their designs. So that let an Ambitious
man be never so Mild, so soon as he has conceived a design to make his Name
famous to Eternity, tho it cost him that immortal Glory which he proposes to
himself, and to obtain it there is a necessity of Extirpating whole Nations, he
makes no scruple of such Inhumanities. And this is the reason that great
Conquerors, such as Alexander and Julius Caesar, never make it a matter of
Conscience to use Sword or Poison for the destruction of whatever persons stand
in their way. Nevertheless it did not behove the Historians to say as they do,
that if Alexander and Caesar were guilty of Actions so Cruel and contrary to
their natural Goodness, it was an argument that their Manners and Inclinations
were changed, because at the same time that they showed themselves most Cruel,
they also showed several acts of Clemency. But if we would judge rationally of
those persons, and understand to what principle we ought to refer their
different Conduct, we must make a recollection of all the Actions of their
Lives. For then we shall see that they were persons that burned with an eager
Ambition to acquire a more then ordinary Renown, or to obtain the Sovereign
Power, and were so mastered by the interest of their Ambition, that they did
whatever their Ambition required. So that when their Ambition thought it proper
to pardon their greatest Enemies, how cruel soever they naturally were, they
pardoned without any trouble. If their interest or ambition required them to
cut the Throats of their best Friends, they condescended with the same ease. So
that they were cruel at the same time that they dispensed their Favors,
because they were as ready to put to Death those they had pardoned, if ^^e
condition of their Affairs required it. Whence it is easy to conclude, that
the Cl^mency of Alexander, Augustus, and Caesar, so highly applauded, was only
Policy. Nor is there any farther Question to be made of this, when we consider,
that Alexander's first Behavior in Asia was courteous and generous, as being
then requisite to make himself beloved by the principal Officers of his Army,
and the persons of Quality that followed him. Besides, that it was also a snare
which he laid for the people which he designed to subdue. On the contrary, his
behavior toward his latter end was rigorous and inhuman, through his mistrust
and jealousy of his most faithful Servants and best Friends, whom he put to
Death with so much ingratitude and cruelty. The same may be said of Caesar and
Augustus. For Augustus in his latter years showed himself Merciful, to try
whether his Clemency would succeed better then his Cruelty; and be a means to
qualify the Hatred which the people had of his Tyranny. As for Caesar, every
one knows, that at the same time that he received Cicero, and several other
considerable persons that gave a luster to his Party, with so much lenity and
mildness, he Banished and put to Death all that would not bend their knees
before him, and implore his Mercy, with submissions altogether adject and
unseemly. Plutareh relates, that Sylla took the same course, and that when he
massacred seven thousand of the Roman Citizens, he carefully preserved those
that were his devoted Slaves. The same Author adds, that the same person had no
respect to the Quality of the Crimes, but that he pardoned all that favored
his proceedings, or whom he hoped to gain to his party; and punished with Death
the slightest Offenses of those that were not by^ss'd by his Interests. Such
was the Disposition of these Victors and Emperors, sometimes Mild, sometimes
Cruel, and sometimes both together; employing both their Virtues and their
Vices, and making use of whatever may be serviceable to increase their Empires.

The Clemency of Nero at his first advancement to the Empire was the effect of
a refined and singular Policy. For he knew so exactly how to restrain and
conceal the savage Barbarity of his Natural Disposition, and to appear soft and
good natured, that during the first five years of his Reign, his Subjects could
not but applaud his Lenity and Indulgence; while he deservedly Gloried, that in
all that time he had not shed one drop of Blood through the whole extent of his
Empire. Domitian imitated Him in his Clemency, to the end that like him he
might afterward fly out into all manner of Cruelty. In a word, the Clemency of
these two Tyrants was feigned and concerted, artificial and deceitful. And we
say, that it was a sly trick, like that of some Beasts, that suffer people to
come near and handle 'em, that they may the more easily devour the people so
deluded within their reach.

The good Humor of Princes is frequently the cause of their Clemency; whether
that good Humor proceed from the Disposition of their Bodies, or from some
secret satisfaction of their desires and passions. For as often as we are
pleased our selves we have an Inclination to please others, and to grant 'em
what they desire, and what they earnestly request.

When Clemency is too frequent and customary with a Prince, it is so far from
being a Virtue, that it is in him the extinction of all Royal Virtues; as being
a quality so mischievous to his Dominions, that it is the most general cause of
their Ruin. It is an ignorance of the use and necessity of Justice; Without
which, says St. Austin, Commonwealths and Empires are but numerous Societies of
Robbers. It Is a false and ill-extended Goodness, a cruel Lenity, and a vicious
Indifference in reference to public Order and Repose. Such was the Clemency
which Titus affected after he obtained the Empire; nor can we forbear,
notwithstanding his being called, The Delight of Mankind, to censure the Oath
which he swore, Never to put any man to Death, which was an Oath by which he
was engaged in the sight of Heaven to be the Protector of Robbers and
Homicides, to authorize all sorts of Attempts and Conspiracies, and to ranverse
and destroy the Empire. As for that Oath which Nerva took at his first
reception into the Senate, that he would never suffer any Senator to be
condemned to Death for any Crime whatsoever, it was only a sneaking Compliment
which he put upon the Senators, disapproved by themselves, and which gave
occasion to the Roman Consul to utter this generous Expression: It Is a great
Misfortune to Live under a Prince that oppresses his Subjects, and commands
them as his Slaves; But it is a much greater Misery, to Live under a Prince
that gives them their full swinge, and prostitutes all things to their
Licentious Pleasure. If therefore we desire to know the real cause of the
Clemency of these two Emperors, we shall find it to be only a secret Fear of
being destroyed by the Factions of the Great Men, or massacr'd by the People,
as almost all their Predecessors had been. For Vitellius, Otho, Nero, and
Caligula, who all preceded Titus, had every one suffered untimely Deaths by
that means; and Nerva ascending the Throne, found it besmeared with the Blood
of Domitian. And this we shall find to be true, especially in respect of Titus,
when we consider, that Mildness was by no means his Natural temper; for his
Consulship was so cruel, that it was publicly said, That if he succeeded in
the Empire, he would prove a second Nero.

But notwithstanding that there are several false kinds of Clemency, it does
not hinder but that there may be a real sort of Clemency; and that this real
and virtuous Clemency may be a great Ornament to a Sovereign Prince. The true
Characters whereof are as follow:

Now we know, that although the proper function of Clemency is either absolutely
to remit those punishments which Offenders have deserved, or to remit something
of their rigor; and so all that are in Authority and have power to punish, may
in some measure be said to be Merciful; Nevertheless, in regard that Fathers
and Tutors have no other Punishment at their disposal then only such as are
called Chastisements; since they who have the power of Life and Death, as the
Judges, are not able to hinder the effects of their Sentences, and therefore
that only Sovereign Princes have only power to save those whom the Law has
condemned to Dye; all the World must grant, That Clemency is the Virtue of
Kings. Fortune, said Cicero to Caesar, could do nothing greater for Thee, then
to make Thee Master of the Lives of Men. And the Goodness of thy Natural temper
can inspire Thee with nothing more generous, then with a Will to make use of
thy Power to the ease of the Distressed. So that Clemency may well be called
the last Refuge of Man: For in regard the Laws are deaf, severe, and
inexorable, the condition of Man, says Livy, would be extremely unhappy, if
being so frail as it is, there were no way to escape their Rigor but by
Innocence.

This weakness and frailty of Man is the first foundation of the Royal
Clemency. For upon many occasions that touch him to the quick, and surprise
him, as for example, when a Man sees his Brother slain before his eyes, such a
sight so strongly moves his natural Affection, that he pursues the Mur^herers
like a Madman, even to the exposing of his own Life. This is therefore that
which a Clement Prince considers; for as he is always disposed graciously
to^^lend an Ear to all that may excuse a suppliant Criminal he willingly admits
such an allegation, that the Oftender killed the Man only to revenge his
Brothers Death; that he had not time to consult his reason upon so short a
warning, and (...) he was transported by his Natural Affections.

Crimes also committed by accident and misfortune are a second ground of Royal
Clemency. For if Crimes voluntarily committed may be thought to deserve Pardon,
because the force of Natural Affection has constrained the Will into Action;
with much more reason ought those Crimes to be pardoned, which a man commits
contrary to his Intention, as the French Gentleman, who shooting at a Wild
Boar, killed his near Kinsman and one of his dearest Friends.

Justice also is a third ground of Royal Clemency. For they justly exercise it
in favor of those Offenders, whose Crimes are less than the Services which
they have done the Public; and some regard may be also had to the Deserts of
their Ancestors. For Punishments, as Plato has observed, were not ordained to
prevent the Criminal Acts, since all the severity of Law, and all the power of
Sovereignty cannot prevent their being committed; nor does Justice in the
Sentences of Death propose the Amendment of those that are executed: Therefore
the Legislators had no other aim in ordering the Punishments of Crimes, than to
procure the public Good; that is, to terrify the Wicked, and prevent Honest
people from being debauched by their bad example. So that, as the Public
Interest excuses the Cruelty of the Law, and all Men approve the Executing of
Robbers and notorious Villains: The same Public Good justifies the Clemency of
Princes in saving from an ignominious Death, such as have signalized themselves
in Defense of their King and Country; by which means their good Service has
been more beneficial to the Kingdom, than the Fact which they committed, or the
bad Example given was ever prejudicial.

There was something of particular rarity in the Clemency of Theodosius: For he
punished his Anger by his Clemency; and never failed to make use of it toward
those that had incensed him, even to transportment. So that they were sure to
be pardoned the Offenses which they committed against him, who had but the
Address to provoke him to Rage.

As for the Character of true Clemency, by which we may know and distinguish it
from that which is false; Cicero tells us. That real Clemency agrees with
Justice. A Wise Prince, said the Stoics, ought not to have that effeminate Pity
which cannot endure the Punishment of Offenders; rather he ought to preser the
wholesome Rigor of the Law before the Dictates of a tend^^ Disposition.

But because the Moral Virtues are only imperfect Virtues, and for that they
cannot be perfect nor accomplished, if not practiced by motives Divine and
Supernatural, Kings that have a desire to be Virtuously Clement, must raise
themselves above the common motives and considerations, and in all their
Gracious Acts propose to themselves the imitation of that God who has so
bountifully displayed his own Mercy in the Redemption of Mankind from an
Eternity-of Torment.

CHAP. IX. MILDNESS.
WE may say of Human Virtues, what is usually said of Men, that they are born,
some under Good, some under Bad Constellations. For there are some Virtues that
are so extremely admired and have that wonderful success in the world; others
so little regarded, that they scarce deserve to be ranked in the number of
Virtues. For in truth we find, that Generosity, Clemency, and Magnanimity, and
some other Virtues of the same nature, are not only the object* of the People's
Admiration, but also the subjects of the ^ncomiums of persons of the most
rational parts: Whereas Humility and Mildness are hardly known; their ill ^ate
being like that of Flowers overgrown with Weeds: For as Flowers that ^ye so
concealed lose not their lo^ely color, so neither do those obscure Virtues
c^^se to be high^y valuable.

To be convinced of this Truth, we have no more to do than to examine, what is
the Office of Mildness, and to compare it with Clemency, to which it seems to
be nearly related. For we shall find that Clemency indeed shines with a geater
Luster, but that there is more of Merit in Mildness. And that which proves it
so to be is this, That Princes are not sensible of most Crimes but out of their
Duty, and that their Clemency not being able to withstand their Sentiments,
they put no constraint upon themselves when they grant their Pardons; whereas
Mildness has to deal with the boiling Motions of Choler, which rise in a
Person, touched to the quick in his concerns of Honor, or unjustly disturbed
in his Interests. And this gives to Mildness a wonderful advantage over
Clemency; and makes it evident at the same time, that we cannot rationally
prefer any Virtue before that, and has the power to subdue a Passion so violent
as Choler.

Aristotle lessens the Merit of Mildness; for he deprives her of a part of her
Employment, for he maintains That the Office of this Virtue is not absolutely
to destroy, but only to moderate Choler. And the reason that persuades him, is
this, because he believes that Choler is natural to a Man, when he concludes
that it is also beneficial to him, since Nature does nothing in vain. Thereupon
he assures us, that it serves him as a Goad that spurrs him awake, and pricks
him forward to undertake with vigor Magnanimous and Great Actions. Farther he
says, That Choler creates the Courage of the Valiant, and the vehemence of
Orators, and that it had a share as well in the Hand of Demosthenes, as in the
Fame of Themistooles; and then he adds, That Choler is not only useful to Man,
but that it is also absolutely necessary. For it is in him, as the Handmaid of
Reason, whose Commands she executes with fervency, and assists him in the
discharge of his principal Devoi^s. Moreover, it is Choler that strengthens and
enables a Man to surmount the Obstac^es which he meets with in the pursuit of
those Enjoyments requisite for his own preservation, and to repel the injuries
of those that seek his Ruin. Therefore says he, this Passion is no dishonor
to any Person, provided, the violencies of his Thoughts are proportionable to
his Provocations; and that he observe the Rules of Justice in his Revenge. On
the other side, all Men censure those who take notice of the injuries that are
done to 'em, and rank insensible Persons in the number of Fools, who are void
of all knowledge and sentiment, and look upon good or bad with the same
indifferency. Lastly, says he, Choler is grounded upon Reason, and arises from
a sense of injury unjustly done us, which is the reason, that while Pleasure,
which nothing can justify, as proceeding from intemperance, enters secretly
into the Heart of Man, on purpose to surprise him; Choler breaks forth and
openly demands the reparation of Injuries; and shows us, that she is not
ashamed to appear, and by consequence that Choler is no ill thing. This is the
opinion of Aristotle, according to which, a mild person is such a one as
suffers himself to be angry and in a Passion, and he that is never moved is
only an effeminate Fool.

But in regard ^he most solid and rational Philosophers have gainsaid this
Opinion, it will be an easy thing to ruin his Arguments, and to show, that
Anger is not natural to a Man, that it is evil in it self, and in its effects,
and so far from being Reason in the execution of her Commands, that it only
perplexes, precipitates and betrays those Orders.

Now that we may find out whether Choler be natural to Man, it is requisite
that we should describe this furious Passion, and oppose it to the Passion in
Man; And first let us represent it, as it came from the hands of Nature, and as
the Philosophers and Poets have depainted it in their admirable descriptions of
the Golden Age. For the Opinions of the one, and the Fictions of the other,
says Lactantius, are no idle Dreams and Imaginations, but the perfect Images of
the Manners of Primitive Mankind, and draughts of State of Innocence.

The First Men, say they, were real in their Words, faithful in their Promises,
and just in their Proceedings. They observed Justice in every thing, not for
fear of the Law, but merely of their own Inclinations.

-- Vindice nullo
Sponte sua, sine lege fidem, rectumque colebant.
They looked upon one another as Brethren, and finding themselves so straightly
linked to the same Nature, they had a tender Love one for another, and
cherished that Love with warmth of those mutual kindnesses they did each other.

They never parted their Vineyards or Fields, nor ever enclosed their Gardens;
they never appropriated to themselves the Gifts and Guards of Heaven, nor
looked upon the Benefits of Nature as their own in particular, which Nature had
bestowed in common.

Nec signare quidem, aut partiri limite campum Fas erat --
Caulibus and Pomis and aperto viveret Horto.
They were Mild, Humane, and ready to do good Turns, and what they got together
by their Labor and good Husbandry, their Bounty the next moment shared to
others, so that their Milk, their Wine, seemed like streams, which flowing from
their own Houses held on their course to the Habitations of their Neighbors.

Flumina jam Lactis, jam flumina Nectaris ibant. This was the natural
description of Man, Now let us hear a description of Choler.

Choler, says Seneca, is an impatient desire of Revenge, a fervent and
obstinate desire of Ruin. She calls for nothing but Weapons, delights in
nothing but Blood, and runs headlong to the destruction of others: When she is
onc upon the full speed, neither Decency, nor the remembrance of past Benefits,
nor the force of Friendship, nor the sentiments of Nature can stop her, but
being deaf to all the Remonstrances of Reason, nor able to discern either Truth
or Justice; She is wholly intent upon the satisfaction of her Fury, making
oft-times no distinction between the Guilty and the Innocent, and frequently
involving her self in the Ruin of others.

Circum erit enim vis atque injuria quemque. Atque unde exorta est, ad eum
plerumque recurrit. This is so faithful a Portraicture of Choler, that
Aristotle depaints it himself almost after the same manner. Choler, says he,
hears Reason, but just like those hairbrain'd Servants, that will not allow
themselves Patience to understand what their Master says, and run headlong to
obey their Commands, ever they know what their Errand is. It is also like those
Curs that bark at Friends and Foes alike, as soon as they knock at the Door.
These Comparisons are true, and it is apparent to every one, that so soon as
Reason has given this impetuous Passion but a sight of that Scorn or Contempt
which she has received, it presently betakes it self to Arms, never staying
till Reason has declared the nature of the Injury, or what satisfaction she
expects.

By these two indifferent Portraictures we may perceive how opposite Choler is
to the Nature of Man, whose Inclinations lead him to the Comfort and Advantage
of those who are like him in Creation, whereas Choler breaths nothing but their
Damage and Destruction: So that in truth, unless we deny Man to be Man, we
cannot presume to say that a Vice so inhumane and pernicious is natural to him.
Of which we may be fully convinced, if we do but consider, that the Virtue
which cures all the distempers of the Soul, and restores her to her Natural
Condition, endues her with a strange abhorrency of doing evil to any one
whatever. The designing of Injury, says Plato, is not comparable with a Man of
Worth; now it is the property of Anger to meditate Mischief; therefore Anger is
incomparable with a Man of Worth. Moreovel, says the Philosopher, Choler
rejoices in the punishment of another, which is an affliction to a Person of
Worth. To which we may add the s^y^ng of St. Thomas, That God takes no pleasure
to behold the sufferings of the Damned, but only in the order of his Justice,
which punishes 'em, and has regulated their several Penalties. Besides it is
most certain that Virtue not only renders Man incapable of doing injury, but
disposes him to bear with the wrongs which others do him. And that we may leave
nothing unsaid upon this Subject, we must observe that a Wise Man, such as
Aristotle, and the greatest of the Philosophers represent him, never believes
he receives an injury, and consequently that he is no way obliged to Revenge.

The Paripateties complain against the Stoics; alleging their accusation to be
unjust, that they uphold Anger. Since they only defend that Passion which
follows the Dictates of Reason, which is never kindled, but when it ought, and
as much as it ought to be; and which in the reparation of Injuries never
violates the Laws of Equity. But they complain without a cause, and justify as
weakly what is laid to their charge; for if there be any such Passion in Man,
which never shows it self but by the Dictates of Reason; if there be any such
thing as Anger, that never pretends in doing mischief, but one to the
Correction and Profits of our Neighbor, it only carries the Name of Anger, but
precipitates nothing of its Nature; since it is the proper Character of Anger
not to listen to Reason, to withstand it, and to delight in the punishment of
him that does the Injury.

However, some will say, this is no such Passion, as is bred in the Irascible
Appetite, Blind, Violent, and Frantic, and which for the slightest offenses
flies out into Rage and Fury. This is at the same time informed, softened and
regulated by Reason, and requires nothing from the Person injured, but that he
take a Revenge suitable to the wrong received. I Answer, That if the Motive
that excites us to endamage another, aims only at particular Profit, which is
the end that Men propose in punishing, or the public advantage, which is that
of Ministers of Justice, It is both just and reasonable: But if it tend to the
hurt of the Person; that is, if it be a desire of Revenge, and to reap our
satisfaction from the pain or vexation which the Party suffers, it is a Motive
malicious, cruel, brutish, and no way becoming a Man. Now such is Choler, by
the very Confession of Aristotle himself. For he defines it to be, A lively and
importunate resentment of the Injury done us, which cannot be appeased or
separated, but by the pleasure of Revenge. So that let our Anger be abated to
never so low a degree, yet so long as it is Anger, 'twill be a desire of
Revenge, and a Passion that rejoices in the harm which another suffers.

Having thus demonstrated Choler to be evil in its Nature, it will be easy also
to show that it is as pernicious in its Effects, and that they who are most
subject to it, are the first that feel their violence, as if it were against
them that Anger seems to turn her Fury. For no sooner is it kindled in the
Breasts of those Men, but it displays it self in their Countenances, disturbs
and alters their Looks in an instant, brings all the Blood into the Faces of
some, while others grow pale upon the same occasion. The Eyes dart forth
furious Glances, a sierce and wild Aspect threatens all the World, and in a
word, all the Natural signs of Madness appear in the Person thus angered, which
was the reason that the Ancients called it a short Frenzy. We are really
Fools, said Philemon, as often as we are Angry.

I forbear to tell how it disorders the very Speech of those who are mastered
by it; I shall only say this, That Men otherwise wary and prudent, when they
are under the Control of this Passion, utter many things contrary to Reason
and Decency. Which is so true, that Homer, so jealous of his Hero's Honor, and
lest he should say or do any thing to wound it, yet cannot forbear, when he
represents Achilles in anger, to make him reproach Agamemn^n after a manner
very scurrilous and unworthy, not only of a Hero, but of an ordinary Person.

But let this suffice for the External Postures of a Person inflamed with
Choler: Let us but consider the terrible Confusion with which this Passion
torments him within; the violence that transports him, the various Designs that
agitate his Brain, the number of Thoughts that darken his Understanding, the
sundry Fancies and restless Desires that pester and entangle his Resolutions,
and we may easily perceive by the disorder of his Soul, and by the various
Emotions, which Plutarch calls his Convulsions, that she is really dislodged
from the natural Seat of her Repose. And therefore we cannot apprehend why
Aristotle should affirm Pleasure to be a more dangerous Evil than Choler,
because, says he That Choler gives Reason leave to speak, and receives her
Orders, tho it mistake in the execution; whereas Pleasure insinuates her self
into the Heart, and gets the Victory over it before Reason can be consulted.
For if such an Author may be contradicted, rather quite the contrary is in
truth to be made out: insomuch that the Philosopher seems not to have
understood the Nature of the Motions of those two Passions. For it is apparent
that Anger is sudden and violent; Pleasure less violent, and rash; that Choler
will not suffer Reason to meddle in the least; whereas Pleasure permits her to
deliberate and judge, tho she labors all the while to corrupt her Judgment.

It now remains to show, that Choler is of no use, and so far from being
Reason's Officer, as Aristotle calls it, that it only consounds and betrays her
Commands.

The opinion of the Perip^teticks, Epicureans, and generally of all
Philosophers, who maintain Choler to be useful, proceeds from another opinion
of theirs, that Choler is as it were a Guardianess That Nature has provided for
Man, to watch over the preservation of all his common and particular Rights,
and insp^res him both with a desire and strength to defend them. For, say they,
this Passion enables him to repel Injuries which he receives from his Enemies,
and arms him to succor his Friends, his Kindred, and his Country; it assists
Parents and Tutors in the Education of Youth, and Magistrates in the punishment
of Crimes. That without her, Man would abandon his most important Duties, and
prove unprofitable both to himself and others. These are their most
considerable Reasons.

But we deny, that Choler is assisting to Man in the discharge of his principal
Duties; in regard experience tells us, that the Passions usually are the
Principles of virtuous Actions, which man performs; of himself; and that this
is the only foundation upon which the whole Machine moves. Only we say, that it
was for want of observing the nature of Choler, that those Philosophers
affirmed it useful for the service of Reason in private Revenges, in the
punishment of Crimes, in the Chastizing of Servants and Children, and in
magnanimous Actions. For that which Anger has common with the other Passions,
is to prevent the D^ctates of Reason, and darken the Understanding; but the
particular qualities of it are, to be most impetuous and violent, and not able
to contain it self. Which is evident in private Revenges, where a man to do
himself an imaginary right, most monstrously violates the Rules of Justice;
while nothing will serve him to wash off a petty contempt, but the Blood of him
that is by the Bonds of Nature so nearly related to him; sometimes losing his
own Lise to recover that which was never lost. Which is the reason that God has
reserved Vengeance to himself; and that the Laws commit the reparation of
Injuries only to the Impartial, that never received them.

As for the punishment of Crime^, who knows not that it is one of the greatest
Encomiums that can be given to a Judge, to be as sedate and calm as the Law it
self?

Quin etiam sonte^, expulsa corrigis Ira,
Et placidus delicta domas: nec dentibus unqu^m
Instrepis horrendum fremit^, nec verbera pos^is.
A Judge, says Seneca, should appear upon the Tribunal with such an Aspect as we
imagine should be that of the Law, calm and free from the emotions of Hatred
and Choler. And to speak the Truth, How can we fix this cruel Passion in the
Breast of a Generous Magistrate, who at the same time that he adjudges a
Criminal to deserve death, has not the least motion of Hatred against his
Person? who having nothing but Mildness in his Soul, at the same time that
there appears such a severity in his Sentences, is so far from satisfying his
Animositiy in punishing the Offender, that he gives to him as well as to the
Public an evident Testimony of his Affection? For what can be more
advantageous than to rid the Public of a Criminal, to prevent the corruption of
his ill example? And what greater kindness, says Seneca, can he show the
Offender, whose Life has been so prejudicial, than to render his Death
profitable, by putting an end to his Crimes, which he could not do himself?

The same is to be said for the chastising of Servants and Children; where
Choler sometimes will not permit us to observe any Moderation; and for that it
is impossible to exercise those punishments in our Passion, but that we shall
have some reason afterward to repent our severity. And therefore it is
requisite to delay those chastisements for some time after the Fault committed.
I would chastise thee, said Socrates to his Servant, if I were not in wrath.
Plato having the Rods in his Hand to correct his own Servant, made a sudden
stop, because he found his Passion up; At what time Speusippus entering
accidentally into his Chamber, seeing him in that posture, and demanding what
he was about to do? I am chastising my self, said he and punishing the Person
wherewith I was going about to chastise one of my Servants, by refusing my
anger that satisfaction which it desires. We take no care to follow those
wholesome Precepts, and Examples: If we delay our Corrections, we neglect 'em
altogether; which shows that we do not correct our Servant or our Children for
their benefit, but in revenge of the little Trespasses which they commit; the
one for their disobedience, the others because they do not serve us to our good
liking. However, ought we not to acknowledge, says Theophrastus, that Anger may
be serviceable to a good Man to excite his exclamations against the wicked?
Upon this condition, answers Seneca, That the better he is, the more his Virtue
shall increase with his Anger. Otherwise, says Plutarch, he shall be
constrained to be in a rage against those that are already transported with
Passion, and fall into the very fault which he reproves. But Seneca adds, What
can a vicious Man have in the persons of those that are vicious and irregular?
Is it their proneness to Evil, and their unhappy Frailty? If so, he ought to be
inflamed against himself, as partaking of humane Infirmity with them. For if he
do not acknowledge it in himself he is utterly mistaken: and if he only blames
it in others, he is unjust. Besides, how virtuous soever a Man may be, well he
knows, that he is usually esteemed much better than he is, and that the public
testimony is much more favorable to him, than that of his own Conscience. He
knows well that he is subject to a thousand Infirmities; and how can he behold
with Indignation the slips and failings of others, and censure 'em with Rigor,
He who himself has need of their Indulgence? It is evident then, that the
disposition of Wise Men in respect of the wicked, can be no sour and lofty
disposition, that puts 'em forward to reproach their evil Lives; but a
disposition mild and charitable, that pities their own miscarriages and labors
their Reformation. The Spirit of Wisdom is a loving Spirit, according to the
Sacred Oracle of Scripture. And there is no greater Testimony of Goodness, says
Aristotle, than that which we give to a Man, when we assist him in the recovery
of Virtue.

The last Reason that Aristotle brings to prove the benefit of Anger, is this,
For that the heat of Choler shares in all warlike Achievements. To which we
Answer, That if a Great Commander has need of being animated with this Passion,
to foresee the designs of his Enemies to range his Army in Battalia, to give
out his Orders to manage the Combat, and be himself in the heat of the
Conflict; we may thence conclude, that he cannot be valiant, unless he be
transported, and that he must be beside himself to manage any dangerous
Enterprise. But for all that, we cannot but admire the General of an Army, who
is always (...) of himself in Fight, even when danger most surprises him. For
we find that the Valor not only of Commanders, but of private Soldiers is most
to be relied on* and most equally proved, where it is least boiling and
precipitate. Therefore, says Plutarch, the Lacedaemonians, before they join
Battle, ordered the Flutes and Cornets to play certain soft and melting Airs,
on purpose to temper the heat and fury of the Soldiers. Lastly, if we do but
reflect upon those barbarous People who have no other courage, then I know not
what kind of natural Rage, that they never go to Fight in cold Blood, but as
they are smitten with the Image of the Injury which they often have, or believe
they have received, they fling themselves into the thickest of the Enemy,
without any Order or Government; but then it happens that notwithstanding the
strength of their Bodies, their ability to endure the rigors of all Seasons,
and the hardships of War, and notwithstanding the fury of their Onsets, they
are frequently vanquished by People more tender and softened by Luxury and
Pleasure. Story tells us, and every one knows after what manner the Romans
handled the Cimbrians, hideous for Bulk and Stature, and terrible for their
Aspects, who had already passed the Alps with an intention to Sack Rome, and
ransack all Italy, yet vanquished by Marius in several Great and Bloody
Battles. So that if the natural Fury of Savage People, be not sufficient to
make Men truly valiant, how shall we believe that Choler, no less Blind, no
less Wild, and Impetuous should be the Soul of Valor?

But whence then comes it to pass, that the Poets call Courage a Noble and
Generous Indignation, and that all the World takes Anger for Valor? It
proceeds from hence, that Choler has certain Qualities that resemble Valor.
First, it is Rash, and thence they believe it Active: It is Obstinate, and that
passes for Stoutness: It Is Terrible, and that renders it Formidable; and then
it is boldly Daring, which makes People imagine it to be Courageous. The
Vulgar, says Seneca, take those that are inflamed with Choler, for persons
brave and courageous.

A Second Cause of this mistake is this, That the vehemence of Choler is taken
for the strength of the Soul; whereas on the other side, it is a demonstrative
proof of its weakness; for this same Passion growing in the Soul like a
Tempest, rears it up, and drives it impetuously to and fro; So that although to
outward appearance the Soul may seem to act with vigor and strength, it is
really a violent Force that tumbles and tosses her like an angered Sea. Which
is more manifestly discovered from hence; that Choler more easily gets the
Mastery of Women than Men; of the Sick People than Healthy; of Age, than Youth;
of Men that live in Plenty and softened by Delights, than of the unfortunate
hardened by Persecutions and Adversities.

As to what the Peripateticks affirm, that Anger is serviceable to Eloquence,
there can be nothing more weak and groundless; and to which it will be
sufficient to answer with Cicero, That it is enough for an Orator to appear in
a Passion, but there is no necessity he should be really angry; and it is so
far from being necessary, that he should be in passion, that it is a dangerous
thing for him to be so; since the perfection of Eloquence, according to
Quintilian, consists in speaking all that he ought to speak, and not in
speaking precisely no more than he ought; but that Choler never speaks as it
ought to speak* but always that which it ought not. Therefore Caius Gracchus, a
Great Orator, yet one that chased himself so immoderately in Talking, that he
sometimes confounded himself by changing the Tone of his Voice, had one of his
Servants always standing behind him, who when his Voice was out of Tune, Tuned
it again by means of a certain Instrument formerly used to keep the Voice to a
constant pitch.

In the Second place we answer, That there is a great difference between the
vehemence of an Orator, and that of Choler. The First is nothing but the
strength of Reason forcibly expressed by Words, by the Tune of the Voice, and
agreeable Gestures: and this Vehemence never fails of making an impression and
persuading. The Second transports an Orator, troubles, distracts, disorders his
Gesture and Action; and by that means conveying his own disorder into the Minds
of the Hearers, puts 'em all in a hurry and confusion; Besides, that it is so
unacceptable, that it alienates the affection of the Hearers.

Now if we have a mind to view the Rock against which Renowned Aristotle so
desperately splits himself, he discovers it to us himself, where he says, That
we are to consider the Passions as the Arms of Virtue. And where he says
farther, That we are to make use of Choler, as of a Soldier, and never suffer
it to Command within us, or do the Office of a Captain. Whence it is visible
this Great Philosopher thought that Men might weild their Choler like a Sword,
which we take up, or lay down, thrust forward, or draw back as we please our
selves; which is a very great Error, since there is no person so stupid, who
does not perceive that if the Passions be Arms, they are Weapons that Fight of
themselves, as Seneca says, and of which we may affirm Man to be so little the
Master, that on the contrary they rather keep Man in subjection. As for what he
says, that Reason ought to take upon her the Conduct of Anger; he supposes
there that Reason is separated from Choler, that she considers its Emotions in
repose and security, and that they have Seats apart; whereas they are both
together in the Soul. And therefore so soon as the Passion of Anger is kindled,
it transports the Soul, and extinguishes within her the sight of Reason. So
that all that Reason can do, is to employ all her Industries to prevent its
growth; for, if she suffer Choler once to get a head she evidently endangers
her seit, to be at the mercy of that powerful and imperious Passion.

It is also certain that Reason knows how to make a good use of Choler in
regard it is the Natural Property of Choler to deprive Man of the use of
Reason; And for that this Passion is too blind, and too violent to be under
Conduct; besides that, the desire of Mischief and Revenge is inseparable from
its Nature. But it is not so with Zeal, which animates all true Christians, to
which the Holy Fathers have sometime given the Name of Anger, tho it arise from
the Sensitive Appetite, as it is there produced by the Love of God, in whose
Service it is but just that all the Powers of the Soul should be employed: and
let it be never so forcible or vehement, its strength and vehemence are still
obedient to the Dictates of Reason. A zealous Preacher cries out vehemently
against Sinners, but he is no way exasperated against 'em, nor does he carry
any Animosities in his Heart, while he reproves and reproaches them in his
Words. On the other side, when Men are in Anger, they chide and punish with
Animosity; and at the same time that they discharge themselves from these
obligations of Charity, they wrong tender Virtue every hour. Therefore says
St. Augustine, The most quick-sighted Philosophers, and whose Opinions approach
nearest to Truth, believe that Choler is absolutely evil, because, say they,
the slightest Emotions of it are malicious and irregular, and that forces us to
sin against Reason at the very time, when we do that which Reason commands us:
We ought to have the same opinion of all the Humane Passions, adds the Holy
Doctor; They resemble that Selve-Love that gives 'em Birth; they are vehement
disorderly, and vicious like that; whereas the Fears and Joys, the Sorrows, and
other Passions of Christians that derive themselves from Charity, are
Peaceable, Mild, Prudent, and Moderate.

If Human Passions then be so contrary to Reason, that it is impossible that
Reason should be serviceable to 'em, we may easily conclude, That it is not the
office of Mildness to reduce Choler to that point of Moderation, set down by
Aristotle, to which so soon as it is reduced, becomes virtuous; but to
withstand all its Emotions, and so to extinguish 'em, that nothing may be able
to re-kindle 'em. Therefore Mildness can never be sufficiently extolled, if the
same Mildness, of which some Persons make a show in their proceedings, were a
real Virtue, and if it effectually carried off the tartness and bittetness of
Choler, whereas it only seemingly removes it, as I am going to make out.

If we had a true Idea of the Condition of Man, or if we knew that he is
possessed with a Self-Love altogether violent and erroneous, and that this
Self-Love renders him impetuous, wild, and inhuman; the knowledge of this would
spare us the trouble of showing that Mildness is no real Virtue, since no body
being deceived by the seeming Mildness of a Person, that never was transported
with Passion in his Life, all Men would judge of him as of a Lion, which we
still believe to be fierce and cruel, tho we see him to be gentle and obedient
to his Governor; and would be so far from pronouncing such a person Mild and
Peaceable, that they would think it sufficient to say he was Tamed.

But what is it that has the Power to tame a Man? Either the Kindness that is
done him, or the Benefit which he hopes to receive: which is apparent from
hence, that the Favorites of Kings and Princes, and all Servants that are
particularly beloved by their Masters, suffer their cross Humors, and sometimes
their Rebukes and Repulses with an extraordinary Mildness, so that that which
makes it appear that th^s Mildness is only a Violence put upon their natural
Inclinations is this, That at the same time that they show themselves so Mild
to those upon whom their whole Fortune depends, they unchain themselves against
all others, like tamed Lions that only quit their wildness in the presence of
their Governors that feed 'em.

This same Mildness proceeds also very frequently from the fear of being put to
shame. For Pride, which inflames Man with a continual desire to make himself
the Master of others, causes him to be ashamed every time that he finds himself
transported with Choler, and that it appears he is not Master of himself.

Sometimes Mildness is only a vain and ambitious desire to triumph over a
violent Passion, that triumphs over the most part of Man; which sort of Vanity
is to be met with in Magistrates, in Philosophers, and all those that labor
for Moderation, and would be thought prudent Persons.

In other Persons Mildness is a desire to gain to themselves the Love of all
Men, particularly of those with whom they associate. For there are some
Virtues, as Valor, Generosity, and Magnanimity, which give us admission into
the Breasts of Men, and fix us in their Esteem; others, as Mildness and
Goodness which open their Hearts, and attract their Friendship.

Love of Peace and Repose obliges many People engaged in Marriage, to restrain
their natural Ardor and Impatiency, and to imitate the Manners and Customs of
Mild and Moderate Persons, because they find no better way to keep Peace at
home, than to give their Wives, their Children, and their Servants a good
example.

Mildness in Dispute is a secret desire we have to vanquish our Opponents,
which is an effect of our experience, that Heat in Disputes troubles and
confounds the Judgment, which is the reason we forbear to chase our selves; to
the end, that being in perfect possession of our selves, we may be able to
explain our selves with clearness and force, which is the most probable way to
prevail. The same is to be said of Mildness in Negotiations; For it is a
Moderation which we never regard, but only to get an advantage over those with
whom we n^goti^te, which is a cunning kind of coolness which certain stout Men
observe in Duels, by which they take time and leisure, and watch their
opportunity to thrust home. Signeur Contarini, Ambassador in France. to this
Coldness added an apparent Indifferency, insomuch that sometimes he would sit
all the whole time of the Conference without speaking a word to the business he
came about: When they waited on him to his Coach, he spoke of it as of a thing
which he had forgotten, and treated as he went down Stairs. But the Duke
d'Olivares made use of a stratagem quite contrary to studied Mildness; for he
endeavored by counterfeit, and meditated heats to put the Persons in disorder
with whom he negotiated.

The Mildness of Princes (who when they have it in their power to punish with
exile or imprisonment, such as go beyond the bounds of Respect and Duty, pass
by their indiscretion and insolence without any notice, or expression of their
displeasure) in such as are Men of parts, is no more than a politic Mildness.
Such was that of Philip of Macedon, who suffered himself to be reviled, even in
his own Palace, and when he had in his Power Arcadian (who cried him down all
over Greece) was so far from putting him to death, as his Courtiers importuned
him to do, that he entertained him civilly, and loaded him with Presents, so
that Arcadian published his Encomiums in all places with more zeal than before
he had defamed him. Which being told Philip by the same C^urtiers, that before
had solicited his death, Do you not see, said He, What an excellent Physician I
am to cure a ray^ing Tongue. Augustus also would never suffer any enquiry to be
made after the Authors of those scandalous Libels that were dispersed in the
Senate, full of Reproach and Calumnies against him. For which Tiberius blaming
him, he made answer, Thou argu'st like a young Man, let 'em alone to talk as
much evil of me as they please, it is sufficient that I have reduced 'em to such
a condition, that they are able to do me none.

Besides these sorts of Mildness, there is also a virtuous Mildness; for they
who are naturally inclined to Mildness are always so; whereas they whose
Mildness is a quality acquired by Study, are frequently transported with the
virtue of their Passion. Nevertheless we do not observe that natural Mildness
is no hindrance to those that are Masters of it, but that they are sensible of
the injury which they receive from the hatred of those that seek their
disturbance, and are desirous of Revenge, so that they are carried away with
the ^artness and malignity of Choler, tho they are able to bridle their
Transportments. Which is manifest from hence, that persons who are of a cold
and moist Complexion, and never subject to anger, yet notwithstanding all their
reserv'dness cannot forbear tart and biting expressions against those from whom
they receive abuses, and to take smart revenges upon those that offer the
injury; So that natural Mildness is only the peaceable and quiet behavior of
the outward Man.

And therefore Christian Mildness alone has the only privilege to calm and
pacify the Minds of those that are provoked by Injuries and Affronts. For that
is it which prevents the Insurrections of Choler and Revenge, which makes a
considerable difference between Mildness and Patience. For a patient Man
strives with all his might to support with mu^muring the injuries done him; but
he that exercises Mildness according to the Rules of the Gospel, does no wrong;
nor does he believe that others do him any when they persecute him; persuading
himself, that being a sinner he deserves the harshest and most rigorous
vexations that can befall him; in so much that we may say, That Mildness is the
perfection of Patience.

Now that we may understand how Mildness operates these wonderful Effects in
the Soul, we must enquire into the causes of Choler. Plutaroh, who perfectly
understood this Passion, observes, that it draws its Original from Pride and
Self-Love. Pride furnishes it with fierceness, its Inflation, and impetuosity
of Motion; and Self-Love supplies it with a Million of occasions that give it
growth and nourishment. Pride causes those sorts of Choler which are rare, but
cruel, implacable, and sanguinary. Those sorts of Choler which are kindled by
Self-Love, are less malicious, and more easily appeased, but they are more
troublesome and more frequent. There is, says Soneca, a nice sort of Anger,
which proceeds from a sower and difficult Humor: Now although this sower and
difficult Humor be in some persons an effect of Bodily Temperament, in others,
as Plutarch has observed, it derives it self from Self-Love, very nice, and
very dainty. For as it causes an infinite number of inconveniences, as it
requires much care and observance, so is it very difficult to be satisfied,
which is the reason that it is continually bemoaning and vexing it self.

Therefore that Virtue which encounters and utterly defeats Choler, must first
assail and destroy our Pride and Self-Love. And this is that which begets
Christian Mildness, because it is an effect of Humility; not of that Humility
which consists in modest Looks and postures of the countenance, which is no
more than Hypocrysie and a continued Lie; but of Humility and lowliness in
Heart, as our Savior calls it. For that Humility is the cause, that Christians
acknowledging themselves to be sinners, are so convinced, that they deserve the
scorn of the World, that tho they should be trampled under foot, they would not
think they had any reason to complain. It disposes 'em likewise to suffer
cheerfully the Privation, not only of all their Comforts and Conveniences, but
of things necessary for the support of Life. So that whatever befalls 'em to
their damage or disquiet, they are contented in all conditions.

CHAP. X. AFFABILITY.
LOwness of Fortune is such a Shame to Human Pride, that there is nothing a Man
will not invent or do to retrieve himself from the Imbasement of a mean
Condition. Therefore we find, that they who are born of obscure Parents labor
to exalt themselves by Places and Employments; or make use of all manner of
Addresses, to have a share in the Favor and Confidence of Great Men; that they
may be taken notice of, and that having no Greatness of their own, they may be
aggrandiz'd by the Grandeur of another. This is that which hurries such
infinite Numbers of People to the Palaces of Princes; it is not their Love nor
their Affection to those Grandees to whom they sacrifice their Service and
Attendance.

But because the high Quality of Men in the first station of Grandeur renders
them inaccessible to the Ambitious that are of mean Extraction, who neither
dare or can approach their awful Presence, either out of fear or respect, they
are overjoyed when some paces are advanced to make an approach easy.

But that Virtue which enclines Princes and great Noblemen to be kind,
courteous, and generous, and so well regulates their Civility, that it
corresponds with their Dignity; That Virtue which is called Affability, is the
most powerful Allurement which they call employ to gain the good Will of all
the World, especially when in such persons it is maintained to its full
perfection. For then they not only give free Access to all that seek for their
Protection; but prevent the Petitions of their Suppliants, and spa^^ (...) that
Modesty to which they are obl^^^^ as often as they make their Addresses, they
embrace the Interests of the People, and encourage 'em to bethink themselves
what may be for their Advantage.

True it is, that Affability is a Charm, whose Force it is a difficult matter
to withstand; but as true it is on the other side, that the Use which is now
made of it, plainly demonstrates it to be no real Virtue. For the Grandees*
that practice it most innocently, or to say better, least criminally, exercise
it only out of a lofty Pride; that is, to fill their Palaces with their
Admirers, which they look upon as a pompous mark of the Grandeur of their
Credit or their Descent.

I say then, that the least evil sort of Affability is that of Great
Personages, that affect to invite numerous Trains to their Courts only to
gratify their Vanity. For the greater Part make use of this Virtue to carry on
the designs of their Ambition. And these, how affable and civil soever they may
appear in reference to the whole Court, they are kind and affable after another
manner in respect to those persons that abide there in a good condition, and
may be useful to 'em in gaining those high* Preferments and Advantages to which
they pretend.

But Affability is not only Vain and Ambitious; it is also Malicious and
Cunning. Such was the Affability of Absalom. That young Prince, says the
Scripture, spoke to all that entered into his Father's Palace; asked 'em,
whence they came? what business brought 'em thither? And when he had heard
their Answers, he commended the Justice of their Causes, and offered his
Intercession, By these demonst ations of Goodness laboring to gain and seduce
them.

This Example not only shows us the Malignity of this Artificial and Crasty
Virtue, but how it is also particularly devoted to the designs of Usurpers and
Rebels, and that it is principally to be met with in the Heads of Factions. For
besides, that they have no other way, but by their great Care and Industry, to
oblige the* Adherence of their Friends and Confederates, who are usually
tempted and frequently overcome by the Allurements of the contrary Party, it is
impossible they should succeed without the Favor of the Multitude. So that it
behooves them to court all sorts of People, civilly to entertain all Comers and
Goers, and after they have spent the Night in making sure of their Friends by
all manner of Caresses, to waste the Day in fawning upon the miserable
Boutefeu's, who are in credit and esteem among the People; which occasioned
that Saying of Pindar, That the Life of the Head of a Party was an Honorable
Toil. The Affability of persons of Quality that have no merit, is an abject
Basen^ss of Mind, and an incapacity otherwise to support their Dignity.

Virtuous Affability proceeds from Charity and Humility, and is never to be
found but in a Person truly Christian. For while the Pride of his Condition
transports him to disdain all the rest of Mankind, Humility inspires him with
such mean sentiments of himself, that he is still ready to receive with a free
and open countenance all men that he knows are like by Nature, and whom is he
apt to believe more virtuous than himself. Charity also contributes to render
him Affable; because it inspires into all Christians a desire to serve their
Neighbor; which is the reason they joyfully embrace all occasions to signalize
their Goodness and Bounty.

CHAP. XI. COMMISERATION.
THE Life of Man is subject to many Evils, Misfortunes, and Crosses, that it
would be always consumed in vexation and discontent, if Men were not sensible
of their trouble, and took care to ease it. But Providence has provided for his
Relief, after a wonde^ful manner, by the different obligations which he has
scattered among Men. For these obligations engage 'em to interest themselves in
what concerns them, and mutually to assist each other. For which reason it is,
that through the Wisdom of Providence several are bo^n of the some Blood, to
the end the Good which they are able to do may communicate it self to their
Kindred and Relations, before Strangers; as the Juice that supports the Life of
a Tree, distributes it self to the Branches next its Body sooner than to those
that are at a distance. Besides, the same Providence infuses into certain
persons such a Sympathy of temper, that they contract a Friendship so soon as
they know one another; and that union begets an obligation to share in each
others Troubles, and to assist each other in all their Necessities. But as
Proximity of Blood extends only to a small number of People, and for that
Friendship is also more straightly confined, the most part of Men in misery would
be abandoned, if the same Providence had not found out the secret to join them
to the most happy by Nature which is common to both. For it is impossible but
that being naturally united, they must be sensible of the Sufferings of others,
and being so sensible, they must do what lies in their power for their Relief.

This is the Privilege of Pity and Commiseration, That they set no bounds in
relieving persons whom they love; they lend their assistance to persons the
most indifferent, even to those that have not deserved it, nay to their very
Enemies. Pity is the Refuge of all in Misery; and therefore we have reason to
bestow on her the highest Encomiums, if they who are charitable to the Poor,
and relieve the Distressed, do those good Offices from a true Piety and love of
God. But our Self-Love, that corrupts and taints all the Good we do, will not
let us be sensible of the Miseries of our Neighbor, nor does it inspire us
with a desire to relieve their Necessities, but only for a private interest to
our selves, as we shall plainly make out.

There are few People that Study the Nature of Self-Love, tho it be one of the
most profitable pieces of Knowledge that we can acquire; since without it we
cannot distinguish the fallacious from the pure and real Virtues. For Self-Love
is of a wonderful extent, in regard that all who are swayed by it, are
disturbed and troubled, for the Subjects they are nearest concerned in, or else
for such wherein they have little or no Interest: they have the said fear for
Accidents which are never like to happen, as for those wherewith they are
threatened: and instead of contenting themselves, to apply remedies to their
present Miseries, they employ their whole care to prevent future Misfortunes
and Calamities.

These which are the dispositions of Men full of Self-Love, sufficiently show
us, by what Princip^e they act, who act by the motives of Pity purely Human;
and that when they open their Purses to relieve a Person who is fallen to
decay; or that they save him from going to Jayl a poor Debtor pursued by his
Creditors; or that they show themselves officious in the relief of their
Neighbors, o'rwhelm'd with Sickness and Sorrow; or that they strive to comfort
a Father or Mother for the loss of an only Son; tho their Actions persuade us,
that they have a real compassion upon the Afflictions and Miseries of their
Neighbors; they are persons who have no Pity but upon themselves, whom they
serve, assist, and relieve in the persons of others, and wipe from their own,
the Tea^s which they seem to wipe from the Eyes of their Neighbors, and their
Friends. There are People who finding that through the Inconstancy of Human
Affairs, the Wealthy are in a short time impoverished by ill Fortune; that the
most strong, and most healthy when they least dream of it' are attacked by
tedious and incurable Diseases; and that the most happy become often the
Objects of Fortunes Hatred; take all the care they can of the Unfortunate, to
the end that others may take the same compassion upon them, should the same
casualties befall Them. So that they prevent all their necessities, and afford
themselves beforehand, all the Relief they can imagine: So that Pity is a
Sentiment secretly interested, a politic Foresight, or more properly the
Providence of Self-Love.

The Tears which Caesar shed when Theodorus presented him with Pomp^y's Head,
clearly demonstrates this to be a Truth. For it is evident that he wept at the
sight of that Spectacle, out of a certain apprehension that Fortune who had
betrayed Pompey, might prove as unfaithful to Him; And that the number and
continuance of the Favors which he received from him, were but a fore boding
Omen of her Inconstancy: For if he had bewailed the deplorable end of Pompey,
out of the least remainder of Friendship that he had preserved for him; would
he not have testified a real abhorrency of an Assassination committed upon so
great a Personage, and would he not have punished the Assassin whom he had in
his Power? But how could he be truly afflicted at a Murder that had delivered
him from so formidable an Enemy, and secured him the Empire? In truth, says
Quintus Curtius,They have little experience of the Heart of Man, who expect
compassion from thence, or think that the Misfortunes of others go so near
their Hearts, as to draw Tears from their Eyes.

This Idea which I have conceived of Pity, is conformable to the Definition
which I have given of it. Pity, says he, Is a Sorrow, which we conceive for the
Misfortunes and Afflictions that happen to others, out of mistrust that they
may one day befall our selves; Now if any one desires to be convinced that it
is this Mistrust from whence our Pity springs let him but observe, that it is
rarely to be found among those that are laden with Wealth and Honor, and who
are fixed in their Prosperity; or among that sort of miserable People, who are
overwhelmed with Calamity, that there remains nothing more for them to fear.
Therefore we have great reason to wonder, that Pity should be looked upon as a
virtuous Quality; much more when we consider that there is nothing to be valued
in the Causes that produce it, or the Subjects wherein we usually meet with it.

Pity in it self is but a mollifying of the Soul, which Virtue inc^ssantly
labors to fortify; so that it is chiefly for Pity's sake, that Plato condemns
Dramatick Poetry. There they represent, says he, Tragical Adventures, and bring
us Hero's upon the Stage, complaining and bewalling their misfortunes, to move
the Spectators Pity; not considering that being thus mollify'd, they are much
more apt to be cast down by Afflictions. Ought they not rather then to have
proposed Us Af^lictions proper to confirm and strengthen the Soul, and to have
brought upon the Theater such great Persons as bo^e their Losses and
Misfortunes with a Generous Equality, and Constancy of Mind? True it is, that
Aristotle is not of his Opinion, believing Dramatick* Poetry to be a lively and
natural Imitation and Portraiture of the Passions, to make Men either fear or
avoid 'em. A singular Remedy indeed, and a strange Undertaking, to pretend to
cure Passions by Passions.

As to the productive Causes of Pity, there are Two in chief, The First is
excess of Self-Love, which is the reason that Man extending his Prospect
through the whole course of his Life, searches out for Remedies for all the
Accidents that may befall him.

The cause of Pity is the mixture of Humors, where Phlegm predominates. For
moist persons are apter than others to receive the impressions of Objects; and
they weep the more easily, because they find some ease in shedding Tears. Hence
it comes to pass, that they who are of this temper, are not always alike
sensible of it; and that there are some times and hours of the day that they
little perceive it, as Phlegm p^edominates more or less. So that we must not
look upon that for Bread or Relief, which is merely given by the Commission of
Nature.

The Subjects that are most susceptible of Pity, are Old Men. Women and
Children, who are all Subjects, weak and easy to be moved; Old Men, because
their Minds and Bodies are enfeebled by Age; Children, because they act by the
impression which those Objects that strike the Senses, imprint therein; And
Women, because their Sex does not admit 'em to employments that awaken and
exercise their Courage; And beside, they want Learning and Knowledge which
fortifies the Mind; so that when bad Accidents befall 'em, they have neither
Strength nor Resolution: And for this reason they extremely bemoan all those
that they behold in durance, and that they would, if they might, says Seneca,
knock off their Shackles, and set open the Prison Doors.

So that although all Men have a kindness for tenderhearted Persons, tho the
whole World be anticipated in favor of Pity, yet we must beware how we take it
for a virtuous Quality; rather we ought to look upon it as a real Passion, as
it is reckoned to be by the consent of all Philosophers. True it is, that
Aristo^le ranks it in the number of those Passions which he calls profitable
and necessary; For he believing that all Generous Actions, and Noble Sciences
are beholding for their Original to Ambition: that desire of Immortality made
so many Hero's and Great Men Famous in all Arts and Sciences; that Choler aids
the valiant, and shares in all warlike Achievements; that Fear causes us to
foresee Mischief, and is a matter of Prudence; believes in like manner that
Pity excites us to supply the wants of the Poor, and to be liberal upon all
occasions.

Cicero cannot relish this Opinion, and laughs at Aristotle for affirming, That
Man could not be Charitable, were he not mollify'd by Pity. Man, says he, would
be very unfortunate, if there were a necessity that he should be miserable,
that he might relieve the Unfortunate; or that nothing but a disturbed or
troubled Soul could succor the Indigent. Or as if he could not, says Seneca,
relieve the Afflicted, without being cast down, languishing and sad like them.

But is not Pity, then, the usual Promoter of that Charity, which we exercise
toward our Neighbor? There is nothing more certain, Answers Cic^ro. But the
Question is not, How Men perform those actions which are laudable and virtuous
in themselves, but how they ought to be done, and what is the disposition of a
Wise Man, when he relieves those that are in necessity. Now the disposition of
a prudent Man is such, that he does good by the calm dictates of Reason, and
never stays till he be excited thereto by his Passions; So that the more he
increases in Wisdom, the less need he has to be moved by his compassion to
succor the Poor; because the Command of Reason is a sufficient motive to him to
do acts of Charity. This disposition of a Wise Man proceeds from hence; That
the forwarder he advances in Virtue, the more like he becomes to God, who
without being moved with the pains of them that suffer, delivers 'em by the
sole Dictates of his Prudence: And that which gives us some reason to suspect,
says St. Austin, That Pity is the weakness and infirmity of our Nature; that
the blessed Angels preserve Men from Shipwreck, although they feel no motion of
Compassion, rising from the danger wherein they see him. And therefore it was,
Seneca said, A Wise Man ought to be always charitable, but not always weak.

Now if we would understand how it comes to pass, that Men have such a kindness
for those that are sensible of the Misfortunes of others, and why Pity has
found advancement among the Qualities of highest value? I Answer, That Men have
conceived an advantageous Opinion of Pity for the same reason that persuaded
the Babylonians that Belus was a God; for as they had that belief, and paid him
Divine Honors, because they found his Statue to be a Sanctuary for Criminals,
so the vulgar seeing Pity to be the Refuge of the Miserable, have esteemed, and
honored it as a Divine Quality; By which we see, that Interest is not only the
Original of all fallacious Verues, but is also the cause of that Esteem and
Virtue which we put upon 'em.

Pity is applauded through that extreme aversion which Men have to Severity,
which is a quality altogether strange and opposite to the Nature of Man;
because it stifles within him all Sentiments of Humanity; and seems to shut his
Heart against all other Men, by rend^ing it insensible of their afflictions and
miseries. We may also say that seeing Severity is a Vice that hinders Men from
mutual Sympathizing in their Sorrows and Afflictions; it is a commendable
thing to be sensible of the Miseries which we are obliged to relieve: but there
we must stop; for if we go a step further, and draw this Consequence from
thence, That the Pity which we have for others merely out of Self-Love, is a
virtuous Quality; we begin to go astray, because the Sentiments that Virtue
inspires, are peaceable, uniform, and free from Interest; and for that Natural
Compassion is a Sentiment unquiet, unequal, and biased by Interest; so that it
is a quite different thing to be moved with Pity, and to be mollify'd by
Charity. Charity re-establishes the power of Reason in Man, Pity weakens it;
Charity makes him always sensible, and causes him to relieve, to the best of
his ability, the necessities of all Men, Friends Enemies, Servants, Strangers,
as also those that are absent. Pity carries him no farther to Relief, than he
is exposed thereto by present Objects. Charity considers our Duty to God in
relieving our Neighbor; Pity is only moved with Temporal Miseries and
Misfortunes.

We must however acknowledge, that tho Pity be in it self no more than a
weakening of the Soul, and tho the inducements to it are no way to be commended,
yet that it is to be valued for its Effects; for it occasions an infinite
number of good Deeds in the World, which would never be done without it. So
that when I have discovered the effects of it, my intention was not absolutely
to condemn it, and to find fault with the succor which we give to our Neighbor
by its Incitements; since it behooves us to approve all good Actions, by
whatever imperfect Principle they are produced. My design was therefore only to
undeceive those People, who believe they are virtuously tender and charitable,
every time that out of their Natural Compassion they take poor People into
their Houses, or pay the Ransom of any Captive: And to let 'em understand that
no Man is virtuous, but when he acts out of a virtuous disposition, according
to that Maxim of Aristotle, He is not virtuous, let his virtuous Actions be
never so great, who does not undertake 'em out of a virtuous Consideration.

So that if there be any Christians, as doubtless there are a great Number, who
do not find in themselves this virtuous disposition, this Exhortation may not
be unseasonable; That if all People that belong to God, are not yet so dear to
'em, as for them to symyathize in their Miseries and Afflictions, or be thought
worthy of their Sighs; Let 'em however follow the Sentiments of Nature, which
binding 'em with the common tie of Affection to all other Men, obliges them to
participate of their Troubles. Oh let 'em do that, through the motives of Pity,
which they cannot do for the sake of God and Charity!

CHAP. XII. GENEROSITY.
WOrds have this Affinity with the Lineaments of the Face, that as it is not
sufficient for those Lineaments to be lovely, unless they be placed in their
Natural Situation: In like manner it is not amiss for Words to be Elegant and
Polite, as being unacceptable when they are not in the place where they ought
to be. The word Generosity is very proper for the proof of what I assert; It is
a Word in good request, it pleases the Ear, and Men have affixed to it a very
fair Idea. And yet it is not sufficient, when made use of, as it is by many
sorts of People, especially by those who not having been bred at Court, pretend
nevertheless to speak more politely than the Vulgar; For we observe that they
give this Name to all manner of Actions and Virtues Illustrious and
Extraordinary. Whereas it properly signifies that Magnananimous Virtue only
that triumphs over Revenge, when it it is in our Power to take our
satisfaction, inclines us to make a good use of all the advantages offered to
us, over those that profess themselves our Enemies upon all occasions, and
spare for no Industry to do Us Mischief.

If we consider the Virtues, as they are ranked in our Estimation, we shall
find that we prefer all those Virtues which we cannot practice without offering
great violence to our Sentiments, before those which we practice easily, or
else as disposed thereto by our Natural Inclinations. And therefore Valor,
which is the reason that Man exposes himself to continual dangers, and that he
surmounts the resistance of Nature, is esteemed quite after another manner than
Goodness, Hospitality, or Humanity, to which he is inclined of himself, and of
which he performs all the Duties without any reward, struggling, or contention.

For this reason it is that they have placed Generosity among the most
excellent Virtues; for that there is none that requires a greater Force of the
Soul, or which encounters within us, a smarter reluctance, or more obstacles to
overcome. For what a great Command must a victorious Captain have over himself,
who having vanquished and taken a fierce and Insolent Enemy, who had provoked
and defied him in several Encounters, entertains him nevertheless, not only
with Mildness and Humanity, but with all the Civility and Handsomness
imaginable? Must not also he be a great Master of his Resentments, who favors
those that have caused him to waste the best part of his Estate through their
quarrelsome and litigious vexations, when after the loss of their suit so
unjustly commenced, it lies in his power to ruin 'em? Lastly, we must
acknowledge that we have need of a great deal of good Nature to pardon a Person
that has offered us a bloody Affront, when his Misfortune delivers him into our
power, and that we have an easy opportunity to revenge our selves. And that
which advances the Power of Generosity upon all occasions, is this, that
besides that, the Power of Revenge is so sweet, that it is a difficult thing
for a Man to surmount its Temptations; and generally all those Advantages that
he obtains against those that have adventured to contend with him, so swell his
Heart, that he has much ado to govern it.

We cannot deny but that the force of Generosity is highly extraordinary; But
thence it does not follow, that it is a virtuous Force: For as St. Austin says,
There are two sorts of strong Men, that divide all Mankind: the one sort, is of
such who are strong through the vehemence of their desires. The other sort,
that is to say, True Christians, are strong through the greatness of their
Charity. There is nothing that they will not venture for the Love of God. There
is nothing which the others will not dare, or are not capable to act for the
Love of themselves, and to gratify their Passions. To them they are beholding
for all their force and Strength; and it is their Ambition that empowers 'em to
vanquish their Revenge, For how sweet soever pleasure of Revenge may be, an
ambitious Person that loves Glory, finds the Honor which he seeks in a
Generous proceeding, much more sweet than his Revenge. Reason also joins with
his Ambition, and shows him, that Revenge, how pleasing soever, it is but a
Transitory Delight; where the Reputation which he acquires by his Generosity,
remains to perpetuity.

The Generosity of Prime Ministers, and such as are in Authority, proceeds from
their Interest; and therefore when they apprehend that a person of Merit, or
high Quality is obstructed, being their professed Enemy, and perplexed in his
Affairs, they presently use all their diligence to help him out of his trouble,
on purpose to gain his good Will, and fix him to their Interests. And upon the
same score they are more officious many times to gratify their greatest
Enemies, than their most faithful and zealous Friends.

Again, our Natural Malignity is the most usual cause of our Generosity; For in
serving those that have crossed our Designs, we do but heap, as it were, so
many Coals of Fire upon their Heads; that is to say, we do 'em kindness for no
other end, but only to make 'em ashamed that ever they did us any injury, and
to render 'em the more inexcusable, if they persevere in their Malice toward
us. The Spirit of Revenge may be reckoned for a piece of this Malignity. For we
believe that if a Person to whom we have been frequently serviceable, comes to
fail in the Obligations which he owes us, he will disband himself, and revenge
the injustice done us, much better than we can do our selves.

The Generosity of Victors toward the Vanquished, is either vain or politic;
which makes us wonder that Historians should extol the kindness which
Alexander showed to the Mother, Wife, and Daughter of Darius, for Actions
really Generous. For besides that their Sex and Quality in some measure,
obliged him to those Civilities, and that he could not have done otherwise,
without a great stain to his Reputation; he was so desperately in Love with
Honor, that his Soul not being satisfied with what he had gained by his
Victories, he labors incessantly to augment his Civilities; besides that, he
took care, as much as in him lay, to alleviate the misfortunes of those Captive
Princes, to prevent their Hatred against him that was the Author of all their
Miseries. He had also a particular aim so far to recover the good Opinion of
Darius, and the Royal Family, as to believe, that since their evil destiny had
deprived 'em of the former Luster, and subjected 'em under his Dominion, they
could not have fallen into better hands. And we find that Alexander obtained
the Honor which he desired by the Prayer of Darius, to the Gods, That if they
were fully resolved in their displeasure, to take from his Family the Diadem of
Persia, they would set it upon Alexander's Head, to recompense the Virtue of so
good and generous a Prince. The same Honor he received from Sisygambis the
Queen. This Sovereignty, said She, is so soft and gentle, that the Remembrance
of my past Felicity does no way render me uneasy in the Condition of my
present Fortune.

Nor was it out of any desire to revenge the death of Darius, or out of any
hatred of the Treason, that he so severely punished that horrid Assassination
committed by B^ssus, since it was his Perfidiousness, how execrable soever,
that put Alexander in the possession of the greatest Empire in the World. But
it was for his Honor, and his Interests sake, that he revenged the Death of
Darius, but chiefly for the sake of his Interest. For he put Bessus to death,
to prevent the Conspiracy of his own Commanders against him. And this is no
more than the Advice which Darius sent him some few Minutes before he expired,
that it would be no less Profitable than Honorable for him to prosecute his
Revenge upon that execrable Parricide Bessus, as owing that Example to the
World; and for that it was the common Cause of all Kings.

Less does it deserve the name of Generosity, when seeing Darius lying all
along dead in his Chariot, he covered his Body with his upper Garment, and
bitterly bewailed the Misfortune of so Great a King, for coming to an end so
unsuitable to his high Dignity. For it was no Sentiment of Generosity that made
him bewail the evil destiny of his Enemy, for that Darius was none of
Alexander's Enemy, but Alexander was Darius's, and had invaded his Empire; So
that it was Alexander himself who was the real Subject of his own Lamentations,
who reflecting upon himself in the Person of Darius, saw himself abandoned by
his own People, ass^ssi^ated by his best Friends, and over-wh^lm'd with those
dire Misfortunes that usually attend great Prosperities.

Among these sorts of People who esteem as Generous all those Sentiments,
wherein there appears something of Grandeur of Mind, as the Contempt of Money
and vain Honors; some there are that vilify this sort of Generosity;
Foreseeing, that almost all the World run after the Favor of Great
Personages, and court their Kindness, not only with a restless credulity, but
after a sordid and misbeseeming manner, they steer a quite concontrary course.
They refuse all attendance upon those Great Men, to desire any Kindness at
their hands, or so much as to speak to 'em. Or if any Minister be civil to 'em,
where he meets 'em by chance; or sends 'em word that he has a particular esteem
for them; instead of Answering these Cruelties with Respect, they become more
haughty, and rigid against all Courtiers; for poor spirited People, giving no
Quarter to those, who being free from the Corruptions of the Court, hold a
friendly Correspondence only with the Prime Ministers, to preserve themselves
in their Employments, or out of a desire to advance themselves.

The Conduct of these false-hearted Generosities is only a vain affectation,
and contempt of Favor, proceeding from a concealed displeasure, to see that
there is no probability of being introduced into Court, either because the
Employments which they desire are already full, or because they believe that
they who are in the Kings Favor are not kind to them. And that which begets in
them this Opinion, is this, that they are altogether insensible of those marks
of Favor shown 'em by the chief Ministers, while they believe that the Honors
and Caresses which they receive, tend only to enslave 'em; Whereas not one of
'em but is easily increased, when a Favorite offers 'em in earnest his Amity
and Confidence. This singularity of their Proceeding proves that it does not
partake of any virtuous Principle; For Virtue affects no particular Conduct,
nor does it absolutely renounce any; but always guides it self by the Rules
which are prescribed by Decency and Reason. Besides, this is a certain Maxim,
That all Singularity, under whatever forced disguises, proceeds from the
Irregularity of the Mind, or some ambitious Desire, or some Interest that lies
concealed in the Heart.

Therefore, as none but Christians have a sincere Love for those that hate 'em,
that persecute 'em, that despoil 'em of their Estates, and ^ear the very bowels
of their Reputation, with Slanders and Calumnies; so none but they alone are
truly Virtuous and Generous; and their Generosity is an excellent proof of
Christianity; For it is Christianity that has taught us to render Good for
Evil, and to imitate God, who causes the Sun to shine upon the Just and the
Unjust, and protects with so much Goodness the Lives of his Enemies.

CHAP. XIII. POLITENESS.
MOst People confine Politeness to Language only, and will allow it no other
Employment than to choose, to place and Muster up words together. Nevertheless,
most certain it is, that Men may be very rude in their Behavior, be Sots and
mere Pedants, yet perfectly understand Language. To Politeness therefore other
Functions belong much more exalted, especially those which it enjoys in
reference to the Soul. For there it is that Politeness renders our Thoughts,
our Relishes, and our Sentiments civil and delicate: and there it is that
Politeness causes this Delicacy and Civility to cast a reflection on our
Actions, our Proceedings, and all the exterior Behaviors of Men: So that it is
no where to be found but at Court, where all things are in that degree of
Perfection, where we observe some Persons so Polite, that they never act or
speak any thing to be found fault with, or that give the least offense.

But they, who together with an excellent Education, have obtained a great
Knowledge in the World, are not satisfied with being Polite in reference to
themselves; nor does their Industry bound it self in the regulation of their
own Actions and Words to that exactness, as not to give the least distaste; but
they find it necessary also to be Polite, in reference to others, and that it
behooves 'em to study their Humors and Sentiments, that they may understand how
to speak, and behave themselves, to render themselves acceptable in company.

Nor do they stop there, but as they are People that dive into the Breasts of
every Man, and for that they know he is less concerned for what flatters his
Inclinations, than for what is serviceable to his Interests, they not only take
all opportunities to serve others, like those that go under the name of Double
Diligent; but they accompany their Services with all that they can imagine to
be most obliging, and most capable to please, because they believe it is with
kind Offices and Services, as with Diamonds, whose value is in themselves, but
their Luster becomes more pleasing and delightful, according as they are Set by
the Artist.

We must not wonder then, if they that have attained the perfection of
Politeness, of which we have given the Idea, are so acceptable at Court, and so
well received in all Companies. And the rarity of this sort of People
contributes much to enhance their price. For if we consider the dispositions of
the greatest part of men, how that to engage some to serve us in our most
important Affairs, it behooves us to set all our Wits at work; how that when we
have earnestly importuned 'em, we must frequently renew our Requests; how they
will put us off from time to time, and at length give us a slight account of
our Business; we are over joy'd to meet with People that seem to divine our
business before we have discovered it, and immediately untertake it as their
own, and follow it close till they have accomplished it, to the wishes of their
Friends.

But whatever Encomiums Men may give this sort of Politeness, and tho we are
persuaded that there is nothing so rare or worthy of esteem, we can easily
prove it to be no virtuous Quality. First, because those Persons who are most
applauded for it, are People so far from the profession of Piety, without which
there can be no sound and real Virtue; that we always observe 'em most deeply
engaged in all the Intreagues at Court, acting altogether according to the
Fetches of Human Policy: and some of 'em very irregular in their Manners,
without Faith or Polity; which however we are still ready to pardon, provided
they do our Business.

In the Second place we never meet with this Politeness but in Persons endued
with abundance of Wit, and consequently capable to apprehend all the effects of
a Kindness don effectually, quickly, and with a good Grace: On the other side,
that Men lose the Fruit of their Services, by long delay, or when they must be
spurred on by Importunity, and tiresome Solicitations; and that it is not the
Obligations, but the manner of obliging that engages People in our Interests.

In the Third place, They that surpass in the Art of Obliging, never do all
they can do, but when they have to deal with Persons as quick as themselves,
who are capable to observe and value what is rare and singular in their
management.

Lastly, They chiefly wait for Opportunities to serve such persons as are most
considerable at Court for their Merit, their Quality, or their Fortunes. And
then it is that they spare neither Care nor Industry, to the end their good
Offices and Services may be embellisht, with whatever is capable to render
their Sedulity valuable, and their Persons Graceful to their Employers.

These are certain Proofs that their Politeness is no virtuous Quality, and
that we ought not to be so much dazzled with the Wonders which they perform for
the service of their Friends; but that all their Services, accomplished with so
much Zeal, so much Diligence, so much Fidelity and Exactness, are but so many
examples of Services to show us after what a ready, exact and perfect manner
they would be served themselves. If any question it, they need no more than
call to mind the Complaints which they make themselves of Persons, who being
obliged to their former Kindnesses, forsake 'em in their Business, or being
entrusted in their Affairs, either neglect or solicit 'em so carelessly, as if
they never minded what became either of themselves or their Friends.

True Christians therefore are the only Persons in whom this sort of Politeness
becomes a Virtue, and who are owners of all the Qualities that are attributed
to it: For they have so great a value for their Neighbors, that they study all
manner of Precaution to behave themselves, as not to give the least Offense in
any of their Words or Actions. They study all the Complacency imaginable, and
they embrace the Interests of their Neighbors with an Affection so Sincere and
Cordial, that in all they act for him it is visible, that they never seek
themselves. So that we may say that Charity, which is the Original of that
Conduct which they observe toward their Neighbors, is the sole and only true
Politeness, and real Civility, and that of all other Men, Christians are the
truly Polite and Civil People.

CHAP. XIV. HVMILITY.
AS there are certain Vizards so fine and so natural, that they can hardly be
distinguished from the Countenances themselves; and others so clownishly and
botche^ly, that they are easily discerned. So there are some Virtues so well
counterfeited that we take 'em frequently for current; and others, of which the
World easily discerns the Cheat. When we see a Person upon the Scaffold that
faces Death with Resolution, and who chooses rather to suffer than to betray
his intimate Friend by his Confession; to weaken such a convincing Proof of
Friendship, it behooves us to have sounded the very bottom of that Man's Heart,
to discover that his Friendship had a less share in that action than his
Vanity. But when we find People Vain in their Re^inues, Haughty in their
Behavior, yet always affecting the lower Hand, and upon all occasions
pretending low Thoughts of themselves; there needs no such piercing judgment to
discern their feigned Modesty, and their counterfeit Humility.

We may say, and that not untruly, that it was in the bosom of the Court, that
this false Virtue was first bred. For it is the Court only that produces this
sort of People that are ashamed and offended at the Encomiunts given them, that
undervalue themselves, and who being extremely troubled to receive Honors that
are due to 'em, pay to others more than they are obliged to do. Which proceeds
from hence, that it is properly at the Court, where Fortune enflames Ambition
to show the greatest Favors. For enflamed Ambition causes Courtiers
continually to assume new Shapes, and to all manner of Parts to obtain and
extol those Favors. In other places she dispences but petty Graces; Whence we
observe, That Men are more Natural in the Country, that they do not force their
Inclinations, and Study less to counterfeit old Virtues, and invent new ones.

To discover therefore the falsehood of this Virtue, it behooves us to consider,
That Pride is so much the absolute Master of Man, that it is the Prince of all
his Internal Inclinations, and of all his Actions. We are to observe moreover,
not without astonishment, That it is equally the cause as well of his Emotions
as of his Repose; and that after it has raised Seditions in his Soul, it as
suddenly calms 'em by a miraculous Power. For at the same time that Delicacy
renders Man sensible of an Injury, Pride at the same instant kindles his Anger,
and that he betakes himself to his Arms to kindle his Resentment; and when his
Transportments, and his Impetuosities disband him; Pride suddenly appeases
him, and restores him to his first settlement. So that Aristotle's definition
of Nature, perfectly agrees with Pride, as being the true principle of Man's
Motion and Rest.

We are also to observe, that Pride is Morally invincible; that the meanest
condition never abates it, no disgraceful or unfortunate accident humbles it,
nor can any Puissance make it submit; So that a proud Person may well be
trampled under foot, but never be tamed.

If Pride then Governs and masters Man, and will never suffer him to be
subdued, as we all find by experience; it is easy from hence to conclude, That
when a Man despises and rebukes himself, his Words betray his Thoughts; and
that every time he debases himself before others, it is only to exalt himself
above others; and that he would never act so contrary to his proud and haughty
Genius, were he not convinced that there was nothing more proper to advance him
than his own voluntary unworthy Thoughts of himself.

There are other Marks to show, that the Humility of the falsely Humble, is no
more than Dissimulation. The First is, That at the same time that they seem to
have such a scorn and contempt of themselves, they continually observe the
behavior of others toward 'em; they rigorously expect from others those
Formalities and Respects which are their due, and revenge the least injuries
done 'em. Wherefore Guarini said, That there was no fair Weather so deceitful,
as that which appears in the Countenances of Courtiers; in regard that at the
same time that they seemed calm and sedate, a Word, or a Gesture would change
all their Serenity into Storm and Tempest.

Gente placida, in vista e mansueta
Mapriu del cupo Mar tumida e fera
A sort of People in their Looks most mild.
But angered once, than Sormy Seas more wild.
A Second Mark is this, That they are smooth and supple, in respect of Persons
useful to their Interests, haughty in their Behavior to others. Cylla, said
Plutarch, humbled himself before those of whom he stood in need, but would be
adored by those that stood in need of him.

The Third Mark is this, That they who so willingly affect the lowest Seats at
Festivals and public Assemblies, never debase themselves in that manner, but
with regard to such persons who they know they can take place of when they
please without contending for it; and that no Men are more jealous to preserve
their rank among their Equals; and that it is a pain to 'em to submit to those
whose quali^y superior to theirs.

The Fourth is, That among those Counterfeiters of Humility, who condescend to
utter the meanst things of themselves, who acknowledge their Errors, their
Defect, and evil Inclinations; There is not one that makes these
acknowledgments in order to his own Reformation, but only to discharge
themselves of some part of the blame which is laid upon 'em, and to lessen the
shame which they ought to have for what they have done. And this petty piece of
Politiques it is, that causes Women to confess their entertaining of Gallants,
that they may do it with more Liberty and less Shame.

As for Errors and Defects, there is not one who accuses himself of any that
are Essential, as to have neither Honor, or Probity to be a Liar or a Cheat.
Only they blame themselves for not being prompt and quick, for being negligent,
slothful, and such like faults that are no stain to their Reputation. The most
perfect may have sometime returned an idle Answer, or have been transported
beyond the bounds of Moderation. But no body confess^s that he has robbed or
betrayed his Friends. And we are further to observe, That they who make these
Confessions with the least trouble, are persons of the deepest reach, for they
understand better than others, that it is not so ignominious to confess Faults
that all the World commits, than to be so vain as never to acknowledge
themselves in an Error.

Now all these Marks confirm that Oracle of the Scripture, There is a wicked
Man that hangs down his Head sadly, but is full of deceit: and that saying of
St. Anstin, That false Humility is great Pride. They also show, That the
Humiliy of the People of this World is but a Piece of unstable Cunning to make
themselves more esteemed than they seem to desire by their words, and by their
actions to make little account of themselves; so that their Humility is only a
disguised Pride and a visible Hypocrisy.

But True Humility, says St. Austin, is a Virtue so particular to Christians,
that the Pagan Philosophers never knew what it meant. I have read great Truths
says the Learned Father, in the Books of the Platonicks; but none of those
Books instruct us in the Knowledge of that humble Piety, which is no where to
be found but among the Christians. For Pride shuts their Understandings against
those Lights that discovered Man to himself, and only carried 'em to the
practice of those flattering Virtues that immortalize their Reputation; Only
Christians have the privilege to humble themselves before God, through their
acknowledgment of that Nothing, out of which Man was first Created, and of that
miserable Condition to which Sin has reduced him.

And therefore we have great reason to wonder at the Mistake of Plutarch, who
apprehends for a great action of Humility, that of Thales, wherefore the Tripos
of Gold with the Oracle, adjudg'd him as the wisest Man then living. For that
Philosopher having labored all his Lifetime to merit that Title, would by no
means let go such a fair opportunity to show that he was worthy of it. For
being so Wise in the esteem of the World, he showed by his refusal of the
Tripos, that he was not so in his own judgment. Nor could he do otherwise
without hazarding the Censure of being presumptuons in regard that Bias, who
was offered it before, had refused it in like manner. So that the Philosopher
behaved him like one emulous of Glory, while he aspired to the reputation of
being Wise, by making a semblance of believing himself a Fool.

But then again, as for the Humility of Christians that tax themselves for many
Defects, of which they neither are, nor believe themselves to be guilty; it is
a false Humility; for that real Humility is never contrary to Truth. Nor does
it consist in the Confession that a Man makes, that he is beholding for his
Being, and all his Blessings both Natural and Supernatural, to the pure
Goodness of God; it be hoves him moreover to acknowledge that his Understanding
is full of Error, that his Inclinations are all depraved, and that by Nature
nothing in the Sight of God, he is become a Nothing in opposition to God, and
in Arms against his Sovereign.

CHAP. XV. LIBERALITY.
PLeasure not only causes the Irregularity of the most part of Humane Actions,
but it is also the most usual Source of the Errors of Men. For as our Minds and
our Senses follow its Allurements with an equal Zeal; so our Wits are always
employed in the search of what is most proper for its satisfaction. Whence it
comes to pass, that we are still to sind out Satisfactions much more lovely in
appearance, than they are indeed; nay, tho they be false and deceitful,
provided they please, we always judge 'em to be real.

And this same perpetual Industry of Human Wit, to gratify its self with fair
and lovely Objects, is the reason that it has found out Heroes with Divine
Qualities; that there are Men, who by the strength of their Reason, triumph
over Pain, Pleasure, Anger and Revenge; and that there are others endued with
Sentiments so Noble, that they are of themselves inclined to undertake and
perform all the Actions which the most Illustrious Virtues inspire.

We must not wonder then, if the World has such a high esteem for Liberality,
which is in the number of those Virtues that cast abroad the brightest Luster;
and that they believe it not only to be a Virtue most sincere, but also rare
and altogether extraordinary. Of this Men are so strongly convinced, and have
such an Affection and Admiration for those that make a noise in the World by
their Presents, and their Bounty, that at Court they seem to make public Vows
for their Advancement, provided they be cunning, and understand the Liberality
that pleases and obliges, and that they take their opportunities to be profuse
in the sight of those, by whom it is for their Advantage to be esteemed.
Princes, and all Persons of high Quality reap great Advantages from Liberality,
since it distinguishes 'em from others in the same degree; and for that by
their Benefits they oblige the more honest sort of People, and attract the Good
Will of all Men. Avarice also gives it a Glorious Luster, and that Vice which
renders so great a number of People Vile and Contemptible, contributes not a
little to enhaunse the value of those who are endued with Noble and Generous
Inclinations; and who never value Money, but out of the pleasure which they take
to spend it.

If Great Personages, and generally all those who are high in esteem for their
Liberality, were really such as by Fame they are represented; If they valued
the happiness of their Great Estates, only for the advantage* of bettering the
condition of their Friends, or for being thereby enabled to gratify Persons of
Worth and Merit; If they embraced all opportunities of doing good, so that we
might say of 'em, And the Good that secks 'em out, at the same time flies their
sight; We could not then without extreme Injujustice refuse 'em the highest of
Encomi^ms. But we shall find they are far different from what they seem to be;
if we refer our selves to the Testimony of those judicious and solid Persons,
who never relying upon common Opinions, take particular cognizance of the
Manners of Men; for these Persons thus instructed and informed, assure us, that
those Persons whose Liberality we adore, are even at the brink of Despair, when
there is any small Expense required at home, at the same time that they are so
extravagantly profuse in the sight of the World. That they refuse even
necessary subsistence to their Relations and Friends, when upon others they
spend even to Superfluity; and that the Wages of their Servants are unpaid,
when they give high Entertainments to Strangers.

And this is a strong proof, That Liberality that advances the Esteem of so
many Persons, is a fallacious Virtue: And the force of the Argument consists in
this, That the Character of True Virtue is to agree with all the other Virtues.
Now the Liberality of those, whose Pu^se is always open to their Friends, is
visibly contrary to Justice; for we know well that while they are so free of
their Presents, and that they let no opportunity of Expense escape, they not
only never mind the payment of their Debts, but frequently give away what they
have borrowed, and sometimes robbed, or got by violence from other People. And
the same Argument makes it out, That the Spirit which animates 'em is the
Spirit of Vanity, which can always find Money to supply a Vainglorious Humor,
but never to recompense a Servant grown old in their Service, nor to pay a
Tradesman that has furnished 'em with his Goods, to his Ruin.

Therefore these Persons so famous for their Liberality, are no more than Civil
violators of Justice and Equity. Of which there are two sorts; Those that ruin
themselves by their Profusion, and deprive their Children of what they lavish
away to strangers: And those that being advanced to high Employments, rob the
Public to en^ich particular Persons, and Heads of Factions; who to gratify
their Friends, and purchase the Favor of the Rabble, despoil the Estates of
those that refuse to side with their Interests.

Now tho they all resemble one another in the injury they do to Justice both
Public and Private, yet the Motives that induce 'em to Liberality, are quite
different. For the Liberality of some is purely Vainglorious, which is the
most usual sort of Liberality. The Liberality of others is Vainglorious, but
Politic withal; and such was Alexander's Liberality, who to outdo the
Presents which Taxites, King of the Indies had sent him, made him a Magnificent
Banquet, where he drank to him a Health of Six hundred thousand Crowns, or a
thousand Talents, which he ordered forthwith to be paid him. And others there
are whose Profusenesses are purely Political, as were those of Caesar, who kept
open House, entertained a vast Retinue of Servants, and divertiz'd the People
of Rome with public Shows and Interludes at his own expense, on purpose to
oblige 'em to give him their Suffrages to advance him to the chief Employments
in the Commonwealth; which was the first step to his Imperial Dignity. The
Profuseness of Scipio was upon the same score, as appears by the reproaches
that Cato the Censor made him. Thou consumest, said he, even the Public
Revenue in excessive Gifts to the Soldiers and Officers, to gain their Hearts,
and make thy self Master of the Army, not minding the Corruption of Military
Discipline, and that thou art the cause, that their Courage grows Effeminate,
while pampered by thy Luxuries.

The Second Proof of the Falsehood of Liberality is this, That as soon as a Man
proposes Expense to himself, that he may appear Honorable, his Avarice opposes
his Vainglory, and contends against it with all it is force. And although the
Contest be concealed in his Breast, yet may it be discovered by the Effects
which it produces. For we find every day that a Great Lord that has entertained
in his House Persons of the same Quality, after he has given order that nothing
be wanting that is in Season, Neat, Delicate, and Magnificent; the next day
when he comes to reckon with his Steward, he disputes the price of Things, and
shows by his Transports his Vexation, and sometimes by his Repentance, that he
had not been so splendid, but that his Ambition got the upper hand of his
Avarice, and that a Liberal Man is but the Martyr of his Vanity.

Affectation is a Third Proof that Liberality is no sincere Virtue. This
Affectation is visible in the foregoing Examples. We have known a Great Lord of
the Old Court, who having lost a great Sum at Play, left off of a sudden; and
because People believed he left off to save the rest of his Money, which was
very considerable, he gave it away in cold Blood to those that supplied the
Cards, to the admiration of all the Company. We have seen a Governor of a
Province, whose Train equaled that of a Sovereign Prince, who orde^'d a
prodigious number of Clothes to be made him, and never wore the same Suit
twice; but after he had worn a Suit one day, gave it away to his Favorites, or
to his Servants, which made him looked upon in his Government, and over all
France, for the most Liberal and Generous Person in the World.

The Fourth Proof is this, That they who are esteemed for their Liberality, let
all the World see what they do: Whence it comes to pass, that they are more or
less Liberal, according to the opportunities which they have to be so; but
never show it, unless they have remarkable Testimonies of their Liberality.

Play is the next Proof, that Man is never truly Liberal; for when the heat of
Play has disordered him, and rendered him incapable to conceal his ordinary
Defects and vicious Inclinations, presently he cries out,

Dolosi Spes refulsit Nummi.
Hope of deceitful Money brightly shon.
The hope of Gain kindles him in such a manner, and renders it self so
suddenly Master of his Thoughts, that if he win, he feels at the bottom of his
Heart, that immediately ascends into his Face: If he lose, he brooks his loss
with an extreme Anxiety; So that the same Person that seems to throw away his
Money profusely, applies himself to his Game with all the eagerness imaginable,
and shows how truly he loves the Good, which he strives to despise.

The Sixth Proof is, That Persons who are accounted Liberal, never observe the
Dictates of Reason in the distribution of their Gifts; for they squander 'em
sometimes to Persons of no Worth or Merit: They take no care to proportion
their Favors to the Nature of their Exigencies; they gratify the Rich, and
leave those unregarded to whom a small taste of their Virtue would be an
incredible Relief. This mark of False Liberality is very considerable; Whereas
on the other side, it is a certain sign that a Man is truly Liberal, if he
prefer out of Choice for Objects, Persons of Merit and Virtue fallen under
Misfortune; if he bestow his Money upon poor Widows, burdened with a numerous
Family; or to People imprisoned for small and trivial Debts.

In the last place we prove that no Man is Liberal, because there is not any
Man but who is Covetous; for that all the Passions are predominant to some
degree or other in the Heart of Man; and consequently Avarice as well as
others: And tho it appear not equally alike in all Men, she shows her self in
all, and at all times, or at least upon several occasions. We find also that
Avarice is a Passion predominant in all those that are advanced in years; For
as their Business increases every day with their Infirmities, and as their
experience also has taught 'em, that there are a thousand ways to lose the
Estate and Fortune which a Man thinks himself sureof, so they all bemoan their
own Conditions, and study all the ways imaginable of Thrift and Sparing; So
that after Ambition, Love, Envy, Jealousy, Hatred and Revenge have tyrannized
over Man, Covetousness comes to torment him in her turn, and so concludes his
miserable Life. This Passion that brings him so low, is the last Agitation that
troubles his Repose, and shows him, That if he seek not for it in God, he must
never expect it but in his Tomb.

What has been said may serve to put us in mind of that admirable saying of
Plato, who said, That the Virtue of Men was no more than an Exchange. For this
definition perfectly agrees with ^iberality, since that which we exercise most
usually, is but exchange of Money for Honor, as we find in those persons who are
prodigal of their own in the sight of Princes and Great Personages, merely to
oblige 'em to return 'em their expenses, in Pensions, Employments, or
Honorable Preferments: and so in these Men who are highly Ambitious, who
purchase the Suffrages of the People to obtain the Sovereign Power; it is an
Exchange of Money for Dominion; The Liberality of Lovers, who consume their
Estates in Presents, and other idle Expenses, is an Exchange of Money for the
satisfaction which they desire*

But Christian Liberality is only true Liberality, and a sincere Virtue. For
Christians always draw from an innocent Stock all the Presents and Benefits
which they bestow, and never give to others what they owe, or what they have
given to others. And in regard they do nothing out of Ostentation, they conceal
their Gifts with an extraordinary care, and in all things observe the Rules of
Charity, Justice and Prudence, which renders their Liberality truly Virtuous,
and that they are the same in their Hearts, as they appear in their Actions.

CHAP. XVI. MAGNIFICENCE.
THere is nothing that flatters the vainglory of Man so much, as his own
Designs and Projects: yet generally all his Contrivances turn to his loss;
Those of the Ambitious disquiet their Repose; Those of the Covetous, condemn
'em to those cares that feed upon their Bowels, while they live; and the
Designs of those that build up pompous and stately Palaces, and go attended
with Magnificent Trains, discover their Littleness, and their Indigence. For
must not that Man think himself to be very little, and otherwise of no Merit or
Worth, who rears up lofty Buildings, furnishes himself with Coaches, and a
numerous Retinue of Pages and Lacqueys, merely to make an Addition to himself,
and to aggrandize himself by that sort of means?

Magnificence therefore is but a haughty Sentiment, and a kind of Despair of
ever finding our selves any thing Great, or of extraordinary Worth; which is
the reason we have recourse to rich Movables, Tapestries heightened with Gold
and Silver, as very low Women make use of Cork to raise themselves higher.
Nevertheless Aristotle extols this apparent Vanity into a sublime Virtue, far
surpassing Liberality: For he believes that it is with Magnificence in respect
of Liberality, as, it is with Valor in respect of Boldness: For that of
Boldness surmounts the Fears that disorder us, while Valor triumphs over those
which are wont absolutely to terrify and subdue us. So Liberality enclines us
to moderate and order our Expenses, and Mauger our Natural Covetousness; but
that it is Magnificence that carries us to Immense and extraordinary Profusion,
and which gives us an entire Victory over Covetousness. But that which makes us
question whether Magnificence have that advantage over Liberality, is this,
That we find Great Personages that have all opportunities to be profuse in
their Buildings and Equipages yet are very pinching and sparing; and to whom it
is a Trouble almost Invincible to be Liberal, but a pleasure to be Magnificent.
But this is certain, That there is no other difference between the Magnificence
and Liberality of this Age, than there is between Pride and Vanity; For what is
the Magnificence of Princes, and opulent Persons? What are those Palaces where
Gold, Marble, and Porphery do cast such a resplendent Luster? What are all
those stately Fabrics in the Country where all the Rules of Symmetry appear?
What are all those Gracious Parks, enclosing Woods and Rivers, but a haughty
and pompous Show of this high Condition and Wealth, of which, if we desire to
be further convinced, we need but consider, that Moderation is only the
aba^ement of this Loftiness and Excess, and that we give high Encomiums to
those, who finding themselves advanced in Dignity, and laden with Riches,
practice that Virtue of Moderation in their Buildings, their Habit, their
Furniture, and their Table Expenses.

How then could it come into Aristotle's Mind, That a Man who consumes the best
part of his Estate in vainglorious and vicious Superfluities, should be a
person not only worthy to be applauded, but also excellently virtuous? For can
it be said, that a Magnificent Person may virtuously hold a stately and
Magnificent Fabric, unless he regulate his Expenses according to his Estate,
and that his Magnificence shows it self in lasting and durable Things, as
Pillars and Columns of Marble, not in brittle Glass-windows? and provided he do
not imitate the Megareans, who made splendid Banquets for their Comedians, and
received 'em into their City with so much Pomp, that the very Streets as they
passed along were covered with Purple. Is it not evident that all the
Inconveniences which this Philosopher would have us to shun, serve only to
preserve a Man from being ridiculous, but no way prevent his being
vainglorious, on bestowing such excessive Sums in Painting, Guilding and
costly Furniture? Is it not certain, that if Magnificence have no other Limits
than those to which Aristotle has confined it, there is no sort of superfluity
which he might not have justified by the same Reasons? and that he would have
been so far from disapproving, that he would have commended those prodigious
Buildings of Lucullus, upon the Shore of the Neopolitan Sea? The Mountain
dug quite through, and supported by a stupendous Arch, the vast and deep
Moats to let in the Sea that surrounded the wondrous Pile? And that he never
would have found fault with long excess in the infinite number of Statues and
Pictures, wherewith it was adorned, nor the more credible number of Rooms and
Apartiments neatly furnished; nor in those heaps of Gold and Silver Plate,
adorned with precious Stones, in which Lucullus was continually served? Yet
these excesses were so generally blamed in Rome, that his nearest Relations and
his Friends, among the rest* Caron and Cicero were highly offended at his
Extravagance; besides that, they were for a long time the Subjects of the
public Satyrs, and Railery of the Town; as we find in Horace.

Therefore we must not attribute the War which the Cynni declare against
Luxury, to their Malice and fantastical Humor. For this War is so far from
being particular, since it is no more than what the Wise Men of all Ages have
done, who ever looked upon the Pomp of Buildings, and the Curiosity of
Furniture, and Habit, as mere Vanity and Childishness. We are true Children,
said Aristotle, the Marble Pillars, and Statues delight us as painted Shells
and Baubles please them* so that there is no other difference between them and
us, but that our Pleasure and divertisements are much more costly, and our
Childhood continues all our Lives. And thus from what has been said it is
evident, how hard a thing it is to condescend to the Opinion of Aristotle, who
so openly defends Luxury, with the solidity of so Great a Philosopher.
Aristotle, says St. Thomas, exempts from him those that are superfluous in
their Expenses, and I condemn as evil whatever is contrary to the Rules of
Justice and Reason.

If then Holy Reason condemns all those that Lodge, that Furnish, that Apparel
themselves Magnificently, and of Gold, Marble, and other Precious things bewail
their had Fortune, that Man makes use of 'em to support his Vanity, the same
Reason shows us, That there is nothing he can do more worthy commendation, than
to ^^lee^ 'em from that Servitude; by consecrating 'em to God for the Ornament
of his public Temples. For that then it is that he is not Magnificent for his
own Name, but for the Honor of God. And therefore it was, that there was
nothing more beautiful, nor so full of Grandeur, as that Fabric reared by the
wisest of Kings, and Consecrated to the Veneration of the Almighty; and
therefore it is, that we see so many Glorious Temples erected to the Honor of
Christ, which remain as so many Monuments of the Piety and Magnificence of
Christian Princes.

The Examples of Judith and Queen Esther make it appear, that they made a good
use of their Virtue of Magnificence. For Judith who in her Widowhood clothed
her self suitably to her Condition, laid aside her Mourning Habit, and put on
costly and magnificent Apparel to appear in all her Luster before Holofernes;
that she might have the fairer opportunity to give the stroke which God had
reserved for her Arm. And Queen Esther, who called the Crown that she wore, The
Sign of her High Estate, that she abhorred, yet put it upon her Head, and
presented her Self to Ahashuerus, apparelled and dressed to preserve her Nation.

We have also learnt from the Conduct of the most Pious and Modest of Princes,
That it is most proper for Sovereign Kings to make Presents proper to the
Grandeur of their Dominions, to the Ambassadors of Princes their Allies; to
make splendid and sumptuous Banquets, to render their Treaties more solemn, and
Magnificently to entertain those Kings that came to visit 'em, or that had
occasion to pass through their Territories. And thus it was that St. Lewis
received the Emperor Frederick at Campergne, where he ordered the Nobility of
his Court to be pompously attired, and made himself a most Magnificent Entry.
This Holy and Devout Prince, says Mezerai, was modest, and an Enemy to Luxury
in his own Person, and Pompous and Superb in his public Ceremonies.
Charlemain, tho for the most part went like the meanest of his ordinary
Subjects; was most sumptuously apparelled when he gave Audience to Ambassadors,
and gave a Crown glittering with Precious Stones. Lewis the Debonnaire observed
the same Method. And the end which those Religious Princes proposed to
themselves upon all occasions, where they appeared with so much splendour, was
to give an Idea of the Strength and Riches of their Kingdoms, that other Kings
might be afraid to invade their Territories, and by that means to secure the
Repose of the People, that God had committed to their Charge.

These are the Lawful employments of Magnificence, besides which, there are
none that can be serviceable to us without perverting the Use of it, and beyond
which, all the rest is but vain Glory and Ostentation. For tho Aristotle affirm
that a sumptuous Palace is an Ornament to the Founder, Certain it is, that tho
all the Palaces of Kings belonged to Him, he would neither be the Greater, nor
the more Magnificent; That his Glory and Magnificence, as the Holy Scripture
teaches us, ought to be within himself; and that it consists in the Use of
these Virtues, with which his Soul ought to be adorned; so that as they who
excel in Arts and Sciences are Famous without employments and preferments; So
Men that excel in Virtues not to be found in other Men, are Magnificent without
Houses, without Retinues or costly Equipages; and we reverence 'em for their
own sakes much more, than they that we behold, attended with numerous and gaudy
Trains of Servants. He alone, said Epicurus, is truly Magnificent, who has no
need of Magnificenee.

CHAP. XVII. JUSTICE.
THE Poets could never tire themselves with heaping Aggravations on the daring
Boldness of those that first attempted to cross the Seas, and trusting to a few
weak and easily broken Planks which they fixed together between them and Death,
forced their way through those vast Abysses of Water.

But for my part, I find those to be far more bold, who first designed living
in Society together. And I am certain, that whoever does admire the daring
Boldness of such an Enterprise, never considered, or never understood the
Nature of Man, so far from being endu'd with Qualities proper for Union, that
they make it their sole Business to persecute, tear in pieces, and destroy one
another. In a word, A Great Assembly of Men is a dangerous Sea, more
treacherous, and more tempestuous than the wild Ocean it self. And let the
Winds be never so impetuous and so innumerable, the Passions of Men surmount
'em in Number, in Contrariety, and Violence.

Let us make good our Assertion, and affirm, That Men through their viciousness
being become the same that the most wild and savage Beasts by Nature are, it
was not an Enterprise so difficult to tame and civilize Bears, Tigers, and
Lions, as to Assemble Men together. There is also this difference, That the
Cruelty of Brutes passes away with their Impetuosity; that they fall upon Men
through the Motives of a Blind Instinct, and that they do not understand the
Art of Mischief. Whereas Men keep their* Resentments a long time, that they
weave and contrive Assassinations and Murders, to execute 'em with more
security, and that they are ingenious to lay snares one for another.

The same Considerations perhaps made the Poets first imagine, that when our
Societies were first established, and that they set up their first Commonweal,
Justice descended from Heaven to prevent it from becoming suddenly a dreadful
Theater of Murders, Assassinations, and Robberies; for which reason they
represent her with a Sword in her Hand, wherewith she menaces the Wicked, and
punishes bad Offenders, and Persons daringly unjust.

This is as much as to say, that Justice is a Heavenly Virtue; whether we
consider it in the Persons of Princes and Judges that dispense it, or in the
rest of Men who make it the Rule of their Actions; or whether we consider it in
the Person of Good Men, who love and willingly obey it; or in the Persons of
the Wicked, who observe her Laws through constraint and fear of Punishment; For
the Fear of Punishment is the Wisdom of the wicked, and the Virtue of those
that have none.

This is the Opinion which all Men have conceived of Justice. They believe that
she drew her Original from Heaven, and the Wisest and most Understanding
Persons have given her high Encomiums. Virtue said a Pythagorean, is a Divine
Virtue, that under several Names Governs the World; and all the parts that
compose it. For so long as she maintains the World in order we give her the
Name of Providence; The Name of Love, when she Rules advisedly Cities,
Commonwealths and Kingdoms; And Virtue, when she disciplines Men into Order
and Civil Conversation. Lastly, it is Virtue, says St. Austin, which has the
privilege to keep Men in subjection to God, and to prevent his Wrath from
withdrawing us from under her Dominion.

We must confess, that these Encomiums give us a fair Idea of this Virtue; and
indeed we cannot imagine a more delightful Spectacle than to see Men equally,
zealous, the one to press us to observe, the other eager to follow the Laws and
Commands of Justice, out of a sincere Love which they have for her. But where
shall we find thi^ sincere Love of Justice? Shall we find it in Sovereign
Princes, the most careful to uphold Justice within their Realms? What was that
care of the Pagan Emperors, and what was afterward the same Care of the
Christian Princes, who only Governed themselves by the Maxims and Spirit of
Christianity; but an ardent desire of Reigning, and a piece of Policy purely
Human? What was it in several Others, but their Natural haughtiness, which not
enduring those that adventured to raise Rebellions, and to Declare War against
'em, punished those bold Attempters with utmost severity? Is it not in others a
love of their Repose, which makes 'em so diligent to stifle seditious
Enterprises, and so exact to execute the Rigor of the Laws upon the Heads of
Sedition? Nor is it impossible but that in some it may be an eager Desire to
obtain the Surname, of Just. For tho the Love of Titles be an Ambition very
frivilous, yet is it to be reck on'd among Human Passions; in regard that Man
is vain and frivilous to that Degree which is not to be imagined. Of which
Augustus was an evident Proof, who wept for joy, when the Senate gave him the
Title of Father of his Country.

The Integrity of Magistrates is a singular Affectation of Reputation, or a
desire to prefer themselves to higher Employments. For as Self Love engages Men
to make their Vices and their Virtues serviceable to their Interest; Hence it
comes to pass that corrupt Judges do justice to enrich themselves, others to
gain the esteem of the World, and that their Sovereigns may deem 'em worthy of
higher Employments.

The Justice of private Persons most exact and careful of doing wrong or injury
to their Neighbors, is a fear of being retaliated with the fame injuries that
they do to others. For Man that sees himself engaged in Society among Men,
lives therein with more Caution and Fear, than if he were in the midst of a
Forest full of Wild Beasts; for he is not only afraid of his Life, but of his
Quiet, and his Repntation. Besides, that the Oppressions, Violences, and
Murders, which he sees committed every day, redouble his Terrors; so that while
he continually meditates how to secure himself from the accidents that threaten
him; he finds no better means than to observe the Laws of others, in respect of
others; and that upon good grounds; For he that behaves himself toward others
with so much circumspection, that he never prejudices any of their Interests or
Concerns, obliges them for their own Reputation to let him live without
disturbance, in peace and quiet. And besides, Men have not the heart to harm or
injure a Person that behaves himself peaceably and justly toward all the World.
Men of Justice make deep impressions of Reverence in others, that we dare no
more presume to touch their Honor, than the Consecrated Vessels of a Temple.

Thus the Justice of Private Men is no more than a kind of Politic
reserv'dness to secure their Lives, their Estates, and their Honors from injury
and violence. Wherefore, says Aristotle, We must not be precipitate in our
Judgments, in pronouncing slightly as we do, that he who performs Acts of
Justice, is always a Just Man. Just and equitable Actions deceive us, says
Plato, because we derive this consequence from thence, That they who are
upright, are lovers of Justice, and are endued with better Inclinations than
other Men; For they are no less covetous and violent than others, only they put
a force upon themselves, and do no injury to any one, lest any person should do
injury to them.

The Justice of the Philosophers, was only a desire to distinguish themselves
from all other Men, by the uprightness of their Dealings, and to show that only
they lived according to the Rules of Right Reason.

The Justice of the Jews, who only acted by the Spirit of the Law, was only a
Fear lest God should withdraw his Protection from 'em, deliver 'em into the
hands of their Enemies, and blast their Cornfieldsd and their Vineyards.

There is not therefore any Justice among Men, since there is not any one that
observes her for the Love of her self; but in Sovereign Princes that defend and
protect it, in Judges that administer it, in private People that exercise it,
it has no other foundation than that of Interest and Ambition, since it was no
more than Vanity among the Philosophers, and in her most zealous Admirers among
the Jews, a servile and interested Fear.

It was not therefore without reason, that the Ancient Poets, whom Lactantius
calls the First Sages of the World, complained that Justice was returned to
Heaven, and frequently wont to cry out,

Deseruit propere terras sanctissima Virgo. For they made not their Complaints
and Exclamations to any other end, but this Divine Virtue is no longer now
remaining among Men. The Fables also inform us the Truth of this; and the short
continuance of the Age of Gold, and Saturns Reign, with which ended the Reign
of Fidelity and Justice, clearly demonstrate, that Justice did not long
continue upon Earth; and that after she was banished, it was only through
Ambition, or Interest, or Fear, that they who called themselves Just, abstained
from doing injury to others. And this Truth is farther also confirmed by the
frequent wishes and sighs of the Prophets, and Patriarchs, by which they
conjured the Heavens to drop down, and the Sky to pour down Righteousness.

Heaven therefore it is that inspires all true Christians with Justice, which
discovers to 'em the Beauty of that Celestial Virtue which attracts the Souls
of all Men. To them it is that Heaven renders it more pleasing, and delicious
than Honey, and more precious than all the Treasures of the World, It Is only in
their Minds that he causes this Divine Light to shine, which instructs 'em,
that his Will is the Rule of all their Duty, and that we are no longer Just,
than while we conform and submit to that. Wherefore none but true Christians
are truly Just, either before God or before Men. I would have all the World to
understand, says Plato, That no Men are Just through their own Natural
Inclinations, and that they cannot love Justice without the particular
assistance of God.

CHAP. VIII. INTEGRITY, Or the HONESTY of MEN.
HOnesty, says Guarini, Is but the Art of appearing Honest. But the Judgment
which the Poet gives of the Honesty of Women, is very unjust. For in regard his
Intention is not to tax their Honesty, because that most commonly it is through
their Pride, and not through any commendable motive of Virtue that they
continue honest; and for that it is only of their External Honesty of which he
discourses; it is therefore false, that this Honesty is only an Art of
appearing Honest, in regard we find that a great number of Women are
effectually so; among whom there are some so modest, that it would be
impossible to wound their Reputation, to tempt 'em to betray their Chastity,
tho they were assured that their failings could never come to the knowledge of
the World. Therefore this Censure of his had been better grounded, had he
applied it to the Honesty and Integrity of Men. For it is no less rare, to see
People so equally Religious, as well to act nothing contrary to Integrity when
they are in private, as when they have many Witnesses of their actions; than it
is to find valiant Men, that assault or repel the Enemy with the same Valor
by Night as they do by Day in the sight of their General. It is also very rare
to find out Men so settled and resolute in their Integrity, as neither to be
shaken by Threats, or tempted by Promises; or so powerful over themselves, as
to resist the force of their Passions. And to be convinced that there are none
such, A Man need only reflect upon all the actions of his Life, and consider
whether any Interest of Hatred, of Revenge, of Love or Ambition, had never so
much power over him as to make him forfeit his Fidelity and Integrity; Whether
it never happened, That to gratify a Woman whom he idolized, he revealed a
ecret of Importance that was entrusted in his Bosom; Whether the fear of
falling into Disgrace with a Favorite at Court, never hindered him to testify
the Truth, when his Testimony was required to save the Reputation of a Person
accused; Lastly, Whether Jealousy had never provoked him to lessen the Merit
of a Noble Action, with the best of his Friends performed in Battle. Certain I
am, that if Men will but seriously examine themselves, few or none will be
found innocent, and that must not be forced to acknowledge, that he has often
failed in his Integrity, when he could do it without fear of Shame or
Punishment, and that it redounded to his Advantage.

But tho we should Grant that there are some Persons whose Integrity is not to
be corrupted; visible it is, that the Motives which excite 'em to the practice
of it, will not suffer us to number it among the virtuous Qualities; because
the Motives are altogether Human, and the chiefest of all is a criminal
Ambition.

Now to show what sort of Ambition it is, we must observe that the real
Inclination of a Man overruled by his Self-Love, desires that his Wit should
surpass the Wit of all other Men, that every thing should yield to the strength
of his Arm, and that all Men in general should submit to him. But finding in
himself, and in other Men, an infinite number of Obstacles that oppose his
Desire, he Assembles and conceals it, as he sees more or less opportunity to
satisfy it; and when he meets with none at all, he moderates and reduces
himself to wish that he may only keep a considerable rank among those, of whom
he cannot make himself the Master. Hence it comes to pass, that Great
Personages labor to aggrandize themselves still more and more, and when they
find it impossible, they value themselves upon the Nobility of their Birth, and
Teat the re^t of Men as if they were a Degree lower than they. There upon they
who have no Descent to boast of, labor i^spite of Fortune, by the help of
Virtue, to erect several Degrees among Men, and place themselves in the First
Rank, by th^im^ans of their Integrity: To which Men give their consent, so much
the more easily, because there is no living in any Society without Integrity,
and because they love it proportionably to the ^^tred which they have for
Treadhery and ^n^^delity.

They who exactly observe the Rules of Honesty, observe not only; that all the
World agrees to rank 'em above others, through the necessity which they have of
'em, but they also find that Persons of Honor and Honesty are very rare; and
this same scarcity is the reason by whom they desire to be most esteemed, seek
our their Company, and desire 'em for their Friends and Confidents; and that it
is very requisite for 'em to preserve their Degree and their Privileges.

They also observe that there is nothing so publicly branded and ignomimous,
as discovered Knavery and Falsehood, and that they who are once found guilty of
such Actions, never regain their Credit.

They find moreover, That tho Persons of Quality prosper not so frequently in
the World, as Persons corrupt and Prostituted; nevertheless, that the success
of Knavery and Treachery is not always infallible, that they are not rewarded
every day; and that when they are, they that gain by their wickedness, pay for
the Profit which they reap by the Treason, but abominate the Traitors.

Upon these Considerations is grounded the Integrity of those, of whom we say,
that they have Honest Souls. Interest produces the Integrity of Low and
Mercenary People, and it is only a desire of Profit.

Some Persons deny that the Principle of Probity in Honest Men, is an Ambition
to be eminent, without either Preferment or Dignity; but only to keep up a
considerable Credit among Men: For that there are many People who practice both
Fidelity and Integrity in private, and therefore they act out of Integrity, and
not out of any desire to be Honored and esteemed of Men. To which we answer
with St. Thomas, That there are some Men so happy in their compositions, that
their very Temper of Body enclines 'em to Uprightness. In the next place, he
who performs acts of Integrity, tho he conceal his Actions from the knowledge
of the World, performs 'em out of a real desire to be applauded by all the
World. And to make the Paradox out, we must understand that Men are so
Vainglorious, and Covetous of Praise, that the most excellent parts of
Knowledge and the most excellent Virtues please, them only, proportionably to
the Esteem and Applause which they bring them. And therefore we may say, that
in the Breasts of all those that are endu'd with extraordinary Virtues, there
is one sort of Ambition resembling that of Victorious Captains, and that both
the one and the other, aim in their way at the Conquest of Human Kind, with
this difference, That Conquerors labor to subdue all Men, to be Masters of
their Estates and Liberties: Whereas they who are endu'd with rare and singular
Virtues, study to possess the first place in the esteem of the Vanquished. But
the Philosophers, who were the First in whom this Ambition appeared, deeming it
impossible to gain the approbation of all the World, (because the most part of
Men have very little judgment, and are moreover Capricious and Unjust,) they
bounded the pretenses of Wisdom to be content with the Approbation of Men
Judicious, Equitable and Virtuous. Afterward observing that it was a difficult
thing to gain the Appobation of Many, in regard the Variety of Judgments is as
various as that of Tastes; they thought it enough for a Wise Man to have the
Approbation of one single Person, provided he be a Person of a clear and solid
Judgment, and in Credit with all honest Men. One single Person, said
Democritus, is worth a multitude. We flatter our selves more, said Epicurus,
writing to one of his Friends, with the esteem which we have one for another,
then with all the Acclamations of the People.

This Opinion seemed best to the Philosophers, even till Seneca's time, who
best understanding what was most proper to gratify the Pride of Man,
pronounced, That a Wise Man being capable alone to judge of the Merit of
Actions, was the only person fit to be Judge of himself, and that he had no
need of any other Approbation. A Wise Man, said he, ceases not to be perfectly
contented, tho he has no witness of his Actions; for what money of himself, and
to be the Object of his own Admiration?

All which clearly demonstrates, that he who performs Acts of Integrity unknown
to the World, performs 'em out of a real desire of applause, seeing that his
strongest Passion being to be approved by himself, he seeks after that
Approbation which is to him most grateful, and which he prefers before all
public Applauses. Although Glory consists not in the praise of a single Person,
said Salust, Yet there are certain Persons, said St. Thomas, that establish
their own Honor upon their own Esteem. It Is true, these Persons are very
scarce, and if they do perform any private acts of Integrity, they nourish a
concealed Hope that some favorable Hazard will bring 'em to light.

It Is not then Integrity, but the Encomium's given to Integrity which Men
affect; nor do evil Actions displease 'em; but they dislike 'em because they
ruin their Reputation: And therefore when they are accused to have committed
any ill Act, to the prejudice of Integrity, tho they know in their Consciences
that they are guilty, they implore the assistance of their Friends, and try all
the ways imaginable to justify themselves. We hear of several Magistrates, says
Plato, who sell Justice, and privately take Bribes; but we shall never find one
that will confess he has taken a Bribe; or that being accused of it, can
patiently endure his accusation.

Let us then confess, to the Glory of God, That it is he alone that infuses
Hon^sty into Men, and that he alone is the only Caelestial Fountain of
Integrity. For He, uniting 'em in the Bonds of Charity, puts 'em into such a
Condition, that it is impossible they should falsify their Word and Fidelity,
or not acquit themselves of the several Duties which they owe one to another.
And there is no doubt but the softness and force of this Tie, can restrain and
hinder 'em from Deceit and Treachery. The Bands of Human Friendship are too
weak to resist the violence of his Passions; and too often we meet with
ambitious Men, that underhand cross the designs of their best Friends, and who
after they have promised 'em the utmost of their assistances for the obtaining
an Employment, use all their Endeavors, and employ all their Craft and Cunning
to deprive 'em of it. There is no solid Integrity, says Plato, but that which
is accompanied with Piety and Holiness. Perfect Honesty, says Aristotle, is
that which we practice out of a consideration of things Divine and Eternal.

CHAP. XIII. Loyalty of Subjects toward their SOVEREIGN.
HOW wonderful are thy Works O God, the Prophet cried out in the Transports of
his Admiration, when he beheld the several Wonders and Masterpieces of the
Deity, that adorned the spacious World. In his Ecstasy to view so great a
number of Creatures, their Beauty, their Riches, and their different Qualities.
But their Magnificence was not the sole cause of his Admiration; For what he
adds, Thou have made all these things in Wisdom shows, that he was equally
ravished with that wonderful Order which God had settled among 'em. Seeing that
after he had Created those various Beings, if he had not regulated their
Motions, the World which was to be a perfect piece of Workmanship, to make
known to us by its own, the Perfection of the Creator, would have proved
nothing but Disorder and Confusion.

If Order then, without which the World would have been a Chaos, appeared so
Lovely and so Admirable, the Secret which the Wisdom of God found out to
establish it, was no less worthy of Admiration. For he made the Creatures
unequal in their Perfection, to the end, the less Perfect might depend upon the
more Excellent, and appointed to every one a Place suitable to the Degree of
its Perfection. To this end he placed the Sun in the midst of the Heavens, that
he might diffuse his Light over all parts of the World; that his enlivening
Heat might contribute to the Birth, the Growth, and the Preservation of Plants,
of Animals, and Men, and that the Earth might every year be renewed by his
Influencies.

God has observed the same Method in respect of Men, he has ordained 'em to be
Born, different in their Condition; he has raised some to a degree above
others; and has ordered the Repose, the Preservation, and the Happiness of
those whom he has placed in subjection to depend upon the continual Cares and
Vigilance of those whom he has appointed for their Governors: So that we may
say, That as the Sun is the Eye with which all Men See, and without whose Light
our Eyes would be useless to us; in like manner our Sovereign Prince is the Eye
of his Realm; and such an Eye that continually enlightens his Subjects, so that
without that Light they would always be groping and wandering in the Dark.

This Order of Divine Wisdom it is, that subjects the Multitude to one single
Person, which Plato considering, it made him wish, That as God was the sole
Governor of the World, that all Men were under one Prince. Mankind, said he,
will never be truly and really happy, till they come under the Conduct of one
sole Monarch: Then all the unhappy Causes of War cease altogether. No longer
then shall Interest, Jealousy and Ambition Arm Sovereign Princes one against
another. No longer then shall we hear the Moans of People, that in so many
places groan under the Dominion of Tyrants, that oppress and despoil 'em of
their Estates: No longer shall the Wicked, the Perfidious, the Villainous find
Sanctuary in Foreign Kingdoms. For then so many different Nations shall be but
as one Family which this same King, and only Father, shall love with a tender
Affection, and enrich with his Favors and Blessings.

But God not only binds Subjects to their Sovereign, by that same Interest
which obliges 'em to Obedience; for knowing well the Blindness and Inconstancy
of Men, he found this Tie would not be strong enough; therefore he has engaged
'em to Submission by the obligation of Conscience, and has made it a Religious
Duty to be Loyal and Obedient to Sovereign Princes. He has also so clearly
explained this Duty in so many places of Scripture, that it is visible he
designed to take away all pretenses of its Violation; having Declared, that
neither the evil Qualities, nor the severe Government of Kings, shall be any
ground for Subjects to revolt from their Obedience. And it was necessary that
God should so Declare himself. For that Fidelity which ties Subjects to their
lawful Princes, being the only cause of the Tranquillity of Kingdoms and
Empires, had God left 'em at their liberty to withdraw themselves from their
Subjection upon all occasions, he had exposed Kingly Government to the rashness
of the Judgments of every one, and their Dominions to frequent Revolutions; and
had he not ranked in the number of his Laws, the obligation of Obedience to
Princes, they could hardly have assured themselves of the Fidelity of their
Subjects; for that the Dispositions of Men frequently alter, and for that their
Natural Inconstancy, and variety of Interests are such, that they cannot answer
for themselves. And this Fidelity thus explained, is an Obligation which God
has laid upon us, not to be broken for the sake of any Interest, nor to be
dispensed withal by any Authority, nor upon any pretense whatever.

Great Politicians demand how Subjects ought to demean themselves, when Kings
in their Treaties violate the Fundamental Laws of Monarchy. For example, What
should the French have done, had Francis the First, been obstinate in observing
the Treaty which he made at Madrid; by which he was engaged to surrender
Burgundy to Charles the V.

To this, one of the most Learned and accomplished Politicians of our age makes
answer, That upon those occasions it ought to be the first Duty of the
Subjects, to divert the King from his Intention by Petitions, and
Remonstrances; of which, if the King takes no notice, What can the Subject do
more, but only receive his Commands, and his Orders, but forbear to put 'em in
execution? Which was the Course which the French men took in reference to
Francis the I. After that, the same Author adds, That if it should happen, he
should attempt to win by force, what he could not gain by fair means, and
violently seek to constrain those that would not willingly follow him, What
should they do in such a strange Conjuncture? Shall they submit to the violence
that threatens to overwhelm 'em, or shall they rise up in opposition? Shall
they submit or resist? Shall they desert the common Good of the Public, or
make War, not against the Prince, for that is not lawful, but against the Will
of the Prince? Which being certain Precipices, into which we must of necessity
fall, and the Malignity of the reigning Constellation not being byany means to
be appeased; What can they do but have recourse to their Arms, and call to
their assistance the first Light of Nature, which is Self-Preservation?

This Case thus resolved by a Person of so solid and clear a judgment, makes me
think, that the Christians in respect of Human Reason are no more then what the
Pagans were, in respect to the Oracles of their false Deities. Those Oracles
thought it their best course to cheat and delude the People, by the Obscurity
and Ambiguity of their Answers. In like manner, How experienced soever the
Christians may be, that the determinations of Reason are deceiful and
uncertain, they cannot forbear consulting it, and nothing is able to make 'em
sensible of their Error in confiding in it. And that for which they deserve to
be blamed in an extraordinary manner, is this, That the Oracle of the Holy
Spirit, which is the only infallible Oracle curses Man that confides in
himself, and who puts his Strength in his Weakness, that is to say, Who relies
upon his Reason, and prefers the crooked and dangerous Turnings which that
discovers, before the sure, straight, and only Path which is taught us by the
Law of God. Thus we find that Politicians are always floating and divided in
their Judgments; never uniform in their Resolutions, while the plain
well-meaning Person that puts his confidence in God; and guides himself
according to his Promises, walks with assurance. For the way of the Lord is the
strength of the simple, says the Scripture. And now let us apply this to our
purpose.

When Princes by their Treaties have parted with Cities of Importance, or some
considerable Province; upon such occasions what do the People do that presume
upon themselves? They consume and evaporate themselves in vain Reasons; they
cry out, That the Subjects have a right to oppose themselves against such
Treaties, and that they are not obliged to act as Subjects, where the King
refuses to act as a Sovereign; they measure the extent of Royal Power, and that
of their Duty, and stretch 'em out, and shorten 'em according to the diversity
of their Thoughts; they enquire into the Rights and Prerogatives of Sovereigns,
and labor to set up the Privileges that Nature has given us. But what does
the plain downright Person do? He walks in the way that the Law of God has
marked out; that Commands him to obey the King; he Obeys, while they endeavor
to draw him out of the way by specious Reasons; they tell him the Prince goes
about to ranvers a Fundamental Law of Monarchy; but he believes himself not
able to give his Judgment in so difficult a Matter; only he knows that Human
Reason deceives us every day, but that the Law of God cannot deceive us. A Man
of Understanding, says the Scripture, trusts in the Law, and the Law is
faithful to him.

This Behavior of a downright Person, that is of a Good Man and a Christian,
is not only the most safe in point of Conscience, but the most Just and
Rational. For as it is impossible for Subjects rightly to understand the Case
of Affairs, it is as impossible altogether for them to judge, whether it be
profitable or prejudicial, to cut off a Province from the Body of the Realm;
and as for the general Knowledge of this Matter, it obliges 'em altogether to
Obedience. For they know that one Province may be given in exchange for another
nearer and more commodious, or Surrendered either for the prevention, or
putting an end to some Great War. They are also well instructed, that they have
nothing to do to descant upon the Actions of their Sovereigns; and that they
ought not to censure their Government without a misbeseeming Audaciousness. It
is not lawful for Subjects, says Tacitus, to condemn the Actions of Kings, nor
to enquire into the hidden Reasons, and Mysteries of their Conduct: The Gods
have made 'em Arbitrers of the Affairs and Designs of Empires; and have only
left us the Honor to Obey. Besides, have the Subjects any reason to complain,
that their Rights are invaded by the Surrender of a Province? Does the Kingdom
belong to them? Is it not the Patrimony of our Princes? Have they not won by
the Sword the greatest part of the Provinces that compose it? Four of our First
Kings, especially Clouis? did not they alone conquer the greatest part of
France? and is it not by Purchase, by Donations and Matches, that the rest of
the Provinces are come to the Crown? And therefore especially in Hereditary
Kingdoms, it is no such unjust thing for a Prince to alienate some part of his
Dominions. Besides that, we are always to take it for Granted, that they never
do it but when compelled by necessity; or that they find a considerable
advantage by it.

The opposition of the French to the Treaty which Charles the VI, made with
Henry the V. King of England, and the War wherein they engaged to prevent the
Effects, are proofs already without any appearance of Reason, that Subjects
sometimes may oppose by force the Will of their Sovereign. For how can we say
that the French upon that occasion, took up Arms against Charles VI. or what
Validity could they imagine to be in a Treaty made when the Prince was troubled
in his Mind, and by which his Son was deprived of the Crown, which was his
Right. In a word, the Ambition of Henry V. the Revenge of the Duke of Burgundy,
and Queen Isabel of Bavaria's hatred of the Dolphin, were the true and only
Causes of that Treaty. So that there never was a War more just then that which
the French entered into, as being against the Usurper of the Kingdom; and for
that they took part with Charles VII. who was not only Successor, but in
Possession, and Master of the Kingdom, his Father being civilly Dead, and not
in a Condition either to Treat or meddle with any manner of Affairs.

As for the resistance of the French to the execution of the Treaty of Madrid
concerning Burgundy, It is visible that Francis I. might easily have surmounted
it, but that he cherished it, that he might have a pretense for the not
observing a Treaty so disadvantageous. It is visible that he left Spain with a
Resolution to break it; for so soon as he returned into his Kingdom, he
summoned an Assembly of the Estates to meet at Angoulesme, where after he had
protested in the presence of Laney (the Emperors Creature) That for his part he
desired to observe the Treaty punctually, he submitted to the Arguments on the
other side, that it was not in his Power to perform it; for that by the
Fundamental Laws of Monarchy, Kings could not alienate any Right or Inheritance
that belonged to the Crown; and that having received the Monarchy entire from
his Ancestors, he was obliged to leave it entire to his Successors. And of this
Men may be soon convinced, if they consider, that Charles the VI. a Prince of
less Courage, less Formidable, and of less Authority then Francis I. laughed at
an opposition of the same Nature; and that Francis I. by the Treaty of Cambray,
which was an Alloy to to that of Madrid, renounced his Pretentions to Flanders
and Artois, and the Right which he had to Milan, and the Kingdom of Naples,
contrary to the Resolutions taken by the General Estates, and contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of Monarchy. True it is, that these Arguments ought to be
grounded upon some lawful Reason; and that King's would injure their
Successors; if they parted with any Province from the Body of their Dominions,
without being constrained: But when they condescend to those Retrenchments only
by compulsion, or for the good of the Kingdom, their Subjects have no reason to
complain; or, if they had, the greatest part of our Kings had more reason to
complain of their Predecessors, particularly of the Children of Henry II. who
by the Treaty of Careau-Cambresis restored near Two hundred Cities, or strong
Holds to the other Party.

To this we must add, that it is a difficult thing to observe that point of
Grandeur, alleged by the forementioned Author; that when Dominions are
united, it is not lawful for kings to part with any parcel thereof; because it
is not long since the settlement of our Monarchs, that France has been enlarged
by the Conquests of our Kings, or been lessened by those of our Neighbors.
Moreover, the Princes of the First and Second Race have frequently diminish^d
its Grandeur, by dividing it among their Children into several Kingdoms.
Lastly, not to mention all the Provinces that have been disunited from the
Crown, it will be sufficient to remark, that Burgundy was disunited by Henry
the younger Son of Hugh Capet, in favor of Robert his Brother, that it
returned to the Crown under King John, who gave it in a short time after to
Philip the Bold, his Fourth Son, and after the death of Charles, the last Duke
of Burgundy, Lewis the XI. made himself Master of it, so that it had not been
reunited to the Crown above Fifty years, when Francis I. was inclinable to
have restored it back again.

Let us proceed to those other Pretenses for dispensing with our Loyalty to our
Sovereigns. Religion, the Reformation of the Kingdom, and the grievances of
Impositions, are the pretenses most frequently made use of to debauch the
Subject into Conspiracies and Factions. But a Loyal Subject ought to be careful
of being deluded by specious Pretenses, and to have always before his Eyes the
saying of Tacitus, That Liberty, and Ease of the People are specious Words
which the Factious make use of to withdraw Subjects from their Obedience.
Therefore to those that complain of the burden of Taxes and Subsidies, we must
answer, That God not only Commands Obedience to Princes that Govern their
Subjects with Lenity and Mildness; but also to those that trample upon their
Necks, and make an ill use of their Power. To those that Pretend Reformation of
State, we are to affirm, that Disorder is not the way to Order, nor is the Cure
of a distempered Kingdom to be wrought by such a violent and dangerous Remedy
as War, which is a Remedy far worse then the Distemper, which they pretend to
heal; or, then they can pretend to have suffered for several years together.

The pretense of Religion is the most predominant of all; and whenever the
Politic Heads of Factions pretend to cover their Ambition with that fair
pretense, they fail not of wonderful success; Under this Veil were concealed
the great Projects and Designs of the House of Lorrain, when the Duke of Guise
formed that famous League against Henry III. And, the reason it got to such a
head in so short a time: and therefore we find that it was the principal and
continual care of the Duke of Guise, and after him of the Duke of Maine, to
imprint in the Minds of the People, by the means of the Religious Orders, that
Preached to 'em, and governed their Consciences, that Henry III. favored the
Hugonots underhand; and reduced the King to such a condition, that he was
forced to League himself with the King of Navarre, with whom he was no sooner
agreed, but happened the deadly Blow at St. Clou.

The pretense of Religion had the power to engage a prodigious number of
Persons of Quality and Worth in that pernicious League, and to kindle a War
both in France and Germany; not only through the Industry of the Nobility, who
made use of it to bring about their own Designs; but also through Ignorance of
the principal Maxims of our Religion; of which, this is one of great
Importance; That we ought not to do an ill thing, to procure a certain Good, or
to avoid an Evil. Now to rebel against our lawful Sovereign, is visibly Evil;
therefore we ought not to Rebel in hopes of any Good whatever, nor for fear of
any Damage or Evil that may ensue. And we must understand, that how terrible
soever those Misfortunes are intended, we are like to fall into, they are
beneath the wounding of our Consciences.

This Religious submission to those whom God has set over us, remarkably
appeared among the Christians of the Four first Ages, who never swerved from
their Obedience to the Pagan Emperors; no, not from those that furiously
persecuted both them and their Religion, that studied their Extirpation, and
put 'em to death with innumerable Torments. And which was a greater wonder,
that several were the Emperor's Domestic Servants, several that had great
Preferments at Court, and so great a number that served 'em in the Field, that
Dioclesian had no less then Thirty thousand in his Army. They that were the
Emperor's Servants served him with Respect, Affection and Fidelity; and they
that were Listed in their Armies, fought with so much zeal for the preservation
of the Empire, that St. Sebastian, one of the Captains of Dioclesian's Guard,
reproaching his Cruelty toward the Christians, Thou exercisest thy Fury, said
he, upon thy best Servants, upon People that every day pray for thy Prosperity,
and the safety of the Empire. St. Romulus, Grand Master of Trojan's Household,
taxed the Emperor in the same manner when he disbanded Eleven thousand
Christians, and banished 'em into Armenia; and boldly reproved him for
depriving himself of the stoutest, and most faithful Soldiers in his Army.

Now in regard the Form of the Oath which the Christians took, when they were
enrolled, cannot be thought impertinent to our purpose; I thought it not amiss
to recite it here, as we find it in Vegetius.

We oblige our selves in the Name of God, of Christ, the Holy Ghost, and his
Imperial Majesty, whom it behooves us to Honor next to God, to be faithful to
the Emperor, to obey his Commands, never to desert our Colors, or refuse to
dye, upon all occasions that call us to defend the public Weal.

This Form was admitted by all the Emperors, till the Reign of Maximian
Hercules, who altered it, and Commanded all his Soldiers to swear upon the
Altars of his false Gods, that they would Fight courageously against all that
opposed his March. That Order was no sooner brought to the Theban L^gion,
consisting of Six thousand six hundred Christians, but they left the Camp, and
set up their Standards about three Leagues off. The Emperor understanding what
had happened, summoned 'em to return, and rejoyn the Body of the Army. But St.
Mauritius who Commanded that famous Legion, made answer to the Messenger, That
he and his fellow Soldiers, were ready to expose their Lives in the Emperors
Service; but that being Christians, they acknowledged no other Deity then the
Living God; and therefore could perform no Religious Act before inanimate
Idols. Maximian having heard their Answer, commanded the whole Legion to be
Decimated, and every tenth Man to be put to death; which not prevailing to
shake the Resolutions, either of the Commanders or Soldiers, he ordered a
second Decimation; but proving altogether as ineffectual, in a fury he let
loose his whole Army upon those innocent People, and Massacr'd every Mothers
Son. Gregory of Tours writes, That the Memory of these Christians, and generous
Warriors was Honored in the Ancient Church; and that there was a great
Concourse of Pilgrims to the Place, where they suffered.

I have given this Portraicture of the Primitive Christians, that the
Christians of our time may therein, as in a Mirror, behold the just
Condemnation of their own Sentiments and Behaviors; that they may learn from
thence, That the French, who made war against Henry III. because they thought
him a Hugonot, and afterward opposed Henry IV. because he was really so, were
guilty of High Treason, both Divine and Human; and Lastly, to convince 'em,
That there is no difference of Religion, no Tyranny of Government, no Interest,
no Reason, no Pretense whatever, that can justify Rebellion. Wise Men, says
Tacitus, patiently endure the Government of bad Princes, like the Influences of
evil Constellations; and look upon Oppression, Proscription, Poisoning, and
those other Effects of their Cruelty, as Famine, Pestilence, and other
Misfortunes that proceed from the ill temper of the Air. We ought to implore
the Gods to send us mild and just Emperors; but we must be obedient to those
the Gods have sent us, whatever they be.

The justice of this obligation never to withdraw from our Obedience to our
Prince, is to acknowledge, even by the Hugonets themselves, the most zealous in
their Religion, such as was the deceased Monsieur Gombaut, who blames the
Rochellers for shutting their Gates against the deceased King, and constrained
him to lay Siege to their City.

They should have set open their Gates, says he, to their Prince, and only
have employed their weapons of Faith against his Force.

The Theology of the Pagans agrees in this point with that of the Christians,
and places the violation of Loyalty to Sovereign Princes, among the Crimes
which are punished by the Gods in Hell.

God, says Plato, has in himself the Beginning, the Middle; and the End of
Things, and Condemns by his just Decrees all those that refuse to live humbly
and peaceably in Obedience, but believing themselves capable to conduct
themselves, shake off their Obedience to their Sovereigns.

But God having established the Thrones of Kings for the benefit of the
Public, and to uphold Order among Men, has not only forbid their Subjects to
Rebel against em, but has also declared the Persons of Sovereign Princes to be
Sacred, and that it is utterly unlawful to make the least attempt upon their
Lives, how unjust, how violent and cruel soever they be. Touch not, says the
Scripture, those that are Consecrated to God by their being Anointed, and
consequently ought to be revered as Holy. And to the end we may not fail in our
Duty to Kings, tells us he is so chary of their Honor, that he will not have it
wounded so much as in Thought. "Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought, says
Ecclesiastes.

We need not wonder then, if the Church instructed by the Holy Spirit, has such
a particular care of Kings, and that it appear by the great number of Decrees
which she has made in their favor, that she employs all her Authority to
preserve both their Lives and their Reputation. The Fathers in a Council of
Constance, thundered out their Anathema's against the execrable Thesis of John
Petit, who subjects the Government of Kings to the censure of their Subjects,
and exposes their Persons to Sacrilegious Attempts. That Doctrine, which the
same Divine, corrupted by the Duke of Burgundy, adventured to maintain, and to
color the Assassination of the Duke of Orleance, the only Brother of Charles
VI. was so detested by all the World, that maugre the Power of the Duke of
Burgundy, then Regent of the Kingdom, it was condemned by the University of
Paris, and the Writing it self publicly burnt before the Church of Nostre
Dame. A certain Council in Spain Excommunicated all those that exclaimed
against the Government of Kings, and tore their Reputation with defamatory
Libels. But it would be too long to recite what we meet with in Holy Writ, in
Councils, and in the Writings of the Fathers upon this Subject.

There is no question therefore, but the Obedience which we owe to God and his
Church, obliges us to a high veneration for Sovereign Princes, inviolably to
preserve our Loyalty, and Religiously to perform their Commands. In the mean
while, where are those Christians that Honor God in the persons of their
Sovereigns, who are Loyal in discharge of their Consciences, and who obey their
Commands with so much exactness, as if they had received 'em from God himself.
Do we not see that there is little or no Fidelity in those that are so sedulous
in their attendance upon Princes? only the desire and hope of their Favors,
redoubles their Zeal for the Service of their King when they receive Rewards?
That it grows remiss and weary when they find themselves slighted; that it is
utterly extinguished when they see no likelihood of bettering their Fortune.
And therefore it is, that in all the motions of the Court, there are so many
People that throw themselves into Parties, and endeavor to put themselves into
a condition, as to be able to wrest by private Compact, and underhand
Agreements, those Gratifications and Employments which are refused 'em, and
which they believe to be due to their Merit?

What is this Loyalty in others, but the fear of those Penalties and
Punishments inflicted upon those that violate their Allegiance by Cabals and
Factions prejudicial to their Prince, and by Conspiracies against their
Persons? Which is apparent from hence that some Princes that loath the severity
of spilling Human Blood, spare not sometimes the most considerable persons in
the Realm, to restrain others within the bounds of their Duty, by the examples
of their Justice.

The Loyalty of Men of Judgment and Solidity, does it not proceed from their
Knowledge, that there is nothing so great as the Power of Kings? and that the
very thought of their destruction is not only Impious, but void of Sense or
Reason? They know that their very Guards which are a Body sufficient, and ready
upon all occasions, will give no leisure to Rebellion or Sedition to grow to a
head. They know moreover, that Kings are the dispensers of all those Favors,
those Honors, Dignities, and Employments, which Men so ardently seek after: So
that they have always in their power, the infallible means to reduce those that
are revolted from their Obedience. Lastly, they know that the greatest part of
those Subjects who have forgot their Duty to their Sovereigns, have brought
themselves to unfortunate Conclusions, have waxed old in Prison, or spent the
remainder of their days exiled in Foreign Countries with their Families.

Is it not also easy to be perceivd that the Loyalty of wealthy Persons, who
are contented with their Estates, and have no other Ambition, them to taste the
sweets of Life, is merely out of Interest. For in regard, that War is chiefly a
scourge to them, which others desire in hopes to gain Honor, or to enrich
themselves, they stand fast to their Prince, as being the Person that
continually watches over the Kingdom to prevent the calamities of Invasion or
Rebellion; and they look upon him as the Tutelar Angel of their Tranquillity and
Happiness.

Deus nobis hac otia fecit.
Such leisure our Terrestrial God
On us bestowed.
Can we have a better opinion of those who being the Kings Domestic Servants,
and advanced to the highest preferments in the Household, can never prove
disloyal without loosing their Reputation, and ruining their Fortunes? and must
we therefore believe their Loyalty to be unspotted and truly virtuous?

What Idea can we form of the Loyalty of those accomplished Politicians, who at
the first breaking out of a Civil War retire into the Country, there to
observe which way the scales will turn, and to take the winning side? and so
cunningly behave themselves as to be feared, and consequently courted from the
Court, lest they should join with the adverse Party?

In a word, the Loyalty of People is only a natural desire to live at ease and
quiet: but as there are many with whom it is all one whither they live in Peace
or no, we may be sure that all such People are equally disposed either to
Obedience or Sedition; so that their Loyalty depends purely upon Seasons and
Conjunctions.

Let us acknowledge then that the Loy alty of those who have given, and every
day give notable Proofs of their Allegiance is built upon a slender and sandy
Foundation, as depending solely upon the dispositions of the Heart of Man, who
changes every time he changes his Interest, or that he harbors new Thoughts in
his Mind. For how can we rely upon a Person valiant and experienced in War,
who in a civil Dissension takes the Kings side, out of a persuasion that it is
usually the victorious Party, and that it will be doubtless most for his
advantage? Is it impossible to convince him that he shall make a better Market
by siding with the other Party; or to tempt him with a promise of being their
Chieftain? And more then all this, may not Revenge, or some other Passion
provoke him to forget his Duty? How many secret Springs and Wires are there in
the Heart of Man to move it to and fro, at the direction of commanding Passions
and Pleasures?

From whence we may conclude, that if we desire to be Loyally Virtuous, and
Virtuously Loyal, it behooves us to be obliged to our Prince, by the same ties
that we are bound to God: and that we honor Sovereign Princes as his
Vicegerents and living Images, as the Ministers of his Justice, and the Organs
of his Will.

CHAP. XXVII. Fidelity in keeping a Secret.
IT may seem that Men honor Fidelity as a Madam, because we have need of it.
As the one is necessary for the Body, the Soul cannot be without the other. The
Heart of Man, says an Italian Poet, is a vessel too small to contain all that
fills it from without, and grows within it self: so that of necessity it must
enlarge it self; and happy are they that can find faithful friends, that are
able to receive what their Hearts cannot contain, and to lodge it carefully.

But to say truth, it is not the smallness of Man's Heart that sets so high a
value upon Fidelity. Thus it is the condition of Man, whom Nature has produced
so imperfect, that he is not sufficient for himself. And therefore she allows
him so great an inclination to Society. Man is therefore so prone to
communicate and impart to others, that he would not be satisfied with his own
Merit, if he did not hope to make it known in the World. This Hope it is that
gives life to all his Sentiments, and sets all his Inclinations at work. This
is that which makes him toil after the Acquisition of Sciences; for he would
neither take any care to be Learned, nor any pleasure in being so, if he did
not hope to make it appear.

Man therefore being thus pressed by his violent Inclinations, to communicate
to others his Thoughts, his Opinions, his Knowledge, his Designs, finds that he
cannot gratify his Inclinations, without exposing himself to the visible
dangers that threaten his Honor, his Repose, his Interests; that the
Infidelity of Man is so great, and so general, that he cannot impart his secret
designs, without raising obstacles at the same time, that may impede their
accomplishment; nor without encountering Accidents, that sometimes injure the
Reputation of considerable Persons, not without some blemish to his own.

Therefore it is that he seeks out for persons Discreet, Secret, and Faithful.
On the other side, They who are conscious of their Fidelity, well knowing how
requisite and necessary it is, put as high a value upon it as they can, to
render it useful and profitable to their Reputation and Fortune. For which
reasons they generally apply themselves to persons of Credit, or of high
Quality, and lay hold upon all opportunities to screw themselves in their
confidence. That of Princes they easily obtain, because their idle hours and
leisure require continual conversation; and besides that their Minds are
sensible and impatient, and their Thoughts more lively and impetuous than those
of other Men. So that through their impatience to satisfy 'em, it is a wonderful
ease to their Minds that they are able to communicate, and tell what they know
to persons that never betray their Trust. For this reason they love those that
have the reputation of Secrecy, and favor 'em upon all occasions, and highly
honor 'em; because they find that persons of Secrecy carefully preserve their
Trust deposited in their Breasts; and not out of any real esteem that they have
of their Fidelity.

And indeed this disesteem of Fidelity might be excusable, if they knew the
motives that obliged them to be faithful, whose Fidelity they have so
frequently experienced: nor would they have such a value as they have for their
Confidents, did they but consider that there is nothing so dear as to meet with
Confidents that keep a secret to the utmost of exactness, without imparting it
to any Soul whatever living. And they would extremely distrust some of those
Secret-keepers, were they but well informed, that there are some persons that
make a Trade of keeping Secrets, like Merchants that trafick for Pearls, which
is a certain Truth, but such a one as requires something of Illustration to
make it evident.

All the world admires the prodigious vanity of Merchants in great Cities; and
they cannot but wonder that the desire of Gain, has intermixed in Commerce
(...) only what is necessary for the support and convenience of Life; but also
what i^ serviceable to Luxury and Pleasure But (...) are ^ew take notice that
all Men are become Merchants; that they expose every thing to sale; some their
valor and military Experience, to be accounted while they live, the Props of
the Kingdom, and to immortalize themselves after death: others their Arts and
Sciences, to make themselves famous; others their Wit, to render themselves
acceptable in all companies: others their dexterity in business, to gain credit
at Court, and make a Figure. But what profit can they make of themselves that
have no good quality, neither* Art nor Science, neither Wit nor Dexterity in
business?

These people gain by their double diligence near some great Person, who at
length heaves 'em into some good employment. By their access to some Lady
courted by all the World for the greatness of her Wit, whose approbation is to
them instead of Merit. By the confidence which the Prince reposes in 'em; for
having their Secrets at their disposal, he employs 'em to satisfy the Curiosity
of some idle Lady, to awaken her Senses, and revive her out of that
Languishment into which her sloth has cast her. Or else they oblige some Person
considerable at Court, whose Ears itch after the rarity of News. Well -- but
are not these People soon discovered? No -- For they never tell any Secret of
importance committed to their charge, but to fuch as they are sure will never
fail 'em, for fear of loosing the satisfaction of their Curiosity. In a word
they are no Sives that can hold nothing that is told 'em: nor no Fools, that
what they hear they tell to all people without distinctions, but such as are
judiciously unfaithful, and prudent dispensers of a Secret.

But if there be any such as can keep a Secret so religiously, as to scruple
the discovery of it to their most intimate friends, they never take this course
but upon good grounds that regard their Interests. Of which the first is, that
Fidelity is an honest way to accomplish their ends: for tho all Men are
governed by their Interests, yet the Interest of all Men are not the same. For
in some the desire of Wealth predominates, in others the desire of being
esteemed and valued, is more prevalent than that of getting Riches. Hence it
comes to pass, that the latter scorn to profit by Prostitutions, and mean
Tricks, and that they only make use of honest ways to advantage themselves.

The Second Reason is, because it is a pleasant way. There being nothing so
delightful to a vain person, as to be the Confident of a Prince; and to be
frequently with him in his Closet, while the Door is shut to all others.

The Third Reason is, because it is a safe way. For it is impossible but that
the Persons entrusting must study the advancement of those into whose Bosoms
they discharge the pleasures or Afflictions of their Minds; and with whom they
have deposited their Lives, their Honor, and their Liberty.

The last reason is, their fear of being disesteemed, and to be deprived of the
advantages of such Honorable Society. For they who reveal the Secrets
committed to their keeping, are despised by all the World, and excluded out of
all companies.

These Human Considerations render us secret and faithful, not the esteem or
love of Fidelity: much less, out of any Obedience to the Commands of God, to do
as we would be done by. And therefore the Fidelity of the wise Men of the Age
is not out of any real Virtue; for that exact Fidelity is a rare thing; which
made the Pagans complain, That there was no Fidelity among Men.

Therefore only Christianity is to be looked upon as a Renovation of the first
Age of the World, where true Fidelity and Loyalty are reestablished. Which
Virtues shined so brightly in the Manners of the Primitive Christians, that in
the Portraiture which Pliny the Second gives of 'em to Trajan the Emperor, he
marks out their Fidelity for a Quality that rendered 'em highly valuable.

Their Life, says he, is very innocent, they keep their words inviolably, and
faithfully restore whatever is committed to their charge.

CHAP. XXVIII. Acknowledgment, or Gratitude.
MEN admire those excellent Comedians that understand so well to vary the tone
of their Voice, their Gestures, and their Actions, that they seem to be two
different Persons at one and the same time. But they would much more admire,
were they but aware, how Interest alone acts that infinite number of Persons
which we see upon the Theater of the World. It Is Interest that acts the corrupt
Judge, and the Magistrate full of Integrity; the Modest, the Magnificent, the
Covetous and the Liberal; which showing it self under the shape of a Person
that demands Counsel, appears at the same time in the likeness of a kind Friend
that gives his advice.

If any Man question the truth of this, let him but nearly consider a
Benefactor, and a Grateful Person. For tho the First may seemingly study to
bestow his Gifts without any design but merely to gratify his Beneficent
Inclination; and that the other desires nothing more then to testify his
Gratitude for the Favors he has received; and yet neither Generosity or
Gratitude can be ascribed either to the one or the other, while both drive
directly to their own Interests.

To be convinced of the truth of this, we must first consider the carriage and
temper of a Benefactor, who as soon as he has any employment or preferment to
bestow, he not only studies who to gratify, but he is no less careful that the
Present which he makes him, may not want any of those Circumstances which are
proper to enhance the Price, and render it acceptable. To which end he casts
his Eye upon some Person that never expects it, that never did him any service,
nor ever spoke to him in his life.

Certain it is that this way of proceeding, if we examine and look upon it, as
to the intention of the Benefactor, is so far from being frank and generous,
that it is only a piece of fine spun Interest; That the Benefactor studied not
to loose his kindness, when he bestowed it with such a comely Grace, and that
all his cares to render his proceedings fair and gentile, are the ties
wherewith he desires to bind the Party engaged. And therefore we have reason to
wonder at the saying of Seneca; We look round about the Houses of those to whom
we lend our Money, or upon whom we bestow our kindnesses to see whither they
have enough to answer us; for covetous Men are not more cautious of their
Security when they lend Money, than others are when they bestow a Kindness; for
that we never fix upon the Person, till we have a long time reckoned up what
service he may be able to do us, or till we find he may be useful to us in our
business, or fit to accomplish our private designs. Upon those Considerations
we prefer one Man before another; and it is to engage him in such a manner that
he may not fail us, that we are so careful, that the most endearing
circumstances we can think of, may accompany our kindnesses.

For proof of this, let us but consider the Surprises, the Indignation, the
desperation of a Person that has met with an ungrateful return of his Favors,
his secret Anxieties and public Complaints against Ingratitude; in what dismal
colors does henot set it forth? How he tears up his Reputation, and exclaims
against him as a Person that had robbed him; otherwise, had he sought to please
himself in the Kindness, he had had his pleasure: or if he aimed at no
advantage to himself, why is he so enraged at his loss? We must confess that
his despair proceeds from this, that he finds all his hopes deluded; and for
that he has not reaped the fruits of the to others Promises. But there is no Man
so simple to believe he hates Ingratitude for its self, or that he is so taken
with the loveliness of the Virtue* that he cannot endure the deformity of the
Vice.

From whence we may easily conclude two things; First, that we are very
deceitful and hypocritical, to make the World believe we carry noble Souls, and
aim at no gratification for the Favors which we bestow; but that we are fully
satisfied, in finding our selves capable to do good to others. The Second is,
that there would be no ungrateful persons, if this Maxim of Seneca were true,
That Men are not obliged to acknowledge any other then the Favors done us
freely, and without hope of recompense.

Now let us see what are the sentiments of a Grateful Person, and what is the
secret Principle of his Gratitude. The First Sentiments then that arise in the
heart of a Grateful Person, are so tender, so affectionate, and seem so
naturally conceived for his Benefactor, that an ungrateful person frequently
deceives himself, and believes he has for his Benefactor a friendship, not only
sincere but cordial. But whatever he thinks, proceeds from his own Self-Love,
and causes him to be thankful for the kindnesses he receives to those that are
the Donors, not for love of them, but merely upon the consideration of his
Interest. But the next succeeding Thoughts to these are quite contrary; For he
that has received great kindnesses, presently perceives, that they are no
Presents but only Loans; he begins to look upon his Benefactor as his Creditor
that Dunns him, and all the obligations which he owes, as so many Chains and
Fetters that load and oppress him. Which Condition is to him so insupportable,
that his desire to free himself inclines him secretly to laugh at all his
Obligations; and his Ingratitude would doubly appear upon the first occasion,
did he not fear the ruin of his new pretensions.

This Fear, or rather Hope of some more considerable benefit, it it which
inspires him with sentiments of Gratitude, which obliges him to publish the
Generosity of his Benefactor, diligently to visit him; and to show him upon all
occasions, how highly, and how particularly he is beholding to him.
Nevertheless, if any other Person, in the height of all this double diligence,
shows him but the least glimmering of some greater Preferment; he turns about
immediately, and goes directly where his Interest calls him. However, he still
carries himself outwardly very fair toward his Benefactors, till the fatal
occasion gives him an opportunity to pick a Quarrel, and then without any
hesitation away he dings to court his greater profit. Then his Interest
declares it self, and his Ingratitude sallys out from the bottom of his Heart,
and shows it self no less black then it is, notwithstanding all the care he
takes to vail it with a million of pretenses, and to lessen the benefits he has
received.

Nor need we be surprised, that a Sentiment so treacherous and base should
breed in the Heart of Man: For more wondrous Sentiments breed there, if we may
believe Aristotle. The Nature of Man is so wicked, that they who owe great
sums, and they who have received considerable Favors, wish with an equal
hatred, the one the death of their Creditors, the other of their Benefactors.

Which saying of the Philosopher concerning the malice of Men to their
Benefactors, will not seem incredible to those that understand the vastness of
his Pride, and that all dependencies and duties are odious to him, but rather
make it evident how far the Thoughts of Men are from sincere and virtuous
Gratitude; and that when they do behave themselves gratefully, it is only in
hopes of some newer Favor.

Aristotle is so far convinced of this, as to assure us, that they on whom we
bestow our Favors, have no affection for their Benefactors, only they admire
the kindnesses which they receive or hope to receive. Which is the reason we do
not apprehend the intention of Seneca, who takes upon him in several Treatises,
to instruct how to bestow our kindnesses; supposing the ill choice of Subjects,
to be the only cause why there is so little Gratitude stirring, when as it
proceeds from the corruption of Man's Heart, which is so ungrateful and unjust,
that unless we could make Men in love with Justice, it is impossible to make'em
Grateful. If thou do not inspire Virtue withal, says Plato, into those whom
thou obligest, they will never be sensible of thy kindnesses.

But Interest is not the only cause of Gratitude; there is also in the first
place, the fear of that shame which attends upon Ingratitude. For since Men are
become the Sovereign Judges of Human Actions, they have adjudged far more
Infamous those that offend or injure them, then they that violate the Laws of
God; and because no Men are more hated, then they who do not equal with their
Services the Obligations they have received, but frustrate the expectations of
their Benefactors: Hence it comes to pass, that they are looked upon by the
Beneficent, as Men unworthy to live, and that Ingratitude is branded, when
Sacrilege and Impiety are honored.

These two sorts of Gratitude, the one proceeding from Interest, the other from
Fear, are the most usual. Those sorts of Gratitude that proceed from Pride and
Vanity, are not so effectual, but they are common enough. We find this sort of
acknowledgment in those, who having been the Favorites of Kings and Princes,
take all occasions to mention the benefits which they have received at their
hands, and enlarge upon the circumstances, seemingly to show that they preserve
'em still in their Memory; but indeed to let the world see that they were no
mean Persons in those days.

There are some sorts of acknowledgment that proceed from malignity, and
murmuring Discontent. Such are those which some affect to show before certain
Persons whom they design cunningly to accuse for neglect of their Services: who
express themselves after this manner. I have been hugely beholding to such a
Prince, he has done me a thousand kindn^sses; but I took nothing so kindly, as
that he still prevented my Requests. These Kindnesses thus acknowledged before
great Persons, from whom they design to wrest particular Favors, are usually
cunning Accusations and Reproaches thrown upon 'em for their remissness, and
private intimations of what they expect at their hands.

There are other Acknowledgments, Vicious and Criminal; Such are the
acknowledgments of those who having a false Idaea of Friendship, believe that
gives 'em a privilege, and imposes an Obligation upon 'em to violate Laws, the
most just and equitable, to espouse the unjust Quarrels of their Friends, to
serve 'em in Duels and Revenges, and to assist 'em in the stealing of Fortunes,
and to concern themselves in Intrigues and Confederacies contrary to their Duty.

Lastly, there are cunning and politic Acknowledgments which we testify to
those that solicit our Assairs, to oblige 'em to Fidelity and Diligence. For
example, There was a Person at Court, who having obliged a Friend to serve him
in a business of importance, that tended to the advancement of his Family, gave
him full assurances of his acknowledgments, proportionable to the difficulties
that presented themselve, so that when he saw him tired out with the pains that
he had taken, and discoursed with the apprehension of new obstacles: Sir, said
the other, I am sensible of the trouble which I gave ye, but consider how much
you oblige me; and were not I a person of an absolute good nature, yet had I
but a grain of Gratitude, it would suffice to make me eternally sensible of the
Obligations you have laid upon me. And this he repeated as often as he found
the zeal of his Friend begin to grow cold. It is not requisite to recite the
rest of this Story; it will suffice to tell ye, that the Person of Quality's
business being accomplished, he soon cancelled the Remembrance of the signal
Service done him: so that indeed the more we study Men, the less we are able to
apprehend, how they can live at peace with themselves. All that comes into his
Mind is this, that while others observe Vices in his Virtues, he perhaps may
see Virtues in his Vices; and in his Actions, look upon that for a great piece
of Dexterity, which we rebuke for double-dealing and Imposture: Or else he may
act like the Peacock, who always looks upon what he has most lovely.

Spiegala Pompa del'e occhiute Piume
Displays the Pomp of his Embroiaer'd Tail.
But never minds his acts of Injustice, Infidelity, and Ingratitude.

There are two sorts of Ungrateful Persons, as there are two sorts of Knaves.
The First are ungrateful to the highest degree, and turn their Tails as soon as
they have received a Kindness, fearless of the Disgrace or Infamy that attends
it. The the other sort fall off by degrees, and to render their Flight more
Imperceptible, they turn their Flight into a Retreat. We find the first sort in
the Country, where Men are more downright, and less able to disguise their
Virtues. With the other sort we meet at Court, where they know how to put an
honest Man upon the vilest and most wicked of Actions.

True Christians therefore both know and practice virtuous and real Gratitude.
For besides that, they are sincerely touched with the^ Goodness of those that
favor 'em with their kindnesses; and that they are always ready most
faithfully and cordially to retallate to the utmost of their power; their
Acknowledgment stops not with their visible Benefactors; it re-ascends to God,
who is the Author and Fountain of all their Happiness, as they are commanded by
the words of the Gospel. Call no man your Father who is on Earth, for your Only
Father, and consequently the sole Benefactor, so bountiful to all Men, is God,
who is in Heaven.

FINIS.

