AN ESSAY Upon The ORIGINAL AND DESIGN OF MAGISTRACY OR A Modest Vindication
of the Late Proceedings IN England

By one who Equally hates Rebellion and Tyranny.

Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

AN Essay upon the Original, and Design of MAGISTRCY OR A Modest Vindication of
the late Proccedings in ENGLAND
AS the Right knowledge of the Supreme Magistrate, is the Basis and Foundation
of our Submisions, and the cause of all the Blessings* which flow from a well
tempered Government, so the Misapprehensions and false Notions that many
People, either through Ignorance, or the prejudice of Education, frame to
themselves of his Power, are no less remarkable for their contrary effects.

We fall into two Extremes equally Dangerous, if either we give the People so
much Liberty, that the Magistrate cannot go about these great Ends, f^r which
he was designed, but like a Weathercock, is turned about at the pleasure of
the Mobile; or such a boundless power to the Magistrate, as makes the Property
of the Subject altogether Precarious, depending upon the Caprice of an
insatiable Monacch.

To keep a just Balance, we must consider Magistracy as it was first Institute
by God Almighty, before it was depraved by the Ambition, Pride, and Avarice of
those who were invested in it. So that in its Original, it may be defined, a
Power delegat from God, for maintaining Order, rewarding the Virtues, and
punishing the Crimes of Mankind; The Application of which power is left free to
any independent People or Nation.

It cannot be doubted, but that God as Creator of all things, might in his own
Person have Exerced a Sovereign Power over all his Creatures, which since he
was not pleased to do; He thought fit in His infinite Wisdom to appoint his
Lieutenants here on Earth, to whom he Communicats some Rays of his Divine
Majesty, both to beget a greater Reverence for their Persons, and procure a
cheerful Obedience from those that were to be Subject; So that, the profound
Deference and blind Submission, which Millions of Men pay to a Mortal; perhaps
subject to as many Infirmities as the most part of those he Rules over, can be
ascribed to nothing else but the firm Persuasion of a Divine Institution; But
that we may the more admire the Goodness of God in ordaining Magistracy, he
has no less proposed Man's happiness then his own Glory, that we might find it
our Interest as well as Duty in Obeying; For tho Man was born free, And
consequently by Nature desirous of Liberty, yet an unbounded freedom, could
have done him very little Service in a natural State, when Innocence was no
protection from the oppression of the Stronger; But Rapines, Violence and
Murder were the chief ways of acquiring Right, in this Universal Chaos, where
homo was homini Lupus, nothing was thought Unlawful, that Ambition, Malice or
Cruelty could propose, so that the Weaker were driven to a necessity of uniting
their Forces against the Stronger. Then began they to Errect Societies and make
Laws for Regulating them, the executing of which Laws was Committed to one or
more Persons, as the Major part of the Society thought fit to Trust, who had the
Name of Captain, General or King; It was He who led them out to Battle, who
disposed of Prises, and punished Malefactors; His Commands were easily obeyed
because but few, and all Just, Honest, and profitable. These had not Learned
the Arcana Imperij, or secret ways to enslave their People, but their Eminent
Virtue and singular Valor, both procured their Dignity and maintained them in
it, and having no Sycophant Flatterers about them to abuse their easy
Credality, they had not forgot that the Peoples Liberty was resigned for no
other end, but for obtaining a greater happiness under their Protection, then
what they could have proposed if every Individual had retained it in his own
Person

There is no other Original of Magistracy to be Learned from Sacred or Profane
History, for tho the Patriarchs had the Government of their own Families,
(which by reason of their long Age were very numerous,) yet that right was
derived from the Law of Nature and not from any Civil Obligation; They had for
the most part no fixed Habitation, but lived as Strangers and Sojourners by the
favor of other Princes, and were never modeled into a Common wealth.

When Domanions were enlarged and Empires began to be erected, different forms
of Government were established according to the various inclinations of People,
when the Conqueror gave Laws to the Conquered it was called Despotick; But when
a free People did enter into a Contract and gave up their Liberty on certain
Conditions, it was called a Limited Government, and these conditions the
Fundamental Laws.

This Sovereignty was either entailed upon a particular Family for considerable
services done to the Common wealth, or it was only to be held during Life
whence Succession and Election.

There is a Majesty in every free State, which is nothing else but an
Independent Power upon Earth tied to no Laws but these of God; these of Nature
and Nations, and the Fundamental Laws of a Kingdom.

This Majesty is either Real, or Personal, Real is that Independencie which
every free State has in Relation to one another, Personal, that Right when its
lodged in a particular Person, which tho it be inseparable from the Sovereign
Power for the greater Splendor, yet it may be violate when the Real remains
entire, otherwise the freedom and Independencie of a Nation would be extinct by
the Death or Captivity of the Prince.

To Majesty or Sovereign Power, are annexed the Regalia or Regal Rights which
are less or more, according to the measure of Liberty given from, or reserved
to the People or the Representatives at the first Constitution; For instance, a
King may have power to make War and Peace, and yet cannot raise Money, the
Legislative Power may be also divided as its in England betwixt King and
Parliament, and generally in all mixed Governments; For that Maxim, That jura
Majestatis sunt indivisa, does only take place in an Absolute Monarchy.

That Power which the People reserveth from the Sovereign is called Liberty,
and its eitheir Tacit or Express; Tacit Liberty is the Exemption of such
things as cannot fall under the Cognizance of the Supreme Power, which may be
reduced to three. 1st. Religion or the Empire over the Conscience, which
belongs only to God Almighty. 2dly. The Power of Life and Death till we
forefault them by the Divine Law, or Municipal Laws of a Kingdom. 3dly. Our
Goods and Heritages, which cannot be taken from us without a Judicial Process,
or when the good of the Common wealth we live in requires a share of them.
These three Privileges were ever reserved in the most Ample Resignation of
Liberty; The First we cannot give away because not ours, we have right to the
second as Men, who are to be Governed by Reason; to the Third as Members of a
Society or Commonwealth.

Express Liberty is a Stipulation, whereby somethings are by express paction
eximed from the Power of the Sovereign, by the People or their Representatives,
which Reservations are called Privileges; and are either thus established by
Contract and Agreement at the first Constitution, or are afterward granted by
Princes, when they would either oblige or gratify their People, as was the
Magna Charta in England, and Edict of Nants in France, or when they desire any
favor from them, as was the Golden bull, wherein the Emperor Charles the 4th.
granted considerable Immunities to the Electors, to engage them to choose the
stupid Vensiaslus his Son, Successor in the Empire.

This Property of the Subject has ever been the Eye sore of Monarchs, tho he
has as just a claim to it, as these have to their Crowns, and whoever goes
about to subvert it dissolves the Constitution, and Forefaults his own Title;
since the same Laws that bestowed this at the same time secured that, and
maintaining the one was made an inseparable condition of possessing the other.
Neither can a Rape committed on our Liberty, be excused upon pretense that
Authority is derived from Heaven. For the Great Sovereign of the Universe,
ordained Magistracy for the preservation not the destruction of Mankind; and
he never sent down any person or Family from Heaven with a Commission to
enslave a People or Nation, to whom the Application of the Civil power was left
Absolutely free: So that they might bestow it on whom and after what manner
they pleased; For tho God loves order, yet he never approved of Tyranny and
Oppression, and he who is all Justice and Mercy can never be supposed to
Authorize what is contrary to both. So that whosoever Acts beyond his
Commission and destroys the Flock instead of protecting it. Is so far from
being Gods Vicegerent, that he is to be looked on as the Common Enemy of
Mankind.

The Violation of the Subjects property is called Tyranny, A name which at
first did only signify the Regal power, but when Liberty began to be oppressed
through the Ambition, Wickedness or Evil management of the Governors it was
made use of, to denot the excess of power.

There are two sorts of Tyrants, those in Title and those in Administration of
the Government. The first sort is he, who Usurps the Crown without any Title or
just pretense, as did Oliver Cromwell in England, of the other, one who has a
just right to the Crown but postponning the public good, Acts Arbitrarly and
contrary to Law: Such a Tyrrant was Philip the Second of Spain.

The want of a Title or a Bad one may be supplied by prescription, or the
subsequent consent of the people, to which perhaps the most part of Princes
must at last recurr, unless they would derive their Pedigree from one of the
Sons of Noah, and instruct an uninterrupted Succession ever since.

Tyranny is the most miserable condition a commonwealth can be in, it
dissolves the Union betwixt King and Subject, and exposes both to all the
miseries that attend a civil War, and to the hazard of falling under a
Foreign power; Yea even tho a Tyrrant should be successful in his Attempt,
yet is he as far from his happiness as ever, for besides the inward remorses
that incessantly gnawes his Conscience he suspects all Men, fears every thing,
and is most justly hated by all, so that they did not Represent a Tyrrant ill,
who drew him si^ting under a Cannopy of State feasting in great Riot, with a
naked Sword hanging over his Head.

What Remedy is there then against so great an Evil, are we tamely to subject
our Necks to a Yoke so insupportable to the more refined sort of Men, or are we
to resist the Supreme Magistrate and Reclaim him by Arms when other means prove
ineffectual? The difficulty is great and each opinion has had its Champion who
writ Volumes in defense of their cause.

The horrid Paricide of King Charles the 1. in the middle of this Age was with
great heat and zeal defended by Milton, and Impugned by the Learned Salmasius,
who being a stranger to our Constitution, and the Transactions of our Country,
(I speak it with Reverence to so great a Man,) did but weakly defend so good a
Cause in endeavoring to prove, that Tyranny was not to be resisted, whereas he
should have Evinced (as easily he might) that Charles the 1st. was a good
Prince and no Tyrant.

The present Revolutions in England revives the dispute and engages me contrary
to my humor, to Impart my thoughts to the public, with no other design then
to contribute my m^an endeavors for vindicating the Nations Honor from the
heavy Imputations of Treason and Rebellion, and if I can make out that
Resistance in some case is Lawful, I doubt not but I shall be easily able to
Demonstrate that the present taking up Arms by the Nobility and Gentry of
England in Defense of their Religion, Laws and Liberties, is both just and
necessary.

There are three Degrees of Resistance, The first is the taking up Arms against
the Civil Magistrate, The second is, The Deposing him, and shakeing off our
Allegiance, The third proceeds to the inflicting of capital punishment: Which
last seems inhumane, because GOD has placed a certain Sacredness in the Person
of Princes, so that none can touch the LORDS Anointed, and be guiltless, and
the depriving them off their Crowns, is a great enough punishment, and our
injuries are sufficiently repaired, when we are out of the hazard of being any
more obnoxious to them; The other two may be allowed of, providing the Remedies
be applied by fit persons, after a due manner, and with such caution as a
matter of so great importance does require.

First, By fit persons, as the Nobility, Gentry, and other Representatives of
the Nation, who, as they are most concerned in the Laws, are supposed to
understand them, and consequently, are the best Judges of Liberty. And they are
persons of so much Honor that it were a piece of ill Breeding, to suspect them
of partiality. Secondly, The Tyranny must be Evident and Manifest, some few
Tyrannical Acts do not constitute Tyranny: private injuries must be suffered,
rather than hazard the public peace, there must be a wilful subversion of the
Laws, not those of lesser moment, but such as shake the very Foundations of
Government. David's Murder and Adultery were very Arbitrary and Tyrannical, and
yet did not make him a Tyrant, for Humane Frailty is still to be indulged,
seeing on this side of time perfection is not to be expected.

Thirdly, This is a violent Remedy, and consequently, should be the last, it
ought to be gone about with the greatest Deliberation, and circumpection
imaginable; when Addresses, petitions, Supplications, and such gentle Methods
prove ineffectual.

Fourthly, The Commonwealth must be in such Danger, that the whole Fabric
would otherwise be Dissolved and Overturned.

Lastly, The effectuating of the Design must be certain, otherwise, we fall
into a worse Evil, then what we seek to shun, for Confusion and Anarchy are
worse than Tyranny, and a wounded head is better than none at all.

What is objected against this Opinion from the Old and New Testament, is very
judiciously refuted by the Author of the Inquiry into the measures of
Submission.

The second Argument is taken from the Oath of Allegiance, which Subjects swear
to their Prince, whereby they engage never to rise in Arms against him. To
which it is answered, that this Oath is accessory to the Contract agreed on
betwixt the King and People, and so must follow the nature of its principle.
The Nature of all Contracts is Obligatory on both parties; so that if one of
the parties fail in the performing his part, the other is loosed from his
Obligation. As its in this case, the People Devolve the power on the Prince
upon certain conditions, expressly specified; The accepting of a Crown on such
Terms, binds the Prince to perform the Conditions, if he does not perform them
he ineffect renounces his Right, and tacitly consents that it return to those
who bestowed it.

Lawyers say, that Contracts can only oblige Equals, and therefore no paction
betwixt King and Subject can be binding, there is no force in this Argument, if
we advert that when this Stipulation was made, the Prince and Subjects were
equal and were only distinguished after the power was conferred.

Thirdly, They instance that this does not bind the Successior, to which its
answered, that the Prince engages for himself and Successors, who if they would
reap the advantage from their Predecessors, must have also the disadvantage of
being tied to the same Rules they were adstricted to. But for the further
security none is admitted to the Government till they take the Coronation Oath.

Fourthly, They upbraid us with the example of the Primitive Christians, who
suffered the persecution of Heathen Emperors, with the greatest Moderation and
Patience: I do admire as well as they the Constancy, patience, and other
Virtues, which these Holy Men were endued with, but their case and ours is
quite different. Paganism at that time was established by Law and Christianity
condemned, the Professors whereof suffered as the Disturbers of the public
Peace, but blessed be GOD, the Law is now on our side, and our Religion is
become a great part of our Property, and the peace of our Country, does very
much depend on the preservation of it, besides if the Christian Religion had
been propagate by Arms, its Worth had been diminished, and the Reputation of
the first Founders of Christianity had very much suffered, whereas the Morality
and Justice of all its Precepts, the Holiness and Purity of its Doctrine, were
of sufficient Efficacy to recommend it, and the Constancy and Resolution, with
which the first Christians suffered Martyrdom; were strong Motives to convince
the Pagan World of the truth of it. But in our Christian common Wealth where
there are no more Heathens to convert, as the robbing us of our Religion, would
be the highest Act of in justice; So the parting with it tamely, would argue
the greatest Stupidity and inconcernedness at men can be capable of.

The only Difficulty that remains, is, who shall be Judge of the Princes
Actions, to know when he is a Tyrrant and when not, if it were allowed to the
Prince Himself, He would be too partial, if we should constitute a Right in the
People, they would be too apt to misconstrue the Princes Actions: (which should
ever receive the most Benign Interpretati^n that the Subject can admit.) So
that to shun both Inconveniences, the Controversy must be decided by the Laws
of the Kingdom. There is just such a Plea betwixt the Church of Rome, and the
Protestants concerning a Judge of Controversies, they contend for the Pope as
Christ's Vicar; and reject the Scriptures, which we believe are the only Rule of
Faith; and that in them all things which relate to Salvation are clearly set
down, so that these of the meanest capacities may easily understand them.

In a Politic State the Supreme Magistrate is Sworn to Rule according to the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, which we must suppose are known both to King
and People, because they are a Rule to direct the Government of the one, and a
measure of the obedience of the other, and were fairly enacted at the first
constitution. Its true indeed, that if a Law made by the Civil Power contain
any obscurity, The sole power of Interpreting that Law belongs to the
Lawgivers; but we must imagine the Fundamental Laws full of perspicuity, and
except there be a notorious Violation of them, resistance can never be lawful.

What has been said on this general Head, will not answer the design of this
paper, if it cannot be applied to the present State of Affairs in England: For
it is of no purpose to prove that Tyrrany is to be resisted by Arms, unless we
make it appear that the English Government had altogether Degenerate into
Tyranny, and that the taking up of Arms under the Auspicious conduct of his
Highness the Prince of Orange, was no rash Act, but done after matture
Deliberation, and withal the circumspection that an Affair of so great
Importance did require.

The great and earnest endeavors to have the Bill of Exclusion past, did
sufficiently evince, what fears and Jealousies the Parliament had of the danger
to which their Religion and Liberties would necessarly be exposed under a
Popish Successor: His Majesty's behavior since he came to the Crown has
clearly demonstrate that these Fears were not groundless, for not being con^ent
to Introduce the Popish Religion so much contraire to Law, He has endeavored
to alter the whole frame of the Constitution, and swallow up all our Liberties
and Privileges in an Arbitrary and Despotick Power.

1. The first step was made against the freedom of Parliaments, (which makes up
a great part of the Government by their having a share of the Legislative Power
lodged in them) by their Issuing out Quowaranto's against all the Burghs and
Corporations in England, the most part of them either through fear or force did
surrender their Charters to the King, who placed such Magistrates in them as he
was most assured of, and by this means did altogether invert the freedom of
Election.

2. Nothing can be more contrary to Law, then the erecting of Seminaries of
Priests and Jesuits in all the Capital Cities of his Dominions, yea such
confidence has he reposed in that Order, that he has committed the direction
of his Conscience to one of its Fathers, and was not ashamed to own himself a
son of the Society.

3. His pretense to a Dispensing Power, was no mean breach of his Coronation
Oath, for by it he Usurped the whole Legislative Power; And would have imposed
on the People (in procuring the Votes of the Twelve Mercenary Judges) if they
had not wisely foreseen the dangerous consequences, and feared that his
Majesty would farther oblige his Roman Catholic Subjects by Repealing all the
Laws that were Enacted in Favors of the Protestant Religion.

It was by virtue of this Dispensing Power, that the Ecclesiastic Commission
was established, the Bishop of London suspended, the Fellows of Magdalen
College turned out; And because the Bishops of England would not so far
Justify his Illegal Pretenses, as to cause their Clergy read the Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience from their Pulpits, they quickly saw all the fair
promises made to them Evanish, and the Loyal Church of England was first
branded with the infamous Character of Trumpeters of Rebellion, and afterward
treated as the worst of Criminals, a very bad recompense for that great zeal,
with which they had ever Preached up the Impracticable Doctrine of
Non-Resistance.

4. In Prosecution of the Blessed Design of Reducing Heretieks to the Sea of
Rome, all ways were taken to discourage Protestants, who were not only debarred
from Offices and Employments of any Trust, unless upon such Conditions as the
Court pleased to Impose, but were even turned out of these that had been
Heritable to their Families; and a great part of the Militia was entrusted to
Roman Catholics, of purpose to Over^aw the Parliaments, in case the next
Assembly should have proved stuborn.

5. Tho by many Laws the holding correspondance any way with Rome be declared
high Treason, yet has his Majesty had his Resident there, and received his
Nuncio here, to the great scandal of all good Protestants, and true hearted
Englishmen; For its in effect a Subjecting the Kingdom to a Slavery, from which
our Ancestors had most gloriously delivered us. These things were acted in face
of the Sun, and none can deny them without renouncing the most comfortable of
all his senses: Yea, the King himself did sufficiently acknowledge them, by his
sudden restoring the City Charters, Magdalan College, and some other of the
grosser sort of Abuses, upon the first Information ^e got of the Princes
Declaration.

The Kings old Age, and the fair Prospect of a Protestant Successor, made us
suffer these things patiently, because we hoped to be very shortly delivered
from them, but to despair us, and cut off all our hopes, and to punish the
Prince and Princess of Orange, for refusing to comply with the Kings Will,
there is a sudden rumor spread of the Queens being with Child, which as it did
allarm the whole Kingdom, so it made these who were most concerned be at some
pains to be assured of the truth of it, and yet after their most exact enquiry
their doubts were increased.

The Court was not ignorant of all this, and yet would not give themselves the
least trouble to satisfy them, tho they had the greatest Interest in the world
to do it.

The place of the Queens lying in, was so uncertain, and the management of the
Birth so misterious, the sending away the Princess of Denmark, the Imprisoning
the Bishops in the Tower, gave more then probable grounds to suspect an
Imposture, and tho these be but presumptions, and have not the strength of a
full Probation, yet they transfer a necessity of eliding them by clearer
evidences.

Thus our Religion, Liberties and Laws being ready to sink, when Gentle methods
had proven ineffectual, when Addresses and Supplications, even from the most
Loyal part of the Nation, were counted so many Acts of Treason, it was high
time to recur to that remedy which nature seems to dictate to every individual
in its own defense.

That zeal with which his Highness the Prince of Orange, had ever espoused the
Protestant Interest against all its Adversaries, made the Nobility and Gentry
of England unanimously pitch on him as the fittest person to be their
deliverer, and both He and his Princess being so nearly interested in the
Succession. No rational Man can blame him, for appearing in Arms and demanding
satisfaction that way, which hitherto had been refused him* If the Remedy had
been delayed, its more then probable, the greater part of the Nation had fallen
a Sacrifice to Popery and Arbitrary Government.

I shall conclude all with a short Reflection upon his Majesty's leaving the
Kingdom, and going for France, which Action alone has done him more hurt, than
all the rest together, for by Depriving Us of that protection which we might
expect from his Government; He looses his Subjects from that Allegiance they
swore unto, upon no other Condition then so long as they should enjoy so great
a benefit: Neither can any who knows his Majesty's Temper, impute his flight to
Fear or Cowardice, but rather of his being conscious of a certain guilt, which
did banish him from one of the greatest Stations in the World, and robbed him
of that Bravery and Resolution that he is naturally ended with, and which tho
he had wanted, yet Innocence had supported him, and made him outbrave all the
Malicious Calumnies of his Enemies, with such a heroic constancy of mind, as
seldom or never fails to come of Victorious.

The Prince had also acquainted him in his Declaration, that he had no other
design in coming to England, than to referr all the Grivances of the Nation and
his own Pretenses to a Free Parliament; Neither the King nor any man else,
could ever accuse this Prince with the least breach of promise: And tho he had
been wanting in that Reverence, that is due to the Character of an Uncle and
Father in Law, yet the Princes own Interest had secured the King from any harsh
Treatment, for if any thing had been attempted against his Person, the Nations
Eyes had been opened and would have seen clearly, that these specious pretenses
of Liberty and Property, were but so many Delusions, and such a Treatment
certainly had deserved the greatest Resentment.

But if the King must needs go, can he find no place for shelter but France?
Where so much Protestanr Blood has been so lately shed, with the greatest
Cruelty and Barbarity that ever was heard; He cannot be ignorant that his
Subjects have a natural Aversion for that Nation, and that his closs and
constant Correspondence with its Monarch, gave them just Jealousies to
apprehend, that there was more than an ordinary Friendship betwixt them, which
was every day increased, by his Copieing so near the methods that had been used
in that Nation, for suppressing the Protestant Religion and establishing
Arbitrary Government. And if the King have any hopes to reduce his Subjects by
Invading them on the Head of a French Army, he will find them but ill grounded,
for instead of reconciling them to him, so dangerous and improper a method
would even alienate the hearts of his best Friends, and Britain would show it
self as forward to Fight against Popery and Tyranny, as it was averse from
giving proofs of its Courage, when it must needs have been fatal to Liberty and
the Protestant Religion.

FINIS.

