The Usefulness of Church-Musick.

A SERMON Preached at CHRIST-CHVRCH, November. 27. 1696. Upon Occasion of the
Anniversary-Meeting OF THE Lovers of Music, On St. Coecilia's Day.

By S. ESTWICK, B. D. and Chaplain of Christ-Church, in Oxford.

Published at the Request of the Stewards.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1696.

TO THE Stewards of St. Coecilia's Feast.
The Right Honorable the Lord Dunluce. Sir John Smith, Baronet. John Hill,
Esquire; Colonel Henry Holt. Colonel Nathan. Blackiston. John Carry, Merchant. Moses
Snow, B. M. Nicola. Matteis,Gent.

GENTLEMEN,
YOU desired me first to Preach, and then to Print this Sermon: I have Obeyed
You in Both; as being willing to do whatever lay in my Power to keep up a due
Esteem of Church-Musick, in an Age that seems hastening on apace to a neglect,
if not a disuse of it. If this Discourse may contribute any ways toward so
good an end, and withal serve to express the Respect I have for You, I have the
double aim I proposed to my self in Preaching and Publishing it.

For I am a true Lover of Music, especially when it is employed to so
excellent a purpose, as that of composing our Attention, and raising our
Affections in Divine Worship, and a true Honourer of all those who favor and
encourage it. After which, I need not tell either You or the World how much I
am,

Gentlemen, Your Obedient and Humble Servant, S. ESTWICK.

A SERMON Preached at Christ-Church, Nov. 27. 1696. upon Occasion of the
Anniversary Meeting of the Lovers of Music, on St. Cecilia's Day.
Col. 3. 16. The latter Part, Teaching and Admonishing one another, in Psalms
and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing with Grace in your Hearts to the Lord.
THE Design of this great Assembly's meeting together, being to celebrate the
Praises of our God with exalted Hearts and Voices, I hope each one has
acquitted himself in a suitable manner, and duly observed the most concerning
part of this Exhortation contained in the latter branch of these Words.

It may be needless to tell you we have all been pleased, if not transported,
whilst the Skilful Performers with laudable Emulations have endeavored to
raise and extol God's Goodness, to the utmost pitch our impaired Faculties will
allow of in this imperfect State: By the Frame of our Nature we may perceive
our selves fitted and prepared for the Reception of Harmonious Sounds; as we
are fenced about with Nerves, we find our selves ready strung, and most of us
tuned for this Heavenly Entertainment: By a kind of Sympathy sometimes we
tremble; we are generally pleased when a fitting Subject is well painted by the
Composer and well breathed and set off by the several Performers.

If any one should be found so hardy, or, as some think, so ill-natured as to
oppose himself to the General Consent of Mankind, and to deny the Power of
Harmony, for his Satisfaction we might have wished him here, where he might
have had the best sort of Argument for his Conviction (viz) the Testimony of
his own Sense; and if after this, he had remained unaffected with the gentle
Insinuations of our softer Strains, and unmoved with the more forcible
Impressions of our louder Acclamations, you are all ready to pity the Fate of
this Unhappy Temper, and to pronounce him such a sort of an Infidel, that is
incapable, if not unworthy of a farther Conviction.

To say we are pleased with Harmonious Sounds, is to say very little in
comparison of what our Apostle has suggested to us, who carries this Matter
much higher, and teaches us the true use and benefit of Divine Music in the
Worship of God.

He is chiefly concerned for that Spiritual Advantage that may result from this
Sensible Pleasure; and intimates to every Good Christian, that at the same time
he is gratified and delighted, he may be bettered and improved by it in Holy
and Virtuous Living.

By Teaching and Admonishing one another in Psalms, etc. we are assured of the
fitness of this Divine Exercise, to promote the Spiritual Interests of Faithful
People, of its suitableness to help 'em forward, as well as refresh 'em in
their Passage toward their Heavenly Canaan; and, in a word, to farther and
advance their Spiritual Good and Edification.

How this is done by this Divine Exercise will be more fully made out in this
ensuing Discourse; in the mean time it ought not to be forgot, that in a large
sense we may be said to be taught and admonished by whatever renews, revives,
and calls to remembrance former Thoughts, and Idea's; we certainly may be
admonished of what we knew before, and I think may not improperly be said to be
Taught and Instructed by whatever excites and enlarges our Desires of Goodness,
by whatever enflames in our Hearts the Love of God and our Neighbor; and
whatsoever Instruction serves to confirm our Faith, to enliven our Hope, and
quicken our Graces, and to render our Souls more Humble, more Holy, and more
like to God than they were before, may in a large Sense be deemed Teaching;
though all this while we gain no fresh Supplies of new Idea's, but having an
Occasion offered us of reviving those old ones that before lay dormant, we are
thereby enabled to turn 'em to a better use, and to reduce our Knowledge to
Practice.

This being the Sense of our Apostle's Teaching and Admonishing in this Place,
give me your Attention, whilst I lay before you some Considerations, that may
serve to enforce the Injunction, and show the Usefulness of Divine Music in
the Worship of God, and the Advantages that may be reaped by it in Particular,
by every one that attends to it in due Manner.

First, I desire to offer to your Consideration, that this Method our Apostle
has made choice of as a help to our Spiritual Improvements, was the old way of
Teaching the World, much applauded by the Wise Ancients, and in their Esteem a
very effectual means of inculcating Wisdom, and making Men more Tractable, by
fixing in their Minds the Principles of Natural and Moral Philosophy. As for
its Antiquity, Timagenes, as Quintilian observes, allows Music to be the
eldest of the Learned Studies: And a greater than him tells us, that about the
same time that Tents, Husbandry, and Working in Brass and Iron were found out
by their several Authors, Jubal lessened their Cares by the addition of Musical
Instruments, which being handled down to After-Ages, and serving to cover the
Nakedness of Vocal Sounds, were embraced and cherished by Legislators and
Philosophers, who found the Aptness Music had to Civilize the ruder part of
Mankind, the Advantages it had in gently insinuating Mysterious Truths.

Upon which accounts Poetry and Music may well be esteemed the Nurses of
Infant Commonwealths, the School-Mistresses of Learning, from whose fruitful
Breasts streamed such a kindly Nourishment, as made Empires swell out to that
extent of Grandeur, as to attract the Eyes of their Neighbors to behold and
dread their Power.

Lycurgus and Numa enacted Laws for the Encouragement of Music, not thinking
themselves secure in their Governments, till by its Charms they had Tempered
and Smoothed their unpolished Subjects; or at least by this pleasant Vehicle,
allured 'em to submit to their harsher Constitutions.

How much Learning owes to Poetry and Music, may appear from this, That the
first Seeds of it were scattered in Number and Measure, and what the Celebrated
Poets sung, and many of the Philosophers taught, gained a more easy passage
into Men's Minds by the agreeable mixture of well regulated Sounds.

Hence it was that the various Motions of the Planets, the Arcanas of Nature,
and the Causes of her seeming Irregularties, were first delivered in Verse; And
Atlas is presumed by Virgil to frame, and Jopas to sing the lofty Song on that
Subject. If the Universe it self was thought to be Composed by Harmony, it is
the less to be wondered, that those Philosophers that embraced this Opinion,
should act agreeably to it; whilst Pythagoras framed his Works as near as he
could to this Model, and applied himself to Music, as a means to brighten his
Morning, and compose his Evening Thoughts: It Is the less remarkable, that
Socrates should divert the taedium of his Age, by a late application to Music;
and that Plato and Aristotle should advance it so high, as that the
Speculations of the former could not be thoroughly understood without it, and
that both allow it to be a necessary Ingredient to the Education of Youth, and
tending much to the Formation of Virtue and good Manners.

In pursuance of these high Encomiums given by the greatest Masters of
Learning, and the Experience of its usefulness, the World became soon
acquainted with the happy influences of it, beholding with pleasure, how much
it served to quiet and calm the unruly Passions of Men, to alleviate the
Troubles of Life, to ease its Labors, to abate the Rigours of Adversity, and
heighten the Enjoyments of Prosperity: It beheld with Pleasure how much it
advanced the Honors of the Military Life, whilst their Heroes were animated
with their Martial Sounds, and in some measure rewarded too by the grateful
acknowledgment of Triumphant Songs. How much also were the Affairs of the Civil
Life bettered by it, when, as Plutarch tells us, their Entertainments were
seasoned with wholesome Admonitions, and their Musicians encouraged Temperance
and Moderation at that very time they stood in need of such faithful and
pleasant Monitors.

Thus this excellent gift of Heaven, when exercised in its Primitive Purity and
Simplicity, tended much to the bettering and improving Mankind; and it is the
less to be wondered, that this common Blessing, that served for so many
excellent purposes, should be enclosed and appropriated to the Service of God's
Worship, and the Uses of Religion: That Men's Tongues and Voices should be
Consecrated to enlarge upon the Noble Themes of God's Power, Wisdom and
Goodness; and thereby to make his Praise Glorious, make him Admired of all his
Saints, and Reverenced of all that are round about him.

For seeing the Great End of Man's Creation was to set forth the Praises of his
Creator, and he alone of all the Creatures of this Sublunary World, was indu'd
with Faculties to qualify him for this Noble Employment; it is but reasonable
that he should do his utmost (for that utmost will come far short of it) to
extol the Praises of God to the highest pitch he is capable of, to Glorify his
Maker with his Body and Spirit, with his Voice as well as Understanding.

A second Consideration that serves to recommend to us our Apostle's Injunction
is the Practice of the Jewish Church, as to the use of Vocal and Instrumental
Music; both which kinds were introduced in the latter end of David's Reign,
when the Ark had rest, and that by the Command of God, (1 Cor. 11. 31*) It Is
true Ezra calls this the Ordinance of David King of Israel; and if he appointed
these Usages as a King, and not as a Prophet, we are assured that these Commands
were however confirmed by other Contemporary Prophets: For thus we read (2 Chronicles. 29. 25.) the Levites were set in the House of God with Cymbals, with
Psalteries, and with Harps, according to the Commandment of David, and of Gad
the King's Seer, and of Nathan the Prophet; for so was the Command of God by
his Prophets.

From which Passage it is evident, that these Institutions proceeded from God,
and that this and no other is the Critical Season, from whence they are to bear
Date.

Now this was long after the delivery of Moses's Law and the Sealing up of the
Ceremonial Canon; and consequently cannot be reckoned a part of that, nor
indeed any violation of that Law.

It cannot be reckoned a part of it, because that Law mentions nothing
belonging to Vocal or Instrumental Music in the Worship of God.

We find indeed some Commands relating to the Priests Trumpets, but these were
appointed for Civil Uses, viz the Calling of Assemblies, the Removal of their
Camps, the Proclaiming War, and giving notice of their Festivals, as we find by
the 10th of Numbers.

These Usages were no Violation of that Law, because the appointment of Vocal
and Instrumental Music was no essential Change and Alteration of it.

It was only an additional Ornament, intended to help and raise Devotion, and
for its Natural fitness and congruity to that End Commanded, and so Received
into the House of God.

A third Consideration that enforces our Apostle's Exhortation and Recommends
the Use of Divine Music in the Worship of God, is the Exercise of it in the
Christian Church, from the first Foundations of it.

We find in a particular manner our B. Lord's approving it by singing a Hymn.
In like manner Paul and Silas followed this Pattern, and all faithful People
throughout all Ages of the Church imitated their Practice herein.

It Is true the first Age of the Christian Church was distinguished from the
following upon this as well as other accounts; here therefore I shall briefly
inform you, what the learned Commentators understand by the several Terms*
mentioned by the Apostles: and first they tell us, that the Psalm is such a
Divine Song, that is either designed, or actually sung to some Musical
Instrument, and this is Mr. Calvin's Sense of this word in his Comment upon
this Text; The Hymn is made to Celebrate the Praises of God, and as such does
not extend so far as the Psalm, because the Matter of the Psalm may take in
Petition of Blessings and Confession of Sins, and Deprecation of Evil, as is
usual in many of the Psalms of David.

As for the third sort, viz. Spiritual Songs, we are to understand by them such
Songs, as were indicted by the Holy Ghost in the Praise of God the Father, and
our Redeemer, and uttered by Virtue of a peculiar Gift, which was Communicated
to some Believers, and frequently found in the Apostolical Age.

Some indeed are of Opinion that these Spiritual Songs are to be understood in
opposition to those Lewd Songs used amongst Heathens, and this may in some
sense be allowed too, yet not so as to exclude the former, and that for this
reason, viz. because amongst other miraculous Gifts vouchsafed to the Church of
God, we are assured that inditing Spiritual Songs by the immediate impulse of
the Spirit which is sometimes call d Prophesying, was as remarkably known, as
Praying by the Spirit. And this our Apostle assures us of in that noted
Passage, 1 Cor. 14. V. 15. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with
the Understanding also: I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
Understanding also; the Scope and Design of which place is to make each
particular Gift of Praying and Singing useful to their Auditors; that is, those
that had either of the two, were not either to pray or sing in unknown Tongues,
but those that their Hearers were acquainted with. We have indeed but few of
these Spiritual Songs transmitted to our Hands; but from these excellent
Patterns we may take our estimate of the rest, and give a pretty good guess at
the great Advantages the Church of God received by 'em: For illiterate Men
becoming suddenly qualified to extol the Mercies of God for the great Work of
our Redemption, we cannot but presume that the matter and manner of this
Exercise, was worthy of its Author; that the Harmony was suitable to the
Subject: and because it was a Gift of the Spirit, it is but reasonable to
believe, that these sort of inspired Persons Commenced good Poets and good
Musicians, and were thus doubly qualified to set forth the Praises of our God.
When we consider again that Psalms and Hymns are joined with Spiritual Songs,
this evidently shows that the use of these was not superseded by the
extraordinary assistance then given, and tho it pleased God to raise up Men to
magnify his Name, and to enlarge upon the new Themes of Man's Redemption and
Reconciliation, yet not with that design to make void the old Subjects that
were accommodated to all Estates and Conditions of Life, and to be of perpetual
use to the Church of God. These by the Goodness of God are continued to his
Church; and all that I shall observe at present is, that as we have the
greatest Reason, so we ought to receive the same with grateful acknowledgments,
and express our Gratitude by making what Improvements we can by these standing
Helps of Piety and Devotion.

And so I proceed to show more particularly the usefulness of Divine Mnsick in
the Worship of God; as how, and after what sort, it tends to our Spiritual
Improvement, and what advantages may be reaped by every good Christian that
attends to it in a due manner.

The usefulness of it will in some Measure appear, by reflecting on the
Infirmities incident to our corrupted Nature, For when we make our approaches
to the House of God, by sad experience we too often find our selves disturbed,
either by the Cares or the Pleasures of this Life.

The Man of Business too frequently brings a load of it upon his Shoulders, not
easy to be discharged; the Man of Pleasure too often ruminates on, and acts
over again the Scenes of his past Follies, or is projecting new ones. The
Tradesman is too apt to make the Temple of God a House of Merchandice. The
Scholar, to make it his Study to refine and digest his Notions in. In short, we
are all too subject to be distracted in our Addresses to the Throne of Mercy,
too liable to bring a Sacrifice without a Heart, and to be present in Body, and
at a distance in Spirit. This being too often our unhappy Condition, what
better Remedy can be thought of for the Cure of these Evils, than agreeable
Harmony, which has a great Force and Efficacy to hush and quiet the Cares and
Business of Life, to quell and lay asleep the thoughts of our Innocent
Diversions or forbidden Pleasures, and by bringing the Mind into a calm even
frame and temper, dispose it to attend to the concerning Matters on which our
Salvation depends.

By the help of these delightful Sounds, we are fitted and prepared to offer up
our Prayers in a better manner, and to receive more eagerly the salutary
Admonitions of Holy Scripture either Read or Explained in the Pulpit. When we
find our Devotion and Attention begins to pall by the length of some of our
Offices, we have from these fresh Recruits provided us to renew and invigorate
our drooping Spirits. In a word, our manifold Infirmities do much want such a
kind of relief, first to bring us into due Temper, and then to quicken us when
we find our selves Fainting under their Pressures.

Secondly, The usefulness of Divine Music in the Worship of God, will farther
appear from the Nature of this Exercise, together with the subject Matter about
which it is conversant.

This Exercise, when skilfully managed, has a native Puissance and admirable
Facility to set off the Matter about which it is Conversant, and make it appear
to the best Advantages, so as to render that which in it self is lovely, more
amiable, and more delightful. There are Sounds proper for every Passion, such
as can damp you, when your Mirth and Joy begins to be rampant and excessive,
such as can raise you when your Spirits are languishing, and either the
needless Troubles, or necessary Cares of Life begin to overset you. Your Hopes
shall be enlarged, and by an overruling Power of Harmony, ye shall be
willingly forced to part with your unpleasing Thoughts, and to enjoy a Calm at
least, if not an Ecstasy of Rapture when the Poet and Musician have severally
discharged themselves, according to their different Tasks and Employments.

Even the mean empty Trifles of this Life, when clothed and adorned in proper
Words, and harmoniously expressed, are made too lovely and too desirable.

Vice its self, which one would think needs Art and all other Imbellishments to
ingratiate it self, owes too much of its Empire to the impure Idea's of
lascivious Poets, and the Performances of wanton Musicians; by the help of
which Varnish, the Mind becomes enamored with the most odious and deformed
Objects, and those excellent Faculties that were given us to raise our Love and
Esteem, and to fix our Mind upon Virtue and our sovereign Good, are too often
debased, and made to serve in the meanest Drudgeries, even the propagating
Sensuality and Uncleanness.

If Vice it self is obliged to call in for those Succors to make her wrinkl'd
ghastly Face look Smooth and Beautiful, how amiable must Virtue appear, which in
its self is lovely, when adorned with those Imbellishments? When the Lineaments
of her Picture are drawn by the skilful Hand of a Chaste Poet, and colored by a
good Musician? For to come now to the subject Matter of our Praises and
Thanksgivings, with what complacency and delight, ought we to receive those
imitable Patterns of Devotion; that display the Scenes of God's Love, and our
thankful acknowledgements for his transcendent Goodness and Mercy to the
Children of Men.

And that more especially when we sing the Songs of Angels or Inspired Men; or
those Holy Raptures of Good Men, wherein God's Power, Wisdom and Goodness are
set forth by the Works of Creation and Redemption.

When in particular we adore his excellent Majesty in our Te Deums, make his
Praise glorious for the Works of Creation in our Benedicite. When we Joy and
Triumph in our Faith by singing the Nicene Creed, and at the same time that we
confess our Faith, show that we are pleased with it: When in the rest of our
Psalms and well chosen Hymns, we ascribe the Honor due unto his Name, and thus
offer him the best Sacrifice in the best manner.

If the bare Matter of our Praises, when attentively read, are so very apt to
raise our Affections, and fill our Hearts with Joy, how much is that Joy
increased, when melodious Sounds, agreeable to the Matter treated of, give each
Word their due force and emphasis, especially when the Composer has an Eye upon
the Sense, lays wait upon what is most material, does not clog his Parts with
needless Repetitions, but orders his business so, that the Hearer shall be
little interrupted, but shall follow him with Ease and Pleasure, whilst he
raises your Idea's by a just representation of the Subject that lies before him.

If his Matter is Great and Majestic, his Harmony rises proportionably with
it; if it is more Grave and Solemn he lengthens his Measure, and gives you time
to pause upon it: If it is more Cheerful and Gay, you will the more easily pardon
him, if he keeps pace with it in a quick measure: If sometimes he repeats the
more emphatical words of our Psalms and Hymns, you will excuse him, because the
Holy Penmen have done the same before him; and where they have not done it, he
does not want an excuse, if, by the variety of the Descant he gives you a fresh
occasion to circumstantiate the Praises of God, and to dwell upon 'em with
greater Complacency.

There are some Expressions that are hardly parted with, and more especially
deferve to be insisted on.

The Consideration of God's Mercy ought to create an Holy emulation among the
Performers, and when the Composer has well acquitted himself, each of 'em seems
to be desirous to raise it to the highest Perfection.

The last follows the Steps of the former, and that with a design to improve
and raise, as well as to make the Harmony more complete; and, to conclude, when
the Composer and Performers have exactly done their Parts, how much must our
Hearts be lifted up? how much have they now been lifted up with these Heavenly
Acclamations? How much must our Joys be enlarged? how much have they been
enlarged, whilst we have all joined together either in Heart or Voice, to
praise and magnify our Glorious God, and tell out His Works with Gladness?

From what I have hitherto said, give me leave to make a few short Inferences,
and so I shall conclude.

Seeing what I have hitherto laid down relates chiefly to the external part of
our Duty, and has a regard to the Modes and Circumstances of performing it.
This gives us a good account of the Nature of those Constitutions that belong
to these; and also suggests to us, that we ought to mind more the Substance of
what is performed in the House of God, than the manner of its performance.

This is very requisite in every Duty, and more especially in our Praises and
Thanksgivings, and if we want that inward frame of Spirit, and that Attention
that is the Life and Soul of 'em, we are only pleasing our selves: And if so,
it is easy to determine what sort of Worship this it to be accounted.

Our Apostle requires the Melody of Heart, and that we should sing with Grace
unto the Lord; we ought therefore to attend to what is doing, that we may not
incurt the Hypocrites Doom, who draw near to God with their Lips, when their
Heart is far from him.

Secondly, If it be true that Divine Music in Gods Worship may contribute to
our Spiritual Improvement; This gives us just occasion to blame the Practice of
the Church of Rome, which has framed and contrived her Praises more to the
Honor of Men than of God; and not only so; but she has locked up the few sound
Pieces of Devotion remaining in their Breviary, in a Language not understood by
the generality of their People.

Possibly they may please the Ears of the People, more than we do ours, but
their Hearts can never be affected, and if so, they are doing but one half of
their Duty; they are doing nothing that concerns the more substantial part of
God's Worship, who being a Spirit, is to be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth.

Thirdly, If the Use and Practice of Church-Musick is of such long standing in
the House of God, and Voices and Instruments were appointed by God himself, to
promote the Edification of his People, this shows us the unjust Exceptions the
Dissenters takes against our Way of Worship, making it to be Popish and
Superstitious, and what not; not considering in the mean time, that those
excellent Offices of Praise, I mean our Hymns were practiced long before Popery
was in being; and as to the manner of adorning 'em with good Music; this I
presume is no fault, however I could wish for the good of their Souls, that
they would come to our Churches, and try whether it is a fault or not; and then
it might be hoped we might keep them there, at least, give 'em no just cause to
forsake our Assemblies.

Fourthly, And to conclude, seeing these usages of our Church have a great
tendency to farther our Spiritual Improvement, this shows what great reason we
have to stick firm to the Practices of our Church, and to adhere to the Model
of our first Reformers, who have discovered their Wisdom and Piety in nothing
more, than in the happy Choice of those Offices that were designed to set forth
the Praises of God.

And because our frail state is such, that we can never hope in this Life, to
do it so perfectly as we ought, let our Constitutions be never so complete;
However, let us accustom our selves to this Divine Work here to the utmost
extent of our Faculties, that we may with the Blessed Saints and Angels Praise
God in the Life to come, and sing Hallelujahs to the Honor of his Great
Majesty, who lives and reigns Three Persons and One God, both now and for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MOnsieur Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, containing Reflections useful and
necessary for the right understanding and judging of the Excellencies of Homer
and Virgil. Done into English from the French. Together with some Reflections
upon Prince Arthur. By W. Jones. To which are added, an Essay upon Satyr. By
Monsieur D' Acier. And a Treatise upon Pastoral Poetry. By Monsieur Fontanelle.
80.

A Comparison between Pindar and Horace. Written in French by Mr. Blondel,
Master to the Dauphin. Englished by Sir Edward Sherburn. 80.

The Art of Speaking. Written in French by Messeiurs Du Port Royal, in
pursuance of a former Treatise, Entitled, The Art of Thinking. Made English.

Remarks on the late Writings of the English Socinians. By Mr. Lurancy. 80.

The Lives of all the Princes of Orange; from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces. To which is added, The Life of His
present Majesty, King William III. from His Birth, to His Landing in England.
By Mr. Tho. Brown. Together with all the Princes Heads, taken from Original
Draughts. By Mr. Robert White. 80.

Ten Sermons Preached upon several Public Occasions. By R. Meggot, D. D. and
late Dean of Winchester. 80.

The Foolish Abuse, and Wise Use of Riches. A Sermon Preached May the 1st.
1695. By W. Talbot, D. D. Dean of Worcester.

Mr. Blackburn's Sermon of Anger. Preached before the Queen.

Mr. Adams's Sermon, before the Lords Justices, at Whitehall, upon the
Thanksgiving for the Taking of Namur.

-- His Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons, at St. Margaret's,
Westminster, Nov. 5. 1696.


