AN ESSAY FOR THE REGVLATION OF THE PRACTICE of PHYSIC. Upon which REGULATION
Are grounded The Composure of all Differences Between PHYSICIANS and
APOTHECARIES: AND Reasons for preferring the long accustomed Way of Practicing
by Prescription.

To which is added A brief Discourse concerning ARCANAS or NOSTRUMS, and
another of the Deportment of Physicians toward the Sick, and one another: as
also of the Apothecaries to the Sick, to Physicians, and to Members of their
own Society.

By a Lover of Truth and the Good of Mankind.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Tailor Bookseller, at the Sign of the Hand and Bible
on London Bridge. 1673.

AN ESSAY FOR THE Regulation OF THE PRACTICE of PHYSIC.
MUch has been writ to widen Differences between Doctors and Apothecaries, and
to make them irreconcilable one to the other, as if upon that breach depended
the better Being and Health of the People, and the Improvement of the Art of
Physic.

This has been propagated by some industriously, by others incautelously: by
the first because thereby is gained a liberty or convenience in practicing an
Art, in which, as they have a very incompetent proportion of Skill, so for the
exercise thereof they have no legal, or a very questionable, authority, and
therefore are concerned, to keep this Contest on foot, under whose Umbrage they
shelter their intrusion, and continue confidently their illicite practice.

Others incautelously, upon injuries received, some bold affronts offered,
their Profession against Law, and Ties of Gratitude invaded: from the sense and
provocation of which wrongs, they have too suddenly preferred the ruin and
extirpation of a Corporation, established by the same Authority with
themselves, considerable for Numbers, for bearing a share in the public
Charge; and very many of them eminently knowing and sk^lful in their
Profession; before such prudent endeavors, as might have reduced all to a just
and regular establishment, contentful to both Faculties, and much conducing to
the public weal and accommodation of the People.

That there should be a necessity of the ruin of one or the other, as some
have supposed, is indeed supposed by such as are F^iends to neither, but as the
Devil persuades men in desperation, that there is now no room left for
repentance: So these would persuade both, that huc tandem deventum est, it is in
vain to think of a Composure now, both parties have criminated and
recriminated, and so highly incensed one another, that there is no hope left to
bring things to a due regulation, just bounds and subordination.

To obviate which purpose is the intention of this Paper, by proposing such a
way of establishment as may afford full content to the Reasonable of both
Professions, may give the Physician a full insight into all the parts of
Pharmacy, both in the knowledge of all Drugs, as also in the best ways of
working upon them; and yet so as not to take up too much of his time from
requiring knowledge in other as necessary parts of Physic. To keep the
Apothecaries within the Verge of their own Profession, upon the operative parts
of which their time being wholly spent, they become very assistant to the
Physician in his Improvements of Medicine. To provide in the best manner for
the people, that their Medicines may be good, sound, efficacious, accoording to
the prescript of the Physician; by means whereof they may be taken with
confidence and good expectation by the Patient, and secure che mind of the
Physician, that his orders are well observed.

In doing whereof, it is not to be supposed, that any thing can be offered in
this or the exercise of any other Art, that shall be wholly free from hazard,
or not liable to objections in the execution; no affair in the world is
exempted from it; it is not therefore amply sufficient, that such a way be
proposed as is exposed to the fewest exceptions* and those of smallest moment,
and (which is most comprehensive of the main ends) by all to be aimed at, the
best provision for the peoples Health, and the improvement of the Pharmaceutick
part of Physic.

1. That the Apothecaries, by their Master, Warden; and Assistants, solemnly
promise, not to pra^^ise Physic, except in case of absolute necessity, but to
keep to their proper business of making, dispensing and vending Medicines.

2. That the Company of Apothecaries do oblige their Members, already admitted,
and to be admitted, not to practice Physic: and in case they do so practice,
to be liable to such fines and penalties as the Master and Wardens, for the
time being, shall in such case establish:

3. That the College and Company of Apothecaries join together, in procuring,
by their joint interest, such Supplements to their several Charters, as our
present state of affairs shall require, to secure to each of them their several
Professions, so far forth as the Common liberty and the Laws of the Land will
allow.

4. That such Apothecaries as, notwithstanding the foresaid Agreement, shall of
themselves practice Physic, complaint, and just proof thereof being first made
before the College, shall, for their first time so doing, be warned thereof by
the College, and also by the Master and Wardens of the Apothecaries Company,
and be admonished to forbear the same for the future: and in case they shall,
notwithstanding, persist so to practice* that then, upon proof made as
aforesaid, they shall be declared by the College, at a general meeting, to be
practicing Apothecaries; and the several members of the College commanded, upon
penalty of a fine, to be then declared, not to send their Bills to them, or to
have to do with them in their Practice, but to leave them to themselves; as
incorrigible intruders into other men's Professions.

5. That the Members of the Society of Apothecaries shall bear themselves with
all due respect and subordination to the Members of the College of Physicians;
and that the Members of the College wall have a fair and candid regard to
Apothecaries, as to persons to whom they have entrusted (under their
inspection) some moiety of the Manual parts of their Art, and that they both of
them unite together, and hold a necessary correspondency for advancement of
these two Ends; 1. The improvement of Pharmacy, and 2. the real promotion of
the Peoples preservation, and also safe and speedy restoration from their
Diseases.


6. That, for the better regulation and execution of this Manual part of
Physic, a view be quarterly made of the Medicines and Drugs of the
Apothecaries, or oftener, as need shall require, by the Fellows of the College,
chosen thereunto, according to the convenience of their several Habitations,
the said Fellows, in case they find things faulty, to give an account thereof
to the Censors of the College, that by them such just and lawful means may be
used for punishment of what is past, and prevention of future miscarriages as
their Charter in that case providing shall thereunto authorize them. And that
the said Fellows in their several Divisions shall, as far as other business
will permit, be present, not only at the making of those general Remedies, viz.
Mithridate, Diascordium, Venice and London Treacle; but of all others also;
whereby the Apothecary may be assisted, negligence and frauds prevented; and
the Physician constantly exercised in the Manual part, and thereby also enabled
to ampl^fie, correct and improve this so necessary and considerable part of his
Art, not only by his Observations made, upon these manual processes, but by
drawing in all advantages from Philosophy, his own Reading and Contemplation.

7. That the Dispensatory be revised by the Fellows of the College, and
republished with such Alterations and Amendmen^^ as they shall judge requisite:
in doing whereof, as a fair regard^ to be had to predecessors, not to vary
without just cause, so are they on the other hand principally to steer
themselves, by the greater probability of promoting common good, and producing
such Medicines, as may, with great certainty, effect the intentions designed by
them. For though the present London Dispensatory be acknowledged to be the best
now extant in any part of Christendom, and not only to excel the Augustane,
but in many particulars, its very amendments in the Annotations of Swelfer: yet
inasmuch as Pharmacy has been these late years much improved by the great
industry of Collegiates, especially by their own manual operations, whereby
many Discoveries have been made, of great improvement to Medicine, and benefit
to the Sick: it may easi^y be concluded, that it is a work of great necessity,
to make a new Directory to Apothecaries, leaving out very many Medicines that
are superfluous; correcting what may with little alteration be retained, adding
such as are rationally composed, and which by much trial and experience are
approved: that so this new Dispensatory may not be clogged with too great a
multitude of Medicines, nor with such as may not, for some considerable time,
without damage be preserved, and yet supplied with such an armamentarium
Medicum, as may most hopefully perform all the just Indications in the method
of Cure, both general and particular: By the doing whereof the Physicians of
this Nation will be deservedly honored both at home and abroad, the
Apothecaries Shops not uselessly encumbered, the best provision made for the
Peoples Infirmities.

Thus may the most considerable objections be answered against the present
method of Practice, which have only force from the defect of some necessary
provisions, which may hereby (and by other suggestions from Physicians of
greater abilities) be supplied: This being intended but as an Essay toward
such a Supplement and Regulation as is clearly wanting; whereby also may be
prevented that ruin to either Physicians or Apothecaries, which by some is
vainly supposed to be unavoidable: Confusion and great disorder is often, and
always ought to be the producer of Order; when prudent men discovering the
defects and inconveniences of what is irregular, and the artifices of such as
design, out of private concernment to keep it so, do set themselves to contrive
such expedients, as may preserve all just Rights and Interests, and endeavor
the establishment of an Art so necess^ry as Physic, from running out into
confusion, where every man may, without control, do what he pleases, which is
not allowable in any other Trade or Faculty whatsoever. The first intention of
making a Dispensatory, was to bring Medicines to some certainty, that
Apothecaries might have a known Rule to make their Medicines by, and not
fluctuate and be left a^ liberty to make them by the uncertain guide of many
and foreign Dispensatories, and the Physicians also, not left doubtful of
their Medicines, as not knowing by what rule the Apothecaries would make them:
And this was done by the College, at the intimation and command of King James,
in the year 1618 Some years after a discovery being made of some defects
therein, the College thought fit to give a timely stop thereunto, by publishing
a new Dispensatory then so called, which they did in the year 1618. Nothing
then hinders, but that upon a greater acquisition of knowledge, the present
College (whose Members, by many instances have approved themselves not to have
neglected the advantages of Succession, but rather abundantly to have imp^oved
them) may produce their Dispensatory also; in many things exceeding the former,
as that did what was first published, by how much their advantage is greater
both in coming after them, and not contenting themselves with a bare
traditional Knowledge, but most of them personally and practically exercising
themselves in the production of Medicines, and gaining thereby those
discoveries, which Learning merely notional and bookish could never attain
unto. Hereby approving themselves to be truly studious of public good, and as
well in this as in other parts of their Art, to bring to light, whatsoever upon
serious deliberation they conceive may promote the same.

If then a new Dispensatory were now made, and the other particulars above
mentioned effected, it would give general satisfaction to the People, answer
the Scruples of doubtful, and obviate the artifices of crafty men, who design
to disturb the whole Faculty, to divide not only Physicians and Apothecaries,
but the Members of the College themselves, that amidst such a Confusion they
may catch at a share of business, which their own abilities, nor the regular
way of Pract^ce does entitle them to.

Physicians making their own Medicines declining the Apothecaries, and using
them only in their Practice, has had, as all other Novelties, a specious
reception, but time discovers many inconveniences that could not be foreseen:
and the most prudent Physicians, though they do not decline making of
Medicines, for their own satisfaction, yet do much decline that way of Practice:

If Physic were now in its first dawn and infancy, to be begun in the world,
(before also Luxury and Intemperance had multiplied Diseases, and increased the
number of Practitioners, and before those Regulations in its practice were by
our prudent Ancestors established) all that applied themselves to this Art,
must necessarily fall into that way of making Medicines themselves, but the
case is now far otherwise, and therefore they are much beside the matter; who
handle this Question without due consideration of its state, as it is now
constituted. Where first,

1. Violence is offered to the Laws and Orders in being for its present
Regulation, which doubtless were made not without serious deliberation and wise
foresight of inconveniences, and therefore those who would innovate in this
particular, may well be supposed either to design for themselves, or that they
have not so fully considered the matter as they ought to have done.

2. I see not with what justice they can pass over the ruin of 7 or 800
persons and their Wives and Children, the Apothecaries, I mean, who are
established by Law, who make up no inconsiderable Company of the City of
London, bear a share in all public Charges, and who may vie with the
Apothecaries of any part of Christendom, for solid Skill in their Profession,
who also, from the encouragement the Law has given them, have declined all
other way of livelihood, and depend only upon this for the maintenance of
themselves and Families: To strike at the foundation of such a society, is, I
say, very inconsistent with the rules of Justice and common Charity, which
ought to be visible in all the purposes of mankind.

3. That Medicines should be better made by Physicians, than Apothecaries is
not likely, it being not barely the Theory that enables thereunto; the one has
served seven years Apprenticeship, and been daily employed upon the operative
part: the the other from a speculative knowledge confidently thrust, himselt
upon that which he finds much different from the Notions and Ideas thereof he
had comprehended in his mind: The one makes it his sole and only business to
make Medicines, to the other it is but a small part of his Employment, he
having besides many and intricate parts of Study; as namely, the Physiological,
Anatomical, Pathological, and Therapeutick part of his Art, each of which are
very comprehensive, and therefore it must be presumed, that either he cannot
give full time to buy select Drugs, and make Medicines enough to furnish the
whole of his Practice, especially if it grows to be any thing considerable, or
that otherwise he must neglect other parts of his Art equally necessary with
that of Pharmacy, either of which are of ill consequence to the Sick. Hence, I
suppose, it was, that our Forefathers, foreseeing this inconvenience, did
entrust this part of their business to Servants, who afterward, growing
skilful and numerous, were incorporated for the better regulation of the
Faculty, and grew up by degrees to the Port they are now at: yet were the
Physicians so prudent as to be the Dictators to them, and frequent Inspectors
of their Operations, and Searchers of their Shops, that so they might be the
better ascertained of their faithful dispensing and making their Medicines:
Which custom being tetianed and faithfully discharged, according to the method
before advised, would very much prevent oversights and frauds, and give the
Physician opportunity of improving Pharmacy, by making observations and
conclusions from the process of Medicines. All which notwithstanding he retains
his liberty to make Medicines at his pleasure, either at home, or to be present
whilst they are made by his order at the Shops of Apothecaries, which is much
the same thing; so that as to the improvement of his Knowledge full respect is
had in this method, without other inconveniences, which is an answer to the
grand objection that seems to bear most weight for Physicians making their own
Medicines.

4 It is also plausibly urged, that now Phisicians are forced to trust
Apothecaries, and that their whole Cure depends upon his fidelity: whereas in
the other way the Physician is sure of his Medicines, they being made with his
own hands.

I answer, that it is all one if they are faithfully and truly made by the
hands of other men, who have good skill to make them. In the matter of
Fidelity, the defect may be in the want of such an establishment as is
mentioned; where, if the Physician were sometimes authoritatively present, and
more often friendly, as a neighbor; or as having a mutual relation and
correspondency in the art, there would be little ground left for such
suspicions. Besides the Apothecary is concerned to be faithful both in point of
Profit and of Reputation, which are obligations of no small moment, nor have we
reason to judge but that the Tie of Conscience is of equal force with them as
with other men: In point, I say, of Reputation and Profit; for they are
apparently hazzarded in making bad Medicines, when the Physician comes to view
and taste the Medicine, and finds it another thing than he prescribed, his
intention thereby frustrated, his Cure retarded, his opportunity lost, his own
credit at stake; how can he choose but lay the fault where it is, and place the
Saddle upon the right Horse; and if through the Apothecaries default such a
thing should happen, how would it spread? what prejudice would it do him? He
would be in danger of loosing not only this but other Customers also, to his
very great damage and disrepute. This the Apothecary very well knows, and
therefore is as much concerned as the Physician can be, that it may be said,
that he has made his Medicines well, discharged his duty faithfully, whereby he
not only fixes that Family he then deals withal, but probably gains thereby
several others also.

If you will suppose men wretchless, and to have no Conscience, it is a weak
reflection, and can no more be charged upon Apothecaries than any other sort of
men: There are good and bad in all Professions: Here are, however, considerable
engagements upon the Apothecary, and the miscarriages and oversights, not to
say unfaithfulnesses, may more probably be found in those who dispense their
own Medicines, where there is no body to oversee or judge them than in those who
have others, and those persons able and concerned, to inspect what they do.

5. If it be urged that Apothecaries, engaging in Practice, neglect the making
of Medicines, and trust much to their Servants, whereby oversights are
oftentimes committed of no small hazard to the Sick: I answer, that the
Objection is very considerable, and is no other ways to be answered, than by
establishing such a Regulation as is above mentioned, where Apothecaries are
restrained to their particular business of making Medicines: But then on the
other hand, the objection is much more cogent against Physicians, especially
those who have daily and competent business, for having his Patients to visit
abroad, and they to visit him at home, having his Studies likewise to attend,
how is it possible he should give time to the making of Medicines; which
requires much attendance and consequently begets a necessity of leaving much to
the care of his Servants, and that not only in the making but in the dispensing
of his Medicines; whereas the Apothecary, reduced to his particular Occupation,
would have nothing else to do but to attend the business of his Shop, and so
more hopefully prevent the inconvenience urged in the Objection.

6. It may be urged, in the sixth place, that Physicians in business making
their own Medicines, must necessarily keep several Servants, which being bred
up in making Medicines, and being apt, as being conversant in Physic, to read
Physic Books, there will arise a new stock of out-of-course Practitioners,
which in little time will be exceeding numerous: almost all mankind when they
grow up toward man's estate, think of living in the world, of marrying and
having a Family, these then having no other way of maintenance, thrust
themselves upon the practice of Phyfick; and venture, from the impulse of
necessity, to attempt any thing that offers it self, which they will with more
c^nfidence do from the Reputation of living, and being bre^ up, as they will
say, under such a Doctor. By means whereof the number of indirect Practitioners
(who swarm too much already) would increase to a vast bulk, Physicians of great
Pract^ce being, in this way, forced to keep many Servants, which would
strangely overstock a Profession that is too much overcharged already, and
which is now the general complaint of all that relate to it.

7. Consultations, which are often necessary, and desired by the Sick and their
Friends, cannot so well be managed in this way, as in what is already
established: unless there coald be supposed a willingness in all Physicians to
communicate their Nostrums, as they are called, to every Physician they are to
consult withal. For who will give his consent to the use of that be does not
understand? or practice by an implicit faith? It is not to be supposed that
Physicians should always meet with those who are in particular friendships and
unions, or that all have that communicative spirit to impart, what they have
with great labor acquired, to every one, especially where they think there
will not be a Retribution.

These and many other inconveniences there are in this way of Practice, which
cannot at first view be foreseen, but may well be presumed to be the motives
that made those who have gone before us to reduce the method of Practice into
the way it is now in: Nor is their wisdom to be slighted as not done upon good
and praise worthy grounds: They did think it likewise necessary to reduce
Medicines to some reasonable bounds, which else would swell to an infinite
bulk, leaving a liberty, however, to the Studies of men to superadd what they
could find more efficacious, to answer known intentions, or to obviate new
occurring Diseases.

Here I purposed to end, for long Discourses are irksom both to the Author and
Reader: The multitude of Books considered, every man should make a conscience
of further pestering the world with more, unless they can produce something new
and profitable to mankind: Some things however I have thought necessary to be
superadded, the present posture of affairs considered, which may conduce
somewhat to the main scope of Reconcilement and Settlement: I shall therefore
subjoyn some Sentiments briefly, upon these Subjects, viz. of Arcana's or
Nostrums; of the ancient and becoming Deportment of Physicians, of the decent
Carriage of Apotheceries toward the Sick, toward Physicians, and also toward
the members of their own Fraternity. Something I mean to subjoyn concerning the
Practice of Midwisery, and so to conclude.

1. Of Arcana's, or Nostrums.
Such are Medicines either by great Industry and manual experiment found out,
traditionally delivered, or collected out of Authors, not common, and by
frequent use approved: All of these may be called in a large sense Arcana, but
the first only are properly Nostrums, as being of each Physicians own Invention.

He who said his Nostrum was his Knowledge in the pathological part of Physic,
and in a good method of Curing, spoke certainly much to the purpose in this
particular: For fince there is so great variety of Diseases and their
symptoms, and these sometimes of great resemblance one to the other, and yet
in their nature very different, and consequently requiring a differing method
of Cure; since also they are often of nice and intricate complication; and yet
the one requiring preference and priority in Cure; The principal hinge of
Practice depends upon accurateness in distinguishing Diseases, where there is
so great likeness, in well understanding and weighing the complication, and in
a prudent and sagacious conclusion of what is first to be done, especially
where there are apparent contraindications. That it is necessary every
Physician should have the knowledge of good and effectual Medicines, that may
answer every Intention, especially such as are generally occurring in practice,
is not to be denied: but to averr, that the main stress of his business depends
upon them, is as if we should account the excellency of a Carpenter to consist
in the goodness of his Tools, which every one is to have, and not in his Skill
to model, draw forth and contrive Platforms of his Work, and in his ability to
effect in good sort, what he has so modeled and contrived: So in Physic
every part of the Art is necessary, though the knowledge in the variety and
nature of Diseases, and in a true method of Curing them, may justly have
priority and preeminence, as being more copious and intricate; and which do
therefore give the greater value and esteem to Physicians, because from them do
flow his more constant and more certain successes, by which chiefly the people
have reason to make their Conclusions.

In consideration of the necessity of Skill in all the parts of Physic, to
make a complete Physician, and consequently the difficulty in the acquisition
thereof, it requiring, besides a good Indoles, and natural inclination
thereunto, great Learning, fit place and convenience for Study, Time well
employed therein from youth upward, and great Industry: as the good Hippocrates
has suggested, upon consideration whereof, I say, Physicians of best note and
ability, have not thought their Art so exposable to popular invasion, as to
judge their Reputation concerned in concealing of Medicines, but rather swayd by
a common regard to the good of mankind, and a desire to profit and improve
their Brethren of the Profession, have been very forward to communicate their
Knowledge in all parts of Physic, knowing well that Life is short enough to
acquire requisice Skill in so noble and copious an Art: and though, different
from this ancient candor in Physicians, some, who boast themselves to have
gained more than ordinary ability, especially some of the more precisely
Chemical way, and of Wits as volatile as their beloved Mercury; have either
communicated little, or in such canting terms of their own invention, the
common artifice of arrogance and imposture, as amounts almost to a concealment:
yet do I not hence judge that such reservation is from any superexcellence in
their Medicines so concealed; for that would appear from the note and frequency
of there Cures, the contrary whereunto, by much obseavation, can be abundantly
instanced, but rather from the necessity of such reservation, that being the
principal Basis upon which they build their desired Fame, (for what is not
known may be boasted at pleasure, and what is known may as easily be vilified)
That indeed which has begot the necessity of some Reservations, contrary to the
custom of former Physicians, is the ill use that is made by Apothecaries of
their publication: who aiming at Practice, and putting their sickle into others
Corn, invading our Art, injuriously reap the fruit of other men's labor. This
is one consequence of that irregularity things now stand in, which by a
settlement may be remedied; when Physicians shall have encouragement to
communicate what by their Study and manual labor they can produce for common
good, being ascertained that they may trust the same to Apothecaries, without
being abused in the irregular use thereof, to their so great and apparent
detriment.

For in this way of settlement, as there will not arise any restraint upon
Physicians productions, they being at full liberty either to make Medicines
themselves at home, or to oversee and put too their helping hand at the Shops
of Apothecaries (which is far from being any dishonor to them) so will the
candor, in gennity and liberal Education of a Physician oblige him to forbear
making any unhandsom profit of Medicines: either by enhansing their prices, or
by unworthily consederating with Apothecaries; but matters being composed, to
let the Apothecary have them either as an encouragement to his Fidelity, or at
such reasonable rates not exceeding the cost of the Ingredients and the charge
of making them: since the Physician will be well recompensed by the Reputation
of an excellent Medicine of his own invention, his customary Fees also keeping
him from having the need of such mean traffic: and likewise concerned in point
of Reputation to lay an injunction upon the Apothecary, he has so gratified,
not to design more than a competent and reasonable profit, whether he vends his
Medicine to Patient or Apothecary: that so it may to all appear, that the
Physician has no other end in the pains he has taken in producing such Arcana's
then improving his Art, and providing the best Medicines he possibly can
invent, for the curing of the most contumacious and turbulent Diseases.

I may end this Paragraph de Arcanis, with what the prudent Septalius suggests
l. 1. Animadversione 14. in these words: As it becomes a Physician to have
always in readinefs choice and tried Medicines, confirmed by frequent
experience: yet it does not become him so to reserve them his Arcana, as not to
be willing to communicate them to others also. I may add that a real and very
considerable benefit redounds thence to himself, since thereby inviting others
to the same promptness of communication, every one of the Society so qualified,
is furnished not only with his own inventions, but the products and effects of
others labors, to the no small improvement of Knowledge, and benefit of the
Sick. Not does any thing conduce more to the Honor of a College, or the
improvement of an Art, than such a candid communication, and participation of
one another Knowledge, an Argument that every member thereof, besides his own
concernment, has a fair regard to his great and principal end, the welfare of
the People, a just respect to his Colleagues, and in order to these a noble
design of clearing what is dubious, and supplying what is defective in his art.

In pursuance whereof it is to be subjoyned, that as there is no better means
to improve Physic to a greater degree of perfection, than by the united
endeavors of every member of the Society, so is there no Society whatsoever,
in England, in the capacity of such an Improvement as the College of Physicians.

As to the first, though many things very considerable have, to the honor of
this Nation, been brought to light, by particular members of the College, so
well known, as that neither the subjects, nor the persons need to be
enumerated: yet is it to be supposed, that those persons have in their
productions taken to their assistance, some of their more intimate associates,
especially in Anatomy, where most has been done, and where the single
endeavors of one man, without assistance can effect little: Yet may it well be
presumed, that the improvements had been, and might yet be, abundantly more;
and that in all parts of Physic, had or would the College make it their
business, to subdivide the members thereof into several Classes, disposing to
each of them such parts of the Art as their particular Genius, and bent of
Study, did incline them to: By means whereof every head and every hand would be
at work, and accounts might at fit times be rendered to the whole Society, and
this fettled upon much the same rules as have been with great judgment
invented, and practiced in the establishment and continuance of the Royal
Society: With this universal Rule, superadded, that as the great and noble End
of the College, is, the Conservation of human Life and its restoration, when
endangered by Sickness, so should they, as persons worthy of such an
undertaking, decline and discourage all nice, useless and superfluous Subjects,
fixing themselves only upon such particulars as have an apparent tendency to
the accomplishment of so excellent an End.

Secondly, I have said that there is no Society in England so capable of
improving the Art, as the Kings College of Physicians. There are none that can
pretend to any competition, but the Universities and the Royal Society.

As to the first, I humbly conceive, that they are in no such capacity: 1. as
being the most of them young men, and therefore wanting that which evinces the
certainty and establishment of Knowledge, frequent experience. Study and the
Learning thereby acquired is a good induction and preparation to Knowledge, but
without long practice, which very few in the Universities are capable of; and
observations skilfully and carefully made thereupon, neither eminent natural
parts, nor the assistance of the best Libraries can produce more than common
Notions, which have been 1000 times printed and reprinted, and which, by taking
up the precious time of young Students, have made them lose those advantages
and profitable productions, which the constant exercise of their own
understandings and assiduous practice would have exerted from them. But in the
main, want of years and continuance in practice are an undeniable disadvantage
to the Physicians of the Universities, and which cannot be said of most of the
members of the College.

2. Though the Universities have frequent Physic Exercises, the best
Libraries, solemn Dissections, a good Physic Garden, and a few eminent
Practitioners, yet though these be allowed, as good preparatory helps to bring
a Physician into the world, to qualify and initiate him for Practice
(especially being first admitted to the society of other long experienced
Physicians, together with a view and attendance upon their Practice, a thing
much wanting and very desirable in England, as of singular use both to young
Physicians and to the Sick;) yet as to the great propagations and improvements
of the Art, there is absolutely necessary (besides long experience) a union,
incorporation, frequent association and communication, which, as it is wanting
in the Universities, so is it well established in the College of London, and I
doubt not but when restoration is made of what the Fire consumed, it will
evidently appear by those designments, which are as yet but in Embryo, that in
the improvement of every part of Physic, such earnest and prudent endeavors
will be used, as shall well satisfy the world, that nothing can well be
expected, or hoped for, in the Medicinal Art, but will in just and competent
time be by them effected.

2. As to the Royal Society, their ends being more general and diffusive as
aiming at the improvement of universal knowledge; they are rather adapted and
qualified for the advance and perfection of the Mathematics and Mechanics
than of Physic; and such have most of their Productions been: and though there
may be many Physicians amongst them, however few compared to the rest; yet are
these Physicians, in justice and prime establishment, rather obliged to honor
their own Society, with what they shall produce in Physic, and being of chief
note in the College, rather to use their interest, that it may be so settled,
that all the improvements in Physic may be placed upon the account of that
Foundation: And it seems to be some ingratitude placed upon that Body of which
they were first members, not to have used their utmost endeavors for such a
Settlement as may bring to pass those worthy ends in their own College they
would patronize in this other Establishment: besides there are in the College,
and belonging to the Members thereof, some things which cannot be said of the
Royal Society: as 1. that all the members thereof are principally, if not
solely, devoted to the Study and improvement of Physic. 2. There is to be
considered, that the use that might be made of the Hospitals, which are under
the Care of Members of the College. 3. That the Physicians in the College,
being more numerous, are in better capacity of being so divided and taxed with
several Charges in Physic, as to comprehend all its parts: and lastly, the
occurrences extraordinary in Practice must of necessity be much more numerous,
than when the number does not rise to a fifth part, were the College so
established as to oblige all the members to give just and frequent accounts of
the same.
This is not spoken with any derogation to the Honor and Ends of that Royal
Society, but to evince the Reputation of the more ancient Foundation of
Physicians, to retrive into themselves one of the great works and chiefest ends
of their Establishment, in which the Royal Society may be collateral, and
fairly assistant, but not principal.

Of the ancient and becoming Deportment of Physicians.
I consider it either in reference to the Sick, or to one another. My purpose
is not here to comprehend all the particulars that concern the regular carriage
and behavior of Physicians, that having been plentifully done in several
Authors of good note, but only to take notice of some few particulars of
greatest moment, to the good of the Sick and to the Reputation of Physicians.

1. Then it is just, that the Physician should have in his regard the Health or
Restoration of his Patient, as what is most his duty, and what being really
implanted in his mind, will make him very intent upon all his occasions, and in
reasonable time a great proficient in his Art: in order to which it is
expedient, that he keep a Register of all the remarkable occurrences of his
Practice, and as well his own defects and failings as his apposite practice and
good successes: For by the one he will be warned for the future to avoid any
precedent mistake, by the other receive great hints and information of what in
like cases is to be intended: using his best reason to consider and distinguish
the variety of Bodies, symptoms and other circumstances. As to his profit let
it come in, sua sponte, he need not be solicitous about it, for whosoever does
faithfully and conscientiously intend the main, viz. the Recovery of his
Patient, can never want encouragement sufficient to recompense his honest
labor: and it is one of the most inglorious things in the world to see a a
covetous Physician, earnest for Fees, and using poor and little art to raise
the esteem of his own worth, or suggest the earnestness of his expectation. In
order to which great End he ought to be a a Lover of mankind, as being the
chief of Gods mundane Works, of near relation to himself; coequal in Gods
regard, and this as well from the natural tie which God has implanted, and a
due regard of the excellency and admirable frame and texture of man's body, and
the extensive abilities of his mind, as from a sense of that duty which is
incumbent upon him, from the time he engaged in the Profession: where, besides
the considerations mentioned, he undertakes a Trust, a Trust of mighty moment
of the Lives of men committed to his care, of which great regard is had as well
by the Laws of our Country, as by the declared pleasure of God in his divine
institutions. This universal Love to his kind, which should be the common bond
of Amity, and good will to men, will engage him in the care of particulars: And
this I would have more expressly the eminent mark of our Profession; namely,
that Physicians are indeed Lovers of mankind, and of all the works of the
Creation, as being daily conversant in the contemplation of the infinite Wisdom
of God, manifested in the never enough to be admired contexture, order, variety
and curiosity of the parrts of the Creation, as likewise in imitation as far as
his ability extends, of the great Physician both of Body and Soul, our blessed
Savior, who went about, doing good and healing all that were sick.

2. It follows then in the next place, that he should keep his mind in a just
and even temper, that as it should not be tainted with Covetousness, and low
desires; so neither puffed up with Pride or Disdain; as if his poor and
indigent Brother were not a fit object of his care, but too mean and
contemptible for his tenderness and visits: a notorious argument of ignorance
and self conceit, since God esteems no man as he is rich or poor, high or low,
these being accidental distinctions, and of man's making, not intrinseck and
consubstantial, and it is fit that Physicians who are Natures Ministers, and
consequently Gods, should see as God sees, and not be deluded in their
understandings, by these slight veils, which crafty and designing men have
thrown over the face of human nature: yea as a true Servant of our great Master
and chief Physician, he should, with most delight, be conversant among the
poor, to compensate their sufferings, raise their drooping spirits, and make
them some amends for the want they have of the good things of the would,
whereof they enjoy so small a proportion. It Is not our own worth, that procures
for us from God, the universal Bestower, these various mercies human nature
stands in need of; but his own frank and distributive Goodness: in imitation
whereof, we ought to make not merit, but need the subject of our endeavors; to
recover lost innocence or health was the great design of our Master, who was to
that end conversant with Publicans and Sinners: Though therefore the Practice
among the Rich may be more profitable, yet is the helping of the Poor as much
our duty, and more, since the Rich are every where courted, and their Practice
with much attendance, and many little stratagems procured, because of present
pay, and a mean distrust of him who has past his word for whatsoever shall be
done for any of his little ones, giving it an equal esteem, and consequently no
less recompense then if done for himself. This ought therefore conscntieiously
to be performed by Physicians, not to acquire same, (though that will
unavoidably attend it) but ex sensu officii and beneficii, from a true sense of
duty and a certain recompense of reward: a reward beyond the Stipend of
Princes, the Fees of the most liberal Nobles; viz. Comfort of mind here, and
Gods favor both here and hereafter.

3. It becomes a Physician, to be courteous and pliable to the Sick, to be of
easy access, ready and willing to give a full hearing to them and their
friends, that so he may receive full information of the nature and state of the
Disease: This is both a more certain way and more satisfactory to the Sick,
than to defign a Reputation, by being thought able, uno quasi intuitu,
presently to discern the quality, difference and accidents of Diseases, in the
Knowledge whereof (it being very easy to mistake, and those mistakes being of no
small consequence) a Physician cannot be too sagacious and circumspect An
observation of such care is no small encouragement to the Sick, and by being
so, is a considerable advantage in the expulsion of a Disease. To be morose and
magesterially conclusive, argues that a Physician has more care to please
himself then his Patient: that he overweens his own knowledge, that he takes
that for certainty, which, at the best is but rational conjecture: assisted by
rules of Art not infallible: That he shows himself more a Master than a
Physician; which is opposite to that candor and affability, which are set down
by the most ingenuous who have writ upon this Subject as the characteristical
note of a true Physician Hippocrates therefore in his Chapter de Medico has
(according to his comprehensive Wisdom) most excellently advised in this
particular, (...). That a Physician be of good and honest manners, and that to
all he join together gravity and humanity, or love to mankind: for an
inconsiderate yielding and overeasie promptitude, though it sometimes profit,
yet is it indeed contemptible: and again, (...). As to his Gesture; let him
have consideration and Wisdom in his Countenance, not asperity and sowerness,
least he appear to be a pleaser of himself, and a hater of mankind.
That although it may be necessary in some cases, to Patients humorous,
conceited and opinionative of their own knowledge, to be positive and enforce a
compliance, by overruling arguments, and manifestation of danger: yet is this
but seldom, and only to such to be done: nothing being more pleasing and
profitable to the Sick than a gentle comportment, joined with diligence, and
real ability, with sincerity and unseined affection. With real ability, I say,
and unfeigned affection: for without these to use glozing and flattering
speeches, and to substitute them with hopes to pass them current, instead of
what the Patient expects and his Disease requires, is a piece of imposture, no
less criminal than to cover ignorance with austeer severity, and to daunt the
Patient from considering his Physicians true worth, by his assumed arrogance
and conndent promises. In this as in all other the bufiness of mankind, just
and sincere dealing is ever the best, most satisfactory to others, most
contentful to the Consciences of those who use it, most commending a Physicians
worth and advancing his Practice: For all the little arts that are otherwise
used of obliging, engratiating, or other contrivances of insinuation, are upon
their discovery extremely prejudicial to them who use them, and produce a quite
contrary effect to what they were designed.

4. It becomes a Physician as well to bear himself with just respect toward
other Physicians, as toward the Sick: the only means to to maintain that fair
and friendly correspondence, which should be between Professors of so noble a
Faculty: and in order to this, Modesty and Ingenuity are the worthy qualities
which have been the grace and ornament of the best Physicians and by which
regular Professors have been distinguished from boasting and vainglorious
Mountebanks: Real worth commends it self, and the frequent benefit the people
find by the Counsels of those who are well versed in their Art, takes off the
necessity of any other stratagems. Boasting (whatever it is in other
Professions) has been always accounted by the best able to judge, to be an
effect either of weakness of mind, joined, as it often is, with arrogance; of
want of real ability, or of little Practice: for where there is modesty, worth
and competent business, such irregular courses are declined, and despised. It
is also observable, that whoever is so vain as to cry up himself, rests nor
there, but is so injurious also as to decry and vilify others They steal from
others fame to patch up their own: This though they do not always do in open
and express terms, least they should be called to account for it, (that being
one great end of the Law, that one man's fame may not be at the mercy of
another) yet are there many sly expressions used, as abusive and damageable as
if they had said it in terminis; as, that he could, wish he had been sooner
called: That he worders such a course was not taken: that he believes all
things were intended for the best, but it had been well, if such a thing had
been done, or such a thing omitted: Tha^ he does well for a young Physician,
but age and experience is yet wanting, and very necessary: Then there are
dislikes without words, as the shaking of the head, expressing wonder or other
passion at the relation of what has been done* All which, with many more of the
like kind, if generally pract^sed, would impress a greater dishonor upon
Physicians, and more certainly ruin the whole Faculty, than all the united
endeavors of all adversaries whatsoever: For persons so injured, upon a just
sense, cannot but be so true to their own Reputation, as either to take the
benefit of Law, where words will bear it, (which however would be of ill fame
to the Faculty) or else in the like kind retaliate; by means whereof there
would arise continual revilings and recriminations, by which the Practice of
Physic would be rend^ed to all ingenuous men most detestable, though, in it
self it be, of all others the most free, generous and independent, and in fine
for mutual candidness toward its Professors the most desirable. There are
therefore, as I have been informed, such excellent Rules and Statutes, made in
the College for the Regulation of the Practice of Physic, both with the
highest regards and greatest sincerity, in reference to the Sick, and with the
most knowing candor and ingenuity to be exercised amongst the Professors
thereof, as cannot well be exceeded by the prudence and contrivance of Man with
just penalties for the breach and violation thereof the publication whereof;
for so far as concerns these two particulars, would surely be very necessary,
as well for the benefit of the Sick as the information and security of all
legal Physicians; by consideration whereof, it is to be hoped, that they would
all become so just in their deportment, and so regardful of the Reputation of
one another, that, by this very candid and just demeanor, it should be easy
for the people to distinguish a Physician regularly bred, especially a
Collegiate, from those who are not such, and therefore are enforced to cry up
themselves, and publish their feign Cures with the exercise of many other long
practiced and easily discoverable impostures, only necessary, where true worth
and legal breeding are wanting. It is further expedient, that he observe those
other Rules of ancient Physicians, left to us as an instance of their Prudence;
and especially of the learned Septaelius: as that a Physician should regard
comeliness and cleanliness, which is to the Body as Virtue is to the Mind: A
negligent and affected slovenliness, to be thought it may be so earnestly
studious, as to be careless of those external things, is as much a saulton our
hand as softness, delicacy, and the being over folicitous by spruceness and
bravery to acquire regard, is a vanity on the other: Those little Politics are
despicable, and imply, reconsciousness of defects in real worth, or failer of
integrity. No, let it be, says Persius, -- incoctum generoso pectus honesto.

A mind concoct in noble honesty, which will carry it beyond all the artifices
of inventive man.

That he boasts not his own Cures o^ Actions, but represent all things with
Truth, Candor and Integrity, giving every man his due, to the utmost, sparing
rather to spread his own Fame than that of others; for Practice, honest,
skilful and conscientious will commend it self, and is the basis of its own
inseparable Repute.

In converse, that he be grave, without affectation, ready in his answers to
give fair and just satisfaction to all: where contests are, to be gentle, ye
constant for Truth, and resolute, but with strength of Reason, not vehemence of
speech: easy and affable to all, but of intimate friendsh^p with few, and those
select for Prudence and unspotted Honesty. Let him so modestly correct the
errors of others, as not to have in his regard Reprehension, but Truth and the
good of others.

That in knowing and taking all fair occasions of doing good to the Sick he be
very perspicatious which cannot be done but by diligence in Pract^ce and making
d^yly observations, especially of the most remarkable occurrences.

That he be not too curions in his diet, hard to be pleased, contented with
what is wholesome, and in moderation, for he that is too solicitous for his
Belly, and a Gormondizer, can never so seriously intend his business, as the
weightiness of the Subject requires. On the other side Physicians should not be
sordid, greedy of gain, Bargain-makers, Beggars, but frank and liberal, forward
to take, at least, equal care of their Patients coming into want, as they used
to have of them when in plenty: placing their felicity in moderate competency,
and the minds contentment, rather than in abundance of Wealth.

That he be patient and watchful over a Disease, neither obstinate in his own
opinions, because he as once taken them up, nor too easy in yielding to the
importunities of the Sick, or their assistants, against the convincing Reasons
of his own mind: but making the health and recovery of the Sick, the true North
Pole, guiding all his actions, and preferring it, even beyond his own
Reputation, where it may not viciously suffer, for it is in this sense, that
according to Socrates, we are to consult our Conscience rather than Fame.

Let him be neither morose and difficult of speech, nor talkative; in the first
he offends the Sick, in not giving them that satisfaction they may reasonably
expect: In the second he exposes his own Reputation, and is judged
inconsiderate, sudden, not giving just time, and ponderation of mind to inform
himself; proceeding tongue and hand before head: which leaves him far short of
speaking with that Convincement and Demonstration, Physicians should be always
eminent for: Above all things let him avoid hard and Latin Words to his
Patients, the Guise of Empericks and the most ignorant Chirurgions: who having
no real worth to gain solid Reputation by, use barbarous and canting
expressions, to amuse their Patients, and to be thought learned: Let this be
left to them, whilst true Physicians speak to the Sick and their Assistants,
plainly, pertinently, and in significant expressions, and amongst themselves
always in Latin: which; being brought into Custom, would be inoffensive, and
in which they may more freely express themselves without discouragement to the
Sick, and argue mildly and rationally any thing in difference, showing no sign
of disagreement before the Sick or his Friends.

He should not be ambitious, there being, indeed, no Honor beyond his
Doctorship, well put on and worn: others are Ensigns, external Trappings, which
the vicious and undeserving may obtain: But this is real and intrinseck worth:
and therefore preferrable.

Vainglorious he is not to be, nor beyond just reason a self Lover; for by the
first he excludes himself, through shame of being thought ignorant, from
learning what he knows not: By the second he thinks himself arrived to that he
is but making a progress to, and by overweening his Knowledge, his very
imperfect knowledge, for such is that of all mankind, yea of the most learned,
he gives stops and checks to his own Progression.

Let him keep himself entirely the Disciple of Truth, devoting himself to no
party, or opinion, by which the Members of a Profession are disunited, and
divide into faction, to the breach of Amity, and mispending of time, in defense
of Tenets unadvisedly taken up, and too earnestly maintained: This is spoken in
the general, for as to the Collegiate Physicians of England, it may to their
Honor be spoken, that those Writings they have produced (which their worth
considered, are of much more use and value than the Rapsodical Volumes of
former times, and other Countries) are grounded upon reiterated experiments,
are new and elaborate, disengaged from party and faction, industriously aiming
at verity, and profitable Knowledge, insomuch that scarce any thing that has by
them been written; but has found fair acceptance in the world, and very little
opposition from other men.

Let him be facile to entertain Consultations with other Physicians, and in
difficult cases prompting the Friends of the Sick thereunto; ready to give a
fair account of what he has done, that so it may appear that nothing has been
done indirectly or unadvisedly: Let him take care however, that such
consultations be managed among Physicians themselves, neither the Apothecaries
nor the Friends of the Sick being present, that so they may proceed with the
greater freedom, both of examining what has been done, and of proposing what is
further to be done, where candor and ingenuity are much to be regarded, the
good of the Sick chiefly to be respected, and in ord^^ to that, care is to be
had, that nothing be insisted upon that is superfluous, merely for show, or
contended for, because of the prerogat^ve of seniority, or desire of
contradiction: but that according to the method of Consults, proposals be
rationally urged, and heartily admitted, preferring in all things, as I said,
the good of the Sick, before any other respect or advantage whatseover.

He is to be always provided with Medicines to answer all intentions in
whatsoever Disease, good, safe and experimented: nor to judge himself a
competent Physician, until he is furnished with such an apparatus, as may
obviate all accidents and occurrences, he may in any case meet withal. Nor to
judge himself concerned to conceal any Arcana's, but to communicate and invite
communication, whereby Amity may be preferred, and every one improve each
others Knowledge, for the Benefit of the Sick and Advance of the Art: leaving it
to Empiricks to boast of their secret Medicines, which indeed have no other
Reputation, but because they are secret.

The best Induction into Practice, besides preparatory Knowledge, Education from
youth in those particulars, that are necessary, as Preliminaries to the Art, is
the being brought up under an expert Physician: and therefore it is much
better, that beginners in Physic should betake themselves to the great Cities,
and acquaint themselves with ancient Physicians of good note, that they may be
guided by them in their Studies, frequent the Shops of Druggists and
Apothecaries, see the Practice of Hospitals, be frequent in Dissections and
constant at all public Anatomies, be admitted to the visits of the most
eminent Physicians; which course is much better, and safer for the Sick, than
that they should settle in little Towns or in the Country Villages, and
venture upon Practice, upon their own little stock of Knowledge, to the great
hazard of the Sick, and the improbability of ever gaining good and justifiable
Skill in the Art they profess. It is also very reasonable, that, besides their
University Privileges, they should submit to the Examen of the College, which
enforces them to acquire reasonable S^ill in the whole Body of Physic, and
gives them the right hand of Fellowship with that Honorable Society, and
Credit with the People, which though University men have sometimes stumbled at,
yet if they rightly consider it, they will find their Interest therein
included, and the Gate of Practice thereby reserved for them, which otherwise
would come out, at large, without Order and Regularity.

Let him modestly bear himself in all places he visits and when his occasions
are with Matrons, or Maidens, let him so manage himself and his discourses, as
to treat of their Matters with decency in words and actions, that the
Profession may thence receive no Scandal nor no sort of persons any offense.

With the unskilful, Nurses, Women, or others, let him not discourse vainly and
impertinently of the Causes of Diseases, or of other things not necessary for
the performance of what is to be done for the Sick; but give them good and
plain instructions of what each of them are on their part to execute: shaming
to raise a fame by such like little Arts, but by the able and conscientious
performance of their duty in the Cure of the Sick.

He is very prudently and worthily to bear himself in the matter of fees and
reward; and therefore he is to make no Compact for the Cure (the mode of some
Chirurgions and Empiricks) and especially not to make advantage where the case
is difficult and dangerous; losing thereby often the opportunities of Cure, not
to be recovered: They who do so, gain to themselves the name of Sordid, and
blem^sh the noblest Profession Hence is it, that most Societies and Colleges
of Physicians have made By Laws against the way of Compact for Cure,
occasioned, I suppose, by the many litigations thereupon, to which such
Compacts give frequent occasion. Secondly, Even the ungrateful he is not to
leave in their necessities, since it is better, out of a sense of humanity, to
preserve the ungrateful, than in humanity to leave them through fear of their
ingratitude. Thirdly, His allowed Fees he may freely take, and that not with
aversation, or blushing, as if the obligation were on the fick men's part: If he
has done well and honestly, he may with confidence receive his reward, since it
is his Profession and livelihood; to enable him whereunto much time and great
expense was required: If at any time be refuses, it should be where he knows
necessities are, where overmuch liberality is shown, or where the case is
deplorable: Confident acceptance encourages the Patient, and makes him hope
well, that the Physician has done his part, which upon ref^s^l he may be
diffident of, since he finds the Physician scarce thinks himself worthy of his
Fee: whence contempt often follows, and loss of Fame, although the Physician
himself did it for no ignoble end: To gain Repute and Practice by it, is one of
the little Arts sometimes used, but proves to the detriment of the doer, since
if he continues not so to do, and crumbles at ingratitude, he becomes
ridiculous and deserted: But in this particular a latitude is to be left, for
the manifestation of friendship for the recompense of Kindnesses received; or a
desire upon the sense of worth to lay an obligation.

It Is not prudent in a Physician to promise too much, since he cannot promise
himself he shall perform it: from his non performance arises two imputations,
one of Ignorance that he was so mistaken, the other of, at least, vain
arrogance, whereby his future promises and prognostics will have the less
credit: Let him manage his business with Prudence, Skill and good Care, and not
to be too positive in his Prognostics, since there is no case but is so far
liable to accidents, as may frustrate the clearest and most apparent grounds of
a good prediction.

Lastly, Let not a Physician advise with too much respect to his own customs,
pallat or inclinations: for that is not only empirical, but irrational, and may
prove destructive: but let him ever have regard to the present case, with due
consideration of all material circumstances, of the difference in age,
constitution, quality, and state of the Disease, that so satisfying his own
mind, that he does all things rationally, and on justifiable grounds (and that
alone is to do it secundum artem) he may be able to satisfy others whatever
the success be, and likewise retain a calm and serene Conscience; since God
Almighty has not allowed mankind a certainty of knowledge, or infallibility in
rebus Medicis, but having given him a rational Soul, with all its faculties,
whereby he may acquire competent knowledge in the formation of man's body, as to
its constitutive and organical parts, the nature of Health, the Diagnosis and
difference of Diseases; and furnish him likewise with a copious materia Medica,
to supply Medicines that may answer all indications in whatsoever Disease; it
is most agreeable to the wise conduct of humane affairs, that should not cure
Diseases by instinct, or infused knowledge, but use his Reason in the best
manner he can for that so noble end, as the Conservation or Restitution of man's
Health.

And thus much concerning the behavior of a Physician, both with regard to
himself in the satisfaction of his Conscience: with respect also to the Sick,
and to other Physicians* In reference to himself, his demeanor is to be
virtuous and* honest, to the Sick it is to be with Care, good Conscience and
Ability: To other Physicians with Candor and Ingenuity: In the next place I
proceed to discourse concerning Apothecaries, in doing whereof, I will consider
the excellency and various parts of their Art. That it is abundantly
sufficient, to take up their time, that meddling in any other Profession,
especially in giving Physic themselves, it must necessarily hinder them from
being so skilful in their own Art, as they might and ought to be. Something
also shall be superadded of their Deportment in reference to the Sick, to
Physicians, to the Brethren of their Faculty.

In our first consideration we will look upon the Art as it is now established
by the Law, In a Fraternity incorporated, allowed certain privileges, and
bearing a proportionable part of the public charge. No body ever questioned,
but that this part of the Art was originally in Physicians, who, at first, made
their own Medicines, by the assistance of Servants, and sometimes also propriis
manibus, both that they might be assured of the well making them, where there
was difficulty, as also for the pleasure and contentment therein; and that by
observations made from the process of the work, and many little accidents that
would sometimes intervene, they might enable themselves, and collect new
Aphorisms and conclusions. This might properly be said to be in the infancy of
the Art of Physic, when Knowledge therein was comparatively very little,
Intemperance, Luxury and Diseases nothing so frequent, the business of
Physicians but small, and therefore allowing good time for these manual
operations. But when, in process of time, and by the great pains and endeavors
of Learned men, the Science of Physic came to be much improved, and in all its
parts augmented, Physicians, for several weighty reasons, did think fit to
entrust the making of Medicines to a certain number of men in some measure
scholastically bred, to whom they gave rules, directing the manner and method
of each operation, and often inspecting the performance thereof, that so they
themselves might more entirely intend the anatomical and pathological part of
their Art, and give full time to their Practice and Methods of Curing.

Now forasmuch as in the Art thus divided, there is abundantly sufficient to
take up the whole time both of the Physician and of the Apothecary, and that
therefore by such a Division it may well be concluded, that both the business
of the one and of the other, may be the better discharged, there is no reason,
in this particular, to blame the Wisdom of our Ancestors, but rather to approve
and applaud the same, as a matter of good regard to the Weal of Mankind.

Take we then the Apothecaries Art as thus, assigned to a certain number of men
incorporated into a Fraternity, with necessary and convenient Rules and Orders
for the Regulation and Government of the members thereof, for the prevention
and Government of the members thereof, for the prevention of fraudulent and
male operations, and it is to be acknowledged to be a very excellent and
praiseworthy Art, especially if we duly weigh and consider the several
Branches and parts thereof, and in how many particulars the Members thereof
ought to be conversant, and well skilled.

For, first of all, he ought to be knowing in all sorts of, at least, domestic
Plants, and of the several parts thereof, the Seeds, Roots, Leaves, Flowers,
Sprouts, Barks, Woods, Fruits, Gums, Rosins, concreted and liquid Juices; with
all other the appendices to Plants: And in order to this, I shall take liberty
in this place to advise, that whosoever designs his Son to be an Apothecary, he
should, beside writing well, the being a good Arithmetician, and the
acquisition in good measure of the Latin Tongue; he should let him spend a good
part of his time, viz. from twelve to fifteen, in gaining the knowledge of what
is above specified, which with a little instruction and encouragement, be will
at these years be very apt unto, whereby will be gained not only the preserving
him from more trivial business, or time-wasting pleasures, but make him much
more desirable, and with less money, by any ingenuous Apothecary and very well
prepared for that Employment.

Secondly, An Apothecary is to be very well skilled in the knowledge of all
foreign Drugs, the place of their growth, the best way of bringing them over,
he is to know when they are well cured, genuine, free from all adulteration: to
learn all the ways how others adulterate them, that he may discover them, and
not be imposed upon: The best ways of preserving them, whether in Boxes,
Glasses or Pots, and of what mettle. This is a matter of great comprehension,
the Materia Medica being of vast extent: and therefore requires much time and
great pains.

Thirdly, He is also and which is the choicest part of his Art, to understand
well the way and best Methods of making up Medicines as well external as
internal, which being of very various sorts, to keep in a readiness most of
which he is obliged: the greatest part of his time taken up therein, will be
but little enough. So that although he be a very serious and industrious man,
and used to no extravagancies of any kind, he shall not complain for want of
business, this part of his Art being abundantly competent and copious: the
making of all sorts of distilled Waters, simple and compound; of the last of
which (not to say any thing of the first, most of them being superfluous,)
there are in the Dispensatory 38 besides these Magistrales, which they make
either by order of Physicians or others 10 Tinctures, 9 medicated Wines, 8
Vinegers, 100 Syrups, 17 compound Honies, 12 Robs or thickened Juices, several
Loochs, Condits, Conserves and compound Sugars 33 compound Powders, 38
Electuaries and Confections, beside 24 that are purging, 28 sort of purging
Pills, 3 Opiats, 32 Trochises. Abundance of compound Oils, 29 Unguents simple,
so called, and 20 more compound, 52 Cerats and Emplaisters: in the making of
which (the Ingredients being at several times of the year ripe, brought over or
fit for use) there is scarce any season but, their time is required for one or
other part; the former two particulars being once well acquired, are always
ready in the mind, by the help of daily practice, and conversation. But the
Medicines of their Shops being daily in decrease, or decay, there is a
necessity of a constant supply, which requires a constant labor and attendance.

Fourthly, Add to all this the Dispensing of Medicines, and giving them
according to order, injecting of Clysters, and, as they have now ordered the
matter, applying of Leeches, raising and dressing of Blisters: Let us consider
all these together, and then let any reasonable man judge whether there be not
enough to take up the whole time of an Apothecary? whether a man that shall be
ingeniously and industriously conversant about all these, can fail of good
repute, and be other than very desirable amongst men? whether such a one can
want a good livelihood? and lastly, whether by meddling with the business of a
Physician, and practicing Physic, he does not draw a perplexed trouble, and
disquiet of mind upon himself; by engaging where he has neither a legal Call
nor competent Ability, injuring thereby not only the Physician, but the Sick,
and his own Conscience, if the vain hope of a little profit, and that but
imaginary neither, has not made it insensible: when especially, and of
necessity, he must, by so interfering, neglect some considerable parts of his
own Professions, and by his much absence from home, being engaged with (at he
calls them) his Patients, give opportunity to his Servants to be slight and
negligent in the performance of their duties, and liable to many omissions and
mistakes, which might have been prevented by the presence and oversight of a
diligent Master: This doubtless deserves a serious consideration, when both
Profit and Conscience are concerned, when by intermedling with what they have
no just right to, they neglect that duty which is incumbent upon them, and the
acquisition of Skill necessary for the discharge of their Profession.

As the Apothecaries think it high injustice to have their Profession taken
from them by others not bred thereunto, or having no lawful authority to use
their Art: So is it no less injury, for them to practice Physic, thereby
invading the Profession of Physicians, to which they are bred at vast charge,
long expense of time, and under the encouragement of the Law. In so doing, the
Apothecaries, besides the unpleasantness of living out of their Sphere, and the
injustice toward those Physicians that are in being, they hinder, and, in
great measure, shut up that passage, which should be kept open for University
men, to plant themselves either in this or in other Cities, or great Towns of
the Kingdom, as the end of their Labors or Studies: This passage, I say, is
shut up by practicing Apothecaries, except it be to some very few, whose Fame
has gone before them, and ushered them into the World: so that the
Universities are no less injured than the College here: and even posterity, the
Successors of both: Upon consideration of which, if both the College here and
the Physicians of the Universities should resolve to take the matter of
Pharmacy into their own hands, it were but just retaliation, who
notwithstanding, out of great Moderation and Prudence, have aimed at reducing
the overflowing streams within their just bounds, desiring much rather, that
the Apothecaries should be sensible of the exorbitancy, and timely draw back
into their proper station, without forc^ng unwilling, persons to the utmost
remedy.

This the Apothecaries excuse, by urging a necessity of so doing, least they
lose their Patients: A necessity of their own creation, and within the capacity
of their own Company to restrain. If this necessity had been brought upon them
by Physicians, there would appear some show of Justice in their Plea: but since
it is apparently otherwise, they have only themselves to condemn for their
transgression, and no less to accuse themselves for the feigning a pretended
necessity, to salve an unlawful Intention, They are seriously to lay this to
heart, and in case they shall not resolve upon a Forbearance and Regulation
herein, they must justly blame themselves for any Resolutions that may be
taken, though never so much to the damage of that Fraternity, for the Remedy
thereof. It may he the most of that Society may be well resolved in this
particular; but that is not enough; for, if a considerable number shall persist
from the Sweetness they find therein, in this unlawful practice, they involve
all the rest therein, and in what may be suffered thereby, and therefore are
concerned not only to conform to what is Reason themselves, but to carry it at
their Hall against the minor number opposing, or to protest against them, that
so the College may know how to make their Distinction.

Concerning their Deportment, besides the common Justice and Honesty that ought
to be in all men; for as Dodonaeus observes, praestat virum bonum esse
Pharmacopoeum quam Socratem, forasmuch as the Health and Lives of Men depends
very much upon his Skill and Fidelity: he is also fairly to demean himself
toward the Sick, with regard also to Physicians, and the Brothers of his
Faculty.

Toward the Sick, first, in well preparing their Medicines, according to the
Physicians order, with good Ingredients, not adulterated, not decayed with age,
without substitution of one thing for another, at his pleasure, either for
cheapness, or his present want thereof: In that case he ought to look out for
it, or if it cannot be had, he is to acquaint the Physician therewith, that so
he who knows the reason, order and dependency of his own Prescription, may
substitute what he conceives most convenient.

Secondly, He is to take care; that Medicines be timely made, that they may be
given seasonably, according to order, much depending thereupon: besides that
the Sick and their Friends are usually veay earnest and solicitous for what
they judge will be helpful in their distress, and the Physician does place much
in the seasonable exhibition of what is prescribed.

Thirdly, He is not to interpose Medicines of his own, unless in a case of
absolute necessity, where the Physician cannot be consulted; forasmuch as he
cannot be ascertained of the Physicians intentions, and may therefore frustrate
and invalidate what is prescribed by his interposition.

Fourthly, He is to make a Conscience in the prices of his Medicine, designing
his profit to arise, not from overcharging any one Patient, but from his
gaining of many, by his care and conscionable dealing toward all. And though
in this case, some respects are to be allowed to his Charge, to the greatness
of that apparatus he is required to maintain in his Shop, to the loss and decay
of Medicines, yet all this is to be done, with such prudent regard toward the
Sick, that, placing his Interest in the multiplicity of Patients fairly
acquired, he may give none distaste, by showing himself covetous of Gain, or
craftily dealing with any.

Fifthly, His Charity to the Sick that are poor is not to be wanting, he will
be recompensed for it, in the Contents of his Mind, in the Obligation he lays
upon the Poor, which, by reflection, will pass to the Rich, or if this last
fails (which he is not to be too solicitous about) he may trust God Almighty
for his Paymaster, who never fails to recompense good actions, as not to punish
evil.

2. In reference to Physicians the Apothecaries ought to be full of fair and
just respect, forasmuch as they entrusted to their management, one of the prime
and considerable parts of their Art: by means whereof the Apothecaries came to
be a Company, and to have esteem and repute in the world: And though they may
be apt to urge that the Physicians did not do this for the sake of the
Apothecaries, however since they reap the profit of it, their Gratitude should
oblige them to make a fairer Interpretation.

2. They cannot but know, at least, their experimental sufferings will make
them understand, that their Concernments depends upon the Credit and Reputation
of Physicians, and therefore for them to use any practices to the diminution
thereof, is not only to undermine the Credit of the Art, and of the legal
Professors thereof, but therein also to subvert the foundation of their own
Interest. I might here enumerate the many little Arts, that have to this
purpose been used upon a great mistake that they do therein better consult
their own Profit, but supposing that time and experience had made them better
to understand themselves, I pass it over, no proofs or discoveries being more
convincing than their own sufferance, which is acknowledged almost by them all.

In the third place I am to mention some particulars concerning their
Deportment one toward another.

First, It ought to be full of Kindness and common Justice; and therefore they
are to avoid all undue undervaluations and supplantings one of another:
Concordia res parvae crescunt. If some take a liberty to defame the Credit of
others, it may be retaliated, and then what will this beget but criminations
and recriminations, to the prejudice of the whole: The Rules of common right
should steer them all, and where disingenuity transgresses, the good and
wholesome orders of the Fraternity should take place, and be strictly put into
execution. Severity restrains Injuries, remissness gives them encouragement.

Secondly, Their particular crying up of a Physician, on whose Practice they
design to depend, is not only injurious to other Physicians, but little less
than a Confederacy against their Brethren Apothecaries: It begets Factions in
the little Commonwealth of Physic, since it enforces others to do the like:
besides the private insinuations they must here use, of crying up some and
decrying others, a very great and injurious license being here often used, in
their private and subtle suggestions, which redounds also to the detriment of
one another.

A third inconvenience is their setting too great a rate upon such Nostrums as
Physicians have placed amongst some of them: By means whereof other
Apothecaries, who are by prescription to provide those Medicines, are forced to
charge the Sick with unreasonable rates, to their great discredit, and yet it
may be to be no gainers thereby, it may be losers, or to endanger the loss of
their Customers. This is a considerable evil, and is to be rectified, if not by
the ingenuity of the Apothecaries, yet by the prudence of Physicians, who, for
the preventing of such excortions, ought rather to communicate their particular
Medicines to several Apothecaries,

This shall suffice to have spoken concerning the Demeanor of Apothecaries, to
the Sick, to Physicians and to their own Fraternity, and it is hoped, that it
will obtain those good ends for which it was intended, viz. the benefit of the
Sick, and the making of the buisiness of Apothecaries more comfortable to
themselves, and more profitable to Mankind.

Concerning Midwives.
IT is no small wonder to those who do well consider it that Midwifery, which
is of so great concernment to the conservation of Women, and bringing children
into the world, should be under little or no Regulation: and that it is free
for any Woman, urged by necessity, or tempted by profit to undertake so weighty
an Employment, authorized thereunto by those who have no skill themselves, and
upon the Certificate of half a dozen of gossiping Neighbors, easily admitted
upon the weighty motive of five or six pounds.

Hence is it, that many very young, ignorant, unhandy Women, of little or no
skill to turn themselves to the several accidents occurring in that affair, or
ability to reduce preternatural Scituations of Children when toward the Birth,
or to know how to bring them into the world in different postures; of very
incompetent Knowledge also to advise Women in the various contingencies of their
Labors and Lyings in, are yet permitted to practice that Art, without any
previous examination, or any proper course taken for furnishing them with
necessary Skill, for such an undertaking.

Hence is it also, that the Lives of very many women and children are
unobservably lost; many women disabled for futute Conceptions, and rendered
sickly through the whole course of their lives, and many Children distorted,
made obnoxious to Diseases of the Head, the Rickets, and many other weaknesses:
These through their unskilfulness working the Bodies of Women, where there is
no occasion, because they would not be thought ignorant, and on the other hand
often neglecting opportunities, through want of Knowledge what and when to do,
whereby sometimes one, and sometimes both Mother and Child are very much
endangered, or lost.

Hence is it likewise, that the Man-Midwife is called upon on every small
occasion, to the great augmentation of the Charge, to the infinite distaste of
modest Women, and this either because of the Ignorance of the Midwife, or
because she would engage the Man Midwife to give her a good word, and speak
well of her amongst the Women.

Where* by the way, it is to be taken notice of, that the Man-Midwives proper
business ought only to be where one or the other is deed, where an Instrument
and violence is to be used, which is an action not agreeable to the softness of
the female Sex. In all other cases Midwives ought to understand how to behave
themselves, and to deliver Women, and so they were in former ages used to do,
until now there ^s grown a kind of Trade, Confederacy and Combination between
some Midwifes and some of the men exercising that work.

Considering the whole matter, I thought it expedient, to communicate to the
World, both the present state of Midwifery, as I have done, and also to subjoyn
a few Proposals for the better Regulation and Government of that so important a
Business.

1. That two Members of the College of Physicians should set themselves apart
particularly for Midwifery, and Uterine Diseases: and that in order thereunto
they should, ab initio, direct their Studies chiefly to these ends.

2. That no Midwife should be admitted to the Practice of Midwifery until she
had first signified the same to the President of the College, and Censors, and
also to the other two Physicians engaged in the Practice of that Art; and that
a month, at least, before she admits her self to examination: during which
time, inquisition is to be made of her behavior, her life and conversation.

3. That at a time then to be appointed, she be examined by the said President,
Censors, and two Fellows, concerning her fitness for such an undertaking, and
that likewise the Midwife her self, whose Deputy she has been, do viva voce
certify concerning her being skilful and well understanding what she desires
to undertake. And that then the President, Censors and Fellows, well approving
her fitness, do authorize her to practice the Art of Midwifery, by Letters of
License under the College Seal, the Fees to be but reasonable.

4. That no Woman do practice the said Art, but such as are in this manner
licensed thereunto, and that upon a considerable penalty.

5. That for the better enabling Midwives to this Employment, they be permitted
to be present in the College at the Dissection of Women's Bodies.

6. That this be drawn into form by learned Counsel, and added as a supplement
to the Charter of the College of Physicians.

The Office of Faculties may herein something suffer, but it is apparently for
common good: The forwardness of Women's thrusting themselves, without due
fitness, reasonable skill and preparation, is indeed hereby restrained, but
that is both just and necessary: since all men will easily assent, that a
public benefit is to be preferred before private Commodity and injurious
License.

FINIS.

