The EARL of Essex his SPEECH, at the Delivering the following Petition to His
most Sacred Majesty, Jan. 25. 80.
May it please Your Majesty,
THe Lords here present, together with diverse other Peers of the Realm, taking
notice that by your late Proclamation, your Majesty has declared an intention
of calling a Parliament, at Oxford; and observing from History and Records how
unfortunate many such assemblies have bin, when called at a Place remote from
the Capital City; as particularly the Congress in Henry the Seconds time at
Clarindon; Three several Parliaments at Oxford in Henry the thirds time; and at
Coventry in Henry the Sixths time; With diverse others which have proved very
fatal to those Kings, and have been followed with great mischief on the whole
Kingdom: and considering the present posture of affairs, the many jealousies
and discontents, which are amongst the People, we have great cause to apprehend
that the consequences of the sitting of a Parliament now at Oxford may be as
fatal to your Majesty and the Nation, as those others mentioned have bin to the
then Reigning Kings; and therefore we do conceive that we cannot answer it to
God, to your Majesty, or to the People, If we, being Peers of the Realm, should
not on so Important an Occasion humbly offer our advice to your Majesty; that
if possible. Your Majesty may be prevailed with, to alter this (as we
apprehend) unseasonable Resolution. The Grounds and Reasons of our Opinion, are
contained in this our Petition, which We humbly Present to Your Majesty.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition and Advice of the
Lords under-named, PEERS of the REALM.
Humbly Shows, Papists, and the sudden Growth of a Forreign-Power, unto
which, no Stop or Remedy could be Provided, unless it were by Parliament, and
an Union of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, in one Mind, and one Interest.

And the Lord Chancellor, in Pursuance of Your Majesty's Commands, having more
at large Demonstrated the said Dangers to be as great, as we in the midst of
our Fears could Imagine them: And so pressing, that our Liberties, Religion,
Lives, and the whole Kingdom would be certainly Lost, if a speedy Provision
were not made against them.

And your Majesty, on the 21. of April, 1679, Having called unto your Council,
many Honorable and Worthy Persons, and declared to them and the whole Kingdom,
That being sensible of the evil Effects of a single Ministry, or private
Advice, or Foreign Committee, for the General Direction of your Affairs; Your
Majesty would for the Future Refer all things unto that Council, and by the
constant Advice of them, together with the frequent use of your great Council,
the Parliament, Your Majesty was hereafter Resolved to Govern the Kingdoms; We
began to hope we should see an end of our Miseryes.

But to our Unspeakable Grief and Sorrow, we soon found our Expectations
Frustrated. The Parliament, then subsisting, was Prorogued and Dissolved before
it could perfect what was intended for our Relief and Security: and though
another was thereupon called, yet by many Prorogations it was put off, till the
21. of October. past; and notwithstanding your Majesty was then again pleased to
acknowledge, that neither Your Person, nor Your Kingdom could be safe, till the
matter of the Plot was gone through, It was unexpectedly Prorogued on the 10th.
of this Month, before any sufficient Order could be taken therein: All their
Just and Pious Endeavors to save the Nation were overthrown; the good Bills
they had been Industriously preparing to Unite all Your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects brought to naught; The discovery of the Irish Plot stifled; The
witnesses that came in frequently more fully to declare that, both of England
and Ireland, discouraged* Those Foreign Kingdoms and States, who by a happy
conjunction* with us might give a Check to the French Powers, Disheartened, even
to such a Despair of their own Security against the growing greatness of that
Monarch, As we fear may induce them to take new Resolutions, and perhaps such
as may be fatal to us: The Strength and Courage of our Enemies both at Home and
Abroad increased* And our selves left in the utmost danger of seeing our
Country brought into utter Desolation.

In these Extremities, we had nothing under God to Comfort us, but the Hopes*
that Your Majesty (being touched with the Groans of Your Perishing People)
would have suffered Your Parliament to Meet at the Day unto which it was
Prorogued: and that no further Interruption should have been given to their
Proceedings, in order to their Saving of the Nation. But that failed us too; so
then we heard that Your Majesty, by the private Suggestion of some Wicked
Persons, Favorers of Popery, Promoters of French Designs, and Enemies to Your
Majesty and the Kingdom (without the Advice, and as we have good Reason to
believe, against the Opinion, even of Your Privy-Councel) had been prevailed
with to Dissolve it, and to call another to Meet at Oxford, where neither Lords
nor Commons can be in Safety; but will be daily exposed to the Swords of the
Papists, and their Adherents of whom too many are crept into Your Majesty's
Guards. The Liberty of speaking according to their Consciences, will be thereby
Destroyed, and the Validity of all their Acts, and Proceedings consisting in
it, left Disputable. The Straitness of the Place, no way admits of such a
concourse of Persons, as now follows every Parliament; the Witnesses which are
necessary to give Evidence against the Popish Lords; such Judges, or others
whom the Commons have Impeached, or had Resolved to Impeach, can neither bear
the Charge of going thither, nor trust themselves under the Protection of a
Parliament, that is it self Evidently under the Power of Guards and Soldiers.

The Premises considered, We Your Majesty's Petitioners, out of a Just
Abhorrence of such a dangerous and pernicious Council (which the Authors have
not dared to avow) and the direful Apprehensions of the Calamities and
Miseries, that may ensue thereupon; do make it our most Humble Prayer, and
Advice, That the Parliament may not Sit at a Place, where it will not be able
to Act with that Freedom* which is necessary; and especially, to Give unto
their Acts and Proceedings, that Authority which they ought to have amongst the
People, and have ever had, unless Impaired by some Awe upon them, (of which
there wants not Precedents) and that Your Majesty would be graciously pleased,
to Order It to Sit at Westminster, (it being the usual Place, and where they
may Consult and Act with Safety and Freedom)

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc. Monmouth, Kent, Huntington,
Bedford, Salisbury, Clara, Standford, Essex* Shaftsbury, Mordant, Evers, Paget,
Gray, Herbert, Howard, Delamer.


London, Printed for Benj. Harris* at the Stationers-Arms, in the Piazza under
the Royal Exchange, 1681.


