AN ESSAY To the Explaining of the REVELATION WHEREIN, Amongst other things of
great moment, is clearly proved, that by the Beast is meant an Universal
Monarch which shall hereafter arise out of the Roman Empire.

That there shall be a Fifth Kingdom upon the Earth, (namely, that of the
Saints) together with the manner thereof.

And that the New Jerusalem is a City properly so called, which God has
reserved in Heaven for the Saints.

Revel. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein.

Prove. 30.5, 6. Every word of God is pure --

Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold by George Sawbridge
dwelling on Ludgate Hill at the Sign of the Bible. 1661.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Revelation is the most excellent of the P rophetick Books contained in the
Scripture, as being the Abstract of them all; and therefore (as the best things
are most liable to abuse,) it has been shamefully entreated by the greatest
part of those, that have undertaken to explain the same. For it seems by
their Expositions, that they imagine this to be such a Portion of holy Writ,
whereon men are only to exercise their Fancies, and to suspend the use of
Reason whilst they inquire into the sense thereof Neither did I ever find
such monstrous Interpretations imposed on any other Book, whether sacred or
profane. For instance, when John does in the first Chapter wish Grace and Peace
to the seven Churches of Asia, from the seven Spirits that are before the
Throne of God, by these (say they) is meant the holy Spirit, who is said to be
seven, either because of his manifold operations, or because he wrought in the
seven Churches. But by what instance taken out of any Author, either sacred or
profane, can they avouch such an Interpretation? Who ever heard that a single
person (as the holy Spirit is) should either for his many Works, or for his
working in sundry places, be termed Seven? And how should any man ever reach
the meaning of our word, if took to our selves the liberty of speaking thus?
Again, when it is in the 11. Chapter spoken of two Witnesses, these (say they)
are the Old and New Testament, or Magistracy and Ministry. But where in the
Scripture are two Witnesses that prophecy, or two Prophets (for so the
Witnesses are there in the 10. Verse expressly styled) put otherwise than for
two men endued with a proph^tick spirit? Yea, can it without the greatest
absurdity be said of any but two men, that they prophecy clad in Sackcloth?
that if any one goes about to hurt them, Fire issues out of their Mouths and
devoureth their Adversaries? that they have Power to shut Heaven, and turn the
Waters into Blood, and smite the Earth with every Plague as often as they
please? that when they have finished their Testimony, they are killed, and
their dead Bodies lie three Days and an half in the Street of a certain City?
In fine, that after the three Days and an half the Spirit of Life from God
enters into them, so that they stand upon their Feet, and afterward ascend up
into Heaven, in a Cloud, whilst their Adversaries stand looking on them? Is it
possible for the wit of man with any congruity to Reason, and to the words of
the Text, to draw these things either to the Old and New Testament, or to the
Magistracy and Ministry? Grant once that we may with our mystical
Interpretations evade the literal Truth of things so plainly delivered in the
Scripture, I would fain know what certainty is to be had there, or how any
thing should ever be proved from thence? Likewise we are told in the History of
the two Witnesses, that they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and sixty
Days. This term of time (say they) signifies a thousand two hundred and sixty
Years: a Day, according to the usage of the Prophets, being put for a Year to
which purpose they allege: Numb. 14.3, 34. where it is said, Your Children
shall wander in the Wilderness forty Years, and bear your Whoredoms, until
your Carcases be wasted in the Wilderness. After the number of the Days in the
which ye searched the Land, even forty Days (each Day for a Year) shall ye bear
your iniqu ties, even forty Years. And Ezekiel. 4.5, 6. where it is said, I have
laid upon thee the Years of their iniquity, according to the number of the
Days, three hundred and ninety Days, so shall thou bear the iniquity of the
House of Israel. And when thou have accomplished them, lie again on thy right
side, and thou shall bear the iniquity of the House of Judah forty Days: I have
appointed thee each Day for a Year. But in neither of these two places are Days
to be drawn out into Years. Otherwise when it is said in Numbers, that the
Israelites were forty Days a searching the Land of Canaan, we must understand
that they spent forty Years about it: which every one sees to be absurd.
Likewise when Ezekiel lay upon his left side three hundred and ninety Days for
the iniquity of Israel, and on his right side forty Days for the iniquity of
Judah, by this reckoning he would have lien on his sides four hundred and
thirty Years. Wherefore the words in Numbers import no more, than that, whereas
the Israelites had spent forty Days in searching the Land, their Children
should answerably thereunto wander forty Years in the Wilderness. So also does
the passage in Ezekiel signify, that forasmuch as Israel and Judah had now
gone a whoring from God for the space of four hundred and thirty Years, the
Prophet should accordingly lie four hundred and thirty Days upon his sides, to
bear their iniquity. I conclude therefore, that it is contrary both to
Scripture and Reason to understand by the thousand two hundred and sixty Days
that the Witnesses shall prophecy, any other than such Days as are properly so
called, consisting of four and twenty Hours a piece. Finally, it is said of the
Carcases of the two Witnesses, that they shall he unburied three Days and an
half in the Street of the great City, where our Lord was slain, (which is the
most evident description of Jerusalem, that can be given) this City (say they)
is meant of Rome, because our Lord was put to death by the Roman Power. It Is
true indeed that a Deputy of the Roman Emperor did crucify our Savior
Christ, but may it therefore be affirmed, that he was crucified at Rome? Are we
wont to say that a thing is done at such a place, when it is done only by the
Authority of him that has his imperial Seat there? What man that was in his
wits, did ever express things in this manner? Certainly, did the Revelation
speak at such a rate as these men imagine, it would be the most ridiculous
piece that ever was penned, and the Author thereof so far from being a Divine
by way of excellency, (for so John of right is styled) as that he would not
deserve a rank among sober Writers. Neither am I a little troubled, when I see
men thus to dally with the Word of God, and make choice of no fitter a subject,
whereon to vent their follies, than this incomparable Prophecy.

I have the more largely insisted upon the History of the two Witnesses,
because of the frequent injury offered to that part above all the rest of the
Revelation. For if some Christian State or Potentate crush any party whatsoever
pretending to Religion, or some eminent persons of the same, then it is
presently given out by the favorers of that party, that now the the Beast is
risen, has slain the Witnesses. Thus the sacred Word of God, that was given to
a far better purpose, must interess it self in our private Quarrels, and be
forced to speak as we stand affected. But it will perhaps be here objected,
that I who am so ready to observe the strange glosses that other men impose on
the History of the two Witnesses, seem not in the mean time to take notice how
uncouth mine own opinion is concerning the Beast that slays them, whilst I
hold him (as appears by the following Treatise) to be such a man as shall
arise from the Dead to reign, before he embrueth his Hands in the Blood of the
said Witnesses. To which I answer, that though my Tenet be strange as to the
Apprehensions that Men generally have touching the Beast, yet is it very facile
and obvious, if you respect the words of the Text it self. For seeing the Angel
explaining the Mystery of the Beast, Chap. 17.9, 10, 11. plainly tells us,
that he is a King, when John says of the two Witnesses, Chap. 11.7. that the
Beast which ascends out of the bottomless Pit shall slay them; what other
sense can rationally be put upon the words, than that the King, which is
decyphered by the Beast, and arises from the Dead, shall kill the Witnesses?
And into what Absurdities must he plunge himself, that goes about to fasten
another meaning on the place! But of this matter I discourse at large in the
ensuing Exposition, to which I refer the Reader for further satisfaction
therein.

Having thus given a taste of the exotic Interpretations that are usually
forced upon the Reve ation, I will now open the original Causes from whence
they proceed, reducing them to three Heads, namely, that men think the whole
Book to be an Allegory, and to contain a Prediction of that which shall happen
to the Churches in all Ages of the World, and to have for its principal scope
the discovery of Antichrist.

To the first of which three Particulars, I answer, that the Revelation cannot
be a mere Allegory, seeing it is fraught with Evangelical Precepts, Promises,
and Threats, and also with sundry clear and evident passages touching the
Exaltation and Government of the Christ, the Universal Judgment, and the
Glorification of the Saints in the new Jerusalem; which last being the chiefest
point of all the Gospel, is no less than three times confirmed by the
testimony, partly of Angels, and partly of God himself, which assures us that
the sayings recorded concerning the same, are faithful and true. Which (as I
afterward evince in mine Exposition) is no other, than if it had been said,
They are perspicuous and plain, and to be taken as the words sound.

To the second I say, that it is presumption for us to devise with our selves
how much it is meet for God to discover touching things to come, and so to
change days into years, and years into ages, and particular men into a
succession of men continued throughout many generations, as it has been the
custom of interpreters to do: we ought rather to content our selves with what
is recorded in the Scripture and to follow the plain doctrine thereof, as
knowing that if God vouchsafed to foretell but one remarkable event, which was
to happen in all the intermediate space between the penning of this book and
the consummation of the world, it was a great favor, and which we could not
have required of him. How much more then does it become us to rest satisfied,
and thank Almighty God who has been pleased to reveal so many choice secrets,
as are contained in this book touching the state of future times? whosever
therefore shall consider well the sixth Chapter, where the prediction of things
to happen after the days of Domitian, (whose Tyranny had been hinted, Chap.
3.10.) does begin and compare it with History, shall find that it reaches no
further than Constantine the great. Likewise the things foretold from the
beginning of the seventh Chapter to the end of the nineteenth are all (save
somewhat that shall happen before the death of the Beast, and whereof mention
is made in the tenth verse of the seventeenth Chapter) to be accomplished
within the compass of that age wherein he shall rise again from the dead. And
of this I give a touch in the following exposition. So that from the Reign of
Constantine unto the age aforesaid is a vast gap, without the intimation of any
thing that shall intervene.

To the third I answer, that if John in penning the Revelation had intended to
detect Antichrist, he would no doubt have named him, else how could he expect
that any man should ever be able to fathom his meaning as to this matter.
Which reason is the more forceible in that we see him so frequently make
mention of Antichrist in his Epistles. And would there (think ye) have been so
deep silence concerning him throughout the Revelation, had John there designed
to paint him out more fully then before? But as men have been too quick sighted
in spying Antichrist, where he was not indeed to be found, so have they on the
contrary been very purblinde when they came to those places, wherein he was
exposed to open view. Wherefore that we may at length attain to the right
notion of Antichrist, let us mark in the first place that John did not by
Antichrist intend any particular person, but many deceivers: to which purpose
let us hear what he says, 1 Epistle 4.3, 4. This is that spirit of Antichrist,
whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the
world. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them. The word them,
as will easily appear by examining the circumstances of the place, has no
other antecedent but Antichrist, and therefore no single person was meant by
him. But if this allegation should seem to any one to carry some doubt and
uncertainty with it, the seventh verse of the second Epistle will soon remove
all scruple, and clearly prove our assertion. For it is there said, Many
deceivers are come into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come
into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is
the deceiver (so the Greek has it) and the Antichrist. In the next place,
seeing it is now manifest that by the Antichrist many deceivers are understood,
let us search out what manner of deceivers they must be, to whom this
appellation agrees. If we consult with interpreters and observe how variously
they define the Antichrist, we shall be at a loss concerning that which we
seek after, only we shall find they so order the business, as that if they had
a spite against any man upon a Religious account, they could transform him
into Antichrist, at their pleasure. Wherefore leaving them, let us betake our
selves again to the touchstone of truth, the holy Scripture, and see how it
defines Antichrist. John the only sacred writer that is to guide us in this,
as well as in the other particulars, describing Antichrist Chap. 2. of this
first Epistle, verse 22. does (if his words be exactly rendered according to the
Greek) speak thus, Who is the liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the
Christ? this is the Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. And Chap
4.3. he says thus, Every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is not of God, and this is that spirit of Antichrist. And Epist.
2.7. (which place was before quoted to another purpose) he says, Many
deceivers are come into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh. This is the deceiver and the Antichrist. From which testimonies it
is evident, that only he who denies that Jesus is the Christ, or that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is an Antichrist. What peevishness is it then that
they who make the same confession touching Christ and his coming in the flesh,
should upon some other difference about Religion reproachfully term one another
Antichristians! And how contrary is this to the determination of the Scripture
it self, which all should make the rule of their words and actions!

These things being unfolded, it is an easy matter to perceive my design in
writing this Essay, which is to enure men more closely to follow the Text of
the holy scipture, as in other parts thereof, so especially in the book of the
Revelation, where men are wont to be loose and exorbitant in a more then
ordinary manner, as if they strove who should depart furthest off from the
literal sense of that prophecy. For bearing in mind continually that rule of
interpreting, which all that are of a sound judgment readily admit, That we
are not to recede from the letter of the sacred Text, without evident
necessity, (which is when the literal interpretation is repugnant either to our
senses, or to the scope of the place, or to a greater number of plain Texts to
the contrary) I have (as I persuade my self) given a sounder and clearer
exposition of this difficult prophecy then is commonly to be met withal. I
have also with the same labor cut off all those forced and factions
applications of things mentioned in the said book to the Pope, which too justly
render the reformed Religion suspected to Papists, who are apt enought to think
that such violent wresting of the Revelation, to disparage them, preceedeth
from a want of solid Arguments to confute their Doctrine. For mine own part,
there is no man that does abominate all Popish Superstitions more than my self,
nor is at a wider distance from them; yet does not the detestation of them so
transport me, as that I am thereby induced to abuse the holy Scripture, to the
end I may render Papists more odious. For such a way of proceeding is wont to
work a contrary effect, causing men, when they once perceive the Papists to be
so palpably wronged, to imagine that their Religion is wholly true and
harmless, otherwise what need was there of so far fetched Allegations to
disgrace them? I have further observed, that there is hardly found amongst us
any man of unsound Principles in matter of Religion, but presently calls in
the Revelation to his aid, torturing the rare Mysteries thereof to get
something out of them, that may give a color to his Absurdities. Wherefore I
made this account with my self, that by opening away to the plain and genuine
understanding of that Book, I might possibly give a check to such groundless
fancies, and hinder them from pestering the World without control in the time
to come. I desire therefore all that shall light on this Essay to peruse it
with patience, and not pass sentence thereon until they have read it quite
through, and well considered the connection of the several parts thereof, and
the congruity of the things therein delivered, both with Scripture and Reason:
and if they perceive the worth and sovereign use of the many secrets therein
discovered, let them give the whole glory of them unto God, who is the Father
of Lights, both of that wherewith the Penmen of the holy Scripture, and also
of that wherewith the sound Interpreters of the same are enlightened.

Reader, forasmuch as here remains an empty page, and some few faults escaped
in the printing of this book, I have thought sit here to insert them, that
being taken notice of in the beginning, the Book might be run over without any
rub in the way.

ERRATA.
Page 2. for were r. are. page 14. l. 9. for then r. them. page 37 l. 21. for
not are r. are not.

AN ESSAY To the Explaining of the REVELATION.
Chap. 13. Verse. 1. And I stood upon the Sand of the Sea, and saw a Beast rise
up out of the Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten
Crowns, and upon his Heads the name of Blasphemy.
The Exposition.
BY the Beast here mentioned is to be understood a Man, according to the
Exposition of John himself, who says in the 18. Verse of this Chapter, Here is
wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of the Beast, for it
is the number of a Man. For if the Number of the Beast be the Number of a Man,
by the Beast must needs be meant a Man, otherwise his Number would be the
Number of something else, and not of a Man. Again, the Beast signifies such a
Man as shall be also a King, and that an universal one. A King, because it is
said Chap. 16.10. that the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Throne (so
it is in the Greek) of the Beast. For if the Beast has a Throne, he is a King,
it being proper to Kings to sit upon Thrones. Thus the four and twenty Elders,
which Chap. 4.4. are said to sit upon Thrones, do Chap. 5.10. acknowledge
themselves to have been made Kings. Yea, it is subjoyned in the forecited
passage, Chap. 16.10. that the Kingdom of the Beast was darkened. But if his
Kingdom was darkened, then it undeniably follows that he is a King, in as
much as a Kingdom and a King are Relatives.

But it is yet superabundantly manifest, that by the Beast is meant a King,
from the Exposition of the Angel, Chap. 17.10, 11. where he says, And there
were seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come;
and when he comes, he must continue a short space. And the Beast that was and
is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven. When he here says, after
he had spoken of seven Kings, that the Beast is the eighth, it must of
necessity be meant the eighth King. Now that this King is to be an universal
one, appears from the 7. Verse of this Chapter, where it is said of him,
disguized under the name of the Beast, that Power (Greek Authority) was given
him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. Yea, the universal Monarchy of
the Beast is sufficiently hinted to us by his rising out of the Sea. For if by
Waters according to the Interpretation given by the Angel, Chap. 17.15. are
meant Peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues, then suitably by the
Sea, which is the general confluence of the Waters, ought to be understood the
universality of Mankind concurring to the advancement of that universal
Monarch, decyphered by the Beast. This Interpretation of mine is further
confirmed by the seventh Chapter of Daniel, where the Angel, explaining to him
the Vision of the four great Beasts that came up out of the Sea, says Verse.
17. These great Beasts, which are four, are four Kings which shall arise out of
the Earth. But those four Kings (as every one that is acquainted with History
can tell) are the Founders of the four universal Kingdoms, namely,
Nebuchadnezzar of the Caldean, Cyrus of the Persian, Alexander of the Greek,
Julius Caesar of the Roman.

When it is further said, that the Beast had seven Heads and ten Horns, by the
seven Heads (according to the Interpretation of the Angel, Chap. 17 9,10.) are
meant seven Hills, whereon Rome (the Birthplace of the Beast, as I shall
hereafter prove) is seated: and by the ten Horns (as the same Interpreter goes
on to explain it, Verse the 12. of the foresaid Chapter) are meant ten Kings,
which shall receive authority as Kings for a while with the Beast.

And indeed the Crowns that are upon the Horns, do of themselves without any
Interpretation sufficiently signify that by the Horns Kings are understood.
But of these things more largely, when we come to the explication of the
Chapter aforesaid.

Finally, as for the name of Blasphemy, that was upon the seven Heads of the
Beast, had it been the will of God that we should know it, he would have caused
John to set it down: But seeing it is neither here nor elsewhere expressed, or
so much as hinted, we should be content to be ignorant thereof, and not betray
the impatient disposition of our minds by ghessing at it.

Verse. 2. And the Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his Feet were
as the Feet of a Bear, and his Mouth as the Mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon
gave him his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority.


So great is the fierceness of the Beast (whereby, as I before proved, an
universal Monarch is understood) that it is composed of sundry Beasts, his Body
being like to that of a Leopard, whose swiftness in seizing on the Prey is
noted in the Scripture, Hab. 1.8. Their Horses are swifter than the Leopards:
as also his lying in wait, Hos. 13.7. As a Leopard by the way will I observe
them. His Feet or Paws are like to those of a Bear; whose chief strength
consists in his Paws, 1 Samuel 17.37. The Lord that delivered me from the Paw
of the Bear. His Mouth is like to that of a Lion, whose ravening with his Mouth
is also marked in the Scripture, 2 Timothy 4.17. I was delivered out of the Mouth
of a Lion. Neither is this all, but the Dragon (whereby the Devil is to be
understood, as John himself expounds it, Chap. 12.9.) gives to the Beast his
Power, which being a Power above Nature, the Beast is thereby strengthened to
atchieve such things, as no natural and humane Power can reach unto. The Devil
also imparteth to the Beast his Throne, and consequently his Dominion over the
other evil Spirits, of whom he is called the Prince, Matthew. 12.24. But of this
also we will speak more in our Exposition of the 16. Chapter. Finally, the
Devil bestows on the Beast great Authority, which being different from those
things that went before, is to be understood of Authority and Dominion over all
the World, according to that of the 7. Verse, where it is said, that Power
(Greek Authority, the same Word that is used here in the 2. Verse) was given
him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. Where by the the way it is to
be observed, that the Authority of the Beast is no lawful Authority, nor
Ordinance or God, as being given to him by the Devil; and therefore Men are no
more obliged to submit out of conscience unto him, than unto the Devil that set
him up: and accordingly when the Saints levy Arms against the Beast, and wage
war with him, (though with ill success, as being vanquished by him in fight,)
they do not sin against God, nor break that holy Commandment of his delivered
to them by the Apostle Paul, Romans 13.1, 2, etc.

Verse. 3. And I saw one of his Heads, as it were wounded to death; and his
deadly Wound was healed: and all the World wondered after the Beast.


It appears by this passage, that the Beast shall receive a deadly Wound,
(whether in Battle, or by some other accident, is uncertain) and that the
healing of this Wound shall cause all the World to admire him.

For who would not wonder at such a King as being wounded unto death, is
notwithstanding afterward cured, seeing this cannot be effected but by
supernatural means? Thus when King Hezekiah, being sick unto death, was
restored to his health, the Cure was not wrought without a Miracle. Neither is
there any sufficient Reason can be rendered, why we should depart from the
Letter in the Interpretation of this place. But if it be here objected; that
the Wound which the Beast receives in one of his Heads, seems not to concern
him, and therefore neither is the Cure thereof likely to draw all the World
into the admiration of him, in as much as the Heads are seven other Kings. I
answer, that though the Heads do principally denote seven other Kings, yet this
hinders not but that one of them may in a less principal manner signify him
also. Yea, that it does so we are assured by the Angels Interpretation, Chap.
17.11. who says, that the Beast is the eighth (King) and is of the seven. The
expounding of which divine Riddle I reserve for the Comment upon that place,
where I will make it appear that it is the sixth Head that represents the
Beast, and consequently we must here understand that Head to be wounded with
the Sword. Nor is this any whit more strange, than that the great Horn between
the Eyes of the He-Goat, Dan. 8.5. should signify one and the same person with
the Goat himself, as the Angel there shows it does, Verse. 21. namely, Alexander
the King of Greece, and the first King thereof, who subdued Darius the King of
the Medes and Persians, and so was the Goat that trampled on the Ram with two
Horns there spoken of.

Verse. 4. And they worshipped the Dragon which gave Power unto the Beast: and
they worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to
make war with him?


In this Verse is set forth the mavelous impiety of the whole World in the
Reign of the Beast, for they shall not stick to worship the Devil, for
investing the Beast with so vast Authority, and also the Beast that is set up
by him, as judging no King in all the World like to him for greatness, nor able
to wage war with him. Neither is this Worship of the Devil to be esteemed such
a sin, as that the Nature of Man cannot possibly be induced to commit it,
otherwise the Devil would not have solicited our Savior Christ thereunto,
telling him, that if he would fall down and worship the Devil, all the Kingdoms
of the World together with the glory thereof should become his, Luke 4 6, 7.
For certainly the Devil is too subtle to propose such a thing to our Savior
(the wisest and strongest Saint that ever was, or shall be) which is so
enormous, that no Man though never so gross and wicked, is capable of being
drawn thereunto. I conclude therefore that this detestable wickedness of
Worshipping the Devil, will be put in practice, according to the very Letter,
during the Reign of the Beast.

Verse. 5. And there was given unto him a Mouth speaking great things, and
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two Months.


These words imply, that the Beast, though otherwise of himself most impious,
yet could not utter so great things, and blasphemies, were he not animated by
an extraordinary Power. For as it is elsewhere said in the Scripture, that none
can do such or such an act of Piety, unless it be given to him, and
consequently God does in mercy enable him by the Power of his Holy Spirit: as
Christ says, that none could come unto him, except it were given him of the
Father, Joh. 6.65. And Paul says, Phil. 1.29. To you it is given in the behalf
of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him: So the
outrageous blaspheming of the Name of God, here spoken of, is so high a strain
of impiety, that were not the Beast incited and spirited thereunto by the
working of Satan, he could in no wise reach unto it. The same is said of his
making war, (namely, with the Saints, as you have it, Verse. 7. and Dan. 7, 25.)
for the space of forty two Months. For this being a more than ordinary act of
Tyranny, requires the assistance of the Devil to stir up and strengthen the
Beast to perform it. As for the duration of this War with the Saints, which the
Beast is said to wage for the space of forty two Months, seeing I have already
proved, that by the Beast is meant a King, neither can any place be alleged
out of the Scripture, where by Months are meant Months of Years, and not of
Days only; I collect, that the said War shall last but three Years and an half.

Verse. 6. And he opened his mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
Name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in Heaven.


What the Beast had by the permission of God received a Power to do, he here
puts in execution, blaspheming the Name of God, and his Tabernacle. By which
Tabernacle is meant the heavenly Jerusalem, the place of Gods abode, as
appears from Chap, 21.2, 3. For there when that holy City descends out of
Heaven upon the new Earth, a voice is heard from Heaven, saying, Behold, the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall dwell with them. Which implies,
that the heavenly Jerusalem is the Tabernacle of God, wherein he will dwell
with men. And this City is therefore called a Tabernacle, because (contrary to
the guize of other Cities) it removes from place to place, as Tabernacles or
Tents are wont to do. Neither is the Blasphemy of the Beast terminated in God
and his Tabernacle, but extends it self to all those dwelling in Heaven,
namely, Christ and the holy Angels, which fully verifieth what Paul says of
this Beast, under the name of the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, namely,
that he shall exalt himself above every one that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
For this Appellation of God is in the Scripture given both to the Father, and
to his Son Christ Jesus, and also to the holy Angels. See Ephesians. 1.17. The God
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory. John 20.28. Thomas answered and
said unto him, (namely, Jesus Christ) My Lord, and my God. Zech. 12.8. The
house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them.

Verse. 7. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them: and Power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and
Nations.


The Beast has Power given to him, not only to make war with the Saints,
(which by the way implies, that the Saints oppose him with Arms, for it is
then rightly termed War, when Hostility is openly used on both sides. See Chap.
12.7.) but also to vanquish them in fight. And this is a thing very remarkable,
giving us to understand, that the Saints, though fighting in a just Cause
against the Beast, yet cannot prevail by force of Arms, in as much as the Beast
is to be defeated by the divine Power of Christ their Captain, who will at
length appear in the Heaven, riding upon a white Horse, and by the Sword of his
Mouth dissipate the Beast and his Accomplices. See Chap. 19.11, 15, 20, 21. What
is here further said of the universal Monarchy of the Beast, is of it self very
plain, and has been touched before, in the Exposition of the first Verse, so
that I need not add any thing thereunto.

Verse. 8. And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, whose Names are
not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the
World.


As the Kingdom of the Beast is universal, so is the Worship also, none amongst
all the Inhabitants of the Earth refusing it, save they whose Names are written
in the Book of Life. For they being appointed of God unto Salvation, are
accordingly preserved by him from committing so great impiety as to worship a
King that openly blasphemeth God, and was set up by the Devil. Furthermore,
when the Book of Life is here said to be the Lambs, it is because God has
prepared it for him, (for Moses of old testified, that God has written such a
Book, Exodus 32.32.) that he might know on whom to bestow eternal Life. For
seeing it was the will of God, that none should have eternal Life, but they
whom he had given unto Christ (as Christ himself witnesses, John 17.2. saying
of himself to the Father, As thou have given him Power over all Flesh, that he
should give eternal Life to as many as thou have given him:) and it was
necessary that God should by some means reveal to him who they were, that had
been given to him, he chose this way of Discovery, providing a Book of Life,
wherein all their Names are written, by the inspection whereof Christ might
understand, who were to be saved. Thus Christ attaineth to the knowledge of the
Decrees of God, touching sundry other matters, by opening a Book sealed with
seven Seals, that was in the Hand of God, Chap. 5.1, 8, 9. And lest any one
should think that this is to be taken in a figurative sense, let him consult
the Prophecy of Daniel, where he shall find an Angel plainly signifying that
the Decrees of God are set down in writing; for thus he says to Daniel, Chap.
19.21, being about to declare the purpose of God touching the Kingdoms of the
World, I will show thee that which is noted in the Scripture of Truth. It is
further said in that passage of the Revelation, that is now under discussion,
that the Lamb (Christ Jesus) was slain from the Foundation of the World. which
must of necessity be understood of the purpose of God touching the Death of
Christ, for Christ was actually slain in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, as the
Scripture elsewhere testifies.

Verse. 9. If any Man have an Ear, let him hear.


This Acclamation is never added in the Scripture, but when there has preceded
some notable thing, that requires a more diligent reflection to be made upon
it. But what is more remarkable than this, that the constancy of the Saints,
and their resolute denial to worship the Beast, (when all the World does the
contrary) is at no hand to be ascribed to the Saints themselves, (as men are
apt to do) but only to the Decree of God, who had before chosen them to
Salvation, without which they also, as well as others, would have committed
that great transgression?

Verse. 10. He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity: He that
kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword. Here is the patience and
the Faith of the Saints.


The equal Judgment of God is here set forth, who usually plagueth Men in the
same kind, wherein they had offended, so that the punishment carries the
footsteps and resemblance of their sin. For the Beast who had brought many of
the Saints into captivity, is himself at length taken captive, and thrown alive
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, Chap. 19.20. and the ten Kings, who had
assisted him in killing the Saints, Chap. 17.12, 13. are themselves slain with
the Sword, proceeding out of the Mouth of Christ, Chap. 19.20, 21. And hereby
is the Faith and Patience of the Saints made conspicuous, whilst they believe
and patiently wait for the vengeance of God to be poured forth upon the Enemy
in the time appointed.

Verse. 11. And I beheld another Beast coming up out of the Earth, and he had
two Horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon.


Now John comes to the Description of the second Beast, whereby is understood
a false Prophet, for so is he expressly called, Chap. 16.13. and Chap. 19.20.
And he is seen to ascend up, out of the Earth, because he arises from the
Dead, who have their place in the lower parts of the Earth. Thus when the Witch
of Endor had raised up Samuel, she said to Saul, I saw gods, (or rather, a god,
as appears from the following Verse) ascend out of the Earth, 1 Samuel 28.13.
Now that the Dead are placed in the lower parts of the Earth, is evident from
sundry Texts of Scripture. See Psalm. 63.9, 10. But those that seek my soul to
destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the Earth. They shall fall by the
Sword, they shall be a Portion for Foxes. See also Ezekiel. 32. from Verse 18. to
the end of the Chapter. And this is the reason why the false Prophet together
with the Beast (who, as I shall clearly prove in my Exposition of the 17.
Chapter, ought also to be raised from the Dead, to act all those horrid things
that are spoken of him in this Book of the Revelation) are not slain in the
Battle of Armageddon, as all the rest are, but taken alive and thrown into the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, as having been once dead already.

When this second Beast is said to have two Horns as a Lamb, this argues that
he makes a show of Lamb-like meekness and innocence in his outward garb, but
in his Doctrine hisseth like a Dragon, uttering such things as tend to the
ruin and destruction of Men, as appears by the sequel of this Chapter.

Verse. 12. And he exercises all the Power of the first Beast before him, and
causes the Earth, and them which dwell therein, to worship the first Beast,
whose deadly Wound was healed.


See how this second Beast, which in shape of Horns resembles a Lamb; begins
to act like a Dragon, in exercising all the Power of the first Beast in his
presence, that he may thereby force the Inhabitants of the Earth to worship the
first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed.

Thus Nebuchadnezzer brought all Peoples, Nations, and Languages to fall down
and worship the golden Image which he had set up, by threatening to cast
Refusers into the midst of a burning fiery. Furnace, Dan. 3.6, 9.

Verse. 13. And he does great wonders, so that he makes Fire come down from
Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of Men;

Verse. 14. And deceives them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of those
Miracles which he had Power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying to them
that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast which had
the Wound by a Sword, and did live.


As the false Prophet made use of Power to drive Men to the Worship of the
Beast, so does he also of subtilty t odraw then to a further degree of impiety,
inciting them by great Wonders, (which it is given him to do) to erect an Image
to the Beast, which received a deadly Wound by the Sword, but afterward
recovered of the same. For of all Impostures, whereby Men are wont to be
seduced to a false Worship, there is none so powerful as that of working
Miracles. Hence Christ says in the Gospel, Matthew. 24.24. There shall arise
false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, in so
much that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect. And Moses
long before in the Law, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3 If there arise among you a Prophet, or
a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder; and the sign or the
wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other
gods, (which thou have not known) and let us serve them; Thou shall not hearken
unto the words of that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your
God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart,
and with all your soul. Neither can any one justly say, that the Wonders to be
performed by the false Prophet, are only seeming Miracles, and not real ones.
For, besides that, neither the Scripture, nor the common use of speaking, does
by great Wonders understand mere Illusions and Deceptions of the sight: the
particular Wonder that John allegeth for an instance, puts the matter out of
all question, for he says, that the false Prophet causes fire to come down
from Heaven before men. But if fire coming down from Heaven be not a true
Miracle, I would fain learn what is?

Verse. 15. And he had power to give life unto the Image of the Beast, that the
Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not
worship the Image of the Beast should be killed.


The false Prophet who had done sundry Miracles to make Men erect an Image to
the Beast, does at length cause the Image it self to speak, with words tending
to this purpose, that whosoever refuses to worship the Image of the Beast,
shall be put to death. Of such a Miracle as this we sometimes read in the
Scripture, as namely, Zech. 10.2. The Idols (or Images, for so the Hebrew word
Teraphim is rendered, 1 Samuel 19.13.) have spoken vanity. Wherefore there is the
less reason, why any man should in the explication of this place betake himself
to a figurative sense, and so impose upon the words an uncouth and uncertain
Interpretation, as men love to do, when they comment upon this Book of the
Revelation.

Verse. 16. And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads.

Verse. 17. And that no man might buy or sell save he that had the Mark, or the
Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name.


The false Prophet thinks he can never sufficiently engage Men to the impious
Worship of the Beast and his Image, which he has undertaken to settle, to
which end he adds another device, causing them, of what rank or quality
soever they be, to receive a Mark upon their right hand, or their forehead, and
permitting none to buy or sell that has it not. Now what this Mark is, (were
it not here set down) would easily appear to us, by comparing two other
passages of this Book; the one, Chap. 14.11. Whosoever receives the Mark of
his Name. The other, Chap. 15.2. over his Mark, over (the word and set in the
English before this second over is not in the Greek) the number of his Name.
Whence it is manifest, that by the Mark of the Beast is meant, either his Name,
or the Number of his Name; and accordingly those words, Chap. 13.17. are to be
rendered thus, Save he that has the Mark, either (not or) the Name of the
Beast, or the Number of his Name. Neither is it a new thing in the Scripture,
that a Mark should be set on the Bodies of Men for Protection. Thus God is said
to have set a Mark on Cain, lest any one finding him should kill him, Genesis
4.15. He also caused a Mark to be set on the foreheads of them that sighed and
cried for all the Abominations that were done in Jerusalem, that the Destroyers
might not come near them, when they in the Vision slew all the rest of the
Inhabitants of that City, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. Finally, we read in this very Book of
the Revelation, Chap. 7.3. that the Servants of God are by an Angel sealed or
marked on the forehead, to secure them from the Plague of the Locusts, Chap.
9.4. and this Mark is the Name of the Lambs Father, Chap. 14 1. We see then by
these Allegations out of the Scripture, that there is no need to fly to a
mystical Interpretation in explaining the Mark of the Beast set upon Men, that
they may be thereby licensed to buy and sell without molestation, especially
because this Mark is said to be imprinted upon certain parts of their Body, and
that (as the Devil is wont to be God's Ape) in imitation of the Name of God set
upon the foreheads of his servants for their security. Of which thing no man
shall ever be able to render a good account, if he once depart from the Letter
of the Text.

Verse. 18. Here is Wisdom, Let him that has understanding count the Number of
the Beast: for it is the Number of a Man: and his Number is is six hundred
threescore and six.


As touching the Number of the Beast, (that is, of the first Beast, as this
Expression does in the Revelation perpetually signify) or of his Name, to such
as are not acquainted with the Greek Tongue, wherein the Revelation was
written, this seems very difficult: but to those who know that the Greeks in
Numbering make not use of Figures, but reckon by the Letters of the Alphabet,
putting the first Letter for one, the second for two, etc. the thing is obvious
and easy. For when it is said that the Number of the Beast (by whom, as John
himself expounded it, a Man is understood) is six hundred sixty six, it is all
one as if it were said, Write the Name of this Man in Greek, the Language of
this Book, and then calculate the Letters thereof, according to the custom of
the Greeks, and it will amount to the Number of Six hundred sixty six. And this
very thing is hinted by expressing the Number of six hundred sixty six in
Greek, not by words, but letters. Thus much then God is pleased to make known
to us; but what the Name it self is, he has concealed, reserving the knowledge
thereof for them, that shall live in the time of the Beast. So that besides
Irreverence toward God, it is also lost labor for us in these times to spend
our conjectures upon it.

Chap.14. Verse. 1. And I looked, and so, a Lamb slood on the Mount Sion, and
with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Name written in
their foreheads.
The Exposition.
BY the Lamb here standing on Mount Sion, is meant Christ Jesus the Son of God,
both because the Name of his Father is writ upon the foreheads of the Saints
here mentioned; and because he is brought in as their Leader: and finally,
because no other person besides him is wont to be designed by the Name of a
Lamb. By Mount Sion it self is under slood Jerusalem. For though Mount Sion (if
you speak strictly and properly) was but a Castle in Jerusalem, taken by David
in the beginning of his Reign over all Israel, 1 Chronicles. 11.4,5. yet is it, as
being the chiefest part of that City, frequently in Scripture put for Jerusalem
it self; as Isai 33.29. Look on Sion the City of our solemnities: thine eyes
shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation. And Chap. 37.32. For out of Jerusalem
shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of Mount Sion. And Chap.
52.1. Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Sion, put on thy beautiful garments,
O Jerusalem. Howbeit this standing of Christ upon Mount Sion with so great a
company attending him, does not argue that he shall ever reign there by his
personal presence, (no more than his standing by Paul in Jerusalem, Acts 23.11.
does evince that he did then reign there after such a manner) but only
intimate that those Saints shall perfectly follow the direction of Christ, no
otherwise than if he were personally present with them in Jerusalem, as the
fourth Verse of this Chapter explaineth it, saying, These are they that follow
the Lamb whither soever he goes. Finally, by the hundred forty four thousand,
upon whose forehead the name of the Lambs Father was imprinted, are meant those
Servants of God that were sealed out of all the Tribes of Israel, Chap. 7.4.
For both their number, and their abode, and the place of their body wherein
they are sealed or marked, exactly agree. Whence by the way it appears that
the Sealing mentioned in the said seventh Chapter shall happen in the Age
wherein the Beast shall arise, (and consequently the general conversion of the
Jews shall precede his coming) otherwise those sealed ones would not thus be
inserted into the History of the Beast.

Verse. 2. And I heard a voice from Heaven, as the voice of many Waters, and as
the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of Harpers harping with
their Harps.

Verse. 3. And they sung as it were a new Song before the Throne, and before the
four Beasts and the Elders: and no Man could learn that Song, but the hundred
and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the Earth.

Verse. 4. These are they which were not defiled with Women; for they are
Virgins; these are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: these
were redeemed from among Men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb.

Verse. 5. And in their Mouth was found no Guile: for they are without Fault
before the Throne of God.


Whether the voice out of Heaven, resembling the noise of many Waters, and the
noise of great Thunder, did utter any words, and what those words are, is not
expressed, or hinted, so that we must of necessity remain ignorant thereof:
neither is it said, who those Harpers are, only it is likely they are the
Saints in Heaven, who are thus brought in speaking aloud from thence, Chap.
12.10. As little is it told us, what the new Song is, which they play upon
their Harps; yea, we are on the contrary assured that none but those hundred
forty four thousand can learn it, and therefore the knowledge thereof belongs
not to us, or any others, but is reserved for them only; which argues that
there is something extraordinary in those godly persons of the Jewish Nation
above those of any other Nation whatsoever. For though it be common to them
with other Saints to be redeemed (or rather bought, as the Greek word
signifies. See Chap. 5.8, 9.) from among men, namely, with the Blood of the
Lamb, and so to be a first fruits unto God and the Lamb, as being theirs in a
special manner, no otherwise than the first fruits were the Lord's under the
Law. See Number. 18.12, 13. yet is it peculiar to them above the multitude of
Believers in any other Nation: First, to be the Servants of God, that is,
Prophets, for so this Appellation is expounded, Chap. 11.18. And to give a
Reward to thy Servants the Prophets. And therefore no marvel if these persons
being endued with the Spirit of Prophecy, know the new Song that is sung in
Heaven, whilst other godly persons in the mean time are ignorant of the same.
Secondly, to be Virgins, and therefore such as have not been defiled with
Women. For it evidently follows, that if they be Virgins, and so never had to
do with Women, they could not possibly be defiled with them. Thirdly, to follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes; which implies that they strayed not from the
way wherein Christ Jesus did lead them, but yielded up themselves to his
guidance in all things. Fourthly, to have no Guile in their Mouth, and
therefore to be without Fault before the Throne of God: which last words,
before the Throne of God, are emphatical; for it is all one as if it had been
said, before the Judgment Seat of God; because (as David testifies, Psalm
9.7.) the Lord has prepared his Throne for Judgment. Behold then the Dignity
of the Jerwish Nation, to which the Lord will advance them in the time of the
Beast, above any other Nation under the whole Heaven, namely, that there shall
be of the People of the Jews at the same time an hundred forty four thousand
Prophets, all of them Virgins, perfectly following the guidance of Christ, and
having no guile or blame before God. Wherefore I may truly say with Moses,
(when he reflected on the peculiar favor that God had vouchsafed to Israel in
another kind) Ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since
the day that God created Man upon the Earth, and ask from one side of the
Heaven to the other, whether there has been any such thing as this great thing
is, or has been heard like it? Deuteronomy. 4.32.

Verse. 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel, to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every
Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People,

Verse. 7. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the
hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and
the Sea and the Fountains of Waters.


The first part of the Angels Message (for so the Greek word ought no be
rendered. See 2 Samuel 18.20. in Greek: neither is the Article prefixed, as it is
wont to be, when the Gospel is meant) is to excite men to fear God, and give
glory to his Name, because the time of his Judgment is come, namely, when he
will judge both the Beast and his Worshippers, partly by the Vials of Gods
wrath to be poured out upon them, whereof see Chap. 16. partly by the utter
Defeat of them at the great Battle of Armageddon, Chap. 19. For indeed the
Judgments of God are so terrible, that even the Prophets, when they only
denounced them, were wont to be seized with a great horror. Thus Esaias after a
grievous Vision had been declared to him, Chap. 21.2. presently cries out in
the following Verse, Therefore are my loins filled with pain, pangs have taken
hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth. I was bowed down at the
hearing of it, I was dismayed at the hearing of it. How much more then ought
they to breed a fear of God in the hearts of such as see them put in execution?
But as the terror of Gods Judgments causes fear, so does the righteousness
of them induce Men to glorify and praise his Name. An instance whereof we have
Revel. 19.1, 2. where it is said, Glory and honor be to our God, because his
Judgments are true and just. The second part of this Message (which is
therefore termed everlasting, because it relates to such Duties as are not
peculiar to any certain time, but to be performed for ever) is to exhort Men to
the Worship of God the Creator of Heaven and Earth. And this Exhortation is
the more seasonable, because of the general Apostasy of the Times here spoken
of, wherein partly by the force, and partly by the fraud of the false Prophet,
it is grown a common practice to worship the Beast, to the greatest dishonor
of God that can be imagined.

Verse. 8. And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that great city, because she made all Nations drink of the Wine of the
Wrath of her Fornication.


Babylon (by which Rome is meant, as will appear by the exposition of the 17.
Chap.) shall length be utterly destroyed, namely, by the ten Kings that are
confederate with the Beast; to show the certainty of which mine, the Angel
speaks of it as already past, redoubling the Expression and Saying, Babylon
is fallen, is fallen Now the reason why he speaks of Rome under a borrowed
name, is, partly that he might not bring danger upon John, by causing him to
describe in plain terms the Destruction of that City, under the Dominion
whereof he lived, (for Jeremy, in that he openly foretold the ruin of
Jerusalem, was very likely to have been put to death, Chap. 26.11.) and partly
that none but the wise might attain to the knowledge of so excellent a
Prophecy, as is sufficiently hinted by those words of the Angel, Chap. 17.9.
where he says, Here is the mind that has wisdom, The seven Heads are the
seven Mountains on which the Woman sits, etc. And this mystical name of
Babylon is very aptly and elegantly given to Rome, because of the great
congruity that was between those two Cities. For first, Babylon was an
exceeding large City, and therefore called great Babylon, Dan. 4.30. So also
was Rome, which is therefore hyperbolically said by the Poet Lucan, lib. 1.
ver. 511. to have been a sufficient Receptacle for all Mankind: but by more
sober Writers, that have inquired into the greatness thereof, to have been
fifty Miles within the Walls. Secondly, Babylon was the Seat of the first
universal Kingdom, and Rome of the fourth. Thirdly, Babylon was exceedingly
addicted to Sorceries and Enchantments, Isai 47.9, 12. So also was Rome; for
though Laws were made at Rome against Astrologers and Sorcerers, yet were they
under hand still cherished there, which gave Tacitus an occasion to say of
them, Hist. lib. 1. cap. 7. that they were Genus hominum, quod in civitate
nostra and vetabitur semper, and retinebitur. That is, A kind of men that in
our state will be always both forbidden and retained. Fourthly, Babylon
exercised great rage and cruelty upon the People of God, Isai 47.6. So also did
Rome, of which it is said Chap. 18.24. of this Prophecy, that in her was found
the Blood of Prophets and Saints, and of all that were slain in the Earth, And
this last Branch of the Comparison brings us to the cause of Rome's
Destruction, assigned in this place by the Angel, when he says, that all
Nations had drunk the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication. For to drink the
Wine of her Wrath (according to the Language of the Scripture, taken from the
custom of administering bitter Potions, whereby Men become disturbed and ill at
ease) is to feel her Anger, and so to be vanquished by her with the Sword. See
Jer. 25.15, 16. Thus says the Lord God of Israel unto me, Take the Wine-cup of
this fury at my hand, and cause all the Nations to whom I send thee to drink
it. And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the Sword that I
will send among them. And Chap. 51.7. Babylon has been a golden Cup in the
Lords hand, that made all the Earth drunken. The Nations have drunken of her
Wine, therefore the Nations are mad.

Neither ought the Fornication or Whoredom of Rome here annexed, to turn us
aside from this Interpretation seeing the subtle Devices that great Cities have
used to ruin other States, are in the Scripture called Whoredoms. Thus the
Prophet Nahum says of Nineveh, Chap. 2.3, 4. There is a multitude of slain,
and a great number of carcases, they stumble upon their corpses: because of the
multitude of the Whoredoms of the well-favoured Harlot, the Mistress of
Witchcrafts, that sells Nations through her Whoredoms, and Families through
her Witchcrafts. You see by this passage that Nineveh was to be ruined for her
whorlsh slights, whereby she drew in other Nations, and made a Prey of them, as
Harlots are wont to do with their Lovers. But never was there any City that did
so overreach and prey upon other Nations, as Rome did, what by making them
Confederates, (but upon unequal terms) what by showing a mavelous readiness
in protecting their Confederates, (thereby to have a fair pretext to make an
Invasion upon others) what by pretending out of mere gallantry to deliver Free
States from the Oppressors of their Liberty, (but underhand reserving to
themselves the sovereign Command over those States after they had subdued their
Enemies.) All which, and sundry other whorish tricks of Rome, far exceeding in
queintness those of any other City we read of, may be seen at large in the
History of Livy, and the notable Discourses of Machiavel thereupon.

Verse. 9. And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any
man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or
in his hand,

Verse. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb.

Verse. 11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever: and
they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and
whosoever receives the mark of his name.


This third Angel seems to make application of what the first Angel said. For
if men ought to worship God, (as that Angel in his everlasting message did
declare) certainly it is very great impiety to worship the Beast, who is the
professed enemy of God, openly blaspheming his Name. And lest any one should
imagine it to be a small sin to worship the Beast and his Image, or to receive
his mark, he denounces with a loud voice, That whosoever does so, shall drink
of the wine of Gods wrath, that is poured without mixture, (and so not allayed
with any thing to abate the force thereof) into the cup of his anger, and be
tormented with fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels and before the Lamb,
and that to all eternity: for if the smoke of their torment shall ascend for
ever and ever, (as the Angel plainly affirms) it is necessary that the
torment it self, from whence the smoke arises, should also continue as long;
and if the torment, then also the tormented. So that it ought at no hand to be
denied that the worshippers of the Beast shall live for ever in the torments of
hell fire. Neither is it to be feared least any one should thence argue, that
by this account they may be truly said to have Eternal life. For Eternal life
(according to the true and usual notion of the Scripture) does not signify a
bare living for ever, but a living for ever in joy, and in the favor of God.
And therefore Eternal life, Matthew. 25.46. is opposed to Eternal punishment,
when it is said, These shall go away into everlasting punishment, (which
implies that they remain alive for ever, otherwise how are they capable of
being punished for ever? all punishment supposing the existence of the subject
that is punished:) But the righteous into life eternal. And to the abiding of
Gods wrath upon men, John 3.36. When it is said, He that believes on the Son,
has everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him: and to damnation, John 5.29. when it is
said, They that have done good, shall come forth to the resurrection of life:
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. These things
being so, such interpreters are not to be heard, as go about to impose a
figurative sense upon what is here in the Revelation clearly spoken concerning
the everlasting torment prepared for the worshippers of the Beast, for they not
only weaken the force of the Angels commination, (which all must needs confess
to be far more efficacious to deterr men from committing so great wickedness,
if the words be plainly and properly taken) but also open a way to evacuate all
other passages of the Scripture, where mention is made of the everlasting
torment of Hell fire. But perhaps some one will object, that these tormented
ones are said to have no rest day and night, and consequently their torment is
to be restrained to such a duration, where there is a vicissitude of day and
night, (which cease together with the world) and so is not properly and truly
everlasting. To which I answer, that this expression of having no rest day and
night (inasmuch as it follows those words, wherein it is said, that the smoke
of their torment ascends up for ever and ever) is used to show, that they
shall at no time have any respiration from their torment, and not that there
shall be an end thereof, namely when day and night shall cease. For seeing all
the time of men in this world, is part either of the day, or of the night, that
which comes not to pass in either of them, is not at all: hence it is that the
Angel, intending to show that the worshippers of the Beast, shall be tormented
without intermission, says, that they have no rest day and night. Thus is it
said of the four living creatures in Heaven with six wings apeice, Chap. 4.8.
That they have no rest day and night, saying, Holy holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, (though there be no vicissitude of day and night in Heaven) namely to
signify that they never cease at any time whatsoever to praise God in that
manner. To conclude therefore, As those words, He shall be tormented for ever
and ever, import that there shall be no end of their torment, so these, They
have no rest day and night, imply that there shall be no intermission of them.

Verse. 12. Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.


This acclamation of the Angel does intimate, that during the tyranny of the
Beast, the patience of the Saints will have a most ample occasion to show it
self, there having never been before so furious a monster, that did so openly
set his mouth against the Heavens, and bend all his forces to extirpate the
Religion of Christ; So that then it will appear, more then in any former age,
how admirable the constancy of the Saints is, who, notwithstanding all the
Machinations, whether of force, or fraud, that Satan and his instruments can
contrive to wrest the crown of piety out of their hands, do in the midst of a
general Apostasy still adhere to the Commandments of God, and firmly believe in
Jesus Christ.

Verse. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.


Here John relates a certain voice which he heard out of Heaven, pronouncing
them happy in particular, that should from thenceforth die, namely under the
tyranny of the Beast, which particular happiness of them, (as we are taught,
Chap. 20.4.) consists herein, that they shall be partakers of the first
Resurrection. For that resurrection is there appropriated to them that suffer
death for the testimony of Christ, and for the word of God, in the time of the
Beast. And the more to encourage the Saints to die for the truth of Christ in
those perilous times, the holy spirit does second that voice from Heaven, and
render the reason thereof, namely, because they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them, and therefore since their works have been more eminent
then those of former times, no marvel if their reward be so also.

Verse. 14. And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat,
like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a
sharp sickle.


This vision, together with that other in the 17, and 18. verses, do (like the
two dreams of Pharaoh, Genesis 41.25, 26.) tend to the same effect, and so are
indeed but one, intimating that the time was now at hand, when Christ should
execute judgment on the inhabitants of the earth, because their sins, (denoted
by the ripe fruits of the earth) were come to maturity. And that this
interpretation is true and certain, appears from that passage, Joel 3.12, 13.
(from whence these two visions of John seem to be modelled) where it is said,
Let the Heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: For there
will I sit to judge all the heathen round about, put ye in the sickle, for the
harvest is ripe, come, get you down, for the press is full, the fats overflow,
for their wickedness is great. Now forasmuch as Christ is to be a principal
agent in the execution of this judgment, he is therefore brought in sitting
upon a cloud, as God in like cases was wont to be in the Old Testament, See
Isay. 19.1. Behold the Lord rides upon a swift cloud, and shall come into
Egypt, and the Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of
Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. Moreover the cloud that Christ sits
upon is said to be white, to set forth the glorious honor of his Majesty; like
as God, intending to make that vision, Matthew. 17.5. to be the more Illustrious,
causes a bright cloud to over-shadow the three Apostles that were with Christ
at his transfiguration. As for the golden crown upon Christ's head, it shows
the Kingly power whereof he is possessed, as the sharp sickle does the severity
of his anger against the wicked, whom he is ready armed to cut off.

Verse. 15. And another Angel came out of the Temple crying with a loud voice to
him that sat on the Cloud, Thrust in thy Sickle, and reap: for the time is come
for thee to reap; for the Harvest of the Earth is ripe.

Verse. 16. And he that sat on the Cloud, thrust in his Sickle on the Earth; and
the Earth was reaped.


An Angel, longing to see the vengeance of Christ fall upon the Inhabitants of
the Earth, that had so openly and outragiously dishonored God, comes out of
the Temple in Heaven, (for there is the place of that Temple, from whence the
Angels are wont to issue forth, as is apparent from the 17. Verse) and cries
to him aloud, desiring him to destroy the wicked, (whose iniquity was now full)
with the sharp Sickle of his Wrath, which is accordingly performed.

Verse. 17. And another Angel came out of the Temple which is in Heaven, he also
having a sharp Sickle.

Verse. 18. And another Angel came out from the Altar which had Power over the
Fire; and cried with a loud Cry to him that had the sharp Sickle, saying,
Thrust in thy sharp Sickle, and gather the Clusters of the Vine of the Earth:
for her Grapes are fully ripe.


For as much as Christ in executing this great Judgment is not only himself
an Agent, but uses also the Ministry of Angels, (both which things are plainly
set forth, Chap. 16. and 19. where this business is again repeated) a Sickle
bearing Angel is likewise introduced, to whom another Angel cries aloud, that
he should put his Sickle in ure, and gather the Vine of the Earth. Neither is
it without a Mystery, that this Angel, which cries, is said to issue forth
from the Altar, and to have power over the fire thereof. For this implies that
he, as being wont to attend at the Altar, did perceive that the Prayers of the
Saints, (with which he burned Incense before God) were now heard, and that God
was accordingly resolved to avenge his People of their Enemies; wherefore it is
evident from this Passage, that there is in Heaven a Temple, and therein an
Altar, which Chap. 8.3. is said to be of Gold, and to stand before the Throne
of God, and to have (as here) an Angel for Priest to burn Incense thereon, that
the smoke thereof may ascend up together with the Prayers of the Saints.
Neither can it with reason be affirmed, that this Angel is Christ, not only
because it is very hard, (if not altogether impossible) to allege any passage
of the Scripture, where the appellation of an Angel is undoubtedly given unto
Christ, but also for that this Angel is here plainly differenced from Christ;
for Christ is said to sit upon a white Cloud, having a sharp Sickle in his
hand, whereas this Angel is said to come out from the Altar, which is in
Heaven. Again, this Angel is said to be another Angel, and therefore if the two
precedent Angels (which are also both of them distinguished from Christ) be of
necessity mere Angels, so must this Angel also. Which Reason is of force
likewise in the 8. Chapter, where this Angel is called another Angel, in
relation to the seven Angels, that stand before God, and so are mere Angels, or
ministering Spirits, and consequently he, being of their Rank, is not Christ,
but a ministering Spirit also.

Verse. 19. And the Angel thrust in his Sickle into the Earth, and gathered the
Vine of the Earth, and cast it into the great Wine Press of the Wrath of God.

Verse. 20. And the Wine Press was trodden without the City, and Blood came out
of the Winepress, even unto the Horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and
six hundred Furlongs.


These two Verses show the accomplishment of what the Angel, who came out from
the Altar in Heaven, did desire. For the Vine of the Earth is gathered, and the
Clusters cast into the great Wine Press of Gods wrath, and trodden without the
City. Which figurative Description does intimate the quashing and utter ruin
of the Inhabitants of the Earth, that join their Forces with the Beast, that
they may cut off all the Saints at once. The fulfilling whereof is set down at
large, Chap. 19. Now this Wine Press is said to be trodden without the City,
because this terrible execution shall be made without Megiddo, a City belonging
to the Tribe of Manasseh, Josh. 17.11. For thither shall the Kings of the Earth
draw their Armies together to make war with Christ, and his Saints, as is
related, Chap. 16.16. Of which City I will discourse more largely in my
Exposition of that Chapter. Now the greatness of the slaughter that Christ
shall then make, slaying his Enemies with the Sword of his Mouth, and so
shedding their Blood, is notably declared both by the depth of that bloody
Stream that issues out of the Wine Press of Gods wrath, (which is said to
reach up to the Bridles of the Horses, and so to be above a Yard from the
Ground) and also by the length thereof, running out for the space of one
thousand six hundred Furlongs, which is by computation, at eight Furlongs to
the Mile, two hundred Miles. Neither will this seem so strange, if we consider
that all the Kings of the whole World together with their Armies shall then
assemble themselves toward the City of Megiddo, and there be slain.

Chap.15. Verse. 1. And I saw another Sign in Heaven, great and mavelous,
seven Angels having the seven last Plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath
of God.
The Exposition.
THis Chapter contains in it self a Preparative to the pouring out of the
Vials of Gods wrath upon the Beast and his Worshippers. For John here sees a
great and wonderful Sign of seven Angels having seven Plagues, which are
therefore called the last Plagues, because the Anger of God is accomplished by
them, so that after them succeeds the chaining up of Satan, and the
uninterrupted prosperity of a thousand years through all the World, as
appears from the 20. Chapter. Now the reason, why the Angels are here sent to
plague the Beast and his Worshippers, is because all humane means did fail. For
the Saints who had adventured to oppose him with Arms, though they fought in a
just Cause, were yet subdued and crushed by him, as we saw Chap. 13.7. So that
now was the time for God to take the business into his own hands, and to put
forth the power of his Wrath by heavenly Instruments, for as much as the
earthly ones had proved ineffectual. Which Observation is of good use, teaching
us to depend upon God for the avenging of his People, even when all humane
ability to perform it is quite vanished.

Verse. 2. And I saw as it were a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, and them that
had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark,
and over the Number of his Name, stand on the Sea of Glass, having the Harps of
God.


The prosecution of the Preparative aforesaid is interrupted by a
Representation of their glorious Estate, who chose rather to suffer Death, than
to worship the Beast and his Image, and to receive his Mark. For all that so
suffer shall have a part in the first Resurrection, as I have before touched in
the Exposition of the 14. Chapter. Now the place where the glorified Saints do
stand to praise God, is said to be a glassy Sea, mingled (that is, filled) with
fire. Of which Sea we read Chap. 4.6. Where John says, that before the Throne
was a Sea of Glass like to Crystal. Wherefore the Sea here mentioned is a
large transparent Vessel, made of a glassie or crystalline matter, and set
before the Throne of God in Heaven, not having Water in it, (as that of
Solomon's Temple, 2 Chronicles. 4.6. which was made after the Pattern of this Sea in
Heaven) but filled with fire. And the Use is, that the glorified Saints
standing, not upon (as the English Translation has it) but by it, may sing the
Praises of God with Harps And in likelihood it is filled with fire, to set off
the terrible Majesty of God, and the fire of his Jealousy, wherewith he is
wont to consume his Enemies, according to that Description of him, Psalm 50.3.
Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him,
and burnup his Enemies round about. Finally, that they which are said to have
gotten the victory of the Beast, are rightly by me interpreted to be such as
suffered death, rather than they would yield to him, is evident from the notion
of overcoming or getting the victory, elsewhere found in the Revelation. Thus
is it said by the Saints triumphant in Heaven concerning their deceased
Brethren, Chap. 12.11. that they overcame him (that is, Satan) by the Blood of
the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony, and loved not their Lives unto
Death. And Christ himself says, Chap. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I
grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his Throne. But it is certain, that our Lord Christ overcame
by suffering Death for the Truth.

Verse. 3. And they sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the Song of
the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just
and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

Verse. 4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou
only art holy: for all Nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy
Judgments are made manifest.


The Song which these heavenly Harpers sing, is called the song of Moses and of
the Lamb, not that they ever used the very words thereof, (as far as we can
judge by what is recorded of them in the Scripture) but because it is
conformable to the doctrine of them both. Howbeit were the Hymn extant, with
Christ (according to the prophecy that went before concerning him:) did sing
in the midst of the Church, Heb. 2.12. as well as the song of Moses, Exodus 15.
we should no doubt perceive that the song here set down was in effect the same
with that of Christ, as it apparently is with that of Moses. Now the contents
of this song are first the great and wonderful works of God, showing themselves
in nothing more, then in the preservation of these Saints from the worship of
the Beast, when all the world ran headlong to that impiety. Secondly, the
righteousness and truth of his ways, in making these Saints according to his
promise partakers of the first resurrection, because they had for him and his
Gospel hated their lives in this world. And this God whose ways are so
righteous and so true, is very significantly here styled the King of the
saints, because to reign is properly to govern by Laws. But there not are any
that submit to the laws of God given by the hands of Christ, and so are
governed by them, but the Saints, all others being either ignorant of them, or
disobedient to them. Thirdly, It is intimated that it would be altogether
unreasonable for any particular man to refuse to fear God, and glorify his
name, when there are so many notable arguments compelling thereunto, as in the
first place, the unparallelled holiness of God. For seeing he is holy of
himself and all others by the participation of his holiness, he is rightly here
said to be holy alone. Again, the example of all Nations, who come and worship
before God, is another inducement to the performance of the duties aforesaid.
Lastly, the righteous deeds of God are alleged to this purpose, partly showed
forth in the glorification of his Saints, that died for his sake, (of which we
spoke before) and partly in the destruction of the Beast, and his followers.

Verse. 5. And after that I looked, and behold, the temple of the tabernacle of
the testimony in heaven was opened:


After that notable digression touching the Saints that are to be partakers of
the first resurrection, John returns to the great and wonderful sign
aforesaid, which is ushered in with the opening of the temple of the tabernacle
of the testimony in Heaven. By which words it appears, not only that there is
a temple in Heaven, (whereof mention was made formerly, Chap. 14.17.) but also
a tabernacle containing it, and a testimony therein. This tabernacle I have
already proved, in the exposition of Chap. 13.6. to be the holy City, the
Heavenly Jerusalem. Wherefore the temple belonging to it must needs be a more
Sacred portion thereof, where the glorified Saints do serve God, according to
that passage, Chap. 7.15. Therefore are they before the throne of God and serve
him day and night in his temple. Now lest any one should put off what is here
said concerning a Tabernacle and Temple in Heaven, by turning it into an
allegory (as men are too apt to do, when they expound the book of the
Revelation) we ought to consider, that even the Author to the Hebrews, (who
utters neither Prophecies nor Parables, but plainly delivers the Doctrine
of the Gospel) does also make mention of a tabernacle in Heaven, stiling it The
true tabernacle, yea of a Sanctuary, or Holy of Holyes, which he in like manner
calls the true Sanctuary. For thus he says, Chap. 8.1, 2. We have such an
high Priest, who is set down on the right hand of the Majesty in the Heavens: A
minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched,
and not man: And Chap. 9.11.12. but Christ being come, an High Priest of future
good things, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands,
that is to say, not of this building; Neither by the blood of goats and Calves,
but by his own blood he entered in for once (so it is in the Greek) into the
holy place (or Sanctuary) having obtained everlasting redemption. And verse 24.
Christ is not entered into the holy places (or, Sanctuary) made with hands,
which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self now to appear in the
presence of God for us. Which passages if we take in the plain and literal
sense of them (as the circumstances, if well weighed, will enforce us to do)
then shall we easily perceive how aptly the same Divine Author, Chap. 8.5.
speaking of the Levitical Priests, that ministered in the Tabernacle, says Who
serve unto the example and shadow of Heavenly things. Whereas if we turn aside
to figurative interpretations, neither will that, nor sundry other places of
the Divine Author aforesaid, be ever rightly understood, nor shall we be able
to render a sufficient reason, why we may not at the same rate allegorize upon
whatsoever is delivered in the Scripture, whereby it will at length come to
pass, that we shall be certain of nothing that is contained therein, being
liable to be carried about with every fancy, that curious wits can invent, and
impose upon the letter of the Holy text. Having thus asserted the truth, and
reality of an Heavenly Tabernacle and Temple, (the consequence of which
Doctrine will further appear, when we come to the 21. and 22. Chap,) we ought
to pass the same sentence upon the Testimony that is said to be therein. For if
the tabernacle that Moses made, was a type of a greater and more perfect one in
Heaven, may not the tables of the Testimony also which were contained therein?
especially seeing that John himself says in another place of this Prophecy,
that the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple
the ark of his Testament (or, covenant.) Chap. 11.19.

Verse. 6. And the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven
plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded with
golden girdles.


The temple being opened for the seven Angels, that had the seven plagues, they
accordingly issue out accoutred like Priests in white linen and golden girdles.
Thus we find that the Priests under the Law were wont to wear fine linen, Exodus
28.39. Thou shall imbroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shall make the
mitre of fine linen, and thou shall make the girdle of needle work. And Levit.
16.11. He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen
breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with the linen girdle, and with
the linen mitre shall he be attired. And the curious girdle of the Ephod,
belonging to the High Priest, was made, as of other things, so also of gold.
Exodus 28.8. The curious girdle of the Ephod which is upon it, shall be of the
same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blew, and of purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen. Now that this habit of the Levitical Priests
was also a type of heavenly things, is evident from the description of the
Angel (an inhabitant of Heaven) that appeared to Daniel, Chap. 10.5. of his
Prophecy. For there Daniel says, I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and
behold, a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold
of Uphaz. In like manner are the seven Angels attired, that here appear to John.
But why labor I to prove the Angels to be priests from their Attire, when (to
omit what I observed in the Chapter immediately foregoing, namely, that one of
the Angels is said to have power over the fire of the Altar in Heaven) there
needs no other Argument to evince this, than that which I hinted at the first
rise of mine Exposition upon this sixth Verse, namely, that they are conversant
in the Temple of Heaven, for it belongs unto none but Priests to converse in
Temples. See 2 Chronicles. 26.11, 17, 18.

Verse. 7. And one of the four Beasts gave unto the seven Angels, seven golden
Vials full of the wrath of God, who lives for ever and ever.


It is not without a Mystery, that one of the four living Creatures gives to
the seven Angels seven Vials full of the Wrath of God. For those four living
Creatures being indeed the multitude of Believers in the four Quarters of the
World, (as appears by their own words, Chaps. 5.9. where, in their new Song
to the Lamb, they say, Thou have redeemed us by thy Blood to God out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and have made us unto our God
Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth:) and it being altogether
impossible for them reigning upon the Earth, (if you speak properly) to reach
out Vials to the Angels in Heaven, when one of them is said to give the Vials
to the Angels, it only implies, that by their procurement, whilst they cry
day and night unto God, it came to pass that these Angels had the Vials of Gods
wrath put into their hands, to the end they might pour them out upon the
Inhabitants of the Earth. But here again we meet with another proof of the
Angels being Priests, in that they are said to have golden Vials given to them,
whereas a Vial is not an ordinary Bowl, but only such an one as is used in
consecrated Places. Thus when it is said 2 Chronicles. 4.8. that Solomon made for
the ten Tables of the Temple an hundred Basins, or Bowls of Gold, the Greek
Interpreters render it Vials. Neither is it to be omitted that when the seven
Vials are said to be fu^l of the Wrath of God that lives for ever and ever:
this Description of God is very emphatical, intimating that God, for as much as
he lives for ever and ever, can certainly accomplish his Wrath, so that his
Enemies cannot possibly escape: whereas Men having their Breath in their
Nostrils, and being ^iable to Death every moment, they may indeed make great
Threats, but perhaps will not survive to perform what they have threatened.

Verse. 8. And the Temple was filled with Smoke from the glory of God, and from
his power; and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven Plagues
of the seven Angels were fulfilled.


The filling of the heavenly Temple with Smoke, so that none was able to enter
thereinto for a time, does not intimate any abstruse and mysterious business,
but only set off the awful Majesty of God, as will appear by the collation of
other like passages of the Scripture. For thus Moses, Exodus 40.35. is said, To
be unable to enter into the Tent of the Congregation, because the Cloud abode
thereupon, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle. And the Priests at
the Dedication of Solomon's Temple, are said, To be unable to enter into the
House of the Lord, because the glory of the Lord had silled the Lords house, 2 Chronicles. 7.2. So that we ought not to hunt after Mysteries, when the Scripture
gives us no intimation of them.

Chap. 16. Verse. 1. And I heard a great Voice out of the Temple, saying to the
seven Angels, Go your ways and pour out the Vials of the Wrath of God upon the
Earth.
The Exposition.
THe heavenly Priests aforesaid being now furnished by means of the Saints on
Earth, with the Vials of Gods wrath, are commanded by a loud voice out of the
Temple in Heaven to pour them out upon the Earth. Not that the greatest part of
them are not to be poured out upon other parts of the World, but, by a Figure
of Deficiency, that is, (...), (as the Greeks are wont to phrase it) the Earth
only is named, both because the first is expressly said to be poured out upon
the Earth, it self, and also all the rest of the Vials, though poured out upon
other places, yet have relation to the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof.

Verse. 2. And the first went, and poured out his Vial upon the Earth; and there
fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the Men which had the Mark of the Beast,
and upon them which worshipped his Image.


The first Vial, as we said before, is poured out upon the Earth, and the
effect thereof is a sore and evil Boil, arising on them that had the Mark of
the Beast, and worshipped his Image. In the explaining of which Vial, (as well
as of the rest) I see no need of betaking our selves to an Allegory. For if
Moses and Aaron, by sprinkling Ashes of the Furnace toward Heaven, caused it
to become a Boil breaking out with Blains upon the Egyptians, Exodus 9.8, 9, 10.
Why may we not as well conceive that the pouring out of a Vial on the Earth by
an Angel may produce the same effect upon the Worshippers of the Beast? And how
then is this plain Interpretation not to be embraced, when we find in the
Scripture that the same Plague did formerly happen to such as had been great
Oppressors of Gods people.

Verse. 3. And the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea; and it became
as the Blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the Sea.


The wickedness of the Beast and his Worshippers is exceeding great. No marvel
therefore if their Plagues be not only the same with those that happened to
the wicked of former times, but also exceeding them, as being purposely suited
by God to their impiety. Of which sort is this Plague of the second Vial, the
pouring out of which into the Sea, turns, not the third part thereof only,
as Chap. 8.8. but all its Waters into Blood, so that every living Soul therein
perishes. By this means they are debarred of fishing in the Sea, which must
needs draw with it the ruin of many thousands that depend thereon for their
livelihood. The same may also be said of their traffiquing by Sea. For the
Waters thereof becoming Blood, like that of a dead man, they are not only
unserviceable to those many uses, wherein Mariners are wont to employ them, but
also by reason of their stench and thickness are altogether unfit to be sailed
in: this Plague therefore is very great.

Verse. 4. And the third Angel poured out his Vial upon the Rivers and Fountains
of Waters; and they became Blood.

5. And I heard the Angel of the Waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which
wast, art, and shall be, because thou have judged thus:

6. For they have shed the Blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given
them Blood to drink; for they are worthy.

7. And I heard another out of the Altar, say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true
and righteous are thy Judgments.


The turning of the Sea into Blood, though it be a great Plague, is yet
insufficient to punish so outrageous sinners as the Worshippers of the Beast,
wherefore the vengeance of God comes yet closer to them, by the pouring out of
this third Vial into the Rivers and Fountains of Waters, whereby they also
become Blood. So that now these Wretches can hardly with digging about the
Rivers and Fountains get Water for their necessary uses. For neither is it
suitable to conceive, that they were supplied any other way, than the Egyptians
(their Predecessors in cruelty) had been in the like calamity. See Exodus 7.24.
And that they had some such supply, is evident by their surviving to undergo
the other following Plagues, which could not have come to pass, had they been
deprived of all means to get Water. And this Plague is so agreeable to their
sin (as it had been in former times to that of the Egyptians) that the Angel of
the Waters, who had power to turn them into Blood, does extol the signal
Justice of God herein, pronouncing them worthy to have Blood given them to
drink, who had not spared to shed the Blood of Saints and Prophets. And not
only he, but also that other Angel, which attends at the Altar in Heaven.
For he, having formerly desired the Sickle-bearing Angel to make a clean
riddance of the wicked, whose sin was now ripe, Chap. 14.18. must needs rejoice
at the equity of Gods dealing in the pouring out of this Vial, which could not
but cause many of them to perish. But it is not to be passed over without
animadversion, that when the Worshippers of the Beast are here said, to have
Blood given them to drink, because they had shed the Blood of Saints and
Prophets: this argues that the pouring out of this Vial (and consequently of
the rest, there being the same reason of them all) happens within the compass
of the three years and an half, that the Tyranny of the Beast lasts, yea,
toward the latter end of that space, in as much as these Plagues have relation
to the cruelty, that had been before exercised toward the Saints and Prophets:
and therefore it is likely, that the pouring out of these seven Vials takes
not up more time, than the smiting of Egypt with the ten Plagues did, which
were all accomplished within the space of one Year. For Moses was eighty years
old when he began to speak unto Pharaoh, Exodus 7.7. and but an hundred and
twenty when he died, Deuteronomy. 34.7. the last forty years of which term he had
spent in leading the Israelites in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 29.5. so that there
remains but the eightieth year of his Life, wherein to inflict those ten
Plagues upon Egypt.

Verse. 8. And the fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sun; and Power was
given unto him to scorch Men with Fire.

9. And Men were scorched with great Heat, and blasphemed the Name of God,
which has Power over these Plagues: and they repented not to give him glory.


The sin of them that worship the Beast, and receive his Mark, as it is greater
than that of evil Men in former times, so is it also of a new kince, and
unheard of in the World before. And therefore God provideth here for it a new
Plague, the like whereof is not to be found in all the Scripture. For the
fourth Vial being poured out upon the Sun, causes it to scorch Men with fire,
and that in a very grievous manner. But it any one here object, that should the
Sun (the common Luminary of the World, but destitute of life and understanding)
have such a Power given to it, the Saints also would not be untouched. I
answer, that the words of the Text imply the contrary; saying, that such as
were scorched by the Sun, blasphemed the Name of God, and repented not to give
him glory; whereby it appears that none but impenitent sinners do feel this
Plague, the Sun, by the mavelous direction of God sending down fire upon
them, but casting out a chearing light upon the righteous. Thus we read Exodus
14.20. that the cloudy Pillar did at the same time cause darkness to the
Egyptians, and light to the Israelites. We read also Dan. 3.22, 27. that the
fiery Furnace which killed the Caldeans, that did but approach thereunto, did
not so much as singe an Hair of the three pious Jews, that were thrown into the
midst thereof. And let this consideration be taken along with us in reading the
story of all these Plagues, that they are so ordered, as that no hurt
redoundeth to the righteous from them, God making a way for their escape. As we
see it did happen to the Israelites, who though dwelling in Egypt, were yet
untouched with any of the ten Plagues thereof. For albeit their immunity be not
mentioned till the fourth Plague, which was that of Flies, concerning which God
says, I will sever in that day the Land of Goshen, in which my People dwell,
that no Swarms of Flies shall be there, to the end thou may know that I am
the Lord in the midst of the Earth, Exodus 8.22. yet reason shows that the
same is to be understood in all the foregoing Plagues, for as much as they were
sent of purpose to punish the Egyptians for their cruelty toward Gods people.
In like manner though it be not here expressly said, that the Sun did not scorch
the Saints, but only the wicked, yet must it in reason be supposed to have so
fallen out, and the aforesaid intimation out of the Text shows as much.

Verse. 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Seat of the Beast;
and his kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their Tongues for pain:

11. And blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains and their sores,
and repented not of their deeds.


As some other of the Plagues, that God inflicted upon the Beast and his
Worshippers, are the same with those that he formerly inflicted upon Pharaoh
and his People, so also is this. For the fifth Angel pouring out his Vial upon
the Throne of the Beast, (which is without question as suitable a means to
procure darkness, as the stretching out of Moses hand toward Heaven) his
Kingdom, that extends it self over the face of the whole Earth, is thereupon
darkened. The extremity of which Plague is such, that it causes Men to gnaw
their Tongues for pain. For consider how grievous a thing it is, to be bound
for several days together in chains of thick and palpable darkness, (for it
would be unreasonable to think that this darkness of the Beasts Kingdom should
be inferior either in duration or grosness to that of Egypt) so as neither to
see one another, nor to arise out of their places. Howbeit we are not to
imagine that the Saints of this time (as well as the Israelites heretofore)
during this dismal Fog, that bespreads the face of all the Earth, have not
light in their dwellings, seeing this Plague, together with the rest, is
ordained of God for the punishment of their Adversaries, and so ought not to
involve both alike. And this is sufficiently hinted (according to the
observation on the pouring out of the fourth Vial) by the blasphemies that
these, Prisoners of darkness are said to vent against God, the Author of this
and the other Plagues; whereas to blaspheme God is so enormous a crime, that it
is impossible it should be incident to the Saints. Wherefore I may truly
bespeak the People of God, that shall be in the Reign of the Beast, with the
words of Isaiah, Chap. 60.2. of his Prophecy, Behold, the Darkness shall cover
the Earth, and gross Darkness the People; but the Lord shall arise upon thee;
and his glory shall be seen upon thee.

Verse. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River
Euphrates; and the Water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the
East might be prepared.

Verse. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of
the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet.

Verse. 14. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth
unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty.

Verse. 15. Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame.

Verse. 16. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew
tongue, Ar-mageddon.


By Euphrates must needs here be meant that River, which runs by Babylon
properly so called, and emptieth it self into the Persian Gulf. For this River
rising in Armenia, and traversing all Mesopotamia and Caldea, lies as a bar in
their way, that come out of the eastern Countries of Persia, Tartaria, India
and China, toward the land of Israel, whither the kings here spoken of are to
march with their Armies. Neither is it a new thing that a river should be dried
up to give way to Princes and their hosts: For we read in the scripture that
Jordane was turned back, to the end Joshua and the Israelites might in a
terrible manner go over without interruption into the land aforesaid. Jos.
3.17. But as the River Euphrates is miraculously dried up by the Angel for the
speedier passage of the eastern Kings, so comes not it to pass without a
miracle that they are drawn to undertake so desperate a design, as to fight
against Christ and his Saints, for three unclean spirits do, by working
miracles, incite not only the foresaid Eastern Kings, but also all the Kings
of the world to the performance of this exploit. And for as much as these are
seen to proceed out of the mouth of the Dragon, and of the Beast, and of the
false prophet, this argues that not only the Dragon, but also the Beast, (to
whom the Dragon is said to give his throne, Chap. 13.2.) together with the
False Prophet, (who is said to exercise all the power of the Beast before him;
Chap. 13.11, 12.) have dominion over the evil spirits, to send them to and fro
in the earth. This so great an expedition of all the Kings in the world
combining to cut off the people of God at a blow, is in it self very apt to
strike a terror into the Saints (were no river dried up to give way to any of
the Kings aforesaid) and so to make them flinch from their faith and Piety,
wherefore the admonition, here given by Christ, is very seasonable, who
comparing his coming to that of a thief, because of the suddenness thereof (for
when his Enemies shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall
seize upon them) pronounces them happy, who in so perilous a time hold fast
the garments of their righteousness, whereby the nakedness of their sins
committed in the time of Ignorance, is kept from appearing to their shame. As
for the place, which these Kings aforesaid make their Randezvouz, it is here
called Armageddon that is, the mount of Megiddo. For Har in Heb^ew signifies a
mount, and Mageddon is the same with Megiddo a City belonging to Manasseh, Jos.
17.11. which is there written by the Greek interpreters Mageddo, and has here
the letter N added thereunto by John. Thus the City which Luke Chap. 9.10.
calls Bethsaida, is by Matthew with the addition of an N termed in Greek
Bethsaidan, Chap. 11.21. But as the letter N is added to the end of the Hebrew
word aforesaid, so is the letter or rather aspiration of h taken away from the
beginning thereof, whilst it is written Armageddon, as it fares with the
Hebrew word Hallelujah, Psalm. 146.1. which in Greek is written both there and
also in the Revelation, Chap. 19.1. Allelujah, without the letter or aspiration
H. Now the mount of Megiddo seems to be chosen of God, rather then another
place, toward which all the Kings of the earth must draw their Armies against
that of the Saints, because this City had been of old renowned for the
wonderful defeat that Barak with ten thousand men at his feet gave to the
potent host of Jabin King of Canaan, who was a mighty oppresser of the
Israelites. Judge. 4.2, 6. compared with chap. 5.19, 20. where in Deborahs song
of victory, it is said, the Kings came and fought, then fought the Kings of
Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo, they took no gain of money. They
fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. For the
memory of the miraculous discomfiture that happened to Sisera, the Captain
General of Jabins Army, and to the Kings of Canaan that sided with him against
Gods people, is of great influence upon the hearts of the Saints to make them
expect the like overthrow to be given to the Beast, and the Kings his followers
in the same place.

Verse. 17. And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there
came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is
done.

Verse. 18. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a
great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake and so great.

Verse. 19. And die great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of
the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give
unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

Verse. 20. And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

Verse. 21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of
the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.


God had already plagued the Beast, and his worshippers in the other three
Elements, of Earth, Water, and Fire, as appears by the history of the first,
third, and fourth vials: Wherefore that all nature may be armed against so
out-ragious offenders, this last vial is poured out into the Air. Which is no
sooner done, but a loud voice is heard out of the temple in Heaven, from the
Throne, saying, It is done. This voice is rightly ascribed to God himself that
sits upon the throne, rather then to any other person about or under the
Throne (as we see it come to pass, Chap, 19.5.) because we find him speaking
after the same manner, Chap. 21.5, 6. He that sat upon the throne, said, Behold,
I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write, for these words are true and
faithful. And he said unto me, It is done. As therefore in that place it
signifies that there is a period set to the duration of the world, so does it
here intimate that no more vials of wrath are to be poured out, forasmuch as
the wrath of God is accomplished by this last. The voices, thunders, and
lightnings that follow hereupon, are all forerunners of the great and sore
Judgments, that God is about to bring upon the inhabitants of the earth. For
thus we see the plagues, pertaining to the seven trumpets, ushered in, Chap.
8.5, 6. Among those Judgments, an Earthquake is one, affirmed here to be the
greatest that ever happened since God created man upon the earth; the truth
whereof will appear to us, if we consider the several effects of this
Earthquake. For first, it sundreth Jerusalem into three parts, to wit, by the
sinking of the intermediate buildings into the ground, (for no other division
is wont to be the effects of an Earthquake.) And of this Cities shaking about
this time we have a more ample relation, Chap, 11.13. For that Jerusalem is
here meant by the great City, is evident in that it is distinguished from great
Babylon, and the other Cities of the nations or Gentiles. Wherefore there
remains no other City to be understood, but that of the Jews, Jerusalem,
which has this very appellation of a great City given to it. Chap. 11.8.
Another effect of this unusual Earthquake is the falling of the Cities of the
Heathen, many of which seem to be overturned thereby, as it is wont to happen
in such shakings. A third effect (or at least a consequent) thereof is the
coming of great Babylon into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup
of his fierce wrath. Not that God had before forgotten her, but because he did
not then so remember her, as to execute his fierce wrath upon her, that
business being reserved for this time. The manner of which execution you may
read at large in the 18. Chapter. The fourth effect is the removal of every
Island, and the sinking of the mountains, which afterward ceased to appear.
These two things shall either come to pass, as they are here related, (for so
the others that go before are undoubtedly to be fulfilled) or else they only
denote the great alteration that shall happen over all the world, by the
erecting of the fifth Kingdom upon the defeat of the Beast, and all the Kings
of the earth that side with him. For in this sense is the like removal
understood, Chap. 6.14. After this earthquake, and the dire effects thereof
comes another Judgment very terrible, namely, that of Hail, which is wont to
be bred in the Air, (the place into which this seventh vial is poured) and
thereof God himself says to Job, Have thou seen the treasures of the hail,
which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle
and war? Job. 38.22, 23. Accordingly we read, not only that this was one of
the ten plagues of Egypt, Exodus 9.23, 24, 25. but also that God did cast down
great Hailstones from Heaven upon the Amorites at the battle of Gibeon, so that
more died with the Hailstones then they whom the Children of Israel slew with
the sword. Josh. 10.5, 11. Nevertheless it is likely that neither the
Hailstones of Egypt, nor those of Canaan were equal in bigness to them that
fall down from Heaven upon the worshippers of the Beast. For they are said to
be about a talent apiece. Now though we cannot certainly tell how much a talent
weighed, yet are we sure that the weight thereof was very great, inasmuch as
the branched Candlestick of the tabernacle and all the vessels thereof are by
the appointment of God to be made of one talent of Gold. Exodus 25.31, 39. But
this plague works no better effect upon men, then the former ones did. For
they are so enraged with the greatness thereof, that they cannot forbear to
vent Blasphemies against God himself. Which shows that the end of these
Plagues is not to reform those, on whom they are sent, (for undoubtedly such as
are come to that height of impiety as to worship the Beast, yea, the Dragon
himself, are altogether incurable) but only to punish and torment them for
their wickedness, and so to set off the Riches of Gods grace toward the
Righteous, whom he has appointed to Salvation.

Chap. 17. Verse. 1, 2. And there came one of the seven Angels which had the
seven Vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto
thee the Judgment of the great Whore, that sits upon many Waters:

2. With whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, and the
Inhabiters of the Earth have been made drunk with the Wine of her Fornication.


The Exposition.
FOr as much as upon the pouring out of the seventh Vial Great Babylon is said
to come in remembrance before God, that he might give her the Cup of the Wine
of his fierce Wrath: and this was a thing of great importance to be clearly
known, (for we find by experience, how much hurt the inadvertency of the time
and persons, appointed of God for the inflicting of this punishment, has done
to Christians) one of the seven Angels aforesaid comes to John, profering to
show him the Judgment of that great City, which (according to the usage of the
Scripture elsewhere, as Isai 1.21. and 23.15, 16, 17. Ezekiel. 16.2, 3, 35) he
calls an Harlot, with whom the Kings of the Earth have had to do, and been
intoxicated with the Wine of her Fornication. The meaning of which Allegory I
will unfold, when I come to the fourth Verse.

Verse. 3 So he carried me away in the Spirit into the Wilderness: and I saw a
Woman sit upon a Scarlet colored Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having
seven Heads and ten Horns.


When the Angel is here said to carry John away in the Spirit into the
Wilderness; this argues that his Body continued where he was before, and that
he was only in the Spirit of his mind hurried away. Thus Paul, writing to the
Colossians, Chap. 2.5. says, Though I he absent in the flesh, yet I am with
you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of
four Faith in Christ. Not that in the substance of his Spirit he was not as
well absent from them, as in his body (otherwise how could he indite that
Epistle?) but because that in the cogitation of his Spirit he was present with
them, and beheld their Christian behavior, God revealing the same unto him, as
it here happened to John, to see this wonderful Vision in the Wilderness, where
(as it seems) the Judgment of Rome, was represented unto him, rather than in
the place of his personal abode, because that City is described both in this
and also in the following Chapter, as ready to become a Wilderness and
Habitation of Devils, and an Hold of every unclean Spirit, and a Cage of every
unclean and hateful Bird. All which Creatures are noted in the Scripture to
haunt desolate places. See Isai 13.20, 21, 22. and 34.13, 14. Jer. 50.39.
Matthew. 12.43. It is further very suitable to represent this City by the name
and feature of a Woman, because in the Prophets of old (whose Language and
Descriptions the Revelation every where follows) nothing is more usual. Thus
Samaria and Jerusalem are brought in as two Women, Ezekiel. 23.1, 2, 3, 4, Who the
Scarlet Beast is on whom the Woman sits, (and which is depainted with that
color, either for the abundance of Blood which he was to shed, or for his
kingly Dignity, or for both) is afterward declared by the Angel, together with
the meaning of his seven Heads and ten Horns. But for the names of Blasphemy,
whereof he is full, it is neither here nor elsewhere so much as intimated what
they be, wherefore it would be no less than impudency in us to undertake a
description of them.

Verse. 4. And the Woman was arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet color, and decked
with Gold and precious Stone, and Pearls, having a golden Cup in her Hand, full
of Abominations and filthiness of her Fornication.


No marvel if this Woman, which sits on the Scarlet Beast, be so richly and
royally attired, for Rome (decyphered by her) being the Seat of the Empire, and
receiving both the Spoils and Tributes of all the Nations in the World, must
needs be infinitely rich; which was indeed the cause of her corruption in point
of manners, making her now reach out the golden Cup of her Abominations and
whorish filthiness, as she had done that of her whorish wrath before, Chap.
14.8. For whereas she had in the times of her strict Discipline by her valor
and mavelous cunning brought all Nations under her yoke, being now on the
contrary grown extremely loose and vicious, all manner of debauchery and
lewdness did distill from her as from the Head, into the Body of the whole
Universe, so that she is in the following Verse styled, The Mother of the
Abominations of the Earth.

Verse. 5. And upon her Forehead was a Name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great,
the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth.


As the Servants of God had his Name written on their Foreheads, and the
Inhabitants of the Earth that of the Beast, so also has the stately Woman,
that John saw in the Wilderness, a Name inscribed on her Forehead: which, lest
any one should think it to be that very Name, whereby she was commonly known
amongst Men, has the word Mystery set before it, intimating that the following
Name agreed to this Woman, not in a proper but in a mystical sense. The reason
and elegancy of which borrowed Appellation given to Rome, (for she according to
the Angels Interpretation, Verse 18. is meant by this Woman) I have already
discovered in the Exposition of the 14. Chapter, to which I send back the
Reader for further satisfaction in this point. Now Rome is here deserved'y
called the Mother of Harlots, and the Abominations of the Earth. For it is
evident from the testimony of Writers, that no City did ever, so abound with
Whoredom, and also other abominable practices, as Rome both in those times and
ever since.

Verse. 6. And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints; and with
the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great
admiration.

Ver. 7. And the angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell
thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, which has
the seven heads and ten horns.


Though the filthiness of this woman was very great, and her actions abominable
above those of all other women, yet would not God have poured out his wrath
upon her in so signal a manner as is related in the two following chapters, had
she not above all her other evils, defiled her hands with the blood of Saints
and Martyrs; For this is one of those sins that make the lowdest cry in the
ears of God, as the History of righteous Abel testifies, Genesis 4.10, 11. But
this woman had already swallowed, and was before her ruin to swallow so much
of this precious blood, that John here already perceives her to be drunk
therewith, which drunkenness of hers might easily appear to him, as he looked
upon her; but that it was caused by quaffing the blood of Saints and Martyrs,
the knowledge hereof must needs proceed from Revelation: whether of the Angel,
(as it is most likely) or of some other heavenly person. And here by the way
let the difference between the Saints and the Martyrs or witnesses of Jesus be
well observed. For the Saints are merely pious men, but the Martyrs or
Witnesses of Jesus are such, as, besides their piety, have also the Spirit of
Prophecy, and so become capeable of bearing testimony to Jesus. For if, (as
this very Angel asserteth, chap. 19.10.) the Testimony or Witnessing of Jesus
be the Spirit of Prophecy, then a Martyr or Witness of Jesus must be such a one
as is endued therewith. Howbeit though John had received that Spirit, yea
understood the cause of the woman's drunkenness, yet (as prophesying but in
part) he could not for all this tell who the woman her self should be; And
therefore (as admiration is wont to proceed from Ignorance) he does exceedingly
wonder at her. In which wondering condition he was likely to have continued, had
not the Angel disclosed to him the Mystery of the woman, as he does also that
of the Beast with seven heads and ten horns that carried her, which description
plainly shows that this Beast is the same that formerly was seen to arise out
of that Sea, Chap. 13.1. And therefore he is, as formerly, simply called the
Beast, whenever he is afterward mentioned. As for his carrying of the woman,
the reason hereof (as will further appear from what shall presently be spoken)
is because the Government of the City, which the woman represents, did
sometimes rest upon him, and so he was the support thereof.

Verse. 8. The beast that thou saw, was, and is not; and shall ascend out of
the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth
shall wonder, (whose names were not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and
yet is.


The Angel beginning to discover somewhat obliquely unto John the Mystery of
the Beast, (whom we shall afterward find to be Domitian) says of him, that
he was and is not. Whereby is meant, that he was sometimes in power, but now at
the time of this Vision was not so. For that it must not be understood of his
being alive, is evident from the close of the Verse, where it is said of him,
that he was, and is not, and yet is. The meaning of which words then would be,
that he was alive, and is not alive, and yet is alive. Which every one sees to
be a flat contradiction. But according to the other Interpretation (which is
indeed that of the Angel himself, as may be seen in the 11. Verse) the words
carry in themselves no contradiction, but a mavelous and divine elegancy,
amounting to this sense, that though the Beast had formerly been in power, and
now was not so, yet was he still in being. But that which exceeds all
imagination of men, and would surpass their belief also, were it not so plainly
delivered both here and Chap. 11 7. is, that the Beast shall ascend out of the
bottomless Pit. Which being spoken of one that was then alive, does imply that
he should die, and afterward arise from the Dead, to act those stupendous
things, that are foretold of him in this Book of the Revelation. For that the
bottomlest Pit is the Mansion of the Dead, and so to ascend from thence is to
arise from the Dead, is evident from that Passage of the Apostle Paul, Rom
10.7. where he says, Who shall descend into the deep? (Greek Abyss, or
bottomless Pit, the same word that is used in the Revelation concerning the
Beast) that is to bring up Christ from the Dead. For what relation would the
Descent into the deep or bottomless Pit have to the bringing up of Christ from
the Dead, if the Dead had not there their abode? In the next place mention is
made of the Beasts going into perdition, which, being here set down as a thing
that is to follow his Ascent out of the bottomless Pit, shall then be
fulfilled, when he is thrown alive into the Lake burning with fire and
brimstone, above a thousand years before the Judgment of the great day, as may
be seen in the 19. and 20. Chap. Which yet new and unusual punishment is to be
imputed to the strangeness of his offenses, before related in the 13. Chapter,
which he (as shall by and by be proved) will perpetrate after he is risen from
the Dead. Last of all, the Angel speaks of the Admiration, wherein all the
Inhabitants of the Earth will have the Beast, that was, and is not, and yet is,
namely, when they shall see him after his Resurrection invested with so vast an
Empire, and cured of his deadly Wound, as is expressed in the 13. Chapter. For
that the things, related of the Beast in that Chapter, are to be performed by
him, when he is risen from the Dead, is evident, in that the very chief of them
came not to pass in the time of his former life, as will appear to any one that
peruseth what has been written of him by ancient Authors. For where is it
said of him in story, that he received a deadly Wound and recovered? (Yea, we
find on the contrary, that when he had been wounded by one Stephanus, he was
so far from being cured thereof, that he was by others coming in presently
after killed outright. See Suetonius in the History of Domitian, cap. 17.)
Where, that his Image was erected, and made to speak, that they might be put to
death that refused to worship it? Where, that he did set a Mark upon either the
forehead or the right hand of Men, without which none might buy or sell? These
and sundry other remarkable things, recorded of the Beast in the Book of the
Revelation were never yet acted by him, nor indeed by any other person
whatsoever (that we read of) since this Prophecy was written; wherefore, if the
Beast, that was long since slain, must do them (as this Prophecy plainly
testifies) it will unavoidably follow that he must be raised from, the Dead to
that purpose. But though the Inhabitants of the Earth in general shall admire
the Beast, yet some will refuse to do so, namely, They whose names were written
in the book of life from the foundation of the world. By which passage it is
clear that there is a certain number of men ordained by name to eternal life
from the foundation of the world. And this Ordination is alleged by the Angel
as the true cause why they above others consent not to the epidemical impiety,
that is committed in admiring the Beast. Neither did I ever meet with any man,
who denying such a particular and peremtory Ordination could give a clear and
satisfactory answer to this passage, which in my judgment (now that I have
made a more diligent search thereinto) seems sufficient to decide the so much
agitated controversy about Predestination, especially if you add that other
invincible argument, taken from the Ordination of Christ himself. For if Christ
were unchangeably Ordained to glory not only from but also before the
foundation of the world, (as the Scripture attesteth, and all Christians grant)
why should not we by like reason affirm the same of his people, it being
altogether absurd, to imagine that the head should be designed, and not also
the body pertaining thereunto, inasmuch as they have a mutual relation the one
to the other? For whereas some endeavor to decline the dint of the foresaid
passage in the Revelation, by referring those words from the foundation of the
world to the book it self, and not to the writing of the names therein: this
can by no means consist, for then to exclude all ambiguity an Article would
have been prefixed to them in the Greek, and accordingly the words have run
thus, (...). Again, I would demand of any man well skilled in that language,
how the Angel could speak otherwise then he does, were it his intention (as I
affirm) to show that certain men's names were from the foundation of the world
written in the book of life. But if he meant to signify that the Book only
was from the Foundation of the World, that (as I before showed) might easily
have been done, by setting an Article, agreeing in Greek with the word Book,
before these words, From the Foundation of the World.

Verse. 9. And here is the mind which has wisdom. The seven Heads are seven
Mountains, on which the Woman sits.

10. And they are seven Kings: five are fallen and one is, and the other is not
vet come; and when he comes, he must continue a short space.

11. And the Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the
seven, and goes into perdition.


Here the Angel comes directly to the matter, making way to the discovery that
he had promised to John, with a so emn Preface, whereby he intimates that the
Interpretation, which he was about to deliver, was so ordered, that none but a
wise and intelligent man could apprehend it. Then beginning to declare the
Mystery of the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, whereon the Woman sits,
he says, that the seven Heads are both seven Mountains, whereon the Woman
sits, (which Description the wise and learned know denotes Rome, that was
built upon seven Mountains,) and also seven Kings, (so the Roman Emperors are
elsewhere styled in the Scripture, for the Jews, John 19.15. say, We have no
King but Caesar. And that he here means Roman Kings or Emperors, is evident,
in that they are coupled with the seven Mountains of Rome, and represented as
they before had been, by the seven Heads of the Beast) of which Kings five
(namely, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius) are fallen (that is, are taken
away by a violent death. Thus David, 2 Samuel 4, 38. says to the Israelites,
concerning Abner, whom Joab had slain, Know you not that there is a Prince, and
a great man fallen this day in Israel? And God says to the murmuring
Israelites, against whom his hand was lifted up to destroy them from among the
Host, until they were consumed, As for you, your carcases shall fall in this
wilderness, Numbers 14.32.) but one is, (namely Vespasian) the other is not yet
come, and when he comes, he must continue but a little while, (That is, Titus
the elder son of Vespasian, who Reigning after his Father, continued but two
years two months and twenty days, as Suetonius in his life witnesses) And the
Beast that was and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and
goes into perdition. This is meant of Domitian the younger son of Vespasian,
who was the eighth King or Emperor from Claudius, if you consider him as
reigning after the death of his Father and his elder brother: But if you look
upon him as Reigning in the absence of his Father, (who was not yet come out of
the eastern parts unto Rome to manage the Empire) he was one of the seven Kings
from Claudius, namely the sixth. For that Domitian after the death of Vitellius
the Emperor did in the absence of his Father Reign at Rome as Emperor, is
manifest from the words of Tacitus, Hist. lib. 3. Cap. ult. Domitianum,
postquam nihil hostile metuebatur, ad duces partium progressum, and Caesarem
consalutatum, miles frequens, utque erat in armis, in paternos penates deduxit;
that is, Domitian, when no further hostility was feared, presented himself to
the Captains of the party, and being saluted Caesar, (that is, Emperor, for
this was the Title of all the Roman Emperors after Julius Caesar) was brought
by the Soldiery in their arms to his Fathers house. And lib. 4. cap. 1. Nomen
sedemque Caesaris Domitianus acceperat, that is, Domitian had assumed to
himself both the Title and the seat of Caesar. ib. cap. 4. Ipsi consulatus cum
Tito filio, proetura Domitiano and consulare imperium that is, to him (namely
Vespasian) with Titus his son the consulship was voted, to Domitian the
pretorship and consular authority. ib. cap. 16. Mox, ejurante Frontino, Caesar
Domitianus praeturam cepit. Ejus nomen epistolis edictisque proponebatur. Vis
penes Mucianum, nisi quod pleraque Domitianus, instigantibus amicis, aut
propria lubidine agebat, that is, Not long after upon the resignation of
Frontinus, Caesar Domitian took the pretorship, his name was prefixed to all
Letters and Edicts. The power and sway of affairs was in Mucianus, save that
Domitian either at the instigation of his friends, or upon his own pleasure
transacted very many things. ib. cap. 20. Vespasianus in Italiam resque urbis
intentus, adversam de Domitiano famam accipit, tanquam terminos aetatis, and
concessa filio egrederetur, that is, Vespasian being intent upon Italy and the
affairs of the City hears an ill report of Domitian, as if he had passed the
bounds of his age, and carried himself with more state then became an Emperors
son, Suetonius also says of him in the description of his life, Cap. 1. Post
victoriam demum progressus, and Caesar consalutatus, honorem praeturae urbanae,
cum consulari potestate suscepit titulo tenus: quam jusdictionem ad collegam
proximum transtulit. Caeterum omnem vim dominationis tam licenter exercuit, ut
jam tum, qualis futurus esset, oslenderet. Nec exequar singula, contrectatis
multorum uxoribus, Domitiam Longinam Aelio Lamiae nuptam, etiam in matrimonium
abduxit, atque uno die super viginti urbana officia, atque peregrina
distribuit: mirari se Vespasiano dictitante, quod successorem non and sibi
mitteret; that is, Domitian after the victory going out, and being saluted by
the name of Caesar, assumed the honor of the City Pretorship with consular
authority as to the Title, transferring all the jurisdiction to the next
Colleague, howbeit he did so licenciously exercise all the power of
Sovereignty, as that he even then showed what manner of Prince he would
afterward prove. For to omit the rest of his actions, having abused the wives
of many Citizens, he took away Domitia Longina, that was married to Aelius
Lamia, and made her his own wife, and distributed in one day above twenty
offices belonging either to the City or to foreign parts, Vespasian in the mean
time ever and anon crying out, that he wondered that his son did not also send
him a successor. ib. chap. 13. Principatum vero adeptus, neque in senatu
jactare dubitavit, and patri se and fratri imperium dedisse, illos sibi
reddidisse. Pari arrogantiacum procuratorum suorum nomine formalem dictaret
epistolam, sic coepit, Dominus and deus noster sic fieri jubet. Unde institutum
post hac, ut ne scripto quidem ac sermon cujusquam appellaretur aliter; that
is, Domitian having obtained the Empire, doubted not to boast in the very
Senate, that he had given the Empire both to his Father and to his Brother,
whereas they had only restored it unto him: with like arrogance as he endited a
formal Letter in the name of his procurators, he began thus, Our Lord and God
commands it so to be done, whence it was afterward enjoined, that none
should either in writing or in speech give him any other Titles. This shifting
of the Kingly power in Domitian seems to be a proof or essay of what shall
hereafter happen to him in the same kind. For as he was sometimes recalled from
a private condition to the Empire, so shall he in future ages arise from the
dead to be a King, as I have before evinced.

By what the Angel has here spoken to declare the Mystery of the Beast, it is
manifest that by the Beast is meant a Man, who was alive when this Vision
happened to John: For the Angel says expressly Verse 8. that he is. It is also
manifest that the Beast had already been a King at Rome, and should after the
decease of his two immediate Predecessors reign there again. But who was there
in the time of this Vision, to whom such a thing does agree, save Domitian,
about the end of whose Empire Irenaeus says lib. 5. cap. 3. that this Book of
the Revelation was seen? Neque enim ante multum temporis (so are his words)
visum est, sed paene sub nostro saeculo ad finem Domitiani imperii. Which may
be so far true, as that perhaps it was not published and commonly known before
that time. Nevertheless it appears from those words of the Angel, Five are
fallen and one is, that it was written in the Reign of Vespasian. These things
being so, I rightly reckon the Kings from Claudius, for if you begin either
before or after him, the words of the Angel will not suit with the truth of the
History, as it is delivered by sundry grave Writers that lived in or about
those times. And it is likely that the Angel so ordered the Vision, that the
computation should begin from Claudius inclusively, because he was the first
Roman Emperor, that employed his Authority to molest the Christians. For
Suetonius in the History of his Life, cap. 25. tells us, that he expelled the
Jews out of Rome, as making continual Tumults by the impulsion of Christ, (whom
he (as it seems) does out of an heathenish malignity call in Latin Chrestus,
and not Christus, as does also the Author of that profane Dialogue, called
Philopatris, which is found among the Works of Lucian, see Page 1003. of the
Salmurian Edition.) However certain it is out of the sacred story, that
Claudius expelled the Jews out of Rome, by which means Aquila and Priscilla his
Wife, both believing Jews, being forced to quit Rome, betook themselves to
Corinth, Acts 18.2. It is further manifest, from what has been before
discoursed, that the Beast Domitian is aptly represented with seven Heads,
because of his relation both to the seven Mountains, and also to the seven
Kings, that were signified by them. For he had not only sometimes reigned in
Rome the seven-hilled City, but was also born there, for so says Suetonius in
the beginning of his Life, Domitianus natus est regione urbis sexta, ad Malum
Punicum; that is, Domitian was born in the sixth Ward of the City, at the Sign
of the Pomegranate, He was also Son to one of the seven Kings, and Brother to
another, as has before been showed.

Verse. 12. And the ten Horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have
received no Kingdom as yet; but receive Power as Kings one hour with the Beast.

13. These have one mind, and shall give their Power and Strength unto the
Beast.

14. These shall make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, for
he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they that are with him, are called,
and chosen, and faithful.


Hitherto the Angel has spoken concerning the Beast and his seven Heads, now
he comes to the ten Horns, that are upon him, which be expressly tells us,
(as you see here) that they are ten Kings, who did not yet reign, but should
receive Authority together with the Beast. Nevertheless out of what particular
parts of the World these Kings shall arise, he does not show, or intimate. So
that we must of necessity be ignorant of that circumstance, either till the
thing it self be accomplished, or at least till God be pleased to make a
Revelation thereof. Only it appears out of Daniel, Chap. 7.24, 25. that they
shall start up out of the fourth universal Kingdom, that is, the Roman. For
that this Prophecy of the Beast and his ten Horns, is the same with that of
Daniel in the Chapter aforesaid, will easily appear, if you diligently compare
both the passages together. By so doing you will find, that the Beast in the
Revelation is in Daniel called the little Horn, in as much as the Actions, the
Confederates, and the time of their Tyranny are exactly the same in both.
Howbeit the time is but short, that these ten Kings shall reign together with
the Beast, for the Angel says, it shall be one hour: which Expression of one
hour, though it be not strictly and properly taken for the twelfth part of a
Day, (it being impossible for the ten Kings to perform all that is here
foretold of them, in the space of such an hour) yet does it confessedly
signify a short period of time, as other like passages of the Scripture will
inform us. Thus Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2.17. says, We, Brethren, being taken from you
for a short time time, (Greek for the time of an hour) in presence, not in
heart, endeavored the more abundantly to see your face with great desire. And
Philemon 15. Perhaps he therefore departed for a season, (Greek, an hour) that
thou might receive him for ever, Now for as much as I have before evinced
that the Beast does personate Domitian the Roman Emperor, and no such thing as
the starting up of ten new Kings, and their Confederacy with him, is said in
History to have yet happened to him, I judge I may firmly and undoubtedly
conclude, that this must hereafter be fulfilled, when he shall arise from the
Dead to rule again. The next thing that the Angel mentions, is the agreement
of the ten Kings, not whereby they stand well affected toward one another, but
whereby they all give their Power and Authority to the Beast, who sets
himself against Gods people. For as to any good correspondence between them in
relation to their particular estates, they are so far from it, that they can no
more cleave together, than Iron be mixed with Clay. Yea, though an union be
endeavored by Alliance, yet can it not be effected, as we are taught by the
famous Vision of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.43.44. For that these Kings mentioned
in this second Chapter are the same with those of the seventh is apparent, as
from other circumstances, so from the Universal Kingdom, out of which they
rise, and also from their very number, in that they are designed by ten horns
in the one Chapter, and by ten toes in the other. Lastly he says of these
Kings that they shall make war with the Lamb: Not that they use hostility
against the very person of Christ, (for he being glorified with his Father in
the heavens, is altogether incapable of having violence offered to him) but
because they are armed against the Saints, of whom Christ is the head, and
Captain. Thus Abijah the King or Judah exhorteh Jeroboam and the house of
Israel from fighting against God, when they were about to assail his people, 2 Chronicles. 13.12. Behold, (says he) God himself is with us for our Captain, and
his Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry alarm against you: O children of
Israel, fight ye not against the Lord God of your Fathers, for ye shall not
prosper. Moreover that the Saints also put themselves in array against those
Kings, appears, not only from what is plainly affirmed hereof, Chap. 19.19.
(where it is said, I saw the Beast and the Kings of the earth, and their armies
gathered together to make war with him that sat on the horse, and against his
army) but may sufficiently be deduced from that very expression of making war
(which is here simply and without limitation used by the Angel) as I have
before proved in mine exposition, on Chaep. 13.7. But in vain is hostility used
by those Kings against Christ, for he being (as the angel further says) a King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, can easily subdue them, as we see it come to pass
in the foresaid nineteenth Chapter. Again, they that are with him (that is, on
his side as this form of speech does elsewhere sometimes signify, see Luke
11.23. He that is not with me is against me) are called (to the Communion of
the son of God, 1 Cor. 1.9.) and chosen (to salvation, 2 These. 2.13.) and
faithful (in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.1.) and therefore such as the fidelity and
goodness of Christ will not suffer so cruelly to be cut off at a blow by these
Kings, who gather their forces to Armageddon to that purpose. But these words,
as well as that of warring, before used, imply that the Saints do muster and
imbody themselves in an army, namely that they may (when their Captain Christ
Jesus has defeated the Beast and all the Kings of the earth with the sword of
his mouth) erect the fifth Kingdom according to that of Daniel, Chap. 7.21, 22.
I beheld and the same horn, (that is, the little horn, whom I before proved to
be the same with the Beast in the Revelation) made war with the Saints and
prevailed against them; until the ancient of days came, and Judgment was given
to the Saints of the most high: and the time came that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom.

Verse. 15 And he says unto me, The waters which thou saw, where the whore
sits, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations and tongues.


The waters where the harlot sits, are not only with truth, but also with
great fitness and elegancy said by the Angel to be Peoples and Nations, both
because of the violent rushing of men, when they are once stirred, and likewise
of the noise which they make, resembling that of waters when they dash against
the rocks, Thus. Isa. Chap 17.12. says, Woe to the multitude of peoples, which
make a noise like the noise of the Sea, and to the rushing of Nations, that
make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters. And Jeremiah says of old
Babylon, the Type of Rome, (as it seems by the Revelation) Chap. 51.55. The
Lord has spoiled Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice: when her
waves do roar like great Waters, a noise of their voice is uttered. Whence it
is that the stilling of the Tumult of the People, is well ranked by the
Psalmist with the quieting of the noise of the Seas, Psalm 65 7. Now Rome is
said to sit upon these Waters, because, being the Seat of the fourth universal
Empire, it was the City to which all Nations were subject, and whither they
were wont continually to resort.

Verse. 16. And the ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate
the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with Fire.

17. For God has put in their Hearts, to fulfill his Will, and to agree, and
give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the Words of God shall be fulfilled.


Here the Angel declares, what the ten Kings aforesaid should do to Rome,
namely, that they should sack and burn it with fire. But for as much as that
City is here described (according to the manner of the Scripture) as an Harlot,
it is therefore suitably said, that they shall make her naked, and eat her
flesh; both which are done by pillaging the place, and slaying the Inhabitants
thereof. Thus God says of Jerusalem, under the name of Aholibah the Harlot,
Ezekiel. 23.29. They shall deal with thee hatefully, and shall take away all thy
labor, and shall leave thee naked and bare. And David says of his enemies,
that they came upon him to eat up his flesh, namely, with the mouth of the
Sword, Psalm. 27.2. But the reason why so many Kings, otherwise at variance
amongst themselves, should yet agree herein, and give their Kingdom to the
Beast, (which two things here concurring to the destruction of Rome, do by the
way clearly intimate, that it is the Beast who sets the Kings upon this
Work) is because God puts the same into their hearts, to the end he may
accomplish his words, that he to wit had spoken touching the fall of Rome,
Chap. 14.8. wherefore in as much as the Angels words are so perspicuous
concerning this matter, they must needs be exceedingly mistaken, who expect
that Rome shall be destroyed, either by other persons, than the ten Kings
aforesaid, or at another time than after the seven Vials of Gods wrath have
been poured out upon the Earth, during the space of three years and an half,
that the Tyranny of the Beast over the Saints shall continue. But neither is
the Beast yet risen, nor the ten Kings his Confederates, nor those prodigious
things come to pass that are mentioned in the 13. Chapter, nor so much as one
of the Vials poured out, as will easily appear to any man, who being acquainted
with the Histories of former Times, and finding no such occurrences there
recorded, had rather adhere to the plainness of the Scripture it self, than
follow the obscure and uncertain imaginations of men.

Verse. 18. And the Woman which thou saw, is that great City, which reigns
over the Kings of the Earth.


This is the Close of the Interpretation, which the Angel vouchsafes unto
John, wherein he discovers who the Woman is, whom John saw in the Wilderness,
namely, the great City, that reigned over the Kings of the Earth; which all
that are skilled in the History of those Times wherein John wrote this
Prophecy, know to be Rome. For she commanding over the whole World, must needs
reign over those Kings that governed in any part of the same. A Proof
confirming the Truth of this matter may be seen in Tacitus, who in the second
Book and twenty third Chapter of his History, says, Accessere cum regno,
Sohemus haud spernendis viribus, Antiochus vetustis opibus ingens, and
inservientium regum ditissimus. Mox, per occultos suorum nuncios excitus ab
urbe Agrippa, ignaro adhuc Vitellio, celeri navigatione properaverat. That is,
Sohemus, who was a King of considerable Forces, and Antiochus who was mighty
for his ancient wealth, and of all the subject Kings the richest, sided with
that party, ( namely, to make Vespasian Emperor) Agrippa also, upon secret
Messages of his Friends, quitted the City unawares to Vitellius, and speedily
sailed thither. Thus much for the Key here given by the Angel to unlock the
Mystery of the Beast, which if our men had rather chosen to use, than vainly
attempted to break up this divine Cabinet with their own forced
Interpretations; neither had they so much wrested this excellent Prophecy of
John, nor exposed the Religion of Protestants to the contempt and scorn of her
Adversaries, who in likelihood measure what Protestants speak in other Points
of Religion, by the Standard of their Expositions concerning the Beast. I
should now proceed to the Explication of the eighteenth Chapter. But that being
only a Relation touching the manner how Rome shall be destroyed, and
containing in it self little or no difficulty, I judge it better to pass it by,
and hasten to the nineteenth Chapter, wherewith the History of the Beast ends.

Chap. 19. Verse. 1. And after these things I heard a great Voice of much People
in Heaven, saying, Alleluja; Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, unto
the Lord our God:

Verse. 2. For true and righteous are his Judgments; for he has judged the
great Whore which did corrupt the Earth with her Fornication, and has avenged
the Blood of his Servants at her hand.

Verse. 3. And again they said, Alleluja. And her smoke rose up for ever and
ever.


The Exposition.
NO sooner is Rome sacked and burnt by the ten Kings aforesaid, but this
Judgment is entertained with a great shout from Heaven, where a vast multitude
cry, Alleluja, ascribing Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the
Lord their God. Of what persons this Multitude consists, whither of Angels,
or of Men, though it be not here expressed, yet may it by a diligent
disquisition be found out. For, first of all, they cannot be Angels, because
the Greek word (...) to be rendered here in English a Multitude, is never used
in the Scripture to design a great company of Angels, but is on the contrary
peculiar to Men, as may be seen Chap. 17.15. where Multitudes (in Greek (...))
are ranked with Peoples and Nations. But all will confess that Peoples and
Nations consist of Men only. Secondly, this Multitude does attribute Salvation
unto God, which the Angels are not any where found to do. For they being by the
perfection of their nature exempted from death or any other tribulation
whatsoever, are thereby also incapable of sharing in the salvation of God, and
accordingly use no such form of praising him. Whence it follows that they be
men. Not holy men upon the earth, for they are denoted by the four and twenty
elders, and the four living creatures, mentioned afterward in the fourth verse
of this Chapter, it remains therefore that the multitude aforesaid consists
of holy men already raised from the dead; and glorified in the Kingdom of
heaven, when Rome is destroyed (and so differ from them, who after that
destruction shall be made partakers of the same anticipated resurrection, as
may be seen in the twentieth Chapter of this prophecy) and consequently are
that great multitude of Saints, before mentioned in the seventh Chapter, verse
9. For that those Saints are such, as being risen from the dead, triumph in the
Kingdom of heaven, is evident from the description there given of them. For it
is said that they were come out of the great tribulation, so it is emphatically
expressed in the Greek, and therefore intimates that they weee set free from
death the chiefest of all tribulations) and also were clothed in white Robes,
and stood before the throne of God, being put into such a condition, that they
should no more hunger; nor thirst, because the Lamb should feed them, and lead
them unto living fountains of water. No one of which things agrees either to
men here living on the earth* or to the souls of such as are departed this
life. Now the reason that inciteth these Saints in heaven with loud and
redoubled voices to cry, Allelujah, that is, Praise the Lord, (for so this
word, originally Hebrew, does signify, see Psalm. 146.1.) is the justice of
God, who (as it is here said) had both judged that great Harlot, which with the
lewdness of her whoredom corrupted the earth, (whereof we have before spoken
in our exposition on the seventeenth Chapter) and also had avenged the blood of
his servants at her hand. and this vengeance is taken in so strange a manner,
that it is not to be parrallelled in all the holy scripture, save in the
prediction concerning the judgment of God against Bozrah and the land of
Idumea, whereof we read, Isa. 34.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and which is not yet come to
pass: for though many Cities have been burned with the fire of men, yea Sodom
and Gomorrah with the fire of God from heaven, yet has it not been known that
any City, after it was once fired, did send up the smoke of her burning for
ever and ever, as it is here affirmed of Rome. Which circumstance alone does
sufficiently prove that the prophecy held forth in this book concerning the
destruction of Rome, is not yet fulfilled, forasmuch as she (notwithstanding
all the sackings and firings that have since happened to her) is yet standing,
and that in great state and splendour, so far is she from being made a
desolation and perpetual burnings.

Verse. 4. And the four and twenty elders, and the four beasts fell down and
worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen; Alleluja.


The action of the Saints in heaven, who give honor and glory to God for
executing judgment upon Rome, is seconded by the Saints on earth, who
prostrating themselves before God, declare their approbation of what the others
had done, by saying Amen, Alleluja. For though the Saints here spoken of, are
in the vision introduced as being in heaven, yet this hinders not but that the
true place of their abode is the earth, no more then the ascent of John into
heaven in a vision, and his viewing the things therein contained, Chap. 4.1.2.
make him in the mean time cease from being a true and real inhabitant of the
Isle Patmos: for these four and twenty Elders together with the four living
creatures I have already proved in mine exposition of the fifteenth Chapter, to
be the Disciples of Christ in the four quarters of the world. Howbeit, the four
and twenty are both here and else where in the Revelation distinguished from
the rest, because (as the very name of Elders given to them does import) the
Pastors of the Church are by them signified. And this number of the Elders
seems to be modelled from the four and twenty Orders of the Priests under the
Law, 1 Chronicles. 24.7, 8. into whose room the Ministers of the Gospel are come,
that the people of God might never want some to watch over them in relation to
the good of their souls.

Verse. 5. And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye
his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.


The praising of God is a thing so comely in the Saints, that they are here
(though upon a new account, as will appear from that which follows) incited
by a voice from the throne to do it again: which voice is not to be ascribed to
God himself, (although it proceeds from his throne) but to some other person
that is under or about the same, and has him that sits on the throne for
his God, as the voice it self does intimate, when it says, Praise our God all
ye his servants. If it be further demanded what manner of person the author of
the voice should be, whether a glorified Saint or an Angel: I answer, that it
rather seems to be an Angel, because we find the like exhortation used by an
Angel, Chap. 14.6, 7. As for the Servants of God, whom the voice speaks unto,
seeing they are distinguished from those that fear God, this sufficiently
hinteth that they are not merely pious men, but such as besides their piety,
are employed by God in the work of the Ministry, and in particular bear the
office of prophets in the Church, for so the servants of God (when differenced
from them that fear God) are elsewhere understood in this book of the
Revelation, see Chap. 11.18. where it is said, That thou should give the
reward unto thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear
thy name, small and great. Now that many Prophets will then exist when these
things are to be accomplished, I have before showed in the exposition of the
fourteenth Chapter.

Verse. 6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thundrings, saying, Alleluja:
for the Lord God omnipotent reigns.

Verse. 7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready.

Verse. 8. And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints.


Though the destruction of the wicked be an inducement to praise the name of
God, and to rejoice, yet is the salvation of the righteous (as being in it self
a work more excellent and glorious) of far greater efficacy to stir up the
Saints to the performance of these two things. Hence it is that the acclamation
here made; is more loud and solemn then the others that went before. For John
says, That he heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thundrings saying, Alleluja.
The reason of which unusual Exultation (that I may confirm what I even now
asserted) is in the first place said to be the Reign of God, namely, upon the
Delivery of the Kingdom into the Hands of the Saints. For though God was long
before said in the Scripture to be the King of all the Earth, Psalm. 47.7. yet
in as much as to reign (if you speak properly) is to rule and govern by Laws,
the Reign of God over all the World may in this sense be rightly said to
commence with the Kingdom of the Saints. And that this Notion of Reigning is
true, and grounded on the Scripture, is manifest, in that God is then said
never to have born rule over the Heathen, the Adversaries of his People, Isai
63.18, 19. which can be no otherwise true, than because he had not prescribed
them Laws. Whereas the Jews on the contrary own God for their King, because he
had been their Lawgiver, as may be seen in those Words of the same Prophet,
Chap. 33.22. The Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.
But when upon the Defeat of the Beast, (who, as I have showed before, is the
same with the little Horn in the seventh of Daniel) The Dominion and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the Saints of
the most High, the World shall be ruled by them according to the Laws of God
which he has given by Christ Jesus, and the Laws of all Nations shall for the
common good be conformed unto that Standard, whereas now they are for the most
part subservient to the Lusts and Interests of a certain sort of Men. So that
God (to whom the Saints are subservient in the Kingdom) will then of right be
said to reign more perfectly and truly, than he had ever done since the World
began.

The second ground here alleged for this Triumphing of the Saints, is, Because
the Marriage of the Lamb was come, and his Wife had made her self ready. By
which Wife of Christ now ready to be married, is neither to be understood the
Multitude of those Saints that shall be raised in glory at the Judgment of the
great Day, (for that Judgment shall happen above a thousand Years after this
Marriage, as appears from the following Chapter) nor of those Saints that
shall be found alive on the Earth, when the great things mentioned in this
Chapter shall be accomplished (for the Saints are not in this World married to
Christ, but only espoused, as the Words of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2. do intimate, who
says of the Corinthian Church, I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may
present you a chaste Virgin unto Christ) nor of those Saints that are here
brought in shouting and rejoicing (for they openly distinguish themselves from
this Wife of Christ) it remains therefore that by Her must of necessity be
understood those Saints, who having suffered Death in the time of the Beast,
for not worshipping his Image, nor receiving his Mark, have this Privilege
vouchsafed to them above others, that being restored to Life they reign with
Christ a thousand Years before the rest of the Dead are raised, as is expressly
declared in the following Chapter. And this is sufficiently employed by the fine
Linen wherewith they are arrayed: for though it be an Emblem of their
Righteousness, to which they attained in this World, (as the Words of the Text
affirm) yet is it indeed the Habit of such as are risen from the Dead, and
glorified, as is evident from Chap. 3.4. where Christ says to the Angel of the
Church in Sardis, Thou have a few Names even in Sardis, which have not defiled
their Garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. And
also from Chap. 7.9. where John says, I beheld, and lo, a great Multitude,
which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds and peoples and
tongues, stood before the Throne and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes,
and palms in their hands. For that these here mentioned are such as had been
raised from the dead, and glorified, I have before proved in the beginning of
mine exposition upon this Chapter.

Verse. 9. And he says unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto
the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. And he says unto me, These are the true
Sayings of God.


Seeing the Angel does here command John to set down in Writing, what he
himself was about to deliver, this argues that it was a thing very remarkable,
and therefore not to be trusted to the memory, which is so slippery and
fleeting, but to remain upon record for ever. And this Injunction is like to
that of the fourteenth Chap. Verse 13. and conversant about something of the
same import. For as they are there pronounced happy, who should thenceforth die
in the Lord, namely, under the Reign of the Beast, and for the confirmation of
the Truth, (as I have in mine Exposition of that place evinced) so are such
here reckoned to be in the some blessed condition, who have the honor to be
invited to the Wedding Supper of the Lamb, who is to be inseparably united, in
the most intimate and sweet familiarity of love, to those very persons, when
raised from the Dead, and glorified. For as Marriages are wont to be solemnized
with a Feast, so also is this of the Lamb, and therefore mention is made here
of a Wedding Supper; which Supper (if we consider what Christ himself speaks
of eating and drinking at his Table in his Kingdom, Luke 22.30. And how in the
22 Chapter of this Prophecy, Verse 14. they are by an Angel termed happy, who
keep the Commandments of Christ, that they may have a right to the Tree of
Life,) will be found to have more literal truth in it, than is commonly
believed, especially if you add what the Angel says to John in the Close of
this Verse, namely, that these are the true Sayings of God. For this (as I
intend more largely to discourse in mine Exposition on Chap. 21.5.) is all one,
as if it had been said, These are the plain and perspicuous Sayings of God,
which are to be understood as the words sound. As for the Guests invited to
this Wedding Supper of the Lamb, for as much as they cannot be either the
Angels, (who being mere Servants are no where in the Scripture admitted to such
familiarity with Christ) nor the married persons themselves, (who would
absurdly be said to be invited to their own Marriage) they must needs be the
Saints, that are here brought in exceedingly rejoicing at this Marriage, and
consequently such as had formerly been raised from the Dead, and then reigned
with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven, and so were capable of having a part in
the Delicacies of this Feast.

Verse. 10. And I fell at his Feet to worship him: And he said unto me, See thou
do it not: I am thy fellow Servant, and of thy Brethren, that have the
Testimony of Jesus, Worship God: for the Testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of
Prophecy.


John is so transported with the favor that the Angel had done him, in
revealing these sublime Mysteries unto him, that he is not able to contain
himself, but falls down before his feet and worshippeth him. Thus Cornelius
being admonished in a Vision, to send for Peter, who should speak such things
unto him; whereby both he and his House should be saved, is ravished with the
sight of Peter coming to him, and adores him. Which Instances do teach us thus
much, that we should hold in high esteem those persons, that are employed by
God to convey unto us the knowledge of divine secrets, whereas contrariwise we
see it come to pass through the stupidity and wickedness of men, who love
Darkness rather than Light, that such rare Discoverers are in stead of
Veneration, usually rewarded with envy, and reproach, yea, with Death it self.
Nevertheless, though the Reverence that we give to such as instruct us in the
abstruse things of God, ought to be great, yet must it be kept within its
bounds, and not entrench upon the Prerogative of God: wherefore we see the
Angel here forbids John to worship him, for that he was his fellow Servant,
(and indeed fellow Servants are not wont to give such Honor one to another)
and wills him to worship God their common Master, to whom Veneration is one.
And Peter also (in the History aforesaid) raises up Cornelius, who was fallen
at this Feer, and worshipped him; which (by the way) is sufficient to fill that
Man of Rome with confusion of face for ever, who pretending to be the
Successor of Peter, though otherwise (as he himself is wont to acknowledge)
inferior in gifts and personal excellency, does yet suffer himself, to be
adored of the People, as he is carried in a Throne upon men's shoulders through
the Streets: yea, when he is initiated into his Office, is set upon the very
Altar to be solemnly worshipped, which none can with any color deny to be
religious and divine Worship, especially if he consider that this Honor is
given to him, as supposed to be the Vicar of Christ. But whereas it is
objected, that contrary to the practice of this Angel appearing to John in the
Revelation, we find that other Angels in the Old Testament, when they showed
themselves to the Servants of God, permitted themselves to be worshipped, as
the Angel that exhibited himself to the view of Joshuah, as may be seen in the
fifth Chapter of his History, Verses 13, 14, 15. I answer, that when the Angels
received Worship, they either represented God, having his Name in them, as that
Angel which with two Companions appeared to Abraham, Genesis 18.2. who is
therefore called the Lord, Verse 13. as also that Angel which went before the
Israelites in the Pillar of a Cloud, Exodus 14.19. Who has also the Name of the
Lord given to him, Verse 24. or at least were endued with singular Authority,
as that Angel whom Joshua worshipped; for he tells Joshua, that he was sent a
Captain of the Lord's host, Whereas the Angel that here comes to John, does
not appear with Authority, (much less represent God, or Christ) but only in
his private capacity, and therefore styleth himself no other than a fellow
Servant of John, and of his Brethren, that had the Testimony of Jesus. This
last Expression, wherein certain Men are said to have the Testimony of Jesus,
and which is also used Chap. 12.17. (where it is said, The Dragon was wroth
with the Woman, and men to make War with the Remnant of her Seed, which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ,) would have
had some difficulty, (though such as might by a diligent inquiry been overcome)
but that the Angel is here pleased to explain it, openly affirming, that the
Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy; and consequently (as we touched
before in the Exposition on the 17. Chapter, where we showed the difference
between a Saint and a Martyr) none is a Witness or Martyr of Christ Jesus but
he that is a Prophet; which is further confirmed by the 11. Chapter, where the
two Witnesses are expressly called two Prophets, Verse 10.

Verse. 11. And I saw Heaven opened, and behold, a white Horse; and he that sat
upon him was called Faithful and True, and in Righteousness he does judge and
make War.

12. His Eyes were as a Flame of Fire, and on his Head were many Crowns: and he
had a Name written that no Man knew but he himself.

13. And he was clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood: and his Name is called,
The Word of God.

14. And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him upon white Horses,
clothed in fine Linen, white and clean.

15. And out of his Mouth goes a sharp Sword, that with it he should smite the
Nations: and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron: and he treads the
Wine Press of the Fierceness and Wrath of Almighty God.

16. And he has on his Vesture and on his Thigh a Name written, King of kings,
and Lord of lords.


The opening of the Heaven is a necessary Preparative to the seeing of Christ,
who residing there cannot otherwise be perceived. Thus we find it to have
happened, when Christ was pleased to afford a sight of himself to his Martyr
Stephen, Acts 7.56. who accordingly there cries out, Behold, I see the Heavens
opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God. But inasmuch as
Christ does here intend to show himself as the Captain of his people, he
appears not, (as he did to Stephen) standing in the heaven, but riding on a
Horse, as Commanders are wont to do. And this Horse is said to be white, (a
color much used in time of joy and triumph) to denote the success and victory
of Christ over his Enemies, according to what we read, Chap. 6.2. where it is
said, I saw, and behold, a white Horse, and he that sat on him had a bow, and a
crown was given to him, and he went forth conquering and to conquer. But the
victories and triumphs of Christ are not procured by such arts of treachery and
falsehood as Earthly Commanders too often put in ure, little regarding unjust
the means be, so they may attain the end they have proposed to themselves, even
the conquest of their Enemies. For Christ on the contrary is faithful and true,
neither making use of a wrong sentence in his Judicature, nor of an unjust
conflict in his warfare, but in both behaving himself according to the exact
rules of righteousness, as will appear by the judgment that he is about to
execute upon the Beast and his followers at the battle of Armageddon. Nor
marvel therefore if so great uprightness be accompanied with suitable glory and
power. For the eyes of Christ are said to be like a flame of fire, and so able
to strike a terror in all them that look upon his face, and on his head are
many crowns, which implies the greatness of his dominion, extending it self
over many kingdoms. Yea, for his greater dignity he has a name written, (to
wit, upon the crowns, for it is absurd to imagine it written upon his head,
inasmuch as it is covered with his crowns) which none knows but he himself.
Wherefore it would be presumption in us to use any means for the finding out of
this name. For besides the reading after that which cannot be attained, we
should thereby discover an ambition in us to entrench upon the prerogative of
Christ, which argues little reverence toward him. If it be her demanded, how
it happens that this name should be inscribed on the crowns encompassing the
head of Christ, and also be seen of John, (as his words imply, in that he is a
witness of it) and yet neither he, nor any other should attain the knowledge
thereof: I answer, this comes to pass because they cannot read it. As it
happened to the wise men of Babylon in the time of Belshazzar, none of whom was
able to read what the part of the hand, sent from God, had written upon the
Palace-wall, Dan. 5.5, 8. For whosoever reads any name, does thereby know it,
although he arrive not at the sense and sign^fication thereof. But Christ is
further said to be clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, which is very
agreeable to the business in hand. For he appearing as the Captain of his
people, and intending to shed the blood of his and their enemies, is aptly
represented with a bloody garment. Neither is it impertinent hereunto that his
name is called the Word of God, as will appear when we have made a discussion
thereupon. For when Christ is styled the word, or rather the speech of God, (so
the Greek word (...) here used does truly signify, as Aristotle in the fourth
Chapter of his book de interpretatione does teach us) this appellation is given
to him either properly, or improperly and figuratively: not properly, for then
he would be but an accident, seeing the same Aristotle in his Treatise of the
Predicaments, Chapter the sixth, rangeth a speech (called by him (...), the
word here under debate) among the species of discrete quantity which is an
accident. But Christ by the confession of all is a substance and no accident.
Wherefore he is called the word or speech of God improperly and figuratively,
but if so, then there must be some resemblance between the speech of God
properly so called, and Christ Jesus, which by searching the Scripture we shall
find to consist in these two respects: first because the speech of God
properly so taken, does immediately flow from the divine understanding: so also
did Christ come immediately from the divine Majesty in heaven to publish the
Gospel to the world, and so was the speech, or immediate interpreter of God.
This is confirmed by that notable passage of John, who having in the entrance
of the first Chapter of his Gospel given the appellation of the word or speech
to Christ, seems to explain the same in the eighteenth verse thereof, saying,
No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son which is (or rather,
was) in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Christ himself also
says in the sixth Chapter of that Gospel, verse 38. I came down from heaven,
not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me, And Chap. 8.42. If
God were your Father, ye would love me, for I proceeded forth, and came from
God. And Chap. 16.27, 28. The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved
me, and have believed that I came out from God. I came forth from the Father,
and am come into the world, again I leave the world and go to the Father.
Secondly, because as the speech of God properly so named, has power to effect
whatsoever he pleases, (for so God himself testifies of it, Isa. 55.10, 11.
where he says, as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and
bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my
word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but
it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whither to I sent it) In like manner Christ had full power to do whatsoever
miracles he pleased, as he himself witnesses, John 5.19, 20, 21. where he
says, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do, for
what things soever he does, these also does the Son likewise. For the Father
loves the Son, and shows him all things that he himself does: and he will
show him greater works then these, that ye may marvel. For as the Father
raises up the dead, and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he
will. These things being so, Christ can easily dissipate all his enemies, as
the event will show in the close of this 19. Chapter of the Revelation. You see
then how aptly John says, that the name of Christ is called the word or speech
of God, when he is brought in as a Captain ready to encounter with the Beast
and his accomplices. For this argues that he can do what mighty works he
pleases. Howbeit the Angels, (for they are elsewhere in the Scripture meant by
the heavenly Armies or Hosts, as appears from the words of the Prophet
Micajah, 1 Kings 22.29. I saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and all the
Host of heaven standing by him, on his right hand and on his left. And also
from the words of Luke, Chap. 2.13, 14, 15. And suddenly there was with the
Angel a multitude (not (...) but (...) in Greek) of the heavenly Host praising
God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
toward men. And it came to pass as the Angels were gone away from them into
heaven, etc.) the Angels, I say, that here follow Christ, though they also ride
upon horses, because they are Armies, and their equipage ought to be some ways
answerable to that of Christ their Captain, are yet clothed only in fine linen,
white and clean, (their usual Priestly weeds, as I have before proved in the
exposition of the fifteenth Chapter) because Christ intends not at this time
to make use of their ministry, in shedding the blood of his enemies, but to do
it by himself, as appears from the one and twentieth Verse of this Chapter.
Whereas Christ on the contrary has not only a bloody vesture, but also a sharp
sword, not indeed hanging by his side, nor held in his hand, but (as it
befitteth the word or speech of God) coming out of his mouth, wherewith he may
smite the Nations, and slay them. The accomplishment whereof may be seen in the
sequel of this Chapter Neither is this disagreeable to what we read elsewhere
in the Scripture. For if Moses could with the rod in his hand do miracles, and
plague the land of Egypt, See Exodus; 4.17. why may not Christ as well smite the
Nations with the sword of his mouth? For as the rod did not contain in it self
the power whereby the miracles were wrought, but was only a sign thereof: so
neither does the sword, which nevertheless is altogether as apt to signify the
divine efficacy of Christ, who by merely speaking the word will slay so many
Nations assembled together to fight against him and his people. But there is
not yet an end of describing the warlike power of Christ, for there remain
three other particu ars belonging thereunto. The first whereof is the ruling of
the Nations with a rod of Iron. Which though it may (with congruity to the
tenor of the Scripture) be taken only for the irresistible power of Christ,
whereby he is able to crush all his Enemies, yet seeing we ought not to depart
from the letter of the Scripture, when it yields a fair and commodious
construction, I propose it to the wise and learned to judge, whether it may not
with probability be thought, that the Saints (into whose hands Christ will at
length miraculously deliver all the Kingdoms of the world, and so rule over the
Nations by them as subordinate to himself) shall both in their judicature, and
warfare (the latter of which is likely to continue till that generation be
extinct) use such an instrument as an Iron rod, to break implacable enemies and
capital offenders in pieces. Neither is this sense contrary to the other, but
does include the same, showing how that irresistible power of Christ shall at
length put forth it self. The second point is the treading of the wine press of
the wrath of God Almighty, which I cannot sufficiently wonder to see how it is
so often applied to the sufferings that Christ himself did undergo, when the
Text speaks of the time present, saying, he treads the winepress, and not
of the time past: But Christ by the confession of all is now exempted for ever
from any further sufferings. Again, when any one treads a winepress, he
himself does not thereby suffer any thing, nor is bruised, but makes the
grapes to suffer bruising. And therefore if Christ tread the winepress of Gods
wrath, he himself must not be considered as enduring the wrath of God, but as
inflicting it upon others. And indeed the words of the prophet Isaiah, Chap 63.
to which this passage seems to allude, do plainly evince this interpretation
of mine to be true and genuine. For he that is there seen coming from Edom, Red
in his apparel, and like to one that treads in the winefat, shows the
reason of this strange attire, verse 3. saying, I have trodden the winepress
alone, and of the people there was none with me: For I will tread them in mine
anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garments, and I will stain all my raiment. Does not this demonstrate beyond all
gainsaying, that to tread the winepress of Gods wrath, is to execute his
judgments upon others, and not to feel the same himself? The third thing is
the name, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that is written both on the
vesture, and also on the thigh of Christ, which likewise apparently belongs
to the warlike power of Christ, because he that is a King is wont also to
command the sword for the defense of his people, and the destruction of his
Enemies, whence it was before, ( Chap. 14.17.) rendered as the reason, why
Christ should vanquish the ten Kings confederate with the Beast, (who together
with all the rest of the Kings in the world do here make war against Christ)
namely because he was Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. For this implies that
Christ has dominion over all the Kings in the world, and so is stronger then
they, and therefore no wonder if he does subdue and crush them. Thus
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.37. is called a King of Kings, because God had given
into his hand all the Earth, and the Kings thereof. Thus also Artaxerxes, Ezra
7.12. is styled a King of Kings, in the beginning of the gracious Commission he
grants to Ezra, because he had now gotten into his hands the Kingdom, whereof
Nebuchadnezzar was sometime seized.

Verse 17, And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fows that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather
your selves together unto the supper of the great God;

Verse. 18. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of Captains, and
the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them,
and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.


Christ (as we have already said) is about to make a slaughter of his enemies.
Wherefore an Angel cries with a loud voice to all the fowls of heaven to
betake themselves to this supper of the great God, that Christ is preparing for
them, and which will be furnished (suitably to the Majesty of the great God)
with all sorts of flesh both of men and horses, for their entertainment. This
invitation seems unlikely to have been made by an Angel, were it not that God
intends to use his ministry in drawing all his guests together; which must
needs appear to the Nations very ominous, when they behold, Eagles Ravens,
Uultures, and other birds of prey flying in shoals toward the land of Israel
where this great supper is to be made, (for that it shall so come to pass, is
evident from the close of the Chapter; wherein it is said, that all the fowls
were filled with the flesh of the slain) nor will the darkning of the Sun less
amaze them, which seems also likely to happen at this time, and has been
known to be a forerunner of great slaughters. For seeing the Angel is said to
stand in the Sun, (which cannot be done without obscuring the light thereof,
nor is here put for nothing) to me it is probable that this denotes a
miraculous Eclipse of that luminary by the interposal of the same Angel that
draws all the fowls of heaven together.

Verse. 19. And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies
gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against
his army.

Verse. 20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into
a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

Verse. 21. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the
horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled
with their flesh.


We are now at length arrived at that battle, for which so much preparation
has been made, and which is the greatest that ever was struck since the world
began, putting a period both to the Tyranny of the Beast, (the forest enemy of
all righteousness that ever was raised up) and also to the sufferings of the
Saints. The place where it is fought is here indeed omitted, but was in the
sixteenth Chapter, said to be called in Hebrew Armageddon, which I in the
Exposition of that Chapter, have accordingly proved to belong to the Country
of the Hebrews. The persons that shall fight it are here said to be the Beast
and the Kings of the earth with their Armies, on the one side: and he that
sits upon the horse with his Army, on the other side. Which last clause
clearly shows that there shall be an Army in the field siding with Christ,
and having him for their Captain, against which the Kings of the earth do
directly bend their force, as being capable of hurt. For it is inconceiveable
that all the kings of the earth should draw their Armies together into the land
of Israel, to fight against the person of Christ in heaven, which should it
descend from thence, (as nevertheless it shall not do until the day of the
universal judgment) would be altogether impassible. Neither can it be said
that this Army of Christ consists of Angels, for (to omit the difficulty even
now mentioned, and which has place in Angels as well as in Christ) the Angels
are ranged in several Armies, as the fourteenth verse of this Chapter
signifies, whereas the Army of Christ here mentioned is but one. Again, the
Angels are in the place aforesaid called the Armies in heaven that followed
Christ. But his implies that there is some other Army of his upon the earth,
even that whereof I now dispute, and which must needs consist of the Saints, as
was also before hinted, Chap. 17.14. The Issue of the Battle is here set down
in this manner, namely, that the Kings and their Armies are all slain with the
Sword of Christ's mouth; but the Beast and the false Prophet are taken, and
thrown alive into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone. All which is so plain, that
it needs no Interpretation. Only let it by the way be observed that from
hence it undeniably follows, that the Beast and the false Prophet, are two
particular Men, otherwise how should they be present at the Battle of
Armageddon, and there be taken and thrown alive into Hell fire? Certainly, this
does intimate that they are Men, who might as well have been slain as others,
but were not, because (as I have before evinced) they had been once dead
already, and were restored again to life to act the things in this Book related
of them. Which if any one should chance to scrupleat, as a thing very uncouth,
(although it be altogether unreasonable so to do, for as much as I have before
out of the Scripture demonstrated the same) let him on the contrary confider
with himself, how suitable it is that they whose actions are prodigiously
wicked, and such as were never practiced in the World before, should likewise
in an unusual way be raised up to perform them. As for those words in the very
Close of this Chapter, where it is said, that all the Fowls were filled with
the Flesh of the slain; this argues that a true and real Battle is here to be
understood, and that the Exposition which I gave upon the 17. and 18. Verses,
affirming that all manner of ravenous Birds should flock to the Land of Israel
to feed upon the Corpses of slaughtered men, is firm and certain, so that it
would be ridiculous to fasten another sense upon the place.

Chap. 20. Verse. 1, 2, 3. And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the
Key of the bottomless Pit, and a great Chain in his Hand.

And he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan,
and bound him a thousand Years.

And cast him into the bottomless Pit, and shut him up, and set a Seal upon
him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, till the thousand Years should
be fulfilled: and after that, he must be loosed a little season.


The Exposition.
SAtan, that old Serpent, (so called and here represented, because of his
subtilty, for the Serpent is in the Scripture noted to be the wisest of all the
Beasts that God created, Genesis 3.1.) had now for many thousand Years abused the
World at his pleasure, and of late knowing his time to be short, had vented
more than ordinary malice against the Saints, in stirring up the Beast to
persecute and kill many of them. Yea, in conclusion he had with his wiles so
inveigled the Kings of the Earth that at his instigation they attempted with
joint Forces to cut off the remainder of the Saints from being a People.
Wherefore to prevent the like mischief in the future, and to the end that the
Saints may enjoy a long Tranquillity after so hot a Persecution, an Angel here
descends from Heaven, and with the Chain that is in his Hand binds Satan
for a thousand Years, that he may no more deceive the Nations till the said
term be expired. At which time though he be again let loose to seduce and
instigate the Nations against the Saints, yet shall that seduction continue but
a little while, as the sequel of this Chapter does declare. Certainly, the
binding of Satan must needs cause so happy a revolution over all the World,
that we may rather guess at it than comprehend it. For consider how peaceable
and glorious the Times must needs prove, when Satan the great Incendiary of all
those Dissentions, Outrages, and Cruelties, wherewith the World is so much
infested, shall be kept in Prison for a thousand Years together, and Men (after
the Extinction of that Generation, in whom Satan had sown the Seeds of Discord)
shall have no other inward Incentive to sin, than the Disposition of their own
Heart, which though it be naturally evil from their youth, yet may it, being
alone, more easily be resisted, nor will without the concurrence of Satan
produce so grievous Disorders as now it does. This therefore is the time when
that shall truly be fulfilled, which God so long ago foretold by the Prophet
Micah, Chap. 4.3, 4. where he says of the Nations, that they shall beat their
Swords into Plough-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall
not rise against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. But they shall
sit every man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them
afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it. But the World now is
and has hither to been so far from enjoying such felicity, that I cannot
sufficiently wonder, how any man, who is neither a stranger to the Records of
Antiquity, nor to the condition of the present times, should ever imagine that
Satan has already been bound, (namely, in the Reign of Constantine the Great)
and so withheld from deceiving the Nations. For it is apparent that since the
said Emperor ruled, as notorious Impostures have been set on foot to delude
and blind the World, as are reported to have been hatched in any former Ages.
Which Impostures we must either confess to have proceeded from Satan, (and
consequently that he has not yet been bound) or most absurdly hold, that Men
may be as shamefully gulled, when Satan has ceased to seduce them, as they
were before, and so that his labor in this kind has hitherto been
superfluous. Nor need I any difficult reasoning to prove what I even now
asserted. For, to omit others, the Mahumetans and Papists will afford us very
evident Instances thereof. By the cunning of which two prevailing Factions, the
Light of the Gospel was for many Ages together since the Reign of Constantine
almost extinguished, but that now in latter times God taking pity on the
miserable condition of his Church, has raised up sundry Reformers, who have
detected many of those Errors, wherewith the Truth had before been obscured,
and so given a good Essay to the restoring of our holy Faith to its primitive
luster.

The reason why Satan is cast by the Angel into the bottomless Pit, rather than
into another place, is because many of the evil Spirits have ever since their
Fall lain there bound in Chains of Darkness, as both the words of Peter, Epist.
2. Chap. 2.4. (where it is said, God spared not the Angels that sinned, but
cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be
reserved unto Judgment) And also of Jude, Verse 6. (where it is said, The
Angels which kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day) do perspicuously intimate. And therefore certain of them, who were
permitted to range up and down the Earth, for the executing of Gods Judgments,
having entered into a Man of Gadara, and being commanded by Christ to come out
of him, besought Christ that he would not send him into the bottomless Pit,
(for so the Greek word (...) used by Luke in the Relation of this Story, and
which is translated in English, the Deep, ought to be rendered, as it is in this
20. Chapter of the Revelation.)

Verse. 4. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given
unto them: and I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the Witness of
Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither
his Image, neither had received his Mark upon their Foreheads, or in their
Hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand Years.

5. But the rest of the Dead lived not again until the thousand Years were
finished. This is the first Resurrection.

6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection: on such
the second Death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand Years.


That Thrones are the Seats of Kings is evident enough; but who they are that
shall sit upon the Thrones here mentioned, and have Judgment given into their
hands, is neither of it self evident, nor here expressed, so that we should be
at a great loss to find it out, were it not that Daniel, speaking of this
matter, (as I have before in the Exposition of the 17. Chapter of this Prophecy
evinced) says, that Judgment was given to the Saints of the most High, Chap.
7.22. It is the Saints therefore that are invested with the Right of
Judicature, and placed on the Thrones after the Defeat of the Beast, and the
Binding of Satan. Neither ought this Kingdom to be expected, till these two
miraculous Events have made way for it. Wherefore as they are exceedingly
mistaken, and fear not to gainsay the plain Words of the Scripture, who hold
that there shall be no fifth Kingdom, or Kingdom of the Saints here on Earth,
when in the mean time an Angel expressly tells Daniel, Chap. 7.27. that the
Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven,
shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High: So are they no
less out of the way, who dream of any humane Force to be used in the Erection
of this Kingdom. For this would be to transform the People of the Saints into a
Company of Thieves and Robbers. But as the rise and fall of the Beast, the
binding of Satan, and setting up of the Kingdom of the Saints here on Earth,
are great and mavelous Works falling out in the Age here spoken of: so also
is the first Resurrection whereof all they shall be Partakers, (and so reign
with Christ in heaven) who being either Prophets, (for none but such have the
Testimony of Jesus) or mere Saints, do suffer Death for refusing to worship the
Beast. For John plainly testifies, that only such are raised up from the Dead
to reign with Christ the thousand Years, as were for their Piety in the Reign
of the Beast, beheaded, or smitten with the Ax, (as the Greek word signifies.)
Which Expression does either intimate that the Beast shall both in Judicature
(as the Romans his Ancestors were wont to do) and also in War make use of such
a Weapon as an Ax to kill the Saints, (as we find in the Scripture that
Nebuchadnezzar did to slay the Egyptians, Jer. 40.22. where it is said, The
voice thereof, (that is, of Egypt) shall go like a Serpent, for they shall
march with an Army, and come against her with Axes, as Hewers of Wood) or else
under the most frequent and noted kind of slaughter, that shall be in use at
that time, all other ways of inflicting Death upon the Saints are comprehended.
For what reason can be imagined, why those Saints that are put to Death with
the Ax should share in the first Resurrection, rather than such as are
dispatched with some other Instrument of cruelty? But lest any one should think
this Doctrine of the first Resurrection, taken according to the Letter of the
holy Text, to be strange, (though to me it seems more strange that Christians
should scruple at a thing so plainly and punctually set down in the Scripture,
for they may as well call into question whatsoever is here spoken concerning
the Resurrection that is to be afterward at the last Day, and to which this
Resurrection is opposed,) go to, let us confirm this precious Truth, so much
encouraging Christians to lay down their Lives for the Gospel, by other
passages taken out of this Book of the Revelation, where such an anticipated
Resurrection is held forth, as belonging both to those Saints that suffer Death
under the Reign of the Beast, and also to those that die for Christ and the
Gospel at any time whatsoever. First, therefore it is in the 11. Chapter said
of the two Witnesses, (who are expressly there called Prophets, and so must
needs be two Men, since none but Men are in the Scripture termed Prophets) that
after they had been slain by the Beast, and their dead Bodies lain unburied
three Days and an half in the Streets of Jerusalem, (for not Rome but Jerusalem
is the great City where Christ was slain) The Spirit of Life from God entered
into them, and they stood upon their feet. From which words it is undeniably
manifest that the two Witnesses are raised from the Dead whilst the Beast
reigns. What hinders then, but that the other Prophets and Saints put to
Death by him, may likewise be restored to Life presently after his Defeat, as
this 20. Chapter does in the plain and obvious sense thereof clearly testify?
Again, we have in the Exposition of the nineteenth Chapter, verse 1. proved
that there is a great multitude of Saints, even before the destruction of Rome,
recalled to life, and triumphing in the kingdom of heaven. Finally it appears
from that notable passage, Chap. 2.26.27. (where Christ says, He that
overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the
Nations, (and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken to shivers) even as I have received of my Father) that
whosoever performs the duty of a Christian to the end of his life, and
undergoeth a violent death for the name of Christ (for I have elsewhere
collected that the notion of overcoming, when applied to the Saints in the
Revelation does intimate such a death) shall be raised up from the dead before
the day of judgment, to reign over the Nations. For can there any such reign
be expected, after that judgment is once past? or did not Christ, to whom
these Saints are in this respect to be made conformable, so come to reign over
the Nations? Neither does that passage of Christ, John 6.40. This is the will
of him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him,
should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Nor that
of Paul, 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive, but every man in his own order. Christ the first fruits, afterward they
that are Christ's, at his coming. These passages, I say, do not a whit withstand
the doctrine of an anticipated resurrection, which we endeavor to evince out of
the book of the Revelation. For Christ speaks of men, only as believing on
him, and Paul, of them as dying in the faith, and not for the same, as the
forecited places of the Revelation plainly do. Moreover, that the Lord Christ
Jesus does now in very deed reign in heaven, and so has done ever since he sat
down at the right hand of God, (and consequently the Saints who are partakers
of the first resurrection, shall there reign with him) is evident from that
notable passage or Paul, Ephesians. 1.19, 20, 21, 22. According to the working of
his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead,
and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, far above all
principalities and powers, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. And has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church. And from that of Peter, 1 Epist. 3.21, 22. The like figure whereunto
even Baptism does also now save us (not the putting away the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels,
and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject unto him. And also from those
of John, Rev. 1.5. and Chap. 17.14. In the former of which he says, and from
Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first begotten from the dead, and the
Prince (or Ruler,) of the Kings of the earth. And in the latter, These shall
make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings; he does not say, he shall be King of Kings. But what
need have I to accumulate texts of Scripture for the proof of this matter, when
the second and third Chapters of the Revelation are of themselves abundantly
sufficient to convince all that are not obstinately bent against the truth,
that Christ does now in his own person govern the Church, and take care of it;
for you shall there have clear and undeniable arguments, both of the cognizance
that he takes of men's actions, and of the protection he affords unto such as
walk uprightly with him, and also of the judgments he executes on them that
either turn aside out of the right way, or at least slacken their first love?
so that I am not a little moved, when I perceive many, who otherwise seem to
own the Gospel, so easily giving ear to such a doctrine, as asserteth that
Christ is not yet in the possession and exercise of his kingdom, but shall
hereafter reign, and that upon the Earth: which opinion thwarteth the whole
tenor of the New Testament (where Christ since his ascension is usually called
Lord) and annulleth the faith we repose in Christ, (for to what purpose is it
to rely on him for help and assistance, if he be not yet in his kingdom?) and
restrains prayer and worship before him, and in a word ushereth in Judaism,
for there at length this pernicious conceit is wont to center. Wherefore seeing
I have irrefragably proved, that Jesus Christ does now reign in heaven, neither
is there so much as one passage in all the Scripture, that says he shall ever
reign upon the earth, but he himself on the contrary plainly testifies, John
18.36. That his kingdom is not of this world, (which could not be true, were he
to reign personally on the earth, as worldly Kings are wont to do) I conclude
that whatsoever Saints are raised up from the dead to reign with Christ during
the space of a thousand years, before the last judgment, must of necessity
ascend up into heaven where he is. And this is plainly taught us in that
forequoted instance of the twowitnesses, who being recalled to life, go up into
heaven in a cloud. Chap. 11.12. It Is true indeed, that the Saints, mentioned in
the fifth Chapter, verse 10. say, That they were made Kings and Priests to
their God, and should reign on the earth. But here is no hint of any
resurrection, and therefore such Saints are to be understood, as having not yet
been dead, did and should reign upon the earth. Thus John says both of
himself, and the Saints in the seven Churches of Asia, Chap. 1. That Christ had
made them Kings and Priests to God. And consequently it might have been truly
affirmed of them, that they should reign upon the earth, where they were
already Kings. For whereas it is usually objected, that those Saints in the
fifth Chapter say of themselves, we shall reign upon the earth, and therefore
did not already reign, this is frivolous: for inasmuch as they were already
Kings, (as they themselves affirm) and some of them sat with their crowns upon
their heads, it must needs be that they did already reign, and so those words
we shall reign upon the earth, do not intimate the beginning, but the
continuance of their reign. Thus John writes to certain Christians of his
time, 1 Epist. 5.13. To the end that they should believe on the name of the Son
of God, which does not argue that they did not yet believe, (the contrary
whereof is in the beginning of that verse affirmed) but that John would have
them to persist in the belief of Christ. It is also said in the 22, Chapter of
this Prophecy, verse the 3. that the Throne of God shall be in the New
Jerusalem, when nevertheless the ministry of Christ in the heavenly Tabernacle
(which I have before proved to be the same with the New Jerusalem) as he
sits at the right hand of the Throne of God, does undeniably show that the
Throne of God is already in that City, and consequently that the aforesaid
passage does only imply the continuance of it there. Thus have I asserted the
doctrine of the first resurrection, and shown that the Saints who are raised
from the dead, after the binding of Satan, do reign with Christ in heaven a
thousand years. From whence it does necessarily follow that they have knowledge
of all the things in the world, as Christ has, otherwise how could they be
partakers with him in ordering and disposing them? But as they are Kings, so
also Priests of God and Christ, and accordingly do serve them both in heaven,
what by giving honor and glory to them, what by interceding with them for the
Saints who are in the mean time reigning on the earth, For so the pattern of
Christ the high priest who does himself appear before the face of God, and make
intercession for the Saints, seems to require. Nor need we to fear least the
Papists should take any advantage from this doctrine to palliate their
superstitious conceits about the Saints; for I do not suppose that the Saints
who are dead, and as Isaiah testifies, are ignorant of us, Chap. 63.16. and as
Solomon, Eccles. 9.5, 6. averreth, know not any thing, nor have any more a
portion for ever in that which is done under the Sun, do pray for them that are
here abiding on the earth, but only such Saints as are raised from the dead,
and translated into heaven, becoming there not only kings, but also Priests of
God and Christ. No marvel therefore if these persons, who thus rise a thousand
Years before the rest of the Dead, are here pronounced both holy and happy;
holy for that without holiness it would have been impossible for them to have
seen God, much less to appear before his face for others: and happy, because
all of them are endued with eternal Life, whereas many of them that are raised
after the thousand Years are expired, are under the Power of the second Death,
as the sequel of this Chapter will show. I may add as a further accession to
their happiness, that they have the Privilege of Reigning with Christ over the
Nations, whereas they that are not raised up till the last Day, thereby become
incapable of such a Kingdom, for as much as Christ shall then put down all
Rule, and all Authority, and Power, 1 Cor. 15.24.

Verse. 7. And when the thousand Years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of
his Prison.

8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four Quarters of
the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to Battle: the Number of whom
is as the Sand of the Sea.

9. And they went up on the Breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the
Saints about, and the beloved City: and Fire came down from God out of Heaven,
and devoured them.


No sooner is Satan loosed out of Prison, upon the Expiration of the thousand
Years, but that profound Tranquillity, wherein the World had so long been
hushed, is presently disturbed, and Men again embroiled in new Troubles and
Commotions. For Satan by his cunning Suggestions inciteth the Nations abiding
in the four Corners of the World, and here comprised under the name of Gog and
Magog, to levy a great and terrible War. Of which Expedition there are two
Chapters in the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel, (namely, the 38. and 39.) that do
discourse at large, so as that what is wanting in the Revelation to the full
description thereof, may from thence be supplied. It appears therefore from
the Relation of Ezekiel, that Gog (of which name we find also a certain
Reubenite to have sometimes been, 1 Chronicles. 5.4.) is a Prince that shall be in
those Times, when Satan is loosed out of his Prison, and who shall issue out of
the Northern parts, bringing with him an innumerable Multitude of armed Men
into the Land of Israel, in hope of a great Booty, the Israelites by reason of
their former long prosperity being grown exceeding wealthy, and dwelling
securely without Walls, Bars, or Gates; and having passed through the rest of
the Country, they at length sit down before Jerusalem, (which is therefore
styled the beloved City, because the City of the great King, and more dear to
him than all the dwellings of Jacob) and so encompass both her and the Army of
the Saints there encamped. But as it happened formerly at the Battle of
Armageddon, that the Saints when set in array against the Enemies, had no need
to fight, it being their strength to sit still, and wait for the Salvation of
the Lord, so fares it with them here; for after a great Earthquake, which is
wont to be a forerunner of such miraculous Defeats, See 1 Samuel 14.15. God
causes the Enemies to smite one another, and not only so, but also raineth
Fire and Brimstone upon them out of Heaven, and devoureth them. The greatness
of which Northern Army does appear by two notable effects that ensue upon the
destruction thereof. For the House of Israel is seven Months burying them, and
seven Years burning up the Weapons wherewith they were armed, so that they have
no need to take any Fuel either out of the Wood or out of the Field during
that time. But who did ever hear or read that so prodigious an Invasion has
been made by the Northern Nations upon the Land of Israel, or indeed by any
Nation upon any Land whatsoever, since the Book of Ezekiel was written, to this
very day? wherefore the accomplishment of this Prophecy touching Gog and Magog
is yet to be expected, and consequently when it is said in the beginning of the
Revelation, that the time is at hand, we must not thereupon conclude that
whatsoever is related afterward in that Book, was shortly to be performed,
(for this very Chapter of it, whereon we now comment, contains the History of
above a thousand Years) but only that they should ere long begin to be
fulfilled, as will easily appear to him that rightly apprehends what the
opening of the Seals, that are mentioned in the sixth Chapter, does intimate.

Verse. 10. And the Devil that deceived them, was call into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented
Day and Night, for ever and ever.


When Gog and Magog are once destroyed, Satan who had deceived and incited them
to make so terrible a War upon the Saints without just cause, is for his labor
cast (not into the bottomless Pit to be there detained for a certain time) but
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to be there tormented for ever and ever.
From whence it may be gathered, 1. That Satan after this time shall not tempt
the Sons of Men any more, and consequently (as we have before discoursed,) they
shall have no other inward solicitation to sin, then what issues from the
natural pravity of their own hearts, which is nothing in comparison of that
malignity, which is infused into them by the artifice of Satan. 2. That the
reason why the Beast was formerly thrown into Hellfire, and not Satan also,
that stirred him up, is this, because God intended to make no further use of
the Beast, whereas Satan was a thousand Years after to seduce Gog and Magog.
Which being done, and so the wrathful Ministry of Satan accomplished, he
likewise is flung into Hellfire to be there for ever tormented together with
the Beast. 3. That Hellfire (for that is the same with the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone) is already in being, and not to be created at the Day of Judgment,
otherwise how should Satan be thrown thereinto before the coming of that Day?
4. That Satan though a Spirit, yet is not therefore immaterial, otherwise how
should a true, real, and material fire as that of the Lake is (seeing the smoke
of men therein tormented is said to ascend for ever and ever, Chap. 14.11.) be
capable of working on him? For he is no less said to be tormented therein, than
the Beast and the false Prophet, who being both Men (as I before proved) must
needs consist of matter, as all will grant. As for the place where Hellfire
is, we shall see concerning that toward the end of this Chapter.

Verse. 11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
Face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no Place for them.

Verse. 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God; and the Books
were opened: and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life: and the
Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according
to their Works.

Verse. 13. And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it; and Death and Hell
delivered up the Dead which were in them: and they were judged every Man
according to their Works.


The Prophecies of the Revelation, if we look rightly on them, considering them
in their own plainness, and not as they are disguized and tangled with the
far-fetcht Opinions of Men, will be found to have been set down in an orderly
manner, those things being usually delivered first that are first to be
accomplished. Hence the casting of the Devil into Hellfire, being once
dispatched, the universal judgment, which was to follow, (whether in a little
or a large distance of time, is uncertain) comes here in its own place very
fitly to be described. God therefore is the supreme Judge, is said to sit upon
a great white Throne. By which words the color of his Throne, which had been
hitherto concealed, seems to be here made known unto us. For seeing God, as
David testifies, has prepared his Throne in the Heavens for Judgment, Psalm
9.7. and 103.19. and whiteness therein does, for its purity and luster, as well
comport with the glory of God, if not better, than any other color, why should
we not believe that the Throne of Judgment whereon God sits in the Heavens,
is (as it is here described) white? But as the glory of God is set out in some
measure by the greatness and color of his Throne; so is it infinitely more by
the action that is here ascribed to him, namely the Annihilation of the heaven
and earth. For to make them so fly away from before his face, as that there is
no more place found for them, is indeed to reduce them into nothing. Otherwise
had they any being, they would also have a place, and be somewhere. This
reduction of the world into nothing leads us to believe the more easily that
it was at first created out of nothing. For had the matter thereof been from
all eternity coexisting with God, it would like him be ens necessarium, and so
likewise of necessity continue for ever with him.

John having seen the sovereign judge sitting on his throne, does in the next
place see them also that stand before him in judgment, and they are the dead
of all sorts, whether they be of high or low degree. For that this expression
of great and small does so signify, is evident from Deuteronomy, 1.17. Where
Moses says to the Judges of Israel, Ye shall not respect persons, but ye shall
hear the small as well as the great. And also from the nineteenth Chapter of
this book, verse 18. Where an Angel inviteth all the fowls of the heaven to
come, that they may eat the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small
and great. For the trial of the persons aforesaid, are opened certain books,
containing not their actions, (for the words import the contrary) but the laws
by which God proceeds in judging them, and consequently they are the books of
the Old and New Testament. For Paul plainly tells us, that as many as have
sinned in (or under) the law, shall be judged by the law, Romans 2.12. And Christ
says, John 12.48. He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one
that judges him, the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the
last day. These therefore must needs be the books, and out of the things
written in them, the dead shall be judged according to their works. For the
inspection of these books does presently discover both of what kind the works
themselves are, and what reward is appointed to them. From whence it may be
collected, that they to whom God never made known his will, nor imparted any of
those laws recorded in the Old and New Testament, but suffered them to walk in
their own ways, albeit they shall perish for their wickedness, yet shall they
not undergo any trial. And thus much are we taught by the Apostle Paul, who
says, 2 These. 1.7, 8. That the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that knew not God. And Romans 2.12. As
many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law, That is,
without having any law proposed, whereby they should be tried and cast.
Moreover that we might have a more full knowledge of the foresaid judgment,
both the resurrection of the dead, which is a preparative thereunto, and also
the several places from whence the dead come forth are here described. For the
Sea gives up the bodies of them that were drowned therein, and the Grave
gives up the bodies of them that were buried in the earth. For that the Grave
is here to be understood by death is evident, in that it is a place of the dead
distinguished both from the Sea, and also from Hell. But there is no other
receptacle of the dead, besides these twain, save only the Grave. Thus we find
that Job does by death, understand the Grave, Chap. 27.15. When he says of the
wicked man, that those that remain of him shall be buried in death, and his
widows shall not weep. Finally Hell (not Hellfire) gives up the souls both of
them that were drowned in the Sea, (under which name all waters are
comprehended) and also of them that were buried in the earth. For that Hell is
designed to be the mansion of separated Souls, appears from the words of
Peter, Acts 2.31. Who speaking out of the Psalms concerning the resurrection of
Christ, says, that his soul was not left in hell, neither did his flesh see
corruption. And also from that passage of David, Psalm 30.3. O Lord, thou have
brought up my soul from Hell, thou have kept me alive that I should not go down
into the pit. For that I have rightly rendered the words in saying from hell,
and not from the Grave is manifest both from the Greek version, which here has
(...), and also from the Hebrew original, not using the word (...) which is
proper to denote a Grave or Sepulcher, See Genesis 23.6.) but (...) whereby Hell
is wont to be expressed, and which lies in the lower parts of the earth, (See
the Hebrew context of Numb. 16.30.33.) Besides it is apparent to common sense
that not the souls, but only the bodies of men are laid in the grave.

Verse. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: This is the
second death.

Verse. 15. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast
into the lake of fire.


What the second death is, and consequently those words mean, which we read in
the second clause of the sixth verse foregoing, as also those Chap. 2.11. where
it is said, He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death, is here
by John explained: for he expressly tells us, that the lake of fire and
brimstone is the second death. So that to be cast into that lake, and to be
under the power of the second death, or hurt of it, are expressions of the same
import. Thus had we the testimony of Jesus expounded to us in the nineteenth
Chapter. Nevertheless how Death and Hell being both of them places and
receptacles of the dead, should be cast into the said lake, is hard to
comprehend. Yea were it not for a certain passage in the sixth Chapter of this
prophecy, I should be inclineable to think that this was a mystery, which God
would not have us pry into, as we have above shown that sundry such mysteries
are to be met withal in the Book of the Revelation. But forasmuch as in the
Chapter aforesaid, verse 8. Death is brought in riding upon a pale horse, and
Hell following him, and consequently both of them are represented in the
similitude of persons, we may from thence rationally collect, that in the
passage here under debate, the Holy Ghost intending to intimate, that after the
universal Judgment there shall be neither burial nor separation of the soul
from the body, does exhibit two persons representing Death and Hell, which are
thrown into the lake of fire, as resigning up their Office to it, and being
swallowed up therein, according to that of the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 15.14. O
death, I will be thy plague; O Hell (so it is in the Hebrew, and not Grave) I
will be thy destruction.

Besides the books of the Old and New Testament, which are the rule by which
the actions of men; that have had some form of Religion delivered by God, shall
at length be examined, there is yet another Book opened in the day of
judgment, to wit, the Book of life, wherein whosoever have not their names
written, are said to be cast into the Lake of fire. From whence it may be
rightly concluded, that as the want of being enrolled in that Book was above in
the thirteenth and also in the seventeenth Chapters alleged, as the Cause why
so many erred most grossly in admiring and worshipping the Beast, so is it here
why so many are thrown into the Lake of Fire, in that it is altogether
impossible for such persons to attain that piety, to which the Promise of
eternal Life is annexed. As for the place of the Lake of Fire that is here so
much spoken of, were it part of the World it would of necessity perish with the
World, which (as we have before evinced) is to be abolished. Wherefore seeing
it abides for ever, we ought in reason to conceive that it is without the
compass of the World, in the Description of which the Scripture does
perpetually omit it. And hence it seems to be called by Christ, the outer
Darkness, Matthew. 22.13. as being without the Verge of Heaven and Earth.

Chap. 21. Verse. 1. And I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth: for the first
Heaven, and the first Earth were passed away; and there was no more Sea.


The Exposition.
WHat I before said touching the orderly course held by John in setting down,
his Prophecies, is here worthy again to be observed. For having in the
precedent Chapter described the abolition of Heaven and Earth, he now
mentions the new Heaven and the new Earth, that are to succeed in their
place. And he therefore affirms that he had seen this new Heaven and this new
Earth, (though to this very day the old ones still continue) because they were
represented to him in a Vision. Thus Christ says to his Disciples, Matthew.
16.28. There be some of them that are standing here, who shall not taste of
Death, till they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom. Not that any of them
were to remain alive to the end of the World, for both the Scripture and the
Ecclesiastical History testify the contrary, but because about eight days
after he vouchsafed to three of them a sight of that glory wherein he shall
come as King to judge the World, Luke 9.27, 28, 29, 30. But for as much as many
endeavor to obscure this passage of the Revelation with their forced
Allegories, let us confirm the plain and literal meaning thereof by what the
Scripture elsewhere speaks concerning this matter. The Apostle Peter
describing the Day of Judgment, and the alteration that shall happen to the
World thereby, tells the pious Jews to whom he directs his Letters, that
the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat, the Earth also and the Works therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then that
all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in
all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and hasting unto the coming of
the Day of God, wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless we according to his
Promise, look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness,
2 Epist. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. Is it possible that any thing should more plainly
and positively be delivered, to show that the Heavens and the Earth, which now
are, shall be dissolved by Fire, and abolished, and new Heavens together with a
new Earth be created of God in their room? Yea, was not this Doctrine long
before taught by two sacred Writers of the Old Testament, to the latter of
which the words of Peter (whilst he speaks of Gods Promise touching a new
Heaven and a new Earth) seem to relate? For the divine Author of the 102.
Psalm, directing his speech to God, says in the 25. and 26. Verses thereof, Of
old thou have laid the Foundation of the Earth: and the Heavens are the Work of
thine Hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all of them shall
wax old like a Garment: as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed. Which passage does not only tell us in plain words that the Heavens
and the Earth shall perish, but with all intimate that new Heavens and a new
Earth shall be created, whilst it says, that God shall change the Heavens and
the Earth, when grown old, as a Vesture. For in the change of an old Vesture, a
new one is taken in its stead. Likewise the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 65.17.
brings in God, saying, Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth: and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind; and Chap. 66.22. God, to
comfort the Jews, speaks thus, As the new Heavens and the new Earth, which I
will make, shall remain before me: so shall your seed and your name remain. Are
not three such Witnesses as these sufficient to confirm the Exposition that we
have given on the foresaid passage of the Revelation? yea, does not the very
close of the Verse evince it, when it is said, The Sea is no more? For seeing
in the World to come there is no place for Commerce and Traffic, to what
purpose should there be any Sea, which serves for a more easy and compendious
passage from one Country to another, that so Men may be supplied with such
Commodities as they want? But if any one here object that he cannot imagine any
more need of a new Heaven and a new Earth, than of a new Sea, I answer, that it
does not therefore follow that they are all alike, in that it is expressly
denied that there shall be any more Sea, but on the contrrary it is plainly
affirmed that there shall be a new Heaven and a new Earth. Neither has God
left us wholly ignorant concerning the use of the new Earth, (and consequently
of the new Heaven, which will in likelihood be subservient thereunto, as the
old Heaven is to the old Earth) as appears from the words of the Apostle
Paul, Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22. where he says, The earnest expectation of the
Creature waits for the Manifestation of the Sons of God. For the Creature was
made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected
the same in hope: Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Children of God. For we
know that the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until
now. Now seeing the Creatures that here expect so earnestly and groan to be
delivered from vanity, are twice plainly distinguished from the Saints and
Children of God, is it not thereby manifest that the other living Creatures
which God created, shall, after the Saints are once clothed with immortality,
be (though not in their former Individuals, yet in others of the same kind)
made immortal as well as they, and consequently live upon the new Earth, or can
any other sense be put upon the words of Paul, without running into Absurdities?

Verse. 2. And I John saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out
of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband.


In the same manner that John had before seen the new Heaven and the new Earth,
does he here see the new Jerusalem: only this Jerusalem is already in being,
and therefore called New, because it is so to the Saints when admitted
thereinto in the life to come. Thus Paul, before Ananias was in very deed come
to him, had already seen him in a vision entering in and laying his hand upon
him, that he might receive his sight. Acts 9.11, 12. But forasmuch as the
knowledge or the New Jerusalem is of so great importance, without which neither
can the happiness of the saints be rightly apprehended, nor their faith, as
wanting a solid foundation, be firm and stable, we will evince out of the
Scripture that by the New Jerusalem is not meant the Church, but (as it is here
expressly termed) a City which God has reserved in heaven for the Saints. To
omit therefore the observation, that may to this effect be rightly deduced from
the very name of Jerusalem, which being in the Hebrew of the dual number, sign
fieth that there are two Cities known by that appellation,, the Testimonies
taken out of the divine Author to the Hebrews, will abundantly confirm our
assertion. For he says, Chap. 11.9, 10. By faith Abraham sojourned in the land
of promise as in a strange country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and
Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise. For he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Certainly a City that is opposed
to Tabernacles, as having foundations whereof they are destitute, and whose
builder and maker is God himself, is a City truly and properly so called. Again
in the 13.14, 15. and 16. verses of the same Chapter he speaks thus, All
these, (namely Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) died in faith, not having received
the promises, but having seen them a far of, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the
earth. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a
country. And truly if they had been mindful of that country, from whence they
came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned, but now they desire
abetter country, that is an heavenly, wherefore God is not ashamed to be
called their God: For he has prepared for them a City. You see by this that
God has provided for the Saints a City, which is their heavenly Country; and
that the Patriarchs believed and longed for the same, although they had
received no promises of it, but only seen them a far off, and that they showed
their faith and longing by confessing themselves to be strangers and pilgrims
on the earth. How much then does their practice condem many Christians, who
having received express promises of such a City and Kingdom, are so far from
longing after it, as that they deny that there is any such place, turning it
into an allegory and mere notion! The same divine Author further says, Chap.
12.22, 23. Ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerablt company of Angels; To the general
assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in heaven, and to God
the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. In which words
the heavenly Jerusalem is not only distinguished, but also parted from the
Church, by the interposal of another thing, to which we have access in the
Gospel, to wit, the myriads of Angels, so that there remains no
tergiversation, but that the New Jerusalem and the Church of God must of
necessity be acknowledged for two different things. Finally he says Chap.
13.13.14. Let us go forth unto him, (that is, Christ Jesus) without the camp,
bearing his reproach: For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to
come. Here also the City is distinguished from the Church, for none can deny
that they which seek for that City to come are the Church, whereas the City it
self is the thing sought for. It further appears from the first clause of
this fourteenth verse, to which the second has relation, that a City truly and
properly so called is here meant. But were all these Testimonies laid aside,
the very descent of the New Jerusalem out of heaven (whereby the New heaven is
to be understood, as the foregoing verse does show) sufficiently argues, that
not the Church, but a City is thereby intended. For the Church consisting of
faithful men and women, that were both generated and regenerated on the earth,
and there have their continual abode, cannot without great absurdity be said to
descend out of heaven, much less out of the New heaven, which is not yet in
being. Moreover the description of the New Jerusalem, set down in this and the
following Chapter, will fully evidence to us both how truly I affirm it to be a
very City, and also how aptly John compares it to a Bride, that is dressed and
adorned for her husband.

Verse. 3. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

Verse. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be
no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain: for the former things are passed away.


The voice that is here heard out of heaven, and which in likelihood,
proceeds from Angels, (for God is brought in speaking immediately after, and
Angels are elsewhere found to congratulate the salvation of men, Luke 2.10, 11,
13, 14.) confirms what I before asserted, that by the New Jerusalem is meant
a place, and not the Church or people of God: for it is styled, upon the
descent thereof out of heaven, the Tabernacle of God that is with men, and so
is a thing different from the men themselves, of whom the Church consists.
Again, though the Church be sometimes in the Scripture known by the name of a
Temple, yet have I not met with any instance where it is called a Tabernacle.
Nor is it absurd that the New Jerusalem, though a City that has foundations,
should here be termed a Tabernacle; for being described as descending down from
God out of heaven, it does (contrary to other Cities) remove from place to
place, as Tabernacles or Tents are wont to do. The privilege that they enjoy,
who are admitted into this Tabernacle, is to have the very person of God among
them. For so much is signified by those words, wherein it is said, God himself
shall be with them: which also intimate that during the state of this life God
himself is not with his people, however his favor and assistance be with them.
Neither let any one check at that expression of mine touching the person of
God, for it is borrowed from Heb. 1.3. Where Christ is called the express Image
of his person. When God shall thus be present with the Saints in the New
Jerusalem, he shall thereby become their God or Sovereign benefactour in the
most perfect manner. For if according to the intimation of the divine Author to
the Hebrews, Chap. 11.16. God be called the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob, because he has prepared for them a City, how much better may he be
called their God, when he vouchsafes to them the enjoyment both of that City,
and also of his own personal presence therein? For seeing that in his presence
there is fullness of joy, as David testifies, Psalm 16.11. it must needs come
to pass that the Saints shall by the means thereof be exempted from all misery
whatsoever, and (as it is here expressed) neither weep, nor sorrow, nor cry,
nor suffer either death, or pain any more, because the former state and
condition of men, wherein all these things had place, is now quite done away.
Where let it by the way be marked, that when it is in the Text said, There
shall be no more death, this does of it self put it out of doubt, that what is
here spoken of men, concerns not this life, but that which is to come,
according to the testimony of Christ himself, who tells us in the Gospel
according to Luke, Chap. 20.35, 36. That they which shall be accounted worthy
to obtain that other world, and the resurrection from the dead, are also the
persons that cannot die any more.

Verse. 5. And he that sat upon the throne, said, Behold, I make all things new.
And he said unto me, Write; for these words are true and faithful.

Verse. 6. And he said unto me, It is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end: I will give unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of the Water
of life freely.

Verse. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God,
and he shall be my son.

Verse. 8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers,
and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: which is the second
death.


The making of all things new, is altogether necessary to the happiness of the
Saints; yet seeing this was a thing, which for the greatness thereof was likely
to find but little credit amongst men (as we by experience find it come to
pass) God is not content with what others from heaven had spoken of it, but
does himself say to John, Behold, I make all things new; and not only so, but
commands John to write the same, that it may remain upon Record for ever,
alleging this as the reason, namely because the words which both he himself
and others had uttered concerning this matter were true and faithful. Which
Epithets are not therefore used by God, that he might only signify that there
was no falsehood in the words aforesaid, (for then what will become of the
emphasis that lies in the word these, it being impossible that any speech
proceeding from God should be false?) but rather to intimate that there was
nothing in them obscure and uncertain, as it fares with sundry other sayings
of God, which are very doubtful and hard to be understood. Thus when Daniel had
declared to Nebuchadnezzar very plainly, both his dream and the interpretation
thereof, he says in the close of his speech, (as the Greek version, not
varying from the Original Syriack, has it, (...), that is, The dream is true,
and the interpretation thereof faithful, or sure, Chap. 2.45. It is also said
Chap. 8.26. after that the visions happening to Daniel at evening on his bed, and
in the morning when he was risen up from thence, had been fully explained, the
vision of the evening and the morning, which was told, is true. Finally when
Daniel Chap. 7. had seen certain visions, and was at first troubled about the
sense of them, but afterward understood it, he writes thus, verse 16.17, 18,
19. I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all
this, so he told me and made me how the interpretation of the things These
great Beasts, which are four, are four Kings, which shall arise out of the
earth. But the Saints of the most high shall take the Kingdom, and possess the
kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. Then I would know the truth of the
fourth beast, which was diverse from all the others. From whence it is evident
that to know the truth of visions, is to understand the interpretation, and
meaning of them. Wherefore to return to the foresaid passage of the Revelation,
when it is said, These words are true and faithful, it is all one as if it had
been said, These words are plain, and certain, and to be taken as they sound:
and consequently such as go about to turn the prophecy touching the New heaven
and the New earth, and the descent of the New Jerusalem, and the making of all
things new into an allegory, do exceedingly err from the true and genuine
meaning thereof. But God has not yet ceased to inculcate the making of all
things new, because of the infinite consequence thereof. Wherefore to show how
certain the same is, he speaks of it though to come, as if it were already
past, saying, it is done: he also backeth it with a strong reason, the better
to imprint the belief thereof, in the minds of men, whilst he says that he is
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. The connection of which reason with
the thing to be proved thereby, is this, that seeing God is not wont, like
frail and fickle man to do his work by halfes, but thoroughly to effect them, it
cannot be but that having once begun the salvation of the Saints, he should at
length accomplish the same, and in order thereunto make all things new. God
having thus fully declared his purpose to make all things new, does afterward
invite men to come and partake of the water of life freely, without money and
without price. The fountain, where this water springs, is in the beginning of
the following Chapter said to be the throne of God and the Lamb, and therefore
we are not to understand any water figuratively so taken, but such as being
received into the body, causes eternal Life in those that drink it. But the
Invitation to drink of this Water is made to none by God, save such as thirst
after it, and so have an ardent desire to enjoy the benefit of the same. What
shall we then say to those, who are so far from longing to drink of this Water,
that they believe there is no such thing, turning all that is said thereof into
an Allegory? In the next place God promises to them that overcome, that they
shall inherit all things, namely, both the Heaven and the Earth that now are,
and also those that are to come. For they (as I have before shown) being such
as lay down their Lives for the Gospel, have a Privilege above others that die
in the Lord, in that they are admitted to reign with Christ in Heaven long
before the general Resurrection, and so like him are the Heirs of all things,
and Sons of God in a more perfect manner than the rest of the Faithful, who
though they enjoy eternal Life with Christ, yet are not vouchsafed the Honor
to sit with him in his Throne. See Chap. 3.21. But as God is the God or
sovereign Benefactour of those that suffer Death for the Confirmation of the
Truth; so on the contrary, such as dare not out of cowardice to partake in the
afflictions of the Gospel, or refuse to believe therein, or are filthy in their
conversation, or unjustly deprive others of their Life, or defile themselves
with Women, or use the confederacy of evil spirits to produce mavelous
effects, or worship either false Gods, or the true God in a false manner, by
Images which they make to themselves, or have guile in their mouth, not
speaking as they mean, have their portion assigned of God unto them in the Lake
of Fire, which is here again said to be the second Death, and that suitably
enough. For if the place wherein the Saints enjoy everlasting pleasure, is in
the Scripture called by the name of Life, (as appears by the Collation of
Mark 9.47. with Math. 18.9. In the former of which it is said, It is better
having but one Eye to enter into the Kingdom of God: In the latter, It is
better having but one Eye to enter into Life:) In like manner may Hellfire,
wherein the wicked feel everlasting pain, be styled by the name of Death.

Verse. 9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven
Vials full of the seven last Plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither,
I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs Wife.

10. And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high Mountain, and
showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from
God.


John had above said that he had seen the new Jerusalem, but neither told us
how he came to have a sight thereof, nor gave us a particular Description of
that goodly Fabric, both which he does now perform. For as to the first, he
says, that one of the seven Angels that had the seven Vials full of the seven
last Plagues, (and therefore in all likelihood the same that had formerly shown
him the Judgment of the great Whore, Chap. 17.1.) came and spoke with him,
offering to show him the Bride the Lambs Wife. But here they that do by a
mystical Interpretation turn the new Jerusalem into the Church, think they have
gotten an impregnable place wherein to secure themselves, especially seeing the
Revelation does elsewhere confessdly style the Church by the name of the Lambs
Wife, Chap. 19.7. But they that argue thus, do not in the mean time perceive,
that when in the 7. Verse of the 19. Chapter mention had been made of the Lambs
Wife, it is in the following Verse subjoyned, that it was to her granted, that
she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white. For the fine Linen is the
Righteousness of the Saints. So that the Scripture it self thereby directs us
by the Lambs Wife in the said place to understand the Church, howbeit not the
Church abiding on the Earth (of which the Adversaries speak) but reigning with
Christ in Heaven; whereas, when in the ninth Verse of this 21. Chapter the
Angel promises to show unto John the Lambs Wife, he presently after presents
to his view a great City descending out of Heaven from God. Which does
sufficiently teach us, that by the Lambs Wife here is not as formerly meant the
Church, but a very City, wherein the Saints shall hereafter dwell. For though
the Wife of Christ does by a more exact Metaphor signify the Church, yet does
not this hinder, but that by a less exact one, the City also to which the
Church has relation, may be signified by the same, yea, nothing is more usual
in the Scripture, (as I have before proved) than to represent Cities under the
notion of Women. Thus we saw that the polluted and foul City of Rome was called
an Harlot, Chap. 17. why then may not that holy and undefiled City, the new
Jerusalem be styled the Lambs Wife? By this means we come to the right
understanding of that passage, Gal. 4.26. The Jerusalem that is above, is free,
which is the Mother of us all. For in as much as the heavenly Jerusalem is not
only inseparably annexed to Christ, but also at his disposal, and so elegantly
called his Wife, she must needs be the Mother of all Christians, who are both
regenerated by the proposal thereof, and designed to be the Inhabitants of the
same.

In the next place he says, that the Angel carried him away in the spirit to a
great and high Mountain, (from whence a fairer Prospect might be had) and
showed him that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from
God. The beauty and excellency whereof he does describe, first in saying that
it had the glory of God. And lest any one should think that the glory of God,
which does enlighten the new Jerusalem, was like to the dazzling and offensive
splendor of the Sun, upon whom neither are Men able to look, nor endure his
heat, John tells us that the Luminary thereof (so the Greek word (...)
signifies) is like unto a stone most precious, even a Jasper-stone clear as
Crystal, (which casts a most chearing light on such as behold it.)

2. He says that it has a great and high Wall, wherein are twelve Gates, and
at the Gates twelve Angels, and names written thereon, which are those of the
twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel. Three of which Gates look toward the
East, and three toward the North, three toward the South, and three toward
the West. All which is so plain, that it needs no Interpretation. Only let
it be observed how God vouchsafes to the Israelites especial honor, above any
other Nation under Heaven, as having inscribed the names of the twelve
Patriarchs, (from whom their several Tribes are denominated) upon the Gates of
the heavenly Jerusalem. From whence it may be collected, that God ordained
those Patriarchs to Salvation from the beginning. For it would be ridiculous to
imagine, that God would write the names of such men on the Gates of the
heavenly Jerusalem, as were not to have any portion therein. And this affords
another collection (whereby that is confirmed which we formerly discoursed upon
the 8. Verse of the 17. Chapter) that all who are to inherit the heavenly
Jerusalem, were by name appointed thereunto from the Foundation of the World.
For what reason is conceivable, why God should in this manner design the twelve
Patriarchs, and not likewise all the rest of the Citizens? By such an account
all would not be alike beholding to God for their Salvation; which is absurd.

3. He says that the Wall of the City has twelve Foundations, whereon are
written the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles. Here therefore what I even now
noted touching the Inscription of men's names upon the Gates of the heavenly
Jerusalem, does not only recurre, but is also very much confirmed, seeing the
Scripture does elsewhere plainly teach, that the Apostles are to be saved. For
Christ says unto them, Luke 22.28, 29. Ye are they which have continued with
me in my temptations, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me. So that the Doctrine touching the Ordination of a certain
number of men by name to eternal life, from the Foundation of the World,
seems by these two Instances to be clearly proved.

Verse. 15. And he that talked with me, had a golden Reed to measure the City,
and the Gates thereof, and the Wall thereof.

16. And the City lies apiece, and the length is as large as the breadth;
and he measured the City with the Reed, twelve thousand Furlongs; the length,
and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.


The Description of the City still goes on: for to the end we might know the
dimensions thereof, the Angel that here talks with John, having a golden Reed
in his hand does measure both the City it self, and also the Gates together
with the Wall thereof. But for as much as the highness of the Gates is not
afterward set down, we must needs remain ignorant thereof, and ought to
content our selves with the measure of the Wall, wherein it is contained. The
City therefore lying apiece, (for that is the fittest Figure for rest, as
Roundness best agrees with Motion) is twelve thousand Furlongs broad, twelve
thousand long, and twelve thousand high, (which after the proportion of eight
Furlongs to a Mile, makes fifteen hundred Miles every way) and therefore it
might well above be called the great City. And indeed the compass thereof ought
to be very large, in that it is to contain all the Faithful that ever were from
the beginning of the World to the end thereof. As for the Wall, it is a hundred
forty four Cubits, after the Cubit of a Man; in whose similitude the Angel here
appears. But the Cubit of an ordinary man, from the elbow to the top of the
middle finger, is accounted half a yard, and so the Wall is seventy two yards.
But in as much as it is not here expressed, whether this measure pertains to
the height, or to the thickness thereof, (for as for the length it must needs
be greater than that of the City it self which the Wall does encompass) it will
be best to refer it unto both, and so to reckon the Wall seventy two yards
high, and as many broad. By which means that will be verified which was before
spoken of it, namely, that it was great and high. The matter whereof this Wall
is made, as to the main Body thereof, is said to consist of Jasper, which is a
stone most precious, and casting a most delicate luster, otherwise the Luminary
of the City would not have been like to it. The Foundations of the Wall being
in number twelve, consist of twelve different precious Stones, which are here
particularly named. But seeing it is hard (if not impossible) for us exactly to
distinguish and describe the same; (as the jarring of those that have written
of them does imply) nor would the right distinction of them, if attained,
advance our spiritual edification, in that it appears not from the Text, that
any Mystery lies couched under them, I will omit any longer discourse of them,
and hasten to that which is further related concerning the glory of the
heavenly Jerusalem. The twelve Gates thereof are said to consist of one entire
Pearl a piece, and the City it self together with the Street thereof to be of
pure Gold, transparent as Glass; which is of such rarity, as neither Nature nor
Art is able to effect. Otherwise the Vessels that are made of Gold, would be of
far greater beauty, than now they are. And though Temples are wont exceedingly
to grace the Cities wherein they stand, yet is the heavenly Jerusalem so
ordered, as that having no Temple, it is not a whit defective in beauty for
that, in as much as the Lord God Almighty together with the Lamb supplyeth the
place of a Temple, adorning the City with his illustrious presence infinitely
more than any Temple could do. For there is no comparison between the beauty of
any Temple, though built by God, and that of God himself; which made the
Prophet Zechary to cry out, How great is his beauty! Chap. 9.17. Accordingly
the Hebrew word (...) recorded among the proper names of God, is by
interpretation the beautiful one, as being most aptly derived from (...) which
signifies to be beautiful, agreeable, and comely. Moreover, as for the beauty
of Christ, the Lamb of God, that is amply set forth in the first Chapter of
this Prophecy, to which I refer the Reader for further satisfaction herein. But
as God and Christ supply the place of a Temple in adorning the heavenly
Jerusalem, so also do they of the Sun and Moon in enlightening of it, and so
render such kinds of Luminaries altogether useless to that City. In which
light of the new Jerusalem, that streameth from God and Christ, and is of a
more pure and exhilarating nature than that of the Sun and Moon, shall the
Nations and Multitudes of them that are saved, converse. For that the word
Nation here used, does elsewhere also in the Scripture sometimes denote no
other than a Company or Multitude, and not all the People dwelling in the
compass of such a Country, or derived from such an Ancestour, is evident from
that passage of Peter, 1 Epist. 2.9. where writing to the believing Jews of the
dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, he says, Ye are
a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation. And this passage of
John, wherein he says, that the Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in
the light of the new Jerusalem, does plainly put a difference between the
Church and her. For the Nations of them that are saved, are the Church, and
therefore the new Jerusalem, in whose light they walk, is the place of their
abode, and so a City, as it is here again and again entitled. To render which
City yet more glorious, it is said, that the Kings of the Earth shall bring
their glory and honor thereinto. For in as much as the virtue of pious Kings,
both for the difficulty that there is in attaining and exercising the same,
because of the extraordinary Temptations to which their condition does expose
them, and also for the great influence it has upon the World, does far exceed
that of other men; hence it is that God, who renders to all men according to
their Works, will at the last Day confer a greater measure of glory and honor
upon such Kings, and therefore their luster will in a signal manner adorn the
new Jerusalem. Howbeit the glory and honor of the Nations that are saved, when
it also (as it is here written) shall be brought into the new Jerusalem, will
add no little splendor thereunto. Moreover, the Gates of this City shall never
be shut. For seeing the Gates of Cities are wont to be shut at night only, and
here shall be perpetual Day, in that the glory of God does enlighten it without
intermission, there is no place left for the shutting of the Gates belonging to
the new Jerusalem. But though the Gates ly continually open, yet shall not all
persons whatsoever enter thereinto. For whosoever, having been of a vicious
life, and addicted either to Debauchery or Lying, would by his abode defile
that holy place, he is debarred entrance thereinto, and such only admitted who
have been pure and undefiled in their ways; which Purity is here intimated by
saying, that they are written in the Lambs Book of Life, and consequently the
Cause why any man attaineth Holiness of Life, is the enrolling of his name in
the Book of Life, to which agrees that of the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 1.4.
According as he has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World, that
we should be holy and unblameable before him in love. The Apostle does not here
say, that they were chosen, because God foresaw they would be holy, but to the
end they might be so. He also speaks to the same purpose, 2 Timothy 1.9. where
he says, God has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according
to our Works, (and therefore not of foreseen good Works,) but according to his
own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the World
began.

Chap.22. Verse. 1. And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as
Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.


The Exposition.
JOhn going forward in the description of the new Jerusalem and the things
thereto pertaining, does here speak of the Water of Life, which God had before
promised to give freely unto such, as thirsted after it, and which causes
eternal Life in the Drinkers of it. This Water must needs be properly taken, in
that all the Circumstances of the place evince the same. For first, the Angel
shows to John the River thereof. But if it fall under the sight, it cannot be
mystical Water, which is exposed to the apprehension of the understanding
only. 2. It is said of this Water, that it is clear or shining (so the Greek
word (...) here used, signifies) like unto Crystal. Wherefore seeing the very
color thereof is here set down, it must needs be Water literally so taken. 3.
It proceeds out of the Throne of God and the Lamb. But Water mystically
understood, though it may proceed from him that sits on the Throne, yet can
it not without manifest absudity be said to issue out of the Throne it self. 4.
The River of this Water has Trees growing on both sides thereof, which agrees
not to Water figuratively so taken. Thus have we asserted the Doctrine touching
the Water of Life plainly and properly so called, which does not only give
light to that passage of David, Psalm. 36.8, 9. but receive attestation from it,
for it is there said, Thou shall make them drink of the River of thy pleasures,
for with thee is the Fountain of Life. But this River of pleasures is here in
the Revelation said to have two Springs, the one rising out of the Throne of
God, the other out of the Throne of the Lamb, that we might acknowledge our
selves indebted not only to God, but also to Christ (whom God has exalted to
be a Prince and Savior, Acts 5.31.) For the benefit of eternal Life. Suitable
whereunto is that acclamation of the Saints glorified in the Kingdom of Heaven,
Chap. 7.10. Salvation to our God that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb.

Verse. 2. In the midst of the Street of it, and of either side of the River,
was there the Tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of Fruits, and yielded her
Fruit every Month; and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the
Nations.


As in the former Verse the Water of Life was shown unto John, so also is the
Tree of Life in this Verse; which Circumstance (as I before reasoned)
sufficiently argues that it is a Tree plainly and properly so called,
otherwise it could not have been presented to his view. Again, this Tree is
said to grow in a certain place, namely, in the midst of the Street pertaining
to the new Jerusalem, and on each side of the River, that runs through the
same. But this never comes to pass when the Tree of Life is to be figuratively
understood. See Prove. 3.18. Wisdom is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon
her. And Chap. 11.30. The Fruit of the Righteous is a Tree of Life. And Chap.
13.12. When the Desire comes it is a Tree of Life. And Chap. 15.4. A wholesome
Tongue is a Tree of Life. In all which Texts the Tree of Life being confessedly
taken after a figurative manner, there is no place mentioned where it grows.
Whereas in the Revelation the place of its growth is also expressed, as
appears both from the passage under discussion, and from the 14. Verse of the
same Chap. where it is said, Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in t^^ough the Gates
into the City. And also from the 7. Verse. of the 2. Chap. where Christ says to
the Angel of the Ephesine Church, To him that overcomes will I give to eat of
the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Which last
passage does further confirm our assertion, in that it styles the heavenly
Jerusalem, (for that we were even now taught to be the place where the tree of
life grows) by the name of the paradise of God. For the true signification of
a Paradise is an Orchard or Garden set with fruit trees, as appears from
Eccles. 2.5. Where the Greek version runs thus, (...). That is, I made me
Gardens and Orchards, and planted trees in them of all kinds of fruits. Thus
that Garden or Orchard which God planted in Eden, for Adam, is described in
this manner, Genesis 2.9. Out of the ground made the Lord God to grow, every tree
that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food: the tree of life also in the
midst of the garden. Where the Greek version has the same words that are used
by Christ in the second Chapter of the Revelation, namely, (...). So that none
can with reason deny that there was a tree of life plainly and properly so
called, which grew in the earthly Paradise or Orchard, where God placed Adam:
no more may he deny that there is such a Tree in the heavenly Paradise or
Orchard, the New Jerusalem. It is further here told us, (to the end we should
rest in the plain and obvious sense of the place) that the Tree of life bears
a different kind of fruit every month, which must needs tend to the great
delight of them that shall eat thereof, in that men are much taken with the
variety of their food: where by the way let it be observed, that the Tree of
life is the measure of time in the world to come, for putting forth twelve
sorts of fruits successively, it makes the twelve months, and consequenrly
the year that consists of them. But it will perhaps be objected, in
opposition to what I affirm out of this Chapter, about eating and drinking in
the New Jerusalem, that Paul 1 Cor. 6.13. says, Meats for the belly, and the
belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them.

To which I answer that Paul speaks of worldly meats, and that vessel which
God has made in the natural body to receive them, so that this pertains not
to the spiritual body, (whereof mention is made in the same Epistle, Chap.
15.44.) nor to those heavenly cates, whereof John here discourses. For
certainly that there shall be eating and drinking in the kingdom of heaven, is
elsewhere so plainly delivered, that interpreters show themselves ridiculous,
whilst they go about to impose another sense upon the words. Hear therefore
what Christ himself says, Luke 22.15.16, 17, 18. I have exceedingly desired to
eat this passover with you before I suffer. For I say unto you, I will not any
more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. And he took the
cup and gave thanks, and said, take this, and divide it among your selves. For
I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the Kingdom of
God shall come. Does not this place signify that Christ shall eat of an
heavenly passover with his Disciples, as he did of an earthly one a little
before his death, and shall also drink wine with them? To the same purpose he
speaks to them afterward, in the 28.29. and 30. verses of the same Chapter,
saying, Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And I
appoint unto yon a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me: That ye may
eat and drink with me in my Kingdom. And also Math. 26.29. saying, I will not
drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new
with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Does not this show, (as I before argued out of
Luke) that Christ shall drink with his Disciples new wine in the kingdom of
God, as formerly he drank old wine with them at his last supper before his
death, and consequently the tree of life is for one month a vine, yielding a
liquor so excellent, that it needs not age to bring it to perfection, but
being only pressed out of the grapes into the cup, is the most rich and
delicate wine that can be imagined? but the tree of life affords to the
Nations of them that are saved, (for only such Nations are here understood, as
appears from the four and twentieth verse of the precedent Chapter) it does,
I say, afford not only meat and drink but medicine also. For when any distemper
begins to creep on the Citizens of the New Jerusalem, the leaves of this
tree being used, do discharge the same. By which means they remain for ever
free from sickness and death. Howbeit the manner how these leaves are used,
whether they be inwardly taken, (which is the more probable opinion) or
outwardly applied, is uncertain, and so ought to be passed over, as also the
business of evacuation. For there is no mention thereof in the Scripture, much
less of the manner wherein it should be performed. So that it becomes not us to
make any further inquiry thereinto. But if any shall yet reply, and say, that
what has been spoken of meat and drink and medicine, to be in the New
Jerusalem, does make the future happiness of the Saints to appear somewhat
gross: I answer, it is not for us to devise what is suitable for the condition
of them that shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven, but to restin that which God
has prepared for them. He could no doubt have given them such an immortality
as needed no outward supply, but could have sustained it self upon its own
inward principles, without either meat, or drink, or medicine, but he has
thought it fit to order the matter otherwise, as appears by the declaration
that he himself has made thereof in the Scripture. And shall we presume to be
wiser than he, and accuse him as not knowing how to make his people happy in
the compleatest manner, by imagining such a felicity as is not recorded in his
word, and wresting that which is there described by our exotic
interpretations? Certainly seeing the Scripture testifies that the foolishness
of God is wiser then men, it becomes us to assent to that which he has
revealed, though seeming foolish to us, rather then affecting to be wise above
what is written, to follow the groundless imaginations of our own heart.

Verse. 3. And there shall be no more curse; but the Throne of God and of the
Lamb, shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him.


How truly I said even now that the leaves of the tree of life shall keep the
Nations of them that are saved free from sickness and death for ever, appears
from the beginning of this verse. For when it is there said, There shall be no
more curse, it is the same as if it had been said, There shall be no more utter
destruction, for so the Greek word (...) which properly signifies a curse, is
wont in the Scripture to be taken. See Zech. 14.11. from whence these words in
the Revelation, seem to be borrowed. For whereas it is there read in English,
There shall be no more utter destruction, the Greek has it (...) That is,
There shall be no more curse. And lest any one should perhaps imagine that
there may possibly be a difference in the signification between (...) and (...)
(which latter is the word used in the Revelation) the collation of Matthew.
26.74. with Mark. 14.71. in the Greek will soon remove that scruple.

Though the tree of life be a great benefit to the inhabitants of the New
Jerusalem, yet is the presence of God a greater, as being better then life it
self, without which indeed life is not lively, and therefore it is said that
the Throne of God and the Lamb shall be in the New Jerusalem, namely that the
Saints may enjoy his presence, and be thereby inflamed to serve and honor him
with the greatest affection. But least any one should turn that which is here
delivered concerning the Throne of God, into an allegory, because a Throne is
sometimes put for Royal power, let us evince both out of the circumstances of
the place, and also from other passages of the Scripture, that God has in very
deed a throne in heaven. For first if by the Throne of God should here be only
meant Royal power, the words would carry no emphasis with them, when it is said
that the Throne of God shall be in the New Jerusalem, seeing the Royal power of
God extends it self to all places alike. 2 The Throne of God is here as
properly taken as that of Christ, whilst it is said, The Throne of God and the
Lamb. But Christ being the son of man, cannot be denied to sit as a King upon a
throne properly so taken. Wherefore neither can God likewise. Both which are
confirmed by that passage of the divine Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 12.2.
Where it is said, That Jesus sat down at the right hand of the Throne of God.
3. The throne of God has been seen, and so is properly to be understood, as
those things that fall under the sense are wont to be. This is manifest from
the first verse, of this Chapter, where John says, I saw a River of water of
life proceeding out of the Throne of God and the Lamb. And also from the
eleventh verse of the twentieth Chapter, where the very color of his Throne is
also expressed, for so John says, I saw a great white Throne and him that sat
on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. And finally from
that notable vision of Micajah, 1 Kings 22.19. who says to Ahab King of
Israel, Hear thou the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne,
and all the host of heaven standing by him, on his right hand, and on his left.
4. It is said of Christ (as we before cited it out of the Epistle of the
Hebrews, Chap. 12.2.) that Christ sat down on the right hand of the Throne of
God; which could not be true, were the Throne of God any other then a seat. 5.
God is in the Book of the Revelation frequently known by the appellation of him
that sits upon the throne. See Chap. 5.13. and 6.16. and 7.15. But this
would be an impertinent description of God, were there in very deed no Throne
in heaven whereon he sits. 6. God is said to have prepared his Throne in the
heavens, Psalm. 103.19, which will not admit any other sense, but that he has
made there a Royal seat for himself. By all these arguments it appears that
to say God does not in very deed sit on a Throne in heaven, is to contradict
both the Scripture, and our very senses.

Verse. 4. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.


That these words, They shall see the face of God, are to be taken as they
sound, I have in effect already proved, by evincing out of the Scripture that
God does in very deed sit upon a Throne in heaven, before which the glorified
Saints shall come and adore him. For it does of necessity follow from thence,
that they shall see his face. Neither do those words of Paul, 1 Timothy 6.16.
(where speaking of God, he says, Whom none of men has seen, nor can see) a
whit derogate from the truth of that which we assert. For he himself elsewhere,
comparing the condition of men in this life with that which shall be in the
life to come, says, Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face;
now I know in part, but then shall I know, even as I am known. I Cor. 13.12.
Wherefore in that fore quoted passage of Tim. he speaks of men conversing in
this world, between whom and God there is not only a vast distance of place
(forasmuch as he is in heaven and they on earth, Eccles. 5.2.) but also sundry
bodies interposed obstructing their sight of him. Yea were they now admitted to
the very person of God, their eyes were not fit of themselves to behold so
spiritual and glorious an object. Whereupon the Apostle John concludes 1
Epist. 3.2. That in the world to come. We shall be like unto God, because we
shall see him as he is. And this passage which we have last cited together with
that other of the Corinthians, gives clear attestation to our opinion, as also
does that saying of Christ, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. So that we have no need to dwell longer on this subject, we pass
therefore to the second thing here mentioned, which is The inscribing of Gods
name upon the forehead of the Saints. This is performed by Christ, as he
himself testifies Chap. 3.12. (where speaking to the Angel of the Church in
Philadelphia, he says, Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple
of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of
my God) and it denotes that they are the ministers of God, and so are
continually to serve him in his Temple. Thus (as we have above discoursed) the
name of the Beast was set upon the foreheads of men to signify that they were
such as served and worshipped him. Neither can any man allege a sufficient
reason why this also shall not be fulfilled according to the letter of the holy
Text.

Verse. 5 And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither
light of the sun; for the Lord God gives them light; and they shall reign for
ever and ever.


John here repeateth what he had before spoken in the one and twentieth
Chapter, concerning this, that there shall be no night in the heavenly
Jerusalem, nor need either of the sun or of a candle, because God is the
luminary thereof. For inasmuch as God dwells in light, 1 Timothy 6.16. and
covers himself with light as with a garment, Psalm. 104.2. Yea is light it
self, having no darkness at all in him, 1 John 1.5. and shall abide with the
Saints continually, 1 These. 4.17. It cannot otherwise be, but that he should by
his presence make perpetual day in the New Jerusalem. As for the Reign of the
Saints, mentioned in the close of this verse, it cannot be understood of ruling
over the Nations, for that cease after the day of judgment: wherefore it is
meant of their Reigning in life, as the Apostle Paul phraseth it, Romans 5.17.
and so of reigning over death for ever, as death had for some time reigned over
them.

Verse. 6. And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true. And the
Lord God of the holy prophets sent his Angel to show unto his servants the
things which must shortly be done.


This is the third time that either God himself, or the Angels confirm the
plain literal, and down right meaning of those things that are spoken
concerning the New Jerusalem, and the happiness of such as are to dwell
therein. For I have before proved, Chap. 21.5. that when it is said, These
sayings are faithful and true, it is all one as if it had been said, These
sayings are evident and certain, and such as do of themselves leave no place
for dispute. To establish which exposition of mine, consider further that the
Apostle Paul does in four several places, namely, 1 Timothy 1.15. and Chap. 3.1.
and Chap. 4.9. and Titus 3.8. tell us that such a point is a faithful saying,
when the thing whereof he speaks, contains in it self no hard and mystical
sense, but is to be understood according to the plain purpose of the words. Why
then should we prefer the imaginations of men before the express language of
the Scripture, and adhere to such interpretations of this prophecy, as have no
other ground but the bare word of those that obtrude them? When the Angel
further adds that the Lord God of the holy prophets, sent his Angel to show
unto his servants the things which must shortly be done; this ought not to be
understood of the same Angel that here talks with John, otherwise he would
rather have said, The Lord God of the holy prophets has sent me. Again, the
things which this Angel showed to John, are so far from being done shortly
after, that they are not as yet come to pass. Wherefore this saying, (as will
easily appear from the same words used in both places) has relation to that
other Angel which is mentioned in the very entrance of the Revelation, and who
showed such things to John, as began a little after to be put in execution. Set
Chap. 3.10. where it is said, Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I
also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the
would, to try them that dwell upon the earth. See also the opening of the Seals,
whereof we read in the sixth Chapter.

Verse. 7. Behold, I come quickly; blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.


Here the Angel, speaking in the person of Christ, says, Behold, I come
quickly; which is not meant of that notable coming of Christ in the clouds of
heaven to judge the quick and the dead, for the event shows it to be
otherwise, inasmuch as to this very day he is not come in that manner:
wherefore he speaks of some nearer and more improper Coming, namely, when he
would visit the lnhabitants of the World, for their wickedness, by bringing a
great calamity upon them. And such a Coming of Christ happened in the days of
Domitian the Emperor, not long after the Penning of this Prophecy, which I
have before proved in the Exposition of the 17. Chapter to have been written in
the Reign of Vespasian the Emperor of Rome. Which Judgment, to be inflicted
on the whole World in the Reign and by the Hands of that cruel Monster
Domitian, when Christ had foretold to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia,
Chap. 3.10. He uses the same words in the following Verse, that he does here.
For thus the whole passage sounds, Because thou have kept the Word of my
Patience, I also will keep thee from the Hour of Temptation, which shall come
upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth. Behold, I come
quickly. Now that Christ is said to come, when he executes Judgment on any
persons for their Faults, is manifest from his own words in sundry places of
the Revelation. See Chap. 2.5. where he says to the Angel of the Ephesine
Church, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
Works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove the Candlestick
out of its place, except thou repent. And Verse 16. of the same Chapter, where
he says to the Angel of the Church in Pergamus, Repent, or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the Sword of my Mouth. And
Chap. 3.3. where he says to the Angel of the Church in Sardis, Remember how
thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou
shall not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know what
Hour I will come upon thee. By this we see how appositely Christ subjoyneth,
after the mention of his speedy Coming, that he is happy, who keeps the
Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. For whosoever did so, should be hid in
the Day of Christ's Anger, when he executed Judgment upon the Disobedient and
Wicked, as he promises to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, in the
fore-quoted place, Revel. 3.10.

Verse. 8. And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and
seen, I fell down to worship before the Feet of the Angel, which showed me
these things.

9. Then says he unto me, See thou do it not; for I am thy Fellow Servants, and
of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the Sayings of this Book:
worship God.


The things which John had heard and seen, by means of this Angel, were so
superlatively great and glorious, and John himself was withal so interessed in
them, (for being one of the Lambs twelve Apostles, he saw his own name written
on the Wall of the new Jerusalem) that being ravished therewith, he forgets
himself, falling down before the feet of the Angel to worship him, although he
had formerly been checked for doing so. Which action of John, though not free
from blame, has yet something in it very laudable, namely, the setting of so
high a value on the knowledge of excellent things, and consequently on those
persons that discover them. When I consider this in my mind, and withal
observe how far Christians generally are from having any certain notion of that
happiness, which God has prepared for them that love him, embracing mere
fancies in the stead thereof, I conclude that some respect is likewise due to
such as vindicate the holy Scripture, where it treats of this matter, from
those false Glosses that men have so long imposed on them. For the right
understanding of the Text in this point, is of sovereign use, and tends much
to encourage Christians onto piety, as filling their minds with a more firm
and lively apprehension of that glory, which they through so many difficulties
do aspire unto. And therefore Paul does very wisely intercede with God in the
behalf of the Saints at Ephesus, that they might know what is the hope of his
calling, Ephesians. 1.18. lest having an uncertain knowledge of the Prize, they
should but faintly run that Race, which God had set before them. But as we
learn from the carriage of John, to esteem highly of them, that do in a true
and accurate manner represent to us the glory of the World to come, so should
the Example of the Angel direct us to refuse all excessive Honors, though
given by those whom we have by special favors obliged to us. For by this means
we shall preserve the Prerogative of God entire, which we ought to have
continually in our Eye.

Verse. 10. And he says unto me, Seal not the Sayings of the Prophecy of this
Book, for the time is at hand.


When the Prophet Daniel had seen certain Visions concerning that which was a
long time after to be performed, he is commanded to shut them up, and seal the
Book wherein they should be written, Dan. 8.26. and Chapter 12.4. But here the
Angel does on the contrary charge John, that he seal not the words of the
Prophecy of this Book, alleging this as the reason thereof, Because the time
was at hand. For the case being so, it much concerned the People of God to be
acquainted with the Revelation, that they might in time prepare themselves, and
by that means avoid a surprisal. Yet must we not therefore imagine that all the
things foretold in this Book, were in a short time to be fulfilled, (for the
very 20. Chapter does abundantly refute such a conceit, there being in it the
History of above a thousand years) but only that they should ere long begin to
be accomplished, as we have before demonstrated in the Exposition of the sixth
Verse.

Verse. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy,
let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still;
and he that is holy, let him be holy still.


When Christ says, Let him that is unrighteous, be unrighteous still; and let
him that is filthy, be filthy This is not a Command (otherwise these unjust and
filthy persons should do well whilst they went on in their wickedness) but a
Commination. For seeing the means, that had already been used for the
reclaiming of them from their unjust and filthy courses, had taken no effect,
Christ was now resolved to deliver them over to their own hearts lusts, whereby
it would come to pass, that they would afterward proceed to a further degree
of Injustice and Uncleanness. Suitable hereunto is that saying of the Angel to
Daniel, in the 12. Chapter of his Prophecy, Verse 10. The wicked shall do
wickedly. In like manner when it is said on the contrary, Let him that is
righteous, be righteous still, (or be jet justified) and let him that is holy,
be holy still, (or be yet sanctified) it is a Promise, whereby Christ shows
that it is his intention to bring those, who harkening to his Word, were become
righteous and holy, unto a greater measure of Justice and Sanctity, agreeable
to that Oracle of his delivered in the Gospel according to Matthew, Chap.
25.29. Unto every one that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance.

Verse. 12. And behold, I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give every
man according as his Work shall be.


It was before shown in the Exposition of the 7. Verse, that when Christ says,
Behold, I come quickly, this must not be understood of his coming at the last
Day. Suitably hereunto neither can the Reward, that he here speaks of, be
meant of such a Recompense as shall then be rendered unto men, but which has
place in this life, namely, whilst he delivers the godly out of temptation,
but reserves the unjust, being punished, unto the Day of Judgment, as is
signified in that fore-recited passage, Chap. 3.10, 11. where this Coming of
Christ is spoken of. See also Chap. 2.22, 23.

Verse. 13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the
last.


When Christ is here called Alpha and Omega, it is presently explained by
saying, He is the Beginning and the End, the first and the last; for Alpha and
Omega, are the Beginning and the End, the first and the last of the Greek
Letters. As therefore Alpha and Omega are the beginning and the end only in
reference to a certain sort of things, so likewise does the Comparison require
that Christ should be. Neither is it so difficult a matter to find out that,
whereof Christ is the Beginning and the End. The divine Author to the Hebrews,
if we consult him, will soon inform us: for he says, Chap. 12.2. that Jesus is
the Beginner and Finisher of the Faith. Lo then, in what sense Christ is styled
the Beginning and the End, namely, because he has begun the business of the
Faith, or the Gospel, (for so the Faith simply put is wont to signify. See
Acts 6.7. Jude 3.) and will at length accomplish the same. You see then how
easy the connection is between this Verse and that which immediately went
before. For if Christ be the Beginner and Finisher of the Gospel, it must needs
come to pass that he should give to every man according to his Works, because
this is the main matter of the Gospel, without which all the Doctrine thereof
would be to no purpose. It likewise appears in what sense Christ is said to
be the first and the last, because in relation to the doing of something, none
is before him that begins it, nor after him that ends it; wherefore if
Christ began the Gospel, (as the Scripture testifies that he did) there went
none before him, but he was the first; likewise if he finish it, (as he shall
undoubtedly do) there will come none after him, but he will be the lost.

Verse. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right
to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City.

15. For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a Lie.


To serve God and perform virtuous Actions in hope of a Reward, is a thing very
lawful, as being commended to us by the Example of holy Moses, who as the
Author to the Hebrews writes, accounted the Reproach of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the Recompense of the
Reward, Chap. 11.26. Yea, by the Example of one that was greater and holier
than Moses, even our Lord Jesus Christ himself, who, as the said divine Writer
testifies, did for the joy that was set before him, despise the shame and
endure the Cross, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God, Chap.
12.2. Neither is it only lawful, but altogether necessary, in that we cannot
otherwise serve God in Faith, and so please him; for the foresaid Author
plainly tells us, that without Faith it is impossible to please God: for he
that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, Chap. 11.6. No marvel therefore if the Angel does
here pronounce them happy, who do the Commandments of Christ to this very end,
that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter through the Gates
into the City. Which words do beyond all gain saying evince that there is in
very deed a Tree of Life, and also a City reserved in Heaven for the Saints,
where this Tree grows, and that the hope to eat of this Tree, and enter into
this City is and ought to be the chief Spur to the performance of our duty. So
that if any man shall of his own head either think to do the Commandments of
Christ without having an eye to any Recompense at all, or at least shall
despise the Reward here proposed as too mean for his curiosity, he is in danger
to come short of happiness. It is further apparent from the Angels words, that
if any man promise to himself the happiness here held forth, and yet does not
the Commandments of Christ, either because he thinks another has done them
in his stead, and so he need not put himself to the trouble of doing them, or
that a desire to do them is sufficient, or upon what other ground soever he
imagines that eternal Life may be attained upon easier terms than by doing the
Commandments of Christ, he deceives himself; for the Angel here tells us
plainly, that such as obey not the Gospel of Christ, but are either of a
profane or snarling disposition, or are in league with evil spirits, or pollute
themselves with Women, or unjustly deprive others of their life, or worship
either false Gods, or the true God in a false manner, or are addicted to Lying,
shall utterly be excluded from enjoying either the Tree of Life, or the holy
City, the Paradise of God, where it grows. Finally, it appears from the
foresaid passage, that the doing of Christ's Commandments is that which gives
men a Right to eternal Life.

Verse. 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in
the Churches: I am the Root and the Offspring of David, and the bright and
Morning Star.


The first clause of this Verse seems to have relation to that which is
recorded in the first three Chapters of this Book, where Jesus sends his
Angel unto John with Instructions to be by him communicated in writing to the
seven Churches in Asia. The second shows the Authority of Jesus over the
People of God, as being the Son of David, Unto whom God had sworn with an Oath,
that of the Fruit of his Loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up
Christ to sit upon his Throne, as Peter testifies, Acts 2.30. For when Jesus
calls himself the Root of David, we must not understand such a Root, out of
which David himself did grow, for by this account Jesus will be, not the Son,
but the Father of David, which is repugnant to the Scripture, and altogether
unfit to show his Authority over the Churches of God. Wherefore he is such a
Root, as sprung from David, and was propagated out of his Seed. And this is
taught us in the Text it self, where after that Jesus had called himself the
Root of David, he does by way of explication presently add that he was his
Offspring, The third description, which is subjoyned to the two former ones,
whereof we have treated, does further set out the dignity of Christ, declaring
him to be crowned with glory and honor, and that in an eminent manner, as the
morning star does far exceed in luster the other heavenly Lamps.

Verse. 17. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears,
say, Come. And let him that is a thirst, Come; And whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely.


In this verse there are three things remarkable, the first whereof is the
desire that both the holy Spirit and the Church had to see the coming of
Christ, before promised, inasmuch as it would openly show both his severity
toward the wicked, and his goodness toward those that had walked closely with
him. The second is the command here imposed upon every one that should hear of
this coming, to wish for it. The third is the invitation made to every one that
is athirst, and earnestly aspireth unto happiness, to come and drink of the
water of life freely. All which are of themselves plain, and need no further
interpretation.

Verse. 18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy
of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him
all the plagues that are written in this book.

Verse. 19. And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the
holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.


Moses in the law enjoined the children of Israel, that they should neither
add to the word which he had commanded, nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. So
does Christ here deal with Christians in relation to the book of this excellent
prophecy, ratifying his injunction with the greatest penalty that can be
imagined. Now to add to the words of this book, or to diminish from them (if
perhaps any man be ignorant of so easy a matter) is to insert something
thereunto, which was not written by John, or to race out something that was
there written by him. This being so, what will become of them at the last day,
who have rejected this whole book from the Canon of holy scripture, pretending
it was written, not by that holy Apostle John, but by some vile person, when in
the mean time the name of John is often there expressed, as the penman thereof,
and the divine excellency of the things contained in the book sufficiently
demonstrateth that it came originally from God? what likewise shall we think of
those, who have so shamefully abused the book of this prophecy, as that they
durst to make it subservient to their own passions and worldly interests,
imposing such glosses on the same, as have no hint or footstep in the holy
Text, and that on purpose to blacken some either person, or party, (with whom
they are angry) and render them odious in the sight of all men? Certainly this
is little less then adding to the prophecy, and argues so small reverence to
the pure and undefiled word of God, at which we ought to tremble, and withal
bewraieth so great malice toward men, as that the fifteenth verse of this very
Chapter, shows that such interpreters will at length be excluded out of the
Kingdom of heaven.

Verse. 20. He which testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly,
Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus.


The Lord Jesus does here the third time mention his speedy coming, of which we
have sufficiently treated: and John following the direction, that was before
given him in the seventeenth verse does beseech the Lord Jesus, that according
to his promise he would come. Which passage is diligently to be observed, as
strongly pressing them, who dare to deny the invocation of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. For it can with no forehead be denied that here is a direct
prayer adderssed to him, since his ascent into heaven, and sitting at the right
hand of God.

Verse. 21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.


As the foregoing verse yielded us a direct prayer made to Christ, so this
affords an oblique one. For John here requesteth that the favor of the Lord
Jesus might still be put forth toward the Saints that were in Asia, to whom he
directed the book of this prophecy. Wherefore let us after the example of so
holy a person, pray earnestly that the same Lord Jesus would continue and
multiply his favor toward all his Saints, that are dispersed through the whole
world, that he would shelter them under the shadow of his wings against the
rage of their enemies, and supply them as their several necessities shall
require, and finally so fill them with the Spirit of grace, that they may
abound in love toward one another, and toward all men.

FINIS.

