AN ESSAY Concerning ADEPTS: OR, A Resolution of this Inquiry, How it comes to
pass that ADEPTS, if there are any in the World, are no more Beneficial to
Mankind than they have been known hitherto to be, and whether there could be no
way to Encourage them to Communicate themselves.

With some Resolutions concerning the Principles of the ADEPTISTS; And a Model,
Practicable, and Easy, of living in Community.

In Two PARTS.

By a Philadept.

God has chosen the Foolish things of this World, to confound the Wise. Prepare
the way of the Lord, and make his Paths straight. Quench not the Light of
Israel. Touch not mine Anointed. London: Printed by J. Mayos at the* Golden
Cross in Thames Street near Queen-Hithe, and are to be Sold by J. Nutt near
Stationers' Hall. School.

AN ESSAY Concerning ADEPTS. In Two PARTS.
The first Part.
I. Section. THat it cannot reasonably be denied, that there is such a thing as
the Philosophers Stone.. II. That it would be a mighty Advantage, to enjoy the
Benefits of it. III. That Adepts say, It is no very difficult matter to obtain
that Inestimable Advantage. IV. That they are Discouraged from communicating
themselves, or their Medicine, as they otherwise would. V. What would Encourage
them to do it, and put them in a capacity to be beneficial to Men. VI. The
Inexcusableness and Folly of rejecting such a Blessing.
The Second Part.
1. Sect. THE occasion of the Second Part. II. An Explication of these words,
It is thought, Adepts wish that Christians would live somewhat, after the
manner of the Lacedaemonians. III. How it would be possible for Christians to
live much after that manner. IV. That undoubtedly it would be most reasonable
and most Christian-like, to follow that sort of Life. V. That yet Adepts cannot
be thought to require expressly so much, for if they pleased, they might easily
reduce Men to an absolute necessity to do so. VI. That in general, they would
undoubtedly require of men nothing but Secrecy and Fidelity, Reason and
Moderation, Justice and Mercifulness; and that it is not to be doubted, could
they be assured of these, they would be ready to communicate themselves, under
some just limitations. VII. What this Condition, more particularly, may be
supposed, for instance, to Imply. VIII. The Assurance which has been intimated
that Princes might give. IX. What Great men might reasonably do, in order to
obtain the Elixir.
The first Part.
1. Section. That it cannot reasonably be denied, that there is such a thing as
the Philosophers Stone.
IT is, evidently, unreasonable to assert or deny any thing without Reason, and
it is constant no man can give any good reason importing that there is no such
thing as the Philosophers Stone. On the contrary, there are many reasons to
believe there is such a thing. There is a Tradition of it in the World. There
are many Books on that Subject, written by men that show an extraordinary
gravity, Sincerity and Fear of God, and who Solemnly and Sacredly protest they
have wrought it with their own hands. And besides, they have, at several times,
shown the effects of it before diverse witnesses; whereof there are too many
instances, to reject this proof. Then they lay down Principles, which appear
rational, to any one that considers them. Any man may know experimentally that
the Sulphur of Silver fixes Mercury. why then should it be thought incredible
that there is a way to get, somwhere, a sufficient quantity of that Sulphur,
and to exalt it, and with it to tinge the Mercury that is in imperfect Metals?
There have been also too many great Cures performed by Philosophers, to be
reasonably questioned by them who are acquainted with those matters: Those that
are not, ought not in reason to determine against it: And those that are
acquainted with some of those Testimonies, that have been given to the World,
are guilty of a Disposition of unbelief, if they are not moved at all with all
those proofs.

II. Sect. That it would be a mighty Advantage, to enjoy the benefits of the
Philosophers Stone.
MY intention is not to dispute about the Principles of the Hermetick
Philosophy; they have been established by many Authors beyond dispute; but most
clearly and most invincibly by the Learned Gasto Claveus, of any I know: But I
write for those who allow there is such a thing as the Sophick Stone. Now, I
would only briefly mind them of the mighty advantage there is, to enjoy the
Benefits it does procure: It procures, 1. Riches, 2. Contentment and Virtue, 3.
Health and Strength. As to the first and last, scarce any that believes that
there is such a thing, is unsatisfied about them. And as to Contentment and
Virtue, I would have it to be considered whether a Man that Enjoys Health and
Strength, and what he desires and is most necessary to his well-being, has not
a mighty and extraordinary inducement to be thankful to to God, to think of
providing for Everlasting Happiness, and to Despise, in comparison of that, all
the Ambition and the Superfluities of this World?

And if things be so, pray consider the Felicity of that Man's State who
possesses all things, and who actually feels no want, nor Pain or Infirmity,
but lives here happy and contented, as long as the Nature of Man is fit to
last, and after that departs Tranquillely and without Anguish, and with ease
and comfort passes into the Regions of the Blessed Children of God above.

What advantages the Sophick Stone would procure to a Nation, it is not
necessary to specify, it being easy for every one to imagine it.

III. Sect. That Adepts say, It is no very difficult matter to obtain their
Inestimable Treasure.
A Depts affirm, that a Man that is reasonable and a Pious Man, and that has
attentively read their writings and considers them, and observes the works of
Nature, may, with a careful practice, through God's Blessing, obtain their
Admirable Elixir, without very much difficulty. Their matter some of them say
may be taken out of many things: They say plainly it is a Mineral Vitriol, that
is not to be had ready made, nor to be bought with money, but the Artist must
make it, so that it is not to be understood to be common Vitriol; and they say
it is not extremely difficult to make it, nor does it require much cost, nor
must we take any Metal for its composition: Some say it may be found in
Antimony, and some say in other things.

For my part, if all that Adepts (or reputed Adepts) say be true, when they
speak without disguise, I do not believe that a man would find it an easy thing
to run through all the Operations to make the Elixir, even though he had almost a
Receipt verbatim for it: But it may be reckoned not very difficult, in
comparison of other works incomparably more Laborious, and with respect of the
inestimable profit it will bring, which ought to make all the Labors of it
seem not grieveous.

IV. Sect. That Adepts are discouraged from communicating themselves, or their
Medecin, as they otherwise would.
I Have hitherto made way to answer the chief Objectons against the Stone. Now
I shall more directly resolve, in this Section, the inquiry, how it comes to
pass, if there are Adepts in the World, that they are no more beneficial to
Mankind? And for a resolution of this, we need but observe the perverse
disposition of the generality of men: For it is certain it is men's fault, and
not the Adepts, that the World enjoys not the benefits of the Elixir. But what
must Adepts do? Must they go communicate their Medicine to some Prince, who
then being furnished with all the Treasure of the World, will perhaps give way
to his ambition, and frame the project to subdue to him all the World, and so
will fill the Earth with Confusion and Violence? Or must an Adept betray
himself to a company of wicked men, as certainly the greatest part of men are,
who, consulting nothing but their own greedy desires will be ready thro'their
Lust and Coveteousness, to commit the greatest enormities to get the possession
of that whereof they are unworthy, and which they would not know how to use,
but to their own destruction and Eternal damnation? Certainly it must be
confessed, those who have the Elixir can scarcely find safe oppertunities to make
use of it to the Benefit of men, in that disposition the generality of men now
are. And this, undoubtedly, does sufficiently solve the difficulty of the
inquiry: For indeed, it cannot reasonably be looked upon as any thing else but
a difficulty, For it can never be thought an Argument that there are no Adepts;
for though we could give no account at all, why, supposing there be Adepts, they
are no more beneficial to mankind, yet it would not necessarily follow that
that supposition that there are Adepts is false; for it might be some reason we
did not know, did hinder them to communicate themselves or their Medecin to
the World; for certainly we know not all things: wherefore, not taking at first
this difficulty as a sufficient ground to move reasonable persons to disbelieve
that there are any Adepts, I said, in the beginning, my design was only to
write for them who allow the reality of the Sophick Stone, and consequently
think there may be Hermetick Pilosophers now living, though at the same time, it
may also seem strange, before due consideration, why they do no more good than
we generally see they do, which is the occasion of that part of the inquiry, of
which I think a sufficient account has been given:

V. Sect. What would encourage Adepts to communicate themselves more, or what
would put them in a capacity to be beneficial to Men.
I Extremely blame those who incessantly compare the matters that relate to the
Hermetick Philosophy with the matters of Religion. But particularly, as to the
Evidence of the reality of the Stone; what comparison is there of that, with
the Evidence of Religion? Does natural Conscience witness any thing concerning
the Stone? Have any Adepts offered their lives, and magnanimously suffered
Martyrdom to confirm the Truth of it?

But, on the other hand, I think those cannot be excused, who, because they
have no ocular demonstration of the Elixir, esteem it not worth while to do the
most reasonable things, to qualify them for a participation thereof.

A wise man ought to beware of extremes, and to weigh calmly every thing, and
to proceed in his actions according to the Laws of reason. And that, I Am sure,
will justify whatsoever Adepts can be supposed to require of the World: That
makes me the more willing to endeavor now, in some measure, to resolve the
latter part of the Inquiry. Importing, Whether there could be no way, to
encourage Adepts to communicate themselves more freely, then hither to they
have done? I answer, There is without doubt; seeing, as has been observed, it
is Men's fault, and not the Adepts, that the World enjoys not the benefit of
the Elixir. Then the question must be, what would encourage Adepts to
communicate themselves and their Medicine; and what would put them in a
capacity to be Beneficial to Men? The Resolution, in general, and in short is,
that Adepts, unquestionably, would freely communicate themselves, if they saw
Reason, Justice and Moderation prevail among Men. Then they would have ground
to hope, that Men would make no ill use of the Elixir, but would be content to
make that use of it which reason and Adepts should direct. And that, we may
suppose, would be chiefly to prevent Pains and Diseases, and to free men from
want, and enable them to do good to them that need; but not to move them to
disturb and trouble other men, and pretend to domineer over and command all
the World, It Is certain, Adepts think there are few just causes of War, except
that which is made for a Peoples own defense. They abhor all violence and
cruelty, ambition and oppression: For certainly God abhors these things, and
they are, evidently, directly contrary to Reason. But what assurance could
Adepts have, that a People would be Just and Moderate, and which way could it
be ascertained, that men for the future would entertain Moderation and Justice?
Why, Magistrates being exemplary in those Virtues, and taking solemnly a
particular Oath that they would constantly persevere in them, and keep Faith
with Adepts; that would be a great encouragement to Adepts to communicate
themselves to some of them for the Universal good of their People*

It is undoubted, Adepts look upon all men to be Brethren and Equals, and
therefore would have all men to be alike happy, if they would be swayed by
Justice and Reason. Their chief learning consisting in that of Piety and the
Fear of God, they cannot but observe that the Christian Religion forbids an
immoderate love of this World and effeminate ease and Luxury, and requires all
men to work and to be actually useful in the World, and particularly charges
Christians to Love all men as themselves, making this the Badge of
Christianity. Therefore they conclude that there should not be such an
unequality among Christians as there is. It is thought, they wish that
Christians would live somewhat after the manner that the Lacedaemonians did by
the direction of Lycurgus. Yet it must not be supposed that they expressly
require this of men, and that without it they will never do good to mankind: But
it is certain, they would at least that men showed that Moderation, Justice and
Mercifulness that their Natures require, and that Religion enjoins; that
unreasonable abuses were reformed, and that a due provision were made for the
helpless and innocent, and no man grieved or neglected, but all humanly treated
and Christianly dealt with, as being, all, the Children of the same Father;
that, in that sense there might be some Equality among them, as the Apostle
wills it to be. Then would all men rejoice, and the Nations would be right
glad; the People would be at Peace and Amity, and the Earth would be full of
tranquillity and order: Every one would have enough, and all might live
comfortably; and Virtue and Piety would flourish every where in the World. Come
then, Lord Jesu! come quickly!

Amen!
VI: Sect. The inexcusableness and folly of rejecting the Beefits which would
accrue to the World, if things were so disposed that Adepts were encouraged in
some measure to communicate themselves, and were put in a capacity to be
Beneficial to Men.
TO show the folly of rejecting the Benefits that would accrue to the World by
these means, I need only refer the Reader to the Second Section, where those
advantages are summarily observed or hinted: That will suffice to help him to
make all the Considerations that ought to be made on this Subject, if he will
attend to it. And to show the inexcusableness of those who reject these
Benefits, we must only observe that the things which are here expressly
required, are nothing but what the Gospel Indispensibly demands, and what God
expects from Men. So that to this case we may justly apply this Oracle, that it
will be more tolerable for Sodom in the Day of Judgment, than for those who
resist good motions and despise the proferr'd Divine Favors, reject the
Counsel of God against themselves, and oppose the Establishment of his Kingdom,
and the execution of his Laws for the good of Men.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part of the Resolution, containing an Illustration of the
Expedients mentioned in the fifth Section of the first Part, and showing that
they are Possible and Reasonable.
I. Section. The Occasion of this Second Part.
NO doubt, those who Laugh at the very name of a Philosophers Stone, will
accordingly deride the Expedients that have been mentioned, to encourage Adepts
to communicate themselves: Yet this mirth of the Scorners is not what we
regard, and we do not now design to go about to confute it: But it may be,
even wiser Persons than those, will think some of these Expedients either*
strange and obscure, or unreasonable and unpossible. I have therefore thought
it necessary to explain at large, what has been said compendiously in the fifth
foregoing Section.

II. Sect. An Explication of these words, It is thought, Adepts wish that
Christians would live somewhat after the manner of the Lacedaemonians.
IT is probable every Reader does not know the manner how the Lacedaemonians
lived, after the instutition of Lycurgus; and those that know it, yet went to
be resolved what somewhat like this here implies: In sum, the use of Money*
was cried down among the Lacedaemonians, (except the Iron Pieces, which being
vile and of heavy Carriage, could occasion no great Trassick, which they
thought was unnecessary or rather inconsistent with a Tranquille Life) and the
Lacedaemonians lived in common: They had a common Hall, where every one, even
their Magistrates, met at a certain hour for their repasts. This is as much as
is here needful to be known of the Lacedaemonians.

But, in the first place, it is not to be doubted, but Christian Adepts would
have Sovereign Magistrates live howsoever they like best. Christianity inspires
a Reverential awe for our Sovereigns, and declares the Anointed of the Lord to
be Sacred, and charges Subjects to submit themselves to them, not only for
wrath, but for Conscience Sake.

As for inferior Subjects, it is thought Adepts are of opinion they might well
live all in common, with relation to the possession of the goods of the Earth
and inferior Offices, if Souveraigns pleased so to order it. And this would be
in some respect some what like the way of living of the Lacedaemonians (though it
should also extremely differ from it in many respects) if a Body of Christians,
excepting the higher among them, lived in Community together, much as they do
in Colleges: And (being supposed to have, for their number, a proportionate
quantity of Ground to what would fall to every ones share, if the Earth was
equally divided among men, not Geometrically but according to the goodness of
the Soil) if they were then all equally obliged to Till this portion of the
Earth appointed to their share, and only employ themselves to those works which
are absolutely necessary for Life, and for the good of the Society; that would
be that sort of Life that is here meant, and that is in some respect compared
to that of the Lacedaemonians.

But to conceive this the better, and make it more familiar, let us suppose,
for instance, we have before us an Estate, of four hundred Pounds a year in the
Country, to serve for a little Community, which we will divide into four small
Parishes adjoining together, which will make a little Town. Let us suppose it
so Peopled that three parts of four of the Land, one year with another may be
abundantly sufficient to keep its Inhabitants with all the necessaries of Life,
and not much more. (If the Earth was equally divided, it would do that at the*
least) The fourth part of the Estate, which was untouched, let us suppose it to
be for the Rent and Maintenance of the Lord of the Manor, and his Noble
Family, who shall have nothing to do but to preside over the Tenants, and see
that they fall not out among themselves, but that Justice be uprightly
Administered among them. By the Tenants, I mean all the Inhabitants of our
Country Town, whom we suppose to hold the Land by the Grant, Consent and Good
will of the Lord of the Manor: wherefore they have the care of the Husbanding
of the whole Estate, but are to yield the fourth part of the Increase, and of
their Labor, to their said Lord and his Heirs, and reserve for their own
Maintenance, as has been said, the three other parts.

The Lord of the Manor, thus, shall be as it were a King among his Tenants;
and (we may suppose) there shall be standing Laws Solemnly Established,
according to which, as he comes to Age, he will take Oath to Govern them. And
our little Town shall yearly choose three Members out of every Parish, for their
Inferior Magistrates, which, making the number of twelve, will, together, make
as it were a Parliament, that shall Sit at set times, to Decide (with the
Approbation and Confirmation of their Lord) of the Affairs of their little
Community.

The Lord shall live in his Palace or Mannour-house, and shall have such other
Houses and such Servants, for himself and his Children and Family, as he shall
think fit at first to appoint; and that shall be Established in the standing
Laws, that it may so remain for the future,

The Tenants shall dwell in four Squares, or four great Houses, that shall be
like so many Colleges, each of which shall be a Parish. Let us imagine one of
those Colleges, for the Situation, like So-ho Square, or Red-Lyon Square in
London. Let that ground in the middle of the Square, which in So-ho and
Red-Lyon Square* is Railed in and kept for a Walk, be here employed to make a
Common Hall, and all the Appartments belonging to it, for our Tenants to meet
together in, to make their Public Devotion, to instruct their Children, and to
take their repasts, and confer with one another. Let that Building be equally
divided into two parts, exactly alike; the one part for the Men, and the other
for the Women: Only let the great Hall, which shall be both a place for their
Public Devotion, and a place to Eat in, and to instruct their Children, be
Common for the Men and Women; but let there be a great Curtain, as there is in
some Schools, to be drawn from one end of the Hall to the other, to divide the
Hall exactly into two equal parts, length ways, to separate the one part for
the Men, and the other for the Women. Adjoining to this Hall may be placed the
Butteries, the Kitchings, the Brewing and Baking Houses, etc. All which to be
double, the one for the Men, and the other for the Women. And all this Building
must be contrived to be, together, Square; and it may all, together, be called
the Common Hall. It may be supposed to be Built of Brick, and Thatcht; and its
height may be as that of a pretty high Hall in a Gentleman's House. Let it be
drawn within, and Paved with Brick. Let there be Stoves in the Hall; and good
Brick Chimneys in the Kitchens, etc. There may be supposed several Cupboards in
the Wall of the Hall, round about the Hall; and drawers under the Tables, to
put their Books of Devotion, and other Books, the Table-Cloths and Napkins and
other Utensils. And over the Hall, there may be Garrets, to keep Fruit in, etc.
About this Public Building, at the distance of the Breadth of an Ordinary
Street, we may suppose there to be Built all along, Private Buildings for the
Inhabitants; a little House for every Family. Those little Houses shall be
adjoining one to another, and shall be Built about the Common Hall in four
equal lines or Rows, an equal row over against every Side of the great
Apiece Building or Common Hall. so that all together shall make an exact
Square. Let all the dwelling-Houses be exactly alike one to another. Let every
House have two little Rooms of a Floor, and two little Closets to each Room.
Let there be an Entry betwixt the two Rooms, and let the Staircase be in the
Entry. Let every House be two Stories high. Let one of the ground-Rooms be a
Parlour for the Master and Mistress to Sit in when they are at Home, and to
Receive their Visitants. The Closets may serve to put their Wood and Coals for
their private Fires, and some to put their Trunks and hang their Garments in.
The other ground-Room shall be to Lodge the Maid Servants in: Over that Room
shall be the Chamber for the Master and Mistress. And the other Chamber in the
same Floor shall be the Nursery for the Children. Over those two Chambers,
there shall be two little Garrets; the one for the Men Servants, and the other
for a spare Bed. Let there be, in every one of those Rooms, a little Chimney,
that they may be Aired sometimes. The Houses shall be Thatched, and shall be as
low as may conveniently be. In the Yard, which shall be of the length of the
House, but not so broad, there shall be the convenient House or Easings, in one
of the further corners of the Yard; and at the bottom of the Wall behind every
one of those, there shall be two small Archesmade, to leave two low spaces void
at the foot of the back wall to draw the Dung out, or let in the Swine to
consume it. Every Yard shall be divided from that of the next Neighbors by a
small Brick Wall. In the middle of the Wall of the Yard, that is length ways
opposite to the Back of all the House, there shall be a back door to go out at,
sometimes. And over against those back doors, and those Yards of the said
dwelling Houses, at the distance of the breadth of a very wide Street, there
shall be built (in four lines, square, about that Backside of the dwelling
Houses) other Buildings, that shall be for Barns, for Magazines, for Shops to
do the Mechanic Works in (except they may be placed about the Common Hall) for
a Gaol, for Stables, Cowhouses, Sties, Hen-houses, Wash-houses or Landries,
Milk-Houses, and Rooms to keep Cheese, etc. And about that, at the distance of
the breadth of an Ordinary Farmers Yard, shall be built four good Brick Walls,
pretty high, which shall make a complete square, and shall wall in the College
or Parish. And in every Angle, or Corner, and Ending of these four Walls, there
shall be a large Gate, to go out into the Fields.

I do not observe what other Conveniences there may be in each Parish; for I
do not design to draw an exact Picture and they may be easily imagined. For
instance, there may be a Garden walled about, and an Orchard in the spare Room
near (or adjoining to) the Magazines and Back-buildings; There may be also, if
you will, twelve Poomps; One in every Street, which is four; and four at the
back side of the Magazines and Barns, where shall be the general Yard for the
Cattle; and four for the use of the Common Hall, two for the Men, and two for
the Women. And, besides the particular Houses of Office in each Yard, there
might be four Public ones, two for each Sex. But these things, and the like,
need not to be Particularized.

This then makes one Parish. And we adjoyn four near one another, to make a
kind of Town, or Corporation, for the help and Service of one another. In these
four Parishes we may suppose there is a sufficient number of Carpenters,
Masons, Smiths, Plow-rights, Weavers, Tailors, and the other like Trades
absolutely necessary to a Society, so that our little Town is like a Kingdom or
a little World, which may subsist of it self, and need not know what there is
beyond its limits. As for Husbandry, we suppose all to be Husbandmen alike,
besides every one's own particular Trade or Calling. My meaning is, that every
one shall have a Particular Handicraft or Vocation, to which he shall labor
some days, or some hours of the day; but withal, every one also shall share
alike in the business of the Husbandry, and there shall be set apart for that
some days or some hours of the day. But with all their Work that they shall
have to do (it they Work only for themselves, that is for the Inhabitants of
the Town or the four Parishes, and they employ themselves in no other works but
such as are really necessary to a well constituted Society; our Parishioners
and Townsmen and Women will find the Work they shall have to do very Facile and
pleasant. The Yoke will be easy, and the Burden light. I reckon they shall have
five hours to Work for the Public every day, and one hour every one for
himself; that is Six hours. Then there will be three hours every day set apart
for Devotion and instruction in Religion; and three hours for Meals and
Conversation: that is Six hours more; which makes twelve hours. We may allow one
hour lost in preparing for Work, and in putting up the Instruments after the
Work, etc.

Let two hours be spent, toward the Evening, in a Public Reading and hearing
of History, Law, and Physic, and such like Studies in order, but let Romances
be utterly banished. After that, two hours shall be allowed for Play or
Recreation, or for every one to spend in his House or in Visits, as he pleases;
That Is hitherto, Five hours, besides the first twelve. Then there remains seven
hours for Sleep. Some certain days, to encourage the Youth, to recreate the
Spirits, to train up Men in the exercise of War for the defensive part, etc.
there may be less time appointed for Work, and more for Play and Sport, such as
Fencing, Shooting, etc. And, that the Youth be not unruly, there shall always
be some of the Elder sort obliged to be present with them: And none of
different Sexes be allowed to play together; but Boys by themselves, and Girls
by themselves. The first day of the Week shall be wholly a day of Rest,
Devotion, and Thanksgiving. In each Parish, there shall be a Schoolmaster and
a Divine, that all, from the youngest to the Oldest, may have due instruction.
Daily also there shall be read among them, after Divine Service, some Portion
of the Whole Duty of Man, and of such other good Books, one after another.

What has hitherto been said, gives a general notion of the Christian Life of
our Country Town's men. We may now observe something more particularly,
concerning, 1. Their Government, Marriages, and Servants; 2. Their Raiment; 3.
Their Victuals; and Lastly, Their Employment.

1. As to their Government, etc. It has already been said, that as for their
supreme Government within themselves, supposing it to be so granted by the
Souveraigns of the Countries where they may be; that is as that of a King, and
Parliament. And as for the inferior Government among them, in their four
Parishes, it may be like that of a Corporation; only it were well to change the
Aldermen, as well as the Mayor, every Year; that every one may have his turn.
They shall Marry, the Men suppose, at six and twenty, and the Women at three
and twenty, or thereabouts. Every man shall have his Wife. And those that shall
not Marry three or four Years within the Term, as also those that shall Marry
so much before the time appointed, shall be liable to some Punishment.

Those that shall Marry without the knowledge and Aprobation of the Major part
of the Governors; Or those that shall commit Fornication and uncleaness, and
those that shall be convicted of Adultery, shall be Condemned to the highest
Punishments. Those that shall be convicted of Theft or Riot, shall be Condemned
to Imprisonment for several Years, according to the demerit and noxiousness of
their Crime. And all those that shall be Condemned to Prison, shall constantly
Work ten hours at least every day at some Laborious Work, whilst they remain
there and continue the Publick's Slaves. They shall be Chained at both their
Feet; but otherwise shall be treated humanely if they will faithfully Work, and
if they show themselves to be Penitent; else they shall have due Correction,
till they be persuaded to do their duty. They shall be brought every morning to
a Shop next the Gaol, where they shall Work. The Children shall live in their
Parents or Gardians houses, till they be seven years of Age. Then they shall be
disposed of into other Men's Houses, and if need be, into another Parish, to
serve till they be Lawfully Married and have a Child, or till they be thirty
years old. Then they shall have a house allowed them of their own, with all
necessaries and Servants; and they shall then be members of the Corporation,
and shall be qualified, like others, for Offices.

The Masters shall not be obliged to work so much as the Servants. And when
they come to a certain Age, they shall be eased from the Laborious work. For,
to do every thing according to Reason, the work must be proportioned to the
Age, and Strength, and Dignity of every one. When they come to be Old, they
shall be Honored as Senators, and shall serve only to give Counsel for the
menagement of the Affairs, and to preside and oversee every thing they can, and
walk in the Streets, and keep good orders in the Parish when the rest are in
the Fields, or busy at their Work.

There shall be no natural precedence among our Parishioners, but that of Age.
And if any deserve to be distinguished for some extraordinary Service, it shall
be only for his own Person, for his Life.

All Offices shall go by turn. There shall be Watchmen continually in the
streets of the Parish, Night and Day. And, that it may not be too tedious to
any one, they shall be changed every four hours.

There shall be a kind of Corps-de-garde at every Gate of the Parish, where two
Elderly Men or Women shall sit as Sentinels.

This suffices to hint what Government there might be in such a constituted
Parish. We may therefore proceed to say somewhat, In the 2 place, of their
Raiment. That shall be exactly alike for all of equal Age and condition. And in
short, the Raiment of them all in general, shall be most plain, but as
convenient as may be. But it must be as little chargable as is possible; for
People may go plain, as the Quakers, and yet have costly Garments; which is
ridiculous. They shall have good Linen, neither too course nor too fine; and
they shall have enough to be cleanly.

3. As for their Victuals, That shall be plain, but wholesome and they shall
always have enough, but not to encourage Drunkness or Gluttony, and Wantonness.
Therefore unnecessary Sawces, and other things unnecessary, as Tobacco, and the
like, shall not be allowed. For their Breakfast, they may have Bread, Butter,
and Cheese, and besides that, Milk-porridge, or sometime Water Gruel, or warm
Milk, or Eggs boiled. For Dinner, they shall have fresh Meat every day; Boiled
three days in the week, and Roast three days, Roast Flesh one day, and Boiled
another; the sixth day of the Week, that is Friday, shall be a Fast, and Fish
or Eggs shall be eaten that day at the end of the Fast. When they have
Rost-meat, they shall have Puddings Boiled by themselves: and the days they
have their Meat boiled, instead of Puddings they shall have Broth; after the
Meat, they may have Butter or Cheese. For Supper, they shall have the same they
have for Breakfast. They shall have, for their ordinary use, good wholesome
drink, and every one shall have sufficient. If it be thought fit, they may Brew
also sometime strong drink, of which every one may have a reasonable share, as
much as it shall be thought good and necessary. If they have more goods than is
sufficient for the Town and their Magazines, they may sometimes trade with the
Men of the World: And the Money they shall thus get, shall be for the Public
stock to buy, at sometimes, what shall be judged most necessary for their
Society.

Pullets, Partridges, Small birds, and such like means, (if they have any)
shall be chiefly for the Sick and Infirm. For to do as we would be done to, is
the law of Reason and the Dictate of the Wisdom of God.

It shall not be permitted to have Pigeons, Geese, Swans* etc. For they
destroy, and do hurt incomparably more than they are worth. For the same reason
^here shall (...) kept no more Dogs, Horses, etc. than are useful and
necessary, for if Men were content with what is necessary; and if the Earth was
Husbanded to the best advantage for the necessities of life, there would be
enough of all necessaries, and all Men might live happy. There remains only
now, 4. and lastly, to say somewhat more of their Employment. It has been
already said, that they shall Employ themselves about no other Work, but what
is really convenient and necessary to a Christian Society. Therefore, Painting,
Ingraving, Weaving of Ribbon, or Lace, or the like Frivolous Arts, are blotted
out of the Catalogue of our Manufactures. As for Music and dancing, I hold
them indifferent. But if they be used, these cautions must be observed. 1.
Neither of them must be a calling or Employment of themselves; but our
Musicians or Dancers must also have another Vocation more essentially necessary
to the Society, and must practice their Music or Dance but at the spare-hours;
and then they may be thought Worthy of some honor. 2. No Songs must be allowed
on the Subjects of Love, nor drinking. 3. Persons of different Sexes must never
be allowed to dance together, and there must not be suffered changes of modes
in Dances, no more then in Garments, nor must there be allowed a too great
variety of dances, but only those that are the most grave. If there was an
Organ in every Common Hall, I should not disallow of that. For Music is
cheerful, and chearfullness preserves health. But the sentiment of the Major
part must be followed, only it must be permitted to every one (that can express
himself) to give freely his Opinion, and every one must be patiently heard; and
the Arguments deliberately weighed; and then no doubt, Reason will ever
carryit. But in indifferent things, every one ought to be content to acquiesce.
This is a serious digression, which was not premeditated. But, as touching
Music, there is none to be so much valued as that of a good Voice. And after
all, the best Harmony is that of Concord and Love among Neighbors Brethren and
fellow Christians. By this, sais our Blessed Savior, It shall be known if ye
are my Disciples.

The first thing that shall be done in the morning (after our People have
washed and are ready, and have been at their private Devotions, which shall all
be done at Six of the Clock, there being an hour allowed for that and their
dressing, being called up to rise at five of the Clock at farthest; then just
at six of the Clock, a Bell having tolled) they shall repair to the Common
Hall, where there shall be made a Public Prayer, and one Chapter shall be read
in the New Testament, after which every one shall receive the portion allowed
for his Breakfast. After that every one also shall prepare for Work, and shall
Work three or four hours, or more, as it shall be best determined Then the Bell
shall toll again, and every one shall wash and clean himself; and all things
being disposed of, and the last sign of the Bell being giving, all shall
repair to the Hall again, where the whole Service shall be read, and after
that, a portion of some Book of Devotion. Then will follow the Dinner, before
and after which, Grace shall be said. And after some Conversation after Dinner,
there shall be Song a Spiritual Hymn, before they return to work. And thus they
shall spend their time, much after the division and designment of it, that has
been mentioned. They may dine about one, and sup about seven. Immediately also
before Supper, the Service shall again be read. And at Night, the last thing
that shall be done in Public before they part, shallbe to Worship God by
Prayer and Devotion. Women that are Nurses, shallbe obliged in the day time to
go now and then to their Children, which may be left several together in some
place, to the care of some old Women or some young Maids, which shall take that
charge by turns.

Sect. III. How it would be possible for Christian's to live much after that
manner.
I do not doubt but that a thousand Difficulties and Objections will be raised
against this manner of Living* but being satisfied they will be vain and
frivolous one's, we'll suppose all reasonable persons, capable to discern their
Vanity (and those that are not reasonable, will yield to no reason.) We will
only answer some few, to serve for instances of the rest.

It will first be objected, that Four Hundred a Year cannot suffice, to
maintain our four Parishes according to the Description, I have given of their
way of living and likewise maintain the Landlord and his Family. I answer if
that will not do, then allow more* I do not enter into that disquisition. But this
I say, that if all men thus did work alike, and all possesed the Earth alike,
and busied themselves about no employment but what is necessary; they would all
live as well at least as I have represented our Parishoners to do. Then there
is no more to be done, but to allow them such an Estate for their number, as
would fall to their share if the Earth was equally divided among all men; that
is, what will be abundantly sufficient to keep them well, supposing they work
moderately. For certainly God has made abundant provision for all his
Creatures, and particullarly for those that are Rational. Supp^^^e therefore
what will do, and allow that, be it more or less.

2. Another Objection perhaps will be, that if Men have no more but just their
share of the things of this World, then 'twill be impossible to allow to every
one of our Parishes such convenient Houses, such Brick Walls, and such other
conveniences as we do. I Answer, That Is a perfect mistake: For, if all Men thus
gave up themselves alike to a moderate and necessary Labor, the World would be
incomparably Richer than it is. And if our Parishes do so, and have
proportionably their share of the Earth, it will be the same thing, as far as
it concerns us, as if it was so practiced through out the whole World. Then, it
must be confessed, Towns are not built in a day; but by degrees they arive to
the greatest perfection. As for our Brick walls, they are lasting, but not very
Chargeable or difficult to get, if every one would lend his help as he might.
Many Garden-walls take up as much Ground and as many Bricks, as should do that
which would serve to Wall in one of our Parishes. And if there was no Rent to
Pay, excepting part of the Increase of a Super-abounding Estate, and if there
went nothing in Superfluities and Extravagant Lusts, all men might have
dwelling Houses, and Enclosures, and all the necessaries of Life.

3. There is another Objection to be made, viz. That though the Theory of this
may seem probable, yet the practice of it is absolutely Impossible, because men
that have not been brought up to Work, will never be able to subject themselves
to it. I answer: Suppose that be a real difficulty, all that is to be done is
this, Thou who have not been used to work, and yet approvest of it, and now
think it an equal duty; bring up thy Children to Work, and help to make up
one of our Parishes: Consecrate thy Children to God in it, and when thou die,
leave what thou have to the use of the Society where thou have chosen to place
thy Children, out of the Dangers and Temptations of this World: I mean, if such
a Society was lawfully Established. For I speak only to show the possibility of
the thing. Therefore, suppose yet some of thy Children be already so far
advanced to Age, that they can hardly be hereafter accustomed to Work, having
been brought up Effeminately and Delicately. Why, then appoint them enough to
be able to have all the Necessaries of Life without working, and leave the
remaining part of thy Estate for the use of our Parishes after thy decease.
There can be no difficulty in this, and if thou, and some other rich Men would
think fit to do so, why could we not in time have as great a number of such
truly Religious Houses of Laborious and good Christians, as some Nations have
of Irreligious Houses, full of idle, and consequently Antichristian folks?

But, lastly, it will be said, that would be a cumber to a Nation, and would do
it no good; and therefore 'twill never be the interest of supreme Governors to
allow of it. I answer: it is easy to show that all this is a mistake. For would
it do no good to a Nation to have a company of Young men Virtuously brought up,
and some of them if superiors pleased, trained from their Childhood in the
discipline of War, to serve their Country in case of need For the supreme
Governors in case of Necessity, might require every one of our Parishes to
furnish them with an equal number of Young men to serve in the Wars, till they
came to a certain Age, and others were sent in their room. And those that
should stay at home, would no less advance their just undertakings with the
Lord of Hosts, by their devout and constant Prayers and holy Life; and by their
Piety and examplary Virtue would draw a blessing upon the Nation, and obtain of
God to continue His Forbearance toward the great number of Sinners in the Land
who deserve severe Judgments. Besides, Supreme Governors might lay equal
impositions upon our Parishes as upon other Estates; and suppose there should
be no use of Money among them, Governors might receive the worth of the Taxes
in Kind, in Corn, and Cattle, etc.

Why then should they be more a cumber to a Nation, than a company of Gentlemen
who have vast Estates, and are always idle, and often consume their Goods in
excess and Riot, and sometime conveigh their Revenues into another Land, where
out of wantonness they choose to pass part of their Life, without caring how
fare their poor Country men?

But this pretended Objection, if any thing further need to be said to it,
shall be yet more fully refuted in the following Section, where will be showed
the reasonableness of this Collegiate Life of our Christian Society.

Sect. IV. That undoubtedly it would be most reasonable and most Christian like
to follow that sort of Life.
IF Men were calm and not Passionate; if they were sincere and Just and not
partial; and if they would reasonably consider of things; they should find that
certainly it would be most reasonable and most Christian-like to follow that
sort of Life. For,

1. All men are of the same Family, and made of the same Blood; 2. The Law of
Christianity is, that we Love other men as well as our selves; 3. This would be
a sure way to make the generality of Men Happy; 4. It would be a great
convenience to the men of the World, that there should be such Societies
established; 5. To wish ill to so just a Constitution, argues much Unchristian
partiality and Uncharitableness.
Now let us a little consider all these Reasons.

1. All Men are of the same Family, and made of the same Blood. Equality
therefore, in a high degree, is the Law of our Natures; we are all made up of a
Corruptible Body and an immortal Spirit. All Mankind is formed in the same
Mold, and they all bear the Image of the most High God: why then should there
be such vast differences made betwixt them? All those that are among us, where
the Gospel is Preached, are not they all capable of instruction and Salvation?
Have they not all the same Baptism, the same Christian hopes, the same Savior,
the same God and Father of us all? And those who have the greatest, shall they
be denied the least? Certainly we are all Brethren and equals, and all partake
of the same common Nature.

Object. But perhaps you will say, That notwithstanding all Mankind are of the
same Family, there has been always a great difference made betwixt Men.

Answ. It is true. And no doubt God consented it should be so, but certainly
that was because the World was unworthy of that Natural, Pleasant, and Loving
way of living in equality and in Common. If Adam had not Sinned, there would
not have been such a vast difference made between Men; for it would have been
alike Lawful to all to satisfy themselves with the goodthings in Eden^^* But
when Man was corrupt and become Wicked, it was thought fit that that should
happen to him which is the ordinary cause of the greatest danger, grief and
trouble; that is, unequality. Yet God does not at all forbid, but rather
wishes, if Men will be reasonable, that they live in the same happy Estate
again. But when I say, there should not be in reason, such a vast difference
between men; it is plain I do not mean that there should be no difference at all
made. There must always be a distinction made betwixt Parents and Children,
Magistrates and Subjects, Old and Young, Masters and Servants, Virtuous Men and
Criminous Persons, etc. But, in general, that distinction must not be that the
one should Swim in the goods of the Earth, and the others should Starve; but it
is to consist in this, that young People, Servants, Children and Subjects
reverence the Magistrates, their Parents, and Masters, and those that are Elder
than themselves; and the virtuous Men be Honored and Praised, and Criminals
punished.

It Is certain God has many times furthered Unequality among men, but it was
because they were unreasonable, and it was a Punishment which in general He
Inflicted upon the World. God is never the Author of Sin, but when men Sin
wilfully, he sometimes grants them their foolish desires, and gives them up to
their own reprobate mind: And then he permits evil to befall them, as himself
says, Behold I frame evil against you: And accordingly, Evil came down from the
Lord upon them. For, Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done
it? Jere. 18. 11: Micah. 1. 12. Amos 3. 6. Therefore, though Unequality be an
evil, it is not strange if God has brought it upon fallen Mankind; not that he
forced it upon men, but, since men lived no longer in Common, but every one
shifted for himself, God was the master to make those, whom He pleased, to
prosper. They, none of 'em, deserved any of God's Favors; therefore He might
bestow them if He would, and deny them to whom He pleased. That may serve for a
full answer to what may be objected from the difference which God made betwixt
Jacob and Esau, and the Jews and the Gentiles. God is the Master of the World,
and He may dispense His Graces as it seems best to His Godly Wisdom. But Men
depend one of another; and they are tied to the Laws which God has given them.
And those are the Laws of their Nature, and the Laws of Revelation. We have
taken a view of the first. Now let us consider the second.

2. The Law of Christianity is, that we love other men as our selves, Christ
calls this His Beloved Commandment. And St. Paul sais, wethout this Love, a man
is nothing, Now, can we reasonably think we love other men as our selves, when
we are at ease and others in trouble; when we take our rest, and others labor
sore; when we have all delicacies, and others are half starved; when we, who
perhaps least deserve it, are Honored, and expect to be so, and we depress and
contemn other men? If this be Christianity, the Devi is the rarest Christian
imaginable: But men are resolved to blind their own selves. Whatever be said,
they will put black for white, and bitter for sweet; they have always don so,
and it is to be feared they always will. (Nevertheless God thinks it fit their
Duty should be represented them, if it be only to serve for a Testimony against
them, if they will not let it serve to milder purposes. How can we say we love
other men as our selves, when we make such differences betwixt them and us? We
put almost as great a difference between somemen and some other men, as between
some men and a Beast; when it may be the Persons we despise, in the Sight of
God are the best and in the highest esteem. Otherwise, men are all alike, like
Counters made of the same Metal. But sure we think poor men are of another
kind, and were born to be abused, and used like Dogs. Alas, how came he to be
Poor, and thou to be Rich? Probably, through Unjustice and Oppression; for
Innocence is oppressed, and Vice flourishes in the World. Possibly, his Ancester
was an honest, harmless man, and was robbed of all, by the Knavery of others;
and thy greatgrand-Father perhaps was the Thief, and thus thou enjoyest the
fruit of his iniquity: Much good may it do thee. What have thou gained thereby?
Vanity and Vexation: The Poor in his straights cries to Heaven, and God
abominates thee and thy ways, and will judge thee for thy Sin. Thou have been
brought up delicately and effeminately, and art not used to work; if thy Estate
should fail thee, thou know not how to get thy living: Therefore thou
dreadest the thoughts of that, and would be ready to pawn thy Soul, to supply
thy lusts and thy super-induced and superfluous necessities; thou art every
moment afraid to lose thy Money, for that is truly thy hope and thy confidence,
O thou Idolater! There is no Peace, no Tranquillity for thee, says God; and
how can thou have peace, when the excess of thy abundance reduces so many,
thy fellow Creatures. to want and anguish, and that stirs them to envy thee,
and wish thee ill. Whereas,

3. If there was an Equality among men, that would be a sure way to make the
generality of men happy. There would be no Thieves then as there is now, for
there would be no occasion to Steal, nor such temptations to Sin, as now there
is. All men would have enough, and would Bless, and Help, and Comfort one
another. Sweet Blessed Life! And would not that be a Christian Constitution? A
sufficient provision would be made for all men; and no man should die with that
grief to see that he leaves his poor Children unprovided for; every one should
take moderate pains; but no honest man should be a slave. But consider now how
sorely a vast number Labor, from morning till night, and can scarce get half a
Belly full of Meat, for themselves and their wretched Family: Regard what
miserable Victuals they feed upon, Bread as black as Soot, and heavy as Lead,
and, with this, often, unwholsom water to digest it; they have not a piece of
Flesh-meat once in an Age, but often eat what some Dogs would not touch, when
they see daily others fare sumptuously. Can such peoples Lives be comfortable?
Can they be healthful? Can we be said to love them as our selves? See how
miserable they are, when they linger with Sickness: They want sometimes Rags to
cover them; and scarce have Shoes to go dry foot. When they burn with a
Feavour, there is no Surgeon to come to them; when they are scorched with
thirst, and raving for want of Sleep, there is no Physician will come to advise
them, and they die miserably in torment. But will not God require it?

If it go not so hard with a great number of the ordinary sort of Men; yet how
many a one Threshes all day for Six pence, when it may be he has above Six
small Children to provide for? But which is much more Deplorable, what poor
Provision is there made for their Instruction? Alas, the generality of them
have no more Education than brute Beasts; they are never taught what the Gospel
is, or what the Christian Religion means; and they are made to know no more
reasons to believe it, than to believe the Alcoran. Indeed what means can they
have of Instruction, as things are carried now? Do we not then neglect the
Souls of Poor Men, for which Christ thought not too much to Die? For alas, it
may be the Poor Fathers and Mothers know nothing themselves, and never so much
as learned to Read And besides, when they leave Work, they are tired and want
rest; yet they have their Children to Feed, and the house-work yet to do; and
it may be they have not one of their Children big enough to help them. Now, if
thou would but consider it, what Miserable and Brutish Life is that they
lead! Poverty ordinarily makes those weak Christians ungentle and Peevish,
always cross and angry; and causes them to live most unchristianly, and instead
of Loving and Comforting, continually to Brawl and Quarrel, and spite and hate
one another.

But in our Christian Community, the work would be Easy; the Victuals would be
ready got for them that Work; they should be wholesome, and there would be
enough; Every Family might have both Men and Women Servants; and every person
might live cheerfully and Comfortably. And, which is the most considerable of
all, there would be sufficient Provision made for the nourishment of the Soul
to Eternal Life.

How many People seldom or never go to Church, out of Bruitishness and want of
Sense of Religion, and sometime because they are taken no notice of and there is
no room for them in the Church, particularly in great Towns. But in our
Parishes no Body could be absent from Public Worship, but it might easily be
observed and Remedied.

As concerning this Perishable Life, there is one great Evil must not be passed
by, though it cannot be noted but to the shame of Christians, or indeed of Men.
The Poor have not only all the difficulty in the World to live, when they have
Youth and Strength; but they are also necessitated to Slave themselves all
their Life, and to Toil and Drudge in their Old and Feeble Age, and Work hard
to the last minute they Breath, as if they had never done any thing for the
Society. But it would not be so, if there was an equality among men.

But thou will say; Equality has also its inconveniences. Rich and Gay Attire
must then be laid aside, as also good Fellowship, and the quintessence of the
delights of Life. And were it not (...) to renounce our Rich Wines, our Sweet
Perfumes, our Jewels, and Pictures, our Coaches, and Furniture, and all the
Pleasures and Conveniences in the World? And must our Children be brought up,
to be Servants to those we have been used to despise and Command?

I Answer, This Objection utterly savoureth of the things of men, and not of
the things which be of God. What, had thou rather keep thy Gay Attire, than
relieve the World from Slavery and Misery? Where is thy Temperance and
Moderation? If Equality has no other inconvenience than to oblige men to use
neat, but modest and decent Garments, the inconveniences of it are not great. (
Despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not?) But what reason is
there thou should abound in Supersluities, and others should want
Necessaries? And what inconvenience is that to oblige thee not to get a
Surfeit, but to teach thee Temperance, and learn thee to take care of thy
Health? God forbids thee no delights but such as are Foolish and not necessary,
or that are hurtful to thy self and others, or that are unnatural and impure.
What necessity is there for thy Strange Wines, Perfumes, and Jewels? There is
not any, no more than for thy Pictures, and such other like Pageantries and
Fopperies. And why should not thy Children serve others, as well as other
Peoples Children serve thee? If they live, their turn will come to be served
themselves. And why should they not serve others, if they are willing others
should serve them one day?

This we speak, not as if it was Lawful to trouble or resist the Constitution
that is in the World, since men shift for themselves and have left off to live
in common; which though we do not think to be so well nor so reasonable, yet
being Established, it must be Sacredly complied with, and must not be at all
altered, except those who, thro'-Gods Providence, are in Authority, were
pleased in some measure to order it. But what we urge all along* is only to
show what in it self would be most reasonable.

We may represent these reasons to those that are Rich and also to those that
are in Authority, especially being Christians; because, if they do not
altogether order this, they may hereafter order something equivalent to it,
providing for the Necessities and Instruction of the Poor, and so aiming at
some sort of equality, especially if Adepts communicated themselves to some of
them. And if they should build and endow some such Houses in Community, as that
I have described; it might perhaps induce some Adepts to enable them to build
more, and do a greater good. However, by what has been said it appears these
Writtings would not prove useless; and in the mean time they cannot reasonably
be thought impertinent or hurtful. For as they authorize nothing but what is
agreeable to order and is for the good of every Man, and the quiet and
Tranquillity of the World* so they declare that Adepts do not absolutely require
such a perfect Reformation, to be prevailed with to communicate themselves to
Men; as we shall briefly see in the next Section. Yet,

4. It would be a great Convenience to the Men of the World, if there were such
Societies endowed and established, as there are Convents and Monasteries in
other Countries. It might be a good Nursery to bring up Children in, and inure
them to Work, before they came to their Estates and to be their own Masters. It
is a good Policy of the Turks, and of several among the Germans, to make all
their Children Work and learn a Trade. It makes them stronger, and of a more
healthful Constitution. And besides, if afterward their Estates should happen
to fail them; they would know how to get their Livelihood; without depending on
others, being used to Labor. They would be fit to Travel throughout the World,
and propagate Christianity, when the day of Visitation, appointed by God,
should come. If there were such Houses, it may be some Adepts would repair to
them, to live there, and be Members of the Corporation; which they would
sufficiently enrich, with the Portion they would bring along with them.
Finally, such Societies would be also very convenient, for Gentlemen, there to
dispose of their Younger Children, as they do in Religious Houses in some
Countries.

5. And Lastly, It is self-evident that to wish ill to so Just a Constitution,
argues much unchristian Partiality and uncharitableness. It shows men to be
very selfish and partial, and not to care what becomes of other Men, so they
fare but well themselves every day. Thus many that call themselves Christians
(being born in that part of the World where the Christian Religion is
Professed, yet) have nothing of Christianity in them, although they make their
boast of the Name of Christ, and pretend externally a mighty Zeal for
Christianity and the Speculations thereof, and perhaps are learned in the
Sacred Languages and it may be in the writtings of the Fathers: Yet these very
men, had they lived in the time of Christ and His Apostles, and heard them
discourse concerning Love, and its Duties, would, no doubt, have fiercely
opposed both the Master and the Disciples, and been ready to cry, Away with them,
Crucify, Crucify.

It is certain, in Scripture, all are required to work, and Christians are
commanded to bear one another Burdens, and not to have the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, with respect of Persons. Nay the Ornaments of
plating the Hair, and wearing of Gold, and Apparel, are expressly forbidden. But
it is not of Late, that Christians seem to have forgot all those things. They
busy themselves about wrangling in obscure Questions and Speculative matters,
and despise that which is plain, and indisputable, and which tends to Practice
and a Holy Life, (which is the Sum and Essence, the End and Intendment of all
the Gospel) and they neglect and pass by the weighty matters, inward Purity,
Justice and Mercifullness. Thus they deal with Religion: but no shifts will
avail with God. He will Judge all men according to the Gospel. And then, many
that call themselves Christians, shall not pass for such. Thou would be
willing, it seems, to be a Christian, so thou might do what thou likest, and
did just obey, of what Christ commands, that which thou were pleased. Rare
Christian! who refuses to receive Christ for his Master, and thinks he knows
best what ought to be prescribed and practiced.

It is certain, they that contradict the plain tendency of the Gospel, and that
which is agreeable to the Spirit of Christ, and is represented to us as the
Essence of Religion, as the Loving other Men as our selves, indisputably is;
they are plainly Antichristians; they evidently oppose the Kingdom of Christ,
Fight against God, and resist His will, most certainly do the work of the
Devil, and are absolutely unfit and unqualified for Salvation.

There is no other Religion wherein men may be Saved, but that which Christ has
taught. Nor can we show that we are Sincerely of that Religion of His, but by
keeping His Commands. Now has He not charged us by His Messengers, that we
should not set our affections on the things of this world; That we should
renounce all worldly Vanities; that we should use this world without abusing
it; And that if need be, we should forsake all for His Sake? But what
appearance is there that men are in that Religious disposition, and that they
would resign themselves to the utmost sufferings for Christ; if now for His
Sake they will not so much as submit to abstain from Superfluities and from
Partiality, to Love other men equally with themselves?

What has been said is abundantly sufficient to evince, that such a Community
as has been mentioned, is both possible and reasonable; and that it would be
most Christian* like to follow that sort of Life.

Sect. V. That yet Adepts cannot be thought to require expressly so much, for if
they pleased, they might easily reduce Men to an absolute necessity to do so.
THat Adepts cannot be thought to require expressly so much of Men, is plain;
because if they would, they might oblige all mankind to live much after the
manner we have described, that is, for the greatest part of Men, to work alike,
and Live in Common. For, to that End, they need but publish their Art to the
world. Then, when every Body knows how to make easily infinite quantities of
Gold and Silver, Money must needs grow vile and good for nothing; no Body will
slave for wages, and all will be Rich alike, new divisions being necessary to
be made. For those that have Lands, not knowing how to work, will be obliged to
quit the greatest part of their Estates to those that will take the care to
till them. But, as in the Apostolic times it was approved that Christians
should Live in Common, but it was not expressly required; so Adepts likewise
prefer that way of Living, but they do not force men to follow it.

Sect. VI. That in general, they would undoubtedly require of men nothing but
Secrecy and Fidelity, Reason and Moderation, Justice and Mercifulness; and that
it is not to be doubted, could they be assured of these, they would be ready to
communicate themselves, under some just limitations.
THere is no reason to doubt, (for those that believe there are Adepts in the
world, and that they are Good and Pious men, who live in the Fear of God, and
heartily wish well to Mankind) but that all that Adepts require, is, 1. that
they may be secure from the Violence and wickedness of Men; and, 2. that they
may be assured that those they shall Communicate themselves to, will be ruled
by reason and the Fear of God, and will do good (according to the Adepts
directions) and not Mischief with the Elixir. These are the just limitations,
under which undoubtedly, they would freely Communicate them selves for the good
of a People. They therefore indispensibly require Justice and Mercifullness,
Reason and Moderation, Secresy and Fidelity.

Sect. VII. What this Condition, more particularly, may be supposed, for
instance, to Imply.
THe above* mentioned conditions may be thought to Imply, for instance, those
or the like, particulars: That selfish worldly designs may be made (as much as
possible) to be laid aside, and the good of all Men particularly respected;
that a Provision may be made that the poor may live more comfortably, and be
better instructed; that a fixed rate may be Publicly set, from time to time,
to most things that are Sold, to avoid as much as is possible Cheating and
Lying in Buying and Selling; That the abuses of Courts, and all unreasonable
customs there may be reformed; that Physicians and Lawyers, as well as Divines,
may have set stipends, that Justice and Physic may be Common and dispensed
Gratis to all Men; that some Children may be brought up (in houses founded for
that purpose) to be sent into several places, to propagate the Gospel; That
Physicians Children, and those of Divines, and Lawyers, and also those of
Soldiers be brought up at the charge of the Public (that the Fathers may have
no occasion to be greedy of gain, and have no other care incumbent upon them
than the Improvement of their Calling and the assiduous discharge of their
Duty; And that the said Children be made use of for the Service of the Country,
in either of those Callings, and be Preferred according to their Capacities and
deserts; That how many mercenary Soldiers soever there be employed, to supply
the defect of the Militia, none have less then one Shilling a day actually in
money, but that none be kept in Idleness, but be employed all day in some Work,
for the good of the Public, and be carefully instructed in Religion, and every
one of them be bound to Marry at a certain Age; that those* among them and
Seamen, that shall be convicted to be habitual profane Swearers, have their
Tongue bore through with a hot Iron; That Curtezans, Coiners and Thieves be
kept in a Bridewell all their Life, to work for the Public; That most severe
Punishments be determined to be indispensibly inflicted upon all Fornicators
and Adulterers; That better Provisions be made than there is, that Scholars be
carefully brought up and exercised in Devotion and Piety, as well as in human
Learning; That all Gaming for money, change of Modes in Clothes, Rich Garments
and Furnitures, and all Superfluities and vain and unnecessary Expenses be
hindered by most severe Penalties, and especially drinking in Tippling-Houses,
none of that Nature being allowed, but only a few Inns for Travelers; That
Pious Practical Discourses, such as the Book called The Whole-Duty of Man and
the like approved Books concerning Religion be read constantly in the
afternoon, in every Church all the Year; And that every Church be so disposed;
that all those that Parish there, may have room; That the Person to whom any
Adept may communicate himself, will bind himself to communicate the Secret to
no body else, but will leave that wholly to the Adepts choice; and in fine,
that the greatest Zeal shall consist in using force and the Arm of Power, not
against Speculative Errors, but against Vices and known Sins. For those who
have a real respect for the Scriptures, and understand them as well as they
can, may be Innocent and honest Men, though they err. No Violence then ought to
be offered to Conscience. And to avoid Stumbling Blocks and put no Stone of
offense in our Brethren's way, and to further Concord, Peace and Amity, nothing
should be required for Union but what is Scriptural. Else we make our selves
wiser than the Spirit of God that dictated the Scriptures, and we run the
hazard to vary from his Assertions, and thwart his Designs

It is certain, if there are Adepts in the World, God will never permit them to
communicate themselves to any Nation except that People be reformed and become
actually Righteous and Just; which it will never generally be, if most of the
above mentioned particulars, or the like, be not observed and provided for,
which might easily be, and would be infallibly of unexpressible advantage to
Human Society.

If, for instance, Physicians, Lawyers and Soldiers were, as well as Divines,
provided for, for their Lives; if their Children were taken off of their hands
as soon as born and brought up in houses and by persons hired for that purpose,
and if their Widows were to preside over these Houses, and had a set annuity
allowed them for life: what need were there that either Physicians or Lawyers,
etc. should have large Salaries; or what occasion were there that they should
have that greediness after gain that makes them both slight and Injure the poor
and oppress the Rich, which is one of the greatest disorders and the greatest
grievances? To maintain the said Widows and Children, the third part of the
Salaries that otherwise should be appointed to the men of the said several
Callings, might yearly be reserved for that use, and all manner of Goods or
Estate that should appear to belong to them, might be appropriated to the same
after their Decease, the Survivers being inspecters over that Business.

If every person of what quality and Estate soever was obliged to follow some
Employment or other, for the good of the Public, how much more easy would all
things be to the Society than now they are, especially if all Superfluities and
unnecessary expenses were also cut off and hindered?

Now, why could not Persons of Quality and Estate be bound to bring up their
Children in all sorts of Learning, and those obliged at a certain age to
exercise some Employment Gratis for the Public, either in the Profession of
Divinity, Law, Physic, or in the Army?

And why could not all Superfluous expenses be regulated, and all the occasions
of them be cut off? There is nothing occasions unnecessary Expenses more than
unnecessary Arts, unnecessary Ornaments in Clothes and Furniture, and
unnecessary Eating and Drinking.

It is evident the former might easily be remedied, and why could not there a
Law be enacted, on the greatest Penalties, regulating our Tables, and
forbidding any Persons to Eat or Drink together save at the usual meals in the
day, Dinner and Supper, and each of these meals not to last above the space of
one hour?

If all the occasions of Superfluous Expenses were cut off, we might be able to
give a good price for all necessary works made in the Nation; to pay well all
workpeople, to set all the Poor a work, that are able to work (if a Private man
and an ordinary Citizen, as Mr. F. with good management was able to set so many
Thousands a work, as is to be seen in his Life; what could not a Parliament,
what could not a Nation do; are we then excusable if any want among us?) to
make sufficient Provisions for the Sick and Old, for Children and Widows; and
in fine, to pay all Subsidies easily and cheerfully.

For whereas a great part of a Princes Revenues are founded upon the
Extravagant Expenses of his Subjects, there might be an equal Poll,
proportionably to every ones ability, and likewise an equal Tax yearly
established in lieu thereof,

If things were so ordered, there would not be so many occasions of Sin as now
there is, and every one in the Nation would live well and Comfortably.

All Workmen and Servants might then (there being less work to do) find an hour
in the day to Pray and Worship God in Public, Morning and Evening; and
infallibly, would thereby draw God's Blessing on their Masters and themselves,
and on the whole People, if God's Service was stricktly kept.

To live Luxuriously is but a Custom: If it was broke off, no Body would miss
it, and evidently it would be of infinite advantage to the Society that it were
so. If Children was used from their Infancy to little else than Bread and
Water, had sufficiently of that for the Necessities of Nature* and saw all
along no body before them use other nourishment; they would never think that
insufficient nor would ever want nor desire other, but in all probability
should enjoy health and strength both of Body and Mind, better than all other
Men How easily then might men earn more than should answer all the Necessaries
of Nature, if things were Rightly menaged!

Many Poor Families complain of having too great a number of Children to
provide for; many Fathers and Mothers go with sorrow to the Grave, seeing no
Provision made for the Maintenance of their numerous Family nor for the
bringing of them up in the fear of God; and there are many persons in the World
that pass their Lives in perplexity and discontent, and in the want of many
things, or in dishonest and unlawful courses to get that which they want:
Whence proceeds all this Evil? even from superinduced necessaries, from a
custom of being used to them, and desiring them more inordinately than those
things which are actually necessary. The number of People would be no cumber,
to a Land, if there was no Pride nor Luxury in the World.

If the Nation made a Fund to hire Houses and Servants to receive and bring up
all the Children that should be brought to them: suppose there was never so
many brought, the Public certainly would lose nothing by 'em, if the said
Children was used all along to have no more than would reasonably suffice
Nature, and if they was kept all their Life to work moderately for the Public.
They would pass their lives without care, want or Perplexity; and they might be
of infinite use to a Nation: And whereas now there are many Persons that are
burdensome and offensive to it, there would be none if a right Method was
taken. How happy might Princes make their People, if there was opportunity to
consider and effect all these things! If Parliaments was called to sit
constantly one half of the Year, they might in time have the oppertunity to
find Remedies to all those disorders, that are a shame to the Professors of
Christianity, and which, no doubt, incense God Almighty's Wrath against us. May
God in His infinite Mercy inspire every one in his Station with what he is to
do, and what every one in particular shall answer for at the great Day of
Judgment!

Sect. VIII. The Assurance which has been intimated that Princes might give.
WHat inconvenience would there be, if a Prince, Illustrious for Piety and
Justice as well as Valor, did take a Public and SolemnOath (besides that of
his Installation that, if there are Adepts in the world, and if any of them
communicate himself to him; he will Religiously observe those abovementioned,
or the like conditions? It were to be wished that all the Princes in the World
would agree to do this. That would Infallibly be a means to persuade Adepts, if
there are such, to communicate themselves, if God did then think sit to permit
it. And, if there are Adepts (as there is reason to believe there is) would the
Lord might be pleased to prepare their Way, and in His own good time to send
them, for the relief of Men, and chiefly for the Honor of His Great Name, and
the advancement of Piety, Holiness and Virtue!

Amen.
Sect. IX. What Great men might reasonably do, in order to obtain the Elixir
IT would be so great an Advantage to men to enjoy the Benefits of the Elixir,
that no reasonable means to obtain it should in reason be neglected. And there
is no Great Man but might put in for it, supposing he be conspicuous for his
Probity and Understanding, as well as for his Riches For, that which will
invite Adepts is, 1. Virtue, 2. Secrecy, 3. An Honorable esteem, and an
Ingenuous search and study of their Art; And Lastly, The being in a Capacity of
doing much good with the Elixir.

1. Virtue. Be thy Riches never so great, and thy desires of the Elixir so
inordinate as to make thee spend unreasonably in search of it, and use never so
many means to that end; thou shall never prosper, if thou be not Virtuous.
Reason, and unanimously all the Writtings of Adepts warrant it: God then will
never bless thy Work, nor enlighten thy Mind, nor send Adepts to thee. A Cherub
with a Flame of Fire stands at the Gate of Eden, to bar all the wicked from
it. If they was entrusted with the Elixir, they would turn the World upside
down, and replenish it with Iniquity and Oppression, and fill the world with
Scandal. If thou be therefore a Swearer, or a Drunkard, an Effeminate, or an
Unjust Person, etc. have no thoughts of finding the Elixir; for infallibly thou will never get it.

2. Secrecy. Though thou were Virtucus thy self, yet if thou be not secret in
the Superlative degree, thou can not have the Elixir; for thy want of Secrecy
might betray it into the hand of other Persons that perhaps should not be
virtuous, and would make an ill use of it. And what greater mischief can there
be, than to betray those Arcana of the Almighty, which are necessary to be kept
secret for the preservation of Mankind?

3. An Honorable esteem, and an Ingenuous Search and Study of the Art. The
Elixir will not seek the Scorners; and the Honny will never be for the Drones.
It is affirmed an Adebt once thought fit to convince an incredulous person, by
giving him a small particle of the Stone, and telling him how he might make
projection of it at his leisure; but it was never known that an Adept
communicated the secret to a despiser of the Art. But that is remarkable, which
I have heard a Wise and Grave man tell: A learned Person, about forty years
since, had conceived a mighty contempt and aversion for the Hermetik Art, and
used for several years, whenever he heard speak of it, to cry it down w^^h
Indignation as Foolish and False. At last, he took a resolution to read the
Books that treat of the Stone, that he might the better be able to expose the
vanity of it: But instead of that, in reading, he discovered the way to make
the Elixir; some time after, fell to work, and actually made it, and got a very
large quantity of it. Afterward, feeling Death near, he sent in haste for Mr.
H. (the person that related this) who was his Intimate Friend and a very
Learned and Good Man; but not being able to come till some days after, all that
the Adept could tell him was that he had designed to reveal his Secret to him
by word of mouth, and that what he delivered to him, was the Powder of
Projection, which he caused then to be given him. Howbeit, neither Mr. H. nor
the Adepts Widow, who both made trial of it many times, could ever make
Projection with it; and so, not knowing what to do therewith, did neglect it,
and in fine, let it be scattered and lost. I cannot still but be wail the loss;
for it was their unskilfulness hindered the Projection. But, in short, who will
obtain the Elixir must work for it.

Lastly, If a Person that is Eminent for Probity and Secrecy, and that is a
lover of the Art, be also in a station to be able to do much good; that will be
all the inducement possible to move an Adept to communicate himself to him.
Irenaeus Philalethes came to London a purpose to impart the Art to the
Honorable Mr. B. who undoubtedly might have done a great deal of good with it,
doing much good with what he had, and, besides his good disposition, being in a
capacity to render great services to the Public by reason of his quality and
fortune, his Credit and I earning. But that Honorable Person, who had such
Natural and acquired accomplishments, and was so well qualified for Philosophy,
and extremely desired to see an Adept, yet took no notice of a very great
failing; he was too communicative, and his house was so disposed, that nothing
that was done in it could be Secret. He ordinarily spent Two Hundred Pounds a
Year in making Experiments, and kept several men to that purpose; But his men
knew as well as himself all that was done, and they were perpetually about him.
Philalehes presenrly perceived this dangerous disposition: But in that Visit,
observed a Person, that happened to be there at the same time, who expressed so
much caution in every word he spoke, that Philalethes resolved to be acquainted
with him. He therefore saw him, and confirmed the good opinion he had conceived
of him, and at once gave him as much of the White Elixir, as sufficed to make
60000 l. Sterling worth of Silver. What afterward happened would be to long to
recite, and has no more affinity to the present Subject. But it does not appear
Philalethes ^ver imparted the Art to him; and he affirms to his (...) would
not, and he would never press him too far for fear of displeasing him. Perhaps
he hopes he will do it sometime, when he will think it convenient. And perhaps
Philalethes has reasons, best known to himself, why he should not do it.

But in all probability, it is any Great Man's fault, that has a genius this
way and that is Virtuous, if he does not invite Adepts to him. For, why cannot
he be Secret? He is in a capacity to do infinite good, even to his Prince and
Country (which is the last and also the highest qualification that can be
desired) He need fear nothing. He can be in no danger. His house is a Palace.
His Retinue are his Guards. He has Favor. He has Access. And it is to be
presumed, he is loved and honored. Besides, having a vast Estate, he may
Publicly do a vast deal of good, and no Body strange at it. And he may do a
great deal under hand, and by means of others that depend of him; and still he
may keep his Secret to himself.

Then why cannot he fix an inconsiderable part of the Superfluities of his
Estate to make experiments, as Mr. B, did? But he must not commit the faults,
that that worthy man did not ^^^erve to avoid. First, he may have his
Laboratory in a Private place. It need take, in all, no more room than an
ordinary Chamber. Let it be divided into two equal parts by a Brick Wall. Then
it will make as it were two large, or rather long Closets, adjoining next one
another, and only parted by a wall. Let there be two Doors for these two
Closets, a particular Door to each particular Closet. Then, into one of these
two Closets no Body need ever to enter but the Master himself, or at most
another man more; and that a choice one, as we shall particularize by and by.
Let there be two small Chimney-Funnells to these two Closets, a Funnel over
each Closet; and let each Funnel be, not next to any Wall, but over the middle
of the Seeling of each Closet, that the Smoke and ill Odours of the Furnaces
may be carried out that way, Let the Closets Windows be placed as high as may
conveniently be. Now, let two Furnaces, that I shall describe, be built so,
that part of each Furnace may be in one of the Closets, and another part in the
other Closet. The design whereof is, that a Servant may continually supply your
Fires, standing in one of the Closets (which for distinction sake we will call
the Servants Closet) and never come among your Vessels that shall be placed on
the other parts of the Furnaces in the next Closet (which we will call the
Masters Closet) where the heat shall come. Wherefore the two parts of each
Furnace must be built immediately joining the Brick Wall, which divides the
Laboratory into two Closets, and two small holes must be made in the said Wall,
to let in the heat from one part of the Furnaces to the other; a hole to that
purpose for each Furnace. The Furnaces must be, the one a Common Wind Furnace,
and the other an Athanor. Almost all the Wind Furnace will be in that Closet
which we call the Masters Closet: There will be only the ashhole of it, and the
hole to put in the Coals, in the Closet where the Servant comes But all the
Tower of the Athanor will be in the Servants Closet: and the other part of it
upon which the Vessels shall stand in digestion, and all the rest of the Wind
Furnace except the doors, shall be in the Masters Closet.

The Laboratory, and Furnaces, and all the Utensils requisite to make it
convenient and fit for the Rich, will not cost above 50l. If thou conceivest in
General the Method of the Art, and wilt work thy self, there needs but one man
to do the dirtiest part of the work, that is, to attend the Fires and put in
the Coals, and make the Lutes, etc. If thou will not thy self undertake the
work, thou must have another Man to do it. if thou can have one rightly
qualified. Two Hundred Pounds a Year, is certainly more than needs to keep
these two Men, and pay them wages, and furnish to all the charges of the
experiments But Rich Men may have all their conveniences; The Labourer is
worthy of his (...)* And Nobles must do all things Nobly. And what is Two
Hundred a Year to some great men? It is but an inconsiderable part of what they
may spare out of the Superfluity of their abundance. Yet, that which is so
little to them, may all the Year round* afford them a Philosophic trial of the
Sublimest Speculation; and may be an agreeable Recreation to them at their
spare hours, when they may see what is done in their Laboratory. Besides, it
will be a maintenance for two of their Fellow Creatures; and may be of infinite
advantage to themselves and all the World.

Suppose you reckon thirty Pounds a piece for the Board of the Men, that's 60 l.
And 50 l. for the wages of the one, and 10 l. for the Wages of the other,
that is 60 l. more. Then there remains 80 l. to buy the Coals, yearly, the
Vessels, the Drugs; and that's superaboundant. It Is evident, all is here set to
the utmost, however this can break, or be very burdensome to no great man. To
think of greater charges is both needless and unreasonable tho* I know, some
have spent more; but that was their fault* For they were deceived by Quacks and
Impostors, and they little understood the ways of Nature, and no more regarded
that, than the means to obtain God's Blessing; esteeming that expenses was the
sure and only means to their end; but they were frustrated.

If you take two men, one for each Closet; the Head Man must be thus qualified.
1. He must be an Artist, 2. He must necessarily be a Temperate and Virtuous, a
Holy* Sober and Moderate Man; 3. He must be a Lover of the Art, and must be
conversant in the Hermetick Writings; 4. He must indispensibly be discreet and
one that is capable of Secresy; And, 5. One that has no other design and thinks
of no other Employment, but will oblige himself to stick to this as long as he
lives; Therefore you must also assure him his Pension for his Life. for in
often shifting of men, there can be no improvement nor Secresy. Lastly, you
must take an Oath of him that he will be Secret, and, as much as is possible,
will let no body (besides one, which shall be you or your heir) know what he
works upon, nor the Method he follows, no, not his own Wife if he have one. And
you must likewise make the same Oath your self, and vow that if any Adept
happen to come to communicate himself to you, you will Sacredly keep the
abovementioned Conditions, as far as in you lies. There Is no Great Man that
does this, but may come in time to be as well known to Adepts as Mr. B. And
when it is perceived that he has used all these cautions, they will be heartily
inclined to communicate with him.

Now, consider sincerely whether that small portion of the Superfluity of your
Revenues can be better spent. You Will say, you are not infallibly assured of the
Stone. No, but there is ground enough to hope; and what you venture cannot hurt
ye; and ('it is certain) according to the common Proverb, Nothing Venture,
Nothing Have.

You Will urge, you might do a great deal of good with that Sum. Yeas, and you
may still do a great deal of good besides, notwithstanding you consecrate this
to Chyinistry; for you are but a Steward of your Estate: And in this do you not
do some certain good? Do you not maintain two men, and it may be two Families,
especially if you let the Men board themselves, and you allow them what has
been accounted for their board? And do you reckon for nothing the good you may
do your self and all men, if you succeed?

Still, you will urge; If this Sum was spared for your Children, it would amount
to something in time. But have you not enough to spare for your Children
besides? And will it not do them good, if it draws God's Blessing upon them?
And, in time, you or your heirs may get the Elixir, which will preserve you in
health and ease to the last moment of your Life. Besides, it will yet be
constantly greater Engagement to you and your Children to be more and more
Pious and Virtuous.

After all, those that are able and yet think much to lay such a sum to this
use, often do nor think it much to lose as much or more at Cards, or spend it
in Vanities. What? Do thou not consider the wretched condition the generality
of Mankind is in, and how miserably they fare in this evil World, where men
wickedly oppress and devour one another? And will thou do nothing to attempt
to relieve good part of them from the heavy Burden they groan under?
Hard-hearted Creature! The very undertaking would be kind, and would acquit
thee. But thou will do nothing for the good of Mankind, and it is enough for
thee that thou and thine are well. Is that thy Conscience? is that thy Charity?
is that thy Religion? Does not the welfare of others at all concern thee?
Rare Christian, that carest neither for the Members of Christ nor Christianity!
For all thy care is to fare well thy self, and flourish in the World, and leave
thy Family Triumphant, whilst others creep in the Dust. Thus are the Heathens
and Sinners disposed; And, therefore, wherein art thou better than they? When
thou come into the other World, and it shall be shown thee how much good thou
might have done; how many people thou might have relieved; how many
useful Books thou might have caused to have been Published; what great
things thou might have undertaken, and what Foundation thou might have
laid for the prosperity of succeeding Genenerations; and it shall be examined
what thou did instead of all this, and whereunto thou have employed all thy
Talents; what will thou be able to say? Thy Summer Houses, thy Sports, thy
Ambition; will these be mentioned with Applause? Those things which are in high
esteem among Men, are Abominations in the sight of God.

Thy lifting up thy self so high above thy fellow Creatures, as if thou
would be held a Divinity, and would be Worshipped of them; Thy
Partiality, thy Pride, and Unmercifullness in making such a difference betwixt
thee and them; Thy Haughtiness in trampling upon them, and thy Cruelty in
contemning and humbling, in afflicting and oppressing them, will make thee then
be despised and abhorred. But they shall be comforted.

The result of which Consideration certainly is this, that those that are Rich
in this World, be not High-minded, nor Coveteous; but that they do good; be
ready to Distribute, and willing to Communicate, that they may lay hold on
Eternal Life. Otherwise they effectually renounce Christianity; For Charity is
the Badge of that Holy Profession: And Christian Charity imports, that we love
other men as our selves: That indeed did, in the Apostolic Age, those truly
zealous and sincere Christians, who were together, and had all things common,
and parted unto all men as every man had need, and did eat their Meat with
gladness and singleness of Heart, in honor preferring one another, Praising
God, and having favor with all People.

That Is the thing Essential, that we have this Pious disposition, that we love
other men as our selves. There may be some doubts in Philosophy; but there can
be non in this, that this is certainly our Duty. And therefore those that are
Rich, ought not to think it much, to hazard something of what thy can spare, to
aim at an Universal good.

I do not pretend to a Demonstration of the Elixir: But I do think there are
credible grounds, to believe that there is such a thing and that it may be had.
And if so, then surely it is reasonable to venture something for it.

When I give my self the Title of Philadept, the signification of that is not
that I am actually acquainted with any Adept, but that I am a well-wisher to
them. I my self never saw one, that I know; But I doubt not there are some men
Living have reason to think they have* For, Sincerely, there are great reasons
to conclude of some men that they were Adepts. If so, it were to be wished they
had left the Principles of the Art, both with men that should direct the same
to the best end, (the general good of mankind,) and with Skillful Artists, who
were both able and willing to make a good use of it. But, whatever Judgment may
be made of the Philosophy of Hermes, I conclude with this infallible decision
of the infallibly Wise Man: The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; And to depart
from Evil, that is Understanding.

FINIS.

