AN ESSAY TOWARD A SCHEME or MODEL FOR ERECTING A NATIONAL East India
Joynt-Stock OR COMPANY More generally diffused and enlarged FOR THE RESTORING,
ESTABLISHING, AND BETTER CARRYING on that most important TRADE: Fully
discoursed in a LETTER TO A Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. MDCXCI.

TO THE Honorable COMMITTEE OF PARLIAMENT Appointed To Bring in a BILL for
settling an East India COMPANY. The Publisher humbly dedicates the ensuing
Treatise concerning (...) East India COMPANY and TRADE.
Gentlemen,
A Committee being appointed to draw up a Bill for settling An East India
Company, no hesitation remained whom to Address the ensuing Papers to, they
properly belonging to your selves; they were drawn up two years since for the
satisfaction of an eminent worthy Member of the preceding Parliament, and upon
its dissolution was thrown wholly by, but is now judged convenient to be
published, hoping it may be of some good use, seeing that the same work is on
soot again and in greater forwardness; the distance of time from its drawing up
may have altered circumstances, so as that some directions and proposals may
have abatement of their Energy, particularly that in the (...) concerning
Tunnage is now of no significancy more than to show the kindness (...) the
Author to them; but in all other things with a small allowance it may serve
indifferently for the present Meridian.

Many and various are the directions and proposals that are offered, but none
of them at all contrary but agreeable to the Regulations concerted by the
House, but more enlarged and dilated; some there are wholly new as in p.
8.9.12. to 18. all which, as they are projected for the enlargement and
security of the Trade and great Advantage of the Nation throughout, will no
doubt be well taken notice of and be seriously pondered and weighed by you; and
if approved of, inserted in the draught; Read seriously, Judge deliberately:
Two grand Objections are every where vigorously buzzed about by the Company and
their Friends, to hinder the Mutation of this present Stock and Management. One
is that a Change is hugely for the Dutch Advantage, that they would give 500000
l. to have a new one established: We are sure the Dutch are great Husbands of
their Money, and part not with it but upon advantageous Terms, which how they
will find in a new Company rightly established (as they have plainly done in
the Old One) is not easy to apprehend. It must be conceded the Dutch as
Traders to India have been always Cordial Enemies to us; and in all Ages given
full Assurances thereof; it is with them as with Hannibal, sworn in his
Childhood at the Altar never to have Peace with the Romans; agreeable whereto
are the Instructions and Actions of their Servants at all times and in all
places. Hence the Spice Trade was ravished from us, our Men slain with most
barbarous unexampled cruelty at Amboyna, and many other Places and Trades were
we deceived of formerly without any public reparation, but in this Companies
time the Dutch have made their Advances quick and thick; fresh in Memory is
their robbing us of Macasser, sweeping away Poleroon a Spice Island, but
through Corruption and Bribery never improved by the Company; so likewise
Bantam, Jambee, and all Dependencies, a vast Trade mightily beneficial to the
Nation; several places on the Coast of India; and then the great Prejudice they
did us, and Streights they put us to on the West Coast, tho no Advantage in the
least to them, being a perfect malicious Act: And indeed whatever they have set
upon has been gone thorough with great easiness, and submitted to with eminent
tameness, and the reason is all along the India Concern has been esteemed a
bare Mercantile Affair, so that the Nation has never interposed. When did the
Company ever Address the Parliament upon any of these Accounts? no, they knew
they were upon an illegal wrong bottom, so durst not appear before them, and of
themselves they had not Stock wherewith to cope and engage with the Adversary,
and rather than Assistance should be given they have bowed down tho to the
Nations great injury, patching up Affairs as well as they could by private
Correspondencies, which the Dutch understand as well as the French; and
sometimes to color the business making a great noise and bustle, sending a
Foreigner to demand satisfaction and adjust Differences, and it may be make
some Preparations, when all is but to cloud the private Intrigue carried on
here; thus some treachero^s Governors in our days (we may now forget York and
Stanley) when they have made their private pact with the Enemy, will burn and
ravage all out parts, drain all they can from the Inhabitants, and then with a
specious Treaty make a rendition; and then the Scene is over. So that its
impossible for any in their Wits to believe the Dutch Favorers of a New, and
Enemies to the present Company, with whom they have such private Concerts, and
whom they find so easy an Enemy, having often foiled them, they know their
strength and can crush them as they please. Now to cure this, it need not be
said delenda est Carthago, but let our Trade be settled on as firm a basis as
theirs is, by making it National, and a Trade of the State, with a real
substantial sufficient fund, as is proposed in this Scheme, we shall then stand
upon even ground, and be able to cope with them on all occasions, having as
good support as themselves, and our State to back (...) ^heirs to back them,
and nothing else will preserve us from their Encroachments. So that its rather
to be judged the Dutch would on the contrary give 500000l. to have this Company
continued, than a new one settled; it being so much for their Interest if to be
compassed, the prospect of a New Company settled as proposed being, as all
observing Persons in Holland know, like a Dagger at the heart of the Dutch
Company.

The other Objection is, that the Concern of Widows and Orphans will suffer by
this Mutation; it does not appear who these Widows and Orphans are, there being
but few upon the last list, and fewer that were considerably concerned, it
being customary for Widows to sell out as soon as the Husband dies, having any
great Stock: so that not the tithe of any Widows Estate may be computed to be
therein. It Is somewhat strange the Orphans and Widows should be the Object of
the Companies care, they have made many such deplorable Objects, but this is
the first Instance of any Compassion in them, and it is from some by ends
because not universal; for why else should not the poor St. Helenian, as well
as the rich London Widows be regarded? But to be short if the Account delivered
into the House be true, there can be no loss, and if otherwise, those that have
been concerned any considerable time can have but very small loss if any,
having been Partakers of large Dividends, and those that have come in lately
(of which there may for small Sums possibly be one or two) have had fair
warning to take heed year after year, and if yet they will venture, who shall
take care for them? They have had time to sell and yet may; if Persons come in
upon illegal Foundations and Titles they take their lot, the State is not
obliged to make them good. Many a Widow and Orphan are cheated, and sometimes
of all they have by deceitful Mortgages and had Titles, and so remain without
remedy; Persons may fall into a condition that may be pitied, but not redressed
as every term gives instances of. These Widows and Orphans if any there be,
have been Partakers of all benefits in the Dividends made upon the Goods
brought home by Andrews and that Crew obtained by Plunderings, Spoils,
Piracies, etc. and that without showing any remorse; there being no instance of
any Protest made against the same in the behalf of either Widow or Orphan, and
is it injustice that they who without any scruple freely and pleasingly share
of all Advantages in evil ways do also partake of the bitter fruits if any be?
What care has been taken for the Widows and Orphans that suffer by the
Exchequer? and yet that is a kind of Crown debt. What has hitherto been done
in behalf of the Orphans of London after so many years Attendance, whose case
differs much and more to be pitied? They had most of them their all therein,
and these b^t^a pittance; their money was forced into the Chamber by the Law of
the Land, so that the State seems answerable in honor at least for their
moneys: Th^se came in freely and upon an unjust Title contrary to the Laws of
the Land, and that known beforehand. But to turn the Tables there is no loss of
any thing likely to come to the Widows, etc. The Chief Managers and Gainers
giving security to make good their Principle; and there is no design in this
Scheme to take away a Farthing of what is theirs. The New Subscribers come not
in to partake of any thing of theirs, but to share of their own, the liberty of
Trade; and no one can complain when nothing of theirs is taken away, but they
enjoy whatever is their own be it little or much; so that all the noise and
clamor about Widows and O^phans vanishes like d^w against the Sun. Upon the
whole tho these People have in all points behaved themselves with great
indecency, rudeness, and ingratitude, taking all opportunities to reflect upon
what the House has done, notwithstanding all the kindness, favor, and
superabundant mercy they have been treated with, so as no Society of People
ever were, considering the woeful circumstances they are under; they have had
the Trade to themselves for some 34 years, and still nothing will please them
but a Continuance, and all the rest of the Nation to be disseized of their
Right thereto; but its hoped by the benign i^fluence of the House, such a
Model will by your wisdoms be agreed on and carried in as may rejoice the
hearts of all true Englishmen, by settling this great Trade upon its true
Basis, Liberty and Property.

Land 12. Jan. 1691/2.
AN ESSAY Toward a SCHEME or MODEL FOR Erecting and Establishing A New
National East India Joynt-Stock, or Company.
Honored SIR,
I Shall not make any Apology in Excuse for a Non compliance with what you
require of me, my Duty to my Country, and the Obligation I am under to you, not
permitting me to deny what my poor weak Endeavors may be thought to contribute
in so National, and necessary a Work; humbly requesting your favorable
Construction and Interpretation of what may fall from a Pen unaccustomed to any
Public Service; this Province might more peculiarly belong to some of those
many who have come from those Eastern Parts much later, and taken up their
Residence in the great City, whereby they have had better opportunities of
making more clear practical Observations, and particular Inspections into all
the late Transactions of the Affairs of India, than one sequestered from all
Business and Traffic, and withdrawn to a more retired life. But seeing you
have singled me out, I shall, resting upon your Candor, present you with my
serious Thoughts, touching the carrying on the East India Trade, in the most
National and Beneficial way for this Kingdom; and that abstracted from any
particular Picque against this present Stock, or any sinister Interest or
Design of my own; For, blessed be God, I am under no such Temptation; but what
shall be offered, will be the Result of the best of my Judgment, upon
Experience, Advice, and Observation of what has been transacted and succeeded,
and the Nature of the Affair so far as it has come to my Cognizance. It could
have been wished, that such a Work, as this you desire, had been prevented, and
that the Company themselves, when invited thereto by the extreme Generosity of
the Honorable Committee of Parliament, would have so far complied with the
Figure which their Quality seems to make in the Land, as to have presented them
with such a Draught or Scheme, as might have answered their End and Proposal,
by comprehending and including all the Subjects of England, willing to come in,
their Birthright intitling them thereto, upon such a Constitution and
Settlement as might have removed all the Clamors against them as a Monopoly,
and wiped off somewhat of the Odium of the Nation, contracted on themselves by
many former, unjust, illegal Actions. But behold! instead of Ambassadors of
Peace, they appear as Heralds of War: What means else the preposing to have
themselves confirmed in that most arbitrary Power they had illegally assumed or
procured? What means that unreasonable Proposal to have the same present
Constitution so much complained of to be confirmed? What means it that nothing
is offered material for enlarging and making the Trade more National.
advantageous, and diffusive to the Subject? Why is nothing proposed for the
amoving the great Grievances and notorious Injuries the Nation complains the
Monopolizing this Trade has brought upon it? But the whole Burden of their
Papers and Proposals is to engross all in their few Hands, as before; and
confer an Enlargement of Powers, tho they had most horribly abused what they
had before illegally obtained; as the numerous Complaints, that have been
exhibited against them to the Honorable House of Commons the last and this
Sessions; and the Votes that have passed upon Hearing some of them,
sufficiently evince: whence plainly appears the great Inconveniency, the little
Assistance, and Success that results from consulting with such Persons for
remedying Miscarriages and Abuses, whose Interest it is to have them continued;
and in truth, it was no more than what was foreseen and foretold by many. And
since Persons of so great a Character, there being among them of the Equestrian
and Senatorian Order Conciliarii nati, and under such high Obligations by the
luxuriant Favor of the Honorable Committee, can so hardly be persuaded in any
measure to forego or release somewhat of their private Interest for a more
National good; it will not be by any means advisable to have any Recourse to
such, what Pretensions soever they make, that they want no due Tenderness for
the Trade and the Nations Interest, whilst the rectifying thereof by any new or
suitable Model be contrary to their private Interest, and so their Inclination;
which will engage them to cast Rubbs and Difficulties in the way rather than to
smooth it to such a Work: Therefore it seems more conducive to the
accomplishing or perfecting so good and National a Design; that rather the
Complainants, and such as have been conversant and are well versed in the
Affair, having no Interest, that is, in this present Stock, be called and
desired to give their Assistance, who may on good grounds be supposed to be
better able to give Light into the Occasion of all the Abuses and
Mismanagements, and direct also to the true and most likely Methods for the
regulating and rectifying of them, which it is hoped will be taken into due
Consideration. Now to come nearer to the matter in hand, it will be necessary
that some Postulata's be laid down as previous to an Answer to the Question,
they leading directly thereto, and are as follows: (Viz.)

1. THAT Foreign Traffic and Commerce, as it is absolutely necessary unto, so
is the Great Privilege and National Concern of this Kingdom, and among others
none more National than the East India Trade.

2. That the People of England, being a Free People, have an inherent, real,
just, undoubted, Natural Right to the National Foreign Commerce of this
Kingdom, and so particularly to that of East India.

3. That the Commerce and Traffic of this Nation may (by those to whom is
entrusted the Legislative Power and Sovereign Authority) be regulated,
circumscribed, and- modelled into wholesome Methods, for the more easy, secure,
Orderly, National and profitable carrying on the said Negotiation.

4. That the Limitations, Circumscriptions, Regulations, Models, Standards,
etc. used in the Methodizing of Trade, ought to agree with, and not be
repugnant to the Fundamental Constitutions of this Nation and Native Freedom of
the Subject; therefore the Terms of Admission for Adventurers to Trade should
be easy and large to the increasing of Commerce and not narrow and difficult
in the Nature of illegal Monopolies, which, of what sort soever, are contrary
to the Freedom of the Subject, and absolutely destructive to the Nation and
Trade thereof.

5. That as some Foreign Trade may best be negotiated by being open to all that
will come thereinto at pleasure; so others may best be carried on by some
Regulations, and Circumscriptions, as either by separate Managements under a
general Society and Governo, by particular Admissions into the same by
Inheritance, a^ is Service, or by Redemption upon Terms, easy to the Subject,
as is or should be the Case of that of the Turkey Company and Merchant
Adventurers and other Companies; or else Conjunctly, by a Joint Stock and
Management, and particularly the East India Trade (for Reasons too long here to
be inserted) is generally agreed by all, may best be managed in a public
National Way, by a well-founded Joynt-Stock and Management both as to the
Honor and Advantage of the Nation, and Profit of the Adventurers.

6. That the present Company, or Joynt-Stock, has a very narrow, unnational,
illegal Foundation, a Small Stock vastly disproportionate to the immense Trade
of the East Indies, whereby it strongly savours of a Cursed Monopoly (or is
absolutely the same) very ill Terms of Settlement, its Constitution being
greatly pernicious to the Whole Nation and the said Trade of India; the
multiplying Votes, according to the repeated quantity of Stock, putting it into
the Power of a few over grown, rich, ill disposed, Malignant Persons, by
Combination and Confederacy to ingross and Monopolize the said Trade and
Management thereof wholly to themselves, (as is the Case at this day) thereby
rendering that Great Affair of the India Trade from public and National (as it
ought to be) a particular private Interest and Benefit; to the irreparable
Damage of the Subject in his Right and Property, and opening a Way to his
entire Destruction, by having so vast and important Concern of the Nation in
the Disposal of so few hands, and such as cannot be esteemed Friends to the
present Settlement, Good of the Subject or Nation; its Constitution being
calculated for the Advancement of Arbitrary Power.

7. That the Arbitrary Management of this Company by the Governor and
Committees, has all along conduced to, and greatly advanced the introducing
Popery, Slavery, and Tyranny into this Nation, during the Reigns of the two
last Kings, (more especially since the Year 1681.) by too great Severities in
unhappy unexampled ways exercised toward and upon the Freeborn Subjects of
England, their Persons, Goods, Estates, and Liberties, as has been made evident
at the Bar of the Honorable House of Commons. And by Hostilities and
Depredations unreasonably exercised toward the Subjects of the Great Mogul and
other Potentates in India and Parts adjacent, together with a continued Series
of unhappy, indiscreet Conduct of their whole Affairs, has already deprived the
Nation of Trade in Bengale, Surat, and other Places, and put the rest and whole
of that invaluable Trade of East India upon the utmost hazard of being
inevitably, utterly, and irrecoverably lost to the Nation.

8. The present Condition of this Company, and Posture of its Affairs are such,
as seem to declare the Managers thereof unfit, incapable, for carrying on the
Trade, or ever bringing it into any good Condition or method again, having
through Charges, Losses, Dividends, etc. come to the End of their Stock, and
it is feared, run it much in Debt; and by a continued trying new Projects and
Tricks, the whole Trade is come to a doleful languishing State, insomuch,

9. That unless some speedy Course be immediately taken for removing the
Management of this Trade out of the hands of these Conductors, and putting it
under the Conduct of abler Guides: it may be of unconceivable Damage to this
Kingdom in having the Care of our Trade in India longer neglected, upon which
its utter Ruin and Loss may ensue, and it will be a sad Adieu that must be
given to it.

10. That this is an Opportune Season for the making such Alteration as may be
useful for the better carrying on this so great Concern to the Nation; the
People of England in general, being highly sensible of the great destructive
Miscarriages it has lain under, and the Parliament of England now sitting on
Inquest for redressing Grievances: therefore in Consideration of the Premises,
That the East India Trade is of a vast National Importance, to which the whole
Nation has an unquestionable Right; and forasmuch as the present Company or
Joynt-Stock has an illegal Foundation, and very improper Constitution, whereby
and through the indiscreet Conduct and Management of their Affairs, they have
brought themselves under very unhappy Circumstances, insomuch that the Trade of
India is in part lost, and all under utmost Hazards, themselves under an
Incapability of remedying the same, and it not being safe, or for the National
Interest, that they be any longer entrusted with the Management of so great a
Concern, and this being the most proper Season that is like to happen, for the
settling this so important a Trade upon a National Foundation and Constitution;
therefore in Answer to the Question proposed, How the East India Trade may be
best managed in a National way for public Benefit? It is humbly concluded as
the best.

That this present Company or Joynt-Stock be immediately dissolved, and a New
Joynt-Stock or Company be erected by New Subscriptions, and established by a
Parliamentary Sanction.
Although it were to be wished this had been done much sooner, seven or eight
years since before it fell so greatly under those most deplorable
Male-administrations, and the Commission of those many Atrocious Crimes which
have since then ensued; as was in great Wisdom proposed by a great Person among
themselves, and backed with strong Reasons, Philopatris, Chap. 2. page 10, 11.
and was also much pressed by many Merchants and others, out of a Prospect of
what has since come to pass, but was then obstructed by the then Managers, and
concerned by some undue unbecoming Applications to Court for their own private
Emoluments and Designs (tho to the enslaving and destroying the Nation) Actions
being then high, the Trade in great Reputation, Subscribers would have been
very forward; whereas we are now ingulphed in War at home and abroad, the
Nation full of Discontents, the East India Trade in a most hazardous Condition,
a lamentable dark State of it appearing from India; but however it being a Work
conceived of absolute Necessity to the Nation, those that are convinced of its
Importance and Advantage to this Kingdom, and value their Right. thereto, will
no doubt (having the firm, legal, and encouraging Basis of an Act of Parliament
to rest upon) signalize their Love and Duty to their Country, themselves and
Posterity, by becoming ready Subscribers to a New National Legal Joynt-Stock,
that so such an inestimable Jewel, as the Trade of India, may not sink or be
lost to the Nation.

These things premised, in which more Prolixity has been med than at first was
intended, tho not then needed; A Scheme or Model for the carrying on this great
important Trade for the more National Benefit of this Realm, comes now more
closely to be considered, and to that purpose this Thesis must be laid down and
discussed.

That the East India Trade being large and National, it is requisite, if carried
on by a Joint Stock, that it be much enlarged suitable to the sa d Trade (the
present national Stock not being National enough, and much too small, for the
Management thereof) and made so extensive, that there may be ^oom for the while
Body of the Nation, recording to their Birthright, to come in and partake
thereof in such Limits and Methods hereafter mentioned, or as upon (...)
Consideration shall be adjudged best; and to this end two Ways are proposed:
Viz.

First, By enlarging and adding to this present Stock.

Secondly, By establishing a New Joynt-Stock by new Subscriptions, and
dissolving this present Stock.

First, As to enlarging by adding to this present National Stock, this is
pressed only by those who are the present Adventurers therein, and these may be
ranked into three Parties or Orders.

First, Those who have a s^^^^ in the Stock, but are not at all concerned in
the Management, these are not (...) o^ hot in the Case, being very sensible of
the Mismanagements, and wh^^her they ^a^d; and are willing to ary Alie^ation,
whether by Addition (...) D^sl^^^tion, only are greatly (...) us, lest upon
^^ss^^^ing the Stock, it will appear a Non entity; but they should consi^^^, if
they have already received their real Stock and Profits by Div^le^ls, as most
surely they have, they ought to rest ^^^^^ed, according to the old honely
Proverb, A man cann t ^^at his Cake, and have his Cake too, the^e being nothing
designed in this Essay to defraud them of their Right, as will after appear.

Secondly, Those and their Confidents, who formerly were in the Management and
Combination, (which is added, because there were some worthy Persons Managers,
and not of the Confederacy) but by a prevailing Party were justly enough turned
out; these (and is it any Wonder?) are discontented they are out of the S^^^^^.
and long to be in again* and know, that upon a new Constitution they shall
never (...) chosen; therefore are for continuing this Company and its
Constitution in the main, only are willing to some unmomentous Alterations,
hoping thereby in their little Cunning to Mount again; they are willing to
acknowledge a great Mismanagement, (as i^^eed there is) and to lay a heavy Load
of Guilt upon the present Managers (as indeed they deserve) especially upon
that great Person who silenced them, and is indeed for Ability super^^r to them
all, and for Integrity equal at least to any of them: and if they can be any
means get him removed (of whom they stand in such ^^ead* and the Company and
Constitution in the main continued, they hope the day is their own, and this
see us the perfect Drift and Design of that Scheme you mention, which
undoubtedly (...) dressed up by their own sly Cook. But should this take place,
the Remedy would be like the Disease, for Ambiti^n, Pride, and invincible
Ignorance, etc would have the Reins, and ^o all would again fall to Confusion;
therefore not to be practiced.

Thirdly, Those who are the present Managers, and such whose Interest is linked
with them, these are Tooth and Nail for continuing this Stock and us
Constitution, that they may still rule and enrich themselves thereby. Now both
these later Parties are Eneimes enough to each other, but for their own private
Ends to the public Detriment do join herein, and are they alone that busy
themselves, and make such a Noise about preserving this Stock and its
Management, according to its present Arbitrary Constitution; or so that still
the Dominion and Power may remain among them, and who can admire that Diana be
cried up by Demetrius and his Company? Seeing that by the same they get their
Wealth: and smely upon apprehension of a Dissolution of this Company, it can be
no Astonishment to hear these merry-hearted sigh, their Joy being darkened, and
those few great Merchants and Traders that were made rich by the imprisoning
this vast Trade in their own hands to be found weeping and wailing, wringing
the hands, and crying out, Alas! Alas! for that a M^ne Tekel is writing upon
all their Greatness and Domimon: the Merchants, the Masters, the Mariners will
come no more with Gifts of the Riches of India; the delicate, dainty,
desirable, goodly, glorious things of India, will no more center in their
Stately Palaces, those Rivers will be dried up. This! This! greves full sore;
and will they not use all their Interest to keep up their dying Gains? Will
they not struggle hard? Hence it is no stone is left unturned, hence it is that
some disrobe themselves of their Quality, and give such Attendance, even like
common Solicitors, making close impertinent Applications with the invention of
many a needless false Story, to amuse the unwary; hence their readiness with
Golden Showers to sprinkle and power where it might Fructify. But Blessed be
God they have not to deal with an ungenerous corrupt Court: So that it is hoped
all their Labor, Toil; and Golden Influences, will be in vain; and as in the
days of their Power, they refused to hear the Cries, the Tears, the Groans of
the Oppressed, the Fatherless, the Widow in their great Distress, and under the
Effusion of that Blood which yet lies uncovered, and calls to Heaven for
Vengeance; so it may be supposed the day is now come that just Judgment shall
be executed, whether it be unto Life, Banishment, or Confiscation: and that as
a Nuisance they be dissolved, never to have any Entrustments of Power more, but
made a Nehustan; and a new Legal one Erected. And because in your last advice,
you say, the great Question is, Whether a New Company, or the Old one Vamped,
Enlarged, Rectified, and Grafted, according to the Model you mention; tho what
is in the Premisals, was all that was designed upon that Head: Yet in regard
such great Interest you say is made (and no wonder) for the latter, and that it
has obtained much with some of Eminency, it is necessary to be dilated on. But
understanding the same work has been undertaken by abler Hands in two several
Tracts, and give great satisfaction, being already Published, as I am told; so
I refer you thereto; and shall only add a small matter on that Head, and then
come to the next Point.

1. This present Company upon its Erection would not, nor did they, Graft upon
the former Stock, then in a very low tho not in the same condition this now is
in; nor was there through out all the Stocks that have been for this Trade (and
there have been many) any such thing done as Grafting on a former; so that
being a Nov^ly, it may be conceived the more impracticable: And seeing this
Company would not admit such a thing upon their Establishment; it seems less
reasonable for them to desire it to be allowed them, or for the Parliament to
admit of it.

2. To Graft upon this present Company, seems absolutely against the Right of
the Freeborn Subject of England, no mean Infiringment of* Magna Charta: Which
the People of England have always claimed, and adventured their Lives and
Fortunes so often and freely, and so lately also, in its behalf. Every of the
Subjects of England has a Native Right to the Foreign Trade of this Kingdom,
and therefore ought, in all conjoined exclusive Stocks, to have his natural
Liberty allowed him to come in upon equal terms with others his fellow
Subjects; which he will be deprived of in this way of Grafting: Being that
after that Proposal, a very few of the Nation will have continued to them, and
in their Hands, above Three parts of Four of this so great Trade, and the whole
Nation besides shall not have a quarter part of the Trade: Which will be so
eminent a Violating the Right of the Subject, as it cannot be imagined that any
within your Walls can either propose or plead for.

3. This present Company is a superlative transcendent Monopoly, treble
refined, not only a Monopoly upon the Nation, in secluding it from the Kingdom
in general, and confining it to the City of London, but even upon the Company
themselves, in impounding it in the hands of a very few Persons, who receive
most of the Benefit thereof; and therefore not to be Grafted upon, being it
will still, according to the present Constitution, remain as a great Grievance
to the Nation, and the rest of the Adventurers that are not admitted into the
Cabal: And how much it imports the Commons of England to rescue so great an
Affair (it being or may be, its most certain, a full fifth Part of the Foreign
Trade of the Nation,) out of the hands of such persons as Monopolize and make a
Prey thereof; and to settle the same^ in such a National Method, and in such
Hands thereby, as that all those that have right thereto, and are willing to
join therein, may partake of the Benefit thereof, will surely be well
considered by their Honors: And how little a share do they deserve therein,
who endeavor to rob the rest of the Nation of the whole thereof?

4. The Grafting upon this Stock, must needs be against the Inclinations of any
persons of Sagacity and Conscience, considering the many numerous and great
Troubles they are plunged into with the Subjects of England, through many too
violent, bitter, and Illegal Actions, to preserve this Monopoly to themselves,
contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, and Rights of the Subject. This
is too sad a Theme to be expatiated upon: So I shall say no more of it.

5. The Grafting upon this Stock, may endanger the loss of the whole Trade of
India: We already see to how low an ebb its come, the Trade of Bengale and
Suratt, and of other places, being left or abdicated by their withdrawing from
them; and the invaluable Island of Boonbay, that great Emporium of India (as
some of them strangely term it) taken from them, and Possessed by the Mogul's
People; and all our Trade elsewhere in danger, being wholly at the Mercy of the
Indians. And these Gentlemen having brought Affairs to this pass; seems it in
the least reasonable to continue them in the Management, but rather that it be
immediately removed out of their hands? least there comes upon the Nation an
entire loss of this so important a Trade, there appearing no other way of
retrieving and conserving thereof.

6. The Grafting upon this Stock seems not at all advisable, in regard of that
perfect rooted bitter Emnity that appears in the present Managers and
Caballists, and many the concerned against any the Subjects of England, that
claim and desire the enjoyment of that Right and Liberty the Law of the Land
allows them: This is so uncontrolably evident, as the most hardened Forhead
cannot gainsay. It would be too tedious to make an Enumeration of particulars
in the Prosecutions that have been made against the Subjects of England; being
upon their lawful Occasions, and acting according to the Laws; but against the
companies Interest. What rigorous Usage had the Andalusians? How heavy a Charge
was laid against them of Piracy, to have taken away all their Lives as well as
Goods? And how well they proved it, the Honorable Committee of Parliament can
well remember. What they farther did by their Orders in India and here, shall
at present be passed over in silence: Only I shall note, That the Andalusians
were Impeached by the Company of the very same Crime here, which they
themselves were acting by then Servants and Orders in India at the self-same
time: And if it were so Criminal in the Andalusians; why it should be so highly
praiseworthy in the Company, seems difficult to conceive. Nor does the
Bitterness of their Spirits appear less notorious at present, insomuch that
even civil Converse is not admitted by them; and all that are not justly of
their Minds for the continuance of this Stock, contrary to the Laws of the Land
and Right of the Subject, are stigmatized with the inviduous Names of
Interlopers, and Enemies to the Company and the Crown; on purpose, as may
justly be conceived, to make a Faction and Party. And can Two walk together if
they be not agreed? No more can any good arise from the Vamping this Company by
a Conjunction of Stocks, while they are at so great Emnity with those that
desire a share in Trade with them; so should there be any mixture of Councils,
what Agreement would there be? Nay rather, what Clashings would there not be,
every Trifle occasioning a Tempest? and what must be the event, but that the
Hatred in the Old Caballists against those that should Graft or Vamp, would
bring great Detriment, if not Destruction on the whole? Tigers and Wolevs may
be Chained, but their Natures not changed; therefore not safely to be conversed
with by the harmless and innocent. Sure it is, without some Harmony in
Affection, there can be no pleasant, profitable, intimate Conversation; and
these Gentlemen, the present Managers, have by a many years continued Series of
Conduct, given most evident Demonstration of the unfitness of their Temper, for
any such Conjunction and Communion; and the unrelenting Hardness of Heart that
undeniably appears upon them at this day, sufficiently manifests their
Disposition unaltered, and most difficultly, if at all changeable; so that the
Proverb holds good: The Ethiopian changes not his Skin, nor the Leopard his
Spots.

7. This Company is of a most ignoble Extract and Original, having its first
Settlement in times of great Confusion; being Incorporated by Oliver Cromwell,
about the time when what he called a Parliament, declared and inaugurated him
Lord Protector of these Nations; and seems to be one of his first Royal
Donatives, or rather a specimen of his intended Government, it being
exquisitely adapted thereto, by its plenty of Arbitrary Clauses: Which the
concerned apprehending (as may be supposed) some Benefit by, might by fit means
procure to be continued in the Charter obtained of King Charles the Second,
upon his Restoration; which was no other in reality than a Confirmation or
Establishment of the former, there being no new Subscriptions, nor Stock, or
Persons, but the same without any Enlargement, or alteration. Now this was far
from being a National Joynt-Stock in its Rise, in regard it had its beginning
and was set on foot, as it were in hugger mugger, without any due public
notice given to all parts, and in a time when the greatest part of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Merchants of the Land, could not, or durst not Subscribe,
and many others but very little, having been under the Fines and Sequestrations
of or Obnoxions to an Inquisition, by the Petentates of Haberdashers-Hall; one
of which continued a Censor to his dying Day, or near it, in the Committee, for
their Direction and Instruction, no doubt, in such Affairs: (and it must be
owned, he lost not his labor, they having made great Impr^^^ments therein): So
that it became rather a private Bargain, or packt Juncto of Olivers, than a
Nati^nal Stock, or Co^^any; insomuch that considering its Birth, Founder, and
Design. it w^^l be conceived very inconvenient to Graft upon, and may be
wondered it should be pressed; but what will not Interest do? And surely none of
clear Spirits desirou^ to remain, and be esteemed Free Subjects, can without
great disdain have any Thoughts of Grafting on this present Stock, and
Constitution; (it being a Vamping Nel's Old Boots) but that a new One be
Erected agreeable to the Laws of the Land.

8. This Company, by reason of many late A^^ions has fallen into great
Disrepute with the Natives and Government of India, among whom the Affairs of
that Trade are negotiated, and brought a Scandal upon the whole Nation; that we
who were in Repute above all other Europians in former days, are now become a
Reproach among those Heathens. And to continue and Graft upon this Company or
Stock, will but justify all late unbecoming, unjust Actions and
Mismanagements, and bind our Reproach upon us: Therefore to take off all that
Odium the Nation lies under in the sight of those Heathens, and to ^estore our
selves to that former Honor and Credit we had with them; nothing can more
conduce (according to the best of my judgment) then an entire Dissolution of
the present Stock or Company, and Erecting a new One with a greater Fund, and
better Constitutions, that it may be as it ought, A National Stock and Trade.
This may be sufficient to be added concerning Grafting: And seeing this Company
did not Graft upon the former, or ever it was done before, and that so to do,
is against the Right of the Subject; and that the present Stock is a most
grievous Monopoly, and involved in great Troubles with the Subjects of England,
by violent and illegal Actions, its Trade brought to a very low ebb, and all
endangered; and still the bitter Emnity of the present Managers toward their
fellow Subjects remaining, thereby prohibiting any fair Conjunction; as also
considering its odd and ignoble Birth under Oliver Cromwell, and the great
Reproach (by their late uncharitable Actions toward the Indians) they have
cast upon the Nation; it will undoubtedly by all Patriots be judged expedient
not to be Grafted on, but rather dissolved, and a new one Erected. And so I
come to the next Point; which is,

Secondly, The other way proposed for enlarging the Stock for the India Trade;
and that is, by Establishing a new National Joynt-Stock by new Subscriptions,
and Dissolving this present Joint Stock, which seems most proper and only
practicable at this time. Now in proceeding to this Work, and settling thereof;
it is humbly conceived these or the like Methods be used.

First, That this New National Joynt-Stock be enlarged to Sixteen Hundred
Thousand Pounds at least, by new Supscriptions; that so, being National, the
whole Body of the Nation may come in and partake thereof; and that it may be a
secure Fund or Bank for the Nation to employ its money on.

Secondly, That this New National Joynt-Stock or Company, be Confirmed and made
a Corporation by Act of Parliament, exclusive to all others from the Cape of
Good Hope to the Eastward of Japan; and that the Trade to East India be
declared a Trade of the State, or the Kingdom; as indeed it will be by the
whole Nation, (willing thereto) having Interest therein, as well as Right
thereunto: So that hereafter all Abuses and Injuries done them in their Trade
and Rights in those parts by any other Nations, may be judged and reputed as
done not only to the particular concerned, but to the Nation, and be espoused
accordingly; which may be a means of preserving what we have, and regaining
somewhat at least of what lost; and prevent our own People from an easy
parting, with any the Privileges, Ports, Trade or Rights in those Parts, and
others of our Neighbor Nations from invading them: Want of which has been of
irreparable Damage to the Nation in the Loss of many Places, and great Trades
in those Parts, in former and later Days; as the Spice Trade, that of Macasses,
Japan, Jacquatra or Batavia and Bantam, etc. And it will be a great
Encouragement to all Persons Endeavors, in advancing the said Trade, and in
all Acquisitions in those parts, it not being only for a private but national
Interest; and this is that which greatly stimulates the Dutch in all their
enlargements. The present Company has in their Charter a larger extent and
tract of the World included then is here proposed for a new one, viz. from the
Cape Good Hope down to the Magellanean Strait, and thence all Southward, and so
all the back of America to Japan, which here is thought good to be omitted as
being of no use and ill fame to them, making a great Noise of the vastness of
their Charter; whereas they never made any benefit thereof but hindered others;
therefore to be left free to all English to Advantage themselves, or on
occasion to endamage other Nations by new discoveries or what already known.

Thirdly, That non obstante the exclusive Clause, yet liberty be granted to all
Ships to Trade to Madagascar and the Coast of Mosambique, and all other places
on the Coast of Africa on the other side or beyond the Cape of Good Hope while
not Traded to by the Company; and that interfere not with the Companies
Commerce; they giving security not to Trade but where allowed, and this to be
without any Fee or Reward more than to the Clerk barely for the Writings.

Fourthly, That Diamonds, Pearls, and all precious Stones, Ambergreece and
Musk, be left free to all natural born Subjects of England to Trade in, paying
one per cent. for the Money sent out, and 2 per cent. upon the Goods home, and
that Gold and all Bullion imported thence be free.

Fifthly, That for the more equal and general distribution of the East India
Trade in this Realm, and the greater and more National enlargement thereof, it
be carried on and managed at several other Ports in the Land besides London;
and such as are at some considerable distance therefrom, viz. at York (whose
Sea Port may be Hull) Bristol and Exon at each of which (and at more if
afterward thought needful) Presidencies may be erected for the management of
the India Trade for the remoter Counties, as to instance more particularly: To
York might pertain the Counties of Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, York, Lancaster,
Durham, Westmorland, Cumberland, Northumberland and Berwick upon Tweed: To
Bristol; Gloucester, Worcester, Stafford, Chester, Salop, Hereford, Monmouth,
and all the Welsh Counties: To Exon; Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon, Cornwall:
Which Division if not judged proportionable may be altered and better settled by
Persons more versed in those Parts. Now if this or some such way be taken the
Ports being at such distance and remoteness from the great City of London, will
make no diminution to the Trade thereof, but be a great Addition to that of
those places by an enlargement of their Exportations as well as consumption in
those Parts of some of what imported which would arise merely from setting up
such Marts; and truly the so long Monopolizing this Commerce solely to London,
as it has had many other ill effects, so the Right of the Subject has been
highly violated, in his being deprived of what by the law of the Land is his
native Due and Property; and its hoped may now at length be well considered of
by the Members for those parts and restored to them, it seeming highly
unreasonable that the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, and Inhabitants of those
parts should be deprived and wholly divested of their Birthright, only for the
advancement of a few London Merchants: This way of diffusing the Trade would
have (in my slender Opinion) many great Advantages attending it; the Nation
would then come to have a through insight into the immense Value of this
important Trade, which it now is so very ignorant of, that even very few save
some of the concerned and others in and about London have any tolerable
cognizance thereof; and even many great and worthy Patriots and Statesmen have
not till of late been thoroughly convinced of its Value; and from this ignorance
of its being so advantageous to this Nation, have most of those direful effects
flowed in upon this Trade, Hinc illae lacrymae, as the loss of great
Acquisitions, Privileges, and Commerce in former days, and the great decay and
almost total loss thereof now of late: It cannot enter into any man's heart
acquainted with this Trade and its Value, that if it had formerly been diffused
through the Nation, and so had become a general Interest by all men's
participating of its Gains, that ever so great a part thereof could have been
so tamely parted with as was by our Progenitors, or such hardships put upon it
as have been of late by the present Managers. No sure; should any of these
things have happened to the Dutch, in what a rage would the Commonalty have
been! what fury would have appeared in the faces of the concerned? and what
Consternation in all? as if their very banks were cutting? or the overflowing
deluge of 72 were again breaking in upon them? who! that was any ways accessory
could have been safe? When they lost Tywan the Governor Mons. Coyet a Swedish
Gentleman of good esteem tho he had in time given sufficient advice of what was
coming, and when it came upon them, did all that man could do, and gave it not
up till it could not be held any longer, and tho forced to it by all the
People, (as I had it from them there present,) yet underwent many years
Imprisonment in the remote Eastern Islands ten times worse than death, e're he
could get any Release, tho stripped and destitute of all; and yet we can part
with our Trades at Japan, Spice Islands, Macasser, Jaquatra, or Batavia, etc.
formerly; and with Bantam, Suratt, and Bengale lately, and seem little
concerned thereat: Such a Stoical Apathy have we been under and still are in
this Affair; and whence can this arise but from our ignorance of the Trade and
its Value? which nothing can better cure than this distribution thereof and its
management to several Presidencies and Marts, whereby the knowledge thereof
will sensibly diffuse it self through the whole Realm, and quicken us for
hereafter to a preventing and redressing of any Injuries that may be offered or
done unto that Trade by any whomsoever, and possibly to regaining of some part
thereof formerly lost; and by this means of distributing the India Trade to
several Ports, there will be an immense Increase thereof, and Advantage thereby
to this Nation as well abroad as at home, what a luster would it give to our
reputation in those parts now at so low an ebb, and what benefit particularly
would accrue to all Traders and Merchants as well as the Adventurers therein,
may be judged by what it has done formerly when it flourished, tho not
comparable to what it may do in this Method, and more especially those Marts
and Presidencies that shall be set up, and the parts thereabouts would be much
increased in their Trade and Commerce abroad and at home, and greatly populated
and enriched, whereby the Coasts of those parts would be much strengthened,
together with a great Increase of Shipping and Mariners; as also a far greater
Exportation of our Manufactures and Mines of this Kingdom, for this Trade
having been only in the hands of a few Merchants in London, they never consider
so much the benefit of the Nation as their own particular emolument, nor
espouse the cause of our Woollen Manufacture and Mines as they might. But if
this Method take place the West and the North being the very places for Woollen
Manufactures and Mines, and the Nobility, Gentry, and Merchants thereof,
concerned in the Trade and Management, will be able greatly to promote the
Exportation of them, (and indeed India will take off a greater quantity of
Cloth, Serges, and Stuffs, as also Tinn, and Lead, then at present is by many
apprehended,) for they seeing with their own eyes and acting with their own
hands, and having always the great staple Commodities of their Country in their
sight and upon their hearts will make it their business to export the same,
(which those at a distance do not) and I am confident this will promote the
Woollen Trade, as also our Mines of Tinn and Lead, more than any the Projects
of late on foot, and much more of them be exported to India than formerly; and
it will be a great convenience to most of the Gentry and Inhabitants in those
remote parts, that they may be supplied with all India Commodities, as well for
necessary uses as also for Adornment of themselves, and their houses ornament;
and these at easy rates in their own Counties or near home, and make their own
choice without chargeable tedious Journies to London, or being obliged to
submit to others Fancies. Now albeit this project of distributing this Trade
and its management into other parts of the Land, may not at first by many be
well accepted as being somewhat strange, never before proposed, and so esteemed
a Novelty, yet if well considered it is not such a Novel, having been one of the
Constitutive parts of the Dutch East India Company; and all along by them
practiced and so designed in France also; yet however we of this Nation are in
many things too superstitious, and so over addicted to some old moldy Customs,
as with Issachar to bow and couch under (tho with heavy groans) the greatest
burdens rather than be at the pains and cost to redress them, as might be
instanced in many things relating both to our Civil and Ecclesiastic State;
yet in such a Case as this, wherein so great a Concern is upon its Settlement,
we are not to consider so much what has been done, but what is to be or may be
done, for the Improvement, Securing and Advantaging this Trade; and accordingly
the Nation thereby, not ought Customs, Tradition, or Novelty in any measure to
balance with the commodiousness of the Trade or Interest of the Nation. Thus
much for the Fundamental Constitutive Part of this Company.

II. The Subscriptive Constitution; wherein for the better Erecting this Stock
upon New Subscriptions, and making them more diffusive and National, these or
the like Methods may be used.
1st. That a Book or Books be provided for that purpose, and committed to the
Lord Major or Sheriffs of the City of London to lie at the Chamberlains Office
in Guild Hall, or some other convenient public place nearer the Exchange, for
all Persons freely to repa^^ unto for making Subscriptions, and this to lie
open two whole Months at least; and that Books may be sent to all Considerable
Cities and Buroughs throughout England for the same purpose; and that the
Members of Parliament or the Sheriffs for those parts do take care therefore;
and that it be published in the Gazette what day the said Books will be opened,
as also about a Fortnight or so, before the said two Months or whatever time
agreed on do expire, what time they will be closed that so none may pretend
ignorance.

2dly. That all Persons whatever of what Rank, Degree, Quality, Sex, or Nation,
inhabiting in His Majesty's Kingdoms have liberty to subscribe; it being but
requisite those who are admitted into all other Concerns and Advantages of the
Nation be not denied this: The Objection hereto is answered in the second head
about Management p. 12.

3dly. That none be admitted to subscribe less than One Hundred Pounds, nor any
odd sums, but even hundreds or fifties, nor any transferrings be afterward
made in any other than such even sums: Nor,

That any Person be permitted to subscribe more than Five Thousand Pounds, that
so there may be the more liberty for the whole Nation to come in, as is highly
reasonable; nor any be allowed directly or indirectly by himself or any other
to have more at any one time afterward than Twenty or Thirty thousand pounds
principal Stock which may preserve it the more diffused; yet if it should so
happen (as is not likely) that upon closing of the Books there shall not be
subscribed the full sum agreed on, that then the before Subscribers may
underwrite again, for which a Fortnight may be allowed, or by consent those
that are willing to enlarge may have it equally proportioned among them
according to their former Subscriptions.

4thly. That for the Payment of the whole Sum a considerable time be allowed,
and that it be done at Four several Payments (viz.) in Four Eight Months, that
so men may not be put to any straits for a sudden raising of Moneys, but may
have reasonable time therefore, and men's other occasions may in the mean time
be complied with, and if it be found needful any the payments be made sooner or
later, that in such case three months notice be given by the Gazette or in some
such public manner.

5thly. That the first payment be made within six months after the Books for
Subscription are first laid open, and that some encouragement be allowed to
those that first pay in their money in some such method as follows, viz.

The Persons that pay their Quota of the first payment within thirty days after
the Books are opened, or in the first month, to have six months interest
allowed them, deducting for so many days interest as the money shall be paid in
after the first Ten days of the month.

The Person that pays his Quota in the second month, to have four months
interest allowed him in manner as before.

The Person that pays his Quota in the third month, to have no allowance of
interest.

The Person that pays his Quota the fourth month, to allow or pay in two months
interest besides his share of money; and interest for so many days as shall
elapse after the tenth day e're it be paid in.

The Person that pays in the fifth month, to allow four months interest besides
his Quota, as before.

The Person that pays in the sixth month, to allow six months interest over and
above his Quota as before.

The like method to be observed in the second payment.

And if any Person shall not pay in his first payment within the six months
allotted, his name shall be erased and have no benefit of Subscription:
likewise if he pay not the second Quota within the six months allotted, tho the
first payment be made, yet his name shall not be continued among the
Adventurers, but shall be as a Creditor, and have his bare money repaid him
upon a months demand, and to have no benefit that may happen in the mean time
to Arise thereon.

That for the two last payments there be to each three months allotted to pay
them in and no more, there being so much time allowed before hand.

And the person that pays in his Quota in the first month to have three months
interest in manner as before.

The Person that pays it in the second month to have one months interest.

The Person that pays it in the third month to allow one months interest all as
before.

And they that in the aforesaid three months shall omit to pay in any these
last payments, shall be concerned according to their first payments and no
more, and their privileges to be according thereto; nor shall they have liberty
afterward to come in for any the last payments, tho they should desire it: but
such money as also what money shall not be paid in at former payments shall be
supplied by other the Adventurers, paying interest for the time due, or
otherwise, as shall be adjudged in a general Court.

7thly. That in regard of the virulent Declaration of many the concerned in the
present Stock against their subscribing to a New One, that none of them having
their Habitation in London, or within Fifteen Miles thereof, be permitted to
subscribe by themselves or others after Ten Days of the time from the first
opening of the Books, be expired.

8thly. That no Person living in London, or within Twenty Miles thereof, have
Liberty more than for the First Thirty Days or Month to come in and subscribe,
the other Thirty Days or Month, being designed only for those that live at a
greater distance and less knowing in the Trade.

9thly. That all Persons subscribing, or having Five hundred Pounds principal
Stock, shall have one Vote in the General Court, and no one subscribing or
having any greater Sum, shall have any more than one Vote. This will obviate
that pernicious Constitution of having Votes according to the repeated Quantity
of every Five hundred Pounds, whereby this Trade has been Monopolized by
Combination into the Hands of a few Persons, and thereby has proved of most
fatal Consequence to the Trade and Nation; and will be suitable to the whole
Constitution of the Kingdom throughout; no Person in Country, City, or Borough
being qualified for Voting, having legally any more than his own personal Vote:
and this Contrivance of having more, was only with a design of an Arbitrary
Conduct and Government, a thing hateful to the thoughts of any true English
Spirit.

10. That such Persons subscribing, or having Two thousand Pounds principal
Stock, be capable thereby of being chosen a Committee man, or of bearing any
Office in the Administration of the Affairs of the said Company or Joynt-Stock.

11. That if it should happen (as is not to be doubted) that upon closing the
Books, there be found more subscribed than the Sum of Sixteen Hundred thousand
Pounds, or, whatever the Sum is that shall be agreed upon to be the Stock for
this Trade, that in such Case the Surplusage of Subscriptions be taken off, not
from the Stock in general, but from those particular Subscriptions only that
are more than Two Thousand Pounds, or the Sum agreed on, for the intitling
Persons to the highest Offices in the Administration of the Company's Affairs,
and from so much only of said Subscriptions as is more than what qualifies
Persons, as aforesaid; and this seems most reasonable, in regard what is more
subscribed is ex abundanti, and those that have so much to spare, may better
have somewhat pared off than such as have less; for should it fall upon them,
they would thereby lose that Right and Propriety which the Model designs them,
and was an Encouragement to them to come in, and the others will lose no
Privilege, so that this way will make it more equal and National.

III. For the general directive part concerning the well management and
carrying on of this Trade, these few points may be convenient.
1. That there be a general Court of all the Adventurers qualified thereto, as
before, in which all Bylaws be made for the better Conduct of the said Trade,
and all Committee Men, Governors, and Deputies or Wardens be chosen for the
Administration of its Affairs, and according to the Direction and Orders, of
which said Court all Governors and Administrators shall act, and to whom upon
any occasions resort shall be had, and therefore such Courts shall be often
held, at least Four times in the Year.

2. That no Person, tho qualified thereto by Five Hundred Pounds Stock, shall
have any Vote, or be a Voting Member in the said general Court, who is not a
natural born English man and Protestant, nor any Feme or under age, or that is
an Apprentice, or any that by the Law of the Land cannot manage his own Estate,
or is incapacitated for Civil Employment.

3. That no Adventurer have liberty of giving his Vote by Proxy, but it must be
his own personal Vote, nor that any have a Vote for what Stock is in their Name
in Trust for others.

4. That each Voting Member or Adventurer upon choosing Committees, Wardens,
Deputies, Governors, etc. before admission thereto, shall take a Corporal Oath,
that the Stock he shall vote for is his own, and not in Trust, and that he will
not give his Vote then, or at any other time for favor or affection, but
Merit, according to the best of his Judgment without partiality; and that no
other Oath be administered till they come into Office, they being unnecessary,
burdensome, and of ill report.

5. That all deciding Votes in the General Court, as also in all Courts and
Committees, be managed by Ballet, for the prevention of any divisions, heats,
or over-awings.

6. That no Person having above One Thousand Pounds Stock in the present
Company, be capable of being chosen a Governor, Master, Deputy, Warden or
Committee fo^three years, or until, all the Accounts of the said present
Company be adjusted and cleared, both here and in India; lest there be any
interfering or hindrance in the progress of settling and carrying on the Affairs
of the new, and concluding those of the old Company.

IV. Concerning the Executive part of the Management, which may come under the
following heads of directions or such like, viz.
1. That there be a Governor or Master, three Wardens or Deputies and Twenty
Four Committees chosen by the general Court of Adventurers who shall upon entry
on their Office take a Corporal Oath for the true and faithful discharge of the
said Office and Trust committed to them; and refusing such Oath, another to be
chosen in his stead, and this Method agrees with most of the Companies in
London, and hereby the Wardens being more, the work will prove the easier, and
yet more constant Attendance may be given as well at the House as upon Affairs
abroad than heretofore could be done.

2. That besides the Twenty Four Committees there be yearly chosen three
Honorary Committees, Hereditary Peers of the Realm by Descent, and qualified
thereto by the Quantity of Stock, and according to the second Article in
preceding Head; and these, being that their greater Affairs will not permit so
constant attendance, are not to be obliged to the Rules so strictly as others,
nor to take any Oath, but to act upon their Honor.

3. That the Governor or Master and three Wardens or Deputies be Quadrinnial,
one of them going off every Year, as the Governor the first Year, the upper
Warden succeeding him, and the second Warden him, and so the third, in whose
place another is chosen yearly, who may be the former Governor, or a new Man;
or rather that the Governor or Master to be chosen yearly, and the Wardens to
be Triennial, one going off every Year; and this last seems nearest the way
that is taken of many or most of the Companies of London, and hereby a Person
of any Ingenuity, will in the said three Years be thoroughly versed in all the
governing Affairs of the Company.

4. That from among the Committees six Persons, or so many as shall be
convenient, be singled out, to whom, together with the Wardens, particularly be
committed the Charge, Care, and Management, or Supervisorship of all the
Offices of the House, as that of the Treasury, Accounts, Auditors, Marine, and
House-Stewardships, Husbands, Secretaries, Warehouse-keepers, etc. Each having
his peculiar Province assigned; and to each of these may be joined, in the
ordinary Management and Execution of the said Offices, two or three more of the
said Committees; and these Six, or so many as may be judged convenient with the
Governor and Wardens may be as a small Senate or Court of Aldermen, who may
have the Management of the lesser ordinary Affairs, and much of the executive
part of the whole, and prepare all Matters for the great Council Days, when the
Committee or Court meet, which may be generally twice in the Week; and may also
have their Councils apart, tho any of the said Committee Men may assist at all
times: and this may be called the Committee or Council of Ten, or so many as
shall be the Number, and the other the Court, or the Assembly or Committee of
Thirty one, or so many as their full Number is. Now these Six may be chosen
every Year New, or go off triennially Two one year, and Two another, and to
succeed in the Officers of each other, and so two new ones chosen, or the same
again, out of the twenty Committee men who with the Governor, one Warden, as
likewises three Honorary Committees, shall be yearly new chosen, as before, who
may all be new Ones, or the same again: This way will fit and qualify such
Persons for the more full understanding of all the Affairs of the Trade, and
House-Offices, and thereby capacitate them the better for being Wardens and
Governors, and may prevent much of that ignorance which now seems to lodge in
most of the Committee Men touching their whole Affair: more especially if they
be obliged upon their going off to render an Account to the Council of Thirty
One, or Court, of their Trust. These Six ought to give more constant
attendance, and be consider^d accordingly, and the rest of the Committee Men
ought to be at a Court before it sits, and stay the whole time, or to lose
their Praemium; which will give them more insight into the business, and
prevent that customary way of stepping in only to show themselves merely to
have their Reward.

5. That the Committees, Wardens, Deputies, Governors or Masters, be men of
considerable Fortunes, that come not in merely to raise themselves an Estate,
and have not a multitude of other business, either public or particular, upon
their hands; that so they may more calmly and constantly attend, and have this
Affair more upon their Spirits, and make it their Work.

6. That the Governor, Master, Wardens, Deputies, Committees, and all Officers
of the House, or to whom any Trust in the Management is committed, be all of
them Protestants, and natural born English men, of the Third or Second Descent
at least; which may be a means to secure the Counsels, and Orders of the Court
from being betrayed to Foreigners, and if to that end all professedly Dutch
Merchants were excluded, it might not be amiss.

7. That none of the late chief Managers, more especially that not any of those
Sixteen Persons (if they should be spared by the Hands of Justice) concerned in
the signing and giving Instructions for the putting to death the Subjects of
England at St. Helena, or any that were instrumental in procuring Orders from
the late Kings for erecting a Court Martial there or in India, be ever
permitted or be capable of being chosen Committee men, Wardens or Governor, or
any Officer in trust for the management of the New Companies Affairs, or be a
voting Member in the general Court; and if any suspected thereof shall tender
himself for a voting Member, or be chosen to any Office as before; that ere he
be admitted, he clear himself by his corporal Oath, (which Oath the Governor,
Master and Wardens or Deputies, be empowered to administer) and refusing such
Oath, or appearing by Examination thereof, to have been guilty as before, never
to be admitted as a voting Member, or into any Office, which will be as a small
commemoratory Penalty, and may deter others from running into any such Extremes.

8. That the Governor, Master, Wardens, or Deputies and Committees, be all of
them Freemen of the City of London, which will make a noble addition to the
glory of that famous City by having an enlargement of eminent worthy Members,
whereby there will be the greater choice of Persons fitted for the great
Offices thereof; which seems at this day very necessary, there being such a
want of fit men, that a worthy person was necessitated to take up his Freedom
upon a late Choice of an Alderman; and it is a very great Reproach to that
great City, that such as have had any hand in betraying its Rights and
Privileges, or are reeking with the blood of their worthy Fellow Citizens,
should be admitted, by any want of more fit persons, to continue or be put up
for Aldermen; it being also but reasonable that such as are chosen to this Work
and Employ, and do manage so great an Affair and Trade in the very City, should
also be of the City: This will agree with the Constitution of the Turkey
Company, etc. And every one so chosen to any the said Trusts and Offices shall,
before he be admitted to sit, and within Twenty days after being so chosen, if
not a Freeman, take up his Freedom of the City, which shall be allowed him,
paying no more than the bare Fees at the Chamberlains Office, and shall have
the same Liberty in choosing his Company, as those have that come in by
Redemption. But if such Person shall refuse so to do, then after the said
Twenty days expiration, another qualified Person be chosen in his Room, nor
shall he be capable of being chosen again till he be actually a Freeman of the
said City, but that notwithstanding any Custom of the City the Estates of such
Persons shall upon decease go according to their Wills or the Laws of the Land
in other Cases, the contrary Custom of the City seeming only to respect
Shopkeepers and Mechanic Trades, and not Merchants.

9. That there be a Committee of Inspections chosen every year by the general
Court, which may consist of seven Persons, of whom three to make a Quorum or
Committee: these ought to be Persons concerned not less than Three Thousand
Pounds each in the Stock, and of great Gravity, Probity, and Experience, and
are to overlook all Transactions, and have such Power as may be convenient, and
necessary for such an Office; and every year to render Account to the General
Court how they find things, and may be of great use to keep all men to their
Duty, and thereby Affairs in good Order and Method.

10. That some Persons of the Privy Council, or other Persons fit for the
Service, be appointed by Parliament to have inspection into Transactions, and
upon any Emergency or grand Affair to have Session among them, or be applied
to, and to have such Power as to the Parliament shall seem meet; the Reason
whereof is, what a great Man in the present Company tells us from another, That
trading Merchants, while they are in the busy and eager prosecution of their
particular Trades, Interest, and Profit, Philopatris primi.
although they may be very wise men, are not always the best Judges of Trade, as
it relates to the Profit and Power of a Kingdom. Probatum est with a Witness
present E. I. Company.

11. That the Ports in India belonging to the English be made free to the
Subject of England, and made easy to others, that so there may be an Accession
and Increase of Trade for the more flourishing, populating, and strengthening
the said Ports. And that the Island of St. Helena be made a free Port for the
refreshing of Ships; they requiring now of some Ships Half a Crown the Tun, and
of others much more per Tun, only for leave to water, and take in some fresh
Provisions. And besides, they upon the Island do want many Necessaries hence,
which if not sent them by the Company's Ships, (of which it is necessary two
touch there yearly outward therewith) that other Ships may have Liberty to
supply them, that so they may not be destitute, and under discouragement for
want of such things as heretofore they have been, to the endangering the Loss
of the Island.

12. That no Dividends be made above Twenty per Cent. at one time, and not till
there be at least Thirty per Cent. or sufficient in Bank more than the
necessary Stock to do it with.

13. That no Money be taken up in India, or very little, and that upon most
urgent Occasions, and but for some small time, as till our Gold and Silver can
be coined, or such like Occasions; it being about three times as dear as here,
and if occasion require it, the same may be better done at home, which will be
easier to the Company, and Benefit to the Nation, and Kindness to particular
Persons.

14. That great Care be had for the Navigating part, not only for encouragement
in Trading, but also that Voyages be so proportioned out, that those Walls and
Bulwarks of our Nation be not enfeebled and destroyed by unseasonable going out
and overlong staying in the Country, which has been a most unhappy Circumstance
of late, ruined many gallant Ships, and destroyed a World of brave Men; and
from what Interest this has proceeded is easy to imagine: For the Seafaring
Party are never Friends to Arbitrary Power, Tyranny, Slavery, or Popery.

15. That in regard all humane Acts are subject to Error, Imperfection, and
Decay; therefore that at the End of Seven years, or some such set time, or as
soon after as there shall be a Sessions of Parliament; that a Report be made
unto them by the Governor and Committee, or the Committee of Inspections, of
the State of the Trade; and if there be any Defects or Excesses in the
Constitution or Settlement, that Provision may be made accordingly: and had
this been done by this Company or another Society in the Nation, there had not
in all likelihood been any such Cause of Complaint against them, or need of
their being dissolved as at this day.

16. That there be a greater Liberty for persons going over to reside in India,
of all Sexes than of later times has been allowed; in regard it will be for the
Enlargement of Trade in those parts, and for the strengthening of our Interest,
and may be a means of settling in some advantageous Parts, which for want of
People we cannot now do.

17. That all such convenient Authorities be entrusted with them as may
preserve them as a Society, in suppressing all Vice, Debauchery, Wickedness,
immoral, irreligious Acts, and for the doing of Justice between man and man the
preserving Order, refelling and subduing Enemies, securing of Trade, all
agreeable to the Laws of this Land, and suitable to a Corporation, and so great
an one at so vast a distance, and such as may gain upon, and not alienate the
Hearts of the Subjects of England.

18. That tho it be hoped there will no such thing happen, yet if there should
any considerable dispute or difference fall out between the Companies Chief and
Council in India, and any the Subjects of England, or others inhabiting there,
as being under the Protection of the English, for any supposed illegal Acts, as
Seizures, Force, Oppressions, Fines, Punishments, or the like, and Complaint be
made thereof here, that the same may be heard and determined by Persons
delegated thereto by Parliament, who may more properly be appointed by their
Offices; as the two Lord Chief Justices, Lord Chief Baron, Master of the Rolls,
and the rest of the Judges, three of them to be a Judicature, of which one of
the Chief Justices, Chief Baron, or Master of the Rolls, to be one, and seven
for an Appeal; whereof two of the former Four to be present, and to act in a
summary way, somewhat in the Nature of the Court at Cliffords Inn after the
Fire of London, which gave such general satisfaction, and prevented vast
troubles and expense. This is proposed, in regard it seems hard for a poor man
to commence a Suit against so great a Company, according to the present
Practice of the Courts at Westminster, as also in that India is at so great a
distance, that the Proofs, tho plain enough to create a firm belief and
assurance of the Fact, or the contrary, yet not such as may pass for legal, and
those Causes may be, and generally are so mixed, as not properly to be taken
Cognizance of wholly in any one particular Court; and besides, this will put a
quick end to all such Complaints, that they may not lie undetermined either to
the Prejudice of any of the Subjects of England, or the ill Fame of the
Company, as has been too much seen hitherto.

19. That the Company be answerable for whatever grand Abuses (which the
aforesaid Court are to judge of) shall be acted by their Chiefs in India
toward the Subjects of England, if they shall refuse to send for them home
upon such Complaint, which seems but reasonable; otherwise none can have
Justice against them till they do come home; which will greatly obstruct Right
and Justice, and this will oblige their Servants to a better deportment abroad,
and the Company to take care not only for good Security, but also that their
chief Servants be of a better sort of People for Principles, Prudence,
Abilities, Conversation, Education, and Extract than has been of latter days.

20. That upon any Action or Suit brought against them, the Company be obliged
to give Bail as single persons; and omitting or refusing, the Governor may be
attached in person; it being but reasonable, tho a Corporation, (and fo great
an one) that they should be so liable, in regard that all whom they sue are
obliged so to do whatever their Estate be; and if it was so with all
Corporations, it would silence many Complaints, prevent some Suits, and much
trouble to the Subjects of England.

21. That no Portion of Stock in the Company of any Persons whatever, or any
Dividend thereon be at any time stopped, seized, hindered either in transferring
the one, or paying the other, upon any pretense whatever, but by a due Course
of Law; and that all Transfers shall create a legal Right.

22. That no Goods of any Persons whatever be at any time, without due Process
at Law, stopped, or Delivery be denied by them in their Warehouses upon any
Pretense or Demand that may be made thereon, sufficient Bail being offered or
given, and the due Charges of Ship, Custom, Wharfadge, Warehouse, etc. paid or
legally tendered; this is the more reasonable, in regard the Owners of Ships are
under Obligations for all undue Actions to the Company, and then their Actions
upon breach of Charter in this new Settlement will be legal, and it will
prevent the many Clamors that are usually heard of the great Losses and Damages
that men have often sustained for want of their Goods in due time, and
sometimes kept from them merely from an Humor o^ Pique of the Officer, or to
pleasure some Friends, having of the same Goods, with time ^o (...) of them
e^^e those other Goods can be delivered.

23. That all Persons qualified through^^, as before, for a Committee-man, have
libe^ty at a^l seasonable times to repair unto any of the Offices of the House,
and inspect Affai^s and Transactions for their satisfaction.

24. That all Goods of any considerable Moment be sold at public Sale by w^y
of Auction, and none by private Contract, (unless for Use of the Crown or such
Public Occasions) and in such proportionate Lots as may best consist with the
occasions of the generality of B^yers, as mostly not exceeding 1000 l. or less
than 5 or 600 l. tho some may.

25. That it would be convenient some Provision be made for the preventing
those many unhappy Marriages and Unchristian Mixtures too frequently made by
Englishmen in India, to the great dishonor of our Religion, and reproach of
the Nation: Therefore that no Englishman, being a Protestant, be permitted to
marry with any person of the Country being a Papist, or not a Protestant, a
thing hitherto too much practiced; and that if any person in their Service
shall marry with any of the Country that is not born of European Parents on
both sides, being Musteeches or others, tho Protestants, yet they shall never,
while so married, be capable of any Office considerable, civil, or military,
that they never be of the Council in any Factories, but may be assistant to
them; nor in any military Office above a Corporal; and those already married as
before, not to be advanced beyond a Sergeant; nor any of the Factors so
married, and while so, that have not been Chiefs already, ever to be Chiefs,
but may be in any other Office in any the Factories, save of Council in the
upper chief Factories; and those that have been Chiefs, tho married, as before,
may yet be so in some under-Factories, but never to rise higher, and somewhat
of the same Nature to be observed as to Seafaring Employments. Great care
should be also taken of the Factors and Servants they sent abroad; both as to
their persons, that they be not misshapen or of ill Looks, but comely
Countenance and good Demeanor, more especially such as appear at Courts; and
likewise as to their Qualities, of liberal Education, docible Tempers, good
Abilities, and quick Parts, sober, free from Vice, that have not spent Estates
in lewd debauched ways, especially common Gamesters, or men addicted to Gaming,
who of all persons are of most prenicious consequence among great Negotiations
and Entrustments; therefore such upon no account to be permitted, but to be
absolutely discouraged.

I proceed to a word or two concerning the Presidencies to be set up in sundry
parts of the Realm, as before noted, page 9.

Which in the main must be conformable to the foregoing Constitutions, and are
to act in Conformity to the grand Chamber of London, with whom there must be a
constant entire Correspondence, and unto whose Direction and Orders in all
grand and needful Affairs submission must be given, and in truth, there may
many things in the Course of Commerce occur, which at present may not be
provided against, and therefore must be left to the Guidance and Conduct of the
chief Chamber upon recourse to them by the said Presidencies; but some few
things at present necessary to their Erection shall be noted, viz.

1. That in each of these Presidencies there be a general Court once in the
Year, consisting of all Adventurers living within the Limits of the said
Presidencies, and being qualified thereto by 500 l. principal Stock, and as
those are to be that are voting Members for London, as in page 12. and at this
general Court there be Choice made of Presidents, Assessors, Committees, and
all chief Officers for the Management of the said Presidencies that may then be
wanting, nevertheless subject to an Approbation from London, as also for
reporting or making Presentment of any Grievances or Regulations in any Matters
relating to the said Presidencies and the East India Trade; and in regard of
their Subjection to the Chamber and Direction of London, it will not be
requisite that these Courts be held more than once in the Year, save upon
urgent Necessities.

2. That there be in each Presidency a President and two Assessors and
Committees in Number according to the Trade that shall be managed therein, as
six to be the lowest Number, and twelve the highest Number of such Committees,
which said Committees shall be yearly new chosen by the said general Court, and
may be the same again or new ones, the President and two Assessors to be
Triennial, the President going off every year, and the upper Assessor
succeeding in his place, and so a new Assessor, who may be the last President,
or a new Man chosen in the place of the under Assessor who succeeds the upper
one; and this way may be most proper, in regard at first there may not be
plenty of persons fit for those Offices; these Presidents and Assessors to have
1000 l. Stock, and Committees 500 l. and to be Persons living in said
Presidencies, and qualified as those of London.

3. That there be also one or two Noblemen Committees qualified as those for
the City of London, and having Seats, and keeping Houses within the said
Presidencies, and that all Noblemen under the same Qualifications when at said
Presidencies at their pleasure be present at their Courts, and hear and debate,
but not to have deciding Votes, unless of the ^ommittee, and if it were so in
London, it might have very good Effects, in that they might the better be
affected with, and more engaged into Affairs of Trade, as is seen in most other
trading Nations, the great Magnificoes of Venice and Heeirn or Lords of
Holland, all concerned in Traffic, which is of singular Use to those States.

4. That when at any time it so happen the Governor, Master, Wardens, or
Deputies of London be at any the foresaid Presidencies, that they then do
preside and have the Chair among them in all Affairs as in London, and that
London Committees being there have Session and Votes with them, and that when
the said Presidents, Assessors, and Committees of each the said Presidencies
happen to be in London, they have Session in the Courts of Committees, and the
Presidents and Assessors to have Votes amongst them, but not the Committees.

5. That there be a constant, due, entire Correspondence between the said
Presidencies, and the Head-Direction at London, to which they ought monthly to
transmit Accounts of all Transactions, Cash, and Negotiation, and yearly to
send their Books made up, and balanced, that Affairs may be kept in due Decorum
and Order, without Confusion.

6. That all Moneys subscribed in the Counties, under said Presidencies for the
greater ease of Subscribers be paid in the said Counties to the Persons deputed
thereunto by the respective Presidencies, and that all Dividends that may be
made of said Moneys so subscribed scribed be paid likewise at the said
Presidencies, or in the same Counties, if so desired; and that as the
Subscriptions, so the Accounts of the Subscribers and concerned be registered
and kept at said Presidencies, but transmitted, the former in Duplicates, the
other constantly in the monthly Accounts and yearly balanced Books, to London,
there to be kept also under the Heads of and Books for each Presidency.

7. That any Person having Moneys in any the said Presidencies or in London,
and removing his Seat from one Presidency to another, or for other Reasons may
at any time have his whole Stock (but not a part) transferred from one, and
admitted into the other at his desire, and thereupon to have his Privilege
where admitted only, and not elsewhere, for said Stock so transferred.

8. That the Persons that have Votes and come into Office in the said
respective Presidencies, be of the Number of such Subscribers, or such as come
in upon Transfers of the same, as before, and none other to have Votes, or be in
Administration of Affairs in said Presidency: And that the Persons, as before,
having Votes in said Presidencies, shall not for the same Moneys have Vote in
any other Presidency, or the grand Direction at London, and so for all of them
mutatis mutandis. But that Persons having Moneys subscribed or transferred in
several or all the said Presidencies and Directions, shall have Votes
accordingly wherever he is so concerned.

Many other Directions might be given, but these may suffice at present being
that, as said before, these Presidencies are to be under the Direction of and
Account to the Head-direction or Presidency of London, so that Rules and
Instructions may be added and altered as there shall be occasion and be found
expedient.

Presidencies or Marts thus set up for this purpose cannot but be greatly
pleasing, and highly useful to all those parts, as is before hinted, it would
be a great Enlargement to the Trade of India, also a vast Improvement of Trade
in general in those parts, thereby a greater Commerce would arise with other
Foreign parts, which would much increase the Navigation, and so the Mariners of
such places; it would marvellously raise those Ports in People, Riches, and
Strength, bring a great affluence of all Manufactures, cause greater Union,
stricter Correspondence under all the said Presidencies, which to enlarge and
preserve, if a Penny Post were set up in said Counties from one Market Town to
another, would greatly conduce; which it is wonder, some ingenious Persons do
not project, a Scheme whereof were not over difficult to be drawn, only I wish
them whoever shall set upon it better Success than the ingenious Mr. Dockwa had
with his, and perhaps his Fate may detain persons there from, tho it is great
pity it should, being of a most universal public Concern and Benefit. I shall
not enlarge on this Head, but for a Conclusion pas^ on to the next and last
Point, which is,

Touching Dissolving the Present Company or Joint Stock.
That it may be most for the Ease and Interest of both the new and present
Company, it is requisite some things be premised in Order thereunto, which as
they may give some Satisfaction, so they will lead to the designed Method, viz.
I. That the present Company being a Corporation, by its Dissolution is not
meant a dissolving thereof in Law in a total, absolute, simple, political, but
in an active practical sense, whereby the Power of the present Managers,
Management and Interest of the concerned ceases as to Action, Conduct and
Negotiation, and is totally laid aside, and a new Constitution and Rule
established, and new Persons and Stock instituted as to Concernment,
Negotiation, and Conduct, and carrying on the said Trade in an incorporated
way, design and method: So that a new one in this sense (as a Corporation) is
only a Confirmation of the former or first Corporation as to its political
Essence or Foundation, being still the same Corporation as was first erected by
Queen Elizabeth an. 1600, as it is said, but with Additions and Alterations
suited to the enlargement of the Trade, the present Sentiments and Applications
of those concerned in, or sensible of the said Affair to those in power;
whereupon the new one being erected, the former immediately, as to its Power
and Acting, becomes indeed as dead in Law, having no Power or Liberty to exert
any its former Authorities, or to act any ways in the least as an incorporated
Body in any its Conc^rns, but the new one comes in its place, and is in Law
still the same Corporation as the former, and is in their stead in all points,
being the legal Successor of the former, as that was of those which preceded
it. Hence it follows,

1. That there is no Interregnum, Interval, Casme, in the least, between the
dissolving the present and erecting a new Company, but the one continues till
the other takes place, as in the goings off and coming on of Mayors, Bailiffs,
and other Officers in Corporations, or shifting the Committees of the present
Company at the usual yearly time for such changes; which obviates any Suspicion
or Thoughts Persons may have of any damage or prejudice that may arise to the
Trade, or concerned while or during the transition of one Stock to the other.

2. Nor will there be any Escheat to the Crown of any the effects of this
present Company or Joint Stock by virtue of the Statute of Mort Main, or any
other; the Corporation, as to its political Essence being still the same.

3. Nor yet will any the Rights, Dues or Demands, that any have or may have
against this present Company upon account of any Contract, Dealings, or
Injuries, etc. cease or be vacated, but a Suit, Plea, Petition, Complaint, etc.
may be made, exhibited, and will lie against the new Company for any thing done
or committed by the former Company or any Persons, for whose Actions they are
liable and answerable; and the new Company be obliged to Satisfaction so far as
the Effects of the said preceding Company will reach to make good. Nor will any
one whatever be discharged or released by this Change or Succession from any
Dues or Demands the present Company have Right unto upon any account whatever,
but the same may be demanded, sued for, recovered, and received by the new
Company as well and amply to all intents and purposes as might or could have
been done by the present Company, the new being esteemed in Law the same
Company as the former. And thus it was in the erection of this present C^mpany,
and in all Confirmations or new Companies made by our sundry Princes
successively: so there will be no cessation of Justice, nor will any be bereft
of what is their Right and Due, which obviates another Objection some persons
make about dissolving this Company.

II. And further it is premised that in this design of erecting a new Comp^^,
there is no intention in the least to do any wrong, injury or prejudice, to the
present Company or Adventurers therein, in any their Effects, Rights, Dues or
Demands; but that they be advantaged in getting them in for their account in
the most secure, easy, and commodious manner imaginable, to their entire
content; to which end, and that all things may be adjusted to their
satisfaction notwithstanding all their rancor and virulency, and Affairs be
carried on by the new Company with the least trouble and hesitancy as to
themselves, and the greatest fairness, tenderness, and candor to the former, in
the dissolving this Company, making even all its Accounts, and making good its
Effects and Stock to the Adventurers if any appear due; it is conceived these or
the like methods following to be most proper.

1. That before the dissolution of this present Joynt-Stock there be a general
Court summoned of all its Adventurers, who shall choose and appoint certain
persons of the Company, as seven or nine, of whom three or five to be an
ordinary, and five or seven an extraordinary full deciding Quorum or Committee,
and shall be Trustees for the present Company, for theadvising, directing, and
adjusting (after its dissolution) all Affairs needful, incident, and relating
thereto, as hereafter specified; and these Trustees to continue three years, in
which time it may be supposed all Accounts and Affairs relating to the present
Company, may be concluded, or till the same shall be wholly finished.

2. That in case of the Secession of any the Trustees aforesaid by death or
otherwise, another fit person or persons from among those concerned in the
former Stock at least One thousand pounds first principal Stock, be chosen in
his or their places by the remaining Trustees or major part of them, and that
within one month, and the Parties so chosen not to be of the Committee of the
new Company, or in any Office under them.

3. That immediately upon Entrance of the New Company, all Books, Accounts,
Papers, Bills, Bonds, Writings obligatory, Contracts with Shipping, or any
Writings whatever, also all Houses, Warehouses, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Possessions, Goods, Household Stuff, and all Effects and Concerns
whatever here in England, be by the said Trustees delivered over to the New
Company, or Possession given them peaceably, to avoid all inconveniences that
else might ensue, and those that can should be given over and received by
Register and Inventory.

4. That also from the day of the New Company's taking place, all Persons in
Service or Office in England do remain so in the same Employs, and Charges, and
at the same Salary, till fuither direction from the same Company, and be
answerable to them for their Trusts for so long as the same has been in their
hands unaccounted for, and that all Rents, Wages, and such growing Charges
whatever from that day do belong unto the New Company, and be paid and
discharged by them upon their own proper Account.

5. That for the adjusting the Value of any dead Stock, Necessaries, etc. here
in England, and any differences that may arise upon transferring one Stock to
the other, or the like; in such case an equal Number of the aforesaid Trustees,
and of the New Company's Committee, do concert the same, and be empowered on
both sides thereto; and so in any Dispute that may happen between the New
Company and the Trustees for the Old; and in all such Cases, if need shall be,
the Governor, or one of the Wardens, for the time being, to be Umpire; or to
avoid all occasion of reflections, such Persons to be Umpires as shall be
agreed upon between the said Trustees and the New Company's Committee.

6. That for the adjusting all Accounts, Debts, Dues, Demands, etc. between the
Old Company and any Persons claiming on any score of Trading, Dealings,
Contracts, Sal^ry, etc. Me^cantile civil Accounts; if in six weeks, or some
certain time after Claim or Demand made, it be not evened by the Trustees
aforesaid; in such case it shall be referred unto an equal Number of the said
Trustees chosen by themselves, and of the then Committee chosen by the other
Party, who shall have a limited time to agree the same in; and in case of
difference, the present Governor, or in his absence the Up^^r or Lower Warden
to be Umpire, or such as specified in the preceding Article, and such
Determination to be binding and conclusive.

7. That upon adjusting Accounts between the Trustees for the Old Company and
any Claimants; a Writing shall be signed by three at least of the said
Trustees, one whereof to be the Chairman, importing a final Ccoclusion made of
such Persons or Societies Accounts, and specifying the Sum due to them, with a
desire that Payment be made thereof; which shall be the Justification or
Warrant for the New Company to pay the same; and no Money to be paid by the New
Company in England on account of the Old but by direction of the Trustees, or
the major part of those that adjusted the Case or Account.

8. That all Goods and Merchandises now in England, or that shall hereafter
arrive for Account of the present Joynt-Stock, shall be taken into Possession
of, and sold by the New Company at their House by Inch of Candle, as formerly,
and the proceed come into their Cash, and disposed of (the necessary Charges)
deducted as hereafter directed by and with the Advice of the Trustees.

9. That out of the Proceed of the Old Company's Goods that are and shall
arrive here in England, their Debts be paid as soon and with as much Expedition
as may be, viz. First, all current Debts not at Interest, as fast as they grow
due, and are adjusted; which all being paid, or sufficient left in Stock, or in
prospect to perform the same; then, Secondly, all such persons that have Money
at Interest, and are not Adventurers; which being effected then; Thirdly, the
rest of the Money at Interest due to the Adventurers, of which they shall be
paid equally in portions as Money comes in; and as it appears there is enough
to satisfy all Demands here and abroad; and Lastly, that what shall be over be
made good to the Adventurers according to their Concern so much per Cent.

10. That there be not allowed to any person or persons Society or Societies
here in England more than one year or some set time to make Claim of any Debts,
Dues, Rights, Accounts, Demands whatsoever of and from the present East India
Company; and all omitting to make Claim or Demand in that time shall be
foreclosed, and have no relief: And that all Subjects of England beyond the
Seas have two years more allowed to them, which will shorten the closing and
concluding the present Company's Accounts, that they be not lengthened out to
an Age.

11. That there be certain Persons appointed by Parliament to hear, judge,
determine, and finally conclude all Claims, Demands, Petitions, and Complaints
against the present Company by any Persons or Societies for any Troubles,
Jnjuries done or pretended to be done unto them by Fraud, Force, Violence,
Depredations, Captures, Seizures, Executions Hostilities, or other such ways by
the said Company, or any under or by Commission from them, or for whose Actions
they are or ought to be answerable; and that a certain time be limited for the
determining such Petitions, Claims, and Complaints, that so it may be known
when there will be an End thereof; and this may be done by Jury or otherwise in
a summary way: and may be the same Persons mentioned in page 16. Article 18.

12. That the aforesaid Trustees shall appoint those in Authority in India, or
any where the Company is concerned beyond the Seas, to transfer all the
Company's Concerns there as Books, Accounts, Papers, all Writings whatever,
Buildings, Houses, Forts, Lands, Rights, Ammunition, Arms, Shipping, Goods,
Merchandises, Cash, Quick Stock, every thing whatever, into the possession of
such as shall be appointed thereto by the New Company to receive the same; and
this is indeed more than needs, or than was done formerly by other Companies
(it falling of Course into the New Company's Power to possess themselves
thereof); however as an Honorary mark, it may not be inconvenient to allow it;
and that all be delivered over by Schedule or Inventory to be transferred
hither.

13. That the Power of the present Company immediately cease, and that of the
New take place in India, and at every part in India, or where the present
Company have Effects or Servants beyond the Seas, as soon as any Ships,
Persons, or Advices, shall arrive at the said Places from the New Company, or
any authorized by them or their Orders.

14. That from the day of the New Company's taking Possession at any the
aforesaid Places in India, and beyond the Seas, all Persons in Service and
Office under the present Company do so remain in the same Station, Service,
Trust, and Salary, as they were in before, and actually execute the same in
behalf and under the New Company, till ordered the contrary, and be answerable
for their Trusts to the New Company in all full, strict, ample manner, as they
were to have done to the present Company; nor shall they be acquitted or
discharged their Trust or Accounts without consent of the Trustees aforesaid,
but prosecuted if required by the said Trustees, they making it appear there is
cause to charge them for any Injuries, Frauds, or Abuses by their
Unfaithfulness done the present Company, and also defray the Charges of the
Prosecution, and indemnifie the new Company: And further, That all Rents,
Salary, Pay, and such Charges whatever, shall from that day be accounted the
New Company's, and by them be discharged accordingly.

15. That the Trustees of the present Company, their Assigns in India, do with
the Chief and Council upon the several places, or such as the New Company shall
appoint thereto, concert the Value of all dead Stock there; as also all Europe
Goods for Sale in India and good Debts; or rather, that account of them be sent
over hither, and that it be concerted here by the Trustees and Committee, and
that what it shall amount to the present Company shall have credit therefore,
the Rupee at 2.6. and the Pathoga at 9 s.

16. That what Goods and Merchandises for Europe, shall upon Entrance of the
New Company upon Trade and Possession in India be found in the Warehouses of
the old Company there, or for which Money shall be given forth, or Contracts
made, provided the Effects come in within Eight months after the said day of
the New Company's Entrance, or having Possession, as aforesaid, otherwise to be
esteemed but as Debts, may be laden for England for Account of the present
Company, but directed to the new one, on such Ships sent out formerly by them
in their Service, as shall by the Trustees here be directed; and that after the
New Company's having Possession in India, no Money shall be given out for Goods
anew on Account the Old Company, but their Money (if any appears) be valued to
them by Exchange; and this will be no hardship upon them, in regard they have
not sent out any quantity of Money or quick Stock for some considerable time,
and besides are deeply in debt there; so that it is conceived when Accounts are
evened but little, (if any) Quick Stock will be left them there; but however if
they shall make any clamor about it, the same may be referred to the Trustees
here, and the Committee to adjust and determine, as before specified, or be
invested for their Account.

17. That for the ease of the present Company in that great Tunnage of Shipping
in India, which lies so heavy on their hands; as also for the public Good of
the Nation in preserving such and so many large Ships, which otherwise may be
destroyed and lost; that the New Company do take off Two thousand Tuns of
Shipping, in such Ships as their Servants appointed thereto shall judge fit for
their Service, upon the Contract they were set out, allowing only Demorage for
what time they shall be detained in the Country, after the New Company's having
Possession in India in the parts the said Shipping is, and the rest of the
Demorage, if any be due, be paid by the Old Company.

18. That whereas through the grievous Mismanagements, horrible Designs, savage
Ravagings, etc. the Trade in India is in diverse places lost or abdicated, and
not recoverable but by making compensation and satisfaction in some measure to
the just demands of the unjustly abused Indians, and restoring unto them the
Goods and Moneys taken from them, and resting in the hands of the present
Company, their Agents, and Factors, amounting to a vast Sum; the Ships brought
into Boon-Bay (which is now as it were a Nest of Pirates) by the Bengale
Merchant Mr. (...) Pierce Commander from the Coast of India, and by the Charles
the Second, Mr. Jonathan Andrews Commander from M^cha and the Red Sea, and by
the Modena, Mr. William Wild Commander from Bussora and Persia, being valued
at upward of a Million of pounds Sterling; and most of it in Gold, Silver,
Pearl, and such like rich Commodities, besides several other Ships brought in
there to a great Value, much of whose Goods have been brought for England,
besides what has come of the like sort of Goods from Bengale: That therefore
they be obliged to make satisfaction, and to restore what taken from the
Indians, and to procure a Peace and Trade, and that the English be at their
Charge settled in as free and peaceable State in all parts of India, where the
English Commerce is at present unsettled by their means, as they were put into
by the preceding Company, or found the same in? when they entered upon the
Trade; and to that end, that in making Peace with the Indians, it may be
managed by Persons unexceptionable for Ability and suitable Qualifications
thereto, and that with them be joined such Persons, now in India, as may seem
fittest to the Trustees and new Committee here; and that very strict charge be
given for the most frugal concluding the same, as may possibly stand with the
Security of the Settlement and Trade designed; And further, that the whole
Management and Charge, if thought fit, be given in and submitted to the
Inspection and Judgment of Parliament at their next Sessions after the said
Account comes home, or unto the King and Privy Council; and if desired by the
Trustees, that at their Charge and Suit the Persons who managed the same do
come home to answer what done by them in that Affair; only if they prove
blameless, that the Trustees aforesaid do allow them such a satisfaction in
reparation of their Credit and Employment, as shall be adjuged by four of the
Committee for the time being, chosen equally by the Trustees and the said
Persons, and the Governor if need be, to be Umpire.

19. That in regard of the many unhansom, unkind, rigorous, dealings of the
present Company, their Agents and Servants in India, there is cause to
apprehend many Demands may be made hereafter in those parts on sundry accounts;
therefore for the saving harmless and indemnifying the new intended Company
therefrom, that a considerable Sum of Money or Fund of the present Company do
remain and lie in the hands or possession of the New Company for the term of
four years, and at the end thereof the same shall be adjusted by the Trustees
and the Committee in manner, as before noted, how much thereof may be repaid
the present Company, or what more may be wanted for the said use; or rather
that then a certain Sum be agreed on between them and on the New Company's
receiving thereof, or being made good to them, the present Company be
discharged of any further demands from any the Natives in India, and all taken
upon the New Company; it was a considerable Stock this Company kept in its
possession of the former for that purpose, which is supposed to this day
remaining with them.

20. That in regard diverse of those Persons whose Goods and Estates were
seized, taken away, or pillaged, to a very considerable Value, aboard the Ships
taken by the Commanders aforementioned, were Subjects of the Grand Signior, being
Arabian and Armenian Merchants, who if not satisfied, may at some time make
their application to the Turkish Court for Redress against the English, and
obtain Relief there from the English Company; that therefore some suitable and
sufficient provision be made upon dissolution of this East India Company for
the Security of the Turkey Company in such Case, which is left to them to
propose.

21. That for the adjusting and evening all Accounts, Claims, and Demands that
may be made in India, by reason of any Debts pretended, or matter of Trade;
that the Chief and Council of the Head-Factory in those parts have power and do
concert the same, to whom may be joined such as the Trustees of the present
Company here shall appoint; and this to have relation as well to Europeans of
all sorts as Indians, that so all Debts of this Company and Demands on them may
be cleared in those parts; and further, that if there be any Europeans
inhahiting there, who cannot address themselves conveniently here, that have
been abused, and their Estates taken away, seized, stopped, or the like, by the
Company's Orders, or by their Servants in Authority under them, and for whom
they are answerable, that the same be inquired into by the Chief and Council of
the Head-Factory for those parts, and such as may be appointed thereto by the
Trustees, as aforesaid, and decided, determined, and made good, and so the like
on behalf of the present Company in any Claims they have on any in these parts.

Lastly, That things be carried on in all points and in all causes with that
candor and ^^stice, so as the present Company may have no cause to complain in
the least, but to be we^ pleased therewith, and this will be both the Duty and
Interest of the New Company; for (...) they indulge any their Servants to abuse
others, it will not be long before they turn the same upon their Masters; and
it cannot be expected that the new Company will do otherwise, in regard the
best of men are most likely by the constitution to come into the direction, and
from such nothing can be supposed to proceed, or be acted, or ordered, but what
is honorable, just and good; the Servants they send out (in the choice of whom
such caution and regard will be had that the Trustees of the old Company will
even be well satisfied in and approve of them) will no doubt take great care of
their behavior and carriage in this matter, it being their interest so to do
least an information comes against them to their ruin or great disgrace and
loss in being recalled.

Thus as succinctly and clearly as time and ability would permit, I have
performed what you required of me; wherein from several undeniable Propositions
previously laid down, I have in general given you the result of my judgment
unbyassed and impartial, upon your Question, viz. That the East India Trade may
best be managed in a National way for the public benefit, by dissolving of the
present Company and erecting a new National Joynt-Stock more enlarged,
diffused, on better Constitutions, and under a Parliamentary Sanction. And in
prosecution hereof it was proposed, That the India Trade being National, if
managed by a Joynt-Stock it ought to be enlarged agreeable to the Trade; this
is allowed on all hands, even the present Company not dissenting to it; then
the ways proposed for enlarging were examined, that of adding to the present
Stock under its Constitution pressed by its Adventurers was rejected, the other
way of erecting a new one considered, and approved, its fundamental
Constitution delineated, and many Precepts laid down as necessary thereto: And
a further progress was made, wherein many things were offered as wholesome
methods for the due and prudent carrying on the Trade in a National beneficial
way: And lastly, I came to the dissolution of this Company, wherein such
Proposals are tendered as makes it appear very feasible and facile without any
prejudice to them as to the Trade by any Interval or Casme or any loss the
Company can sustain in its Effects, and all those difficult things of valuing
dead Stock, making good all demands and dues from them, and to them and their
neat Effects is rendered not only practicable but exceeding easy and safe; nor
has any thing (as I apprehend) been proposed under this last head that in the
least does grate or bear hard upon them, but what they themselves (if
themselves) must heartily and readily close with) it being my study so to
compose these methods, that they might have their right end in giving content
to all Parties by a dividing to all their due Portions, and that in a
perspicuous, quick, plain, cheap, equal way, which if effected is what I
desired, and have most cordially aimed at; if not, it is what I could atrain
unto: And such is your candor as to accept of my unfeigned endeavors, and
overlook and pardon my weakness. Now of these particulars that I have gone
through as necessary to be considered both on the erection of a new Company and
dissolving the present or old one, it will be needful that some of them be in
the body of the Charter or Act it self, others in the Preamble, and some only
made by Laws, all which and others that may be necessary, will present
themselves upon perusal of their Charters and Customs, and consideration of the
nature of the Affair. And as hinted at the beginning, it will be of great use
that when the Bill be drawn up some Merchants and persons versed in the Affairs
of India, men of clear Spirits, good Understanding, and of fair and even
Tempers (not having been of the Cabals) be summoned to attend the Committee,
and by some selected Members thereof be consulted with, which may much conduce
to the well modelling this grand Affair. If upon perusal hereof your self, or
imparting thereof to others, Objections do arise against any thing herein laid
down, you know my insufficiency so well not to impute it; but as to any else, I
have to desire of them that they would not find fault with words barely, of
which I freely confess my self no great Master, so that it may not be apparel'd
in a modern garb; and its hoped the Age is past wherein Men were to be
Criminals for a word; but as to the matter and substance, let them search
thereinto, and object what they can, not doubting it will stand the test, and
be found agreeable to the Laws of God and Man, particularly our own Laws and
Constitutions. to Reason, Justice, Equity, Conscience, Prudence, humane and
divine, natural, moral, and spiritual, distributing to each one their real
Right and Liberty, and divesting none of their just Privilege and Property. But
if any have other Apprehensions, I would request they would not so much
acquarrel at, and oppugn these my private (it may be) Sentiments, but that as
they manifest its inconveniences, so also they would propose and show us some
more excellent way and method for the better and more National carrying on this
so g and, important Affair; that so less time may be lost, and then from the
diversity of Methods and Plots that may be offered, a most wholesome, useful,
advantageous, extensive, National, secure, pr^dent, thriving, and lasting Model
may be extracted, for the retrieving, improving, and establishing this so
necessary and beneficial Commerce to our Nation and Posterity, maug^e all
opposition whatever, from treacherous Friends or open Enemies; of both which we
have no want, the greater is our Misery. I add not more, but await what may be
the issue; and ^^uly whether you know or will believe it or no, men's eyes begin
to fail, and their hearts to sink on this account; this is the second Sessions
that this A^^^ir has been before you, and nothing yet done after all the pains
therein, save a Vote or so, which tho a Reviv^l, yet passing no further, causes
sadness again; to you it is the Subjects of England have applied themselves for
Justice and Succor against this great Society, and tho their Plaints are taken
notice of, yet Judgment has not been executed, and because hereof they seem
jocund, concluding they shall escape; hence also from the same delay do the
Enemies of our Liberties, the Locusts of the late Reigns, come swarming forth
of those lurking holes, a just fear of deserved punishment had lately driven
them into wiping their mouths, saying, They have done no wickedness, and ready
no doubt to react the same Villainies again, Omission or Neglect of Justice may
cause great trouble, if not ruin, notwithstanding all our blooming hopes and
fair indications: Saul a most hopeful (...), and Ahab a great King, are
dreadful instances, who for sparing such as were appointed to destruction, came
to sad Ends, falling by the hands of the uncircumcised and thousands with them:
There is a time when the hand is not to spare, nor the eye to pity; it is a
Maxim Moral and Divine, That Public Justice is a sure ^^^^ng Fou^^ation for
the Public Wealth, Prosperity and Success of a Realm; a due Execution of
Justice on notorious Delinquents procu^es Peace and Quiet, and prevents much
Mischief, is the Atonement in times of great Distress and Wrath, procures
lasting Blessings upon the Actors, as in the Case of Phineas and his Posterity.
You have this day g^^atly comf^^ted the hearts of the People of the Land in
thrusting forth that Person as unworthy of Session among you, which brings to
mind a Story I have read ('it is in the Roman History) of one Septimius Arabinus
an execrable Wretch notoriously infamous for his many Oppressions, cruel,
bloody Prosecutions of his Countrymen the Free Romans their Liberties,
Properties, and Lives, for which I think he was proscribed, but to
Heliogabalus, the Monster of Men he becoming a great Privado, was acquitted and
readmitted into the Senate; but upon the grand Revolution and choice of
Alexander Severus to be Dictator or Emperor the Senate ( Romes Parliament) for
that always remained, and sitting even during the time of the Imperial Crowns,
attending him with a Congratulatory Address, Arabinus (like Satan) impudently
appeared among them, whose hated head the Dictator no sooner espied, but
lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, cried but, O Numina! Arabinus non
solum vivit, sed in Senatum venit: Oh ye Divine Powers! what is it mine eyes
behold? What Age and Times are we fallen into? Arabinus is not only permitted
to live, but admitted to sit in the Senate: What! he that broke and dispensed
with all Laws, instructed or encouraged men so to do, shall he become one of
our Legislators? And shall a R^man and Heathen be in such an Ecstasy upon sight
of a Tool of the foregoing Reigns for the betraying the free Romans Rights and
Privileges? And shall not Englishmen and Christians upon the like view be under
some more than ordinary Emotion of Spirit? Go on and prosper, ye Heads of our
Tribes; you have taken a right Course to purge first ^our own House, and then
to cleanse the rest of the Land, whether there be an Arabinus ^n Court or Camp,
sure I am there are many in the great City, Counties, and Corporations, and not
a few in this I am discoursing of, may they all feel the Power of your Justice
according to their Demerits, as what you have done is the first beginnings, so
may it be an Earnest of further Proceedings in this kind, but whether do I
swerve? Particularly there have been laid before your selves in this and the
former Sessions, and fully proved in the House and Committees many Violences,
Outrages, Seizures, Oppressions, Deaths (the like scarce perpetrated since the
days of Brember and Tresilian) committed by this Company, their Orders and
Procurement toward and upon the Free Subjects in their Goods, Liberties,
Bodies, Estates, Lives, and as an Accumulation the Commission of these heinous
Crimes are not wholly new and late, and so merely from the Persuasions,
Agreeableness of, or Sympathy with the late Reigns, but what has radically and
naturally flowed from them, and appeared in them at their first Foundation by
Oliver Cromwell, for even then breathing Threatenings and Slaughters they sent
forth their first Ships with Commissions and Instructions (as upon the proof
has appeared) for seizing and spoiling the Subjects of England then in India;
and they effected it fully in many places, as is uncontroulably evident in Mr.
Skinners Case (and Instances ^ight be given in many others) which was committed
about thirty years since, and it is conceived by some (tho with my dissent) one
Reason why the Company took in but half what subscribed, designing to make up
the other with the Spoils they should get in India from the Subjects of
England; so that their very Foundation has been laid in Oppression, swadled
with the Spoils of the People, nursed up by Arbitrary Government, sucking in as
Mothers milk Despotick Power and Sovereign Authority. Quo semel est imbuta
rec^ns servabit ^dorem, and having received in their Youth still continue the
same tincture; and wha^ horrible Superstructures they have made our own Eyes
behold, and many in their Bodies, Relations, and Estates are bitterly sensible
of; you have upon fair deliberate Hearings agreed to the Proofs, and that
satisfaction should be made, and in a full House almost n^mine contradicente in
the Case of the poor St. Helenians voted it Murder; whence it undeniably
follows, there were Murderers, and some owned themselves guilty at your Bar of
giving Instructions for the same. Now what is the sequel why the word is, If it
be told thee, and thou have heard of it, and inquired diligently, and behold it
be true, and the thing certain, as it is in this Case -- then shall thou bring
forth the Man, etc. as great care is to be taken not to be rash, but well
assured before Judgment; so when Judgment is given, Execution ought most surely
to follow. Now if in these Cases no Reddress comes from you, whither shall
Application be made? As the able and learned Sergeant Tremayne said in the
Close of his Plea at your Bar upon the same Case, Justice could not be had
elsewhere against them they had in the late Reigns made such Interest in
Westminster and Whitehall, That if no Relief came from you, all their unjust,
illegal Actions must pass for Law. Let never such things be said of the Commons
of England; but from them let Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness
follow as a mighty Stream.

Now what may succeed I cannot presage, but heartily wish, whether the old
Company, a new one, or none be settled by you; yet they may be obliged to render
full satisfaction for all wrongs, injuries, damages done the Subject; but if
that should not be, and that all the distresses, seizures, flights,
imprisonments, deaths, hitherto must go for nothing; yet that some provision
might be made for the Subject by way of Exempt from their power, and liberty be
granted to stand upon their own defense for the future, if reprisals may not be
granted for what is past, it being without controversy as just, righteous, and
legal for the Subject to make defense and on seizures to reprise himself on
their goods in England or India, as for the Company to seize their effects in
either places: Abasuerus the great Persian Monarch upon hearing and considering
the Complaint of the Jews under great distresses, spoils, and fears; when he
found they were abused; not only gave them an exempt from the power of their
Enemies, but also liberty to stand upon their guard, and to slay them that had
designed their ruin; and for all their wrongs and cruel usages to recompense
themselves by the spoils of such their Enemies, Informers, and Persecutors, tho
his Natural Subjects: Notwithstanding his Decrees and Proclamations issued out
before for the prosecuting and ruining the poor Jews, who could not submit to
the impositions of those Heathens; and this is recorded to all ages for the
reputation, honor, glory, and renown of that mighty Prince.

I have yet one more wish that the great burden laid on this and other
Plantation Trades in the duties importing were well considered of and abated
(the groans of the Plantations being very great) there is nothing can advance
this Nation more, or like to Trade, nor any thing that more than freedom, easy
and low duties, of which the whole World gives ample testimony; but this may
sooner be wished for than expected, I know neither this or any thing else
appearing for the Nations Interest will lie at your door, you have always
evidenced your self a true Patriot both in Council and in Camp, you have not
from your youth up at any time shunned any enterprise on the Nations account
tho never so hazardous, you have jeoparded your life frequently in behalf of
our Laws, Liberties, and Religion; never counting any thing dear to you that
you might serve your Nation; your Time, your Strength, your Estate, your Blood
you have freely and valiantly bestowed in the Nations service; and are an
Instance (I would hope not the only single one) that have served your
generation with your Estate, and not for an Estate: No! those things never
moved you, but a higher Principle, and your reward is with you from the Lord
(for I think you never (...) any from Men) A hoary head in the way of
righteousness which is a Crown of glory; I ha^^ (...) ready abused your
patience, so shall not detain you any longer than to Subscribe my (...)*

Land. 20. Jan. 1689. Honored Sir, Your Really Devoted Servant.


