AN ESSAY For the raising a National Fishery BY THE Poor of England, WITHOUT
TAX or MONEY, THAT Shall Employ and Maintain all the Poor, and growing Poor of
this Nation for ever, and in less than Five Years, totally ease the Public
from that grievous Burden.

Humbly Addressed to the Honorable House of Commons in behalf of the Poor of
ENGLAND.

LONDON.

Printed and are to be sold by John Nut, near Stationers' Hall. MDCC.

Price 4 d.

Most Wise and August ASSEMBLY.
THE many Groundless and Chymerical Projects of this designing Age, I sear, may
too justly deter the more Prudent part of Mankind from a farther Disquisition
into Things of this Nature, than the bare Title informs; yet 'twould be too
severe a Fate that all should undergo that Censure without a farther enquiry;
for as Light came out of Darkness, so Truth may be Collected from Error, and a
great Treasure may lie hid where least expected.

I shall not presume to Apologize for the Subject treated of, 'twill best speak
for it self, but do crave Pardon for the injury I have done it, by my unskilful
Management; but as brightest Gold may be sullied by the touch of an unclean
Hand, though not at all deprived of its native worth, so I cannot by what I have
done, detract from the innate Value of this inestimable Jewel, Fishery

I could have wished that some more able had undertaken this Design, that could
have charmed your Ears with Eloquence, that might have moved, though
Self-interest and Security may be allowed prevalent Motives; but as Eloquence
is not my Talent, so it was not my Design, but Truth and Plainness, wherein I
have no other Aim but to promote the publicly Good to my Power, by contributing
my poor Mite, nor do I ask Reward or Patronage, but with the Learned Verulam
conclude, That nothing can be worthy of a Patronage that has not Truth to
Patronize it self.

I have more than once, with great regret, beyond Seas heard in Conversion,
when speaking of the excellency of one Constitution, and Parliamentary Power,
they have wittily, as they thought, in way of Raillery, replied, and with a
seeming Pleasure, that there were more than one thing the Parliament of England
could not do, and that was to raise a Fishery. I thought the Assertion too
bold, but the Reason they gave, was because they had not done it after they
declared it to be for the Honor, Advantage, and Safety of the Nation; though it
cannot be denied but with the highest Concern, it is too true, that hitherto it
has not been done, or attempted to any Purpose; yet there is nothing more
certain than that it is in the Power and Wisdom of an English Parliament to
effect this great Work, and convince the World of the Error, when God shall
please to put it in their Hearts to do it, which is with longing Desire
earnestly expected by all true Lovers of their Countries good, and it is hoped
that this Essay may stir up and animate some of our worthy Patriots to
prosecute so honorable and advantageous a Design, that on this Basis may be
erected a super Structure for the public Welfare, and Glory of God, that Fate
shall not be able to shock.

AN ESSAY FOR THE RAISING A National Fishery.
The following Discourse is Grounded on these two Principles, viz.
THAT the Trade of England Improved. And the well Employing the Poor, are the
two main Pillars, on which the Welfare and Security of this Nation (under God)
Depends.

The Poor of this Kingdom may be considered in these Four Capacities.

I. As Trades Men, and Artificers, who either being too Numerous, cannot get
Employment, or by decay of Trade have lost it; or not having Stock sufficient
of their own to Work, nor Credit to procure it, they are rendered Poor and
Necessitous by an inevitable Fate. Or they are such who by Ill-husbandry,
Losses, or both; or being thrown in to Prison, by Merciless and Inhuman
Creditors, are brought to the greatest Extremities, whilst their Wives and
Children become a Parish Charge. This is the too Deplorable State and Condition
of many Thousand Families, That loudly Cry for Relief.

IIly. As Poor Husbandmen and Day-labourers, who continualy Increase in far
greater proportion than Labor to Employ them; and must to support Life
necessarily be compelled to Beg or Steal, if not worse.

IIIly. As common sturdy Beggars, and wandering Vagabonds, Men, Women and
Children, who daily Increase and Crowd the Streets; of these the greatest part
never did Work, nor ever will if they can avoid it: and when by Begging they
cannot obtain Relief to their Desire, they will not scruple to Murder, Rob, or
commit any other Violence to attain if.

IVly. As Aged, Decrepit, Lame, Blind, Dement^red, etc. In a Christian
Commonwealth, the Law of God, of Nations, and of Nature, viz. self
Preservation does require that all these Poor should be taken Care of, and
provided for by the Public: Of which kind the two first would Work if they had
it. And the third sort, (as his Majesty was Graciously pleased to mention in
his Speech to both Houses of Parliament) ought by compulsion to be brought to
it. The fourth kind are no^ ^capable to Work themselves, and must be kept
without it.

The grand difficulty now will be how to find means to Employ these Poor, so,
as they may become useful to the Public, by inableing them to maintain
themselves, and be no longer a burden to the Public and Dishonor to the
Kingdom.

The Building of Workhouses, it is presumed will not reach that End, for there
are many already Built about this Town Unimploy'd and Decayed, and others that
are Employed, but to wrong purposes, and serve only to enrich those Officers
belonging to them; as Bride-well and many others, that seem not in any respect
to answer the end of their Institutions as well as many other Hospitals, the
Poor having little benefit from thence* and granting that many more Workhouses
were erected, what Work would they do in them? Beating Hemp will scarce keep
them from Starving. If they Card or Spin Wool, they Interfere with those of the
Woolen Manufacture, and injure them who from Children have Earned their Bread
by those Labors, who now for want of Employment (some thousands) are ready to
Starve, which by the Addition of so many more Hands will only make them just so
much worse than they are already; for it is not want of Hands the Woolen
Manufacture stands in need of; but of Work to Employ those Hands they already
have: And with Submission it may be thought as good Policy, to Instruct Beggars
to Plow, Sow, Reap, etc. and then Employ them to the prejudice of those
Industrious and Necessary Husbandmen we have already.

Therefore some other way must be found out, or at least attempted, that shall
Employ, and furnish with Food and Necessaries, all the superfluous Hands of
Poor and Necessitous Trades men, Husbandmen, Laborers, Beggars, Vagabonds,
etc. to be an Asylum for all the Distressed to fly to for Releif, without
infringing, or interfering on the painful Husband-men's Labor, or with the
Woolen Manufacture, or any others which would prove a desperate Wound instead
of a Cure; which must be effected by an other method, if ever attained.

Among the Various Methods that possibly may be thought on or proposed, (with
humble Submission it is believed) there can be but one sound, that will in all
respects effectually answer this great End, which is not of Humane Invention,
but by the providence of God is put into our Hands, if we would lift them to
our Mouths; though for our Ingratitude to Heaven, our stuborn Blindness, Sloth
and Idleness, we are unworthy of so great and peculiar a Blessing we might
enjoy, above many others, that is, the FISHING TRADE.

I shall not here Illustrate on the many Advantages (besides Maintenance of
the Poor) 'twould be to this Kingdom, nor mention the Disadvantages the loss of
that Trade has brought on us, they are too obvious already, and are both
Universally known and acknowledged. But how to put this great Design
successfully in Practice, remains as yet the Mystery.

To the Explicating of which, I humbly offer the following Propositions or
Suppositions.

First, That English Men being furnished with Busses and Nets, will be allowed
as capable to catch Fish, and eat them, without any Hardship, as well as the
Hollanders or any other Nation, and in many respects we have naturally the
advantage of them, or any other People, for the Trade and Business.

Secondly, That those English Men that have not wherewith to buy Meat, the Case
of too many poor honest working Families in this Town, would think it a
happiness to be fed with wholesome Fish, Bread and Roots, which, without
Offense, was the Diet of those Worthies, the Founders of Amsterdam, Venice, and
of our own London, and of most other Flourishing and Trading Towns in the World.

Thirdly, 'Twill be likewise granted, that Men being now furnished with Busses,
Nets, and other Necessarys for Fishing, under a due regulation at a Public
Charge, have the same means to Live, the same Tools to Work with for the
support of themselves and Families, as our fore Fathers had, though on much
better and easier Terms, and may without doubt live and thrive as well as they
did, under greater Difficulties, and this without any Fish Transported (if that
were necessary) for Fish at Home will either But or Barter, for Bread, Meat,
Cloths, Fire and all other Necessaries.

Fourthly, That naturaly there are but three ways for all Mankind to get a
living, which are either Planting and Sowing the Fruits of the Earth; hunting
wild Beasts, or devouring one another, or catching Fish, it is presumed the
third king only can be applicable to this Matter, for in the first Peopling of
all Collonies, there first care must be to clear the Ground of Trees to plant
Food for their own Sustenance, before they can arrive to greater things, so
originally in the first Planting of Fishing Collonies, they were begun by only
Fishing for Food, and raised by their redundancy, who by furnishing others that
wanted, had in Exchange or Barter all other Necessaries first, afterward all
manner of Superfluities, till in time they acquiring great Riches, Dignities,
and Dominions.

This is the natural Rise, Progress, and ultimate of all Fisheries, and
probably as they were all thus raised by degrees, there may be no other means
possible to revive and raise our lost and decayed Fishery, but by the same
means.

It Is a Subject of the greatest wonder to Foreigners, and Shame and Indignity
to our selves, that English Men can Beg, or want Work, who may have Fish for
catching, Roots and Pulse for Planting, Cloths for Spinning, etc. yet this is
too easily answered, they cannot do this without Tools, not purchase them
without Money, nor be employed by those that have both.

It Is farther presumed, that wholesome Food, warm Cloths, and Huts to secure
from Cold and Weather, are all the Poor stand in need of.

There Women and Children may be Employed in Knitting Nets, Spinning Thread,
etc. whilst the Men are Fishing, Carrying and Recarrying. Sir Walter Raleigh
affirming that every Fishing Ship sets to work Thirty several Trades and
Occupations, and eight Thousand Persons by Sea and Land, and that three hundred
Persons are no able to make one Fleet of Nets in four Months for one Buss.

That to allure them to Industry and a regular Life, among this new
Commonwealth of Fishers, they should be encouraged to Marry among themselves,
and be endowed with some Privileges and Immunities, the more they multiply the
greater the Blessing, for they can never want Food and Necessaries till they
have drained the Sea of Fish. This would prevent the Murder of many poor
Infants, and check the many Robberies and Murders that are daily committed, and
would re-people the Sea Coast round the Kingdom, repair all our old decayed
Fishing Towns, and build many new ones; and asking Pardon for the Expression,
do affirm, that a Wall of Fishing-Nets round England, would be a much better
Defense and Security to the Nation, than Friar Bacon's Brazen Wall would have
been, could his Art have done it.

It remains now to show how this great and glorious Work may be put in
Practice, so as succesfully to accomplish this great End without Tax, or
additional Expense to the Public, which it is presumed will make it worth the
Trial, and this to be done by a right application of the Poors Revenue, which
heitherto has been wrongly disposed of, and to litttle purpose, either for the
common Good, or comfort of the Poor.

The due Care, Government, and Management of the Poor, is the great concern of
the Public and its Ministers and Magistrates, are not without great reason
Stilled the Fathers of the Poor, to put them in mind that they should cherish
and nourish them as Children, for how Paradoxical soever it may seem, the Hands
of the Poor are the true and real Riches, Strength, Security and Blessing of a
Kingdom, when rightly employed, and the Bain, Curse, Plague and Ruin of a
Nation, when idle of themselves, or maintained so, or which is Equivolent,
employed to no purpose.

To come closer to the Matter: The yearly revenue of the Poor is Estimated at
about 800000 l. and probably if it were nicely enquired into may be found a
Million; now supposing this great Revenue be paid yearly for the future, as it
has been for many Years past, and is still growing; and if not prevented must
increase for ever, and that this Money be employed to the Poors use as now,
'twould be well worth knowing what good 'twould do them, or what Benefit either
poor or Public would receive in proportion to such a mass of Treasure raised
and buried, without any visible appearance of public Good, nor the tenth part
of the Poor provided for. Now if to accomplish this glorious Enterprise of
raising and establishing a Fishery on an immovable and solid Basis; there were
required, 20, 30, 40, or a 100 Years, and that the yearly income of the Poor
for that time were required to do it, that is, 20, 30, 40, or a 100 Millions,
if the end I say were then attained, though on these Terms (if not to be effected
otherwise) 'twill, I doubt not, be allowed the Money was well employed and
disposed of to good purpose; since 'tworld for the future free them or their
Posterity from the burden and charge of the Poor, without the addition of any
new Tax for their relief, and the Money would circulate among the Handicraft
and Trading People, to the great improvement of the Woollen Manufacture, and
others, and would besides raise some Hundred Thousand Seafaring Mon, and
repeople the Sea Coasts and Fishing Towns, etc. whereas in the usual Course
this Money is now employed, it scarce serves to buy Food for half it is given to,
and the rest are left to shift for it as they can get it.

If then, as aforesaid, a Fishery though obtained in so long time, and at so
great expense, would be well worth the attaining, how much more then, ought
those generous offers to be embraced, that fairly lays down a demonstrative
Method, that shall in five Years and less, raise and establish an everlasting
Fishery to maintain all the Poor, and growing Poor for ever, by their own
Labor, and to become a Bullwark and Defense of this Kingdom, by raising so
many thousand Seafaring Men, improving Navigation and all Trades, and
Manufacturies, and making this Nation the most Rich, Potent and Flourishing
Kingdom on Earth.

A Draught or Scheme of the Design in general Terms is thus Proposed; with
submission to better Judgments.

That a Million Credit be raised on the Revenue of the poor, to be paid in two
Years, which can be no difficulty to do, since the Fund and Security is as good
as any in England, and well disposed Persons on such an Occasion, will be
contented with moderate Interest, and possibly the Bank of England may to
promote so pious and honorable a Design signalize themselves on such an
Occasion, there being no necessity to draw the Money all at once, but as it is
disposed of.

That 200000 l. of this Money be appointed to build a thousand Busses and
Boats., at 200 l. per Buss.

That 200000 l. more be employed for Hemp or Thread for Nets, and what other
Materials relate and their fishing Tackle.

That 200000 l. be appropriated to Cloth a Hundred thousand poor Men and Women
able to Work, with their Children at 2 l. per Man.

That 100000 l. be designed for Conveniences for them to ^e on, etc.

That 100000 l. more be applied to build Chapels, Warehouses to store their
Corn and Fish in, and for Cask, etc.

That a 100000 l. be laid out for Corn, and for Salt to cure their Herrings.

That the 100000 l. remaining, be appropriated to Fishermen, the Masters of
Busses and Mates, who are to instruct them, and to Clergymen, Clerks,
Warehouse Keepers, Coopers, and all other Officers there shall be need of, for
the due and regular Execution of this great Undertaking.

That these 100000 Poor be dispersed into a 100 several places round the Coast,
a thousand in a place, to be first planted in and about the decayed Fishing
Towns, which will occupy a far greater number.

There will be ten Busses to every new Fishing Settlement, and to each Buss
there is at present assigned but a 100 poor besides Children, though 'twould
maintain more than a 1000 well employed.

That those Hundred Poor belonging to each Buss, Men and Women, become bound
for five Years, the Men and Boys to the Masters of Busses, to instruct them in
the Art of Fishing, and the Women and Girls to those that shall instruct them
to Spin Thread, and Knit Nets, etc.

The Boys and Girls to be bound for a longer time, the Masters being paid for
their Service, to lie under no Obligation to furnish them with Cloths, Meat or
other Necessaries, but only to instruct them how to Fish; and being thus set
out and furnished with Materials, it is presumed there will be no danger of
their Starving, and no doubt will find themselves with Drink, and be able to do
something more than keep themselves in a very little time.

The five Years Service expired, besides their Food, to be allowed some Pay for
their Labor, out of the Profits of the Fishery.

That they be Fed four Days in a Week, with Bread, wholesome Fish, either Fresh
or Salt, with Roots, as Turnips, Carrots, Parsnips, Potatoes, etc. And the
other three Days, with Meat, either Beef, or Pork, with Pease or Roots: That it
be no longer an Injunction on them, to eat Fish four Days in a Week, than till
they have raised sufficient Stock to purchase Flesh, and reduce their Fish Days
to twice a Week.

That all Aged and Decrepit Poor, etc. Unable to Work, be confined to their own
Parishes, (the greatest part being in London) and not suffered to Beg, but that
Provision of Red and Pickled Herrings be sent from the Fisheries, to their
respective Parish-Officers, either to dispose of to them, or for them, for
other Provisions, according to an exact account of their Numbers, which,
together with the Collection of Broken Meats by the Poor in Baskets, in their
several Parishes and distributed, will abundantly Maintain them better than now
they are.

That no Person be permitted to Beg, or any suffered to Relieve them in the
Streets, but if found there, to be sent to one or other of the
Fishing-Collonies to Work if able, if not, to their own Parish, that they, and
all other Poor that voluntarily come, be provided with Food, first for Work,
and afterward with Clothes when they have Earned them.

That in one Year this Design may be completely put in Practice, all the
Busses, Warehouses, and Chapels Built, and Nets made, and the Poor
immediately set to Work, for the Money taken up on Credit, not being Payable
till two Years end, the Poor will have the same Provision for this Year, as
usual to Maintain them whilst they are Kniting Nets, etc. and till the Fishery
be actually set to Work, which may be done in part, the next Herring-Season, if
from Lady Day they should commence.

What hitherto has been said, has only Designed the capacitating the Poor to
Maintain themselves, but now it is time to speak what farther may be done by
them, to the great increase of the Public Treasure, and promotion of Trade in
general.

First, That the Business of this Publick-Fishery, be only the Herring and
Pilchard Fishing; and not permitted to Sell any of them at home, to prejudice
those Industrious and Labourious Fishermen we have already, who otherwise
would be Ruined by this Design,

2. That they intermeddle not with the New Foundland nor Whale-Fishing, to the
Detriment of those Fishers and Merchants that use those Trades, but be only
employed in Fishing on our own Coasts, provided the Merchants be not too slack
on these Encouragements to Prosecute those Trades; or Whale and Cod-Fishing may
be the Business of the Royal-Fishery.

3. That great Care be taken, by diligent Inspection, that the Fish be Caught
when best in Season only; and that none but sweet and good Herrings be Cured,
and that after the best manner, and all made Good and Merchantable Ware.

4. That the Poor being first served, what remains to be exposed to Sale, and
for the Encouragement of Merchants, to export them beyond Seas, to be Sold at
very reasonable Rates, or Bartered for Hemp, Salt, Corn, etc.

5. That all Profits arising above the Poors Provision, be the public
Treasure, and applicable as shall be appointed by Parliament, which if they are
pleased, may be assigned for the Planting of Timber, so much wanted in England;
or the Rebuilding White Hall, and to make it the most Stately and Magnificent
Palace in the World in five Years time, and that without any Tax.

6. That the English Red-Herrings are the Best in the World, and a good
Commodity in all Places.

7. That for a farther Encouragement of this Fishery, and to promote Trade, if
it should please the Parliament to lay a Restriction on the Irish Fishing, that
is, on their Herring and Pilchard Fishing only; for we ought to be rather more
jealous, and careful to prevent the growth of A Fishery any where to our Power,
than of the Woolen Manufacture, because one will secure the other. That by this
means great quantities of Herrings would be Transported to Ireland, and in
return, they might bring Tallow, Hides, Corn, etc. but principally Wool, which
would greatly improve the Woolen Manufacture, for the fundamental Cause of the
decay of that great Trade, is the very same by which the Fishery is lost and
ruined; that is, Forelgners sell Fish better Cheap than we can, which is the
true Reason of the loss of that Trade, and it is to be feared, if not prevented,
their slight making and dressing their Cloth, their excessive Straining and
Racking to lengthen it, and many other Knavish Practices in that Trade, more
than formerly, may in time bring it to the fame Fate, Foreigners being
discouraged to Buy it, not daring to trust them, have put them on Invention to
make better themselves, and Sell Cheaper, notwithstanding they have the
greatest part of the Wool from honce.

Therefore, unless Care be taken that Cloth be well and truly made, without
Deceit, and by plenty of Wool made Cheaper, it seems very unlikely for them
ever to retrieve their almost lost Trade, for they cannot lessen the Price of
Men's Labor to do it, that being but sufficient when employed to maintain them.

8 That if the Merchants slight and neglect the Benefit of Buying up the Poors
Herrings, being Good and Merchantable Ware, and to Transport them to all parts
of the World, where ever any were carried, and to our own Plantations, etc. and
in return, to bring Salt, etc. that then they be sent by Vessels of their own,
and disposed of for the best advantage for the Public; for no People on Earth
can under-sel or forestal us in any Market, for we have the (...) nothing, as
all attempts of this kind hitherto has done, and ever will till they attain the
Art to catch Fish without Money, and sell them for nothing, when they please,
which seems a Paradox, yet is a real Truth. For it is catching Fish without
Money, in regard there is no more Money paid for the raising this Fishery, than
would be if it were let alone, nor any one compelled to Fish that has any thing
else to do, nor to eat them but such as have not wherewith to buy Meat, and if
those will not catch Fish when they may, and eat them when they have done, even
let them starve a Gods Name. The Poors Revenue is a kind of Rentcharge,
claimed by Custom, and paid time out of Mind, or a Debt entailed on the
Public from Generation to Generation as a reward of Folly, ill Husbandry and
Indiscretion on one side, and of Laziness, Idleness, and starving Beggary on
the other.

To conclude, the letting the Poor into any Manufactury that have not been
brought up to it, must be of pernicious Consequence to the Public, by injuring
others whose Business it is already, and are in want of employ, for the
multiplying of Hands to Work will be found but an odd Improvement, unless the
Consumption be made much greater, for it is taking Bread from those that have
it, and giving it to Beggars, or the increase of Beggars in one place to set
them to work at another, and would still increase Poverty ad Infinitum, but of
the great Riches, Strength, and many Benefits a Fishery would bring to Rich and
Poor there is scarcely any

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THAT this Essay being committed to the Press, and the greatest part Composed,
before the Order or the Honorable House of Commons, Lunae 11. Martii 1699.
relating to the Royal Fishery:

The Author desires to be excused for some Expressions therein that may now
seem Superfluous.

ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 2. read A Fishery. the same page l. 17. for one read our. page 3.
l. 6. for the read that.


