A JOURNEY TO ENGLAND, etc.

A JOURNEY TO ENGLAND. With some ACCOUNT OF THE Manners and Customs of that
NATION. Written at the Command of a Nobleman in France. Made English.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms-Inn in
Warwick Lane. 1700.

TO THE READER.
WHen I first chanced upon this severe piece, and read it in the Language it
was sent me, I was so much concerned for the honor of our Country, that it was
my resolution to suppress the Publication of our shame, as conceiving it an Act
of great Inhumanity; But upon second, and more impartial Thoughts, I have been
tempted to make it speak English, and give it Liberty, not to reproach, but to
instruct our Nation, remembering what the Wiseman has said, Open rebuke is
better than secret Love. Prove. 27. 5. The truth is, I cannot say but the
particulars, are most of them, very home; and which we may no way evade,
without acknowledging, at least, that the Gentleman (whoever he were) made
notable use of his time, but best of all, by setting upon an effectual redress
of what is amiss. And though I doubt not, but one might easily retort in as
many instances, upon defects as great (if not greater) of that Nation; (for he
that finds fault, had need be perfect) yet were it then fittest to do it, and
to revenge this Charitable Office, when we shall have first reformed our selves.

Farewell.
CONTENTS.
ALE and Alehouses Page 14 Beauty of the Ladies 3 Bowling-Greens 33 Balls 27
Bunglers at Raillery 28 Confidence of the Innkeepers 4 Cough (the Generality
of it 14 Description of the Country 3 -- Of London 5 -- Of the Presbyterians 7
-- Of the Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. 12 Dancing Masters, Their
Insolence 28 Hide Park 29 Horses, Dogs, etc. 33 Ill Manners of People at
London. 5 Lords surley 24 Ladies go to Taverns 16 -- Want Confidence 21 -- Have
familiar ways with them 23 -- Have no Standard for Dressing 22 Old Women wear
Colored Clothes p. 22 Pleading at Westminster 31 Quarelling 18 Spring-Garden
29 Taverns 15 With-Drawing-Rooms (don't know how to use them 34 Younger
Brothers Rob on the Highways. 20
End of the Contents.
A JOURNEY TO ENGLAND, etc.
MY LORD,
YOU Command me to give you a Minute account of what I observed, and how I
passed that little time which I lately spent in England; a Country, whose
Character you so greatly desire to be informed of, in a Conjuncture (as you
rightly deduce) of strange Vicissitude, and indeed they are a People of all the
World most fond of alterations; And to whom, My Lord, should I more readily
submit? First, encouraged to make this excursion by your Lordship, who had
formerly beheld, and so much admired the Splendour and Magnificence of this
Court, and Kingdom in its greatest Acme and Luster. But, My Lord, I cannot
imagine, that you should esteem me either of Years, or Capacity to inform You,
whose Judgment is so Mature, and Correspondence so universal, as that there is
nothing which can escape your Cognizance, not only in that Island, but in all
the World besides. But since you oblige me not to dip into the Transactions of
State, the effects of Providence, Time, and other Notices of a Superior Orb;
and in which you cannot be instructed by so weak an instrument as your Servant;
and demand only the little Remarks of my hasty, and desultory Peregrination;
though I cannot pretend to improve your Lordship's Knowledge, yet I may hope to
give it diversion, and an Essay of my Obedience.

It must be avowed that England is a Sweet, and Fertile Country.

Terra potens armis, atque ubere gleba.

That the Fields, Description of the Country.
the Hills, and the Valleys are perpetually clad with a glorious, and agreeable
Verdure; that her Provisions are plentiful; her Staples important; and her
interest very considerable; not omitting the most Beautiful Ladies, I had
almost said, of the World, Beauty of the Ladies
but for a just respect due to the Illustrious Circles of our Court, where the
Beauties of Conversation, so far transcend the tinctures of Lillies and Roses.
But these, My Lord, are not the Memoirs which you demand; I will therefore
hasten to my Post.

After a short Passage from Calais, Rudeness of the English.
we came on shore at Dover, where the People of the Town entertained us with
such suspicious and forbidding Countenances, whispering, and stiff Postures,
that I should never have believed so great a difference in the Addresses of two
Nations, could have been produced by so short a trajection, and in a Port
continually accustomed to the Faces of Strangers, had not the contrary humors
of our contiguous Neighbors, the Spaniards, made it possible, in so many
pleasant instances. But I was amazed, when we had taken Post, and scarce out of
the Village, at the Acclamations of the Boys, running after, and affrighting
our Horses, hooting, and crying out, French Dogs, French Dogs, a Monsieur,
Monsieur! By a particular expression of Welcome, which other People would
interpret Derision; But in this Triumph (though somewhat late ever we set out
of Dover) we attained as far as Rochester the first night, where, how new a
thing it appeared to me, to see my confident Host set him down cheek by joul by
me, Confidence of the Innkeepers.
belching, and puffing Tobacco in my Face, you may easily imagine, till I
afterward found it to be the usual style of this Country; and that the
Gentlemen, who lodge at their Inns, entertain themselves in their Company, and
are much pleased with their impertinences: Arrived at the Metropolis of
civility, London, we put our selves in Coach, with some Persons of Quality, who
came to conduct us to our Lodging; but neither was this passage without honors
done to us, the Kennel dirt, and roots being favors which were frequently cast
at us by the Children, and Apprentices without reproof; Civilities, that in
Paris, a Gentleman as seldom meets withal, as with the contests of Car-Men, who
in this Town domineer in the Streets, o'er-throw the Hell-Carts (for so they
name the Coaches) Cursing, and reviling at the Nobles: You would imagine
yourself amongst a Legion of Devils, and in the suburb of Hell. The Ill manners
of the Commonalty at London.
I have greatly wondered at the remisness of the Magistrate, and the temper of
the Gentlemen, and that the Citizens, who subsist only upon them, should permit
so great a disorder, rather joining in the affronts, than at all chastizing the
Inhumanity. But, these are the natural effects of Parity, popular Libertinism,
and Insulary Manners.

I find, as you told me, My Lord, London to be a Town so nobly Situated, and
upon such a River, Description of London.
as Europe certainly shows not one more useful and agreeable; Their Fountains,
which are the Pride and Grace of our Streets, and plentifully supplied in this
City, are here immured, to secure the Waters from, I know not what, impurities:
But certainly, it does greatly detract from the beauty of the Carfours, and
intercepts the view.

Amongst the piece of Modern Architecture, I have never observed above two,
which were Remarkable in this vast, City. The Church of St. Paul's, and the
Banqueting House at White Hall, of which I remember to have heard your Lordship
speak: But you would be amazed at the genius of these People, that not much
above forty Years ago should suffer this goodly and venerable Fabric, to be
built about and converted into raskally Warehouses, and so sordidly obscured
and defaced, that an argument of great Avarice, Malice, Meanness, and deformity
of Mind, cannot possibly be expressed: Nothing here of Ornament, nothing of
Magnificence, (only a heavy piece of Architecture;) no public and honorable
Works, such as render our Paris, and other Cities of France, renowned, and
visited by all the World; emulating even Italy herself, for her Palaces,
uniform and conspicuous Structures: I assure your Lordship, that England is the
sole spot in all the World, where among Christians their Churches have been
made Jakes, and Stables, Markets and Tipling-Houses; and where there were more
need of Scorpions, than Thongs, to drive out the Publicans and Money Changers:
In sum, where these excellent uses, are pretended to be the Marks of Piety and
Reformation. I had sometimes the curiosity to visit the several Worships of
these Equivocal Christians, and Enthusiasts: But I extremely wondered to find
those whom they call Presbyterians, Description of the Prebyterians.
and that would imitate us of the Religion in France and Geneva, to have their
Discipline so confused and different. In this remark, My Lord, to be somewhat
more particular, you will not be displeased; because it was a thing you so much
recommended to my especial Notice. Form, they observe none; They pray and read
without method, and indeed, without Reverence or Devotion; I have beheld a
whole Congregation sit on their -- with their Hats on, at the reading of the
Psalms, and yet bare-headed when they sing them, in diverse places they read not
the Scriptures at all; but up into the Pulpit, where they make an insipid,
tedious and immethodical Prayer, in Phrases, and a tone so affected and
mysterious, that they give it the name of Canting, a term by which they do
usually express the Gibbrish of Beggars and Vagabonds; after which, there
follows the Sermon, consisting (like their Prayers) of Speculative and
Abstracted Notions, and things, which, nor the People, nor themselves, well
understand: But these they extend to an extraordinary length, and Pharisaical
repetitions; 'till almost they sleep; I am sure, 'till their Auditors do.

The Minister uses no Habit of distinction, or gravity, but steps up in querpo;
and when he lays by his Cloak (as I have observed some of them) he has the
action rather of a Thrasher, than a Divine; this they call taking pains, and
indeed it is so, to those that hear them: But thus they have now encouraged
every pert Mechanic to invade, affront and outpreach them; and having canceled
all manner of decency, prostituted both their Persons and Function to
usurpation, penury and derision. You may well imagine by the manners of the
People, and their prodigious Opinions, that there is no Catechisms, nor
Sacraments duly Administered: The Religion of England is Preaching, and sitting
still on Sundays. How they Baptize I know not, because the Congregation is
dismissed, and they agree in no form; and for the other Sacraments, no Man
gives, or receives alike: Such of their Churches as I have frequented, were
damned up with Pues, every three or four of the Inhabitants, sitting in narrow
Pounds or Pulpits, by themselves; for they are all turned Preachers now, In
short, there is nothing more unlike to our reformed Churches in France and I
think in all Europe beside; the apprehension of Popery, or fondness to their
own imaginations, having carried them so far to the other extreme, that they
have now lost all Moderation, and Decorum; And I have been herein, My Lord, the
more industrious to inform my self of each particular; because it seems yet to
be as public as the Religion of the State. Some of their own party, I have
heard deplore this confusion, but certainly, they themselves gave the first
occasion to these Monstrous Liberties, by a Rigid, and Uncharitable Discipline;
primarily (it seems) introduced by the Scots, and so refined upon by these, as
there are few or none that will submit to the Tyranny; but every one takes his
own course, and has protection for it. Some well natured abused Men I have met
withal among them; but, if I mistake not, for the greater Ingredient,
Ambitious, Ignorant, Overweening, Sower, and Uncharitable, ne quid asperius,
combining with the interest of the times, and, who to render themselves
powerful, have in compliances with the Spirital Pride of the Mechanics and
Corporations, connived at those many, and prodigious Schisms and Heresies which
are now spawned under themin such numbers, as give terror to the State. I omit
to tell your Lordship that few take Notice of the Lord's-Prayer; it is esteemed
a kind of weakness to use it, but the Creed and the Decalogue are not once
heard of in their Congregations; This is Milk for Babes, and these are all
Giants. They do frequently Solemnize their late National deliverances, and some
days of Christian Bloodshed, with all possible exactness. But they think it
gross Idolatry to join with the whole Christian Church of all Professions under
Heaven, in the Anniversaries of our B. Saviors Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, and descent of the Holy Ghost, Spiritual, Eternal, and never to
be forgotten Mercies. Would your Lordship believe that this madness should
advance so far, as to disturb the French-Church there, which you know, does in
all places observe those signal Deliverances and Blessings, both by Preaching,
Prayer, Sacraments and Exhortations, apposite to to the Occasion; What think
you will be the issue of this goodly Reformation? I could tell you more of the
Mysterious Classis; their ridiculous, insidiary, and presumptuous Questions;
their unheard of Animosities against their Brethern of the Church of England,
suffering themselves to be rather torn in sunder by the Sectaries, Demotrius
and the Crafts-Men, whilst they contend about trifles and mere shadows.

Concerning the Independents, Descripti- of the Independents, Auabaptists,
Quakers, etc.
all I can learn is; They are a refined, and Apostate sort of Presbyters; or,
rather such as renounces all Ordination, as who having Preached promiscuously
to the People, and cunningly ensnared a Select number of Rich, and ignorant
Proselytes, separate themselves into Conventicles, which they name
Congregations. There is nothing does more resemble this Sect, than our Romans
Missionaries sent out in partibus Insidelium; for they take all other
Christians to be Heathens. These are those great Pretenders to the Spirit, into
whose Party, does the vilest Person living, no sooner ascribe himself, but he
is, ipso facto, bubt a Saint, hallowed, and dear to God. These, are the
confidents, who can design the minute, the place, and the means of their
Conversion: A Schism full of Spiritual disdain, incharity, and high imposture:
But every alteration of State, destroying the interest of the versatile
Contrivers, they are as ready to Transmigrate into the next more thriving
Fraternity, as the souls of Pythagoras into Beasts, and may then perhaps,
assume some other Title, This is a sad, but serious truth, and not a little
menaces the common Christianity, unless timely prevented. But, Sir, I will not
longer tire your patience with these Monsters (the subject of every
contemptuous Pamphlet) nor with the madness of the Anabaptists, Quakers,)
(which are increased to a prodigious number) Fifth Monarchy-Men, and a Cento of
unheard of Heresies besides, which, at present, deform the once renowned Church
of England; and approach so little the pretended Reformation,, which we in
France have been made to believe they are arrived to.

But I have dwelt too long on this remark, I return to the Town, where they arc
pestred with Hackney-Coaches, and insolent Car-Men, Shops, and Taverns, Noise,
and such a cloud of of Sea-Coals, that if there be a resemblance of Hell upon
Earth, it is in this Vulcans in a Foggy Day: Of the Cough.
This pestilent Smoke so fatally seizes on the Lungs of the Inhabitants, that
the Cough, and the Consumption spare no Man. I have been in a spacious Church,
where I could not hear the Minister for the Peoples Barking.

There is within this City, and in all the Towns of England (which I have
passed through) so prodigious a number of Houses where they sell a certain
Drink called Ale, that I think a good half of the Inhabitants may be
Denominated Ale-House-Keepers, Of their Ale.
these are a meaner sort of Cabarets: But what is most deplorable, where some
Gentlemen sit (especially in the Country) and spend much of their time;
drinking of a muddy kind of Beverage, and Tobacco, which has, universally
besotted the Nation, and at which (I hear) they have consumed many noble
Estates. Of their Taverns.
As for other Taverns, London is Composed of them, where they drink Spanish and
Red-Wines, and other Sophisticated Liquors to that fury and intemperance, as
has often amazed me to consider it: But thus some mean Fellow, the Drawer,
arrives to an Estate, some of them having built fair Houses, and purchased
those Gentlemen out of their Possessions, who have ruined themselves by that
base and dishonorable Nice of Ebriety: And that nothing may be wanting to the
height of Luxury and Impiety of this Abomination, they have translated the
Organs out of the Churches, to set them up in Taverns, and even a worse sort of
Tipling-Houses, chanting their Dithyrambicks, and bestial Bacchanalias, to the
Tune of those Instruments, which were wont to assist them, in the Celebration
of God's Praises, and regulate the Voices of the worst Singers in the World,
which are the English in their Churches at present; I cannot but commend the
Reformed in Holland, who still retain their Organs in the Churches, and make
use of them at the Psalms, without any Opinion of Superstition; and I once
remember to have heard the Famous Diodati wish they might be introduced even at
Geneva. A great error undoubtedly in those who sit at the Helm, to permit this
scandal; to suffer so many of these Taverns and occasions of Intemperance,
Women at Taverns, and Drink Healths.
such Leaches, and Vipers; to gratify so sordid and base a sort of People with
the spoils of honest, and well Natured Men. Your Lordship, will not believe me
that the Ladies of greatest Quality, suffer themselves to be treated in one of
these Taverns, where a Curtesan in other Cities would scarcely vouchsafe to be
entertained: But you will be more astonished when I shall assure you, that they
drink their Crowned Cups, and roundly, strain Healths through their Smocks,
Dance after the Fiddle, Kiss freely, and term it an honorable Treat. But all
this my Experience, particular address, and habitudes with the greatest of that
Nation has assured me, that it is not the pass time, only of the inferior and
Meretricious sort; Of the hard Drinking at private Houses.
since I find it a chief suppletory at all their Entertainments, to drink
Excessively, and that in their own Houses, before the Ladies, and the Lacques:
It is the Afternoons diversion; whether for want of better to employ the time,
or affection to the drink, I know not: But I have found some Persons of
Quality, who one could not safely visit after Dinner, without resolving to
undergo this Drink Ordel, and endure the Question: It is esteemed a piece of
Wit, to make a Man Drunk, for which some swilling insiped Client, or Congiarie,
is a frequent and constant adjutant, Your Lordship may hence well imagine, how
heavy, dull, and insignificant the Conversation is; loud, querillous, and
impertinent. I shall relate a story that once happened in my presence, at a
Gentleman's House in the Country, where there was much Company and Feasting. I
chanced to come at Dinnertime, and after the Cloth was taken away (as the
manner is) they fell to their laudable Exercise: But I unacquainted then with
their Custom, was lead up into a With-Drawing-Room, where I had the Permission
(with a Noble Person who introduced me) to sit and converse with the Ladies,
who were thither retired; the Gentleman of the House leaving us in the mean
time, to Entertain his Friends below: But you may imagine how strangely I was
astonished; to see within an hour after, one of the Company that had Dined
there, entering into the Room all bloody, Of the quarelling among the English.
and disordered, to fetch a Sword which lay in one of the Windows, and three or
four of his Companions, whom the Fumes of the Wine had inspirited, pursuing,
and dragging him by the Hair, till in this confusion, one of their Spurs
engaged into a Carpet, upon which stood a a very fair Looking-Glass, and two
noble pieces of Porselain, drew all to the ground, broke the Glass, and the
Vasas in pieces; and all this on such an instant, that the Gentleman and my
self, had much ado to rescue the affrighted Ladies from suffering in the
tumult; but at last we prevailed, and brought them to terms, the quarrel
concerning an Health only, which one of them would have shifted. I don't
remember, My Lord, ever to have known (or very rarely) a Health Drank in
France, no not the King's; and if we say A vostre sante Monsieur, it neither
expects Pledge, or Ceremony. It Is here so the Custom to Drink to every one at
the Table, that by the time a Gentleman has done his Duty to the whole Company,
he is ready to fall asleep, whereas with us, we salute the whole Table with a
single Glass only. But, My Lord, was not this, imagine you; an admirable Scene
and very Extraordinary? I confess, the Lady of the House being much out of
Countenance at what had happened, proffered to excuse this disorder, and I was
as ready to receive it, till several encounters confirmed me, that they were
but too frequent, and that there was a sort of perfect: Debauchees, who style
themselves Hectors, that in their mad and unheard of Revils, pierce their Veins
to quaff their own Blood, which some of them have Drank to that excess, that
they died of the intemperance; These are a professed Atheistical Order of
Bravo's composed for the most of Cadets, who spending beyond their Pensions, to
supply their extravagances, practice now and then the Highway, Younger
Brothers Rob on the Highway.
where they sometimes borrow, that which they often repay at the Gibbet; an
Ignominious Trade, unheard of amongst our Gallant Nobles; however Fortune
reduce them. But I know not whether I might not here Match these Valiant Hero's
with an avowed Society of Ladies, and some of them not of the meanest for Birth
(I even blush to recount it of that Fair Sex,) who boast of making all
advantages at Play, and are become so Dextrous at it, that seldom they make a
sitting, without design and Booty; For there is here, My Lord, no such thing as
Courtship, after the decent mode of our Circles; for either being mingled in a
Room, the Gentlemen separate from the Conversation of the Ladies, to Drink, as
before I related; or else to Whisper with one another at some Carner, or
Bay-Window, abandoning the Ladies to Gossip by themselves, which is a Custom so
strange to a Gallant of our Nation, as nothing appears more barbarous and
undecent; and this in effect: must needs be the reason, that these Beautiful
Creatures want assurance, address, and the charming Discourse of our Damoisels,
which are faculties so shining, and agreeable in their Sex with us in France:
And in truth even the Gentlemen themselves, are greatly defective as to this
particular, ill Courtiers, Unpliant, Morose, and of Vulgar address; generally,
not so polished, free, and serene, as is universally found, even amongst the
most inferior of our Nation. I am not ignorant that they impute it to a
certain levity m us; The Ladies want Address, and Confidence.
but it is a mistake in them, and that because they so hardly reform it,
without some ridiculous affectation, as is conspicuous in their several Modes
and Dresses, Have no Standard for Dressing.
which they vary ten times for our once; every one affecting something
particular; as having no Standard at Court, which should give Laws, and
Countenance the Fashion. The Women are much affected with Gaudry, there being
nothing more frequent than to see an Ancient Lady wear Colors, a thing which
neither Young, nor Old of either Sex do with us, save in the Country, and the
Camp; Old Women in Colored Clothes.
but Widows at no time. And yet reprove they us for these Exorbitances; but I
have often disputed the case: Either we do ill, or well; if ill, why then do
they ape us? if well, why do they reproach us? The truth is, they have no
Moderation, and are neither so lucky, nor frugal as our Ladies are in these
Sumptuary expenses; and whereof the Magistrates takes so little Cognizance,
that it is not an easy matter to distingnish the Lady from the Chambermaid;
Servants being suffered in this brave Country, to go clad like their
Mistresses, a thing neither decent, nor permitted in France, where they may
wear neither Lace, nor Silk. I may not forget to acquaint your Lordship, that
though the Ladies, and the Gentlemen are so shie of one another, yet when once
they grow acquainted, it passes into expressions, and compellations extremely
new to our usages, and the style of our Country: Do but imagine how it would
become our Ladies, to call Monsieur N -- Jack N. what more frequent than this?
Tom. P -- was here to Day; I went Yesterday to the A place near Paris like
Hide-Park. English Women have Familiar ways with them.
Course with Will. R -- Henry M -- treated me at such a Travern; These are the
particular Idioms, and graceful Confidences now in use; introduced I conceive
at first by some Camerades one with another; but it is mean and rude, and such
as our Lacques, would almost disdain in Paris; where I have often observed two
Chimny-Sweepers, accost one another, in better Forms, and Civiller Addresses.
But to be confident and civil, is not a thing so easily understood, and, seems
a peculiar talent of our Nation.

However the Ladies are not more obliging and Familiar, than the Lords are
difficult and inaccessable; Some of the Lords surley.
for though by reason of my Birth, and Quality, my recommendations and
addresses, I found some tolerable reception amongst them; yet I observed, that
they kept at such a surly distance with the Gentlemen, even of Family, that
methought I never beheld a ruder Conversation; especially, when comparing their
Parts, and Educations, I found them generally so much inferior, as if a Lord
were indeed other than a Gentleman; or a Gentleman's not fit Companion for a
King: But this must needs be the result of an ill, and haughty institution, and
for that most of these great Persons are in their Minority, and the Age wherein
they should be furnished with the noblest impressions, taught only to converse
with their Servants, some Sycophants, and under the Regiment of a Pedant, which
imprints that scornfulness and folly, and fits them with no better forms when
they should produce themselves, and give testimony to others, as well of their
Superiority in Virtue, as in Birth, and Dignity. But this is, My Lord, a
particular, which I have heard you often complain of, and which we do
frequently take notice of, at their coming abroad into our Country; where for
want of address, and fit Persons to introduce them, they seldom return more
refined than they came, else they could not but have observed, that there is
nothing which makes the distinction of Nobles in France, but the Title, and
that his Majesty himself does them the honors, which here they usurp upon
their equals; But, My Lord, they are sufficiently punished for it in England:
Where, to me they appear so degenerate, for want of this humility and free
Conversation; by which, and their other Vices, they grow now so much despised,
that the Gentlemen need seek no Revenge: For though (as I told you) the
Gentlemen are most of them very intemperate, yet the Proverb goes, Whence the
Proverb, As Drunk as a Lord.
As Drunk as a Lord. But, My Lord, as there is no rule so general, but it does
admit of exceptions, so should I give my own Experience, as well as your
Lordships the contradiction, to make the Censure Universal; there being even
amongst these, some few, and in particular my L. P. my L. M. my L. D. etc. whom
I esteem to be very noble, and accomplished Persons, as who have learned (by
the good Fortune of a better Education) how to value the Conversations of
worthy Men, and who indeed, do sufficiently verefie all those Attributes which
are due to their Qualities, and therefore whom this Paragraph does no ways
concern.

Nor should I be less severe and unjust, totally to exclude even some of the
Ladies from the Advantages of this Period, whose perfections and Virtues, claim
an equal right to all that I have here spoken, out of a due resentment of their
Merits and Excelllencies.

It was frequently, Their Balls.
during the last Winter, that I was carried to their Balls, as where indeed, I
expected to see what should appear the most of Gallant, and Splendid amongst
the Ladies, nor really did my expectations deceive me; for there was a
confluence of very great Beauties, to which the glistering of their Jewels
(which upon this occasion they want not) could add nothing save their Weight;
the various Habits being so particular, as if by some strange Enchantment, they
had encountered, and come out of several Nations: But I was astonished to see,
when they were ready to move, that a Dancing Master, had the boldness to take
forth the greatest Ladies, and they again the Dancing Master, who performed the
most part of the Ball, whilst the Gentlemen, that were present, were the least
concerned, and stood looking on; so as it appeared to me more like the Farce of
a Comedy, than a Ball of the Nobles, and in truth, their measures, when any of
them were taken out, made me some what ashamed to lead a Lady who did me the
honor, for fear (though my skill is very vulgar in that exercise) they should
have taken me for a Dancing Master, as who had happily employed my Youth so
ill, as to have some advantage of the rest in that faculty. This favor is
particular to the Dancing-Masters in this Country; and Reason good; for they
have such ample Salaries, The Insolence of the Dancing Masters.
as maintains both their Prodigality, and an Insolence, that were insupportable
in France, where these trifling Fellows do better know themselves, are worse
paid, and less Presumptuous. Nay, so remiss are the Ladies, of their respect
in this instance, that they not only entertain all this; but permit themselves
likewise to be invited, and often honor these impertinent Fantasticks, by
receiving the Ball at their Petty Schools.

When this Ceremony was ended, some of the Gallants fell to other Recreations,
and as far as I understood, were Offering at that Innocent, yet Salt, The
English Bunglers at A R^^ll^ry.
and Pleasant diversion, which in France is called Rallery; but so far were
they from maintaining it within the decencies, and Laws, which both in that,
and our Characters we observe that in a little time, they fell so upon personal
abusing one another, that there was much ado to preserve the Peace, and as I
heard, it was the next Day, the product of a Quarrel, and a Duel.

I did frequently in the Spring, Accompany My Lord N. into a Field, Of Hide
Park.
near the Town, which they call Hide-Park; the place not unplesant, and which
they use, as our Course; but not with that Order, Equipage, and Splendour; there
being an Assembly of such wretched Jades, and Hackney-Coaches, as quite takes
away the resemblance.

The next place to be remembered is the Spring-Garden, Of Spring-Garden.
so called, and in order to the Park, as our Thuilleries is to the Course, the
enclosure not disagreeable, for the solemness of the Grove, the warbling of the
Birds; but the Company Walk in it at such a rate, as you would think all the
Ladies were so many Atalanta's, contending with their Wooers; and my Lord,
there was no appearance, that I should prove the Hippomenes, who could with
very much ado, keep pace with them: But as fast as they run; they stay there so
long, as if they wanted not time to finish the Race; for it is usual here to
find some of the Young Company till midnight; and the Thickets of the Garden
seem to be contrived to all Advantages of Gallantry, after they have been
refreshed with the Collation, which is here seldom omitted, at a certain
Cabaret in the middle of this Paradise; where the forbidden Fruits are certain
trifling Tarts, Neats-Tongues, Salacious-Meats, and bad Rhenish; for which the
Gallants pay sauce, as indeed they do at all such Houses throughout England;
for they think it is a piece of Frugality beneath them, to Bargain, or Account,
for what they Eat in any place, however unreasonably imposed upon; But thus,
those mean Fellows are (as I told your Lordship) enriched; Beggar, and insult
over the Gentlemen. I am assured that this particular Host. Has purchased,
within few Years, 5000 Livers of annual rent; and well he may? at the rates
these Prodigials pay, whereas, in France, a Gentleman esteems it no Diminution
to Manage even these expenses with Reason. But, My Lord, it is now late, and
time to quit this Garden, and to tell you, that I think there is not a more
Illustrious sight in the World, than to meet the Divinities of our Court,
marching up the long Walk in the Thuilleries, where the pace is so stayed and
grave, the encounters so regular and decent; and where those who feed their
Eyes with their Beauties, and their Ears with the Charming Accent of their
Discourse, and Voices, need not those refreshments of the other Senses, finding
them all to be so taken up with these.

I was curious before my return, Where they plead as at Westminster.
and when I had Conquered some difficulties of the Language, and Customs, to
visit their Judicatures, where, besides, that few of their Gownmen, are to be
compared to those of the Robe in our Palais for Elocution, and the talent of
well speaking; so neither do they at all exceed them, in the forms and colors
of their Pleading; Of the Pleading amongst the Lawyers.
but (as before I spoke of their Rallery) supply the defects of the Cause, with
flat, insipid, and grossly abusing one another; a thing to trifling, and
misbecoming the gravity of Courts (where the Lawyers take Liberty to Jest Men's
Estates away, and yet avow their Avarice) that I have much admired at the
temper of the Judges, and their remissness in reforming it: There was a Young
Person, whom at my being there, was very much cried up for his Abilities, and
in whom I did not observe that usual intemperance, which I but now reproved;
and certainly, it springs either for want of those Abilities, which the
Municipal Laws of this Nation (consisting most of them in Customs like our
Normandy, whose Ancient Dialect their Books yet retain) are so little apt to
furnish; or the defect of those advantages, which the more pollished Sciences
afford us, without which, it is impossible to be good Orators, and to maintain
their Discourses without diversion, to that vile nency.

But, what is infinitely agreeable in this Country, Of the Bowling-Greens and
Races.
are the Bowling-Greens, and the Races, which are really such pleasures abroad,
as we have nothing approaching them in France, and which I was extremely
delighted in; but the Verdure of the Country, and delicious Downs, are what
gives them this pre-eminence, and indeed, they are to be valued, and do in m^
esteem, very much commute for the loss of that glorious Planet, which ripens
our Vines in France.

The Horses, and the Dogs, Of the Horses, and Dogs, Parks, etc.
their incomparable Parks, of Fallow-deer, and Laws of Chase, I extremely
approve of; but upon other occasions, all Englishmen ride so fast upon the
Road, that you would swear there were some Enemy in the Ariere; and all the
Coaches in London seem to drive for Mid-Wives.

But what did much more afflict me, is their Ceremony at Table, where every Man
is obliged to sit till all have done Eating, however, their Appetites differ,
and to see the formality of the Voider, They don't know the use of
With-Drawing-Rooms.
which our With-Drawing-Rooms in France are made to prevent, and might so here,
if they knew the use of them, to be, that every Man may rise when he has dined,
without the least indecency, and leave the Servers to their Office.

I have now but a Word to add, and (...) is the tediousness of Visits, which
they ma^^ here so long, that it is a very Tyra^^y, to sit to so little purpose:
If the Persons be Ladies, that are strangers, Woman sometimes Silent.
it is to look upon each other, as if they had never seen any of their own Kind
before, and hand here indeed the Virtue of their Sex is Eminent. For they are
as silent and fixed as Statues; or if they do talk, it is with Censure, and
sufficient confidence: So difficult it is, to Entertain with a grace, or to
observe a Mediocrity.

In sum, My Lord, I found so many particulars, worthy of reproof in all those
Remarks, which I have been able to make, That to render you a veritable account
of England, as it is at present, I must pronounce, with the Poet.

Difficile est Satyram non scribere. And shall defer what I have further to add
till the return of my Lord Ambassador.

FINIS.

