I Do allow the PRINTING and PUBLISHING of this BOOK, Entitled Trials Per
Pais: Or, The Law of England, Concerning Iuries by Nisi Prius.

Fr. Pemberton.

Trials per Pais, OR THE Law of England CONCERNING JURIES BY Nisi Prius, etc.

The Second Edition, Newly Revised, and much enlarged, with an Addition of
Precedents, and Forms of Challenges, Demurrers upon Evidence, Bills of
Exception, Pleas puisne Darrein Continuance, etc.

Very Useful and Necessary for all Lawyers, Attorneys and other Practicers,
especially at the Assizes.

By G. D. of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

Per testes solum, lex ipsa nunquam litem dirimit, quae per Juratam xij.
hominum decidi poterit. Cum sit modus isle ad veritatem eliciendam multo
potior, and efficacior, quam est forma aliquarum aliarum legum orbis.

Fortescue. cap. 21. LONDON, Printed for George Dawes, and are to be Sold by
Matthew Wotton, at the Three Pigeons, against the Inner Temple Gate, in
Fleetstreet, 1685.

TO THE PRACTICERS OF THE LAW.
Gentlemen,
IN the Dedication of Books, such persons should be chosen, whose Studies or
Profession agree with the nature of the Subject. To prove conclusions, in one
science, by the Heterogene Principles of another; To make a Grammarian Patron
to a pecie of the Mathematics; to dedicate a Treatise of Logic to a Master of
Music, or a matter of Practice, to a man of Speculation; would not only be
improper, but absurd. You know that in the whole Practice of the Law, there is
nothing of greater excellency, nor of more frequent use, than Trials by Juries.
In this, our Common Law (and not without just cause) values it self, beyond the
Imperial Laws, before the Canon Law, or any other Laws in the world. And seeing
the hopes and life of all the Process, the force of the judgment, and the
truth, nay the right of the Parties, lie in the Trial; for as one elegantly
says, Qui non probat, at the Trial, dicitur veritate and jure carere, and
indeed the knowledge of all the Law, tends to this: for without victory at the
Trial, to what purpose is the science of the Law? The Judge can give no
sentence, no decision without it, and must give judgment for that side, the
Trial goes; therefore I may well say; it is the chief part of the Practice of
the Law: And if so, to whom should I offer this Treatise, but to you, the
Practicers?

I need say nothing for small Tracts and Treatises: The infinite number of them
in the Civil Law (there being for every Title, a distinct Tract) nay the number
of them in our Law, sufficiently shows their use.

Ringelbergius, in his Book de ratione studii, giving directions what books
Students ought to carry with them, when they change places, and travel from one
to another, tells us, That out of the Volums (by reason of their bigness not
portable) he used to tear out several leafs, and take them with him, in his
journeys, and so he says he had served the works of Pliny, Tully, Plato,
Demosthens, etc. although he had given great prices for them; which justifies
the writing of this Treatise, the subject matter thereof, being of such general
use in all Circuits.

When I read the elaborate books of Farinacius de testibus, and the 3 Exquisite
and Incomparable Volums of Mascardus de probationibus, in the Caesarian, and
Pontifical Laws, (which works were so valued and esteemed, that they were
looked upon as new lights sent from Heaven, by the professors of those Laws:) I
could not but see the defect, and want of such books, in our Law: for surely
they are as necessary in the one as in the other. And although I cannot compare
my weak endeavors, with those excellent and methodical works, theirs being
entire, this only quasi an Abridgement, fitted for use, not for show: Yet until
more learned, and judicious Proficients in our Law, shall undertake the work, I
thought fit to produce mine.

To compare this sort of Trial by Jury, with the Trials of other Laws and
Countries, and declare how much and wherein it excels them all, after Fortescue
de laudibus, etc. and his learned Commentator; would be like the arrogance, of
Limning after Apelles, and requires the room of a Volum, rather than an
Epistle. And considering my own insufficiencies, I shall praise it more by
saying nothing, than all I can: for to say less than a thing deserves, would
be, instead of an Encomium, a disparagement. Therefore I shall content my self
only to say, that Trials in other Laws are by Witnesses only, privately
examined; This, by Witnesses publicly examined and confronted; and by Jury
also, and so consequently the fact is settled, with the greater certainty of
truth, upon which the uprightness of the judgment depends.

It would be well if there were less corruption in the returning of Juries, but
I think it is paralleled, if not exceeded, by that of examining Witnesses
privately, on whose depositions, the Trials in other Laws consist: And so that
must be no objection against the thing. I hope an expedient may be found out to
prevent the corruption in returning Juries, but I believe it never can in the
other.

To say this Trial by Jury is too popular in a Monarchy, would be a good
objection, from a Frenchman, but not of any Englishman, who lives under the
best tempered Monarchy, and the best sort of Government in the World, to which
this manner of Trial is so proper, and well accommodated, that neither the
wisdom of our Ancestors could, nor (I may say) can this present, nor after ages
invent a better.

But as the unskilful Painter, drew a Curtain, before what he could not
express, with his Pencil, so must I vail, with silence, the excellencies of
this Celebrated Trial, which I am not able to delineat.

Gentlemen,

To make an Apology for the style of a Law book, especially of an Epitome,
would be a vain thing, Ornari res ipsa negat contenta doceri; neither shall I
make any Apology for my undertaking this work: if 'twas better performed, yet
Momus would be carping; and if 'twas worse, it would be good enough for him,
who cannot, or will not, do it better: Be it what it will your kind reception
will abundantly satisfy

Your Servant G. Duncombe.

THE PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
THE Philosopher could not see a man unless he heard him speak; Loquere ut
videam. Speech is the Index of the Mind, and the Mind only discriminates the
Man: For, although an Idiot who has but the shape of a man, may with silence
so hide his folly, that strangers to his Manners cannot discern him from a
Sophister; Yet, doubtless, Silence is the greatest Enemy to Learning, the Grave
wherein Oblivion buries the Parts and Knowledge of the bravest spirits.

Wherefore Learned Salust from Historiae facil princeps.
this takes his Exordium; Omnes homines qui sese student praestare caeteris
animalibus, summa open niti decet, ne vitam silentio transeant, veluti pecora:
Those men who would excel Beasts, should labor that their lives might not pass
in such silence, as Beasts do. It seems he deemed, that man little inferior to
a Beast, who acted nothing to prolong his Memory; For this he held to be the
duty of every man, saying, Quo mihi rectius esse videtur, ingenii quam virium
opibus gloriam quaerere; and quoniam vita ipsa, qua fruimur, brevis est,
memoriam nostri quam maxim longam efficere: In my opinion, it is far better, to
acquire Glory by the Riches of Wit, than strength; and because our lives are
short of themselves, we should endeavor by Ingenuity, to eternize their memory.

And to effect this, Nulla dies abeat, Nulla dies sine linea.
quin linea ducta supersit; No day should pass over our heads wherein we should
not act some memorable exploit: Men should not live like Snails, never stirring
out of their houses; but be active (I mean not busybodies in other men's
matters, but) in their own Callings, of which the wise Cato tells us, Every man
should give a reasonable account; And if we believe the famous Seneca, Nihil
est turpius quam grandis natu senex, qui nullum habet vitae suae argumentum,
quo diu se vixisse dicat, praeter aetatem: Nothing is more unworthy, than an
old man, who has nothing to show for his Antiquity, but a Gray-Beard; Whose
soul served only as Salt to keep his body sweet, and is no sooner dead, than
forgotten, long before he is half rotten; yet who is so apt to deride the
Endeavors of other men, as this ancient Ignoramus, whose wrinkles in his face,
worn-out looks, and many years sway more with the vulgar people, than all the
Arguments of Law or Reason? Had Seneca been such a silent Momus, the World
would never have been blessed with his so learned Works. And doubtless writing
Books is needful in no Science more than in the Law; For without Books, how
would the Lawyers do for Arguments at the Bar, or Resolutions at their
Chambers? Whence the Oracle Sir Edward Cook pronounces this, Omnes debere
Juris-prudentiae libris componendis animum adjicere; That all men ought to
addict themselves to the Composing Books of Law; some to the Reporting of the
Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges, who are Lex loquens; and some to the
collecting of these Cases and Resolutions, methodizing, and fitting them for
some particular purpose, as Littleton, Stamford, Fitzherbert, Crumpton,
Perkins, Finch, etc. and indeed, most of the Law Books extant, if not all,
(setting aside the Reports) are nothing else, but Collections out of others.
This I speak, not in Derogation of them, in the least; for as it is equally, if
not more laborious; so it is full as glorious, Judiciously to cull authentic
Cases out of the Volumes of the Law, (where so many are no Law) and rightfully
place them in a particular Treatise, as it is to report the Judgments and
Resolutions from the mouth of the Court; for the Reporter is but the Courts
Secretary, and Cook's Institutes merit as much as his Reports;

And Ash's Tables, Fitsherbert, and Brooks's Abridgement, are as useful as the
Year-Books themselves, of which kind of Collections, one elegantly thus breaks
out, Quo quidem beneficio, haud scio, aut aliud aut legum Candidatis magis
gratum, aut Reipublicae magis commodum, aut divini honoris illustrationi magis
idoneum, vel cogitando quidem consequi, quisquam poterit. Than which benefit I
know not, whether any man can even imagine another, either to Lawyers more
grateful, or to the Commonwealth more profitable, or for the illustration of
Divine honor more fit. For with the least labor, a small price, and little
time, they present you with those Resolutions, and Judgments which lie
scattered in the Voluminous Books of the Law; which would otherwise cost much
time, pains and charges, to find out. The thoughts of which public good, first
gave life to these Endeavors of mine: Not that any one should in the least
imagaine, that I am so guilty of vain Ostentation, as to believe, that my Parts
or Abilities can perform any thing in this kind, like other men: No, Ipse mihi
nunquam Judice me placui. I could never yet please my self with my own labors,
much less are they worthy to please others; haud equidem tali me dignor honor.
However, when I consider* that no man has yet written particularly concerning
this Subject, and of what general use it is, I doubt not, but that this
Treatise will receive a favorable construction from most men, and a plausible
acceptance from others.

The use of it, is, in a manner Epidemical; since men's Lives and Estates The
use of the Book.
are subject to that Trial per Pais, here demonstrated; but in particular, the
Practisers at Law, (especially Circuit-Advocates, Attorneys, Sollicitors,
Clerks, etc.) and all Jurors, (for whose directions it is of singular use) are
chiefly concerned herein. But I will not hang a Bush out, to invite, and
prepossess your Judgments, Vincat Vtilitas. The profit which every ingenious
Reader shall gather out of it, will speak more for it, than the best Eulogical
Preface.

And for my own part, I profess my self to be Philomathes; but not Polymathes.
And notwithstanding the hard-favoured objections, which some men cast upon it,
I really think the study of the Law, to be the most pleasant Study in the
world. And he which delights in the Study of any other Art or Science, must
consequently be delighted with this. For the knowledge of the Law, as Doderidge
says, is most truly styled, Rerum Divinarum humanarumque scientia, and
worthily imputed to be the Science of Sciences; for therein lies hid, the
knowledge of every other Learned Science.

So that he which gives himself to the study of Divinity, may here fill himself
with holy and pious Principles of Divine Laws: For, Lex est sanctio sancta,
jubens honesta, and prohibens contraria; Fortescue, cap. 3.
sanctum etenim oportet, quod esse sanctum definitum: The Law is a holy
Sanction, or Decree, commanding things that be honest, and forbidding the
contraries: Now the thing must needs be holy, which by definition, is
determined to be holy. So that in this respect, says Fortescue, men may well
call Lawyers Sacerdotes, that is, givers, or teachers of holy things. For the
Laws being holy, it follows, that the Ministers, and setters forth of them,
must be givers of holy, things; and so by interpretation, does Sacerdos
signify; and doubtless, he which duly considers those Rules of Theology, which
lie scattered throughout the whole body of the Law, must needs conclude our
Laws to be Commentaries upon the Old and New Testament; and do so much bear the
Image Legis Divinae, that they may well be attributed to the Most High.

The Rules of Grammar, Philosophy natural, Political, Oeconomick, and Moral; as
also the Grounds of Logic, and of other Arts, and Sciences, so much abound in
our Books, that the very reading of the Law, will make a man Master of any of
those Sciences.

And since Rhetoric is Ars ornate dicendi, and consists of those two parts,
Elocution, and Pronunciation; How can we read in our Law Books, those Learned
Arguments, Elegant Speeches, and Judgments pronounced with such Eloquence and
Elegance of words and matter, and not conclude, that Rethorick is the Glory and
Grace of a Lawyer? Though some (not gifted that way) would persuade us, that
the Law has little relation to it.

If any man be delighted in History, let him read the Books of Law, which are
nothing else but Annals and Chronicles of things done and acted from year to
year, in which every Case presents you with a petite History; and if variety of
matter does most delight the Reader, doubtless, the reading of those Cases,
(which differ like men's faces) though like the Stars in number, is the most
pleasant reading in the World.

I thought to have expatiated my self in this Eulogical Commendation of the
Study of the Law; But when I consider the Glory of the thing it self, I think
it but in vain to light the Sun with Candles; and as no Arguments will persuade
one to love against Nature, so he whom the excellency of the Law it self cannot
invite to study it, will never be forced to it with the fist of Logic, or
other persuasion: Wherefore it is now time to expose my self to the Censure of
the Reader, who always judges according to his capacity, or affection; for
which cause, if I were to choose my Reader, I could wish with Caius Lucilius,
Quod ea quae scribo, neque ab indoctissimis, neque a doctissimis legi, quod
alteri nihil intelligerent, alteri plus fortasse, quam ipse de se: That this
Treatise might not be read, of the most Learned, nor of those who are not
learned at all, because these understand nothing, and the others more perhaps
than my self.

However, I put this Request to all, Bracton, l. 1. fol. 1.
Vt si quid superfluum, vel perperam positum, in hoc opere intervenerit, illud
corrigant, and emendent, vel Conniventibus oculis pertranseant; Cum omnia
habere in memoria, and in nullo peccare, divinum sit potius quam humanum: That
if any thing be superfluous, and placed amiss in this Work, That they will
either correct and amend it, or without carping connive at it; since to
remember to do all things right, and nothing amiss, is rather the part of a
God, than Man: wherefore let him which never offended, cast the first stone.

A Summary of the Contents of each Chapter in this Book.
CAP. I. THE Derivation of the word [Jury]. The Definition, Antiquity, and
Excellency of Juries, by way of Preface. p. 1 CAP. II. Of an Issue; and the
diverse sorts of Trials thereof; and when a Trial shall be by a Jury, and when
not: when by the Spiritual Law, When by Certificate, when by Battle, when by
an Almanac, etc. What Issue shall be first Tried per Pais; what shall be tried
by the Court; and what by examination of the Attorney, Sheriff, etc. p. 7 CAP.
III. Of a Venire facias; To whom it shall be directed; when to the Sheriff,
when to the Coroners, when to Esliors, and when to Bailiffs. When well awarded.
etc. p. 35 CAP. IV. What faults in the Venire facias shall vitiate the Trial,
what not; when a Venire facias de novo, shall be awarded; when several Ven.
fac. When the Ven. fac. shall be betwixt the Party, and a stranger to the
Issue. Who may have a Venire facias by Proviso, and when. p. 50 CAP. V. Why the
Venire facias runs to have the Jury appear at Westminster. though the Trial be in the
Country; Of the Writ of Nisi prius, when first given, when grantable, when not,
and in what Writs of the Justices of Nisi prius. Of the Tales, at Common Law,
and by Stat. when the Transcript of the Record of the Nisi prius, differs from
the Roll, whereby the Plaintiff is nonsuited he may have a Distringas de novo.
p. 66 CAP. VI. Of the number of the Jurors, and why the Sheriff returns 24.
though the Venire facias mentions but 12. If he returns more or less, no Error;
and of the number 12. And when the Trial shall be per primer Jurors. And of
Inquests of Office. And when to remain pro defect. Jurator. p. 83 CAP. VII. Who
may be Jurors, who not; who exempted, and of their Quality and Sufficiency. p.
90 CAP. VIII. Concerning the Visne, from what place the Jury shall come, etc.
p. 98 CAP. IX. Challenges. p. 130 CAP. X. Of What things a Jury may inquire,
when of spiritual; when of things done in another County or in another Kingdom;
when of Estopels, and when not; when of a man's intent, etc. p. 173 CAP. XI.
Evidence and Witnesses. p. 181 CAP. XII. The Juries Oath; Why called
Recognitors in an Assise, and Jurors in a Jury. Of the Trial per medietatem
linguae; when to be prayed, and when grantable. Of a Trial betwixt two Aliens,
by all English. Of the Ven. fac. per medietatem linguae, and of Challenges to
such Juries. p. 351 CAP. XIII. The Learning of general Verdicts, especial
Verdicts, privy Verdicts, and Verdicts in open Court; and where the Inquest
shall be taken by Default. Inquests of Office, etc. Arrest of judgment,
Variance betwixt the Nar* and the Verdict, etc. ^ 359 CAP. XIV. How the Jury
ought to demean themselves, whilst they consider of their Verdict; when they
may eat and drink, when not; What misdemeanor of theirs will make the Verdict
void; Evidence given them, when they are gone from the Bar, spoils their
Verdict: For what the Court may fine them, and where the Justices may carry
them in Carts, till they agree of their Verdict. An amercement affered by the
Jury. p. 416 CAP. XV. What punishment the Law has provided for Jurors
offending; as taking reward to give their Verdict. Of Embraceors. Decies
tantum. Attaint: Several fines on Jurors. What Issues they forfeit, and of
Judgment for striking a Juror in Westmin. etc. p. 430

Precedents containing the Forms of Challenges to the Array, etc. And the
Proceedings thereupon. Pleas Puis le Darrein Continuance; Demurrers upon the
Evidence, Bills of Exception, etc. And the Law concerning the same. Very Useful
for all Lawyers and other Attorneys, Practisers especially at the Assizes.
A Form of Challenge to the Array. p. 449 Challenge to the Array, because the
Sheriff is Cousin, etc. p. 450 A Challenge because the Sheriff is Tenant, etc.
ibid. A Precedent of a Challenge for default of Hundredors, which has been
several times made use of at the Assizes. p. 451 The form of a Challenge made
by the Defendant, because the Plaintiff is the Sheriffs Cousin. p. 452 A
Challenge to the Array, because no Knight was returned upon the Jury. p. 453 A
Challenge against the Sheriff for returning the Jury at the Instance, request
and denomination of the Plaintiff. p. 454 A Challenge because that the Town is
within a Hundred, of which the Plaintiff is Lord, and prays a Writ to the next
Hundred. p. 455 Challenge because the Sheriff and two Coroners are Tenants of
the Plaintiff, and a Venire facias awarded to the rest of the Corroners: p. 456
Challenge, where after the last Continuance, the Cousin of the Plaintiff, is
made Sheriff after Issue joined. ibid. Challenge because the Sheriff is of
Council with the Plaintiff and has received Fees, and the Defendant does deny
the Challenge, therefore the Venire facias awarded to the Sheriff
notwithstanding. p. 457 Challenge because the Plaintiff is Brother to the
Sheriff. p. 458 Challenge where the Plaintiff is Sheriff and one of the
Coroners is his Tenant. ibid. Another Challenge to the same purpose. ibid.
Challenge because the Wife of the Plaintiff is Kin to the Sheriffs Wife. p. 459
Challenge because the Plaintiff is the Sheriffs Servant. ibid. Challenge after
the Jury Impannelled, returned and called; because the Pry in aid is Sheriff,
and of the Council of the Plaintiff, and a Distringas Jur. with a december Tales
Coron. awarded. ibid. Challenge because the Plaintiff is one of the Sheriffs of
London, and the Venire facias awarded to the other Sheriff. p. 460 Challenge to
the Deputy Sheriff, because he Impannelled and returned the Jury at the
instance and Denomination of the Plaintiff. p. 461 Challenge by the Kings
Sergeant upon an Indictment of Felony, because the Sheriff returned the Jury of
Life and Death, at the Instance and request and denomination of the Prisoner.
ibid. Challenge by the Kings Sergeant for the King, to some of the Jury for
default of Freehold to the vallue of 40 s. per annum. p. 462 A Precedent of
Challenge to the Array. p. 464 A Precedent of a Plea after the last
Continuance. p. 465 A Precedent of a Demurrer upon the Evidence. p. 469 A Bill
of Exception. p. 470 A Release pleaded, at the Assizes after Issue joined. p.
475 The Death of one of the Defendants pleaded after the Last Continuance. 475
A Baron Challenges the Panel, because no Knight was returned of the same. p.
ibid.

Trials per pais.
CAP. I. The Derivation of the Word [Jury.] The Definition, Antiquity and
Excellency of Juries.
JUrie (Jurata) comes of the French Vid. Cap. 12 Jurie.
word [Jurer, i. e. Jurare.] And signifies in Law, those 12 men who are sworn
Judges in matters of fact, evidenced by witnesses, and debated before them: I
call them Judges, because, as it is the property of the Court, Jus dicere; so
it is in the power of the Jury to determine the fact, upon an Evidence Pro, and
Con; According to those common Adagies, Ad quaestionem Juris respondent
Judices; Ad quaestionem facti respondent Juratores: And as the Judgment of the
Court ought to be guided by the Law; So Vid. cap. 15.
is the Verdict of the Jury, by the Evidence. They of the Jury are called
Juratores Jurors, a Jurando, as in ancient Laws Sacramentales a Sacramento
praestando.

I need not here divide and show the differences The Antiquity and excellency
of Juries.
of Juries, nor the several sorts, they being so well known, viz. The Grand
Jury, or great Inquest, and petty Jury, or Jury of Life and Death, in Criminal
causes, and in Civil Causes, the Assise. Jury. Inquest of Office: By some
called Inquest of Jury, and Inquest of Office. Something concerning each of
these, will incidently be spoken of in what follows. As to the excellency of
Juries, it appears from their Antiquity.

Sr. Hen. Spelman, verb. [Inquestio] says, Trial by Juries was used in England,
Normannis no^d^m ingressis, Leg. Ed. Confess. Ca. 38 postea inquisisset
Justitia, i. e. [Justitiarus] per Lagamannos, i. e. [legales homines] and per
meliores homines de Burgo, vel de Villa, vel de Hundredo, ubi mansisset Emptor,
etc.

For as to Trial by 12 men, though Mr. Daniel and Poyldor Virgil deny it. to be
older than the Conquest, and the latter says there is no Religion in it, but in
the number; yet he stands fairly Corrected, by that Excellent and learned
Antiquary, Mr. Camden. p. 1^3. who says, Whereas Polydor Virgil writes that
William the Conqueror first brought in the Trial by 12. men, there is nothing
more untrue; For it is most certain and apparent by the Laws of Etheldred, that
it was in use many years before. etc. And whereas Lamb. verb. [Centuria] says,
In singulis Centuriis Comitia sunto, a^que liberae Conditionis viri duodeni,
atate superiores, una cum praeposito Sacra tenentes jurento, se adeo virum
aliquem innocentem haud damnaturos, sontemve absoluturos, he referrs to the
Laws of Etheldred, cap. 4. cited by the learned Spelman verb. [Jurata.]

And to the same does my Lord Coke referr, Com. super Lit. 155. and Preface to
his 3. and 8. Report. And as to the Religion in the number of 12. my Lord Coke
gives instances ubi supra, and Sir Henry Spelman, in verb. [Jurata] supra,
makes addition thereto.

So that I may truly say, Trials by Juries have been used in this Nation, time
out of mind, and were contemporary and coeval with the first Civil Government
thereof and Administration of Justice; for amongst the first Inhabitants, the
Britains, the Freeholders were used in all Trials.

And Trial by Juries was (as you see practiced by the Saxons) continued by the
Normans, and confirmed by Magna Charta. And was ever so esteemed and prised in
this Island, that no Conquest, no change of Government ever prevailed to alter
it.

It Is true, Trials by Juries before the time of H. 2. were not so frequent,
be-because Sadae or Purgationes, Ordalia, Trials by hot Iron, hot Water, cold
Water, Duels, and other Superstitious ways, were then in use; but Trials by
Juries were here in the Saxons time, and were found here, and not brought in by
Willi^m the Conqueror from Normandy: Nay, rather settled by Edw. the Confessor
in Normandy, where he a long time was, and taught many Laws, as you may see in
the book of the Customs of Normandy.

Glanvil lib. 2. cap. 7. says, Ex aequitate autem maxima prodita est legalis
ista instit^tio, speaking of these Trials in opposition to Duels, etc.

Their general use (being the only Tryers The use of Juries.
of Chooses in fair, almost in all Courts throughout England) speaks them a
public good. To be tried by ones Peers is the greatest privilege a Subject
can wish for, and so excellent is the constitution of the Government of this
Kingdom, that no Subject shall be tried but by his Peers. The Lords by their's,
The Commons by their s, which is the Fortress and Bulwark of their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates; and if the good of the Subject be the good of the King,
as most certainly it is, then those are enemies to the good of the King and
State, who attempt to alter or invade this Fundamental Principle, in the
administration of the Justice of this Realm, by which the Kings Prerogative has
flourished, and the just liberties of the people have been secured so many Ages.

And what answer shall I make to the Princes, vehementer admiror, videlicet,
Wherefore are not Juries used in other Countries, if they are so good? but that
of Fortescue, the Portescue ca. 29.
Learned, who best could tell, scil. That other Countries can scarce produce
one Jury, so well accomplished with Wealth and Ingeny, as one County, nay, one
Hundred, can in England.

But not to dwell in the Porch, I will address my self to the Gravity of the
Law, where you must not so much expect the flash of Rhetoric, as the light of
Reason; No, the Law knows best how to express Things not words most regarded in
the Law.
her self, in her own terms, wherefore all other Sciences must learn, with
reverence, to keep their distance, And (as the Golden Finch sings) be glad to
have their Finch. c. 3.
sparks raked up in her Ashes.

And since an Issue is previous, and the matter of a Trial, I shall first give
you the description thereof, and then touch upon the several Trials allowed by
the Law, for discussion of the truth.

CAP. II. Of an Issue, and the diverse sorts of Trials thereof: and when a Trial
shall be by a Jury, and when not; when by Certificate, when by the Spiritual
Law, when by Battle, and when by an Almanac; what Issue shall be first tried,
per Pais; what shall be tried by the Court; and what by Examination of the
Attorney, Sheriff, etc.
ISsue, exitus, says Cook, is a single, 1. Inst. fo. 126. Omnia unum aliquem
sortiuntur exitum; vel per patriam, vel per Judices terminandum. Finch. Epistle.
certain and material point, issuing out of the Allegations, and Pleas, of the
Plaintiff and Defendant, consisting regularly upon an Affirmative and Negative,
to be tried by Twelve men; and it is twofold, scil. either special, as where
the special matter is pleaded; or general, as in Trespass, Not guilty: In
Assise, null tort, null disseisin, etc. And as an Issue natural comes of two
several persons, so an Issue legal, issues out of two several Allegations of
adverse parties.

And to give you likewise his definition of Trials. Note, that upon a demurrer
to part, and Issue to part, though it is the best way to give Judgment upon the
quaestio juris first, yet the Court may try the quaestio facti first, at their
discretion. 1 Inst. 72. 125. Lach. 4. Rolls. tit. Trials. 626. 723.
Trial, It is to find out, by due examination, the truth of the point in Issue
or question between the parties, whereupon Judgment may be given; And as the
question between the parties is twofold, so is the Trial thereof; For either it
is quaestio Juris, (and that shall be tried by the Judges, either upon a
demurrer, Special Verdict or Exception: For, Cuilibet in sua art perito est
credendum, and quod quisque noverit, in hoc se exerceat.) Or it is quaestio
facti, And the trial of the fact is in diverse sorts; First, chiefly, and most
commonly, by a Jury of Twelve men, (of which kind of trial, my intention is
principally to treat in this Book.)

For by Twelve men are matters of Proceedings in Civil Causes.
fact (for the most part) tried with us in England, in Causes both Criminal and
Civil: in Causes Civil, after both Parties have said what they can, one against
another, in Pleading, if there arise a question about any matter of fact, it is
referred to Twelve indifferent men, to be Impanelled by the Sheriff, and as
they bring in their Verdict, so Judgment passes. And this the Judge is to
declare as the Law is upon the fact found: For the Judge says, the Jury finds
thus, and then the Law is thus, and so we judge. For the Law arises upon the
fact.

For Criminal Causes, the course is this: Proceedings in Criminal Causes.
At the King's Bench for Midds. and at the great and general Assizes, and at the
general Sessions of the Peace, there is one Jury called the Grand Jury, which
consists commonly of 24 men substantial men, out of every Hundred with in the
County returned by the Sheriff, and they are to consider of all Bills of
Indictment preferred to them, which they either approve of by writing Billa
Vera, or disapprove by writing upon them Ignoramus; and those which they
approve of are to be tried by another Jury called the Petit-Jury. Or the
Grand Jury may charge any person, upon their own Presentment, which will be of
the force of an Indictment, and the party charged may Traverse the offense, and
bring it to be tried by a Petit Jury.

Some lesser matters in these Courts are proceeded upon without a Jury, and
some things are removed by Certiorari into higher Courts, and then must be
tried there; and that thing to which there is a Traverse put in, must be tried
and ended by a Petit Jury, which (for the most part) in all Civil and Criminal
Causes are but Twelve men, which ought to be Freemen, not Villains or Aliens,
and lawful men, not Outlawed, and also men of worth and honesty.

But because it is necessary to be known, that there are many ways allowed by
the Common Law, to try matters of fact, besides this by Juries, I will here
repeat some of them; And for this, first hear the Oracle, who tells you, that
he had read of six 1 Inst. fol. 74.
kinds of Certificates, allowed for Trials, by the Common Law.

1. The doing of service by him that Trials by Certificate.
holds by Escuage in Scotland, was to be tried by the Kings Marshal of his
Army, Per son Certificat en escript south son seal que serra mis a les
Justices, says Littleton.

2. If it be alleged in avoydance of an Outlawry, that the Defendant was in
prison at Bordeaux, in the service of the Mayor of Bordeaux, It shall be tried
by the Certificate of the Mayor of Bordeaux. Note this was when Bordeaux was
partel of the dominions of the King of England. Rolls tit. Trial fo. 583.

3. For matters within the Realm, the Custom of London shall be Certified by
the Mayor and Aldermen, by the mouth of the Recorder. vide apres 17.

4. By the Certificate of the Sheriff, upon a Writ to him directed, in case of
Privilege, if one be a Citizen or Foreigner.

5. Trial of Records by Certificate of the Judges, in whose Custody they are by
Law. All these be in temporal Causes.

6. In Causes Ecclesiastical, as Loyalty of Marriage, general Bastardy,
Excommengement, profession; These and the like are regularly to be tried by the
Certificate of the Ordinary. vide apres 16.

If the Def. claim his privilege as a Scholar of the University of Oxon, of
such a College, or Hall: This shall not be tried by Certificat, but per pais.
Rolls tit. Trial. 583.

Concerning Certificates of Spiritual persons, vide Rolls ibidem. 591, 592.

7. A Record shall be tried by the Record it Records.
self, and not per pais. But matter of fact concerning a Record is tryable by a
Jury, as whether a plaint, etc. was levied according to the Custom; and non
prosecutus est ullum breve, is tryable by the Country. Mixed with fact.
Hob. 244. Hutt. 20. So if a Statute has two Seals, or but one, 1 Leon. 229. 2
Cro. 375. 1 Inst. 125. b. so in a per quae servitia, if the Tenant say he held
not of the Conusor Jour del note levy, shall be tried per pais. In Escape upon
a Cepi returned ne unques in son guard, shall be tried per Record, but upon
Rolls tit. Trial. 574.
a Capias not returned, the prisal shall be tried per pais. So shall an action
brought by Covin, for the Covin is not of Record. In a scire facias per Roy to
have execution of a Judgment in a Quare impedit, if the Def. say that after the
Recovery the King presented, and issint Judgment execute, and the issue be
whether the King presented per cause del Judgment, or of an avoydance after
the death of J. S. who was presented by a stranger after the avoidance, upon
which the King had Judgment; This shall be tried per pais. And Why there needs
no visne, where Letters Patents were made; otherwise in pleading Deeds. 4 Rep.
71.
for this Reason, in pleading of Letters Patents, the place need not be
alleged, where the Letters Patents were made, because the D^fendant cannot
plead null tiel Record, but must plead, non concessit, and then the Jury shall
come from the place where the Lands lie. Vide li. 6. fo. 15. 1 Inst. 117. 260.
Plo. Com 231. But upon a Non est factum pleaded to a Deed, there must be a
place alleged where the Deed was made, because (though the Deed, as to the
matter of Law, be tryable by the Court, yet) the sealing and delivery thereof,
Dee^.
and other matter of fact, must be tried by the Jury; so that in this case of a
Deed, there is a Trial per Pais, and by the Court. 1 Inst. fol. 35. vide apres*
18.

The issue upon an Indictment or acquittal What issues shall be tried per
Record.
upon this shall be tried by the Record. So shall the allowance of a Protection
in Bank. The imprisonment upon the execution, and not for other cause, in
escape. The justification of an imprisonment, because he is a Justice of Peace.
A Statute-Merchant, Count or not Count, Baron of the Parliament, or Vicount or
not. Whether a place be within the Ligeance of the King of England, or in
Scotland. A Fine sur release, Rendering his body in discharge of his Bail,
shall be tried by the Record. Rolls tit. Trial 574.

But in escape against the Mayor of Astaple What per Pais
for suffering J. S. in execution upon a Statute Staple to go at large, if the
Defendant say he was not in Prison upon the execution, but upon a Plaint there,
this shall be tried per pais and not per Record, because 'twould be
unreasonable that the Defendant should certify a Record, where he himself was
concerned. ibid. The time of inrolliing Letters Patents shall be tried per
pais. Co. Lib. 4. 71. 9 H. 7. 2.

Disseisin of an Office in any Court, or Office Raseing a Record.
rasing a Record in any Court, by the Filizers and Attorneys of the Court.

8. A Peer of the Realm, i. e. a Lord of Peers.
the Parliament, shall upon an Indictment of Treason, or Felony, misprision of
Treason, and misprision of Felony, be tried by his Peers without Oath, 1 H. 4.
2. But in an Appeal at the Suit of the Party, he shall be tried per probos and
legales homines Juratores. 10 E. 4. 6. etc. because that is not the Kings Suit,
but the Parties. Vide li. 9. 31. Le case del Abbot de Strata Mercella. And in a
Praemunire, his Trial shall be per pais. 12 Bep. 93. Lamb. In^t. 520. 3. Inst.
30.
Bolstr. 1. part 198. Dutchesses, Countesses, or Baronesses, although married,
shall be tried, as Peers of the Realm are, but so shall not Bishops and Abbots.
Stam. 153. 20 H. 6. 9. 2. Inst. 48, 49, 50. 156. b. 294.

9. The Customs and usages of every Court shall be tried by the Judges of the
Customs of Courts, etc. tried by the Judges.
same Court, if they are pleaded in the same Court, ib. and many other things
are tried by the Judges, as the reasonableness of a fine of an offender or upon
surrender of a Copyhold Estate; and so it is of Customs, services, and also
of the time that a Tenant at will shall have to carry away his Goods: And these
Cases come under the Rule, which makes matter of Law to be tried by the Judges;
Vide 1 Inst. fol. 56. And in some Cases matter of fact shall be tried by the
Judges, as if the Plaintiff appear by Attorney in Court, and then the Defendant
pleads that the Plaintiff is dead; If one appears, and says, that he is the
Plaintiff, whether he is, or not, shall be tried by Inspection.
the Judges, li. 9. 30. So the nonage of an Infant, generally by inspection of
the Court. But in many Cases, Infancy shall be tried per Pais, as if an Infant
appear by Attorney, v. Bulst. 1 part 131. Rolls tit. Trials 573.
in Error, this shall be tried per Pais, li. 9. 31. and so it is in an Aetate
probanda.

Maihim, in an Appeal of Maihim the Maihim.
Court may adjudge this upon the view, at the prayer of the Defendant, and this
Trial is peremptory to the Parties, by a Jury of Surgeons. Vide Rolls tit.
Trial 578.

Maihim may be tried again by the Court, by inspection for increase of Damages
but then these things are to be considered, First, it must be a Maihim, and not
a bare wounding. Secondly, The Maihim must be ascertained in the declaration,
so as that it Maihim.
may appear that the Maihim inspected, and the Maihim in the declaration be all
one, as was resolved Mich. 21 Car. 2. B. R. in the Case of Badwel and Burford,
the principal Case of which was, that the Defendant whipped the Plaintiffs
Horse, which made him throw her, and another Horse trod on her, and maimed her
hand, and adjudged no increase of Damages in that Case, being a Consequential,
and not a direct Maihim.

Nonage in a Writ of Error to reverse a Inspection.
Judgment or a fine of the Tenant by resceit, of one vouched come deins age,
and issint pray le paroll a demurrer, Nonage sur aid prayer, in Appeal, Audita
querela, to avoid a Statute Account, and in all actions where it is prayed that
the paroll demurroit, Nonage shall be tried per Inspection. But in account
against one of full age, if he plead Nonage when he was Bailey, this cannot be
tried by inspection. Rolls tit. Trial 572. how this Trial by inspection shall
be, vide Rolls ibid. at large.

In all Cases where the matter may be tried by inspection, examination or
discretion of the Justices, if they doubt the matter, they may refuse to try
this, and compel the Parties to a Trial per pais, or other proofs 21 H. 7. 40.
per touts Justices.

10. There are many Trials allowed by Trials by Witnesses and proofs.
the Common Law, by Witnesses only, without a Jury, as of the life and death of
the Husband in Dower, so the proof of a Summons, or the Challenge of a Juror,
must be tried by Witnesses; and regularly, the proof ought to be by two or
three Witnesses, 1 Inst. 6. and diverse other things v. 4. Inst. 278.
must be tried by examination of the parties and Witnesses, as the Trial by
Wager of Law, etc. Finch 423.

Nonage was anciently tried by the Verdict Glanvil lib. 13. cap. 18.
of Eight men, but now by inspection, and Fullage by Twelve men.

In an Appeal by a Feme of the death of Appeal.
her Husband, if the Defendant say that the Baron is alive in another County,
or generally, that he is alive, this shall be tried per proofs. 41 Assise 5.
Vide Rolls tit. Trial 577. what shall be tried by proofs in an Assise, and what
not.

In a Writ of Annuity if the Defendant Annity.
say the Party is dead in Britain, this shall be tried per proofs. 26 E. 3. 70.

11. Duke or no Duke, Earl or no Dukes, etc.
Earl, Baron or no Baron, shall be tried by the Kings Writ. lib. 5. 35. lib. 6.
53. But Duchess or no Duchess, etc. by marriage, shall be tried per pais,
because the marriage is matter of fact.

12. In a Plea del alien nee, the League League.
between the King, and the Sovereign of the Alien, shall be tried by the Record
of the Chancery, for every League is of Record. lib. 9. 32.

13. If a Manor be ancient demesne, or Manor.
not, it shall be tried by the Book of Doomesday, which is in the Exchequer.
But whether certain Acres be parcel of such a Manor, or no, it shall be tried
by the Country. ib.

14. The proceedings of a Court, which Courts not of Record.
is not of Record (as the County Court, the Hundred Court, the Court Baron,
etc.) shall be tried by the Country, and not by the Rolls of the Court, because
they are no Record. ib. Co. Lit. 117. b.

The Privileges and Liberties of Courts By Charters and Records.
of Record, Cities, and Boroughs must be tried by their Charters and Records.

15. Whether the Ordinary committed Wills and Administration.
Administration to the Plaintiff, or whether the Testament was proved before
the Ordinary, or whether such a Will be the Will of the Party, or whether he
dyed intestate, or not? In all these Cases, the Trial shall be per pais,
because probate of Wills, and constituting Administrators, did not belong to
Ecclesiastical Judges originally, but were given to them of late. But the trial
thereof is left to the Common Law, and was not given to them. lib. 9. 32. 40.

An Executor brings an Action of Debt, the Defendant pleads that the Testator
never made him Executor, if the Plaintiff gives in evidence the Probate of the
Will, the Defendant shall only give evidence in Dis-affirmance of the
Plaintiffs Probate, which is matter of Fact; but as to matter of Law the Court
gives credit thereto, as where another Will was made, for there the parties
might have appealed, but if the Seal be Counterfeit, or the Probate forged, its
Tryable per Jury, Adj. Pasch. 20. Car. 2. B. R. Noell and Wells. v. Wentworth's
Executor. 69.

The Trial of all Criminal matters is Criminal matters.
by the Country, and the party accused cannot be denied it, unless it be his
own fault, as where he is mute, and will not put himself upon his Country, in
due time, for then without further trial Judgment de pain foit and dure is
passed by the Judges upon him, Stamf. Pl. Coron. 150.

16. In an action upon the Case for calling Plo. Com. 267. Special Bastardy.
one Bastard, the Defendant justified that the Plaintiff was a Bastard; And it
was awarded that this should be tried per pais, and not by the Ordinary, Hob.
179. Devant. 6. And so a Plea that the Plaintiff was born at such a place
before marriage, this is special Bastardy, and shall be tried per pais. Plo.
14. Dyer 89. vide hic cap. 22.

17. When an issue is taken, whether a Customs of London.
Custom or no Custom in London, If the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens be
parties, or interessed in the Action, This Custom shall be tried by a Jury,
and not by the Certificate of the Mayor and Aldermen, by the Recorder. Hob. 85.
Day and Savadges Case. Devant. 3. Styles 137. Moor 871. vide apres tit. Visne.
Rolls tit. Trial 579, 580.

The Custom of London shall be certified by the Mayor and Aldermen, by the
mouth of the Recorder. Co. Lit. 74.

In an information upon the Statute 5 Eliz. for using a Trade, to which the
Defendant was not bound Apprentice, If the Defendant plead a Custom of the
City, that he who is free of one Trade, may use any other; This shall be tried
by the mouth of the Recorder.

Note this difference, He that is free of one Manual Trade cannot use another
Manuel Trade: but it is otherwise of those Trades which are not Manual. In
such, one that is free of one, may use another by the Custom.

Liberties claimed by Custom in London, the Custom of making Indentures of
Apprenticeship void, if not Enrolled within and year, The Custom to devise
Lands, Foreign Attachment, etc. shall he tried by the mouth of the Recorder.
But the Issue whether there be a Market every day of the week in London shall
be tried per pais, because the issue is not upon the Custom. Rolls tit.
Trials 580. vide hic cap. 8.

18. A matter of Record being mixed with Matter of Record, mixed with matter of
Fact.
a matter of fact, shall be tried per pais, and not by the Record. Hob. 244.
Peter and Staffords Case. Devant. 7.

19. In Writs of Right, and Appeals Trials by Battle.
that touch life, Trial may be by Battle, or by Jury, at the Defendants choice;
The Battle, in a Writ of Right, must be by Writ of Right.
Champions, (who must be Freemen.) But in an Appeal, it must be in proper
person. The Champions, in a Writ of Right are not bound to fight longer than
until the Stars appear; and if the Champion of the Tenant can defend himself
until then, the Tenant shall prevail: The Judges of the Court of Common Pleas,
are Judges of the Battle, in a Writ of Right: and the Judges of the Kings Bench
in an Appeal of Felony. It seems they seldom or never killed one another in
this trial of Battle, for their Weapons were but Batoons, and he that was
vanquished, was presently upon Proclamation made to acknowledge his fault, in
the Audience of the people, or else to cry Cravent in the name of Recreantise,
etc. and upon this, Judgment was to be given, and after this the Recreant
should amittere liberam legem, that is, should become infamous, etc. 2
Institutes 247. Finch. 421. lib. 9. 31. Mirror of Justice 161, 162, etc. 1
Inst. 294.

Glanvil says, the trial by Grand Assise Grand Assise.
came by the Clemency of the Prince. Est autem (says he) Magna Assiza Regale
quoddam beneficium, Clementia Principis, de consilio Procerum populis indultum.

For the Trial of Treason, Murder, and Felony as well upon Appeals, as upon
Indictments, see Stamford's Pleas of the Crown.

By Glanvil cap. 1. lib. 14. it appears the trial of these Crimes by the old
Law, was this; If there were no direct proof, nor accuser, or if there was any
accuser, or direct proof, yet if the party denied the same, then the trial was
by Wager of Battle, if the party accused was not 60 years old, and of sound
Limbs; but if he was older, or not sound, then he Per judicium Dei.
was to be tried per judicium Dei, namely, per calidum ferrum vel aquam, that
is, if he was a Freeholder, he was to run bare foot, and bare legged over a row
of hot Iron Bars, and if he passed three times without stop or fall, he was
acquitted. And if he was a meaner person, called Rusticus, he was to run
through vessels filled with scalding water.

20. In a Writ of Disceit, upon a Recovery Recovery by default. Summoners
pernors, veiors.
by default, the Trial shall be, if the Judgment was given upon the Petit Cape,
by the Summoners, if upon the Grand Cape, by the Summoners pernors, or veiors,
and not per pais; So if a Recovery by default in a real Action be pleaded, to
which the other says, Nient comprise, this shall Nient Comprise.
not be tried per pais, but by the Summoners and Veiors. lib. 9. 32.

En Assise if the issue be, whether the Land was extended in an Elegit, etc.
This shall be tried by the extendors joined with the Assise. 31. Ass. 6. vide
Rolls tit. Trial 581, 582.

Of Trials per L'escheator, per Examination, vide ib.

In an Appeal, if the Exigent be awarded, Escheator Sheriff.
and the party pray a Writ to inquire of the goods and Chattles, and to seize
them, this may be awarded to the Escheator, or Sheriff at the Election of the
Court. 41. Ass. 13. vide hic cap. 24, 27.

21. In debt upon a simple Contract, Detinue, Wager of Law.
etc. The trial may be by Wager of Law, or per pais, at the Defendants
Election. But when the Defendant wageth his Law, he ought to bring with him
Eleven of his Neighbors, who will avow upon their Oath, that in their
Consciences he says true, so as he himself must be sworn de fidelitate, and
the Eleven de credulitate. Ib. Finch 423. and 1 Inst. 295. you may read
excellent Learning concerning this Trial.

22. If Profession be denied, it shall be Profession.
tried by the Court Christian; But if the time of the Profession be in issue,
this shall be tried by the Country. lib. 4. 71. So though an Inrollment, or
other matter of Inrollment.
Record, cannot be tried per pais, yet the time when the Inrollment was made,
may be tried per pais. So whether the party Appearance.
appeared in such a Court, or on such a day, etc. shall be tried per pais. Cro.
3. part. 13. So whether one was Sheriff Sheriff. Admission, etc. Plenarty.
such a day or not. Cro. 1. part. 421. Admission, Institution, Plenarty, and
Ability of the Parson, shall be tried by the Bishop. But Induction shall be
tried by the Country, and so shall Avoydance by resignation. Dyer 229. Moor 61.
And void, or not void shall be tried per pais, 1 Inst. 344. And Plenarty, if
the Clerk be dead, Mirror of Justice 324. li. 6. 49. The cause of refusal of a
Clerk by the Bishop, shall by tried by the Metropolitan^, if the Clerk be
living; but per pais, if he be dead. l. 5. 58.

Ability shall be tried by the Ordinary, if Per spiritual Law. Vide hic cap. 16.
the Clerk be alive, but if dead, then per pais. Institution, resignation, full
or not full; Profess^on, unless alleged in a Stranger. Prior removeable at
will, or perpetual general Bastardy, the Right of Espousals, Divorce, etc.
shall be tried by the Bishops: but in many cases, these matters being mixed
with other circumstances, shall be tried per pais.

As if the Church be void by Resignation, Per pais. For although Institution,
resignation, etc. are Spiritual, yet avoidance, induction etc. are notorious to
the Country.
or void or not void, Induction, Institution and Induction together, because
the Common Law shall be preferred, Prior or not Prior.

Bastardy alleged in a stranger to the Writ, or in one dead, or Abatement of
the Writ. Whether a feme, be a feme covert in possession, etc. in trespass by
Baron and feme, Nient Son feme shall be tried per pais. And see in Rolls tit.
Trial 584. etc. Many cases where Bastardy, Marriage, etc. shall be tried per
ley spiritual, or per pais. The time etc. of Consecration of a Bishop, and of
other spiritual matters, shall be tried per pais. By what spiritual person the
trial shall be, and for what cause. vide ib.

23. An Idiot, found so from his Nativity Ideoty.
by Office, may come in person in the Chancery, before the Chancellor, and pray
that before him, and such Justices or Sages of the Law, which he shall call to
him (who are called the Council of the King), he may be examined, whether he be
an Idiot, or no; or by his friends he may sue a Writ out of Chancery,
retornable there, to bring him into the Chancery. Ibidem Coram nobis, and
concilio nostro examinand. lib. 9. 31.

24. If it be in question, whether the Sheriff.
Sheriff made such a retorn or not, It shall be tried by the Sheriff: If
whether the Undersheriff made such a Retorn or not, it shall be tried by the
Undersheriff; If Retorn.
the question be, whether such a one be Sheriff or not, he is made by Letters
Patents of Record, and therefore it shall be tried by the Record. ib. Cro. 1.
part. 421.

25. If an Approver say, that he Commenced Dures.
his Appeal before the Coroner per dures, this shall be tried by the Record of
the Coroner; and if it be found that he did it without dures, he shall be
hanged, ib. Corone br. 75.

26. The Trial, whether a Statute showed Statute.
before, be the true Statute or not, shall be by the examination of the Mayor,
and Clerk of the Statutes, which took the Statute, and not per pais, ib.
Whether a Statute has two Seals or not, shall be tried per pais, Leon. part.
228, 229.

27. In Assise the Tenant said, that the Escheator.
Lands were taken into the Kings hands, this shall be tried by the Examination
of the Escheator.

28. If one in avoidance of an Out 'awry, Certificate.
allege that he was in Prison at Bordeaux, ultra mare in servitio Majoris de
Bordeaux, this shall be tried by the Mayor's Certificate; and in such like
Cases, other Trials shall be by the Certificate of the Marshal of the Messenger.
Host, and by the Captain of Calice, and also by Messenger, of a thing done
beyond Sea. Ib.

29. At the Petit Cape, the Tenant said Petit Cape.
that he was imprisoned 3. days before the default, and 3. days after, this
shall be tried by the Examination of the Attorney; Nient Attach. per 15. Jours
in Assize shall Bayley.
not be tried per pais, but by examination of the Bayley. ib.

30. It seems an Almanac is so infallible, Almanac.
that it has countervailed the Verdict of a Jury. For in Error of a Judgment
given in Lynne, the Error assigned was, that the Judgment was given at a Court
held there on the 16th day of February, 26 Eliz. and that this day was Sunday,
and it was so found by Examination of the Almanacks of that year: upon which it
was ruled, that this Examination was a sufficient Trial, and that a Trial per
pais, was not necessary, although it were an Error in Fact; and so the Judgment
was reversed. Cro. 3. part. so. 227. 1 Leon. 242. the same Case, and there it
was said, it was twice so ruled before.

31. In ancient times there was a trial in Criminal Causes called Ordalium, for
Orde al.
upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Defendant might put himself upon God and the
Country (as is the use at this day) or else upon God only; and then if he was a
Freeman, he was to be tried per ignem, that is, he was to pass over Novem
vemeres ignitos nudis pedibus, and if he was not hurt by this, then he was to
be acquitted, otherwise condemned: and this was called Judicium Dei; But if he
was a slave, then his trial was to be per aquam, and that diverse ways, which
all appear in Lambard, verbo Ordalium. From which kind of trial, I presume we
still retain this expression of an innocent person, That he need not fear fire
or water: this manner of trial was first prohibited by the Canons, then by
Parliament: The trial by Battle is likewise prohibited by Battle.
the Canons; but not by Parliament, as you may read in the ninth Report, fo.
32. and in the authorities there cited, which I therefore omit to recite here,
(though I have the Books by me) and so in this whole Treatise, where I refer
you to a Book, I shall not set down the authorities cited in that Book, which
will avoid prolixity.

32. When the matter alleged, extends Which Trial shall be first.
to a place at the Common Law, and a place within a Franchise, it shall be
tried at the Common Law. 1 Inst. 125. 4. Inst. 221.

In what Cases a Trial in one issue shall Trial in one issue binds in another.
bind the same party in another issue, upon the same matter.

In Debt against two per several Precipes, if one plead a release, and they are
at issue upon the Deed, and the other plead the same issue, if it be found the
Deed of the Plaintiff in the former issue, this shall bind him in the second
issue, 12 H. 4. 8.

In trespass if the Defendant Plead villenage in the Plaintiff, if this be
found against the Defendant, this shall bind him in the same issue, in another
action in the same Court betwixt the same parties. 44. Ass. 5.

If a man be found guilty of a Conspiracy upon an Indictment at the Kings suit,
this shall not bind in a Writ of conspiracy at the suit of the Party, but he
may plead not guilty. 27. Ass. 13.

If a man upon an Indictment of extortion confess it, and put himself in the
Kings grace and makes fine, etc. this shall bind him, and he shall not plead
not guilty to the suit of the party, for a confession is stronger than a
Verdict. 27. Ass. 57. per Sharde. vide Rolls tit. Trial 625.

He which is not party to the issue nor In what Cases trial against one shall
be against others.
can have attaint, or challenge the Inquest, shall not be bound by the Trial.
11. H. 4. 30.

And therefore in Trespass against two, and one pleads a Release, and the other
justifies as his Servant: If the issue be found against the Master, it shall
not conclude the Servant. 11 H. 4. 30. Rolls ib. 625.

One shall not be compelled to try a traverse At what time the Trial shall be.
the same Sessions he makes it, for a man shall have time to make his defense,
and is not supposed to be ready to answer sudden objections, and for this
reason many Judgments upon Indictments have been reversed.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer, nor Justices of Peace cannot inquire and
determine the same day. But Justices of Gaol Delivery, and Justices in Air may.

Justices of Peace cannot proceed to the delivery of a person indicted of
Felony before them, the same day he is arraigned. 22 E. 4. Coron. 44. Declared
by all the Justices of England, to be observed as a Law.

In an Indictment in B. R. or in the same County and removed thither, the
Defendant may be arraigned and tried the same day. For the Kings Bench is a
Court of Air for all Offenses in that County. Otherwise of an Indictment
removed out of another County. Vide Rolls tit. Trial 626. many Cases de ceo.

33. All matters done out of the Realm of Marshal Affairs.
England, concerning War, Combat or Deeds of Arms, shall be tried and termined
before the Constable and Marshall of England, before whom the Trial is by
Witnesses, or Witnesses or Combat.
by Combat, and their proceeding is according to the Civil Law, and not by the
Oath of Twelve men, 1 Inst. 74. 261. Wherefore if the Kings Subject be killed
by another of his Subjects in any Foreign Country, the Wife or Heir of the
Dead, may have an Appeal before the Constable and Marshall, who sentence upon
the testimony of Witnesses or Combat. ib. So if a man be wounded in France, and
dye thereof in England. ib. 4. Inst. 140.

It is worthy our observation, to take What Issue shall be first tried.
notice when there are several issues, which of them shall be first tried; And
for this you have already heard, that where issue is joined for part, and a
Demurrer for the Residue, the Court may direct the Trial of the Issue, or judge
the demurrer first, at their Latch. 4.
pleasure, though by the opinion of Dodrige, It is the best way to give
Judgment upon the Demurrer first, because when the issue comes afterward to be
tried, the Jury may assess Damages.
damages for the whole.

A Scire facias was brought on a Recognisance in Chancery, the Terre-tenants
pleaded several Pleas, the Plaintiff demurred to one, and took issue on the
other, the Record was sent into B. R. to try the issue, and it was tried, and
Verdict pro Plaintiff, the demurrer not being argued, and it was adjudged per
R. B. that Judgment ought to be given on both by that Court, Jeffreyson and
D^wson's Case Hill. 21, 22 Car. 2. B. R. vide for these things 1. Roll. abr.
534, 535. Roll. rep. 287. and in the principal Case, 4 Inst. 80. was denied to
be Law.

An Immaterial issue joined, which will Immaterial issue.
not bring the matter in question to be tried, is not helped after Verdict by
the Statute of Jeofailes, but there must be a Repleader; because this is matter
of substance; for if there were no issue, there could be no Verdict, and so it
is as if nothing had been done in the cause.

In an Action against two, the one pleads Plea to the Writ.
in abatement of the Writ, the other to the Action; the Plea to the Writ shall
be first tried, for if that be found, all the whole Writ shall abate, and make
an end of the business; for the Plaintiff ought not to recover upon a false
Writ. 1 Inst. 125.

In a Plea personal against diverse Defendants, Plea to the whole, first tried.
the one Defendant pleads in bar to parcel, or which extends only to him
that pleads it: And the other pleads a Plea which goes to the whole: the
Plea, that goes to the whole, (that is) to both Defendants, shall be first
tried, because the other Defendant shall have advantage thereof; For in a
personal Action, the discharge of one, is the discharge of both.

As for example, if one of the Defendants Release.
in Trespass, pleads a Release to himself (which in Law extends to both) and
the other pleads not guilty, (which extends but Rolls tit. Trial 628.
to himself;) or if one pleads a Plea which excuses himself only, and the
other pleads another Plea which goes to the whole, the Plea which goes to the
whole shall be first tried; for if that be found, it makes an end of all: And
the other Defendant shall take advantage hereof, because the discharge of one,
is the discharge of both. Discharge of one discharges both.
But in a Plea real it is otherwise, for every Tenant may lose his part of the
Land; as if a Praecipe be brought as Heir to his Father against two, and one
pleads a Plea which extends but to himself, and the other pleads a Plea which
extends to both, as Bastardy in the Demandant, and it is found for him, yet the
other issue shall be tried; for he shall not take advantage of the Plea of the
other, because one Ioyntenant may lose his part by his misplea.

Brown and Stamford Justices, consulted with Grammarians in things of Grammar;
and Hulls a Bachelor of Law (Tempore Hen. 6.) was called into Court, to show
the difference between precise and causative Compulsion. Vide Plow. 122. 127,
128.

Pasch. 16 Car. 2. B. R. An action of Trover, etc. was brought de sex
Capitalibus fibulatis, Anglice 6 laced Coifs; after Verdict for the Plaintist,
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Latin words were both Adjective,
and so not certain: but it was answered, that Capaital is a Substantive, and
the Nomenclator of Westminster School was produced to warrant it, and it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff accordingly, and the Court allowed that authority
before Rider's Dictionary.

CAP. III. Of a Venire facias; To whom it shall be directed; when to the
Sheriff, when to the Coroners, when to Esliors, and when to Bailiffs. When well
awarded. etc.
HAving given you the Epitome of what Trials are allowed by the Common Law, and
what shall be tried per pais, and what not; we shall now apply our selves more
particularly to the Trial by Juries: And because a Venire facias is the
foundation and Causa sine qua non, of a Jury, (I mean in Civil Causes; for in
Criminals, as upon Indictments, the Justices of Gaol Delivery, give a general
Command to the Sheriff, to cause the Country to come against their coming; and
take the Pannels of the Sheriff without any process directed to him; yet
process may be made against the Jury, though it is not much used. Stamford,
Plees del Corone, 155.) I will first recite the Writ, in terminis, the rather,
because I intend to order my Discourse, according to the method of the Writ.

Rex etc. Vic. B. Salutem. Praecipimus tibi Venire facias.
quod venire facias coram Just ciariis nostris de Banco apud Westminster. tali die,
duodecim liberos and legales homines de vicinet. de C. quo^um quilibet habeat
quatuor libras terrae, tenement. vel reddit. per annum ad minus, per quos rei
veritas melius sciri poterit; Et qui nec D. E. nec F. G. aliqua affinitate
attingunt; Ad faciend. quandam Jur. patriae inter parts praedict. de placito,
etc. quia tam idem D. quam praedict. F. inter quos inde contentio est, posuer.
se in Jur. illam. Et habeas ibi nomina Jur. illorum and hoc breve. T. etc.

This is one of those Latin Letters, (as Finch terms them, fo. 237.) which the
King sends with Salutation to the Sheriff. But withal Commands him, that he
cause to come twelve free and lawful men of his County, to resolve the question
of the fact, in dispute between the parties, upon the issue; and it is a
Judicial Writ, issuing out of the Record, for Plaintiff or Defendant, after
they have put themselves upon the Country: for upon the words Et de hoc ponit
se super patriam, by the Defendant, Or, Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per
pa^riam, by the Plaintiff, and issue joined thereupon, the Court awardeth the
Venire faci^s, vid Ideo fiat inde Jurat.

And if they come not at the day of the Writ returned, then shall go forth
against them, an Habeas Corpora, and Distringas to bring them in to try the
matter. The which two last Writs are usually made with this clause, Nisi prius
Justiciarii venerint, etc. and are returnable after the time of the Judges
coming their Circuit.

And first, you see it is directed Vicecomiti, Sheriff.
i. e. to one who is Vicecomes, and has the Regiment of the County, instead of
the Earl of that County, to whom once it did belong: as we are taught in the
Mirror, Chap. 1. Sect. 3. scil. That it appears by the Ordinance of ancient
Kings before the Conquest, That the Earls of the Counties had the Custody or
Guard of the Counties. And when the Earls left their Custody or Guards, then
was the Custody of Counties committed to Viscounts, who therefore are called
Vicecomites.

What great Repose and Trust both the What trust in the Sheriff.
King and Laws put in this great Officer, the Oracle tells you, 1 Inst. 168.
that he is Sheriff, that is, praefectus Comitatus, Governor of the County; For
the words of his Patent be, Commisimus vobis Custodiam Comitatus nostri de,
etc. And he has a threefold Custody, triplicem Custodiam, viz. first, Vitae
Justitiae, for no Suit begins, and no Process is served but by the Sheriff. And
he is to return indifferent Juries for the trial of men's Lives, Liberties,
Lands, Goods, etc. Secondly, Vitae Legis, he is after long Suits, and
chargeable, to make Execution, which is the life and soul of the Law. Thirdly,
Vitae Reipublicae, he is Principalis Conservator pacis, within the County,
which is the life of the Commonwealth, for Vita Reipublicae Pax.

Yet notwithstanding the height and To whom the Venire facias ought to be
directed.
Latitude of this great Officers power and trust, the Law adjudges him in many
cases not capable to do so much as return a Jury; For if he be of kindred by
nature, or of affinity by Marriage to any of the parties, or (that I may say
all in a little,) if he be not as indifferent almost in all respects as he is
whom the Law allows to be a Juror, he ought not to meddle with the retorning of
the Jury. But the Venire facias shall be directed to the Coroners, (or to some
of them, Coroners.
if the residue are not indifferent) who in that case are hac vice, Vicecom.
And if the Coroners are not indifferent, then the Venire shall be directed Ad 2
Electores, that Fortescue, cap. 2. 5.
is, to two whom the Court shall choose and deem fit to retorn the Jury; And to
the retorn of these Elisors or Esliors, ab Eligendo, Esliors.
no Challenge will be admitted. Bro. tit. Venire facias 14. as to the Array;
but to the Challenge. Sheriff of London.
Polles, 1 Inst. 158. If one of the Sheriffs of London be a party, then the
Venire may be directed to the other Sheriff; if the Undersheriff be a party,
yet the Venire may be directed to the Sheriff, with this Proviso, Quod Sub-Vic.
tuus in nullo se intromittat cum executione istius brevis. 18 E. 4. 3.

Judicial Writs (say Cook and Sanders, Suggestion.
Plo. 74.) may be directed to the Coroners; As the Venire facias, where the
parties Of whom.
are at issue; there, upon the surmise of the Plaintiff, that the Sheriff is
his Cousin, and upon prayer that the Venire Coroners.
be directed to the Coroners, for avoydance of his own delay that might happen
So in Ejectment against four upon Affinity of the Sheriff to one of the
Defendants. Rolls tit. Trial 668. Examination.
by the challenge of the Array, The Defendant shall be examined whether it be
true, or not, and if he confess it, then the Venire shall be awarded to the
Coroners; for then it appears to the Court by the Defendants confession, that
the Sheriff is not indifferent; But if the Defendant denies it, then the
process shall be awarded to the Sheriff, because the Sheriffs Authority and
profit shall not be taken away, without cause apparent to the Court; But if the
Defendants will allege Not of the Defendants Suggestion.
any such matter, and pray a Venire facias to the Coroners, there the Plaintiff
shall not be examined, neither shall such allegations be allowed, because
delays are The Defendant may not have a Venire facias to the Coroners.
for the Defendants advantage, and the Defendant may Challenge the Jury for
this cause, and so is at no prejudice.

And see in term. Hill. 3 H. 7. fo. 5. placit. ult. In a quare Impedit, where
the Defendant showed how the Sheriff was Cousin to the Plaintiff, and prayed a
Writ to the Coroners, but it was denied him upon the same Reason. Fitz. tit.
suggestion placit. 8. Br. Challenge 153.

In the Lord Brook's Case Trin. 1657. B. R. In Ejectment, the Court was moved,
that Lord Brooks might be made Ejector, which was granted; then the Court was
informed that the Lessor of the Plaintiff was High Sheriff of the County, and
that the Coroner was Undersheriff, and it was prayed that Elizors might return
the Jury; but the Court would not grant it at the prayer of the Defendant,
though the Plaintiff offered to agree to it, it being in a Trial by Nisi prius:
but had it been in a Trial at Bar, they would have granted it. But the regular
course is, for the Plaintiff to pray it, or else the Defendant may challenge
the Array at the Assizes; for it is a principal challenge, that the Lessor of
the Plaintiff is High Sheriff, or of kindred to the Sheriff, for which see
Hutt. 25. More 470. Rolls rep. 328. And it was so adjudged, Trin. 15 Car. 2. B.
R. Duncomb and Ingleby, that it is a principal challenge.

In Ejectment, the Plaintiff suggested For what causes Process shall be
directed to be Coroners.
that he and one of the Coroners, were all of the Liberty del Countee Wigorn',
and prayed a Venire facias to the other Coroner; although this is no principal
challenge, and the Defendant might have opposed the prayer, yet because he
confessed it, the Award was well to the Coroner. So if the cause be that one of
the Coroners be retained of Counsel with the Plaintiff. If the suggestion do
not comprehend a principal challenge, but only of favor, this is not
sufficient to award process to the Coroners; but if it be a principal
challenge, as affinity, etc. if the Defendant confess it, the award shall be to
the Coroners; if he will not confess it, then to the Sheriff; and in such case
the Defendant shall never challenge the Array for that cause: so if the
Plaintiff pray process to the Coroners for favor in the Sheriff, if the
Defendant say that this is not favorable, he shall never challenge for favor
unless de puisne temps.

If the Array be quashed because made by the Sheriffs Minister, who was aiding
and of Council with one of the parties, yet the Writ shall not be directed to
the Coroners, but to the Sheriff, commanding him to make the Panel by another
Officer. As, Ita quod the Sheriff ne se intromittat, etc.

If the Tales be quashed for affinity in the Sheriff, but not the principal
Panel, because 'twas made before the affinity, yet all shall be awarded to the
Coroners, Scil. the Distringas of the principal Panel, and that they return a
new Tales, for there shall be but one Officer if the Array be quashed, because
made but by one of the Coroners, or for affinity in one, etc. Yet the Process
shall still go to the Coroners, Ita quod the Coroner se non intromittat.

If Default be in the Sheriff and To whom Process shall be directed for default
in the Sheriff and Coroners.
Coroners, the Court may choose two Esliors, and if the parties can say nothing
against them, they shall make the Panel.

But the Distringas shall not be directed to Esliers, for the Court cannot make
Officers to distreyn the Kings Liege people, but the King may. 8 H. 6. 12.
dubitatur.

Process may be directed to the Justices of Assise, by assent of parties, not
without. When a Panel is made by the Esliors, they shall afterward serve all
Process that comes upon this, as the Sheriff should. 15 E. 4. 24. 18 E. 4. 3,
8. Rolls tit. Trial 670. For it may be the Sheriff will distreyn only those who
are his friends, and be partial.

When the Process is once awarded Venire facias once directed to the Coroners,
shall not be to the Sheriff afterward.
to the Coroners, for a default in the Sheriff, if there be a new Sheriff made
afterward, who is indifferent, yet the Process shall not revert, but continue
to the Coroners pendant le plea. 14 H. 7. 31. Bro. tit. Venire facias 17. So
the Entry is, Ita quod Vicecomes se non intromittat. 18 E. 4. 3. 8 H. 6. 12.

And therefore where the Sheriff ought Sheriff shall not return the Tales,
where he cannot the Venire facias.
not to retorn the Venire, he cannot retorn the Tales. For in Error in the
Exchequer Chamber of a Judgment in the Queen's Bench, the Error assigned was,
because the Venire facias was awarded to the Coroners, for Consanguinity in the
Sheriff; and it was returned by the Coroner, and afterward a Tales was
awarded, and it was returned by the Sheriff, and it was tried, and a Verdict
given, and Judgment. And for this cause held to be Erroneous, and not aided by
the Statute of 32 H. 8. or 18 Eliz. Wherefore the Judgment was reversed. Cro.
3. par. 574. Bro. tit. Octo. Tales 9.

I will instance one Case more in the same Reports, fo. 586. because it is very
full in the point. After issue in Trespass, the Plaintiff for his expedition
surmised, that he was Servant to the Sheriff, which being confessed by the
Defendant, the process was awarded to the Coroners, and Where the Coroner
returns the Venire facias, he ought to return the Tales.
after Verdict, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Tales de
Circumstantibus was awarded, and returned by the Sheriff; which was held by the
whole Court to be good cause for Staying the Judgment: For it is a mis-tryal,
not aided by any of the Statutes; for process being once awarded to the
Coroners, the Sheriff afterward is not the Officer to return the Jury, no more
than any other man. And process ought always to be returned by him, who is an
Officer by Law to return it, otherwise it is merely void. But afterward upon
view of the Record, it appeared that the Tales was returned by the Coroners,
and their names annexed thereto, wherefore it was without further question. But
the Court said, if their names had not been annexed No name to the Return.
to the Tales, yet it had been well enough; for they be annexed to the first
Panel. And it shall be intended that the right Officer returned it, and the
usual course is, That to such Tales there is not any officers name subscribed,
and yet it is good enough; for it is not within the Statute of York, which
appoints that the name of the Sheriff should be subscribed; but it was moved,
that the Record of the Postea is, that the Tales were returned by the Sheriff;
But the Court held, that it was amendable, and it was done accordingly, and the
Plaintiff had Judgment.

But if the Venire be awarded to the Coroners, Venire facias to the Sheriff,
after one awarded to the Coroners.
for default in the Sheriff, and they do nothing upon the Writ, then I suppose,
upon a default discovered in the Coroners, de puisne temps, the party may show
this to the Court, and have a Venire awarded to the Sheriff, (if there be an
indifferent one made in the mean time) or else to Esliors, and sice converso.

In Error of a Judgment in Chester, Venire facias to the Coroners, after one
to the Sheriff.
the parties being at issue, a Venire was awarded to the Sheriff. And at the
day of the Return, it was entered Quod Vicecomes non misit breve. And then the
Plaintiff prayed a Venire facias to the Coroners, for Cozenage betwixt him and
the Sheriff, which was awarded accordingly; and at the day of trial, the
Defendant made default, and there upon Judgment, Error was assigned, because
that after the Plaintiff had admitted the Sheriff to execute the Writ, he could
not pray a Venire facias to the Coroners, without some cause de puisne Temps;
sed non allocatur, because there was nothing done upon the first Writ. And the
Defendant having made default, it was not material. Cro. 3. part. 853.

But the Defendant might have demurred No Venire facias to the Coroners, after
one to the Sheriff.
to this prayer; For if the Plaintiff pray a Venire facias to the Sheriff, he
shall not challenge the Array nor have a Venire afterward to the Coroners,
because the Sheriff is his Cousin, or for any other principal challenge,
whereof he might by common intendment have Conusance, when he so prayed the
Venire facias; for upon showing this Cause at first, he might have prayed
Process to the Coroners; but for a principal challenge, of which by common
intendment the Plaintiff could not know at the first, as that the Defendant is
of kindred to the Sheriff, etc. he may afterward challenge the Array, when
they appear, or if the Sheriff does nothing upon the Writ, he may pray a new
Venire to the Coroners. 15 H. 7. 9.

If the Plaintiff prays a Venire facias to If the Defendant denies the
Planitiffs suggestion, he shall have no benefit of it by Challenge.
the Coroner, because he is of kindred to the Sheriff, if the Defendant will
not confess this, but denies it, this shall be entered, and the Defendant shall
not challenge the Array for this cause afterward. Br. tit. Venire facias 21.
and 23.

If a Venire facias be awarded to the Coroners, By Consent, the Venire facias
may be directed to a wrong Officer.
where it ought to be to the Sheriff, or the Visne comes out of a wrong place,
yet if it be per assensum partium, and so entered of Record, it shall stand, for
omnis consensus tollit errorem. 1 Inst. 126. li. 5. Mistryal without such
consent.
36. But if it be directed to the Coroners, where it ought to be to the
Sheriff, without such consent of parties: This is an insufficient Trial, not
remedied by any Statute, except it be upon an insuff^ient suggestion, and then
the Statute of 21 Jac. 13. helps it.

Upon suggestion that the Plaintiff and Venire facias to some of the Coroners.
the Sheriff, and one of the Coroners are of kindred to the Plaintiff, or
Defendant, or upon any other suggestion which contains a Principal challenge,
the Venire facias may be directed to the other Coroners. Dier 367.

Error of a Judgment in Northampton, Bailiffs.
because in Northampton the Court being held before the Mayor, and two
Bailiffs, the Venire facias upon the Issue was awarded to the two Bailiffs, to
return a Jury, before the Mayor and Bailiffs, secundum Consuetudinem: which
being returned, and Judgment given, the Error assigned was, because the
Bailiffs being Judges of the Court, could not also be Officers, to whom Process
should be directed, there being no Custom that can maintain any to be both
Officer and Judge. But all the Court (absente Hide) conceived it might be good
by Custom. And that it is not any Error, for the Judges be not the Bailiffs
only, but the Mayor and Bailiffs; and it is a common course, in many of the
Ancient Corporations, where the Bailiffs are Judge and Officer to return Writs.
Judges, or the Mayor and they be Judges; yet in respect of executing Process,
they be the Officers also. And one may be Judge, and Officer diversis
respectibus, as in Redisseisin, the Sheriff is Judge and Officer: Whereupon
Judgment was affirmed. Cro. 1 part. 138.

In Trespass and Assault laid in the Venire facias to the Garden of the Palace
of Westminster. Rolls tit. Trial 667.
Court, to be at the Palace of Westminster, It was adjudged, that the Venire
facias shall issue al Garden del Palace, and not to the Sheriff of Middlesex.
Bro. tit. Ven. fac. 31.

In Trespass against two, if one plead, Award of Venire facias.
and two issues are joined upon his Plea, and two other issues are also joined,
and the Court award a Venire ad triandum extitum illum quam praedictum alium
exitum inter the Plaintiff and the other Defendant, etc. This is a good award,
although there be several issues betwixt the Plaintiff and both Defendants,
because that this word Exitus may be for all reddendo singula singulis. Hob. 91.

If an Inquest remain for default of Rapers, and a December Tales is awarded, and
the Defendant says for his deliverance that he is Lord of the Rape, where,
etc. and that all there are within his distress, and prays a Writ to the next
Hundred; The Court may try this by Prochein Hundred.
Tryors presently, without a return of the Sheriff, and if it be true may award
to the next Hundred; otherwise if it be false. 3 H. 6. 39.

CAP. IV. What faults in the Venire facias shall vitiate the Trial, what not.
When a Venire facias de novo, shall be awarded; when several Venire facias's.
When the Venire facias shall be betwixt the party and a stranger to the Issue;
Who may have a Venire facias by Proviso, and when.
WE have now showed you to what Officer the Venire facias shall be directed;
The next step in the Writ is Praecipimus tibi quod Venire facias: Which words,
Venire facias, are Venire facias why the Writ so called.
the most effectual words in the Writ, and therefore they give the denomination
to the whole Writ. And here opportunity is offered us, to speak something of a
Venire facias in general. I am not ignorant how our Books swarm with Cases
which arise from the defects in this Process, and how that Verdicts have been
set aside, Judgments stayed, and reversed, for want of sufficicient Returns,
misawarding disagreement with the Rolls, discontinuance, and many other faults
in this Writ. But the Statutes of Jeofailes (especially the Statute 21 Jacob.
cap. 13.) have pardoned (as I Statute of Jeofailes 21* Jac. 13.
may so say) these enormities; As, the awarding this Writ, hab. Corpora, or
Distringas to a wrong Officer, upon any insufficient suggestion, or by reason
the Visne is in some part misawarded, or sued out of more places, or of fewer
places than it ouhgt to be, so as some place be right named, The misnaming of
any of the Jury, either in Surname, or addition in any of the said Writs, or
in any return thereupon, so that upon examination, it be proved to be the same
man that was meant to be returned; or if no Return be upon any of the said
Writs, so as a Panel of the names of the Jurors be returned, or annexed to the
said Writ; or if the Sheriff or Officers name, having the Return thereof, is
not set to the Return of any such Writ, so as upon Examination it be proved
that the said Writ was returned by the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, or such other
Officer. In all these Cases, the Judgment shall not be stayed, nor reversed for
these defects.

But this Act does not extend to any Writ, Declaration, or Suit of Appeal of
Felony, or Murder, nor to any Indictment, or Presentment of Felony or Murder,
or Treason; nor to any Process upon any of them; nor to any Writ, Bill, Action,
or Information upon any popular, or penal Statute: Wherefore since
Informations, and popular Actions are grown so frequent, Popular Action; etc.
the Attorneys, etc. herein had best beware of these Jeofailes.

By this Statute, many defects are remedied, which were not by the Statutes of
32 H. 8. Cap. 30. and 18 Eliz. Cap. 14. yet all are not; for this Act only
helps the mis-naming of a Juror in Surname, or addition, and says nothing of
his Christian name: wherefore I conceive the Law in Christian name mistaken in
the Venire facias, incurable.
Codwels Case, in the fifth Report, remains as it was then; which is, that if a
Juror be mis-named in his Christian name, on the Venire, though he be named
right in the Distringas, and Postea, yet this is ill, and not amendable; and
with this agrees Goddards Case, Cro. 2. part. 458.

And since the Court (Cro. 1. part, so. 203.) doubted thereof, I may well put
the Christian name right in the Venine facias, and wrong in the Distringas.
Question, if a Juror be right named upon the Venire, and mis-named in his
Christian Name, in the Distringas, etc. whether this is amendable, or not;
without dispute, it is not by the Statute of 21 Jacob. for that only helps the
Surname. But with Reverence to the Courts doubt, I conceive clearly, it is
helped by the Statutes of 32 H. 8. and 18 Eliz. as a discontinuance of Process;
and I may with the more confidence believe it, because in Codwels Case
aforesaid, where in the Panel of the Venire, a Juror was named Palus Cheale,
and in the Distringas, etc. he was right named Paulus Cheale, and so because he
was mis-named in his Christian Name, in the Venire, Judgment was arrested. But
it is there adjudged, that if he had been well named upon the Venire, and
misnamed on the Distringas or Postea, then upon Examination, it should be
amended. But the Countess of Rutlands Case, lib. 5. 42. is express in the
point, and so is Cro. 3. part* 860. Rolls 196. Teppet in the Venire and Tipper
in the Distring. Amended. And so if the mistake be in the Panel Jurata, the
Sheriff may come in Court, and amend it. And so if Samuel be in the Venire and
Distringas, and Daniel in the Nomina Juratorum, upon examination, this may be
amended. And so if the name be right in the Ven. and mistaken in the Christian
name in the Distringas or Postea it is amendable. Rolls 197. And so if he be De
A, in the Venire and Distringas, and De B. in the Nomina Juratorum, this is
amendable.

And it is to be known, that in most Cases, where the Venire facias, Hab.
Corpora, or Distringas be defective, they are to be amended; but if the Malady
be so fatal in the Venire, that it causes a mis-tryal, (as in the mistake of a
Jurors Christian Name, or where a Juror not returned is sworn, etc.) then the
Verdict Venire facias de novo.
is to be set aside, and a Venire facias de novo, to be awarded; and so was it
to be upon those mistakes, (now amendable by the Statutes,) before the making
thereof. And where a Jury gives a Verdict which is accepted, One Jury shall
not try a cause twice.
and recorded by the Court, be the Verdict perfect or imperfect, the Jurors are
discharged, and shall never try the same issue again upon a new Nisi prius. But
if the Verdict be so imperfect, that Judgment cannot be given upon it, then
the Court shall award a Venire facias de novo, to try the issue by other
Jurors. li. 8. 65. Bulstr. 2 part. 32.

If upon an issue all the matter be not Venire facias de novo.
fully inquired, a Venire facias de novo shall issue. 18 E. 3. 50.

In an Audita Querela, if the parties go to issue upon payment according to the
defeasans of the Statute, and this is found for the plaintiff, but the Jury do
not assess Damages, the Court shall award a Venire facias de novo, to assess
damages. 22 E. 3. 5. vide hic cap. 6. and Rolls tit. Trial. 593. 595.

If the Record of the Nisi prius be unum modum tritici for modium, and the
Plaintiff is Nonsuit at the A^^^se, for this mistake, if the Record in Court be
right, scil. Modium, this Nonsuit shall not be Recorded, but a Venire facias de
novo shall be awarded. So for any other mistake, as if the Record in Court be
Gray's Inn Lane, etc. and the Nisi prius, which is but a transcript, be
Graves-Inn Lane, etc. For this is a nonsuit upon another Record, than what is
in Court.

In Battery against Three who plead Three several Pleas, and upon the Writ of
Nisi prius, two issues are found for the Plaintiff, and Damages assessed; but
nothing is found for the third issue, this is a mis-trial, and a Venire facias
de novo shall issue.

In Detinue, if the Jury find Damages Detinue.
and Costs, but no value, as they ought, this shall not be supplied by a Writ
of Inquiry of Damages, but a Venire facias de novo shall be granted. And so of
other defects in finding the full issue.

In a Quare impedit if the issue be found Quare impedit.
for the Plaintiff, but by negligence, the Jury do not inquire of the four
points, scil. de plenitudine, ex cujus pr^sentatione si tempus semestre
transierit, and the value of the Church per annum; This shall be supplied by a
Writ of Inquiry, without any Venire facias de novo, because the Court ex
officio ought to have charged the Jury with the four points of Inquiry, and if
the Jury had found them, no Attaint lay; for as to this, they were but as an
Inquest of Office.

In a Writ of Annuity, if the issue Annuity.
be found for the Plaintiff, but the Jury do not assess Damages or Costs, this
shall not be supplied by a Writ of Inquiry, but a Venire facias de novo shall
be granted.

In Ejectment against Baron and Feme, and Ejectment.
the Jury find the Wife not guilty, and find a special Verdict as to the
Husband, which special verdict is afterward adjudged insufficient by the
Court, a Venire facias de novo shall be granted for both, as well the Wife as
the Husband, and the Wife may be found guilty, because the Record and issue is
entire, and the Verdict is insufficient and void in tout.

So if there be several issues, and the Imperfect Verdict.
Jury find some well and directly, and in others special Verdicts which are
imperfect, a Venire facias de novo shall be granted for all, and the Jury may
find contrary to their first finding.

In trespass of Assault and Battery, and taking away of grain, and the
Defendant as to the Batery justifies in defense of his grain, upon which the
Plaintiff demurs, and as to the grain he pleads not guilty, which is found for
the Plaintiff, and the Jury do not tax Damages for the Battery depending in
demurrer as they ought, in this case, if the demurrer be afterward adjudged
for the Plaintiff, yet the Damages for this cannot be afterward supplied and
taxed by a Writ of Inquiry of Damages, but a Venire facias de novo shall issue
to Trial, because all is comprised in one Original. Vide apres cap. 13. and
devant cap. 2.

Who shall grant it?

In a Scire facias upon a Recognisance in Chancery, if the Parties be at issue,
upon which the Record is commanded into B. R. and there it appears that the
Venire facias is not well awarded, the Venire facias de novo shall be awarded
in the Kings Bench, and not in the Chancery. Roll. ^it. Trial 723.

In Yelvertons Reports, fo. 64. the Case Album breve, the County left out in a
Venire facias.
is, That a Venire facias was made Vicecomiti, leaving out Salop, for which
there was a blank left in the Writ. But re vera, it was returned by the Sheriff
of Salop. In Arrest of Judgment it was alleged, that the Venire facias was
Vicious for this cause; But Gaudy said, it should be amended; and by Fenner and
Williams, It is as no Writ, because it is not directed to any Officer. And then
it is aided by the Statute of Jeofailes, For it might rather be called a blank,
than a Writ, because it was directed to no Officer. If there be no return of
the Sheriff indorsed upon the Venire facias, it was held not amendable. 35
Eliz. lib. 5. 4 Otherwise of the Distringas, if that be Album breve, and no
return, if the Venire facias be Right. Rolls tit. 204.

In Cases where there are several Defendants, who plead several Pleas, the
Plaintiff Several Venire facias.
may choose either to have one Venire facias for all, or several, for every one
of the Defendants; But (if you will be ruled by Stamford) the surest way is to
have a Venire facias against every one, and then one cannot have benefit of the
others Challenge: neither shall the death of one abate the Venire facias
against the other; (This he speaks of in Appeals) But if the Court once award a
joint Venire facias, you cannot have several Venires afterward, though there
be nothing done upon the first; except it be upon matter de puisne Temps, as
the death of one of the Defendants, etc. lib. 8. 66. lib. 11. 5, 6. Stamf. 155.
Bro. tit. Venire facias 2. 35.

But now it is the usual course to have but one Venire facias upon several
issues, though against several Defendants, Cro. 3. One Venire facias in several
issues. Vide Rolls tit. Trial 596. 620. 667. Hob. 88. 51.
part. 866. Hob. 36. 64. And so usual, that the Court declared, Cro. 2. part.
550. That there never shall be several Venire facias to try several Issues in
one County; For what need the Plaintiff trouble himself, and the Country, with
several, when one Jury will serve his turn; Et frustra fit per plura quod fieri
potest per pauciora. But otherwise, if it be in two Counties. Cro. 3. part. 866.

After issue joined by two Defendants, Venire facias between the Plaintiff and
2 Defendants where one is dead.
if one of them die, and then a Venire facias is awarded betwixt the Plaintff,
and both the Defendants, and so in the Hab. Corpora and Distringas, yet this
shall not Vitiate the Venire facias, etc. to make Error; because though one of
the Defendants be dead, yet the other being alive, it is sufficient. And there
needs be no surmise in Judicial Writs, that one of the Defendants No surmise in
Judicial Writs of death in one of the parties.
is dead; It is time enough to show it to the Court at the day in bank. Cro. 1
part. 4. 26. But if there be two Defendants, and the Venire facias be but
against one of them, it is Error, 7 H. 4. 13. and Bro. tit. Ven. fac. 11. Cro.
1. part. 426.

If the Venire facias bears date before Venire facias dated before the Action
brought.
the Action brought, or varies from the Roll, yet it is aided by the Statutes
of Jeofailes. Cro. 1. part. 38. 90, 91. 203, 204. Miscontinuance or
discontinuance, or Jeofailes.
misconveying of Process, is aided by 32 H. 8. 30. The want of any Writ
Original or Jud^cial, defaults in their form, and insufficient Returns
thereupon, are aided by 18. Eliz. 14. Cro. 3. part. 259. But you must have a
care the Venire facias be not faulty in any other matters of Substance; for if
the parties names be mistaken, or the issue, Parties names mistaken in a Venire
facias.
as if the issue be ne unques Execuor, and the Venire facias be in placito
debiti, etc. this is a Mistrial. Cro. 2. part. 528. So it is, if the Venire
facias be in placito transgressioni^, Mis-tryal.
where the Action is in placito transgressionis, and ejectionis firmae. This
misawarding of Process is not aided by any of the Statutes, and better it were,
that there had been no Ven^re facias at all in No Venire facias helped.
such a Case; for then the Statutes would have helped it. Cro. 3. part. 622.

If a Venire facias be directed to the Coroners, Return of Process.
all the Coroners ought to join in the return, they being Ministers, not
Judges, and so both of the Sheriffs of London ought to join, or else the Return
is not good. Hob. 97.

Note, the Principal Statutes of Jeofailes are 8 H. 6. cap. 12. and cap. 15. 32
H. 8. cap. 30. 18 Eliz. cap. 14. 21 Jac. cap. 13. and 16 and 17 Car. 2. 8.
Entitled an Act to prevent Arrests of Judgments and superseding Executions.
And the three first of these Statutes do not extend to Appeals, nor to Pleas of
the Crown, or to any proceedings upon them, for these are excepted, nor to the
amendment of any Exigent, to make any one Outlawed. As you may see at large,
lib. 8. 162. Blackamors Case.

And the four last of the said Statutes do neither extend to them nor to
Actions, or informations upon Penal Laws. Only in the last of them, viz. 16, 17
Car. 2. there is a limitation in the negation of the Extent, scil. Other than
concerning Customs, Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, to which it does extend.

If the Venire facias be directed Vicecomiti London, Salutem, etc. praecipimus
tibi, and not vobis, after Verdict this is Amendable. 39 Eliz. B. R. Adjudge,
Rolls 200.

And so it is, if after and habeas ibi hoc breve, and Nomina Juratorum be left
out. ib. and 204.

But if the date of the Test be after the return, this was held not amendable,
32, 33 Eliz. B. R. ib. sed vide hic ante. But if the Award of the Ven. fac.
upon the Roll be right, and the Writ wrong, it may be amended by the Roll, as
the Misprision of the Clerk. ib. 201.

If the words, quorum quilibet habeat be left out, or duodecim, or qui nulla
affinitate attingunt, or Vicecomiti be left out, these are amendable, as
mistakes of the Clerk. Rolls 204, 205.

In some Cases a Venire facias shall be Venire facias between a party and a
stranger.
awarded to make an Enquest betwixt a stranger to the Writ and issue, and the
party. I will instance but in one, and that is upon the Statute of Westminster. 2.
cap. 6. If a Tenant being impleaded vouch to warranty, and the Vouchee denies
the Deed, or other cause of the Warranty, etc. That the Demandant may not
hereby be delayed, he may sue out a Venire facias to try the issue between the
Tenant and Vouchee.

Inquests in Pleas of Land, shall be as Inquest at whose request.
well taken at the request of the Tenant, as of the Demandant. 2 Edw. 3. cap.
16. If the Plaintiff, or Demandant, desisteth in prosecuting his Action, and
brings it Venire facias by Proviso.
not to Trial, then the Defendant, or Tenant may sue forth a Venire facias with
a Proviso, which is to no other end but that the Sheriff should summon but one
Jury, if the Plaintiff also should have brought him another Writ, to the same
purpose; And although, (as my Lord Dyer says, fol. 215.) the granting of this
Venire facias, etc. with a Proviso, depends much upon the discretion of the
Court, yet for the greater part, it is not grantable for the Defendant, unless
when he is actor as well as the Plaintiff, or unless there be a default, and
Leches in the Plaintiff; therefore there can be no Trial by Proviso against the
King (unless with the Attorney General's consent,) because no default, or
Laches can be imputed to the King. But an avowant in Replevin, may have a
Venire facias with a Proviso, immediately Proof presently after issue joined.
after issue joined, because he is Actor, and in nature of the Plaintiff.

If the Plaintiff in Detinue, and the Garnishee be at issue, and the Plaintiff
prays a Nisi prius, and this is granted, Garnished.
yet the Garnishee at the same time may have a Nisi prius with Proviso because
he is Plaintiff also. 19. li. 6. 46. Rolls tit. Trial 629.

If the Plaintiff deliver the Writ to the Sheriff tarde, so late that he cannot
serve Tarde.
it, the Defendant shall have a Writ with a Proviso.

But at the same time the Plaintff may have another Writ, and the Sheriff may
return which of them he pleases at his Election. 8 H. 6. 6.

The Proviso ought to be, quando duo brevia sunt in eodem gradu and qualitate.

If the default be in Plaintiff after issue in the prosecuting of the Venire
facias, then the Defendant may have a Venire facias with Proviso, but not a
Hab. Corpus with a Proviso until the Plaintiff have made a default in the same
Writ, for he ought only to have the same Process with a Proviso, in which there
was a default of the Plaintiff first: and therefore although the Defendant had
a Venire facias with a Proviso upon a default of the Plaintiff, yet he cannot
have a Nisi prius by Proviso without another default of the Plaintiff.

If the Defendant had a Hab. Corpus by Proviso and the Jury remain for want of
Hundredors, yet he cannot have a Distringas Jur. with a 10. Tales cum Proviso,
until a default of this request of a Tales, is in the Plaintiff. D. 15 El. 318.
10.

But note the Nota (in Stamford's Pleas, How the Plaintiff may stop the
Defendants Proviso.
del Coron. fol. 155.) That if by negligence of the Plaintiff, the Defendant
sues a Venire facias with a Proviso, yet the Plaintiff may at his pleasure stay
the Defendant, that he shall not proceed in his Process, in praying a Tales
upon the Defendants Process, as it appears T. 15 H. 7. fol. 9. And the
Defendant shall never be received to pursue this Process with a Proviso, so
long as the Plaintiff pursues, or is ready to pursue, as appears Mich. 14 H. 7.
fol. 7.

And seeing the Tales men offer themselves Tales men.
to us, we will tell them upon what account they come, before they thrust
themselves into the Inquest, commonly for the love of eight pence; but it may
be, to do some of their Neighbors a shrewd turn.

CAP. V. Why the Venire facias runs to have the Jury appear at Westminster,
though the Trial be in the Country. Of the Writ of Nisi prius, when first
given, when grantable, when not, and in what Writs. Of Justices of Nisi prius.
Of the Tales at Common Law, and by Statute. When the Transcript of the Record
of the Nisi prius differs from the Roll, whereby the Plaintiff is Nonsuited,
he may have a Distringas de novo.
BUt to observe the Method of the Writ, the next words are, Coram Justiciariis
nostris de Banco apud Westminst. tali die. And here first of all, you may ask
me, to what purpose the Sheriff is com^anded to cause the Jury to come to
West^^^ister, when they are to try the Cause in the Country, and in truth are
not to come to Westminster? I must confess the resolution of this question is
not unnecessary: wherefore we must know, that Originally, before the Writ of
Nisi prius was given, the purpose for which the 12. men were to be summoned
upon the Writ of Venire fac. Why the Venire facias is to have the Jury appear
at Westminster.
to come to Westminster, was that contained in the Writ, videl. Ad faciend.
quandam Juratam; for then was the Trial intended to be there, if a full Jury
appeared; if not, then a Hab. Corpora, (with a Tales sometimes Hab. Corp.
annexed to it, the form whereof you may see in the Register) and if they did
not appear at the Return in the Hab. Corpora, then went out the Distringas.
This Distringas.
I speak of the Common Pleas: But the course of the Kings Bench, and Exch^quer,
is, after the Venire fac. to have a Distringas, leaving out the Hab. Corpora.
Trials then were all at the Bar. (I speak not of Assizes.) But now, because
Jurors did not use to appear upon the Venire facias, it being without penalty;
Trials at the Bar, are appointed upon the Hab. Corpora, and Distringas, because
the Jury will Trials at Bar.
more certainly appear at the day in the Distringas, through fear of forfeiting
issues: which the Sheriff returns on the Distringas, not on the Venire facias.
By the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. no Jury shall be compelled to appear at
Westminster, for the Trial of an offense (upon any penal Law) committed above
30. miles from Westminster, Where a Jury is not compellable to appear at
Westminster.
except the Attorney General can show reasonable cause for a Trial at Bar.

Thus it was at Common Law, before the giving of the Writ of Nisi prius, when
all Jurors, together with the parties came up to the Kings higher Courts of
Justice, Where the Cause depended; which (when Suits multiplied) was to the
intolerable burden of the Country 27 E. 1. cap. 4. Wherefore by the Statute of
Westminst. 2 cap. 30. A Writ of Nisi prius was first Nisi prius, when first
given, and wherefore.
given; and that, in the Venire facias, as we may see in the form of the Writ
there mentioned, scil. Pr^cipimus tibi quod venire facias coram Justiciariis
nostris apud Stamfords Pleas of the Crown. 156.
Westmon. in octabus Sancti Michaelis, nisi talis and talis tali die and loco
ad parts illas venerint 12. etc. By which Writ it appears, that the Venire
facias was not returnable, till after the day of the Nisi prius. But the
mischief thereof was so great, partly Nisi prius in the Venire facias.
in respect that the parties not knowing the Jurors names, could not tell how
to make their Challenges, and so were surprised; and partly, in respect of the
Jury, who were greatly delayed by the Essoyns of the parties, that by the
Statute of 42 E. 3. cap. 11. It is Ordained, that no Inquest, but Assizes and
deliverances of Gaols, be taken by Writ of Nisi prius, nor in other manner, at
the Suit of the great or small, before that the names of all them that shall
pass in the Inquests, be returned in the Court. And their names The names of
the Jurors must be returned into the Court before any Trial, and why.
must be returned upon a Panel annexed to the Venire facias, so that either
party may have a Copy of the Jury, that he may know whom to challenge; And the
Jury not coming upon the Venire facias, make a feigned default, which warrants
the Distringas, etc. unless they appear at the day of the Nisi prius.

So that by what has been said, you It is in the Courts discretion, whether to
grant a Nisi prius, or not.
may perceive to what purpose the Sheriff is commanded to cause the 12. men to
come to Westminster, though the Trial be in the Country. And that, ad faciend.
quandam Juratam, because it is in the discretion of the Court, whether to grant
a Writ of Nisi prius, or to have a Trial at the Bar. And for this, the Duke of
Exeter being Plaintiff in Trespass, a Nisi prius was prayed for the Duke, and
it was denied, for that the Duke was of great power in that County. And if the
Trial should be had in the Country, inconvenience might thereupon follow, as
you may read, 2 Inst. 424. and 4. Inst. 161. Nay in some Cases, (as if the
Cause require long examination, etc.) it is not in When the Court cannot grant
a Nisi prius.
the power of the Court to grant a Nisi prius, if the King please: For in such
Cases, (as it appears by the Writ in the Register, 186.) the King by his Writ
may restrain, and command the Justices, that they shall not award any Writ of
Nisi prius, and if they have, that they supersede it. F. N. B. 240. 241, No
Nisi prius shall be granted where the King is party, without especial Warrant
from the King, or the Attorney Where the King is concerned.
Generals consent. Stamf. 156. F. N. B. 241. 4 Inst. 161.

In a praecipe quod reddat, if the Tenant after aid of the King, pleads to the
Inquest; the Plaintiff shall not have a Nisi prius, because the Tenant has aid
of the King, and so the King is in a manner Party. 25 E. 3. 39. Neither is a
Nisi prius to be granted, if any of the parties may have prejudice by it.

If the Justices de Nisi prius die before Certification of Verdicts.
the day in Bank, yet the Record shall be received from the Clerk of Assise,
without a Certiorari, or other form of entry but the ancient form.

Also in that Case a Certiorari may be directed to the Executors or
Administrators of the Justices, to certify the Record. D. 4, 5 Mar. 163. 55.
Rolls tit. Trial 629.

They have no power to increase Damages, What things the Justices of Nisi prius
may do.
nor to allow or disallow protections, nor to allow a Plea of Excommengement in
the Plaintiff. But they may record the protection and the default, and this
shall be allowed or disallowed in B.

They may demand the Jurors upon a Jurors sur pain fine.
Pein, they may amerce Jurors, and punish a Trespass done in their presence,
which is in despite of the King, and for this make Process, and may fine
Offenders.

In Ejectment the Defendant may plead at the Assizes, that the Plaintiff has
entered into parcel of the Land mentioned in the Declaration puis le darrein
continuance, and the Plea puis darrein continuance.
Justices of Nisi prius may accept this Plea. But it is in their Election; for
if they perceive the Plea is dilatory, they may refuse it, for it is in their
discretion. Sir Hugh Browns Case in Scaccario. Mich. 8 Jac. Rolls tit. Trial
630.

If 11 Jurors be sworn, and the 12th. The power of the Judge upon disagreement
or other matter.
is challenged, and the Jurors cannot agree in the challenge; for 10 affirm the
challenge, and the other denies it: although the party which did not take the
challenge, will not agree that the Eleven sworn shall Challenge.
have another to them in the lieu of him that is challenged, yet the Court may
do this.

If a challenge be taken to the Array before any Iuror is sworn, and Triors be
chosen, who cannot agree, yet they shall not be commanded in Custody, because
they never were sworn upon the principal. But the Court may discharge them and
choose others.

If there be three Triors who will not agree, the Court cannot take the Verdict
Jurors discharge.
of two, and command the other to prison. The same Law in case of a Verdict
upon an issue.

Where 14 Jurors are impannelled for the King, the Judge cannot discharge any
of them after they are sworn, if not that they will not agree with their
Companions.

If the Jury say upon demand of the Amencement.
Court, that they are agreed, and afterward when they are opposed, they say
the contrary in any matter, they may be amerced for this. Rolls tit. Trial 675.

And now since the Nisi prius (for so it is Nisi prius why so called.
called, because the word prius is before venerint, in the Distringas, etc.
which was not so in the Venire facias, upon the Statute of W. 2. cap. 30.
before rehearsed,) must not be in the Venire facias, because the names of the
Jurors are to be returned to the Court, before the granting of the Nisi prius;
therefore the Nisi prius is now in No Nisi prius before the Venire facias is
returned.
the Hab. Corp. and Distringas. And if the Sheriff return not a Panel of the
Jurors, upon the Venire facias, there shall be no Nisi prius upon the Tales,
until a Panel be returned. 27 H. 6. fol. 10. 1 H. 5. fol. 11. which brings me
again to speak of the Tales.

A Tales is a supply of such men, as were The Tales at Common Law.
impannelled upon the Return of the Venire facias, grantable, when enough of
the principal Panel to make a Jury do not appear, or if a full Jury do appear,
yet if so many are challenged, that the residue will not make a Jury, then a
Tales may be granted. And this at Common Law was by Writs of December tales, Octo
tales, etc. (out of the Kings Courts) one of them after another, as there was
need, until there was a full Jury. But now by the Statutes of 35 H. 8. 6. 4,
5. P. M. 7. 5 Eliz. 25. and 14 Eliz. 9.

The Justices of Assise, and Nisi prius, Tales by Statute.
at the Request of Plaintiff, or Demandant, Defendant or Tenant, or of the
prosecutor tam quam, (if two, more, or but one of the principal Panel appear
at the day of Nisi prius,) may presently cause a supply to be made of so many
men as are wanting, of them that are there present standing about the Court;
and hereupon the very Act is called a Tales de circumstantibus.

Note the difference between Tales at Common Law, and Tales by the Statute, the
first called only [Tales], the second, [Tales de circumstanubus], the last of
which cannot be granted at a Trial at Bar, which is a Trial at Common Law; for
there it must be only [Tales] by Writ annexed to the Venire facias. But Tales
de circumstan tibus is given by Statute to Trials by Assise and Nisi prius, per
Stat. 35 H. 8. 6. Yet such a Tales to an indictment in Wales, was out of that
Statute, and helped by 4, 5 Ph. Mar. 7.

If the Issue be to be tried per two Counties, and one full Inquest appear of
one Tales in what Cases it shall be granted.
County, but the Inquest remain for default of Jurors of the other County, A
Tales shall be awarded to the County where the de fault is, not to the other.

If a Juror die after he is Impannelled, a Tales shall issue, not a Venire
facias.

Upon a Pluries Distringas, three only appear, What persons may have a Tales.
the Plaintiff prays another Distringas, without praying a Tales, yet if the
Defendant pray a Tales, the Court ought to grant it. D. 20 El. 359. 2.

A Tales shall be granted in an Attaint, if In what Cases.
all the Grand Jury make default.

It cannot be granted at the day of the At what time.
return of the Venire facias.

If the Venire facias be good, and the Hab. Corpus, ill, if the Panel be
affirmed, yet the Tales is void, for in effect there is only a Venire facias
returned, and then no Tales.

If the Defendant has a Hab. Corpus Tales with a Proviso.
with a Proviso, yet the Tales ought not to be granted with a Proviso at the
Defendants request, before a default in the request of a Tales in the Plaintiff.

At Common Law before the Statute by Custom of a Court a Tales de
circumstantibus might be granted, for this is a good Custom. Dubitatur, Rolls
tit. Trial 672.

If great persons are concerned, and by Tales denied.
their laboring the Jury does not appear, and Tales men are prepared for their
turn, and there is a great tumult de circumstantibus; The Justices of their
discretion may deny a Tales, and adjourn in Bank, notwithstanding the Statute.
The principal Panel must stand, or else there can be no Tales.

If the Bailiff of the Franchise answer, that there be not sufficient of his
Bayliwick, the Justices may award a Tales de circumstantibus to be returned by
the Sheriff.

If the Tenant for life pray in aid of the King who has the reversion, the
Justices cannot grant a Tales de circumstantibus, because the King is concerned.

If two Coroners or Esliers return the Panel, one of them cannot return the
Tales, etc.

If the Defendant sue the Writ of Nisi prius by Proviso, yet the Plaintiff may
have a ^ales, etc.

The Sheriff may return 24. 40. or any number upon the Tales de
circumstantibus. And it may be prayed by Attorney, (although Attorney.
the Statute does not mention an Attorney) as well as in proper person. The
Vouchee in a praecipe quod reddat may pray a Tales, though he be neither
Plaintiff nor demandant, in the first action.

If there be three Plaintiffs in Replevin, etc. and one of them makes default
at the Nisi prius, the other two cannot pray a Tales: otherwise of two
Coparceners.

Mayor and Commonalty, in their proper persons cannot pray a Tales. A Bishop or
Abbot may.

Two Plaintiffs in Trespass and at the Nisi prius the Defendant shows a Record
to the Court, by which it appears that one of the Plaintiffs was Outlawed after
the last continuance, the other cannot pray a Tales.

The Sheriffs upon the Tales de circumstantibus may Impannel a Priest or
Deacon, if he has sufficient freehold of Lay Fee, but not an Infant, nor one
of the age of 80 years.

He may Impannel Coroners, Capital What persons of the Tales.
Ministers of any Corporation, Foresters, men blind, mute, (if they have their
understanding, but not Deaf men) Excommunicated persons, but not Outlawed or
attaint, not Aliens, nor Clerks attainted, nor persons attainted of false
Verdicts.

The Coroners may put the Sheriff on the Tales.

It seems by the Statute, none of the Challenge.
parties can challenge the Array of the Tales, but only to the Poll.

After a challenge to the Poll tried, there shall be no other challenge to the
same Poll, for any cause or matter that is at the same time.

In an action of Trespass, for taking away the Plaintiffs money, one of the
Tales was challenged, because he was a common Fosterer of Thieves, and dwelt in
a suspicious place, and of ill fame, and held a good challenge.

For Challenges see the Tit. Challenge at large.

What issues shall be tried by Tales de circumstantibus, see Williams his
reading, and hic cap. 7.

But ^ since none can come after the Reporter, observe with me his Nota
Lecteur, in his 10th. Report 104. That at Common Law, in the granting of a
Tales, five things are to be considered.

1. The time of the granting, etc. thereof. 2. The number of the Tales. 3. The
order of them. 4. The manner of Trial, that is, where by them with others, and
where by them only. 5. The quality of them is to be considered.
As to the first, 4 things are likewise to be considered.

1. That the time of granting them, is upon default of so many of the principal
Panel, that there cannot be a full Inquest.

2. That at the time of granting them, the principal Array stand; for Tales are
words similitudinary, and have reference to the assemblance, which then ought
to be in esse; and therefore if the Array be quashed, or all the Polls
challenged and treited, no Tales shall be awarded, for then there are not
Quales, but in such a Case, a new Venire facias shall be awarded. But if at the
time of granting the Tales, the principal Panel stand, and afterward is
quashed as aforesaid, yet the Tales shall stand; For it suffices if there were
Quales, at the time of granting the Tales.

3. It is to be observed, that he which is merely Defendant, cannot pray a
Tales till the Plaintiff has made default.

4. In some Cases, a Tales shall be granted after a full Jury appear and is
sworn; as if a Jury be charged, and afterward before a Verdict given in Court,
one of them die, a Tales shall be awarded, and no new Venire facias: and so if
any of the Jurors Impannelled die before they appear; and this appears by the
Sheriffs return, the Panel shall not abate, but if there be need, a Tales
shall be awarded. And the time for Challenge, and Trial of the Tales, is after
the principal Panel be tried; and if the principal Panel be affirmed, the
same Tryors shall try the Tales; But if it be quashed, then the two Tryers of
the Principal shall not try the Tales.

As to the second, to wit, the number, two things are to be observed.

1. That in all Cases, the Tales ought to be under the number of the principal
in the Venire facias, (unless in Appeals) as in Attaint under 24. and in other
Actions where the Venire facias is of 12. under 12. And the reason wherefore
more than the number may be granted in Appeals of the Plaintiffs part, is,
because the Defendant may challenge peremptorily; and if default be in the
Plaintiff, then the Defendant may pray a Tales, and the Reason is in favorem
vitae, and that he may expedite and free himself from vexation and the question
of his life, for fear that his Witnesses should die.

2. That the number ought always to be certain, as 10. 8. 6. or 4. etc. But now
by the Statute of 35 H. 8. a Tales de circumstantibus may be granted, as well
of an uncertain as a certain number, and that by force of these words in the
Stat. 35 H. 8. So many, etc. as shall make up a full Jury.

As to the third, to wit, the Order, It is to be known, that always in every
new Tales, the number shall be diminished, as if the first be 10. the second
shall be 8. and so always less. But if the Tales awarded be quashed by
Challenge, you may have another of the same number.

As to the fourth, to wit, the manner of Trial, that is commonly by them with
others; but by them only, when after the granting the Tales, the principal
Panel is quashed, then the Trial shall be only by the Tales; or if the Tales
do not amount to a full Inquest, another Tales to supply the former, may be
granted.

As to the fifth, to wit, the Quality of the Therefore if the Venire facias be
not de medietat. linguae, the Tales cannot. 3 E. 4. 12.
Tales, they ought to be of the same Quality as the Quales are; and therefore
if the first be per medietatem linguae, of English and Aliens, so ought the
Tales to be, so if the Principal be out of a Franchise; so if the Venire facias
be directed to the Coroners, so ought the Tales; and all things which are
required by the Law, in the Quales, are required in the Tales: As you may read
in the aforesaid Statutes. vide Stamf. Plees del Corone, fol. 155.

Where a Juror is withdrawn, when the Plaintiff intends to bring the Cause to
Trial again, he may have a Distringas, etc. with a December Tales.

By the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 3. If there be not enough sufficient
Freeholders as are required in an Attaint, in the County where Attaint.
such Attaint is taken; a Tales may be awarded into the Shire next adjoining.

If the Transcript of the Record, of the Nisi prius be mistaken, and not
warranted by the Rolls, for which cause the Plaintiff becomes Nonsuit, he may
have a Distringas Nisi prius. amendable.
de novo, upon motion to the Court, and the Postea shall not be recorded, Cro.
1. part. 204. Palmers Reports. 378. For there is but a Transcript of the Record
sent to the Justices of Nisi prius. First they were Justices of Nisi prius, and
Justices of Assise.
Justices of Assise, and therefore they retain that name still though Assizes
are very rarely brought: For this common Action of Ejectment has Ejected most
real Actions; and so the Assise is almost out of use.

CAP. VI. Of the number of the Jurors, and why the Sheriff returns 24. though
the Venire facias mentions but 12. If he returns more or less, no Error, and of
the number 12. And when the Trial shall be per primer Jurors. And of Inquests
of Office; and when to remain pro defectu Juratorum.
NOw for the Quales: and these you see for number, must be 12. by the Common
Law, D. and St. fol. 14. for quality, liberos and legales homines. And first of
their number 12. And this number is no less esteemed of by our Law than by Holy
Writ; Of the number 12.
If the 12 Apostles on their 12 Thrones, must try us in our eternal State, good
Reason has the Law to appoint the number of 12. to try our temporal. The
Tribes of Israel were 12. the Patriarchs were 12. and Solomon's Josh. 4. Genes.
49.
Officers were 12. 1 Kings 4. 7. vide Sir Hen. Spelman, verb. [Jurata]
Therefore not only matters of fact were tried by 12. but of ancient time 12.
Judges were to try matters in Law, in the Exchequer Plow. Com. in prooemio. 12
Judges.
Chamber, and there were 12. Counselors of State, for matters of State; And he
that wageth his Law, must have 11. others with him, which think he says true.
And the Law is so precise in this number Less than 12 in Inquests of Office.
of 12. that if the Trial be by more or less, it is a Mis-tryal; But in
Inquests of Office, as a Writ of Wast, there less than Finch 400. 484.
12. may serve. F. N. B. 107. c. and in Writs to inquire of Damages, the just
number of 12. is not requisite, for they may be over or under; And so it was
resolved Trin. 1651. B. R. Abbot verse. Holt, that the Sheriff ought (in Writs
of Inquiry) to summon 12. by their names, yet Inquest of Office. Vide hic cap.
13.
Damages assessed by a less number is sufficient, and in the Writ to the
Sheriff, quod ipse inquirat per Sacramentum pro borum hominum, omitting
[duodecem] its good and usual.

And in a Writ of Inquiry of Waste by 13. it was holden Good. 1. Cro. 414.

In Dower if the Tenant come at the Grand Cape, and say he was always ready to
render Dower, and issue is taken upon this, although seisin of the Land be
presently awarded, yet no Inquest of Office, but the Jury upon the Trial of the
issue, shall assess Damages. 22 E. 3. 15.

In what cases there shall be an Inquest of Office, and in what not, see Rolls
tit. Trial 595.

And although there can be no Verdict Why the Sheriff returns 24.
but by 12. yet by ancient course and usage, (which as my Lord Cook tells you,
makes the Law in this Case, 1 Inst. 155.) the Sheriff is to return 24. And this
is for expedition of Justice; for if 12. should only be returned, no man should
have a full Jury appear or sworn, in respect of Challenges, without a Tales,
which should be a great delay of Trials; And for this cause at Common Law,
'twas Error if the Sheriff returned less than 24. But now it is remedied by the
Satute of 18 Eliz. as a mis-return, see Cro. 1 part. 223. li. 5. 36, If the
Sheriff return less than 24 it is no Error.
37. By which Books it appears, that if the Sheriff return but 23. etc. it
shall not vitiate the Verdict of 12. No, though a full Jury do not appear, so
that the Trial is by ten of the principal Panel, and two of the Tales,
notwithstanding Maynards Opinion to the contrary, and Cro. 3. part. 587. The
Sheriffs used to summon above 24. scil. effraenatam multitudinem, but Must not
return above 24.
now they are prohibited by Statute, to summon above 24. Westminster. 2. cap. 38. In
what cases the Inquest shall remain for default of Jurors.


If the issue be to be tried by 2 Counties, if but one of one County appear,
although a full Inquest appear of the other, yet this shall remain for default,
because they cannot try that whith is in another County. 2 Counties.
There ought to be six of each County. And so of one Inquest out of a
Franchise, and another out of the Guildable, and so of 2 Pannels returned in an
Assise by several Bailiffs of Franchises to try one issue, and one Panel makes
default, the issue shall not be tried by the other Panel, for the Jurors in
one Franchise cannot make the view in another Franchise. Roll tit. Trial 673.

If the Jury be of 2 Counties, or 2 Pannels The manner of swearing the Jurors.
of the Guildable and Franchise, etc. they shall be sworn interchangeably first
one of one, then another of the other.

If the Jury go at large until another day after they are sworn, and the Roll
of the entry be not in Court, they may be sworn anew. Roll. tit. Trial 674.

To make a Jury in a Writ of Right, Where there must be 16. and 24. in a Jury.
which is called the Grand Assise, there must be 16. scil. four Knights, and
12. others; the Jury in an Attaint, called the Grand Jury, must be 24. Finch
412. and 485. But if the issue be upon a matter out of the point of the
Attaint, as upon a Plea of non-tenure, the Trial shall be by 12 Juratores. 21
E. 3. 10.

There may be more than 16 in a Writ of right. Rolls tit. Trial 674.

When Process used to be made out Where Witnesses join with the Jury, the
number is uncertain.
against the Witnesses in Carta nominat. to join with the Jury in Trial of the
Deed, as was used before the Statute of 12 E. 3. C. 2. ([his Testibus] being
then part of the Deed) then the number was uncertain, according as the number
of Witnesses were in the Deed: wherefore no Attaint lay, if the Deed were
affirmed, because more than 12 joined in the Verdict. But otherwise, Cannot
prove a Negative.
if the Deed was not found* because Witnesses cannot prove a Negative. F. N.
Br. 106. h. 1 Inst. 6. 2 Inst. 130. etc.

If 12 are sworn, and one of them depart Juror departs and another sworn by
consent.
by consent, another of the Panel may be sworn, and join with the other 11. in
the Verdict. 11 H. 6. 13.

In Error upon a Judgment in Cornwall, A Jury of 6.
because the Trial was but by 6. adjudged that it was erroneous, though it was
returned secundum consuetudinem ibidem ante, etc. for such Customs are against
Law, unless in Wales, which are permitted by Act of Parliament. Cro. 1. part.
259.

If the record be pleaded in Bar of the Per primer Jurors. See hic cap. 4.
Assise, and the Party that pleads says, the same Tenements were put in view to
the former Jurors: If the Plaintiff says nient comprise, This shall be tried
per primer Jurors, and auters. 13 H. 4. 10.

So if the Tenant says that these Lands are not the same Lands before
recovered, this shall be tried per primer Jurors and auters. 22. Assise 16. and
so in a Redisseisin.

So in an Assise, if the Defendant plead a Recovery per view de Jurors in
another Assise, this shall not be tried by the Assise but per primer Jurors. 13
H. 4. 10.

And if at the return of the former Jurors and others, all the former Jurors
appear, the Trial shall be by them only, but if any do not appear, they shall
be supplied by the others. 40. Assise 4.

In such cases where the Plaintiff is not to recover the Land, nor to defeat
the former Judgment, if nient comprise be pleaded upon a Recovery pleaded,
this may be tried by other than the former Jurors. 1 H. 6. 5.

As in Trespass for Trees cut, the Defendant pleads that he recovered before in
an Assise the same Land where, etc. and cut, etc. the Plaintiff says this Land,
where, etc. was not put in view, and so nient comprise. This shall not be tried
by the first Jurors, but by others, because this action does not defeat the
former Judgment nor recover any thing but Damages. Note the difference. 1 H.
6. 5. Where the Trial shall be per primer Jurors, Certificate of Assise what.
and where by them and auters, and where only per auters, see Rolls tit. Trial.
593.

This is where the Bailiff of a Tenant in an Assise pleads, etc. and loses
by the Assise. and the Tenant himself has a release, or some other discharge
to plead, then he may by this means have the parties and first Jurors to appear
again, and if it be found, he that before recovered shall lose the Land, and
yield double Damages. Terms of Law.

CAP. VII. Who may be Jurors, who not; who exempted; and of their Quality, and
Sufficiency.
SO much for their Number, next their Jurors must be Liberi.
Quality is to be considered; And for this, the Writ informs you who they ought
to be, 1. Liberos, that is, Freemen, not Villains, or Aliens, and that not only
Freemen, and not bond; but also those that have such freedom of mind, that they
stand indifferent, without any Obligation of Affinity, Interest, or any other
Relation whatsoever, to either party; sometimes the word Probos, instead of
Liberos, is attributed Fortescue cap. 25.
to them; they are both good Epithetes for a Juror, but I esteem the first most
significant.

2. They ought to be Legales, not outlawed, Legales.
not such as have lost Liberam legem, or become infamous, as Recreants, persons
attainted of Felony, false Verdict, Conspiracy, Perjury, Praemunire, or Forgery
upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 14. and not upon the Statute of 1 H. 5. 3. Not
such as have had Judgment to lose their Ears, stand on the Pillory or Tumbrel,
or have been stigmatized or branded, nor Infidels, neither can any such be
Witnesses. 1 Inst. 6.

3. Homines; they ought to be men, (yet A Jury of Women.
there shall be a Jury of Women to try if a Women be Enseint, upon the Writ de
ventre inspiciendo.) But what kind of men these ought to be, is worthy to be
known. And for this, some men are exempted from serving in Juries, in respect
of their Dignity, as Barons, and all above them in degree. Many are exempted by
the Writ de non Exemption of Juries.
ponendis in Assisis, F. N. B. 166. as aged persons 70. years old, and many
others are exempted, as Clerks, Tenants in ancient Who are to be exempted from
Juries.
Demesne, Ministers of the Forest, (out of the Forest) Coroners, Infants under
the age of 14. years, Officers of the Sheriff, sick decrepit men, and such as
are exempted by the Kings Charter: yet in a Grand Assise, preambulation,
Attaint, and in some other special Cases, such men as are not exempted by
reason of their Dignity, shall be forced to serve, notwitstanding their
exemption in other Cases. See Daltons Office of Sheriffs, fol. 121. 52 H. 3.
cap. 14. 2 Inst. 127. 130. 378. 447. and 561. Counselors, Attorneys, Clerks,
and other Ministers of the King Courts, are not to serve on Juries; But I find
one Jury made of Attorneys of the Common Bench, and Exchequer, in a Case
brought upon a Bill in the Exchequer, by Sir Thomas Seton, Justice, against
Luce C. for calling A Jury of Attorneys.
of him Traitor in the presence of the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer.
And this Jury of Attorneys gave the Justice one hundred marks Damages. 30
Assise 19.

The Court frequently order a Jury of Merchants, to try Merchants Affairs.

If the Charter of exemption be, that he In what cases they shall be discharged
by Charter.
shall not be put in Juratis Assisis seu recognitionibus, aliquibus yet this
shall not excuse in a Writ of Right upon Trial of the Grand Assise, for he
comes, not in in this Case by such Process as in other Cases, but is chosen by
the Oath of the 4 Chivaliers, and now he is in a manner Judge in this Case. 39
E. 3. 15.

Neither shall it exempt him in an Attaint, nor in a Grand Inquest, to inquire
of Felonies, etc. because the Charter has not this Clause, Licet tangat nos
and haeredes nostros, 42. Ass. 5.

At the Nisi prius the Bailiffs of a Vill. A^ what time and how the Charter
shall he allowed.
may show a Charter, that to try contracts, and ^. within the Vill. the Inquest
shall be all of Denizens without Foreigners, and this shall be allowed, and the
Foreigners shall be ousted. 29. Assise 15.

So may the Burgesses, who are put upon a Jury, out of the Borough, if they
have such a Charter. 30. Assise 1.

If a man be Impannelled of an Inquest Allowed without Writ.
and show such Charter of exemption of the same King in whose time he shows it,
this ought to be allowed without Writ. 39 E. 3. 15. Rolls ib. 633.

4. De vicinet. de C. It is not sufficient that they dwell in the County, but
they are to be of the Neighborhood, Nay le plus procheins, Visne.
to the place of the fact, as by Artic. super cap. 9. it is appointed: They
must be most near, most sufficient, and least suspicious, ib. as I shall show
hereafter.

5. Quorum quilibet habeat quatuor libras Sufficiency of Jurors.
terrae, tenement. vel reddit. per annum ad minus; This is their sufficiency,
where the debt or Damages (or both together, 1 Inst. 272.) amount to 40 Marks
or above. The sufficiency of Jurors in other Cases of lesser moment, is still
left to the discretion of the Justices, Fortescue cap. 25. who (experience
tells us) never require Jurors under 4 li. per annum, according to the Statute
of 27 Eliz. cap. 6. before which, men of 40. s. per annum, served; But neither
this, nor the Stat. of 35 H. 8. extend to Juries in Cities, Towns Corporate, or
other privileged places, or in the 12. Shires of Wales, so that there they
shall be returned, as before they lawfully might have been; for the Jurors
sufficency in Attaints, see the Statutes 15 H. 6. 5. 18 H. 6. 2. and 13 H. 8. 3.

As to the Statute 35 H. 8. 6. The trial ordained by that Statute, lies only in
such actions, which have their ordinary trial by 12. men, and not more, and by
Writ of Nisi prius, and this only in those actions, in which the Process of
Venire facias, Habeas Corpora and Distringas, lies against the Jurors, and in
no other actions.

And although the Statute only mention the Trial of issues joined in the Kings
Courts commonly holden at Westminst. and if the action be commenced in any
other Court: yet if the Issue be joined in any of the Courts at Westminster, it
shall be tried according to the said Statute, and so if those Courts are
removed from Westminster, the issues joined in them shall be tried as the said
Statute directs.

And the words betwixt party and party, shall only be intended of Common
persons, and not betwixt the King and any other person, nor when the King joins
with any other person, in any action which by his release or pardon may be
discharged before the action brought.

Which is necessary to be known, in respect of Tales de circumstantibus, etc.
See Williams his reading upon this Statute lately come out in print. In which
are many ingenious speculations, but because they do not come often in
practice, and the project of this Treatise, is only to contain matters useful
for practicers; that the Book may not swell too big, I omit them, referring
you to the reading it self. See afterward in the Chapter of Challenges.

It is the General course of the World, to esteem men according to their
Estate; For Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in arca, Tantum habet and
fidei: And sure I am, the makers of this Law had cause enough to do so in this
Case; for if men of less Estates should serve in Juries, such Fellows would
only be shifted into Inquests as had more need to be relieved by the 8 d. than
discretion to fifth out the truth of the fact: It Is hard to get an unbyassed
Jury now; But surely, less rewards would sooner bribe and bias meaner men,
than these. Therefore lest poverty or necessity should tempt, Every Juror must
have 4 li. per annum, as aforesaid, of Freehold, out of Ancient Demesne. And
the Court may Jurors of above 4. l. per annum.
in matters of great consequence, direct a Venire facias, for a Jury of above 4
l. per annum, a piece, but not under. Cro. 2. part. 672. But in such Cases
(every one knows) the Court most Commonly orders the Protonotary to choose 48.
out of the Sheriffs Book of Freeholders, of the most substantial men in the
County, and the parties strike out 12 a piece, then the Sheriff returns the
rest.

Note in former times when Estates of inheritance were in few men's hands, such
Jurors of 20. per annum.
as had 40. s. per annum were found sufficient men to serve on Juries. After
Estates of inheritance coming in greater measure to the Vulgar, it was by the
said Statute 27 Eliz. cap. 6. made 4. l. per annum, and the same reason
improving in late times, it was thought consisting with the wisdom of a
Parliament to raise it to 20. l. per annum, to the end men's Estates might be
trusted in the judgment of more knowing Judges of fact, when they become
litigious, and this was by an Act of 16, 17 Car. 2. cap. 3. which being but a
probationer, and to continue but for 3 years, and from thence to the end of the
next Session of Parliament, it is expired, but for that it may be revived, as I
humbly judge it expedient, I have thought fit to hint thus much concerning it.

Such a man who has Land, Rent, Office or other profit Apprendre, out of
ancient Demesne, to the clear yearly value of 4. li. of which he may have an
Assise, he has sufficient Freehold, to be a Juror. Vide the said reading.
Where you may know what Estate is sufficient to make a man a Juror. See hic in
the Chapter of Challenges.

Et qui nec D. E. nec F. G. aliqua affinitate Jurors mus: not be of affinity to
the parties.
attingunt, the Law is very cautelous, in not leading men into temptation:
Therefore lest kindred and Affinity should wrong the Conscience to help a
friend, our Jurors must not be related to any of the parties; And for this
Reason likewise, the Statutes provide, that no man of Law shall ride Judge of
Assise, or Jail-deliver, in his own Country, 8 R. 2. 2. 33 H. 8. cap. 24. yet
the contrary hereof is often done by a non obstante; but how consistent with
integrity or prudence, they know best who procure it to be done. But because
most things concerning the Quality and sufficiency of Jurors, will come more
properly under the Title Challenge, I will refer you thither; And first,
observe more particularly, De quo vicinet. the Jury ought to come.

CAP. VIII. Concerning the Visne, from what place the Jury shall come, etc.
VIcinetum is derived of this word Vicinus, Visne.
and signifies Neighborhood, or a place near at hand, or a Neighbor place,
where the question about the fact is moved. And the most general Rule (says
Coke, 1 Inst. 125.) is, That every Trial shall be, out of that Town, Parish, or
Hamblet, or place known out of the Town, etc. within the Record, within which
the matter of fact issuable is alleged, which is most certain and nearest
thereunto, the Inhabitants whereof may have the better and more certain
knowledge of the fact.

And if a thing be alleged in D. the Venue must not be of D. but de vicineto
de D. for otherwise the Neighborhood would be excluded. Roll. tit. Trial 622.

And if the fact be alleged in quadam pla^ea vocat. Kingstreet in parochia
sanctae Margaretae in Civitate Westminster. in Com. Midd. In this Case the Visne
cannot come out Parish.
of Platea, because it is neither Town, Parish, Hamlet, nor place out of the
Neighborhood, whereof a Jury may come by Law; but in this Case, it shall not
come out of Westminst. but out of the Parish of St. Margaret, because that is
the most certain. But therein also it is to be noted, that if it had been
alleged in Kingstreet, in the Parish of St. Margaret, in the County of
Middlesex, then should it have come out of Kingstreet; for then should
Kingstreet have been esteemed in Law a Town: For whenever a place is alleged
generally in pleading (without some addition to declare the contrary, (as in
this Case it is) it shall be Town.
taken for a Town.

And albeit parochia generally alleged, is a Parochia.
place uncertain, and may (as we see by experience include diverse Towns; yet if
a matter be alleged in parochia, it shall be intended in Law, that it
contains no more Towns than one, unless the party do show the contrary. But
when a Parish is alleged within a More 559.
City, there without question the Visne shall come out of the Parish, for that
is more certain than the City.

If a matter be pleaded done apud Bradford in Forfeild in parochia de
Belbroughton, the Venue shall be of Belbroughton, and not of Bradford, for
Belbroughton shall be intended to be a Town, and one Town shall not be intended
to be in another Town, and therefore Bradford shall not be intended to be a
Town. Rolls tit. Trial 619.

The Venue shall ever be of the most certain place.

In a Quo warranto for using a Warren in D. if the Defendant say the Ville D.
is parcel of the Manner of S. and prescribes to have a Warren within the said
Manor and Demesnes thereof, the Venire facias shall be of the Manor, for the
Manor by intendment, is more large than the Vill. If the Visne be de D. and S.
and the Venire facias be de D. S. and V. this is not good, because it is too
large. If apud Burgum de Plymouth, the Venue may be de Plymouth generally. If
apud Villam de Cambridge in Warda Fori, and the Venire facias is de Villa and
Warda praedict. this is helped by the Statute of Jeofailes.

If the place be out of a Town, the Venue shall not be of the next Town, but
from the place it self, but the Sheriff ought to return the Jury de pluis
prochein vill.

In Ejectment of Land in Foresta de Kevennon in Com. the Venue may be de
vicineto Forestae, for this is a place known, and by intendment, because the
Defendant has not pleaded in abatement, This is out of any Parish or Vill.

In inferior Courts within Boroughs the Venire facias is Quod Venire facias 12.
liberos Burgenses Burgi and parochiae de B. although there may be 12 Burgesses
which are not inhabitants, Rolls tit. Trial 622. etc.

The Venue shall follow the issue. vide hic postea.

In Trespass and Battery in London, if the Defendant justify in Mid. by
Process out of the Marshalls Court, that he arrested him, and because the
Plaintiff would not go with him, he beat him, etc. Absque hoc that he is guilty
in London vel alibi, out of the Jurisdiction of the Court. To which the
Plaintiff replies and acknowledges the arrest, but says that he beat him at
London de injuria sua propria absque tali causa, and issue upon this, This
shall be tried in London, and the words absque tali causa are void, the issue
being joined upon a place certain, scil. London, affirmed in a Writ of Error.
Rolls ib. 624. But the Court said, that he might have Demurred upon this Plea.

If a Trespass be alleged in D. and null De Corpore Comitatus.
tiel ville is pleaded, the Jury shall come de Corpore Comitatus. But if it be
alleged in S. and D. and null tiel ville de D. is pleaded, The Jury shall come
out de vicineto de S. For that is the more certain. So if a matter be alleged
within a Manor, the Manor.
Jury shall come de vicineto Manerii. But if the Manor be alleged within a
Town, it shall come out of the Town, because that is most certain, for the
Manor may extend into diverse Towns. And all these points were resolved by all
the Judges of England, upon Conference between them, in the Case of John
Arundel Esquire; indicted for the death of William Parker.

Where there may be a special Visne, the De Corpore Com.
Trial shall never be de Corpore Comitatus, Leon. 1 part. 109.

If a Venire facias ought to be of one or more Vills in certain, in a County,
and this is awarded de Corpore Comitatus, This seems to be aided by the Statute
of 21 Jac. of Jeofailes, for this comes from the Vills out of which it ought to
come, and from others, in as much as it comes de Copore Comitatus. Rolls tit.
Trial 618. and many other cases touching this matter.

But in Ejectment of Land called S. and no place is named where the Land lies,
and a Venire is awarded de Corpore Com. this is erroneous, and too large,
because there is a place certain where the Land lies, and yet it is not named
in the Nar. as it ought to be. Hob. 121.

But if the issue be taken upon a title of dignity, as whether Chivaler or not,
this may come de Corpore Comitatus, because that the lieu lou, etc. is not
material. ib:

If A. by the name of A. of the County of Hamshire bring a Scire facias upon a
Recognisance in Chancery in the County of Mid. against B. And the Defendant
plead that the Plaintiff is Outlawed by the name of A. of the County of
Chester, to which the Plaintiff replies, that he is not una and eadem persona,
this may be, by the body of the County of Mid. where the Writ is brought.
ibidem.

In a quare impedit for the Church de Uselbee, and the Defendant pleads that
there is no such Church, the Venue shall not come de Corpore Comitatus, but de
vicineto de Uselbee, for this is a place known, and it is intended the Church
of Uselbee is within the Ville of Uselbee, Hob. 325.

IN a prohibition, if the parties be at issue Wild.
upon a custom de non decimando of wood in the Wild of Sussex, the Venire
facias shall be de Corpore Com. for the Wild is not such a place, whereof the
Court may have conusance to be sufficient to have a Jury to come stom this, for
the Wild is a wood by intendment. Hob. 348.

In a real Action where the Demandant Heir tried where the Land lies, where not.
demands Land in one County, as Heir to his Father, and alleges his Birth in
another County, if it be denied that he is Heir, it shall not be tried where
the Birth is alleged, but where the Land lies; For there the Law presumes it
shall be best known who is Heir. But if the Defendant make himself Heir to a
Woman, (for that is the surer, and more certain side, and the Mother is
certain, when perhaps the Father is uncertain) and therefore there it shall be
tried where the Birth is alleged, because they have more Cro. 3. part. 818.
Cro. 2. part. 303.
certain Conusance, than where the Land lies.

And so it is where Bastardy is alleged, Bastardy.
the Trial shall be in like Case, Mutatis mutandis.

If the man plead the Kings Letters Patents, Non concessit where the Land lies.
and the other party plead non concessit, it shall not be tried where the
Letters bear date, for they cannot be denied, but where the Land lies.

Every Trial must come out of the Neighborhood of a Castle, Manor, Town,
Visne.
or Hamlet, or place known out of a Castle, Manor, Town or Hamlet, as some
Forests, and the like, as before,

Every Plea concerning the person, Where the Writ is brought at Common Law.
Plaintiff, etc. shall be tried where the Writ is brought.

When the matter alleged extends into a place at the Common Law, and a place
within a Franchise, it shall be tried at the Common Law.

Matters done beyond Sea may be tried in England, and therefore a Bond made
beyond Sea, may be alleged to be Matters done beyond Sea, how tryable in
England. Vide cap. 10.
made in any place in England, if it bear date in no place; But if there be a
place, as at Bordeaux in France, then it shall be alleged to be made in quodam
loco vocat. Bordeaux in France, in Islington in the County of Middlesex, and
from thence shall come the Jury 1 Inst. 261. Lach. 4. and 5. So if the Tenant
plead that the Demandant is an Alien born, under the Obedience of the French
King, and out of the Legiance Alien.
of the King of England; the Demandant may reply, that he was born at such a
place in England, within the Kings Legiance, and hereupon a Jury of 12. men
shall be charged; and if they have sufficient Evidence that he was born in
France, or in any other place out of the Realm, then shall they find, that he
was born out of the Kings Legiance. And if they have sufficient Evidence that
he was born in England, or Ireland, or Guernsey, or Jersey, or elsewhere within
the Kings Obedience, they shall find that he was born within the Kings
Legiance. And this has ever been the pleading, and manner of Trial, in that
Case. So of other things done beyond Sea, the adverse party may allege them to
be done at Things done beyond Sea.
such a place in England, from whence the Jury shall come, and in a Special
Verdict, they may find the things done beyond Sea. Ib. lib. 7. 26. Lib. 7. 26.


So when part of the act is done in England, and part out of the Realm, that
part that is to be performed out of the Realm, Part without the Realm, and part
within.
if issue be taken thereupon, shall be tried here by 12 men, and they shall
come out of the place where the Writ or Action is brought. Ib. lib. 6. 48.

Error, for that Judgment was given by default against the Defendant, being an
Infant, Full age tried where the Land lies.
issue was taken that he was of full age. And Godfrey moved, whether the Trial
should be in Norfolk, where the Land was, or in Middlesex, where the Action was
brought. And the Court held, that it should be tried in the County where the
Land lay; and Tanfield said, It was so adjudged in the Kings Bench, between
Throgmorton and Burfind. Cro. 3. part. 818.

Questions of Title of Land (except by Where the Land does ly.
special order of the Judges in some cases) are to be tried in the County where
the Land lies, for the Law is, that all real and mixed actions, as Wast,
Ejectment, etc. must be brought in the County where the Land is. But Debt,
Detinue, Account, Transitory Actions.
Actions of the Case, Battery, etc. are of their own nature Transitory, and yet
they ought to be laid and tried in their proper County, where the fact was
done, unless the Court order the contrary, for some Special reasons; and if
they are laid out of the proper County, daily practice tells us the Court may
alter the venue upon Affidavit, of the true place of the fact.

All Criminal matters are to be tried Criminal matters.
where the offense is committed.

If the Venue arise in two Counties, This is called a Joynder of Counties.
Finch. 410. Jury out of two Counties.
the Jury upon 2. Venire facias shall come from both, 6 out of one County, and
6. from the other. Cro. 3. part. 646. but by consent of parties, entered upon
Record, it may be by 5. out of one, and 7. from the other, as appears, Cro. 3.
part. 471. where in Replevin, the Defendant avows for Damage But out of more
than two Counties it cannot be made.
fesant, The Plaintiff by his Replication, claims common by Prescription in
loco quo, etc. being Broadway in the County of Worcester, appurtenant to his
Manor of D. in the County of Gloucester, and issue thereupon, and 2 Venire
facias awarded to the Sheriffs of the several Counties, and now 7. of the
County of Worcester appeared, and 5. of Gloucester. And although there ought to
have been 6. sworn of each County, to try that issue, as appears 49 Ed. 3. 1.
31 H. 8. 46. yet by the assent of parties, those 12 who appeared, by advice of
all the Justices, were sworn, and tried the issue. And it was commanded that
this Assent should be entered upon Record; for otherwise it would be a strange
Precedent.

In an Assise of Common in Confinio Comitatus, and the issue be, whether he had
Common by prescription in Land in one County, appendant to a Manor in another
County, this shall be tried by both Counties.

The same Law is in Trespass brought in one County (which cannot be in
confinio) upon such an issue, the Trial shall be per ambideux Counties. 49 E.
3. 20. See Rolls tit. Trial, 599. etc. many cases where the Jury shall come
from two Counties.

In an Action upon the Statute of Marlebridge, for taking a distress in one
County and chasing in another County, upon not guilty, the Trial shall be only
by the County where the chasing is, for this is all the cause of the action. 4
H. 6. 4.

In Escape upon an Arrest in one County, Escape:
and an Escape in another County, upon not guilty, this shall be tried, where
the Escape is laid, for the action is upon the Escape. Rolls ib. 602.

In an Action of Trover, apud Paxton in Covenant in P. to sell at R. tried at P.
Com. Hunt. the Defendant pleads a Bargain and Sale, apud Royston in Com.
Hertford, in the Market there, whereby he after converted them, apud P. in Com.
Hunt. The Plaintiff says, that he was possessed of those Goods, apud P. in
Com. Hunt. and that J. S. there stole them from him, and by Covenant betwixt
him and the Defendant, at P. in Com. H. he sold them to the Defendant, as he
has pleaded: The issue was upon the Sale made by Covenant, etc. And it was
tried in the County of Hunt. and found for the Plain^ff. And it was moved to be
a mis-tryal; for it ought to have been by a Jury of the County of Hertford, or
at leastwise by a Jury of both Counties; But it was adjudged to be well tried
because the Sale is confessed, and the Issue is upon the Covenant alleged in
Hertford, Cro. 3. part. 511.

In Debt upon a Bond in London, the Usurous Contract in another County.
Defendant pleaded an Usurious Contract in the County of Warwick; the Plaintiff
replied, that the Bond was made upon good consideration, Absque hoc, that it
was made for such Usurious Contract: the Trial shall be in the County of
Warwick; for the Bond is confessed, and the usury in Warwick is only in
question; so if the issue A Dures shall be tried there, not where the Action is
brought.
be, whether the Deed were made by Dures, the Trial shall be where the Dures,
and not where the Deed, is supposed to be made. Cro. 3. part. 195.

Where issue is taken upon a surrender, Surender.
it shall be tried where it was alleged to be done, and not where the Manor
is, of which the Copyhold is holden. ib. fo. 260. Br. tit. Visne 114.

In an Assumpsit laid at London in Warda Ward or Hundred, no good Visne.
de Cheap, the Venire was De parochia de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap, whereas
no Parish was mentioned before in the Count, and adjudged that the Venire was
ill laid in the Count, for a Venire facias may be of a Town, Parish, Manor, or
other place known, but not of a Hundred or Ward, ib. and so it is adjudged, ib.
Cro. 1 part. 165. for the Ward in a City, is but as the Hundred in a County.
The Parish in London is in lieu of a Vill and the Ward of a Hundred. Roll. tit.
Trial 620, 621, 622. vide hic apres.

Where the Visne is laid to be at a City, City.
in an Action brought in a superior Court, or within the City, though it be
both a City and County, the Venire facias may be de vicinet. Civitatis, Lach.
258. Though it has been held not good, but that the Venire facias must be de
Civitate, leaving out Vicinet. as you may read in Stamf. 155. But now the Case
in Cro. 2. part. 308. and Bulstr. 1 part. Rolls 622. 623.
129. say, that all Venire facias's are awarded de vicinet. Civitatis, which is
intended as well de Civitate it self, as de vicinet. infra Jurisdictionem So in
all inferior Courts. Styles 2. March 125.
of the City. And so it is, de vicinet. Civitatis, or de vicinet. or de
Civitate Coventry, Eborum, Norwich, Sarum, Bristow, Exon, and all other Cities
which are Counties in themselves. In all places besides London, no London.
mention is made of the Parish or Ward. Jb. 493. But in London the Parish and
Ward is mentioned. And therefore it was adjudged, Cro. 2. part. 150. That it
was not good to allege any thing done in London generally; But it must be, in
what Parish from which a Venire may be; But where a thing is laid in a City, in
alta Warda there, and the Venire facias is from the City only, it is well,
because City.
it shall be intended there be no more Wards in the same City. Cro. 3. part.
282.

In an action against the Hundred upon the Hundred.
Statute of Winton, etc. upon the Roll the Venire facias is awarded of Bradley
quod est proximum Hundredum, and the Venire facias is generally of Bradley.
This is well, because by the Roll it appears that Bradley and the Hundred were
all one. Roll. tit. Trial 598.

If a thing be laid done, apud Bristol, viz. in Wardae Sanctae Mariae in Warda
de Ratliff, and the Venire facias is de Warda de Ratliff, this is not good. ib.
619.

But if it be alleged in a Ward in the City of Bristol, etc. the Venue shall
be of the Ward, not de Civitate.

A Venire facias was awarded from T. Ward.
and not de vicinet. de T. and for this cause resolved to be ill, and not
amendable. Cro. 2. part. 399. Bro. tit. Ven. fa. 8.

If the issue be, Si rex concessit per literas De vicinet. left out, ill.
patentes, The Trial shall be, as has been said, where the Land lies, and not
where the Patent was made, because the Patent is of Record; and if it be
traversed, Where the Land lies.
it shall be tried by the Record, and therefore the issue being upon non
concessit, the issue is not upon the Patent; but where the issue is upon non
concessit, or non dimisit, of a thing which passes by Deed, the Trial shall be
where the Grant or Demise is alleged: But of a Feoffment, or Lease for life
pleaded, the issue being non Feoffavit, or non dimisit, Livery ought to be
made, and therefore the Trial shall be where the Land lies. Cro. 2. part. 376.
3. part. 259.

Where the offense is laid in the Count Where the Action is laid in one County,
and the Justification in another, the Trial shall be where the Justification is.
to be in one County, and the Justification in another County, and the
Plaintiff replies, de injuria sua propria, etc. The Visne shall be where the
Justification is alleged; As, one Example for all, to illustrate. In an Action
upon the Case, for words supposed to be spoken at Bridg-North, in the County of
Salop, the Defendant pleads, that he spoke them as a Witness upon his Oath,
upon an issue tried at Chard, in the County of Somerset. The Plaintiff replies
de son tort demesne, etc, And thereupon it was tried by a Venire facias of
Bridg-North, And Error thereof assigned, because it ought to have been by a
Visne of Chard, where the Justification arose, and it was held clearly to be a
mis-tryal; and not aided by the Stat. of Jeofailes, wherefore the Judgment was
reversed. Cro. 3. part. 468. 261. 870. More 410.

Replevin, taking 2 Horses at such a place in Denford in Com. Northampton, the
Defendant makes Con^sans as Bailiff to the Lord Mountague of his Manor of S.
which Manor is holden of the Honor of Gloucester, and that the place in
which, etc. is within the said Honor, and alleges a Custom within the said
Honor, on which Custom the parties were at issue, and the Venire facias was
from Denford the place of taking, which was moved after Verdict, for that the
Venue was not so large as the issue, which was the Honor, and of this opinion
was the whole Court of C. B. Pasch. 13 Car. 2. Hull verse. B^nning.

But the great question was, whence the Venue should arise in this Case, and
per Bridgman Chapter Just. and Just. Hide, in no Case can a Venue arise from an
Honor; and Chapter Just. said, he had caused the Prothonotaries to search for
Precedents, and they Honors.
could not find that ever a Venue did arise from an Honor, which is but a
bundle of services, and an incorporeal thing, from which no Venue can come, and
yet an Honor may have demesns, as the Honors of Grafton and Hampton have, but
Gloucester not.

Chapter Just. and Just. Hide, seemed that the Venue should be de Corpore Comitat.
Hob. 266. 249. But when the Court was after moved for their opinion, they bad
them take a Venire facias at their peril, and would give no opinion.

An action of Debt was brought on a Bond to perform Covenants in an Indenture,
wherely the Defendant had granted to the Plaintiff, a walk called shrob-walk in
the Forest of -- in Com Northampton, and Covenanted for peaceable in joyment,
etc. and he was ousted per Earl of Northampton who had right, on which Right
issue was joined, and the Venire facias was from Shrob-walk.

Per Cur. It Is not good, for it appears by the Record that Shrob-walk is not a
Vill: but if the Obligation had been laid to be made at Shrob-walk, the Venue
should arise from thence as a Vill. Inter. Stirt and Bales Pasch. 19 Car. 2. B.
R.

The Venue shall follow and be according Out of what County.
to the issue.

As for words in Warwickshire Thou art a Vide ^ic ante and postea.
Thief and stolest my Iron: The Defendant justifies and says, the Plaintiff
stole the Iron in Leichestershire, and brought it into Warwickshire, and
therefore he spoke the words in Warwickshire. If the Plaintiff replies de
injuria sua propria absque tali causa, the Jury shall come from Leicestershire,
to which the absque tali causa refers, for the words are acknowledged. See
Rolls tit. Trial 598. 623.

When part of the matter to be inquired of, is in one County or place, and part
in another, the Trial shall be there where the best Conusans of the matter may
be.

As in an action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declares that the Defendant took
the From the place best known.
Horse of A. at S. and sold him at D. to the Plaintiff as his proper Horse, and
afterward A. retook the Horse. If the Defendant plead that the property was in
him at the sale, upon which issue is joined; The Venue shall be de S. where the
taking is supposed, for there the property may be best known; which is only in
question. 42. Ass. 8. see several cases in Rolls ib. 603. under this head.

If the issue be whether L. did ride from London to York, and from York to
London Where the Counties cannot join.
5 times in six days, this may be tried by London only. Although part of the
matter to be inquired of was done in each County.

In an action of Battery in London, if the Defendant justifies in defense of
his posses^on in D. in Essex, and the Plaintiff says de son tort demesne s^ns
tiel cause, this ought to be tried by both Counties if they might join, because
he may be found guilty at another day, and therefore because they may not join,
this may be tried in Essex.

Of Assizes in confinio Com. See. 1 Inst. 154.

In case for words in one County, if the Defendant justify in another County,
and the Plaintiff reply de son tort demesne, etc. although the Counties ought to
join, if they could, and the Justification is principally put in issue, yet the
Trial may be in either County at the Election of the Plaintiff.

In Ejectment in London upon a Lease Rolls tit. Trial 620.
made there of Land in Mid. if the Defendant plead not guilty, this may be
tried in London, because the Counties cannot join although London cannot join
with another County. 49 E. 3. 20.
the Jury ought to enquire of the Ejectment in Mid. and judgment affirmed in a
Writ of Error. See Rolls tit. Trial 602.

Two Counties may join although they be not nearest, nay though 20 Counties be
between them. Finch French. 59. 1 Inst. 154.

But if it be of a Lease at Ickford of Land in Bury in Suff. the Venue must be
of Bury not of Ickford. ib. 619*

If the issue be taken upon the name or Where the Writ is brought.
condition of the person, this shall be tried in the County where the Writ is
brought, 21 E. 4. 8. for this may be well known there. Rolls ib. 615.

Where the issue is to be tried upon a point which shall be tried by two
Counties, and one cannot join with the other, this shall be tried, where the
Writ is brought. 21 E. 4. 8. but for this see before where the Counties cannot
join.

In Debt in London against I. S. of D. in Where in other County than where the
writ is brought.
Essex, if the Defendant says that he was at S. in Essex at the time of
purchasing the Writ, and not at D. this shall be tried in Essex, and not where
the Writ is brought, for none can know where he dwelt so well as the County of
Essex. 12 H. 6. 5.

Vide many cases in Rolls ib. 605. etc. about this matter.

In an Action of the Case against a Sheriff, upon an escape in London, and the
Arrest laid Where the escape was, and not where the Arrest was.
to be in Southampton; adjudged, that the Visne shall be where the escape was,
because that is the ground of the Action, and not where the Arrest was: Cro. 3.
part. 271.

In Debt upon an Obligation, payment was pleaded, apud domum mansionalem
Rectoriae de Much-Hadam, and the Venire facias was de vicineto de Much-Hadham,
where it ought to have been de vicinet. Rectoriae de Much-Hadam; but it was
adjudged good, because Much-hadam is here intended a Vill. ib. 804. So you see,
that where a thing is alleged to be done at the Capital House Rectoriae.
of D. there the Venire shall be of D. For that is intended to be all one with
the Vill. Castle.
But where it is at the Castle of Hertford, etc. there the Venire facias shall
not be de Rolls tit. Trial 621.
vicineto de Hertford; but de Castro de Hertford, for Castrum Hertford is
intended a distinct place by it self; and so of all Castles. Cro. 2. part. 239.
More 862.

A Venire facias may be awarded of a Castle. Rolls 618.

Where the issue is not parcel of the Manor Manor.
of D. or the Custom of a Manor is in question, the Venire ought to be of the
Manor. Hob. 284. Cro. 2. part 327. If the Manor be laid to be in a Vill, the
Venire facias Rolls tit. Trial 621.
may be of the Manor in the Vill, as de vicineto mane^ii de Stansted-Hall in
Windham. Cro. 2. part. 405. More 851. Arundels Case. li. 6. 14.

The Venue cannot be of a site of a Manor. Rolls tit. Trial 618.

In the Common Bench, in Trespass, for taking away a Bag of Pepper, the
Defendant justified as Servant of the Mayor and Commonalty of London, for
Wharfage due to them, by the Custom of London, which the Plaintiff refused to
pay. The Plaintiff replied that the Custom did not extend to him, London.
because he was a Freeman of the City, and ought not to pay Wharfage, to which
the Defendant re-joyned, that the Custom extended to him, as well as to
strangers; upon which, issue was joined.

Resolved, 1. That the issue should be tried Re^order.
per Pais, not by the mouth of the Recorder, because he certifies nothing but
what the Mayor and Aldermen direct, who are concerned in the cause.

2. That the Venire facias should not be awarded to the Sheriffs of London, nor
Middlesex, because the Trials there, are by Freemen. But it shall be to the
County Where the Trial shall be by the County next adjoining.
next adjoining, viz. to the Sheriff of Surry. So where any City is concerned,
the Venire facias shall not be directed to the Officers of the City, but to the
County next adjoining. Hob. 85. Styles 137. More 871. vide hic cap. 2.

If the issue concern the Mayor and Commonalty of a Town, the Array shall be
made all of Foreigners. 31. Assise 19. vide Rolls tit. Trial 597.

So if the issue concern the Mayor and Commonalty, etc. although they are not
parties, yet the Venire facias shall be directed to the Sheriff of the next
County. 15 E. 4. 18.

Where a man lends a Horse to another Where a man lends his horse in one place,
and he is spoiled in another, Visne where he is spoiled.
to till his Land, and the Horse dies with excessive Labor, the Visne shall be
from the place where the excessive labor was, and not where the delivery was.
More 887. vide Hob. 188. Rolls tit. Trial 615. pasch. 22 Car. 2. B. R. Horsley
versus Potter. An action of the case was brought for misusing an Horse, in
Itinere; the Contract was laid at Swafham in Norf. and the riding to
Peterborough in Northamptonshire, where the Horse died, it was tried in Norf.
and the Court seemed that it ought to have been tried in Northamptonshire,
where the damage was done, and not where the contract was made, but it was
aided by the Stat. of Jeofailes. 17 Car. 2. cap. 17. (after Verdict) that
Statute being then in force.

Where a promise is laid in one place, and Promise in one place and breach in
another. Visne guided by the issue.
the breach in another, the Visne must be according to the event of the issue,
whether it be taken upon the promise, or breach. But if no place be alleged
for the breach, and issue be taken upon it, the Visne must be from the place of
the promise, which shall be intended right, where the contrary appears not, see
Godbolt 274.

Easter 39 Eliz. In the Kings Bench, Trespass, Assault and Battery, en Wilts,
continuing the Assault in Middlesex, and adjudged that the Jurors shall come
out of both Counties. More 538.

The name of a Manor, or Land, or Misnomer.
other local thing, shall be tried where it lies, because it is local; but the
name or addition of a person, shall be tried where the Action is brought,
because this is transitory. Bro. tit. Visne 7. lib. 6. 65.

In Covenant upon an Indenture of Demise of the Rectory of Stoken Church, in
the County of Oxford, That the Defendant Where the Land lies.
had good Power and Authority to demise: The Indenture was alleged to be made
at London, and the Venire facias was awarded to the Sheriff of Oxon, and this
being assigned for Error, Judgment was affirmed, and this adjudged to be good.
More 710. because the Rectory was in Com. Oxon. vide page 45.

In Debt upon an Obligation in one Where the Land lies and not where the Writ,
etc.
County to perform Covenants in a Lease, and the Land and payments were in
another County; The Trial shall be where the Land and payments are. 44 E. 3. 42.

In Debt upon a Lease in one County, and the payment of the Rent upon the Lease
limited there also, but the Land was in another County, and the payment upon
the Land; this shall be tried where the Land and payment was, for he was bound
to pay this there upon the distress. ib.

But the Trial should have been where the Writ was brought, if the payment had
not been alleged to be where the Land was. ib.

If Debt be brought for Rent upon a Lease Where the Land and Writ, etc.
for years, and the Action is brought, where the Land is, but the Deed of the
Lease bears Date in another County, the Trial shall be where the Land and Writ
is brought. 45 E. 3. 8. The issue being whether the Lessor had a conditional
estate or not, and so a lawful eviction.

If the issue be in an Assise whether the Where the Land lies and where not.
Tenant be the eldest Son of J. S. and his birth is alleged in another County,
yet this shall be tried where the Land is. 46. Ass. 5.

If an infant bring an Assise, and a release of his Ancestor is pleaded against
him dated in another County, this must be tried where the Release is dated, and
not by the Assise, although the Plaintiff be an Infant, and the circumstances
are to be inquired. 21 E. 3. 20. See Rolls ib. 611.

In case if the Plaintiff declare upon a trust Where from two places in one
County, and where not. Vide hic. cap. 10.
at D. and of a wrong at S. upon not guilty, if it appear the trust is not
material, the Venue shall only come from S. and not from both places, one not
being material.

In case for stopping a way from such a place, to such a place, and that the
obstruction was at D. upon not guilty the Venue shall not come from D. only,
for all the way is put in issue.

In Trespass in one Vill, and a release pleaded dated in another Vill, within
the same County, upon non est factum, this shall be tried per ambideux. Rolls
ib. 624. vide hic ante. See Rolls ib. 615. many cases about this.

Where the Venue cannot be from a Vill, De Corpore Com.
Hamlet or lieu conus, there it may be de Corpore Comitatus, for if it might
not be so, the cause could not be tried.

A lieu conus is a Castle, Manor or other notorious place well known, and
generally taken notice of by those who dwell about it, and not a Close or
Pasture of ground, or such like place of no repute.

A Custom of a County is to be tried de Corpore Comitatus, for the Custom runs
thorough the whole County.

Where the Parish is named by way of Parish.
denotation, or explanation of the place where the Fact is alleged to be done,
as at the Parish*Church of Hauk Huck^nol, there the Venire facias shall be of
the Town, not of the Parish. Bulstr. 1 part. 60, 61.

If the Fact be alleged in Kingstreet, in Town.
the Parish of St. Margarets, in Com. Mid. You have already heard that the
Visne shall be from Kingstreet, because it is intended to be a Town; but where
it is alleged to be done at Grays-Inn-Hall, or Lincolns-Inn-Hall, etc. in
Holborn, the Visne shall be from Holborn, which is the Town; for as Yelverton
said, it was never heard of any Inns of Court.
Venire facias to be had of any of the Inns of Court, Bulstr. 2. part. 120.
especially of the Not from house or hall.
Hall, because it cannot be of a House, much less of a Hall.

In Ejectment upon a Demise made at Denham of Lands in parochia de Denham
praedict. The Visne may be of Denham, or of the Parish of Denham, because
Denham and Parochia de Denham pr^dict. are all one by intendment of Law.
Bulstr. 2. part. 209. More 709. Hob. 6. But when it appears by the Record, or
is intended that the Parish Parish.
is more spacious than the Town, as the case in More 837. where in Ejectment
the Lease was alleged to be made at Bredon, of Tithes in W. and W. Hamlets
within the Parish of Bredon, there the Venire facias must not be of Bredon, but
of the Parish, because it appears, that the Parish extends further than the
Town. Hob. 326.

Where an Action of Debt for Rent, is For Rent where the Land lies, and when
not.
brought upon the privity of the Contract, by the Lessor, as against the
Lessee, or his Executors, for Arrearages due in the lifetime of the Testator,
the Visne may be laid in any place; but where the Action is brought upon the
privity in Estate, as against the Assignee of the Lessee, or his Executors, for
Rent due after the Testators death, the Visne must be, where the Lands lie.
Lach. misprinted, 197. 262. 271. v. li. 3. 24.

And so it was adj. in case of Hall and Arnold, Mich. 1656. B. R. and it was
further adj. there, the Case being of a Lease made at London of Lands in
Monmouthshire, rendering Rent payable at the Old Exchange, for which action is
brought by the Heir. If there had been no place of payment, the Heir must have
brought his Action where the Lands lie, but the place of payment being in
another County, he has his Election, as on a Lease for years of Lands in two
Counties.

Walkers Case, in Debt upon a Lease of Debt for rent of Land in another County.
Land in another County, Nihil debet shall be tried where the action is
brought. Br. tit. Visne 119. Vide page 93.

In Replevin brought by Strede, against Hartly, for taking a Distress at
Baildon, the Defendant made Conusance as Bailiff, because that locus in quo,
etc. was holden of W. H. as of his Manor of Baildon, and upon issue, horse de
son fee, the Venire facias was de vicineto de Baildon; and upon motion that the
Venire facias ought to have been, as well from the Manor, as the Town, The
Court adjudged it to be well enough, for that the Court shall not intend Manor.
the Manor was larger than the Town, because it does not appear so to be,
though possibly it might, as like the Case of Town and Parish. Hob. 305. 326.

If the Sheriff return that there are no Visne next adjoining in what Cases.
Freeholders of that Visne, or if the Visne be where the Kings Writ runs not,
as in the Cinque Ports, etc. or in a place where Cinque Ports.
the men are privileged from serving on Juries out of that place, as the Isle
of Ely, etc. the Plaintiff may pray a Venire facias of the Visne next
adjoining, and if the Visne be in Wales, (ou brief le Roy ne Court) the Venire
Wales.
facias shall be directed to the Sheriff of the next English County, to cause
the Jury to come de propinquiori Visne of his County, to the Visne in Wales
adjoining: For the Court shall not be ousted of the Plea. Fitz. Abridg. tit.
Visne 8. Jurisdict. 24.

In an action against a Hundred, the Venire facias may come from the next
Hundred generally.

In Trespass, if the Defendant plead not guilty to part, and to the residue a
Plea, which causes the Trial of that to be by a Jury de Prochein Hundred, The
Venire shall be awarded al Prochein Hundred, for both issues, because there
ought not to be two Venire facias in one action vide Rolls tit. Trial 596.

In an Appeal of murder committed in the Cinque Ports, although the King be
concerned, yet because this is betwixt common persons, the Venire facias to the
next adjoining Vill. ibidem.

If the issue be joined of a matter in Ireland, Ireland.
this shall be tried by a Jury of the next County in England. ib.

If the issue be to be tried by the Venue of Prochein Hundred.
a Manor, and the Plaintiff suggests that he is Lord of the Hundred in which
the Manor is, and that all within the Hundred are within his Distress, if the
Defendant acknowledge this, the Venue shall not be de Corpore Comitatus, but of
the next Hundred, for if it should be de Corpore Comitatus, this should be
tried by the Tenants of the Manor. Rolls ib. 667.

If the Visne is in some part mis-awarded, or Visne mis-awarded in part.
sued out of more places or fewer than it ought to be, so as some place be
right named, this is aided by the Stat. of Jeofailes, which has ended the
differences, in many cases reported in our Books, concerning this point,
wherefore I purposely omit them.

Error, for that the Judgment was given Infamy where the Land lies.
by default against the Defendant, being an Infant, upon issue that he was of
full age, adjudged, that the Trial should be in Norfolk, where the Land was,
and not in Middlesex, where the Action was brought. Cro. 3. part. 818.

If the Visne comes from a wrong place, May be out of a wrong place by Consent.
yet if it be per assensum partium, and so entered of Record, it shall stand;
for Omnis Consensus tollit errorem. 1 Inst. 125.

Holmes verse. Sanders Hill. 22, 23 Car. B. R. Error to reverse a Judgment
given in the Kings Bench in Ireland, in Debt for Rent brought by the Assigns
of a reversion, the Plaintiff declared of a Lease of Land in such a Parish in
the Suburbs of Dublin, on nil debet pleaded, the Venire facias was from the
said Parish in Civitate Dublin, and Judgment there per Plaintiff, it was
assigned for Error, because the Land lies in the Suburbs of the City, and the
Venire facias was from a Parish in the City.

Per Cur. It is all one, for the Suburbs are always within the Franchise of the
City, as Fleetstreet is within the Suburbs of London; but the Strand not,
though so reputed.

Note, It was adjudged, Error in an Inferior Court, that the Venire facias was
awarded secundum consuetudinem Curiae which ought to be per Curiam. Reader
verse. More, Mich. 1650. B. R.

CAP. IX. Challenges.
YOu have already seen of what Visne the Jury ought to be: The next thing to be
considered, is concerning Challenges.

Challenge is a word common as well to the English as to the French, and
sometimes Challenge.
signifies to claim, and the Latin word is vendicare; sometime in respect of
revenge to challenge into the field, and then it is called in Latin, vindicare
or provocare; Sometime in respect of partiality or insufficiency, to challenge
in Court persons returned on a Jury. And seeing there is no proper Latin word
to signify this particular kind of challenge, they have framed a word
anciently written Chalumniare, and Columpniare, and Calumpniare, and now
written Calumniare, and has no affinity with the verb Calomnior, or Calumnia,
which is derived of that, for that is of a quite other sense, signifying a
false accuser, and in that sense, Bracton uses Calumniator to Calumn^ator.
be a false accuser: but is derived of the old word Caloir, or Chaloir, which
in one signification is to care for, or foresee. And for that to challenge
Jurors, is the mean to care for or foresee, that an indifferent Trial be had,
it is called Calumniare, to challenge that is, to except against them that are
returned to be Jurors, and this is his proper signification: But sometimes a
Summons, Sommonitio is said to be Calumniata, and a Count to be challenged, but
this is improperly. And forasmuch as men's Lives, Fames, Lands, and Goods, are
to be tried by Jurors, it is most necessary that they be Omni exceptione
majores, and therefore I will handle this matter the more largely.

A Challenge to Jurors is twofold, either Challenge is twofold.
to the Array, or to the Polls: to the Array of the principal Panel, and to
the Array of the Tales. And herein you shall To the Array.
understand, that the Jurors names are ranked in the Panel one under another,
which order or ranking the Jury, is called the Array, and the Verb, to Array
the Jury, and so we say in common speech, Battle Array, for the order of the
Battle. Array.
And this Array we call Arraiamentum, and to make the Array, Arraiare, derived
of the French word Arroier; so as to challenge the Array of the Panel, is at
once to challenge or except against all the persons so Arrayed or Impannelled,
in respect of the Partiality or default of the Sheriff, Coroner, or other
Officer that made the Return.

And it is to be known, that there is a principal Principal Challenges.
cause of challenge to the Array and a challenge to the favor: principal, in
respect of partiality, as first, if the Sheriff or other Officers be of kindred
or affinity to the Plaintiff or Defendant, if the affinity continue. Secondly,
If any one or more of the Jury be returned at the denomination of the party,
Plaintiff or Defendant, the whole Array shall be quashed. So it is if the
Sheriff return any one, that he be more favorable to the one than to the
other, all the Array shall be quashed. Thirdly, if the Plaintiff or Defendant
have an Action of Battery against the Sheriff, or the Sheriff against either
party, this is a good cause of challenge. So if the Plaintiff or Defendant have
an action of Debt against the Sheriff, (but otherwise it is, if the Sheriff
have an action of Debt against either party) or if the Sheriff have parcel of
the Land depending upon the same Title, or if the Sheriff or his Bailiff which
returned the Jury, be under the distress of either party; or if the Sheriff or
his Bailiff be either of Counsel, Attorney, Officer in fee, or of Robes, or
servant of either party, Gossip, or Arbitrator in the same matter, and treated
thereof. And where a subject may challenge the Array for unindifferency, there
the King, being a party, may also challenge for the same cause, as for Kindred,
or that he has part of the Land, or the like; and where the Array shall be
challenged against the King, you shall read in our Books.

In Ejectment, the Plaintiff suggesteth that his Lessor, the Sheriff and
Coroners were Tenants to a Dean and Chapter, whose Interest was concerned, and
prayed the Venire facias to Elisors, and had it, being confessed by the
Defendant, and the Court took it a principal challenge. v. Hut. 24. More 470.
Roll. rep. 328. Duncomb and Ingleby, Trin. 15 Car. 2. B. R.

A prayer to Elisors in Trials at Bar may be at the suit of the Defendant or
Plaintiff, but in Nisi prius at the prayer of the Plaintiff only, and per Cur.
it is a principal challenge that the Plaintiffs Lessor is Sheriff or kindred,
and if the Plaintiff does not pray, etc. the Defendant may challenge the Array
at the Assizes. Lord Brooks Case, Trin. 1657. B. R.

It Is a good challenge to the Array, that the Array is made and returned by 2
Coroners, only when there are four in the County, and that the Writ is returned
by one of the Sheriffs of London only. So if a Bailiff return them that are out
of his Franchise, or if an Array be to be of persons out of a Franchise and
Guildable, and the Bailiff return them, for the Sheriff ought to make it; and
that some of the Panel were returned by the Bailiff of a Franchise, where the
whole Panel is returned as Array by the Sheriff, this is a good challenge to
the Array, for otherwise the parties would lose their challenge to the Array
made by the Bailiff. Rolls tit. Trial 636.

If the Defendant sue the Writ of Hab. By what person.
Corpus by Proviso at the return, the Plaintiff may challenge the Array for
Kindred between the Defendant and the Sheriff. D. 15 El. 319. 13.

D. 15 El. 319. The Array was quashed although the Sheriff was the Naufe in
What Consangunity is sufficient.
descent, and the Tenant in the 7. descent from the Ancestor of whom both
descended, Cousin to the parties Wife, although herself no party. So if the
Wife be dead, if issue be alive. These are good challenges to the Array.

Alliance to one party is a good challenge. For affinity.


If the Sheriff be allied at the making At what time.
of the Panel, and be dead at the challenge, yet this is a good challenge.
It Is no challenge that the Sheriff became of kin after making the Panel.

It Is no challenge to the Array if all the Jurors be of affinity.

It may be after a Tales prayed, for no challenge can be until the Jury is
full. If the suggestion of Cousinage to have the Venire facias to the Coroners
be denied, and the Venire facias is awarded to the Sheriff, the same challenge
shall not be allowed to the Array, but any other cause may be alleged, than
what was before denied.

Favorably made by the Sheriff or his For favor.
Bailiff or the Bailiff of a Franchise, is a good challenge. That the Sheriff
is within the Distress of a party, or servant to the Plaintiff, Of the Robes of
the Plaintiff, was Arbitrator for a party, is procurator and maintainer of a
party, That the Sheriff purchased part of the Land in question, That the Panel
was made by the Bailiff of the Franchise of the other party. These are good
challenges to the Array.

It Is no principal challenge that one party is Tenant, or servant to the
Sheriff, but it is a good challenge for favor.

It is a good challenge to the Array, That Denomination.
the Sheriff made the Array, or put a Juror into the Panel at the denomination
of any of the parties in favor to them, or of their servants, or of one
interessed, or of a maintainer, or of the Counsel, or of a procurator.

Not if strangers by the Sheriffs leave make the Panel, or it be made at the
request of both parties.

It Is a good challenge to the Array, that For malice.
one of the parties has brought an action of Debt against the Officer that
returns the Panel, or that there is a difference betwixt the Officer and the
party, that the Officer killed his servant.

But not that the Officer has Debt against the party, for he may demand his
Debt without malice.

The Challenge ought to be quod tempore How and in what manner the Challenge is
to be made.
Pannelli praedict Arraiati, the Sheriff was Cousin to the Wife of the
Defendant, etc. not afterward, nor before, unless you aver that she was alive
or had issue at the making the Panel.

If the Challenge be taken for Cousinage, it ought to be shown coment Cousin,
but in such a challenge to be a Juror it is not necessary to show coment Cousin.
What Counterplea of a Challenge is good and how to be pleaded.


The manor and conveiance of the Cousinage alleged in a challenge is not
traversable. You may traverse the Cousinage prout without modo and forma. If
the Challenge be that the Sheriff was Cousin to the Plaintiff, or within his
distress; it is no Counterplea to say he is likewise of kin to the Defendant, or
within his distress also.

Where the King is party to the issue, no Where the King is party.
challenge shall be to the array for favor, 38 Ass. 19.

Otherwise if the Sheriff be Vadelect of the Kings Crown, or such menial
servant.

If it be presented that I. S. has made a nuisance to London and le gents, it is
no challenge to the array, to say the Sheriff of Middlesex is deputed and
removable by the Commonalty of London, because this is the suit of the King.

The King may make his challenge that the Sheriff is within the parties
distress, although every subject owes greater favor and obedienue to the King,
by reason of his Allegiance, than to any Lord by reason of Tenure.

In a writ of Right or any other writ, a What persons may be impannelled.
Baron of the Realm may excuse himself.

In a writ of Right the Inquest ought to be all Knights. A Banneret may be
impannelled in this writ; so may a Sergeant, if there be not Chivalers
covenable.

In an attaint upon a recovery by false verdict in an Assise, some Knights
ought to be returned, and if there be not any in the Hundred where the Land
lies, they shall be returned out of the County.

By default of the Sheriff, as when the array of a Panel is returned by a
Bailiff of a Franchise, and the Sheriff return it as of himself, this shall be
quashed, because the party shall lose his challenges. But if a Sheriff return a
Jury within a Liberty, this is good, and the Lord of the Franchise is driven to
his remedy against him.

If a Peer of the Realm, or Lord of Parliament Where there must be a Knight
returned of the Jury.
be demandant or Plaintiff, Tenant or Defendant, there must a Knight be
returned of his Jury be he Lord Spiritual, or Temporal, or else the array may
be quashed: but if he be returned, although he appear not, yet the Jury may be
taken of the residue. And if others be joined with the Lord of Parliament, yet
if there be no Knight returned, the array shall be quashed against all. So in
an attaint, there ought to be a Knight returned to the Jury.

If two Peers sue as Gentlemen, and admit themselves so in pleading; it is no
challenge to say, no Knight is returned; for the Sheriff is in no fault.

And when the King is party, as in traverse Where the King is party.
of an Office, he that traverseth may challenge the array, as hereafter in this
Section shall appear; and so it is in case of life: And likewise the King may
challenge the array, and this shall be tried by Tryors according to the usual
course. The array challenged on both sides shall be quashed.

And if two estrangers make a Panel, and not in favorable manner for the one
party or the other, and the Sheriff returns the same, the array was challenged
for this cause, and adjudged good.

If the Bailiff of a Liberty return any out of his Franchise, the array shall
be quashed, as an array returned by one that has no Franchise shall be quashed.

Challenge to the array for favor: He Challenge to the favor.
that takes this, must show in certain the name of him that made it, and in
whose time, and all in certainty: This kind of Challenge being no principal
challenge, must be left to the discretion and conscience of the Triors; as if
the Plaintiff or Defendant be Tenant to the Sheriff, this is no principal
Challenge, for the Lord is in no danger of his Tenant, but e converso it is a
principal Challenge; but in the other he may challenge for favor, and leave it
to trial. So affinity between the Son of the Sheriff, and the Daughter of the
party, or e converso, or the like, is no principal challenge, but to the
favor; but if the Sheriff marry the Daughter of either party, or e converso,
this (as has been said) is a principal Challenge, or the like. But where For
the King.
the King is party, one shall not challenge the array for favor, etc. because
in respect of his allegiance, he ought to favor the King more. But if the
Sheriff be a Vadelect of the Crown, or other menial servant of the King, there
the challenge is good; and likewise the King may challenge the array for favor.

Note, upon that which has been said it appears, that the challenge to the
array, To the Array.
is in respect of the cause of unindifferency, or default of the Sheriff or
other Officer that made the Return, and not in respect of the persons returned,
where there is no unindifference or default in the Sheriff, etc. for if the
challenge to the Array be found against the party that takes it, yet he shall
have his particular challenge to the Polls.

In some Cases a Challenge may be had to the Polls, and in some Cases not at
all. To the Polls.
Challenge to the Polls, is a challenge to the particular persons, and these be
of four kinds, that is to say, Peremptory, Principal, which induce favor, and
for default of Hundredors.

Peremptory, this is so called, because he Peremptory Challenge.
may challenge peremptorily upon his own dislike, without showing of any cause,
and this only is in case of Treason or Felony, in favorem vitae; and by the
common Law, the prisoner upon an Indictment or Appeal, might challenge thirty
five, which was under the number of three Iuries; but now the Statute of 22 H.
8. the number is reduced to 20. in petite Treason, Murder and Felony; and in
Case of high Treason, and Misprision of high Treason, it was taken away by the
Stat. of 33 H. 8. but now by the Stat. of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mary, the Common
Law is revived for any Treason, the prisoner shall have his challenge to the
number of 35. and so it has been resolved by the Justices, upon conference
between them in the case of Sir Walter Raleigh and George Brooks: But all this
is to be understood when any subject that is not a Peer of the Realm, is
arraigned for Treason or Felony. But if he be a Lord of Parliament, and a Peer
of the Realm, and is to be tried by his Peers, he shall not challenge any of
his No Challenge of Peers.
Peers at all, for they are not sworn as other Jurors be, but find the party
guilty or not guilty, upon their Faith or Allegiance to the King, and they are
Judges of the fact, and every of them does separately give his judgment,
beginning at the lowest. But a Subject under the degree of Nobility, may in
case of Treason or Felony, challenge for just cause as many as he can, as shall
be said hereafter. In an appeal of death, against diverse, they plead not
guilty, and one joint Venire facias is awarded, if one challenge peremptorily,
he shall be drawn against all. Otherwise it is of several Venire fac.

Note, that at the common Law, before the Stat. of 33 E. 1. the King might have
challenged peremptorily without showing The Kings Challenge restrained.
cause, but only that they were not good for the King, and without being
limited to any number, but this was mischievous to the subject, tending to
infinite delays and danger. And therefore it is Enacted, Quod de c^tero licet
pro Domino Rege dicatur quod juratores, etc. non sunt boni pro Rege: non
propter hoc remaneant inquisitiones, etc. sed assignent certam causam calumni^
suae, etc. whereby the King is now restrained.

Principal, so called, because if it be Principal Challenge the Polls.
found true, it stands sufficient of it self without leaving any thing to the
Conscience or discretion of the Triors. Of a principal cause of challenge to
the Array, we have said somewhat already; now it follows with like brevity,
to speak of principal Challenges to the Polls, (that is) severally to the
persons returned.

A principal Challenge is nothing else but such matter which proves evident
favor, or enmity in the Iuror; and therefore it belongs to the Justices to
draw the Iuror, and not to leave the decision to Tryors, 21 E. 4. 11.

Principal Challenges to the Poll may be To the Polls.
reduced to four heads. First, Propter honoris respectum, for respect of
Honor: Secondly, Propter Defectum, for want or default: Thirdly, Propter
Affectum, for affection or partiality: Fourthly, Propter Delictum, for Crime or
Delict.

First, Propter Honoris respectum, As any Principal Challenges to the Polls.
Peer of the Realm, or Lord of Parliament, as a Baron, Viscount, Earl,
Marquess, and Duke, for these in respect of Honor and Nobility, are not to be
sworn on Juries; and if neither party will challenge him, he Propter honoris
respectum.
may challenge himself: for by Magna Charta it is provided, Quod nec super eum
ibimus, nec super cum mittemus nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, aut per
legem terrae. Now A Peer may challenge himself.
the Common Law has divided all the subjects into Lords of Parliament, and
into the Commons of the Realm. The Peers Peers and Commons.
of the Realm are divided into Barons, Viscounts, Earls, Marquesses and Dukes;
The Commons are divided into Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen,
and Burgesses: And in Judgment of Law, any of the said degrees of Nobility are
Peers to another: As if an Earl, Marquess, or Duke, be to be tried for Treason
or Felony; a Baron, or any other degree of Nobility is his Peer. In like
manner, a Knight, Esquire, etc. shall be tried per Pares, and that is by any of
the Commons, as Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen, or Burgesses; so as when any of
the Commons is to have a Trial, either at the Kings Suit, or between party and
party, a Peer of the Realm shall not be impannelled in any Case.

Secondly, Propter Defectum, Challenge Propter defectum.


1. Patriae, as Aliens born. 2. Libertatis, as Villains or Bondmen, and so a
Champion must be a Freeman. 3. Annui sensus. i. e. liberi tenementi.
First, what yearly Freehold a Iuror ought to have, that passes upon Trial of
the life See before, cap. 7. Quorum quilibet habeat 4. l. etc.
of a man, or in a Plea real, or in a Plea personal, where the Debt or damage
in the Declaration amounts to 40. Marks, Vide Littleton, Sect. 464. Secondly,
this Freehold must be in his own right, in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for term of
his own life, or for another man's life, although it be upon condition, or in
the right of his Wife, out of ancient Demesne; for Freehold within ancient
Demesne will not serve: but if the debt or Damage amounts not to 40. Marks,
any Freehold suffices. Thirdly, he must have Freehold in that County where the
cause of the action arises, and though be has in another, it suffices not.
Fourthly, if after his return he sells away his Land, or if Cesty que vie, or
his Wife dies, or an entry be made for the condition broken, so as his
Freehold be determined, he may be challenged for sufficiency of Freehold.

It seems before the Statute 2 H. 5. freehold of any value was sufficient, for
there Freehold of 5. s. was sufficient. 3. H. 4. 4. by that Statute in all
Pleas real and personal, where the Debt or damage, or both together amount to
40 marks, the Juror must have 40. s. Freehold. In an Attaint they must be able
to expend 20. l. per annum.

In an account upon the Receipt of 100. s. if he count to his damage, 200. s.
if the Juror has but 20. s. or under 40. s. it is sufficient, because he shall
not recover damages, and so this is not within the Statuts 10 H. 6. 18. for the
sufficiency of Jurors. See Rolls tit. Trial 648.

A man seized of the Manor of Dale enfeoffs a stranger upon condition to pay
yearly to J. S. and his Heirs 40. s. Rent. J. S. dies seized of this Rent, and
then his Heir takes it. Yet the Heir has not sufficient Freehold.

Land to the value of 40. s. is given to Husband and Wife and the Heirs of
their two bodies begotten, who have issue a son, the Husband gives the Land by
fine to an estranger and his Heirs, and dies, the Wife enters, and dies seized,
the son has not sufficient Freehold to be a Juror.

A man seized of Land to the value of 40. s. within the County of Mid. and of
Land to the value of 12. within the County of Sussex, and grants a Rentcharge
of 40. s. issuing out of all the said Land to a stranger in fee, the Grantee
has sufficient Freehold to be a Juror in both Counties. See many speculative
cases upon this subject, in Williams his Reading upon the Statute 35 H. 8. cap.
6.

4. Hundredorum: First, by the common Challenges propter defectum hundrrdorum.
Law in a Plea real, mixed, and personal, there ought to be four of the Hundred
(where the cause of action arises) returned for their better notice of the
cause; for Vicini vicinorum facta praesumuntur scire. And now since Littleton
wrote, in a Plea personal, if two Hundredors appear, it suffices; and in an
Attaint, although the Jury is double, yet the Hundredors are not double.
Secondly, If he has either Freehold in the Hundred, though it be to the value
but of half an Acre, or if he dwell there, though he has no Freehold in it, it
suffices: Thirdly, if the cause of the action rises in Hundredors.
diverse Hundreds, yet the number shall suffice, as if it had come out of one,
and not several Hundredors out of each Hundred. Fourthly, if there be diverse
Hundreds within one Leet or Rape, if he has any Freehold, or dwell in any of
those Hundreds, though not in the proper hundred, it suffices. Fifthly, if the
Jury come de Corpore Comitatus, or de proximo Hundredo, where the one party is
Lord of the No Hundredors.
Hundred, or the like, there need no Hundredors be returned at all. Sixthly, if
a Hundredor after he be returned, sell away his Land within that Hundred, yet
shall he not be challenged for the Hundred, for that his notice remains;
otherwise as has been said for his insufficiency of Freehold, for his fear to
offend, and to have Lands wasted, etc. which is one of the Reasons of Law, is
taken away. Seventhly, he that challenges for the Hundred, must show in what
Hundred it is, and not drive the other party to show it. Eighthly, his
Challenge for the Hundred is not simpliciter, but secundum quid; for though it
be found that he has nothing in the Hundred, yet shall not he be drawn,
butremain praeter H. that is, besides, for the Hundred, and albeit he dwells,
or have Land in the Hundred, yet must he have sufficient Freehold.

Note, This challenge for want of Hundredors must be given in writing
presently, and the other party is to demurr thereto, if opposed.

If a challenge be, that there is not any Hundredor returned, it may be averred
to the Court, that there is not any sufficient within the Hundred, which is not
within the Fee of the Plaintiff, although this be not returned by the Sheriff,
and this be found true by Tryors, the Array shall be affirmed. 45. Ass. 1.

If the King be made party by aid prayer, and sufficient Hundredors do not
appear nor are returned, yet the Panel shall not be quashed, but a Tales of
Hundredors shall be returned. But betwixt Common persons in such cases the
Panel shall be quashed, and this shall not be only a challenge to the heads.
25 E. 3. 43.

If the Sheriff return quod non sunt plures del Hundred, he shall take of the
Hundred adjoining which shall be sufficient. 19 H. 6. 48.

If the Juror has sufficient Land within the Hundred, although he does not
dwell within the Hundred, yet he is a sufficient Hundredor. 9 H. 6. 66. nay
though he dwell in another County.

If he be not Hundredor at the return of the Venire, but be at the return of
the Distringas, yet this does not take away the challenge.

After four are sworn, or after a challenge At what time the Challenge must be.
to the Polls, there can be no challenge for the Hundred. Rolls tit. Trial 636.

Who shall be a sufficient Hundredor, See Williams his reading aforesaid.

If he dwell or have Assets, within the Leet, Rape, Franchise, or Vill, where
the Venue is, he is a sufficient Hundredor.

If he has Assets, in Rent, Common, of any sort Market, Fair, Piscary, Toll
passage, Leet, Office of Bayliwick, etc. he is a sufficient Hundredor;
otherwise of an advowson, etc.

3. Propter affectum: and this is of two sorts, either working a principal
challenge, or to Challenges propteraffectum.
the favor. And again a principal challenge is of two sorts, either by
Judgment of Law, without any Act of his, or by Judgment of Law upon his own
Act.

And it is said that a principal challenge is, when there is express favor, or
express Principal Challenge.
malice. First, without any Act of his, as if the Juror be of blood or kindred
to either party, Consanguineus, which is compounded ex Con and sanguine, quasi
eodem sanguine natus, as it were issued from the same blood; and this is a
principal challenge, for that the Law presumes that one Kinsman Kindred.
does favor another, before a stranger, and how far remote soever he is of
kindred, yet the challenge is good. And if the Plaintiff challenge a Juror for
kindred to the Defendant, it is no Counterplea, to say that he is of kindred
also to the Plaintiff, though he be in a nearer degree. For the words of the
Venire facias, forbid the Juror to be of kindred to either party.

If a body politic or incorporate, sole or Bodies Politic.
aggregate of many, bring any action that concerns their body politic or
incorporate, if the Juror be of kindred to any that is of that body (although
the body politic or incorporate can have no kindred, yet) for that those
bodies consist of natural persons, it is a principal challenge. A Bastard
cannot be of kindred to any, and therefore it can be no principal challenge.
And here it is to be known, that Affinitas, Affinity Affinity.
has in Law two senses. In its proper sense it is taken for that nearness that
is gotten by marriage, Cum duae cognationes inter se divisae per nuptias
copulantur, and altera ad alterius fines accedit, and inde dicitur Affinis. In
a larger sense Affinitas is taken also for Consanguinity and kindred, as in the
Writ of Venire facias, and other-where. Affinity, or Alliance by Marriage, is a
principal challenge, and equivalent for Consanguinity, when it is between
either of the parties, as if the Palintiff or Defendant marry the Daughter, or
Cousin of the Juror, or the Juror marry the Daughter or Cousin of the Plaintiff
or Defendant, and the same continues, or issue be had. But if the Son of the
Juror has married the Daughter of the Plaintiff, this is no principal
challenge, but to the favor, because it is not between the parties. Much more
may be said hereof, sed summa sequor fastigia rerum.

As if he has formerly tried the cause, although Peremptory Challenge upon
Record.
reversed by Error, or upon the same title; if the Record be not showed, this
challenge is not peremptory. For he that grounds a challenge upon a Record,
etc. ought to have the Record ready. 33 H. 6. 55. The Record ought to be
exemplified. 21 E. 4. 74.

It Is a good challenge to say the Juror was attainted in an Attaint, or Writ of
Conspiracy, but attainder in a Writ of Forgery of false Deeds, upon the Statute
1 H. 5. 3. but it is upon 5 Eliz. 14. is not, because this Attainder is given of
late time by the Statute 33 H. 6. 55.

In a Writ of Conspiracy it is a principal challenge, that the Juror was one of
the Indictors, and although the Trial is now of the Conspiracy, and not upon
the first point, viz. the Felony.

In Trespass if one justify as Master, and the other as Servant; it is not a
principal challenge to say the Juror passed in the first issue for the Master,
but he ought to conclude, and issint favorable. 18 E. 4. 12.

If two plead not guilty, and first one issue is tried and then the other is
tried; it is no challenge to say the Juror tried the other issue, and gave
Damages, of which Damages he shall be charged if he be attainted in an Attaint,
for perhaps the Defendant will be found not guilty.

That the Juror is within the distress of any Deins distress.
of the parties, is a good cause of challenge. And so it is, if he be within
the distress of any person concerned, although no party to the action. As
within the distress of A. the Master of the Defendant who justifies as servant
to A. by reason of his Freehold; and the issue is sur le franktenemen^. So for
him in reversion received, within the distress of the Tenant for life. And so
in an Action by the Tenant for life, within the distress of him in reversion:
these are good challenges.

So in an Action by Dean and Chapter, within the distress of the Chapter, or
one of the Chapter, are good challenges.

Consanguinity of the half blood is a principal Principal for Consanguinity.
challenge: If the Juror be at the ninth degree, if it can be showed it is good.

In an Action by the Dean and Chapter, or Major and Commonalty, Brother to one
of the Comonalty, or to one of the Commons, is a good challenge: So to any
person concerned in interest, although no party to the action. As Cousin to the
Patron, of the Parson etc. so in Attaint to one of the petit Jury.

But in an Ejectment, and Not Guilty pleaded; it is no challenge to the Array
that the Sheriff is Cousin to the Lessor of the Plaintiff: For it does not
appear that the Title of him in Reversion shall be in question, and he in
Reversion is no party to the action. See it so adjudged upon Demurrer, Rolls
tit. Trial 653. But now in our feigned Ejectments it is otherwise, because the
Title of the Lessor is only in question.

It Is a good challenge that the Juror Princ^pal for Affinity.
is Goss^p to the Plaintiff, and sic e converso; and so although the son be
dead, for the spiritual affinity remains, and so is Curat of the Juror. That
the Juror has married the Sister of the party. That the Daughter of the Uncle
of the Juror has married the Uncle of the party. Cousin to the Wife of the
party. These are good challenges although the Wife, etc. is dead, if her issue
be alive; otherwise if she be dead without issue, for then the cause of the
favor is determined.

But it is no challenge to say, the Juror is Brother to one who married the
Sister of the party; nor that the Son of the party married the Sister of the
Juror: because these are not parties to the action.

In Attaint it is a good challenge to the Juror, that he has married the Sister
of the Wife of one of the petit Jury, for the Alliance.

If a Juror declare the right of one party, Principal for favor.
or give his Verdict before hand, or take money, this is a principal challenge:
But if he promise a party, this is not a principal challenge, but for favor.

If the Action depending betwixt the party Principal for malice.
and Juror, be such as implies malice, this is a good challenge: but not if it
imply no malice.

That the party has an Appeal depending against the Juror, or the Juror
against him, or Action of Battery. That they are in debate and wrangling, etc.
are good challenges. Not actions of Debt, or Trespass, Quare clausum fregit,
etc. Nor that the brother, etc. of the party, has actions against the Juror.

That the Juror was born out of the Kings Peremptory.
Ligeance; for although he came into England an Infant, and is sworn to the
King, yet he continues an Alien; and that he is Alien.
outlawed, for then he is not legalis homo, are good challenges.

If the Juror says that he will pass for one For favor.
party, because he knows the verity of the matter, this is no challenge: But if
he says it is for favor, it is a good challenge, if the Tryors find he spoke for
favor, and not for truth.

In an actioon betwixt the King and a party, King.
the Subject cannot take any challenge for favor, as in an Indictment of
Barretry etc. the Defendant cannot challenge a Juror for favor to the King.

If the Record be in the same Court, it How Challenges shall be taken of a
Record.
need not be shown, but if it be in another Court, it ought to be showed; or
else it is no principal challenge.

After the Array is affirmed, there shall At what time they may be taken.
not be such challenge to a Juror which would have been a sufficient challenge
to the Array. As it is not a good challenge that the Juror was impannelled at
the denomination of a party, for this had been a good challenge to the Array.

If a man challenge a Juror for non-sufficiency of Freehold, and this is
adjudged against him, yet he may challenge for favor. And this shall be tried,
10 H. 6. 18.

If the, Jury upon finding of the principal do not tax the Damages, for which a
Venire facias issues to the same Jurors to tax the damages, the parties cannot
take any challenge for a cause before the first Trial. But for a cause arising
after they may. And so against les primer Jurors.

The King cannot challenge a Iuror after King.
he is sworn, unless it be for a Cause arising after he is sworn.

If the Defendant challenge the array In what cases he which challenges ought
to show the cause presently.
which is found against him, or he release the challenge and the array is
affirmed, and afterward he challenge a Iuror; he ought to show the cause
presently.

But if there be two Defendants, and one challenge the array, and afterward
both challenge a Iuror; the other shall not show cause presently.

If any of the Jurors be sworn, and there be not sufficient, for which a Tales
is granted, and at the return one of the primer Jurors is challenged, the cause
ought to be showed presently, he being sworn before.

In an action between the King and a King.
common person, as in an Indictment of Barretry, presentment of nuisance, etc.
the Defendant if he challenges any Iuror, must show the cause presently.

But in an Inquest betwixt the King and a stranger, the stranger need not show
the cause presently: For in this case, the King is as a common person of the
Realm.

Cause ought to be showed before the Tales be perused.

If both Parties challenge, although for several causes, as if one be for
favor, and Treat.
the other peremptory; yet the Iuror shall be drawn without showing cause.

It may be in an Inquest before the Sheriff In what Inquest a Challenge may be.
to enquire of waste, both to the Array and Polls.

But not in an Inquest of Office, as in a writ of inquiry of damages.

In a writ of Right a challenge may be to the Polls del 4 Chivalers return.

Not of Cosinage to the witnesses coming to try the deed in an Assise.

If one party challenge the Array which Trial and Tryors of Challenges.
is affirmed, and afterward challenge a Iuror; he ought to show cause
presently, and this shall be tried presently; but otherwise of the other, who
did not take the Challenge to the Array.

The challenge of him who first challenged, shall be first tried: Although the
first be for favor, and that of the others be riens deins H.

If the Venue be of two Counties, and both Pannels challenged, the Esliors
shall be one of one panel and the other of the other.

If the array be challenged, the Court to try the array may choose two Tryors,
according to their discretion. 20 Ass. 15. 19 H. 6. 9.

If an action be depending between the Juror What challenge they may try.
and one of the parties, and for this he is challenged, and the other says that
this is brought by Covin; the Tryors may try this: for although the action is
of record, yet the Covin is not.

The Juror may be examined upon a voier Evidence.
dire, to any challenge that is not to his dishonor; but the Tryors are not
bound by his Oath.

The tryors after they are sworn may go at large by assent of the parties until
another day.

In trespass against two who plead to In what cases a challenge or affirmance
by one shall serve for others,
issue, and a Venire facias is returned, although one accept the Array, yet the
other may challenge it, and if it be found, the Array shall be quashed against
all. So in an Appeal against Principal and Accessory, for one shall not
disinherit the other.

But in an Appeal by two, if the Defendant challenge a Juror, and one of the
Plaintiffs agree to this; the other shall not be received to say that this is
by Covin, but the Juror shall be drawn in favor to the life of man.

And yet in a Pr^cipe quod reddat by two, and the Tenant challenge the Array,
because the Sheriff is Gossip to one of the Demandants, and one Demandant
acknowledge the challenge, the other may say that this is not so, and have it
tried. Rolls tit. Trial 662. etc.

In Gager de ley none shall be challenged Ley gager.
for favor or insufficiency etc.

If there be a challenge for Cosinage, he Cosinage.
that takes the challenge must show how the Juror is Cousin. But yet if the
Cosinage, that is, the effect and substance be found, it suffices; for the Law
prefers that which is material, before that which is formal.

If the Juror have part of the Land that Dependingon the same Title.
depends upon the same Title.

If a Juror be within the Hundred, Leet, or any way within the Seigniory,
immediately or mediately, or any other distress of Distress.
either party, this is a principal challenge. But if either party be within the
distress of the Juror, this is no principal challenge, but to the favor.

If a Witness named in the Deed be returned Witness.
of the Jury, it is a good cause of challenge of him. So if one within age
Infant.
of one and twenty be returned, it is a good cause of challenge.

Upon his own Act, as if the Juror has Challenges arising from the Jurors own
Act.
given a Verdict before, for the same cause, albeit it be reversed by Writ of
Error, or if after Verdict, Judgment were arrested. So if he has given a
former Verdict upon the Former Verdict.
same Title or matter, though between other persons. But it is to be observed,
that I may speak once for all, that in this or other like Cases, he that takes
the challenge must show the Record, if he will have it take place as a
principal challenge, otherwise he must conclude to the favor, unless it be a
Record of the same Court, and then he must show the day and term.

So likewise one may be challenged, that he was Indictor of the Plaintiff or
Defendant, Indictment.
either of Treason, Felony, Misprision, Trespass, or the like in the same cause.

If the Juror be Godfather to the Child of God father.
the Plaintiff or Defendant, or e converso, this is allowed to be a good
challenge in our books.

If a Juror has been an Arbitrator chosen Arbitrator.
by the Plaintiff or Defendant, in the same cause and have been informed of, or
treated of the matter, this is a principal challenge. Otherwise if he were
never informed nor treated thereof; and otherwise if he were indifferently
chosen by either of the parties, though he treated thereof. But a Commissioner
Commissioner.
chosen by one of the parties, for examination of Witnesses in the same cause,
is no principal cause of challenge; for he is made by the King under the great
Seal, and not by the party as the Arbitrator is, but he may upon cause be
challenged for favor.

Arbitrator in another matter is no cause of challenge.

If he be of counsel, Servant, or of Robes, Counsel.
or Fee, or of either party, it is a principal challenge.

If any after he be returned, do eat and Eat or drink at the parties charge.
drink at the charge of either party, it is a principal cause of Challenge,
otherwise it is of a Tryor after he be sworn.

Action brought either by the Juror against Actions of malice.
either of the parties, or by either of the parties against him, which may
imply malice or displeasure, are causes of principal challenge, unless they be
brought by Covin, either before or after the return; for if Covin be found,
then it is no cause of challenge; other Actions which do not imply malice or
displeasure, are but to the favor, as an action of debt, etc. More 3.

In a cause where the Parson of a Parish Parson and Parishes.
is party, and the right of the Church comes in debate, a Parishioner is a
principal challenge. Otherwise it is in debt, or any other Action where the
right of the Church comes not in question.

If either party labor the Juror, and give To labor the Jury.
him any thing to give his Verdict, this is a principal challenge. But if
either party labor the Juror to appear, and to do his Conscience, this is no
challenge at all, but lawful for him to do it.

That the Juror is a Fellow Servant with Fellow Servant.
either party, is no principal challenge but to the favor.

Neither of the parties can take that challenge to the Polls, which he might
have had To the Polls.
to the Array.

Note, if the Defendant may have a principal cause of challenge to the Array,
if the Sheriff return the Jury, the Plaintiff in that Venire facias to the
Coroners.
case may for his own expedition, allege the same, and pray Process to the
Coroners, which he cannot have, unless the Defendant will confess it; but if
the Defendant will not confess it, then the Plaintiff shall have a Venire
facias to the Sheriff, and the Defendant shall never take any challenge for
that cause, and so in like cases. But on the part of the Defendant, any such
matter shall not be alleged, and Process prayed to the Coroners, because he
may challenge the Jury for that cause, and can be at no prejudice.

Challenge concluding to the favor, when Challenges to the favor.
either party cannot take any principal challenge, but shows causes of
favor, which must be left to the conscience and discretion of the Tryors, upon
hearing their evidence to find him favorable or not favorable. But yet some
of them come nearer to a principal challenge than other: As if the Juror be of
kindred, or under the distress of him in the reversion or remainder, or in
whose right the Avowry or Justification is made, or the like: These be in
principal challenges, because he in Reversion, remainder, or in whose right the
Avowry or Justification is, is not party to the Record; otherwise it is, if
they were made parties by aid, Receipt, or Voucher, and yet the cause of favor
is apparent; so it is of all principal causes, if they were party to the
Record. Now the causes of favor Favor.
are infinite, and thereof somewhat may be gathered of that which has been
said, and the rest I purposely leave the Reader to the reading of in our books
concerning that matter. For all which the rule of Law is, that he must stand
indifferent as he stands unsworn.

The Subject may challenge the Polls, King.
where the King is party. And if a man be outlawed of Treason or Felony, at
the Suit of the King, and the party for avoiding thereof alleges
imprisonment, or the like, at the time of the Outlawry, though the issue be
joined upon a collateral point, yet shall the party have such challenges, as if
he had been arraigned upon the crime it self, for this by a mean concerns his
life also.

Propter delictum, As if the Juror be attainted Challenges propter delictum.
or convicted of Treason, or Felony, or for any offense to life or member, or
in attaint for a false Verdict, or for perjury as a Witness, or in a conspiracy
at the Suit of the King, or in any Suit (either for the King, or for any
Subject) be adjudged to the Pillory, Tumbrel, or the like, or to be branded, or
to be stigmatized, or to have any other corporal punishment whereby he becomes
infamous, (for it is a maxim in Law, Repellitur a sacramento infamis) Infamous.
these and the like are principal causes of challenge. So it is if a man be
outlawed Outlawed.
in Trespass, Debt, or any other action, for he is Exlex, and therefore is not
legalis homo. And old Books have said, that if he be excommunicated, he could
not be of a Jury.

A Bastard may be of a Jury, yet may be Bastard.
challenged if he be of Kindred. Jenk. Cent. 1. Cap. 90.

See the Statutes of W. 2. and Artic. supra chartas, what persons the Sheriff
ought to return on Juries. And see F. N. B. breve Who ought to be on Juries.
de non ponendis in Assisis and juratis; and the Register in the same Writ. And
see there what remedy the party has that is returned against Law.

It is necessary to be known, the time when the challenge is to be taken.
First, At what time Challenges must be taken.
he that has diverse challenges, must take them all at once, and the Law so
requires, indifferent Trials, and diverse challenges are not accounted double.
Secondly, if one be challenged by one party, if after he be tried indifferent,
it is time enough for the other party to challenge him. Thirdly, after
challenge to the Array, and Trial duly returned, if the same party take a
challenge to the Polls, he must show cause presently. Fourthly, so if a Juror
be formerly sworn, if he be challenged, he must show cause presently, and that
cause must rise since he was sworn. Fifthly, when the King is party, or in an
appeal of Felony, the Defendant that challenges for cause, must show his cause
presently. Sixthly, If a man in case of Treason or Felony, challenge for cause,
and he be tried indifferent, yet he may challenge him peremptorily. Seventhly,
a challenge for the Hundred must be taken before so many be sworn, as will
Hundredors.
serve for Hundredors, or else he loses the advantage thereof.

In a Writ of Right, the grand Jury must Writ of Righ^
be challenged before the four Knights, before they be returned in Court; for
after they be returned in Court, there cannot any challenge be taken unto them.

Nota. The Array of the Tales shall not The Array of the Tales.
be challenged by any one party, until the Array of the principal be tried; but
if the Plaintiff challenge the Array of the principal, the Defendant may
challenge the array of the Tales. After one has taken challenge to the Poll, he
cannot challenge the array.

Now it is to be seen how challenge to the array of the principal Panel, or of
the Tales, or of the Polls shall be tried, and who shall be Tryors of the same,
and to whom Process shall be awarded.

If the Plaintiff allege a cause of challenge against the Sheriff, the Process
shall be directed to the Coroners; if any cause against any of the Coroners,
Process shall be awarded Coroners.
to the rest; if against all of them, then the Court shall appoint certain
Elisors, or Esliors (so named ab eligendo) because they Elisors.
are named by the Court, against whose return, no challenge shall be taken to
the array, because they were appointed by the Court, but he may have his
challenge to the Polls. Note, if Process be once awarded for the partiality of
the Sheriff, though there be a new Sheriff, yet Process shall never be awarded
to him: for the entry is, Ita quod Vicecomes se non intromittat. But otherwise
it is, for that he was Tenant to either party, or the like.

If the array be challenged in Court, it Array.
shall be tried by two of them that be impannelled to be appointed by the
Court: for the tryors in that case shall not exceed Two Tryors.
the number of two, unless it be by consent. But when the Court names two for
some special cause alleged by either party, the Court may name others; if the
array be quashed, then Process shall be awarded, ut supra. If there be a demurr
to a challenge, the Judge before whom the cause is to be Demurr to a Challenge,
how determinable.
tried, may determine it, or adjourn it to be heard another time. Styles 464.
Vide Bulstr. 1. part. 114.

If a Panel upon a Venire facias be returned, Array of the Principal and Tales.
and a Tales, and the array of the principal is challenged, the Tryors, which
try and quash the array, shall not try the array of the Tales; for now it is,
as if there had been no appearance of the principal Panel; but if the tryors
affirm the array of the principal, then they shall try the array of the Tales.
If the Plaintiff challenge the array of the principal, and the Defendant the
array of the Tales, there the one of the principal, and the other of the Tales
shall try both arrays. For other matter concerning the Tales, see in Cooks
Reports matters worthy of observation. When any challenge is made to the Polls,
two Tryors shall be appointed by the Court; and if they try one indifferent,
Two Tryors.
and he be sworn, then he and the two Tryors shall try another: and if another
be tried indifferent, and he be sworn, then the two Tryors cease, and the two
that be sworn on the Jury shall try the rest.

If any of the Jury, after some of them be sworn, be challenged, those that are
sworn are to say, whether he that is challenged be indifferent Trials of
challenges.
or not. But if the first or second man be challenged, then the Court does use
to appoint some of them, (who it pleases), that shall be afterward sworn to
try the indifferency of the person challenged.

1. All challenges must be taken before Rules concerning Challenges.
the Jurors are sworn.

2. If one challenge a Juror, and it be found against the challenger, he may
not challenge the Juror for a second cause.

3. If one challenge the array and it be found against him, he may not
afterward challenge any of the Polls, without showing cause presently, and this
shall be tried presently.

4. No challenge shall be admitted against the Tryors, appointed by the Court.

If the Plaintiff challenge ten, and the Defendant one, and the twelfth is
sworn, because Trial of Challenges.
one cannot try alone, there shall be added to him one challenged by the
Plaintiff, and the other by the Defendant. When the Trial is to be had by two
Counties, the manner of the trial is worthy of observation, and apparent in our
Books. If the four Knights in the Writ of Right be challenged, they shall try
themselves, and they shall choose the grand Assise, and try the challenges of
the parties. If the cause of challenges touch the dishonor, or discredit of
the Juror, he shall not be examined upon his Oath; but in other cases he Juror
examined.
shall be examined upon his Oath, to inform the tryors. If an Inquest be
awarded by default, the Defendant has lost his challenge; but the Plaintiff
may challenge for just cause, and that shall be examined and tried.

Wheresoever the Plaintiff is to recover View.
per visum juratorum, there ought to be six of the Jury that have had the view,
or known the Land in question so as he be able to put the Plaintiff in
possession, if he recover.

In Proprietate probanda, and a Writ Challenges.
to inquire for waste, the parties have been received to take their challenges.
But passing over many things touching this matter, I will conclude with the
saying of Bracton, Plures autem aliae sunt causae recusandi juratores, de
quibus ad praesens non recolo, sed quae jam enumeratae sunt, sufficiant exempli
causa. 1 Inst. 157, 158.

Treat does signify as taken out or withdrawn, Treat what.
and is applied to a Juror, that is withdrawn by consent, or removed and
discharged by challenge.

A Juror sick was withdrawn, and another sworn. Palmers Reports 411.

If the Defendant do not appear at the trial Challenge lost.
when he is called, he loses his challenge to the Jurors although he does
afterward appear.

It Is a good challenge to a Juror to say he A wrong name.
is returned by another name in the Panel.

A Juror appeared and said he had no No Freehold.
Freehold, and prayed that he might not serve, yet the Judge would not spare
him; for he may have an action against the Sheriff for returning him. Rolls 2
part. Reports 483.

CAP. The Challenge pro defect. Hundred, must be written in Parchment, and the
Council must arraign it in French, upon which the Defendant may take issue or
demur. The Clerk or Associate in Court must call the Jury over, and ask if they
have any Lands within the Hundred, or had at the time of the Array of the
Panel, and whether they dwell, or did dwell, in the same. And upon examination
if it appear clearly, that they have no Lands or Tenements, nor dwell in the
Hundred; then the Clerk is to mark them by the side of every of their names
thus [pr^ter Hundred] but if he find there be two Hundredors, he is to resort
back to the prae^er Hundred. and swear them in order. So that you see the Trial
whether Hundredors or not, is determined by the Courts examination by the Poll
severally. But if the Council demur, and the other side join in demurrer, the
Judge of Assizes may affirm the Challenge, and overruled the Demurrer, or allow
the Demurrer good, and proceed to the Trial of the Cause; or if the Judge
doubt, it may be determined in Bank, but this is great delay. If the challenge
be adjudged good, the Court awards, Que le panel il soit casse.

At Common Law there ought to have been In Cities, Corporations, Buroughs, and
Towns, and Counties, this Challenge cannot be.
4 Hundredors returned and appeared in all actions pro meliori notitia causae
in controversia, for vicini vicinorum facta scire praesumuntur. But by the
Statute 35 H. 8. ca. 6. six are to be returned and appear. But since by the
Statute 27 Eliz ca. 6. if two Hundredors be returned and appear, it is
sufficient in all personal actions: But in real actions there must be six, or
else Remanet pro defectu Jur.

The Court shall appoint two Tryors in a challenge to the Poll, and if they
find two indifferent the first Tryors shall be discharged, and the two that are
found indifferent, being sworn to try the Issue, shall also be sworn to try the
rest of their Fellows.

At Common Law there used to be returned 24 upon the Venire, and afterward a
Habeas corpora with a December Tales, and if a full Jury did not appear or were
challenged, then a Distringas with an Octo Tales, and so to the Duo Tales, if
there was not a Tales de circumdantibus may be in the case of Aliens.
full Jury. And this was the course until the Statute 35 H. 8. which gives the
Tales de circumstantibus at the Assizes, etc. and by the Stat. 5 Phil. and
Marie ca 7. where the King, Queen, or Informer, etc. are parties.

A Challenge may be taken to those of the Tales de circumstantibus.

By the Statute 33 Ed. 1. The King and those who prosecute for him, must show
their cause of Challenge, as betwixt party and party, and left to the
discretion of the Justices.

The King or any one authorized for him may release his challenge. Where the
party may challenge, the King may challenge.

It Is no challenge to say, the Juror is the Kings Tenant, or that he is
favorable to the King, but it is good to say, the Sheriff or Juror bears grudge
or malice to the Defendant where the King is party. If the Juror has any
Freehold it is sufficient, although not to 40 s. a year: For the Statute which
injoyns that, speaks only betwixt party and party.

The first, who challenges be he Plaintiff or Defendant, shall have the
preference and advantage of his challenge. If a Juror be once challenged and
withdrawn upon the principal; he cannot serve upon the Tales, if he does it is
Error, and Judgment may be stayed. And so if he be challenged, and a Jury
remain pro defect. Juratorum, if he be sworn upon a new Distringas, it is Error,
not helped by any Statute of Jeofailes, and a mis-tryal and a Venire facias de
novo may be awarded. Cro. Eliz. fol. 429. Whitbys Case.

Elisors may be sworn in some cases to return and impannel all Juries, as
should upon any Venire facias, Habeas Corpora or Distringas Jur. come to their
hands impartially, indifferently and without favor or affection, or at the
denomination of any person.

The Record of Attainder Conviction, Excommunication Outlawry, etc. or a Copy
thereof ought to be produced, to prove the cause of challenge thereupon.

Where bodies politic or Corporate are concerned, a challenge may be taken
which arises from the individuals, as Brother to one of the Prebendaries, is a
good challenge where the Dean and Chapter are parties, etc. Hob. 87. so a
Parishioner, where the right of the Church comes in question at the Suit of the
Parson. 17. Ass. 15.

In High Treason, the prisoner may peremptorily challenge to the number of 35.
which is under the number of 3 Juries but in Petite Treason, murder or Felony
the number is reduced to 20. The prisoner may challenge any that are Witnesses
against him.

Where the King is party the Defendant must show the cause of his challenge
instantly.

After a challenge for cause, the prisoner may challenge the same person
peremptorily.

CAP. X. Of what things a Jury may inquire; when of spiritual; when of things
done in another County, or in another Kingdom; when of Estopples, and when not;
when of a man's intent, etc.
THe next words in the Writ, which See more of this matter, cap. 13.
have not yet been taken notice of, are these, per quos rei veritas melius
sciri poterit; and this is the chief end of their meeting together: No Court
can give a right Judgment, Ex facto Jus oritur.
unless the truth of the fact be certainly known; and to find out this truth,
no way is like to this of Juries: for they do not only go upon their own
knowledge, though they are Neighbors to the place where the question is moved,
and so are presumed to have a better knowledge of the fact, than any others;
For vicinus facta vicini praesumitur scire; But lest this presumption should
fail, the Law allows other Evidence to be given to them, by which they may more
certainly and confidently give their Verdict of the issue, which is meant by
this word Rei.

And here, it will not be amiss to give you a brief description, de quibus
rebus, what the Inquest may inquire of, and find.

Wherefore, though it be true, that a Jury shall not be charged, nor meddle
with Of the Law.
a matter of Law; and if they do, and find it, their Verdict as to this shall
be void; yet daily experience (as well as Littleton, Sect. 368.) tells us, that
they may take upon them the knowledge of the Law, and give a general Verdict;
though to find the special matter is the safest way for them, because, if they
mistake the Law, they run into the danger of an Attaint.

In the Case of Manby and Scott, adj. Trin. 13 Car. 2. B. R. one question was
if the Verdict was well found, in an action of the case against the Husband for
Wares bought by the Wife; the Verdict finding, that the Wares were necessaries,
and according to her degree, whereas (as was objected) they ought to have found
the degree of the party, and the value of the Wares and left it to the Court to
judge.

But it was answered and resolved that the Court. i. e. the Judge before whom
it is tried informs the Jury of the matter of Law, and accordingly they find,
and so it belongs not to this Court.

Broughton a Reader of the Temple brought a Bill by Quo minus in the Chequer
against Prince for maintaining a suit against the Stat. etc. Prince pleads that
he was admitted in the Inner Temple, and student for many years there, that he
was Consiliarius, in Lege eruditus, and took his Fee in that cause. B. replied,
de Injuria sua propria absque hoc quod in lege eruditus, etc. and hoc petit
etc. and deus defendit similiter.

It was moved that the Defendant should demurr to the Replication. Atkinson,
excepted to the Traverse and Conclusion; for it cannot be tried by a Jury; for
(says he) if matter in Law be to be tried by the Judges, a fortiori, the
learning of the Law ought to be tried by them.

Per Manwood Chapter Baron, It shall be tried by the Country. 3 Leo. 237. Broughton
verse. Prince; which case is cited 3 Cro. 728. to be otherwise ruled, yet, it
was allowed there a good issue, whether a Parson of a Parish could speak Welsh.

Hut. 20, 21. Whether a plaint was levied according to the Custom, was tried by
a Jury, who are directed by the Court, as to the plaint, and whether it were
pursuant to the Custom, and are to find according to such directions.

In many cases, the Jury are to inquire Of a man's intent.
of the knowledge and intent of a man, as where the Nar. is, that the Defendant
kept a Dog which killed the Plaintiffs Sheep, s^iens canem suum ad mordendos
oves consuetum; though sciens be not traversable, yet the Jury upon Evidence
must inquire of it. lib. 4. 18.

In some cases, a Jury may try and find a spiritual thing, as a Divorce,
Matrimony, Of spiritual things.
etc. and must take notice thereof, upon pain of Attaint. li. 4. 29. lib. 9.
lib. 7. 43. vide hic cap. 2.

The Jurors of one County, may find any transitory thing done in another
County: Nay In Trespass Quare Clausum fregit, in the County of D. where the
Trespass was committed in the County of S. upon Not guilty, if the Jury find
the Defendant guilty in the County of S. their Verdict is void. But if they
find him Guilty generally, an Attaint lies. Finch. 400. Because this Trespass
is local; and what is local cannot be inqured of by men of another County, for
they can have no conusans of it.
some times they must find local things in another County; as if the Heir
pleads riens per descent, and the Plaintiff replies, Assets in a Parish and
Ward within London, the Jury may find Assets in any County; in the same case
against an Executor, who pleads plene administravit; the Jury may likewise find
Assets in any part of the world. And the Reason is, because the place is only
named for necessity of trial. But where Of things done in another County or
Country. Vide cap. 8.
the place is part of the issue, it is otherwise. And therefore if I promise in
one place to do a thing in another, and issue is upon the breach, the Jury
ought to come from the place of the breach. But if I promise in London, to do a
thing at Bordeaux in France, and issue upon the breach, yet this shall be tried
in London for necessity, because otherwise it would want trial, the Jury must
inquire of the breach at Bordeaux. But if I promise in France, to do a thing in
France, so that both Contract and performance is Rolls tit. Trial fol. 571. 624.
beyond Sea, this wants trial in our Law. lib. 6. 47. li. 7. 23, 26, 27.

In the Case of Drake and Beer. Trin. 15 Car. 2. B. R. this difference was
agreed by the Court, viz. That a Jury in an Inferior Court may inquire of
things out of the Jurisdiction, if they be but for increase of Damages, as is 1
Cro. 571. Ireland verse. Blackwell, but if they inquire of any thing issuable
out of that Jurisdiction, it is naught, 1 Cro. 101. 2 Cro. 503.

Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in the Palace Court, in
Indebitat. for that the Defendant was indebtted to the Plaintiff Infra
Jurisdictionem for Nursing of a Child, not saying the Nursing was Infra
Jurisdictionem.

(...) Windam Just. held it good, for that it is a debt every where, and not
like a debt that arises by matter collateral: But Twisden ^ust. doubted.
Whitehead verse. Brown. Pasch. 15 Car. 2. B. R.

The Jury may find Estoppels, as the taking Estoppels. When the Estoppel is
found, the ^ourt may judge according to the e^pecial matter.
of a Lease of a man's own Land, by Deed indented; or the delivery of a Deed
before the date, as in Debt by an Administrator upon a Bond dated 4 Aprilis, 24
Eliz. The Defendant pleaded, that the Intestate dyed before the date of the
Obligation, and isint nient son fait, upon which they were at Issue, and
adjudged that the Jury might find that the Bond was delivered the 3d of April,
because they are sworn ad veritatem dicen^um; though the parties are estopped
to plead a Deed was delivered before the date; but they may plead a delivery
after the date, because it shall never be intended, that a Deed was delivered
before the date, but after it may.

But if the Estoppel, or admittance be Estoppels.
within the same Record, in which Issue is joined, then the Jurors cannot find
any thing contrary to this, which the parties have affirmed, and admitted of
Record, though it be not true: For the Court may give judgment upon matters
confessed by the parties; and the Jurors are not to be charged with any such
thing, but only with such in which the parties vary. li. 2. 4. li. 4. 53. Co.
Lit. 227.

A Decree in Chancery shall be tried by a Decree.
Jury, and not by it self; for it is not a Record, but a Decree Recorded. The
Chancery, as it is a Court of Equity is not a Court of Record: But touching
things agitated in the Petty Bag Office, it is a Court of Record.

The Jury may find Deeds, or matter of Records not showed.
Record, if they will, though not showed in Evidence. Finch 400. They may
inquire of things done before the memory of man. lib. 9. 34.

Null tiel Record is not to be tried by a Jury, but upon the general issue,
etc. they may find a Record.

The Jury may find a Warranty, being Warranty.
given in Evidence, though it be not pleaded: Nay, the ^ury may find that,
which cannot be pleaded, as in Trespass, upon not guilty; The Jury may find
that the Defendant leased Lands for life, upon Condition, Condition.
and entered for the Condition broken; Tho. this cannot be pleaded without Deed,
yet the Jury may find it. Lit. Sect. 366.

Where a Collateral Warranty binds, this may well be given in Evidence: For
although it does not give a right, yet in Law this shall bar and bind a Right.
Lib. 10. 97.

But this matter comes more properly under the Title Evidence; wherefore we
will proceed to that.

See also in Chap. 13.

CAP. XI. Evidence and Witnesses.
EVidence, Evidentia: This word in legal Evidence.
understanding (says Coke 1. Inst. 283.) does not only contain matters of
Record, as Letters Patents, Fines, Recoveries; Inrollments, and the like, and
writings under Seal, as Charters and Deeds, and other Writings without Seal, as
Court-Rolls, Accounts, and the like, which are called Evidences, Instrumenta.
But in a larger sense, it contains also Testimonia, the Testimony of
Witnesses, and other proofs, to be produced and given to a Jury for the finding
of any Issue, joined between the parties: And it is called Evidence, because
thereby the point in Issue is to be made evident to the Jury: Probationes
debent esse evidentes (id est) perspicue and facile intelligitur.

And this Evidence (with Bracton) we may term probatio duplex, viz. viva, as
Witnesses, viva voce; and Mortua, as by Deeds, Writings, and Instruments; and
violenta praesumptio, in many cases, is plen^ probatio, and therefore if all
the Witnesses to a Deed be dead, then the Deed shall receive Credit; per
collationem sigillorum scripturae, Presumption.
etc. but especially if there has been a continual and quiet possession; which
is a violent presumption. 1 Inst. 6. for no man can keep his Witnesses alive.

If a thing be generally referred to proof, Proof.
this shall be intended proof by Jury; but if other manner of proof be agreed
upon, that shall take away the proof which the Law generally intends by Jury:
Hob. 127. As if I promise to pay what money you prove B. borrowed; this may be
proved in the same action brought upon the promise. Vide Rolls tit. trial 594,
595.

Men that are so branded with Infamy, Witnesses.
that they cannot be Jurors, (for which see before, who may be Jurors) cannot
be Witnesses; yet per Glyn Chapter Just. and Newdigate Just. Mich. 1657. B. R.
Conviction of common Barretry hinders not from being a witness, but Maynard,
Sergeant, held strongly against it.

At Lent Assizes, Suff. 1657. St. John Chapter Just. C. B. would not allow one who
had been whipped for petty Larceny, to be a Witness; but Earl Sergeant said,
they ought to be stigmatici that are disabled from being Witnesses: Yet per
Roll. Chapter Just. one burned in the hand for Felony, may be a Witness; for he is
in capacity to purchase Lands, and his fault is purged by his punishment.
Styles 388.

The Wife cannot be a Witness for, or Who may be Witnesses.
against her Husband, 1 Inst. 6. that is in case of a common person between
party and party, but between the King and the party, on an Indictment she may,
although it concerns the Feme her self, as in the Lord Audley's Case, Hutt.
116. So she may have the Peace against her Husband.

And so it was resolved in John Browne's Case, Trin. 25 Car. 2. B. R. on the
Stat. of 3 H. 7. cap. 2. vid. 1 Cro. 492.

The King cannot be a witness by his Letters under his Signet manual: One
attained of Piracy cannot be a witness to prove another guilty. If he accused
another before he was attainted, and afterward confesses he wronged him, this
confession shall be rejected, because he is attainted. A woman cannot be a
witness to prove a man to be a Villain. Co. Lit. 6. 8.

Neither can the party to the usurious Contract, be a Witness against the
Usurer, in an Information upon the Statute of Usury. But Kinsmen never so near,
Tenants, Servants, Masters, Counselors, and Attorneys, etc. may be Witnesses.
A Counselor may be a Witness to the Agreement, etc. but not to validity of an
assurance, nor to the Counsel he gave. March, Rep. 43. If a Witness being
served with Process, and having money sufficient to bear his charges, (or less
if he accept it) do not appear to give his testimony, he forfeits 10 l. to the
party damnified, and must recompense his damages. 5 Eliz. 9. If a Witness
commit wilful perjury, he loses 20 l. shall be imprisoned 6. months without
bail, stand in the Pillory, and be disabled to be a Witness, so shall the
suborner, who procures the perjury. 5 Eliz 9.

A party robbed is allowed a good witness in his own action against the
Hundred, for he is not bound, nay is to be blamed, to tell any one what charge
he carries with him; and if he should not testify, the Law would be often
fruitless for want of Evidence, or else more Robberies committed by the parties
discovering his money.

In the Case of Brereton and Tatam, Mich. 1656. B. R. Glyn. Chapter Just. Cited the
Lord Chandoi's Case in this Court, where one Gates an Executor was produced to
prove the Will as a witness, to which he (as Counsel) excepted, because of his
Executorship. It was answered that he had fully administered: He replied, the
Assets might afterward come to his hand; but the ^ourt resolved that it would
not be presumed to bar his Testimony, which was allowed in the principal Case,
being in ^j^ctment.

It Is no good exception to a Witness that he has common per cause of Vicinage
in the Lands in question, because its but an excuse of Trespass, and no
interest. Clapham's case. Mich. 1657. B. R.

The same of common of Shacke.
If Obli^ee devises the debt to the Obligor, and (...) Executors deliver up the
Bond in sat^^^^action of the Legacy which is cancelled, and after the validity
of the Will is questioned, viz. whether the Testator was compos, etc. the
Obligor is a good witness for the will, because by the cancelling of the Bond
his debt was discharged. But Contr. in case of a Mortgage, for though the deed
be cancelled, if it be no good will, he must pay the money. Goodman verse.
Turbervill. Mich. 1657. B. R.

An Action was brought by the Corporation of the Weavers of Norwich, for a
penalty against a Weaver for workign in his Trade in Harvest time, contrary to
an Ordinance by them made. And Atkins, Just. allowed one of the Corporation to
be a witness, though one moiety of the penalty was due to the Corporation. Lent
Assise 1657.

In a Trial at Bar, where an Estate for Life is limited to I. S. remainder to
the poor of the Parish of Greenwich by Will; the Inhabitants of Greenwich were
allowed to be witnesses to prove the Will. Townsend and Roane Mich. 1658. B. R.

An Action of Debt was brought, Summer Ass. Suff. 1669. by the Town of Ipswich
for 50 ^. a Fine set on one chosen Common Council Man (called their prime
Constable) for refusing to renounce the Covenant, etc. And the Town Clerk
(though a Freeman) was allowed a witness to prove Election, Refusal, etc. and
the Fine set, which is for necessity, for that none other are or ought to be
present at those Acts. Rainsford Just.

Per Hale Chapter Just. Norf. Summer Ass. 1668. A Freeman of Lynn is not an
allowable witness to prove the custom of Foreign bought and Foreign sold in
that Town. Harwich verse. Twels.

As to Witnesses privileges:
One was sub-poena'd ad testificandum, and prayed a privilege from being
arrested, which was granted, and per Cur. it will supersede an Arrest on mean
process, but not upon an Execution; yet the Sheriff in that Case may be
committed for his Contempt. Hen. Nevil's case Mich. 15 Car. 2. B. R.

Detaining of Witnesses:
Sir Jo. Jackson was Convict on an Information for preventing of Evidence to be
given on an Indictment of Perjury against Fenwick and Holt, who had been
witne^^es for Sir J. J. he arrested some witnesse^, and gave money to others and
so they were acquitted: He was fined 1000 Marks, 1 ^^^ths imprisonment,
behavior for 12 months. Hill. 1663. B. R.

Proofs to determine matter of Fact, and Proo^s.
to be offered to a Judge and Jury, are of two sorts. First Living, as by
Witnesses, and to a Jury one witness is sufficient. And Dead, as matters of
Record, as Letters Patents, Fines, Recoveries, Inrollments, etc. Writings
sealed and delivered; as Feoffments, Leases, Releases, etc. And without Seal,
as Court-Rolls, Accounts, etc. And if the Case be between the King and a
Prisoner, he is first to say what he can himself, and then all that can say any
thing against him are to be heard upon Oath, and then others may be heard for
him, but not upon Oath: And according to this Evidence on both sides, or
without any Evidence at all, the Jury are to give their Verdict, according to
their knowledge and Oaths.

Such persons as are infamous, as are persons attainted of Felony, or of a
false Verdict, or of a Conspiracy, or of Perjury, or of Forgery, upon the
Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 14. and not upon the Statute of 1 H. 5. 3. and such as
have had Judgment, to lose their Ears, or stand on the Pillory or Tumbrel, or
have been stigmatized or branded, and Infidels, Men not of sound memory, or not
of discretion, or such as are interested in the cause, or have benefit, are not
competent witnesses. Co. 1. Inst. 6. but we see Jews are daily admitted
witnesses.

An account given to and allowed by the Plen^ Administravit.
Ordinary, is not good Evidence; nor a Pedigree by a Herald of Arms, to prove
an Pedigree.
Heir, but it must be proved by Deeds, Records, or Witnesses.

If the issue be a Recognizance or not, a Recognisance.
Recognizance with a defeasance is good Evidence. Plo. 14. So of an Agreement,
Agreement.
a special Agreement will prove it. Plo. 8.

A License to alien Land, or a pardon for alienation of Land, was held by a
common Tenure in Ca^ite.
presumption, to be a good proof that the Land was held in capite.

A thing which is concluded in the Ecclesiastical Ecclesiastical proceedings.
Court, which does concern Lands, is not to be given in Evidence; for the
Courts of Common Law are not to be guided by their proceedings.

Ancient Deeds may be given in Evidence, Ancient Deeds.
although the execution of them cannot be proved.

He that takes out a Copy of part of a Record, Copy of a Record.
must at least take out so much as concerns the matter in question, or else the
Court will not permit it to be read.

If one produce ^ Lease made upon an Outlawry.
Outlawry, in Evidence to a Jury to prove a Title, he must also produce the
Outlawry it self.

To prove a Feoffment a Deed of Feoffment, Feoffment.
is showed, but no Livery is indorsed, if possession has gone with the Deed, it
is good Evidence. Rolls Reports 1. part 132.

Upon Not Guilty to an Information upon Proviso.
a penal Law* a Proviso to excuse him may be given in Evidence. Jones Reports
320.

If a man prescribe in a non decimando Non decimando.
generally, he cannot give a Bull in Evidence. Palmers Reports 38.

A Deed with the Seals torn off was admitted Deed.
to declare uses. Palmers Reports 403, 405.

Records prove themselves, and cannot be Records.
proved by Witnesses; but Copies of them must, and are good Evidence, and so
may any thing done in the County Court, Court Baron, or Hundred-Court, etc. be
proved by Witnesses.

A Fine, or common Recovery, may be Fine.
given in Evidence, though it be not under the great Seal, or Seal of the
Court, and without vouching the Roll of the Recovery; and the part indented is
the usual Evidence that there is such a Fine, though they which saw the Fine,
are also good Evidence. Plow. 410. Styles 22.

Depositions in the Ecclesiastical Court Depositions.
cannot be given in Evidence, though parties be dead. March 120. A Defendants
answer in an English Court, is good Evidence against him, but not against
others. Godbolt, 326. Where the evidence proves the effect and substance of the
issue, it is good. By order of Court the Depositions taken of a Sick Witness
may be given in evidence.

As upon plene administravit, if it be proved Assets.
that the Executor has goods of the Testators in his hands, he may give in
Evidence, that he has paid of his own money for the Testator, to the value of
those goods. Co. Lit. 283. Dyer. 2.

So if a Lease be pleaded, a Lease upon Lease.
Condition is good Evidence. 1 H. 8. 20. because the Genus comprehends the
Species. So of a Feoffment pleaded, a Feoffment upon Condition, or a Fine which
is a Feoffment of Record, is good Evidence. 44 E. 3. 39. A special agreement is
evidence for an agreement. Plo. 8.

But if a Feoffment be pleaded in Fee, Feoffment.
upon issue non feoffavit modo and forma, a Feoffment upon Condition is no
Evidence, because it does not answer the issue; and wheresoever Evidence is
contrary to the issue, and does not maintain it, the Evidence is not good. 11
H. 4. 3. Feoffments 41. agreement in reversion is no evidence but a Lease and
Release is. 20 H. 7. 5. If the Indorsment be of a Livery by Attorney, the
Letter of Attorney must be showed.

Upon an Assumpsit to the Husband, an Assumpsit.
Assumpsit to the Wife, and his agreement, is good evidence. 27 H. 8. 29. upon
non assumpsit to a special promise, payment is no evidence per 3 Judges.

In challenge to the array, because made Challenge.
at the denomination of the Sheriffs Clerk, evidence at his Bailiffs
denomination, is good, because favorably made is the substance. 38 H. 6. 9.

If the issue be in a Suit against an Executor, Assets.
Administrator, or Heir, Assets in London; to prove Assets in another place, is
sufficient. Li. 6. 47. Dyer 271.

Account pleaded before two; Account Account.
before one, is good Evidence. Hob. 55. because the account is the substance.

Upon the general issue, the Defendant may give any thing in Evidence, which
proves the Plaintiff has no cause of action, What Evidence upon the general
issues.
or which does entitle the D^fendant to the thing in question.

But if he has cause of justification or excuse, it must be pleaded: wherefore
upon non detinet, in detinue, the Defendant may give in Evidence a gift from
the Plaintiff; for that proves that he does not detain the Plaintiffs goods;
but he cannot give in Evidence that the goods were pawned to De^inue.
him for money, and that it is not paid, but he must plead it. 1 Inst. 283. For
the property is in the pledger.

Upon Not guilty, in Battery, Son assault In Battery.
demesne, is no Evidence; for thereby the Battery is confessed. Ib. neither is
Not Guilty, good Evidence upon Son assault demesne:

Upon Not Guilty, in Trespass, Insufficiency Trespass.
of the Plaintiffs mounds, or to justify for a Rentcharge, Common, License,
Son assault demesne, or the like, is no good Evidence. Ib. but to prove a
Trespass before or after the day laid in the Declaration is good. 1 Inst. 283.

So upon the Plea, Null Wast fait, in an Wast.
Action of Wast, he may give in Evidence any thing that proves it no Wast, as
by Tempest, by Lightning, by Enemies, etc. But he cannot give in Evidence any
justifiable Wast, as to repair the House, or the like; nor a reparation of the
Wast, before the action brought. Ib.

Upon non est factum, It Is no Evidence, to Non est factum.
show the Bond that was made upon an usurious Contract, or that the Sheriffs
name is mistaken, etc. in a Bail-Bond; or that the Bond is joint, or several,
or delivered at another place; or that it is void by Statute. But it must be
pleaded in abatement. Ib. Hob. 72.

But to prove that the Seal was broken off, and put on again; or to prove a
Rasure of the Deed; delivered as an Escrow, etc. this is good Evidence. Li. 5.
119. 11. 27. If 'twere done before the action brought; but if the Seal was
broke off, etc. by chance, after issue joined, the Jury may find it specially.

To prove the Sealing and delivery of a Deed, and not know the party that did
it, is not good evidence; but if he knows the party upon sight of him, it is
good enough. Kelw. 59.

Upon Not Guilty, in Trover and Conversion, Trover.
a Demand, and denial of the Goods, is good Evidence. Plo. 14. li. 10. 57. Cro.
1 part. ult. pub. 495. Hob. 187.

Upon plene Administravit, the Executor Plene Administravit.
cannot give a Judgment in Evidence. Kelw. 59. nor payment of Debts by
Contract, in Debt brought upon an Obligation. A Cup pawned and redeemed with
the Executors own money, is good Evidence; but a recovery ought to be pleaded:
upon nil debet, in Debt for Rent, That the Lessor entered into part of the Land,
is no good Evidence. Golds. 81. But non demisit, i^, 9 H. 7. 3.

Upon Not guilty, in an Action upon the Parco fracto.
Statute de parco fracto, That the Plaintiff has no Park, is good Evidence. 19
H 8. 9.

So upon Not Guilty, in Trespass, in the Warren.
Plaintiffs Warren, Evidence that he has no Warren, is good. 10 H. 6. 17.
Kitchen. 119.

A Shop-book no evidence after a year. Shop-books.
7 Jac. cap. 12.

In Debt for Arrerages of an account upon Account.
Nil debet modo and forma; No account is good Evidence. 2 H. 6. 26. Upon Not
guilty in Trespass, a Lease for years, 12 H. 8. 2. or that locus in quo, etc.
is the Freehold Trespass.
of another, 4 E. 3. 45. is good Evidence; but upon this he cannot justify his
entry upon the place by a strangers License, or Command, Br. general issue 81.
because this is a justification by way of excuse: Neither is a Lease at Will,
good Evidence in this case.

So upon Not guilty, in Trespass for Not guilty in Trespass.
goods, it is good evidence that the goods were a strangers. 9 H. 6. 11. But
that they were a strangers, and that he as Servant to the stranger, or by his
commandment, took them from the Plaintiff, is not good, Br. general issue 81.
because the Trespass is confessed. But that the stranger gave them to the
Defendant is good. 9 H. 6. 11. In Trespass the Buttals must be proved as they
are laid.

If the Defendant plead payment to a Bond Payment by presumption.
or Bill, and it appears the Debt is very old, and it has not been demanded,
nor any use paid for it many years, common presumption is good evidence, that
the money is paid, and the Juries use to find for the Defendants, in such cases.

If the Trespass were in truth done the 4th. Trespass another day.
of May, and the Plaintiff alleges the same to be done the 5th. of May, or
the first of May, when no Trespass was done; yet if upon evidence, it falls
out that the Trespass was done before the Action brought, it suffices. 1 Inst.
283.

It Is dangerous to permit evidence to a Deed.
Jury by Witnesses, that there was such a Deed, which they have seen or read,
or prove the Deed by a Copy, because the Deed may be upon Condition,
Limitation, or power of Revocation; and if this should be permitted, the whole
Reason of the Common Law, in showing Deeds to the Court, would be subverted;
for the Deed might be imperfect, and void, which the Witnesses could not
perceive; yet in cases of extremity, as where the Deed was burned, or lost by
some other notorious accident, the Judges may at their discretion, allow them
to be proved by Witnesses. li. 10. 92. and so of a Record.

In Case against an Executor; whereas Executor.
the Testator was indebted to the Plaintiff, the Executor promised to pay the
debt, in consideration the Plaintiff would forbear to sue him; the Executor may
give in evidence upon Non assumpsit, that there was no Debt, or that he had no
Assets tempore promissionis, for then there would be no Consideration. li. 9.
94. William Banes Case, upon the issue neunques Executor to prove an
Administration granted to him, is good evidence. Dyer. 305.

Evidence shall never be pleaded, but the Evidence.
matter of fact shall be pleaded, and if it be denied, the evidence shall be
given to the Jury, not to the Court. lib. 9. 9.

Evidence, that the Wife of every Copyholder, shall have the Land durante
viduitate, will not maintain the issue, that the Custom of a Manor is, that
she shall have the Land during her life, after Estate for life.
her Husbands death, because, though durante viduitate, imports an Estate for
life, yet an Estate durante vita, is more large and beneficial. li. 4. 30.

Things done before the memory of man, What may be given in Evidence.
in another County, or in another Kingdom, may be given in Evidence to a Jury,
as Assets in another County, etc. More 47. See li. 4. 22. 9. 27. 28. and 34.
li. 6. 46, 47.

Upon issue, payment at the day; payment Payment.
before or after the day, is no Evidence. More 47. but upon Nil debet, it is
good Evidence, because it proves the issue.

Upon issue, Assets or no Assets, or seized, or not seized, if one give a
Feoffment, etc. in Evidence, Covin may be given in Evidence, Covin.
by the other, but not if the issue be infeoffed, or not infeoffed, for it is a
Feoffment tiel quel, though made by Covin. li. 5. 60. Hob. 72.

The Book of Doomesday brought in Doomesdaybook.
Court, is good Evidence to prove the Land, to be ancient Demesne. Hob. 188.

In Attaint, the Plaintiff shall not Attaint.
give more evidence, nor examine more Witnesses, than was before, but the
Defendant may. Dyer 212.

Copies of the Court-Rolls, are the only Court-Rolls for Copyholders.
evidence for Copyholders, for (as Littleton, Sect. 75. tells you) they are
called Tenants by Copy of Court-Roll, because they have no other Evidence,
concerning their Tenements, but only the Copies of Court-Rolls. But Cook
explains the Text, and says, This is to be understood of Evidences of
Alienation; for a Release of a Right by Deed. A Copyholder (that comes in by
way of admittance) may have, and that is sufficient to extingish the Right of
the Copyholder which he that makes the Release had.

In Actions upon the Case, Trespass, Battery, or false imprisonment against any
Justice of Peace, Mayor, or Bailiff of City, or Town Corporate, Headborough,
Portreve, Special Evidence upon the general issue, by whom.
Constable, Tythingman, Collector of Subsidy or Fifteen, in any of his
Majesty's Courts at Westminst. or elsewhere, concerning any thing done by any
of them, by reason of any of their Offices aforesaid, and all other in their
aid or assistance, or by their Commandment, etc. They may plead the general
issue, and give the special matter of their excuse, or Justification in
Evidence. 7 Jac. cap. 5.

General acts of Parliament, may be given Statutes.
in Evidence, and need not be pleaded; and so may general Pardons given by
Parliament, if they be without Exceptions; But commonly advantage of the Act is
given by the Act it self to the offnder, without pleading it, as by the late
(most truly Pardons.
so called) general act of Indemnity, every person thereby pardoned, may plead
the general issue, and give the act in evidence, for his discharge, which are
general, and which particular Statutes, see lib. 4. 76.

Upon not guilty in Trover, the Defendant Trover.
may give in Evidence, that the goods were pawned to him for 10 l. That he
distrained them for Rent, or damage feasant, That as Sheriff, he levied them
upon Execution, or that he took them, as Tithes severed. Cro. 1. part. 157. 3
part. 435. Hob. 187. A demand and denial of the goods is evidence of a
conversion.

If there be two Batteries between Plaintiff and Defendant, at diverse times,
the If there be two Trespasses, and the Defendant peads a Justification; if the
Plaintiff replies de injuria sua propria, etc. he cannot give in Evidence a
Trespass at another time; But he should have replied, that at another time, in
the same day of his Count, the Defendant did the other Trespass, etc. to which
the Defendant may plead another Justification, but the Plaintiff cannot then
plead a Trespass at another time, but must conclude Sans tiel cause, etc. vide
Apres.
Plaintiff is bound to prove the Battery made the same day in the Declaration,
and shall not be admitted to give another day in evidence, as the case may be.
As in Battery, the Defendant pleaded, Son assault Demesne, and the Plaintiff
replied, de injuria sua propria absque tali sua, and in evidence, the Defendant
maintained, that the Plaintiff beat him the day mentioned in the Declaration,
and in the same place; which the Plaintiff perceiving, he gave in evidence,
that the battery was made another day and place, to which the Defendant
demurred, upon the difference aforesaid. Brownlow 1 part 233. 19 H. 6. 47. But
upon not guilty, it is otherwise, though there be never so many Batteries
between the parties. Littleton, Sect. 485.

Prohibition for suing for Tithes in Booking Park in Essex, and surmised, that
the Lands were parcel of the possessions of the Priory of Christ's Church in
Canterbury, and the said Prior and his Predecessors had held it discharged of
Tithes tempore dissolutionis, and pleaded the Statute of 31 H. 8. The Defendant
pleads, that the Prior and A non decimando.
his Predecessors, did not hold them discharged, and upon issue joined thereon,
the evidence was that the Prior, or his Predecessors, time out of mind, etc,
never paid Tithes; but no cause was shown, either by unity of possession, real
composition, or other cause to show it discharged: In nil debet, upon the
Statute for tithes a Lay person cannot give a Non decimando in evidence, so may
the King, and any other spiritual persons. li. 2 B. of Winchesters Case.
Cook said it was no evidence; for it is a prescription in non decimando, Curia
contra; For a spiritual man may prescribe in non decimando, and by the Statute
of 31 H. 8. he shall hold it discharged, as the Prior held it; and if he held
it discharged, non refeit, by what means; for it shall be intended by lawful
means, and the Jury afterward found for the Plaintiff. Cro. 3. part. 2. 6.

Upon non assumpsit, in a general Indebitatus Indebitatus assumsit.
assumpsit, the Defendant may give in evidence, payment at any time, before the
Action brought, but upon a special promise to pay money, etc. it is otherwise,
Causa patet; for in the first case, if there be no Debt, the Law will infer no
promise.

If a Church-book, or any thing else is given A Church-Book is no evidence.
Brownlow 1. part 207. Postea 26. Assise. pl. 4.
in evidence, which ought not to be allowed, the Court above cannot quash the
Verdict, except it be certified and returned with the Postea. Brownlow 1 part.
207. But the Court may order a new Trial, upon cause showed, as for excessive
damages, etc.

The Court will not permit the Jury to carry any Writings out with them, but
what are proved, and under Seal.

But here I recollect my self, and consider that this Chapter is of greatest
use to our Circuit practiser, and therefore I shall go no further in scattered
instances, but digest my further Collections into a method more beneficial,
which may be improved by any Practiser, as other matter shall occur.

Quare defendens Crimen feloniae ei imposuit, Action of the C^s^.
etc. the Plaintiff cannot give in evidence words only, but Acts, as arresting,
charging or conventing him before Justice of Peace for felony. Sanders verse.
Edwards Mich. 14 Car. 2. B. R.

If any action arises on request, as in Trover or special promise, the Statute
of limitation goes only to the request. Juy's case. Mich. 1652. C. B. v. 1 Cro.
139.

Declaration for words spoken in the presence of A. B. and others, in evidence
it suffices that they were spoken in the presence of others only, Wingfield
and Coote, Lent Assizes Norf. 1662. per Hale Chapter Baron.

In Indebitatus for carrying of Herrings, the evidence was, he was a Porter at
Yarmouth, and when Herring-Ships came home, he went (of his own head) and
carried up to the Defendants house, with other Porters, so many Herrings, and
Good, by Twisden Judge of Assise Norf. Summer 1662. Jermin verse. Lucas.

In action for hindering to sit in a Pew claimed by prescription, repaired, etc.
ought to be given in evidence; and one may prescribe to sit in the uppermost
seat in a Pew. Buckston and Bateman, Mich. 14 Car. 2. B. R.

In action for executing an illegal Warrant, etc. It Is good evidence to prove
the Just. of Peace acted as such without showing his Commiss^on, so on the
Statute of Hue and Cry. Constables case. Norf. Lent Assizes per Hale Chief
Baron.

Action for stopping up lights, etc. One had a piece of Ground and builds an
house on part, and Leases it, then he sells the other part of the Ground to one
who builds on it, and stops up the lights of the first house, the Lessee has a
good action. But if two owe two pieces of Ground, and one builds, the other may
also build and stop up his lights. Palmer verse. Flesher Mich. 15 Car. 2. B. R.

If a Master always gives his servant money to buy his Markets with, it is good
evidence to discharge the Master in an action brought against him for goods
taken up on Trust, by that servant. Per Glyn Chapter Just. Mich. 1658. at
Guild Hall, Sr. Tho. Rouses case.

A water course runs through my Ground to the Grounds of J. S. where is a pit
that time out of mind used to be filled with that water. I may stop the water
in my Ground, and use it as I will, so I do not turn the course another way,
but when I have done with it, let it fall into its own course. Per St. John Chapter
Just. C. B. Suff. Summer Assizes. 1657. Smart and Tystead.

Action for words, You forswore your self in your answer in Chancery. Defendant
justifies. Plaintiff replies de Injuria sua propria absque tali causa, per Hale
Summer Assise, Suff. It Is a good replication, and a small mistake in an answer
shall not convict of perjury, for the Council may mistake or his Clerk.

Action for not scouring a Ditch, by which the water overflowed his Land, etc.
and declare quod quidam Rivus run there, etc. Upon evidence it appeared only a
Land-floud, and good by name of Rivus, though it be dry great part of the year;
and it was held the best pleading of the course of this River to put a place
from whence it comes, and so to the Plaintiffs Land, without mentioning mean
places by which it passes, which may be many, and must be proved if laid, per
Whitfield 1641. York, Clayton 96.

Soldiers lying in an Inn 14 days, are guests within the Custom of England,
Harlands Case, per Whitfield 1647.

The Plaintiff in action of the case intitles himself by prescription, to a
Fold course for Sheep upon all the Lands in such a Field on Mich. day, and so
to Lady day, the Lands being unsown, and for that the Defendant put on Sheep,
etc. before Mich. day and after, and thereby fed the grounds, etc. the Plantiff
could not take so good feed. actio inde.

1. The owner may put on Sheep and feed his own grounds before Mich. unless a
Custom be to the contrary, which ought to be laid in the declaration, Contra of
a stranger.

2. It appearing that part of the Lands, etc. had been the Lands of the
Plaintiff who was Lord of the Manor, and prescribed as such, and there being
no exception of those Lands in the prescription, the Plaintiff was nonsuit, for
as to those Lands the prescription was gone by unity of possession. Per Hale
Chapter Baron, Norf. Summer Assizes 1668. Branthwait verse. Hunt.

Assumpsit.
In Indebitatus, covenant to pay, is no evidence, 2 Cro. 505. nor money due for
rent by specialty, or on Record. Hob. 284. Hutt. 35.

But an account stated for rent and other things, is good Evidence.

In Indebitat. for money, etc. delivery of Corn or other matter in
satisfaction, is good evidence, Contr. in a special Action of the case on
Assumpsit.

Indebit. lies not for money won at Dice, Wiche's Case Hill. 14, 15 Car. 2. B.
R.

If a promise be made to pay at a day certain, and the day is past, the
Plaintiff may declare to pay on request: so if he declare on payment at a day
certain, and give in evidence, a promise on request, i. e. when it is created on
account which gives the duty, for there the time is ex abundanti; but where the
action is founded on the Contract, otherwise, for there the evidence must
pursue the Contract. Hill. 1650. B. R. Child's case.

Promise to restore a Horse hired for a Journey, if the Horse dies in the
Journey without the Riders default, his promise binds not. Lisle's case, cited
in Matraver's case Trin. 1651. B. R.

One brings an Assumpsit for 20 l. and gives in evidence a promise if two would
surrender to pay them 20 l. a piece, good. Mich. 1655. B. R. Thomas and Gerey.

Indebit. for 50 l. brought by Edgar against Chetham Clerk. The evidence was,
T. was indebted to Edgar in 50 l. Chetham desires Edgar to let him take the 50
l. of T. and he would give Edgar a Bill of Exchange to receive so much at
London: accordingly T. promises to pay Chetham the money, which promise he
accepted, and gave a Bill of Exchange to Edgar; after T. became insolvent, then
Chetham prohibits the payment of his Bill, whereupon this action is brought.
Per Wadh. Wyndham Just. Ass. Norf. Summer 1663. the action lies, for Chetham
having accepted the promise of T. and given a Bill, etc. is now become a Debtor
to Edgar until his Bill be paid, though he never receives the money of Thompson.

In Indebitat. It is good evidence against the Father, that Physic was
delivered to his Daughter at his request, Stone-house verse. Bodvill Hill. 14
Car. 2. B. R.

One promises a Bailiff that if he would let one arrested be in his house that
night, he would deliver him in the morning, it is a good promise, and the
Bailiff or the Plaintiff may bring the action. Benson verse. French Pasch. 15
Car. 2. B. R.

Indebitat. The case was, the Plaintiff sold 60 Comb of Rye to the Defendant at
14 s. per Comb, to be delivered before Mich. the Plaintiff delivered 50 Comb
before the time, and brought this action for the money for it, and good, though
it was agreed the money to be paid on the delivery of the last Rye. per Hale
Chapter Baron.

1. Though the agreement is entire, yet the several deliveries make several
contracts. 2. Though the payment was to be on the last delivery, yet a time
being set for delivery, it is intended to be paid when the delivery should have
been. 3. The time being past, it is now a duty, and so Indebitatus lies. 4. The
Defendant has his remedy for not delivering the residue. Baker verse. Sutton.
Lent Assise Norf. 1662.
Indebitat. lies for a portion, after the Ioynture settled, so for 1000 l. on
promise of so much for every Horse-shoo nail, but the Jury may mitigate
Damages. ib.

A promise to marry B. within 3 Months, within a Fortnight after they meet, and
the party promises again to marry her within 3 Weeks, this last promise is no
discharge of the former, being all within the time of 3 Months, but had the
last promise been to marry her within some other time after the 3 Months, it
had discharged the former. Hite verse. Chaplin. Pasch. 1658. B. R.

Indebitatus by one, Defendant give evidence that another was partner with the
Plaintiff, at the delivery of the Wares, Plaintiff Nonsuit. Franklin verse.
Walker, Norf. Lent Assise 1667. per Moreton. Contr. in Trespass, for there
Ioint-tenancy must be pleaded.

Indebitatus for 9 l. Defendant pleaded non assumpsit infra sex annos, issue
inde, the Plaintiff proved a Debt of 9 l. due 10 years before, and an
acknowledgement of the Debt within 6 years, and an offer to pay 5 l. for the
whole.

Per Hale, The Plaintiff nonsuit, for the acknowledgement of the Debt is no
more than is done by the Plea, but there must be a new promise of the Debt
within 6 years to make the action hold, and here the promise or offer to pay 5
l. gives no action for the 9. l. Bass. verse. Smith Suff. Summer Assise 1668.

Debt.
Debt on a Bond to perform Covenants, to deliver possession at the Terms end to
the Lessor or his Assigns; breach was assigned in not delivery to two
purchasors, demand being made by both, and issue joined thereon, in evidence
demand by one is good. 2 Cro. 475.

Debt on Bond to perform an award, ita quod the award be delivered to the
parties, in evidence, delivery proved to the Wife is sufficient for the Jury to
presume the delivery to the party himself, per Hale Norf. Summer Assise 1665.
Trice and Prat.

At the same Assizes per Moreton Just. delivery to the parties Son is good
evidence, Violet and Cook.

Debt against an Heir, etc. riens per descent, etc. a Feoffment given in
evidence made before the action, that it was fraudulent may be given in
evidence, though not pleaded, 5 rep. Co. Goathes case Hob. 72.

Debt against Executor, who pleaded ne unques, etc. Plaintiff replied that he
Administered as Executor, and gave in evidence Administration granted to him, by
which he Administered, Good. Dyer 305.

In Debt against Executors, and plene Administravit pleaded, the Defendant
cannot give in evidence a Bond satisfied, where the Executor and Testator were
obligors, per Coventry Lord Keeper 33 Eliz. Perkins verse. Perkins.

In Debt for Tithes, Modus to a Vicar is good against the Parson, and so is a
Modus to a Parish Clerk, per Moreton Just. Lent Cambr. 1667. Barber verse.
Cosier.

In Debt against Executor de son tort, who pleads ne unques, etc. It is
sufficient to charge him, by proving he has administered of never so little
value. Clayton 6.

Against Executor de son tort, who pleaded fully administered, the evidence was,
the Intestate made a Bill of Sale of his goods to the Defendant, who was bound
with him in a Bond as surety, for his Countersecurity, but the goods remained
in the Intestates possession during his life, for some few hours, ruled a
fraudulent Deed by Barkley Just. at York. 11 Car. Legard and Linley. Clayton
39. quaere.

Debt against Administrator, who pleaded If the Defendant pleads plene, etc.
praetor judgments, etc. The Plaintiff must prove Assets above the sum of those
Judgments. Huntington, by Judge Windham. 33 Car. 2.
plene, etc. and gave in evidence Judgments, and good without pleading, per
Henden. 1638. York. Clayton 65. Quaere, for if Judgments be kept on foot by
fraud, and given in evidence, how can a Creditor who sues for a just Debt, be
prepared to detect this fraud? And note, in Scire facias against an Execuor on
Judgment per Testator, the Defendant pleaded fully, administered generally, and
the Plaintiff demurred specially, and Sir William Jones Sollictor general moved
to amend the Plea, and Hale Chapter Just. thought he ought to plead specially, how
fully administered. Bradford verse. Hutchinson. H. 25, 26 Car. 2. B. R.

Debt for Rent on a Lease, the evidence to prove the Lease was, that the
Plaintiff leased a House to the Defendant at a Rent, but no time mentioned, and
it was agreed at the same time, that the Lessee was not to leave it without
half a years warning, per Hale, Norf. Summer Assise 1668. It Is a Lease at will,
and the leaving on half a years warning, is but a Collateral agreement, and no
part of the demise.

Ejectment.
The Plaintiff Counts of a joint Lease made by A. and B. in evidence it
appeared that A. B. and C. were Ioynt-tenants, that C. Leased to B. and that A.
and D. Leased to the Plaintiff, by 3. Just. against two it is good. 2 Cro.
Jurdanes case. fo. 83.

Count of a joint Lease made by two, in evidence it appears they were Tenants
in Common, by 3 Just. against one, it is not good. 2 Cro. 166. Mantles Case.

Count of a Lease by Husband, evidence was a Lease by Husband and Wife with
Letter of Attorney to make livery, and it is made in name of both, by 3 Just.
against one it is good, for Livery as to the Feme was void. 2. Cro. Gardners
case.

Of a Lease made 5. May 10. Regis habendum from Lady Day last past for 21 years
Extunc prox. sequent. In evidence a Lease of 5 May 10. Regis habendum, from
Lady Day last past for 21 years next following the date of the said Indenture,
adjudged good and affirmed in Error. Hob. 19.

Ejectment of a Rectory, evidence of the taking of Tithes only, and not Entry
into the Glebe, the Plaintiff was nonsuit. Latch. 62. Hems and Stroud.

Ejectment of a Lease to A. of Lands in the possession of three Tenants for
years, delivered to I. S. as an Escrow with Letter of Attorney, to enter into
all, and then to deliver his Deed, etc. evidence, that the Attorney entered upon
one Lessee in name of all, and delivered the Deed, etc. Per Jones Just. It Is
good enough, for where the Freehold is in one, his Entry into one Lessee for
years in name of all the rest is good. Latch. 71. Dame Argells case.

Where one declares on a fictitious Lease to A. for three years, and within the
same time declares of another fictitious Lease to B. of the same Lands, the
last is not good. For Trespass for the mean profits must be brought in the
first Lessees name, ut dicitur.

Ejectment of Tithes, a Lease for life of Tithes is good, if there be Church or
Churchyard to make Livery in, resolved in Trial at Bar, Wheeler verse. Hanchet
Hill. 14, 15 Car. 2. B. R. v. Jones rep. 321, 322.

Entry and Claym made upon the Land within 5 years after the death of the Baron
of the Countess of Peterborough to avoid a fine, she being issue in tail,
proved by one Witness, and allowed at a Trial at Bar, B. R. Mich. 15 Car. 2.
Floyd and Pollard.

Custom of Copyholders in extreme is to surrender into one Tenants hands, in
the presence of credible Witnesses. A surrender was made accordingly, but
presented to be done to another Tenant, yet being proved to be done to a
Tenant, it was holden by Wadh. Wyndham Just. to be good, and by him, a Glove or
a Turfe, is a Rod to give seisin by, Maye's case. Norf. Summer Assizes 1663.

A Will under which Title to Land is made, must be shown it self, and the
Probate is not sufficient. Contr. if it were on a Circumstance, or as
inducement, or that the Will remain in Chancery, or other Court by special
order of such Court. Eden verse. Chalk-hill. Mich. 13 Car. 2. B. R.

Also Inrollment of a Deed, which needs no Inrollment, is no evidence. ib.

The issue was fine uncertain, or certain 2 years Rent and no more, the
evidence was of admittances on surrenders uncertain, but all under 2 years
Rent. Per Williams Just. you ought to produce fines on descent, and fines paid
above two years Rent. 2 Bulst. 32. Allen verse. Abraham.

A lease was made by parol and agreed to be put in Writing, and Indentures
bespoke, but being held for Ten years, and no Indentures executed, it was ruled
for a lease parol. Per Barkley Just. 13 Car. 1. York, Clayton 53.

By Just. Berkley (1638. York, Hedges cont-Clayton 57) a Will under Seal,
proved examined by the original, was allowed good evidence. Quaere, I think the
practice against it.

A Lease and Release were given in evidence to entitle the Plaintiff, and they
both were named haec Indentura, but were not indented, good, per Hale Chapter
Baron, Norf. Summer Assizes 1668. Briant verse. Trendle.

After default (in Ejectment) the Defendant, may confess Lease, Entry and
ouster, and may give evidence, and have all advantages (except Challenges) and
if the Plaintiff becomes non suit, any one for the Defendant may pray it be
recorded.

Per H. Wyndham Just. Bucks Lent 68 Dr. Crawle's case. Deprivation in spiritual
Court for Simony disables from bringing Ejectment, because he can make no
Lease, yet quaere.

If Mortgagor continues in possession, without provision for that purpose in
the Deed, he is Tenant at Will, and if he levies a Fine it is no disseisin by
him continuing in possession still, because after the Will determined he is
Tenant at sufferance. Per Hale Chapter Baron Bedford Summer Ass. 1669.

Declaration on a Lease made 14 Jan. 30. Eliz. evidence of a Lease Sealed 13
Jan. good, for if it was a Lease 13. it was a Lease made 14. 4. Leon 14.

Feoffments of 40 years standing, and possession going accordingly, you need
not prove Livery, it may be intended per Jury. Roll. rep. 132.

The Common Rock on which so many have split, is laying the Lease to be a die
datus, and the Entry the same day, which is a disseisin, not purged by the
Commencement of the Lease, for where an interest passes [a] is exclusive, and
so the entry the same day, is before the Lease was to Commence, and is a
disseisin, but in cases of Obligation where no interest passes, it is contra,
quod nota.

Trespass.
Count of Trespass done in one acre, evidence of Trespass done but in half that
acre, good. 2 Cro. Winkworths Case.

The Lady Hatton brought Trespass for breaking her Close, and taking away her
Horse, etc. against two Defendants, they plead Not guilty, as to the taking of
[Her] Horse, as to the rest, they say that the Horse of one of the Defndants
was in the Close, etc. and they took him out doing as little damage as they
could, quae est eadem, etc. The Plaintiff replies de injuria sua propria, etc.

The evidence was, that the Plaintiff as Lady of the Manor took the Horse as
an Estray, and it was Cried and Marked, etc. that the Defendants refused to pay
for the meat, and took him away, before the year and a day was out.

1. Per Wadh. Wyndham Just. d'assize, A Lord may detain an Estray for meat, yet
no Trespass lies if the owner takes him, but an action of the Case lies for the
meat.

2. If the action had been brought against the servant only, he must justify,
etc. But being brought against Master and Servant, this joynt-justification is
good.

Cambr. Summer Assizes 1667. Lady Hatton against Cotes and al.

In Trespass, the evidence for the Defendant was, that the Defendant had a
Barn, and purschased a way over the Plaintiffs Land to that Barn, after the
Defendant bought other Lands lying contiguous to that Barn on the one side and
to a Haven on the other side, and carried Carriages by that way to the Barn,
and through it over his own new purchased Land to the Haven. Per Hale Chapter
Baron. If I purchase a general way to such a place, I may go from thence on my
own ground whither I please, though I purchase the ground after the way
purchased. Summer Assizes Norf. 1665. Heynsworth verse. Bird.

Trespass was brought against many, by a School-mistress, for taking away a
child (her Scholar) with a Scarf of the Mistresses, per Keeling Chapter Just. In
Trespass for taking [things] all are principals that are present and
consenting, Contra, in taking [persons] and this action lies not by the
Mistress for the child, but for the Scarf only. Lent Norf. Ass. 1663. Mary
Coopers case.

Trespass lies for Lessee in Ejectment on a fictitious Lease to recover mean
profits during the continuance of that Lease mentioned on Record: And the
Recovery shall maintain it. Otherwise if brought by the Lessor, for he is no
party to the action.

Trespass lies not for pulling down a Pew in a Church fastened to a pillar with
a Chain. Contra, had it been fixed by nails driven into the pillar, per Glyn
Chapter Just. Trevors case,

Trespass quare fregit liberam Warrenam suam, and took his Conies. In evidence
it appeared that the Plaintiff had liberty of chase in the place, which though
it includes Warren; yet a general Trespass lies not, but an action of the case.
E. of Arundels case, Pasch. 1658. B. R.

Per Earl Sergeant, if Beasts be impounded, and the Key lost, the Officer by
Replevin may break the pound, and deliver the Cattle, per Stat. Marlebridge 52
H. 3. 21.

Tenants in Common must join in Trespass done against them, so Avowry, Lead and
Lamsteads case, 7 Car. B. R. cited by Finch in Argument. Or Tenant in Common
surviving shall have Trespass.

In Trespass, the Defendant sets forth a conditional Feoffment for payment of
money at such a day and place, and that he paid it accordingly; issue joined on
the payment at the day and place, evidence of payment before the day is not
good. Contra, had the special matter been pleaded with acceptance. More 47.

In Trespass with Continuando to recover mean profits, an Entry and possession
of the Land before the Trespass must be proved, and also another Entry after
the Trespass.

In Trespass, the Defendant prescribes to dig in the Common for Clay, to repair
ancient houses holden of that Manor, and good. Berney verse. Stafford Norf.
Lent Assizes 1667.

In Trespass they were at issue on Not Guilty, and at the Assizes the Defendant
left his former plea, and pleaded an accord with satisfaction, the Judge would
have had it replied to and tried presently, but the Council refused, whereupon
the Jury was sworn, and the Plaintiff nonsuited. Bedford Assizes Lent 1667.
Green verse. Reynolds. But this was contrary to the opinion of Sir Orlando
Bridgeman, at the same Assizes, and Contr. to 10 H. 7. 21. and 1 Bull. 92.

Trespass lies by Recoveror in Erroneous Judgment for a mean Trespass, because
the Plaintiff in Writ of Error recovers all mean profits, and the Law by
fiction of relation will not make a wrong doer dispunishable. 13. rep. Co. 22.
but Contra, where Act of Parliament restores, etc.

Trespass for assault and wounding in Suff. the Defendant as to vi and armis
non Cul. As to the other justification of molliter Manus, etc. in Norf. and
several Trials. Per Hale Chapter Baron Suff. Ass. Summer 1668. the vi and armis
cannot be tried till the other be tried. Contr. If the first issue of non Cul.
was as to the wounding: and by him evidence of Livery of seisin, generally
shall be intended for life only.

The Hogs of B. were put into the yard of A. and broke into the Land of C. and
did Trespass, action lies against A. though the servant of B. did look to them
and serve them, by which the owner had the special possession of them. So if
Agisted Cattle do Trespass, the Agistor shall answer. Dawtry verse. Huggins,
Clayton 33. per Barkley. 11 Car. York.

A. by Indent. of uses raised an Estate to B. in Fee, who regrants Turbary to
A. by another Deed, and after A. levies a fine to confirm the Estate and uses
abovesaid declared, this does not touch the Turbary, per Vernon, 11 Car. York,
Clayton 42.

Any one employed by an Officer, is an Officer within 7 Jac. 5. to plead
general issue, and give the special matter in evidence. Clayton 54.

Prescription to tether Equos and Boves upon such a balk, etc. Mares and Cowes,
good evidence within that prescription. Per Barkley Clayton 54.

Per Hale, A Corporation may bargain and sell, though, it has been thought an
use upon use, they being seized to the use of their house. But I think it
rather a trust than an use.

If a Just. of P. send his Warrant to I. S. (who is no Officer) to bring one
before him, if I. S. be no Officer, he is not bound to execute it, yet if he
does execute it, it is good, and he may execute it in any part of the County.
And so a Constable of one Town may execute a Warrant in any other Town in the
same County, and any such Warrant is as large as the Justices Commission is,
per Hale Norf. Summer Assizes 1668. Wrongries case.

In Trespass against one for Gleaning on his ground, per Hale Norf. Sum.
Assizes 1668. The Law gives license to the poor to glean, etc. by the general
Custom of England, but the license must be pleaded specially, and cannot be
given in evidence on non Cul.

Trover.
The Citizens of London gave in evidence their Custom to take Toll. Jones 240.

In Trover, for an Horse proved of 15 l. value, the Jury gave but 3 l. damages,
upon mistake, they thinking that the Plaintiff had his Horse again.

Per Wadh. Wyndham; if the Jury had not been gone, they should have mended
their Verdict; but a new action of Trover lies for damages for the Horse, in
which the Jury shall prove the 3 l. given was only for the conversion, not the
value of the Horse; and by him, Trover lies for goods in the Plaintiffs
possession, to recover damages for the conversion only. Tyndal verse. Jolliffe
Norf. Lent Assizes 1660.

In Trover by Administrator where the conversion was in the time of the
Intestate, the Plaintiff must show the Letters of Administration, Contr. where
the conversion was after his death. Per Hale Norf. Sum. Ass. 1660.

If an Estray be claimed within the year and the day, etc. and the Lord refuses
to deliver it; Trover lies, though the keeping is not paid for, and the Lord
says he detains for the same, and the Lord cannot detain for the meat, etc. but
must bring his action. Per Moreton Just. Lent Norf. 1667. Bond verse. Paston,
Quaere, and vide Dent tit. Trespass, per Wyndham Contr. and I think is Law.

At the same Assizes, Daniel verse. Berney, by Moreton Just. Proclamation may be
made of an Estray by any person, and it is not necessary, that it should be
made by the Bell-man or any other Officer. Vide Co. Entries 170. Barber verse.
Fawcet, In Trover, issue was joined, on tender of amends for keeping, etc. and
Verdict pro Plaintiff and judgment.

Note, I find precedents, that in Trover, the matter of an Estray may be
pleaded specially, or given in evidence on Not guilty.

Oats were taken from the owner, and carried to a Miller to make into Oat-meal,
and before it was done, the owner prohibits the Miller, etc. and demanded the
Oats, who, notwithstanding, made them into Oate-meal: Per Barkely it is a
conversion in the Miller. 1630. Clayton 57. Hollworth's case.

On non Cul. The Defendant gave in evidence, a seizure for goods Foreign bought
and Foreign sold: Per Custom of Lynn Norf. good per Hale, Norf. Sum. Ass. 1668.
Harwich verse. Twells.

A man lends his Horse to a special purpose, the Bailee abuses the Horse, and
over works him, then the lender takes the Horse again: Per Hugh Wyndham Just.
Lent Assizes Bucks. Trover lies not, Constables case.

Dower.
In Dower, the issue was ne unque seisie que Dower, and for the Plaintiff, a
Feoffment in Fee was given in evidence to the Husband, the Defendant would have
given in evidence, a seisin in tail with a discontinuance, and then the
Feoffment, etc. and so a remitter, but it ought to be pleaded per Cur. Dyer. 41.

If an Heir Mortgage for years and then assign Dower legally i. e. a 3. part
of the whole, the assignment shall bind the Mortgagee; Cont. if the assignment
be illegal, as of one whole Manor when there were three Manors; that being
not as the Law would have done it. And if a disseisor assign a legal Dower,
it is good: But if the Heir Mortgage in Fee, and then assign, etc. legally,
etc. that is not good, because the whole Freehold was out of him at the time of
assignment: Per Hugh Wyndham Just. Bucks Lent Ass. 1668.

Account.
Against S. as receiver of two 30 ls. and as Bailiff for receiving his Rents
for several years, not saying any certain sum of Rents: Per Earl Sergeant, the
proper way is to find quod Computet, as to what is certain in the declaration
and so proved, as the money was, but not to the Rents, and so he said was the
opinion of Hale. But per Moreton Just. the Verdict shall be general, and it may
be both ways. Saye's case Norf. Lent Assizes 1667.

Thus far I have made an Essay of a method, to be further built upon by our
Practiser, and have given some cases, not in Print, and (it may be) useful. I
shall add some other cases, not so proper for heads except that of [Evidence]
with which I shall conclude this Chapter.

Evidence.
Inspection of a Deed Enrolled may be given in evidence, Contr. of a bare Deed
not Enrolled, or of a Deed that needs no Inrollment. Pasch. 1655. B. R.
Goodson's case.

A Deed to Lead the uses of a fine was Enrolled on the acknowledgement of but
one of the parties to it, and was allowed by Glyn Chapter Just. in evidence, as
Roll Chapter Just. had done before him, though no binding evidence, Turber verse.
Maddison Pasch. 1655. B. R.

An office found at a death, etc. may be given in evidence.

A Verdict against one, under whom either Plaintiff or Defendant claims, may be
given in evidence against the party so claiming, cont. If neither claim under
it. Duke and Ventres Mich. 1656. B. R.

If an Action be brought on a Statute, which has several provisoes in it, the
Defendant may plead, not guilty, and aid himself by any of the provisoes in
evidence: But if provisoes be made to that Statute, of which the Defendant may
take advantage, he ought to plead it, and not give it in evidence, per Roll.
Chapter Just. Mich. 1650. B. R. Jones 320. accord.

Iointenancy in trespass cannot be given in evidence; but must be pleaded in
Abatement, Jones versus Randal, Hill. 1652. C. B.

Arrest and Imprisonment to prove a Bankrupt must be proved by Record: Newby
verse. Bathurst Pasch. 1659. B. R. In a Trial at Bar.

The custom of New England, to marry by the Magistrate in the presence of a
Minister, was allowed good by Hale Chapter Just. B. R. Trin. 1663. at Guild Hall,
int. Hall and Hall.

The Certificate of the King under his sign Manual was allowed in Chancery for
proof without exception, Hob. 213.

Records, as Patents, Statutes, Judgments, may be given in Evidence, Hob. 227.
contr. to Dyer 129.

When Records are pleaded, they must be Sub pede Sigilli, Contr. if given in
Evidence. Styles 22. Whites case.

An answer in Chancery, is Evidence against the Defendant himself; but the Bill
must he proved. Godb. 326.

Upon a traverse of a Lease parol for years, viz. Absque hoc quod A. demisit,
etc. Nihil habuit in tenementis, may be given in Evidence. Dyer 122.

Showing a Grant to digg Turfs, is no Evidence against a Prescription for the
same, but the Grant being the same with the Prescription, shall be taken as a
confirmation. Crew and Vernon, Moore 819. Quaere tamen. v. Moore 830. Where a
Court of Pipowder is claimed by Prescription and Grant, and good. 2 Cro. 313.
Acc.

In Trespass for taking Goods, after Judgment, per confession, non sum
informatus, or nil dicit, Property need not be proved to a Writ of inquiry; for
it would oppose the first Judgment, Quod quaerens recuperet; and the Judges
might have Assessed damages if they would. Yelv. 151. Yet quaere, if the
Defendant may not disprove property in mitigation of Damages; for the Jury may
find no Damages.

A Copy of a Deed, is good Evidence where the Defendant has the deed, and will
not produce it. Per Vernon just. Clayton 15.

A deed of Feoffment without Livery may be given in Evidence as a Release. Per
Berkly 11 Car. Clayton 32.

If a Fine be given in Evidence, with five years non claim, etc. the fine must
be showed with the Proclamations under Seal, and the Chirograph will not serve.

The confession of a party must be taken whole, and not by parts; As if to
prove a debt, it be sworn that the Defendant confessed it, but withal he said
at the same time, That he paid it, his confession shall be valid as to the
payment as well as that he owed it. Per Hale Chapter Just. And so is common
practice.

A deed cancelled by practice, was allowed to be read, in Evidence in action
under that Deed, the practice being proved. Hetly 138.

Against a Purchasor bona fide, recital in a Deed of money paid is not
sufficient, nor acquittance for the money, unless it be of ancient standing,
and then it shall be presumed.

The Deed to lead the uses of a Fine sur concessit, need not be proved per
Testes.

If a deed of Feoffment be shown, but no Livery, possession going with the
Deed, is Evidence to a Jury to find Livery.

At Guild Hall Trin. 23 Car. 2. Hale Chapter Just. cited the Case of Sir Paul
Pindar, A Levari, etc. was proved by a recital of it in another Record, and
Hale and Mainard demurred on the Evidence, and adjudged against them, for this
Cause, viz. That it was proved, there was such a Record, that it was filed,
that it was taken off the file. But (by him) generally without such proof, the
evidence is not good, because one Record may recite one that never was.

The Jury are to decide the fact, and evidence is not given but to inform them
in their consciences of the truth, for although no evidence is given of either
side, yet they may give their verdict of one side or the other. 14 H. 7. 29.
And therefore although two witnesses are necessary, where the trial is by
witnesses, as in the Civil Law; Yet they are not of necessity, where the trial
is by Jury. And where witnesses are joined Office of the Jury.
with the Jury, yet they may be rejected, if they will not agree with the
twelve, and the twelve may give their Verdict.

The Jury after they are departed from the Bar, may return to hear their
evidence of any thing they doubt before the Verdict.

Sur Travers de done in tail, the witnesses Done in Tail.
prove, That another made the Done; this does not warrant the issue.

In an action against the Sheriff upon Extortion verse. Vic.
the Statute of Extortion, That he took it for Barretee of one who was acquit,
is good evidence.

Possession is an evidence of right, and he that has possession may distrain
the Cattle Possession.
of him that has no title, for the taking is in respect of the possession,
more than of the title.

In debt for Rent upon a Lease, and nil Debt for Rent.
debet pleaded, ne unques seisie de terre is good evidence, otherwise upon the
plea of riens arrere, or levy per distress.

Parson or not Parson, in such issue Parson.
you may give in evidence a resignation, although it be in another County and
Spiritual.

In riens pass per le fait, Not his Fait.
deed may be given in evidence.

In Trespass, quare claus. fregit, with What ought to be proved in evidence.
abuttals, all the abuttals and descriptions must be proved. But if the abuttal
be laid North, etc. and it incline North, though not directly, it is
sufficient: and sic de caeteris.

Upon this Issue, the account given Plene administravit.
to the Ordinary, shall not be given in evidence, nor any respect had to it.

Will, The probat is good for the personal What shall be given in evidence, and
what is good evidence.
estate, but not to prove a Will in writing of Land by the Statute.

Recital of other Grants by Letters Patents, Recital in Letters Patents.
in Letters Patents are some evidence, but not fit to be allowed, without
showing the former Letters Patents or a copy. But the Jury may find them.
Surmise in a Prohibition.


The proof of this surmise in any Court of Record, shall not be given in
evidence in another action, upon the same custom, because the Defendant in the
prohibition cannot cross examine. Depositions.


Depositions in the Court Christian, in the Court of the Council of York
touching the title of Land, of which they have not conusance, or in another
Suit against him who claims not under those parties, by the Commissioners
upon a Commission of Bankrupt, because the party could not cross examine: shall
not be allowed in evidence.

But a sentence given in the spiritual Court touching Tithes may be given in
Evidence in an Action at Common Law, for this is a judicial act.

After evidence given, and the Jury ready Former Trial.
to give their Verdict; and then the Attorney General will not proceed, but
draws a Juror, and brings another information, none of the former Jurors shall
be admitted to give in evidence, that the Jury were ready to give their Verdict
against the King in the first information, for this ought not to be discovered,
for so no benefit would accrue to the King by his Prerogative to draw a Juror.

But this may be given in evidence in another What may be given in evidence
upon a special Issue.
action, where the King is not concerned.

In debt for rent upon non demisit, that Debt for rent.
the lessor riens avoit in the land at the time of the demise, may be given in
evidence.

Upon an Issue of Common appendant, etc. Common.
common per cause de vicinage, cannot be given in evidence.

If the Defendant plead son assault demesne Son Assaule demesne in Battery.
in Battery, and the Plaintiff reply, de injuria sua propria absque tali causa,
And so issue is joined, if there was a battery at another day than what the
Plaintiff and Defendent have assigned, upon the Plaintiff, and another upon the
Defendant by the Plaintiff, The Verdict ought to be for the Defendant; for if
the Defendant prove any assault made upon him by the Plaintiff, this ought to
be found for him, although it was at another day than what he has alleged,
for the day is not material: But upon such special justification the Defendant
has liberty to prove his Plea at any time, and the Plaintiff might have made a
new assignment at another time, for peradventure there might be several
trespasses at several times, to which the Defendant may have several Pleas, and
therefore if such manner of pleading should not be allowed, and such evidence,
the Defendant could not tell how to help himself, nor could know for what
Trespass the action is brought. Vide devant hic and appres cap. 13.

If the Issue be whether the Kings Surrender.
Tenant by Letters surrendered to the King or not, the accepting of new Letters
Patents, which is a surrender in Law, is good evidence.

In a special promise to pay 20 l. if the Plaintiff would pay 10 l. etc. and an
averment Non assumpsi^.
that he paid the 10 l. upon non assumpsit, the Defendant shall not give in
evidence that the Plaintiff did not pay the 10 l. neither is the Plaintiff
bound to prove it, for the issue is upon the assumpsit, and not upon the
payment of the 10 l. which might have been traversed. And although 'twas said
that in all actions there is a general issue to be taken, which shall put all
the declaration in issue, and that must in this be non assumpsit, or nothing,
yet by the advice of all the Justices of Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, it was
ruled as abovesaid. Mich. 16 Car. B. R. between Holditch and Brodrig. I have
been the more particular in this, because I have known Plaintiffs nonsuited in
such cases at the Assisses for want of proving the averment: although I must
confess I never agreed with the Judge herein that did it. For it is a mistake
to say, The Plaintiff must in all cases prove his whole Declaration, if he
proves the matter in issue, he ought not to be nonsuited. Rolls tit. Trial.
1681.

If an Advowson be pleaded to be granted Grant per fait. Where it is sufficient
to prove the effect of the Issue.
Per fait, and this issue is taken by a stranger to the fait, if it be found
granted sans fait, or by another fait, it is good, for the Deed is surplus, and
the effect of the issue is upon the grant not upon the fait.

If an Imprisonment by dures at D. Dures.
be in Issue, it is not material whether he was ever at D. or not, for the
effect of the Issue is, if the Deed was made by dure^.

So of a Feoffment pleaded by Deed, a Feoffment without Deed or another
Feoffment.
Deed is good, for the effect of the Issue is upon the Feoffment, not upon the
Fait.

In escape of a Prisoner, and the Issue Fresh Suit.
is, if the Jailer immediately after the escape made fresh suit, if the
Prisoner has escaped a day and night before the Jailer knew it, and then he
makes fresh suit, it is sufficient to prove the effect of the issue, for
convenient pursuit is immediate fresh suit in Law.

If in pleading an Indenture of demise Non demisit modo and forma.
you mistake the recital, and the issue is non demisit modo and forma; The
mistake shall not hurt, for the effect of the Issue is upon the demise.

If a man plead not guilty, he cannot give What thing may be given in evidence
upon the general Issue. Trespass. Battery.
in evidence a matter justifiable, which shall be a confession of the act, for
this is contrary to the issue. As son assault demesne in Battery, upon Not
guilty: but upon Not guilty, in Trespass for beating ones Servant, per quod
servitium amisit, you may give in evidence that the Plaintiff did not lose his
service by the Battery.

Nor upon null wast fait, can he say, suficientment repair devant le brief
purchase. Wast.


If my servant without my consent put my Cattle in the Land of another, I may
Servant.
plead Not guilty, and give this matter in evidence; for by putting the Cattle
in, the servant has gained a property.

Upon Not guilty, he may give in evidence Information.
a discharge by a Proviso in the same Stat. for thereby he is Not guilty,
Contra formam Statuti, but not a discharge by another Statute.

Upon non habuit seu tenuit ad firmam contr. formam Statuti, the Parson may
say, he took the Farm for maintenance of his house according to the Proviso in
debt upon the Stat. 21. H. 8.

But upon the Stat. 5 E. 6. for engrossing upon Not guilty, it is said, that the
Defendant cannot give in evidence a license according to the Proviso of the
Stat. sed quaere rationem.

Upon ne unque son Receivor, etc. the Account.
Defendant cannot say that he paid the money according to directions, etc.

In a Scire facias against Terrtenants Seisin Feoffment.
and a Feoffment pleaded before the judgment absque hoc that he was seized
tempore Judicii, and issue upon the seisin, that the Feoffment was fraudulent,
to defraud the judgment, may be given in evidence; but otherwise if the issue
had been upon the Feoffment.

So upon reins per descent, by an Heir Riens per descent.
in debt upon an obligation, that the Defendant aliened the Assets by fraud and
covin, and so void by the Stat. of 13 El. may be given in evidence, because
these are the general issues.

In Trespass for taking a stack of Corn, Parcel.
the evidence may be of part, and the Verdict as to 4 Combs or Bushels, Guilty,
and as to the rest Not Guilty.

Upon this plea the Executor may give in evidence a retainer for a debt due to
himself, Plene administravit.
of as high a nature: or payment of debts with his own money, and that he kept
goods of the Testator in lieu, for this alters the property.

They can have nothing but what is delivered to them in Court, and given in
evidence What evidence the Jury may have with them. Exemplifications.
by the party in Court, if an exemplification come out of Chancery of witnesses
examined there upon Oath who are dead, the Jury shall have this with them; but
if the exemplification comprehend some Witnesses alive and some dead, they
shall not have it with them. Neither shall they have any Pedigree drawn by a
Herald at Arms, for it is no evidence Pedigree.
but only information for direction. What Evidence the Jury may have with them,
see the 14. Chapter.

If a man makes a Feoffment and afterward Who may be witnesses. Not persons
interested.
makes another, with covenants that he was seized, etc. and afterward an issue
is taken upon the first Feoffment, the Feoffee shall not be a Witness.

In an information for Usury, the Usury.
party shall not be a Witness, because he would thereby avoid his own Bonds,
etc. and be testis in propria causa.

Three men swear an Arbitrament, in Perjury.
three several actions against them upon the Statute 5 Eliz. of perjury, each
of them may be a Witness for the other; but in an Indictment of perjury, upon 5
Eliz. the party grieved shall not be a Witness, for he is to have 20. l.

Common experience tells us upon an Indictment for Battery, etc. the party
grieved may be a Witness, because it is only for the King.

In an action against the Hundred upon Hundred.
the Statute of Winton, etc. the Lessor living out of the Hundred may be a
Witness, for it is not reason that he and his Lessee being an inhabitant should
be both charged: If the Servant be robbed of the Masters money, the Master may
be a Witness to prove the delivery of the money to the Servant before the
Robbery. Rolls tit. Trial 686.

A thing which is concluded in the Ecclesiastical Proceedings in Ecclesiastical
Courts.
Court concerning Lands, is not to be given in evidence to Juries, for the
Courts of Common Law are not to be guided by their proceedings. Mich. 22 Car.
B. R.

Matter in Law is not to be given in Matter in Law.
evidence, for the Jury are only to try matters of fact.

An ancient writing that is proved to Ancient Writings.
have been found amongst Deeds and evidences of Land, may be given in evidence,
although the executing of it cannot be proved, for it is hard to prove ancient
things, and finding them in such a place, by presumption, they were honestly
and fairly obtained, and preserved for use, and are free from suspicion of
dishonesty. 24 Car. B. R.

A writing or answer permitted to be read Totum and pars.
in part, may be read in toto.

A Copy of part of a Record cannot be Copy of Records.
given in evidence, unless it is proved that the part showed in evidence is all
concerning the matter in question.

A transcript of a Record or Enrollment Transcript Enrollment.
of a Deed may be given in evidence, for they are things to be credited being
made by Officers of trust.

The Council of that party who does begin Council.
to maintain the issue, whether of Plaintiff or Defendant, ought to conclude.

A Juror who is a Witness, must be Juror.
also sworn in open Court to give evidence, if he be called for a Witness; for
the Court and Council are to hear the evidence as well as the Jury.

The Jury may carry from the Bar an Exemplification.
exemplification under the Great Seal of Depositions in Chancery, but if they
are not exemplified, the Jury can only look upon them at the Bar, but not have
them with them out of Court.

If one produce a Lease made upon an Lease upon an Outlawry.
Outlawry, to prove a title, he must also produce the Outlawry it self: but if
it be to prove other matter, he needs not show the Outlawry. And so it is of an
Extent, without showing the Statute or Judgment on which the Extent is
grounded.

By Rolls an Office found after the Office.
death of a Tenant in Capite, of Lands in another County, may be given in
evidence to try the title of those Lands, if there was a special Livery granted
unto the Heir.

If a Witness be Bayl, upon motion the Court will give leave to alter the Bayl.
Bail.
Styles 385.

Debt for 10 l. against a Witness, upon the Statute 5 Eliz. does not lie,
unless Charges.
the Witness has his charges, and he is not bound to come without his Charges
first paid: but if he accepts of 12 d. and a promise for the rest at the trial,
he is bound, and an action lies against him if he does not come. Cro. 1 part
522. 540. Goodwin against West.

A Counselor may be examined as a Counselor.
Witness against his Client, so far as it is of his own knowledge, not what his
Client reveals to him, and he knows only by his Clients information.

In Criminal causes against the King Criminal causes.
Witnesses may be sworn, unless the Crime be Capital.

Tenant at Will of part of the Lands Tenant at Will.
was admitted to prove Livery of seisin and the execution of a Feoffment under
which he held. Bulst. 1 part 202.

If one be attainted of Felony and pardoned, Attainted of Felony.
he shall not afterward be sworn of a Jury, for Poena mori potest, culpa
perennis erit, and therefore is not fit to serve on the Inquest, nor yet to be
an indifferent Witness, and two such persons proving a suggestion, were
rejected, and the prohibition disallowed. Brown against Crasham Bulst. 2 part.
154.

In Trespass with a simul cum, if nothing Simul cum.
be proved against them in the simul cum, they may be examined as Witnesses.
Styles Reports 401.

CAP. XII. The Juries Oath; why called Recognitors in an Assise, and Jurors in
a Jury; of the Trial per medietatem linguae; when to be prayed, and when
grantable. Of a trial betwixt two Aliens, by all English. Of the Venire facias,
per medietatem linguae, and of Challenges to such Juries.
THe Jury having heard their Evidence, Assise, Enquest and Proof, are taken for
the word Jury. Vide 28 E. 3. 13.
let them now consider of their Verdict; But first they must remember their
Oath, which in effect is, To find according to their Evidence; and therefore
they should have had it before the Evidence, but that the form and order of the
Venire facias, (which I have tied my self to follow,) leads me to it after
their Evidence, in these words; Ad faciend. quandam Juratam; I have already
showed the derivation of this word Jurata, See Chap. 1.
and what is the legal acceptance of it; only observe with our great Master
Littleton, That the word Assize, is sometimes taken 1 Inst. 154.
for a Jury, so as the Learned Commentator does well paraphrase, That the word
Assise, is Nomen Aequivocum Aequivocans, because Assiza for Jurata.
sometime it signifies a Jury, sometime the Writ of Assise, and sometime an
Ordinance, or Statute; But Jurata, is Nomen Aequivocum Aequivocatum, because we
always understand that wo^d (according to the aforesaid definition) to be a
Jury of twelve men, so called, by reason of the Oath they take, The Juries Oath.
Truly to try the Suit of Nifi prius, between party and party, according to
their Ev^dence.

And as in an Assise, the Jurors are called Why called Recognitors in an
Assise, and Jurors in a Jury.
Recognitors, from these words in the Writ of Assise, sacere Recognitionem; so
upon a Nisi prius, they are called Juratores, from these words in the Venire
facias, Ad faciend. quandam Juratam.

In ancient time, the Jury, as well in Common 12 Knights.
Pleas, as in Pleas of the Crown, were 12 Knights, as appears by Glanv^l, lib.
2. cap. 14. and Bracton, fol. 116.

The next words of the Venire facias, are Inter parts pr^dictas. In the fourth
Chapter, I have instanced, That in some Cases, a Jury shall be awarded betwixt
the party, and a stranger to the Writ, and Issue; I will now show what the Jury
shall be, when one of the parties is an Alien, the other a Denizen; and when
both parties to the Issue are Aliens.

This Trial is called in Latin, Triatio Jury per medietatem linguae.
b^linguis, or per medietatem linguae. And this Trial by the Common Law was
wont to be obtained of the King, by his Grant made to any Company of strangers,
as to the Company of Lumbards, or Almaignes, or to any other Company, that when
any of them was impleaded, the moiety of the Inquest should be of their own
tongue. Stan. Plea, Cor. lib. 3. cap. 7.

And this Trial in some Cases, per medietatem Its Antiquity.
linguae, was before the Conquest, as appears by Lamb. fol. 91, 3. Viri duodeni
Jure consulti, Angliae sex, Walliae totidem, Anglis and Wallis Jus dicanto. And
of ancient time, it was called Du^decim virale Judicium. 1 Inst. 155.

But afterward, this Law became universal: first by the Statute of 27 Ed. 3.
cap. 8. It was Enacted, that in Pleas before the Mayor of the Staple, if both
parties were strangers, the Trial should be by strangers. But if one party was
a stranger, and the other a Denizen, then the Trial should be per medietatem
linguae. But this Statute extended but to a narrow Compass, to wit, only where
both parties were Merchants or Ministers of the Staple, and in Pleas before the
Mayor of the Staple. But afterward, in 28th Year of the same Kings Reign, cap.
13. It was Enacted,

That in all manner of Enquests and Proofs, which be to be taken or made
amongst Aliens, and Denizens, be they Merchants, or other, as well before the
Mayor of the Staple, as before any other Justices, or Ministers, although the
King be party. The one half of the Enquest, or Proof, shall be Denizens, and
the other half Aliens, if so many Aliens and Foreigners be in the Town, or
place, where such Enquest or Proof is to be taken, that be not parties, nor
with the parties in Contracts, Pleas, or other Quarrels, whereof such Enquest
or Proof ought to be taken: And if there be not so many Aliens, then shall
there be put in such Enquests or Proofs, as many Aliens, as shall be found in
the same Towns or places, which be not thereto parties, nor with the parties,
as aforesaid is said, and the Remnant of Denizens, which be good men, and not
suspicious to the one party, nor to the other. So that this is the Statute
which makes King.
the Law universal, concerning the medietatem linguae; for though the King be
party, yet the Alien may have this Trial. And it matters not, whether the
Moiety of Aliens, be of the same Country as the Alien, party to the Action, is:
for he may be a Portugal, and they Spaniards, etc. because the Stat. speaks
generally of Aliens. See Dyer 144.

And the form of the Venire facias, in this Venire facias, per medietatem
linguae.
Case is De vicenet. etc. Quorum una medietas sit de Indigenis, and altera
medietas sit de alienigenis natis, etc. And the Sheriff ought to return 12
Aliens, and 12 Denizens, one by the other, with addition which of them are
Aliens, and so they are to be sworn. But if this Order be not observed, it is
helped as a mis-return, by the Statutes of 18 Eliz. Cro. 3. part 818. 841. So
that Brooks says, it is not proper to call it a Trial per medietatem l^nguae,
because any Aliens of any tongue may serve. But under his favor, I think it
proper enough.

For people are distinguished by their Language, and Medietas Linguae, is as
much as to say, half English, and half of another tongue or Country whatsoever.
Though it be not material of what sufficiency the Jurors are, yet the form of
the Venire facias, shall not be altered, but the Clause of Quorum quilibet
habeat, 4 l. etc. shall be in, Cro. 3. part. 481.

But suppose that both parties be Aliens, of whom shall the Inquest be then? It
is resolved, that the Inquest shall be all English; for though the English may
be supposed to favor themselves more than strangers, yet when both parties are
Aliens, it will be presumed, they favor both alike, and so indifferent. 21 H.
6. 4. but if the Plea be before the Mayor of the Staple, and both parties Alien
Merchants of the Staple; it shall be tried by all Ali^ns. Stamford's Pleas del
Corone. 159. A Scotchman is a Subject, and shall not have this Trial. Egyptians
are also excluded when tried for Felony, made by the Statute against them, 1
Phil. and Mar. cap. 4. 5 Eliz. cap. 20.

Where an Alien is party, yet if the All English.
Trial be by all English, it is not erroneous, because it is at his peril, if
he will slip his time, and not make use of the advantage which the Law gives
him when he should. Dyer 28.

The Alien ought to pray a Venire fac^as, When the Alien should pray a Venire
facias per medietatem.
per medietatem linguae, at the time of the awarding the Venire facias: But if
he does it at any time before a general Venire facias be returned and filed,
the Court may grant him a Venire facias, de novo. Dyer 144. 21 H. 7. 32. though
it has been questioned.

But if he has a general Venire facias, he Tales.
cannot pray a December tales, etc. per medietatem linguae, upon this; because the
Tales ought to pursue the Venire facias. 3 E. 4. 11, 12. And so if the Venire
facias be per medietatem linguae, the Tales ought to be per medietatem Tales.
linguae, as if 6 Denizens, and 5 Aliens appear of the principal Jury, the
Plaintiff may have a Tales, per medietatem linguae, li. 10. 104. But if in this
case the Tales be general, de circumstantibus, it has been held good enough;
for there being no exception taken by the Defendant, upon the awarding thereof,
it shall be intended well awarded. Cro. 3. part. 818. 841.

If the Ylaintiff or Defendant be Executor or Administrator, etc. though he be
an Alien, yet the Trial shall be by English, because he sueth in aut droit; but
if it be averred Where the Trial of an Aliens cause shall be by English.
that the Testator, or intestate, was an Alien, then it shall be per medietat.
linguae. Cro. 3. part 275.

Mich. 40. and 41 Eliz. The Queens Attorney Part English, and part Aliens.
exhibited an Information against Bar, and diverse other Merchants, some
whereof were English, and some Aliens: After Issue, the Aliens prayed a Trial
per m^dietat. linguae. But all the Justices of England resolved, that the Trial
should be by all English, and likened it to the case of privilege, where one
of the Defendants demands privilege, and the Court, as to his Companion cannot
hold Plea, there he shall be ousted of his privilege, sic hic. More 557.

By the Statute of 8 H. 6. cap. 29. 29. Challenge.
Insufficiency, or want of Freehold, is no cause of Challenge to Aliens, who
are impannelled with the English, (notwithstanding Stamford's Opinion. Pl.
Coron. 160) for this Statute says, that the Stat. 2 H. 5. 3. shall extend only
to Enquests betwixt Denizen and Denizen.

If the Defendant do not inform the Court When the Alien should pray a Venire
facias per medietatem.
that he is an Alien, upon awarding of the Venire facias, and so yray a Venire
facias, per medietatem linguae; he cannot challenge the Array for this cause at
the Trial, if the Jury be all Denizens (notwithstanding Stamford's Opinion to
the contrary, and the Books cited by him, fol. 159. pl. Cor.) For the Alien at
his peril should pray a Venire facias, per medietatem linguae. Dyer 357. Vide
Rolls tit. Trial. 643.

If the Plaintiff be an Alien, he must suggest it before the awarding of the
Venire facias; but if the Defendant be an Alien, the Plaintiff is allowed to
surmise that, before or after the Venire facias, because the Defendants quality
may not be known to him before. 27 H. 7. 32.

CHAP. XIII. The Learning of General Verdicts, Special Verdicts, Privy
Verdicts, and Verdicts in open Court; and where the Inquest shall be taken by
default. Inquests of Office, etc. Arrest of Judgment, Variance betwixt the Nar.
and the Verdict, etc.
VErdit or Verdict; In Latin, Vere dictum, Verdict.
quasi dictum veritatis, As Judicium, est quasi Juris dictum: Is the Answer and
Resolution of those 12 men; concerning the matter of fact referred to them by
the Court, upon the Issue of the parties. And this is the foundation, upon
which the Judgment of the Court is built, for ^x facto jus oritur; the Law
arises from ^he fact; Wherefore it is no wonder, that the Law has ever been
so curious, and cautelous, as ^ot to believe the matter of fact, until it is
sworn by 12 sufficient men, of the Neighborhood where the fact was done, whom
the Law supposes to have most cognizance of the truth, or falsehood thereof:
which being sworn (for the words are, Juratores predict. The Credit of Verdicts.
dicunt super sacru^m suum, etc.) is the Verdict, whereof we now treat; And
such credit does the Law give to Verdicts, that no proof will be admitted to
impeach the verity thereof, so long as the Verdict stands not reversed by
Attaint. And therefore upon an Attaint, no Supersedeas is grantable by Law.
Plo. Com. 496.

And it is worth our observation, that the Law seems to take more care of the
fact, than of her self; for the Major part of the Judges give the Judgment of
the Law, though the other Judges dissent. But every one of the 12 Jurors must
agree together of the fact, before there can be a Verdict, which must be
delivered by the first man of the Jury. 29 Assise. pl. 27.

And this Verdict is of two kinds, viz. one General or special.
general, and the other special, or at large.

The general Verdict, is positively, either General Verdict.
in the Affirmative, or Negative, as in Trespass, upon Not guilty pleaded; The
Jury find Guilty, or Not guilty; And so in an Assize of Novel disseisin,
brought by A. against B. The Plaintiff makes his plaint, Quod B. disseisivit
eum de 20 acris terrae, cum pertinentiis, The Tenant pleads, Quod ipse nullam
injuriam seu disseisinam prefato A. inde fecit, etc. The Recognitors of the
Assize do find, Quod predict. B. in just and sin^ judicio disseisivit predict.
A. de predict. 20 acris terrae cum pertinentiis, etc. This is a general
Verdict. 1 Inst. 228.

A Special Verdict, or Verdict at large, is Special Verdict.
so called, because it finds the special matter at large, and leaves the
Judgment of the Law thereupon, to the Court, of which 1 Instit. 226.
kind of Verdict it is said, Omnis Conclusio boni, and very judicii sequitur,
ex bonis and veris premissis, and dictis Juratorum. And as a Special Verdict
may be found in Common Pleas, so may it also be found, in Pleas of the Crown,
or Criminal Causes that concern life or member.

And it is to be observed, that the Court The Court cannot refuse it.
cannot refuse a Special Verdict, if it be pertinent to the matter in Issue. 1
Inst. 228.

It has been questioned, whether the Jury A special Verdict may be found upon
any Issue, as upon an absque hoc, etc.
could find a Special Verdict, upon a special point in Issue, or no, as they
might upon the general Issue. But this question has been fully resolved in
many of our Books, first in Plo. Com. 92. It is resolved, That the Jury may
give a special Vardict, and find the matter at large, en chesc^n issue en le
monde, so that the matter found at large, tend only to the Issue joined, and
contain the certainty and verity thereof. lib. 9. 12.

And in 2 Inst. 425. upon Collection of many Authors, it is said, That it has
been resolved, that in all Actions, real, personal, and mixed, and upon all
Issues joined, general or special, the Jury might find the special matter of
fact, pertinent, and tending only to the Issue joined, and thereupon pray the
discretion of the Court for the Law. And this the Jurors might do at Common
Law, not only in Cases between party and party, but also in Pleas of the Crown,
at the Kings Suit, which is a proof of the Common Law. And the Statute of Westminster
the 2d cap. 30. is but an affirmative of the Common Law.

And as this spetial Verdict is the safest for A Freehold upon Condition,
without Deed, may be found by Verdict, though it cannot be pleaded.
the Jury, 1 Inst. 228. so in many Cases it is most advantageous to the party,
and helps him where his own pleading cannot. As for example, says Littleton,
Sect. 366, 367, 368. Albeit a man cannot in any Action, plead a Condition,
which touches and concerns a Freehold, without showing writing of this; yet a
man may be aided, upon such a Condition, by the Verdict of 12 men, taken at
large, in an Assize of Novel diss^isin, or in any other Action, where the
Justices will take the Verdict of 12 Jurors at large: As put the case, a man
seized of certain Land in Fee; lets the same Land to another, for term of
life, without Deed; upon Condition to render to the Lessor, a certain Rent, and
for default of payment, a Reentry, etc. By force whereof the Lessee is seized
as of Freehold; and after, the Rent is behind, by which the Lessor enters into
the Land, and after the Lessee arraign an Assize of Novel disseisin, of the
Land against the Lessor, who pleads that he did no wrong, nor Dissesin. And
upon this, an Assize is taken. In this case, the Recognitors of the Assize may
say, and render to the Justices, their Verdict at large, upon the whole matter;
as to say, that the Defendant was seized of the Land, in his Demesne as of Fee,
and so seized, let the same Land to the Plaintiff, for term of his life,
rendering to the Lessor such a yearly Rent payable at such a Feast, etc. Upon
such Condition, that if the Rent were behind at any such Feast, at which it
ought to be paid, then it should be lawful for the Lessor to enter, etc. By
force of which Lease, the Plaintiff was seized in his Demesne, as of Freehold,
and that afterward, the Rent was behind, at such a Feast, etc. By which the
Lessor entered into the Land, upon the possession of the Lessee. And pray the
discretion of the Justices, if this be a Disseisin done to the Plaintiff, or
not. Then, for that it appears to the Justices, that this was no Disseisin to
the Plaintiff, insomuch, as the Entry of the Lessor was congeable on him, The
Justices ought to give Judgment, that the Plaintiff shall not take any thing by
his Writ of Assize, and so in such case, the Lessor shall be aided, and yet no
Writing was ever made of the Condition: For as well as the Jurors may have
Conusance of the Lease, they also as well may have Conusance of the Condition,
which was declared and rehearsed upon the Lease.

In the same manner it is of a Feoffment in Fee, or a gift in tail, upon
Condition, although no Writing were ever made of it. And as it is said of a
Verdict at large, in an Assize, etc. In the same manner it is of a Writ of
Entry, founded upon a Disseisin, and in all other Actions, where the Justices
will take the Verdict at large, there where such Verdict at large is made, the
manner of the whole Entry is put in Issue.

But in Assise of Rent it cannot be found to be upon Condition, unless they
also find the Deed of the Condition.

So of a Confirmation in Fee to Lessee for years.

Per Hale Chapter Just. Guild Hall, Hill. 1671.

A Special Verdict may be found as to Damag^s in an Action of the Case: as the
Case was there, viz. Pro Quer', and if so, etc. then such Damages; if so, etc.
then Damages such; and he said, he had known it so done in Debt, and the
Damages three ways.

Also in such case, where the Enquest may General Verdict.
give their Verdict at large, if they will take upon them the knowledge of the
Law upon the matter, they may give their Verdict generally, as is put in their
charge, as in the case aforesaid, they may well say, that the Lessor did not
disseize the Lessee, if they will, etc.

The Jury may likewise find Estoppel, Estoppels.
which cannot be pleaded, as in the 2 d Report, fol. 4. it well appears, where
one Goddard, Administrator of James Newton, brought an Action of debt against
John Denton, upon an Obligation made to the Intestate, bearing date the 4th day
of April, Anno 24 Eliz. The Defendant pleaded, that the Intestate dyed before
the Date of the Obligation, and so concluded, that the said Escript, was not
his Deed, upon which they were at Issue.

And the Jury found that the Defendant delivered it as his Deed 30 July, Anno
23. Eliz. and found the Tenor of the Deed in haec verba, Noveriat universi,
etc. Dat. 4. Aprilis, Anno 24 Eliz. And that the Defendant was alive 30 July,
Anno 23. Eliz. And that he dyed before the said date of the Obligation, and
prayed consideration of the Court, if this was the Defendants Deed; And it was
adjudged by Anderson, Chief Justice Windham, Periam, and Walmesley, that this
was his Deed, And the Reason of the Judgment was, That although the Obligee, in
Note, that a Deed may be pl^aded to be delivered after the dare, but nor
before, because it shall not be intended, written before the date, which may be
after the date. 12 H. 6. 1.
pleading, cannot allege the delivery before the date, as it is adjudged in 12
H. 6. 1. which case was affirmed to be good Law, because he is estopped to take
an averment against any thing expressed in the Deed; yet the Jurors, who are
sworn ad veritatem dic^nd. shall not be estopped. For an Estoppel is to be
concluded to speak the truth, and therefore Jurors cannot be estopped, because
they are sworn to speak the truth.

But if the Estoppel or Admittance, be As in Wast supposed in A. to plead that
A is a hamlet in B. and not a Town of it self, admits the Wast, etc. 9 H. 6.
66. and the Jury cannot find no Wast, for that would be against the Record.
Estoppel.
within the same Record in which the Issue is joined, upon which the Jurors
give their Verdict, there they cannot find any thing against this, which the
parties have affirmed, and admitted of Record, although it be not true; For the
Court may give Judgment upon a thing confessed by the parties, and the Jurors
are not to be charged with any such thing, but only with things in which the
parties vary. Ib. li. 5. 30.

So Estoppels, which bind the Interest of the Land, as the taking of a Lease of
a man's own La^d, by Deed indented, and the like, Cro. 1. part 110. Lib. 4. 53.
being specially found by the Jury, the Court ought to judge, according to the
special matter; for albeit, Estoppels regularly must be pleaded and relied
upon, by apt conclusion, and the Jury is sworn ad veritatem dicend. yet when
they find veritatem facti, they pursue well their Oath, and the Court ought to
adjudge according to Law. So may the Jury find a Warranty being given in
Evidence, though it be not pleaded, because it binds the right, unless it be
in a Writ of Right, Warranty not pleaded.
when the Mise is joined upon the mere right. 1 Inst. 227.

Verdicts ought to be such, that the Court Uncertain Verdicts.
may go clearly to Indgment thereon, and therefore Verdicts finding matter
incertainly, or ambiguously, are insufficient and void, and no Judgment shall
be given thereupon: As if an Executor plead Plene Administravit, and Issue is
joined thereon, and the Jury find that the Defendant has Goods within his
hands to be administered, but find not to what value, this is an uncertainty,
and therefore an insufficient Verdict. li. 9. 74. 1 Inst. 227.

It is the Office of the Jurors, to show the The Office of the Jury.
verity of the fact, and leave the Judgment of the Law to the Court. And
therefore upon an Indictment of Murder, quod felonice per cussit, etc. If the
Jury find per cussit tantum, yet the Verdict is good, for the Judges of the
Court are to resolve upon ^he special matter, whether it was felonice, and so
Murder, or not. li. 9. 69. And if the Court adjudge it Murder, then the Jurors
in the conclusion of their Verdict, find the Felon guilty of the murder
contained in the Indictment.

A Verdict that finds part of the Issue, and Verdict finding part of the Issue.
finding nothing for the rest, is insufficient for the whole, because they have
not tried the whole Issue, wherewith they are charged; As if an Information of
intrusion, be brought More 406.
against one, for intruding into a Message, and 100 Acres of Land, upon the
general Issue, the Jury find against the Defendant for the Land, but say
nothing for the House, this is insufficient for the whole.

But if the Jury give a Verdict of the whole Finding more than the Issue.
Issue, and of more, etc. That which is more, is Surplusage, and shall not stay
Judgment: for Utile per inutile non vitiatur, Leon. 1 part. 66. Gro. 1 part.
130. But necessary incidents required by Law, the Jury may find.

Yet in many Cases, (nay almost in all) Where the Verdict ought to be of more
than is in the Issue.
the Jury ought to find more than is put in Issue, otherwise their Verdict is
not good; and therefore they are to assess Damages and Cost, because it is
parcel of their Charge* as a Consequent upon the Issue, though t^ be not part
of the Issue in terminis. li. 10. 119.

An Action of the Case on Deceit was brought, for that he sold unto the
Plaintiff two Oxen, and warranted them to be sound; on not Guilty, the Jury
found him Guilty as to one, and not Guilty to the other, and good; for that the
Action was founded not on the Contract, but the Deceit. 3 Cro. 884. Gravenor
and Mete.

In Debt the Plaintiff declares, that he had Judgment against Baron and Feme
for a Debt of the Wives, dum sola, etc. that they were in Execution, and
suffered to Escape, the Jury found the Husband only in Execution and Escaped,
and Judgment for the Plaintiff. Roberts versus Herbert, Hill. 12. Car. 2. C. B.

So in Trespass against two, one comes, Damages by the first Inquest.
and pleads Not guilty, and is found guilty. In this case, the first Inquest
shall assess damages for the whole Trespass, by both Defendants; and
afterward, the other comes, and pleads Not guilty, and is found guilty: The
finding of Damages by the first Inquest, to which he was not party, shall bind
him; and therefore if the Damages are outrageous, and excessive, the Defendant
Attaint.
in the last Enquest, shall have an Attaint. li. 10. 119.

So in Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, if Issue be joined upon a Feoffment, and
the Jury give outrageous Damages, An Attaint lies; for the inquiry of Damages
is consequent and dependant upon the Issue, and parcel of their charge. Ibidem.

In the 11th Report, fo. 5. It was resolved, Damages by the first Inquest.
That in Trespass against two, where one comes and appears, etc. against whom
the Plaintiff declares with a simul Cum, etc. who pleads and is found guilty,
and Damages assessed by the Enquest, and afterward the other comes and pleads,
and is found guilty; The Defendant which pleaded last, shall be charged with
the Damages taxed by the first Inquest; for the Trespass which the Plaintiff
had made joint by his Writ, and Count, and done at one time, cannot be severed
by the Jurors, if they find the Trespass to be done by all, at one and the same
time as the Plaintiff declared.

So in the Trespass against diverse Defendants, Several Damages. Vide Devant ca.
4.
if they plead not guilty, or several Pleas, and the Jury find for the
Plaintiff in all, the Jurors cannot assess several Damages against the
Defendants, because all is but one Trespass, and made joint by the Plaintiff,
by his Writ and Count. And although that one of them was more malicious, and de
facto, did more and greater wrong than the others, yet all came to do an
unlawful act, and were of one party, so that the act of one, is the act of all,
of the same party being present. But in Trespass against two, if the Jurors
find one guilty, at one time, and the other at another time, there several
Damages may be taxed. But if the Plaintiff bring an Action of Trespass against
two, and declare upon a several Trespass, his Action shall abate. And this is
the diversity between the f^nding of the Jury, and the confession of the party.

And in Trespass, where the Defendants plead several Pleas, all tryable by one
Jury, and they find generally for the Plaintiff, the Jurors cannot sever the
Damages; if they do, their Verdict is vicious.

But in Trespass against two, where one Judgment de melioribus dampnis.
appears, and pleads not guilty to a Declaration against him, with a simul Cum,
etc. and afterward the other appears, and pleads not guilty to a Declaration
against him also, with a simul Cum, etc. Whereupon two Venire fac. issue out,
and one Issue tried after the other, and several Damages assessed: in judgment
of the Law, the several Juries give one Verdict, all at one time, and the
Plaintiff has his Election to have judgment de melioribus dampnis, by any of
the Inquests. And this shall bind all, but fiat nisi una Executio.

It is a Maxim, That in every case where Damages.
an Inquest is taken by the Mise of the parties, by the same Inquest shall
damages be taxed for all: And in Mich. 39 H. 6. fo. 1. In an Action of Trespass
against many, (who pleaded in Bar the Term before) and one of them made
default, which was Recorded, Writ of Inquiry.
There it is resolved by all the Court, That for saving of a Discontinuance, a
Writ of Enquiry of Damages shall be awarded; but none shall issue out, because
he shall be contributory to the damages taxed by the Inquest, at the Mise of
the parties, if it be found for the Plaintiff; and if it be found against the
Plaintiff, then the Writ of Enquiry shall issue forth.

And the Reason wherefore no Writ shall issue out at first, to inquire of
damages until, etc. is, because that if a Writ should issue out, and be
executed, this is nothing but an Inquest of Office, and not at the Mise of the
parties, and yet this Inquiry (if it might be allowed) ought to serve for all
the damages; For inquiry of damages, shall not be twice, and the others which
have pleaded to Inquest, if the Issue be found against them, shall be
chargeable to those damages which are found by the Inquest of Office, and if
they be excessive, they shall have no remedy, although there be no default in
them; for they cannot have an Attaint, because it is but an Inquest of Office.

But in Trespass against two, who plead Damages by the first Inquest.
not guilty, etc. severally; and several Venire fac. awarded. The Inquest which
first passes, shall assess damages for all, and the second Inquest ought not to
assess damages at all, but that Defendant shall be contributory to the damages
assessed by the first Jury, notwithstanding he is not party to it; yet if these
damages be excessive, he shall have an Attaint, (because though he is a
stranger to the Issue, yet in Law, he is privy in Charge.) And so no damage or
mischief can accrue to him in this Case.

Now let us see, when something is left Verdict, when to be supplied, by Writ
of Inquiry, etc.
out of the Verdict which the Jury ought to have inquired of, whether it may be
supplied by matter ex post facto; and how: And for this, know, that if damages
be left out of a Vide hic. cap. 6.
Verdict, this omission cannot be supplied, by Writ of Inquiry of damages: for
this would prevent the Defendant of his Remedy by Attaint, which would be very
mischievous; for then such omission might be on purpose, to deprive the
Plaintiff of his Attaint, li. 10. 119.

And the Rule is, That when the Court ex officio, ought to inquire of any
thing, upon which no Attaint lies, There the omission of this, may be supplied
by ^ Writ of Inquiry of damages; as in a Quar impedit, if the Jury omit to
enquire of these 4 things, that is to say, de plenitudine, ex cujus
presentatione, si tempus semestre transierit, and the value of the Church per
annum, there the Plaintiff may have a Writ to inquire of these points. Dyer
241. 260. because of these no Attaint lies, as it is holden in 11 H. 4. 80.
because that as to these, the Inquest is but of Office. But in all cases, where
any point is omitted, whereof on Attaint lies, there this shall not be
supplied by Writ of Inquiry, upon which no Attaint lies. And therefore in
Detinue, if the Jury find Damages and Cost, and no value, as they ought, this
shall not be supplied by Writ of Inquiry of damages, for the Reason aforesaid.
Ib. Et sic in similibus.

But how then? What, shall the Plaintiff Verdict set aside, because the damages
not well assessed.
loose the benefit of his Verdict, because the Jury assessed no damages, (or
did insufficiently assess them)? Certes in such Cases where damages only are to
be recovered, he must loose the whole benefit of his Verdict; but where any
thing else is to be recovered, besides damages, as in Debt, Ejectment, etc. he
may release his damages, and have Judgment Release Damages.
upon his Verdict as to the rest. And so where damages are to be recovered, if
part of them are assessed insufficiently, and part well, he may have Judgment
for those damages well assessed. And oftentimes the insufficienc^ Verdict set
aside in part.
of the Declaration shall set aside the Verdict; as if an Action upon the Case
be brought upon two promises, and one of For insufficiency in the Declaration.
them be insufficiently laid, and the Verdict give entire damages, this is
naught for the whole; But if the Damages had been severally assessed upon the
several promises, then the Verdict as to the promise well laid, should have
stood.

In the 11th Report, fo. 56. Marsh brought a Writ of Annuity against Bentham,
and the parties descended to issue, which was tried for the Plaintiff, and the
Arrerages found, etc. But the Jurors did not assess any damages, or Cost; which
Verdict was insufficient, and could not be supplied by Writ of Inquiry of
damages: wherefore Release of damages where none were assessed.
the Plaintiff released his damages, and costs, and upon this had Judgment:
upon which the Defendant brought a Writ of Error, and assigned the Error
aforesaid, scil. the insufficiency of the Verdict; fed Judicium affirmatur,
because the Plaintiff had released his damages and costs, which is for the
benefit of the Defendant.

In Detinue of Charters, or non detinet, Verdict for the Plaintiff, and
Damages, but the Jury did not find the value of the Deeds, and a Writ of
Inquiry was awarded to that purpose and returned, and ruled good; and by
Twisden Just. Debt against Executor who pleads plene, etc. and it is found
against him, and the Jury give no damages, that cannot be aided by Writ of
Inquiry. Burton versus Robinson. Pasch. 17 Car. 2. B. R.

In Dyer 22 Eliz. 369. 370. In a Wri Release of damages where they were not
well assessed.
of Ejectione Custodiae terrae and haeredis, the Jurors assessed damages
entirely, which was insufficient; for it lay not for the Heir, yet the
Plaintiff released his damages, and had Judgment for the Land: And Note, that
insufficient assessment of damages, and no assessing, is all one.

The Jury ought to assess no more damages Damages and Costs.
pro injdria illata, than the Plaintiff declares for: But they may assess so
much, and moreover give cost, which is called Expensae litis; though in the
proper and general signification. Dampnum, also comprehends Costs of Suit, as
the Entry reciting both damages and costs, well affirms, scil. Quae dampna in
toto se attingunt cum, etc.

But if the Jury do assess more damages More damages than the Plaintiff
declares for.
then the Plaintiff declares for, the Plaintiff may remit the overplus, and
pray Judgment for the residue, as in the 10th Report, fol. 115. in Trespass the
Plaintiff declared ad dampnum, etc. 40 l. at the trial the Jury assessed
damages occasion transgressionis pr^dict. ad 49 l. and for costs of Suit 20 s.
upon which Verdict* the Plaintiff at the day in Bank, remitted 9 l. parcel of
the said 49 l. assessed for damages, and prayed Judgment for 40 l. Damages
remitted.
(to which damage he had counted) with increase of costs of suit, and had 9 l.
de Incremento, added by the Court, which in all amounted to 50 l. and had his
Judgment accordingly: upon which, a Writ of Error was brought, and the Judgment
affirmed.

For as in real Actions the Demandant shall not count to Damages, etc. because
it is uncertain to what sum the damages will amount, by reason he is to recover
damages pendant le brief, so in the ease of Costs, he shall recover for the
expenses depending the suit, which being uncertain, cannot be comprehended in
the Count, because the Count extends to damages past, and not to expenses of
Suit. For in personal Actions, he counts Damages in real and personal Actions.
to damages, because he shall recover damages only for the wrong done, before
the Writ brought, and shall not recover damages for any thing, pendant le
brief. But in real Actions, the Demandant never counts to damages, because he
is to recover damages also, pendant le brief, which are uncertain.

The Jury may if they will, assess the damages Damages and Costs entirely
assessed.
and costs entirely together, without making any distinction, 18 E. 4. 23. But
then they must not assess more damages and costs, than the damages are, which
the Plaintiff counts to; for if they do, the Plaintiff shall recover only so
much as he has declared for, without any increase of cost, because the Court
cannot distinguish how much they intended for cost, and how much for damages.

As in 13 H. 7. 16. 17. One Darrel brought a Writ of Trespass, and counted to
his damage 20 marks; the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Jury taxed the
damages and costs of suit jointly to 22 marks, and the Verdict was held to be
good for 20 marks, and void for the residue, because it does not appear how
much was intended for damages, and how much for costs, so that there may be
more damages than the Plaintiff declared for, or less, and so the Court knows
not how to increase the cost; wherefore he shall have Judgment but for 20
marks, by reason of the incertainty.

Where a special Verdict is not entered according Verdict amended by the Notes.
to the Notes, the Record may be amended, and made agree with the Notes at any
time, though it be 3, or 4, etc. Terms after it is entered. lib. 4. 52. lib. 8.
162. Cro. 1 part. 145.

In the Case of Turnor and Thalgate, Mich. 1658. B. R. It was said per Cur'
That special Verdicts may be amended by the Notes, but the Notes cannot be
amended or enlarged by any Averment or Affidavit, for that were to f^^d a
Verdict by the Court. Yet in that Case, where the Notes were, that the
Judgment, etc. was vacated pro ut per Rule, the Verdict was amended, vacated
per Cur' pro ut per Rule; for so is implied in the Notes.

See a Verdict amended by the Notes after Judgment and Error brought, Rolls. 1
part. Reports. 82.

If the matter, and substance of the Issue Form. Hob. 54.
be found, it is sufficient; for precise forms are not required by Law in
special Verdicts, (which are the finding of Laymen) as in Pleadings, which are
made by men learned in the Law; and therefore intendment in many Cases shall
help a special Verdict, as much as a Testament, Arbitrament, etc. And therefore
he which makes a Deputy, ought to do it by Escript; but when the Jury find
generally, that A. was Deputy to B. all necessary incidents are found by this;
and upon the matter they find, that he was made Deputy by Deed, because it does
tantamount. lib. 9. 51. And in the 5th Report, Goodale's Case. It was resolved,
That all matters in a special Verdict, shall be intended, and supplied, but
only that which the Jury refer to the Consideration of the Court.

In all Cases where the Jury find the matter Ill conclusion.
committed to their charge, at large, and over more conclude against Law, the
Verdict is good, and the conclusion ill. li. 4* 42. and More 105. 269.
the Judges of the Law will give ^udgment upon the special matter, according to
the Law, without having regard to the conclusion of the Jury, who ought not to
take upon them Judgment of the Law. li. 11. 10. Vide Devant.

Where the Declaration in Trespass is As general as the Narr.
Cum aliquibus averiis, of a number uncertain, and the Verdict is as general as
the Declaration, cum aliquibus averiis, there the Verdict is good. Cro. 2.
part. 662.

In Ejectione firm, where the Plaintiff declared of a Message, and 300 Acres
of Pasture in D. per nomina, of the Manor of Monkhall, and five Closes per
nomina, etc. upon Not guilty, the Jury gave a special Verdict, viz. quoad four
Closes of Pasture, containing by Estimation 2000 Acres of Pasture, that the
Defendant was Not guilty; Quoad residuum; they found matter in Law: And it was
moved by Yelverton, That this Verdict was imperfect in all; For when the Quoad
Residuum, uncertain.
Jury find that the Defendant was Not guilty of four Closes of Pasture,
containing by estimation, 2000 Acres of Pasture, it is uncertain, and does not
appear of how much they acquit him. And then, when they find quoad residuum tne
special matter, it is uncertain what that Residue is, so there cannot be any
Judgment given; and of that Opinion was all the Court, wherefore they awarded a
Venire facias de novo, to try that Issue. Cro. 2 part. 1^3.

Ejectione firmae of 30 Acres of Land in D. and S. The Defendant was found
guilty of 10 Acres, and Quoad Residuum not guilty; Quoad Resisiduum.
and it was moved in arrest of Judgment, That it is uncertain in which of the
Vills this Land lay: and therefore no Judgment can be given: sed non allocatur,
and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, for the Sheriff shall take his
Information from the party for what ten Acres the Verdict was. Cro. last part.
465. diversitas apparet.

Where the Jury find Circumstances upon Circumstances.
an Evidence given, to incite them to find fraud, etc. yet the same is not
sufficient matter upon which the Court can judge the same to be fraud, etc.
Brownlow 2. part. 187. Yet in many Cases, the Jury may find Circumstances and
presumptions, upon which the Court ought to judge: As to find that the Husband
delivered Goods devised by the Wife. Upon this, the Court adjudged that More
192.
the Husband assented to the devise at first.

Where a Verdict is certainly given at the Postea amended, how.
Trial, and uncertainly returned by the Clerk of the Assizes, etc. The Postea
may be amended; upon the Judges certifying the truth how the Verdict was given.
Cro. 1. p^rt. 338.

In many Cases a Verdict may make an ill Ill Plea, made good by Verdict.
Plea or Issue good. As in an Action for words, Thou wast perjured, and have
much to answer for it before God; Exception after Verdict for the Plaintiff, in
arrest of Judgment: For that it is not laid in the Declaration, that he spoke
the words in auditu complurimorum, or of any one, according to the usual form:
sed non allocatur; for being found by the Verdict that he spoke them, it is not
material, although he does not say, in auditu plurimorum; whereupon it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff. Cro. 1. part. 199.

See Cro. last part. 116. Where the Bar was ill, because no place of payment
was alleged; yet the payment being found by Verdict, it was adjudged well
enough; for a payment in one place, is a payment in all places.

Trespass by Baron and feme de clauso fracto, of the Barons. And for the
battery of the feme, ad dampnum ipsorum, the Defendant, Quoad the Clausum
fregit, pleaded Not guilty, Quoad the Battery justifies. And for the first
Issue, it was found for the Defendant: And for the second, for the Plaintiff,
and now moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration is not good, because
the Baron joins the feme with him in Trespass Baron and Feme.
de clauso fracto of the Barons, which ought not to be; But for the Battery of
the feme, they may join, whereto all the Court agreed; But it was moved, That
in regard it was found against the Plaintiffs for this Issue, in which they
ought not to join, and the Defendant is thereof acquitted, and the Issue is
found against the Defendant, for that part wherein they ought to join: This
Verdict has discharged the Declaration for that part which is ill, and is good
for the residue. As in 9 E. 4. 51. Trespass by Baron and Feme, for the Battery
of both: The Defendant pleaded Not guilty, and found guilty, and damages
assessed for the Battery of the Baron, by its self, and for the Battery of the
Feme by its self, and Judgment was given for the damages for the bat^ery of the
feme, and the Writ abated for the residue. (And of that Opinion was Lea, Chief
Justice, and Doderidge al. contra.) And the same Law I conceive, if the Jury
had found the Defendant Not guilty of the battery to the Palmer's Reports, 338.
Husband, but guilty to the Wife. Cro. 2. part. 655.

Rochel and his Wife, brought an Action of Trespass and Assault in the
Exchequer, Rochel and his Wife against Steel.
Hill. 1659. against Steel, and others, who pleaded Not guilty, and the Verdict
found Steel guilty of the Battery to the Wife; but found nothing concerning the
Husband. Wherefore Judgment was stayed; but the Barons held, That if the Jury
had found the Defendants not guilty, as to the Husband, then the Verdict had
helped the Declaration, and the Plaintiff should have had Judgment for the
Damages, for the Battery of the Wife.

The Jury may find any thing that may be Of what a Verdict may be.
given in Evidence to them, as Records, either Patent, Statute or Judgment.
Things Plo. Com 411.
done in another County, or Country; for which see Evidence before. Hob. 227.
And of those things they ought to have Conusance, they are to have Conusance
also, of all Incidents, and dependants thereupon; for an Incident is a thing
necessarily depending Incidents.
upon another. Co. Littleton 227. b.

If the Verdict may by any ways be construed How construed.
good, a construction to destroy it, ought not to be made.

If one of the Jury be Outlawed when the Verdict is found, the Verdict is not
good, but Outlaw.
may be reversed by Error.

In a special Verdict the case in Fact must be found clear to a Common intent
without Equivocation. Vaughan's Reports 78.

If the Jury collect the Contents of a Contents of a Deed.
Deed, and also find the Deed in haec verba, the Court is not to Judge upon
their Collection, but upon the Deed it self. The Jury may find the Contents of
a Deed or Will proved by Witnesses, Ibidem.

Trespass for disturbing him of his Common Common.
belonging to 100 Acres, and the Jury find Common for 50. this is for the
Plaintiff; otherwise upon an Avoury, or Quod permittat, which are founded upon
the right, but the Trespass is for Damages. Palmer's Rep. 289.

If the matter and substance of the Issue The Verdict may be against the
Letters of the Issue, so the substance is found.
be found, it is sufficient, though it be against the Letter of the Issue. As
in the first, Institutes, fo. 114. b. A Modus decimandi was alleged by
prescription, time out of mind, for Tithes of Lambs: And thereupon Issue
joined. And the Jury found, that before twenty years then last past, there was
such a prescription, and that for these twenty Prescription.
years, he had paid Tithe Lamb in specie. And it was objected first, That the
Issue was found against the Plaintiff, for that the prescription was general
for all the time of the prescription, and 20 years fail thereof. 2. That the
party by payment of Tithes in specie, had waved the prescription, or custom.
But it was adjudged for the Plaintiff; for albeit, the modus decimandi had not
been paid by the space of twenty years, yet the prescription being found, the
substance of the Issue is found for the Plaintiff.

In Assiise of Darrein Presentment, if the Avoydance.
Plaintiff allege the avoydance of the Church by privation, and the Jury find
the voydance by death, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment; for the manner of
voydance is not the title of the Plaintiff, but the voydance is the matter. 1
Instit. 282.

If a Gardein of an Hospital bring an Assise against the Ordinary, he pleads
that Deprivation.
in his Visitation he deprived him as Ordinary, whereupon Issue is taken, and
it is found that he deprived him as Patron, the Ordinary shall have judgment,
for the deprivation is the substance of the matter. Ib.

The Lessee Covenants with the Lessor, not to cut down any Trees, etc. and
binds himself in a Bond of 40 pounds, for the performance of Covenants. The
Lessee cut down 10 Trees, the Lessor brings an Action Breach of 20 Trees cut
down for 10.
of Debt upon the Bond, and assigns a breach, that the Lessee cut down 20
Trees: whereupon Issue is joined, and the Jury find that the Lessee cut down
ten: Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff, for sufficient matter of Issue
is found for the Plaintiff, to forfeit the Bond. Ib.

And this Rule holds in Criminal Causes: For if A. be appealed, or indicted of
Murder, viz. that he of malice prepensed killed J. A. pleads that he is not
guilty Modo and forma, yet the Jury may find the Defendant Indictment of
Murder, and Verdict finds Manslaughter.
guilty of Manslaughter without malice prepensed, because the killing of J. is
the matter, and m^lice prepensed is but a Circumstance. Plo. Com. 101.

And generally where modo and forma, are Modo and forma.
not of the substance of the Issue, but words of form; there it suffices,
though the Verdict does not find the precise Issue.

As if a man bring a Writ of Entry in c^su proviso, of the Alienation made by
the Tenant in Dower to his disinheritance, and counts of the Alienation made
in Fee, and the Tenant says, that he did not Alien in Manner, as the Demandant
has declared, Alienation.
and upon this they are at Issue, and it is found by Verdict, that the Tenant
aliened in tail, or for term of another man's life. The Demandant shall recover,
yet the Alienation was not in manner as the Demandant has declared, Littleton,
Sect. 483.

Also if there be Lord, and Tenant, and the Tenant hold of the Lord by fealty
only, and the Lord distrain the Tenant for Rent, and the Tenant brings a Writ
of Trespass against his Lord, for his Cattle so taken, Trespass by the Tenant
against the Lord.
and the Lord plead that the Tenant holds of him by fealty and certain Rent,
and for that Rent behind he came to distrain, etc. And demand Judgment of the
Writ brought against him Quare vi and armis, etc. And the other says, That he
does not hold of him, in manner as he supposed; and upon this, they are at
Issue. And it is found by V^rdict, that he holds of him by fealty only, in
this case the Writ shall abate, and yet he does not hold of him, in manner as
the Lord has said; For the matter of the Issue is, Whether the Tenant holds
of him or no; for if he holds of him, although that the Lord distrain, the
Tenant for other services which he ought not to have, yet such Writ of
Trespass, Quare vi and armis, etc. does not lie against the Lord, but shall
abate. Littleton, Sect. 485.

Also in a Writ of Trespass for Battery, The Verdict may find the Defendant
guilty of the Trespass at another day or place.
or for Goods carried away, if the Defendant plead not guilty, in manner as the
Plaintiff suppose, and it is found that the Defendant is guilty in another
Town, or at another day, then the Plaintiff suppose, yet he shall recover.

So the Jury may find the Conspiracy at Conspiracy.
another day, for the day is but form.

In Battery if the Defendant justify at Battery.
another day with a Traverse Devant and apres, he may be found guilty at
another day.

If the Defendant by this Plea agree with Son assault Demesne.
the Plaintiff in the day, year, and place, and the Plaintiff reply, De son
tort demesne sans ties cause, and the Defendant prove an Assault by the
Plaintiff, the Plaintiff shall not give in Evidence a Battery at another day.
Rolls. tit. Trial. 687. Vide devant. cap. 11.

And so in many other cases these words, scil. in manner as the Demandant or
the Plaintiff has supposed, do not make any matter of substance of the Issue.
Littleton. Sect 485.

And it is a Rule, That where the Issue taken, Modo and forma, when words of
form.
goes to the point of the Writ or Action, there Modo and forma are but words
of form, as in the cases aforesaid.

But when a Collateral point in pleading When of substance, and must be found
by the Verdict.
is traversed, as if a Feoffment be alleged by two, and this is traversed Modo
and forma; And it is found the Feoffment of one, there Modo and forma, is
material; So if a Feoffment So in non assumpsit modo and forma, upon an
Indebitatus assumpsit, there modo and forma, were not material. Secus, when the
Action is upon a Collateral promise.
be pleaded by Deed, and it is traversed Absque hoc quod feoffavit, Modo and
forma, upon this Collateral issue, Modo and forma are so essential, as the Jury
cannot find a Feoffment without Deed. Co. Littleton, 282.

But here is a diversity to be observed, That albeit the Issue be upon a
Collateral point, yet if by the finding of part of the Issue, it shall appear
to the Court, that no such Action lies for the Plaintiff, no more than if the
whole had been found, there Modo and forma, Trespass Quare vi and armis, lies
not against the Lord for distraining his Tenant, without cause.
are but words of form, as in the aforesaid case of the Lord and Tenant, it
plainly appears; for it was all one, whether the Tenant held by fealty only, or
by fealty and Rent, because if either was true, the Tenant could have no
Trespass, Quare vi and armis, against the Lord in that case, by the Statute of
Marlbridge. cap. 3. Vide hic Devant.

After the Verdict recorded, the Jury cannot Jury cannot Vary from their
Verdict, when it is recorded.
not vary from it, but before it is recorded, they may vary from the first
offer of their Verdict. And that Verdict which is recorded shall stand. 1 Inst.
227. Plo. Com. 212.

There is also a Verdict given in open Court, and a privy Verdict given out of
Court, before any of the Judges of the Court, Open Verdict and privy Verdict.
so called, because it ought to be kept secret, and privy from each of the
parties, before it be affirmed in Court.

Because the Jury may vary from their The Jury may vary from a private Verdict.
private Verdict, as if that find for the Plaintiff, the open Verdict may be
for the Defendant, and this shall stand, and the private Verdict shall not be
deemed a Verdict; for the Jury are charged openly in Court, and in Court their
Verdict ought to be received, and this which they pronounce openly in Court,
shall be adjudged their Verdict.

And although it is usual to take the Verdict secretly, when the Jurors are
agreed, yet this is not of necessity of Law, but of courtesy of Law for the
ease of the Jurors, and in this case, their saying shall not be their Verdict,
till it is openly pronounced in the Court; for when they come in the Court, the
Plaintiff shall be demanded, and then may be nonsuited: But when they give
their Verdict secretly, the Plaintiff is not demandable, nor can be then
nonsuited, but he may be nonsuited, when the Verdict of right ought to be
rendered. Ergo, the force is in the giving of the Verdict in the Court, and not
elsewhere.

And also in the Court it self, if they pronounce Bro. tit. Verdict. 12.
their Verdict, they may change it, if they be mistaken, or it be not full in
Law, or for some other reasonable cause immediately perceived. Therefore if
they may vary, and contradict their first Verdict given in open Court. A
fortiori upon better advisement, they may do so when their first Verd^ct was
given out of Court, and they not discharged; for they be in the Custody of the
Baily, till they be discharged in Court. Plo. Com. 211. More 33.

The Jury having once given their Verdict, Jury shall give but one Verdict in
the same cause.
although it be imperfect, shall never be sworn again upon the same Issue
(unless it be in case of Assise, when the party is to recover by view of the
Jurors). But there must be a Venire facias de novo. Cro. 2. part. 210.

If a Verdict be good in part, and naught Verdict good in part.
in another part, it shall stand in part, and a new Inquest shall be for the
rest. Bro. tit. Verdict. 89.

For the Juries direction in their Verdict, What permitted in Pleading for the
Juries direction in their Verdict.
greater liberty is permitted in pleading a matter doubtful in Law; for, a
Traverse (for this Reason) may be omitted. As in debt against an Executor, It
is a good plea to say, Administration was committed to him, and therefore he
should be named Administrator, and not Executor, without traversing that he is
not Executor; for the lay people know no difference, between one administrating
as Executor, and one administrating as Administrator, 9 E. 4. 33.

For this Reason likewise, the special matter may be pleaded together with the
general Issue, etc. As that the Obligation put in suit, was sealed by him, and
delivered to A. to keep till certain Indentures were made A Special non est
factum.
between the Plaintiff and him; before which Indentures made, the Plaintiff
took the Obligation out of the possession of A. so is not his Deed. This is
good, and yet by this general conclusion, the matter precedent shall not be
waved, for it were perilous to put the special matter in the mouth of
Lay People. 9 H. 6. 38.

Damages. Where the Issue upon a collateral Matter is tried in a foreign
County, Hundred, etc. where the Principal and Accessory shall be tried.
In Trespass, if a Release be pleaded in a Foreign County, and tried there for
the Plaintiff, there also shall damages be assessed by the same Jury. For where
the 21 Ass. 14.
principal is tried, there also shall the Accessory and incidents be inquired
of. I need use no other instances to illustrate this, than the case abovesaid.

They may find a Condition to defeat a What things the Jury may find.
Freehold of Land, although it be not pleaded; but of things in grant, they
must also find the Deed of the Condition.

Upon Traverse of a Lease Modo and forma, the Jury may find a Lease of another
date, Modo and forma.
although the date be mistaken in the Pleading, but not a Lease made by
another, than from whom was pleaded; for this is out of the issue in matter and
form.

In an Assise of Rent, the Jury may find Rent.
that the Rent was granted with an Atturnment, although no specialty be showed.

A Fine or Recovery may be found by the Matter of Record.
Jury, without showing of it under Seal. The Jury cannot find against what is
admitted by the Record.

They may find a Divorce, which is a Record Divorce.
in the Spiritual Court, but not by our Law.

Attainder of Felony not pleaded cannot be Attainder.
found, unless Sub pede sigilli. 26 Ass. 2.

The Jury is not to inquire of this which is agreed by the parties.

As in Dower, if the Tenant says he has Dower.
been always ready to render Dower, and the issue be if the Husband dyed
seized, the Jury is not to inquire, if the Estate was dowaable; for this is
confessed.

If the Defendant does not deny the Wast.
Wast, but Pleads another matter, scilicet null tiel vill lou, etc. the Jury is
not to inquire of the Wast, but give damages although no Wast be made.

In Debt upon a Bond, with a Condition Award.
to perform an Award, and the Defendant Plead Nullum fecit Arbitrium, and the
Plaintiff reply, fecit Arbitrium, and sets it forth, and the Defendant rejoyn
Null tiel award, the Jury cannot find any matter dehors to make the Award void
in Law; which does not appear within the Award pleaded. As that the release
awarded would discharge the Bond of the Submission, for nothing is in issue,
but whether such an Award was made in f^it as is alleged, neither could this
matter be alleged by any Rejoinder; for it would have been a departure from
the Plea, and ^ Jury cannot find that which would have been a departure,
because out of their issue. But in this Case, if the Defendant would have took
advantage of it, he ought to have Pleaded all this matter in his Bar, and not
have said Nullum fecit Arbitrium; for it is a departure in the Rejoinder to
acknowledge an Award which was denied in the Plea.

In Debt for 20 s. and the Issue be, solvit How the Jury ought to find their
Verdict, and what shall be intended.
ad diem, and the Verdict be quod debet the 20 s. this is not good, because it
is not direct but by Argument.

In Debt upon an Obligation, if the Defendant say, That he is a Layman not
lettered, and 'twas read as an Acquittance, Nient lettered.
Et issint nient son fait, if the Jury find he knew what he did, and that it
was a Bond, and he was willing to be bound, this is no good Verdict, because
they ought precisely to find if it was his Deed or not.

If the Issue be, whether where a Copyhold is granted to three for the lives of
two, if he which dye seized, etc. ought by Custom to Custom.
pay a Heriot or not, and the Jury find that there was never any such Estate
granted in the Manor; this is not good for the reasons aforesaid.

So if the Issue be, if by Custom an Estate tail may be granted, and the Iur^
find, that it may be granted in Fee; which is greater, yet it is not good.

In Trespass for taking and cutting his Trespass.
Leather, if the Defendant justify as a Searcher, and cut it for the better
search More scrutatorum, without any other damage; and the Plaintiff reply, De
injuria sua propria Absque hoc, that he cut it, More scrutatorum, upon which
Traverse, issue is joined, and the Jury find that the Defendant cut it as the
Plaintiff has alleged; this is no good Verdict, because it is not any answer to
the issue, but by Argument.

In Trespass and Battery in A. to find Battery.
not guilty in A. is not good; for it ought to be generally not guilty.

Upon this Plea, if the Plaintiff reply Riens per Descent.
that he has diverse Lands in D. per descent, and the Jury find he had diverse
Lands by descent, this is good, without finding what; for it is Uncertain.
not material, in regard upon this false Plea a general Judgment, is to be
without having respect to the Assets.

Of 5 Acres, if they find the Defendant Ejectment.
guilty in 8 pieces. de terre parcel tenementorum predict, it is a void Verdict
because uncertain, and no Execution can be made of pieces.

In case upon non Assumpsit Pleaded, if Verdict Special.
the Jury find that the Defendant non Assumpsit; yet if two Witnesses say true,
then we find that he did Assume. The first shall stand for the Defendant, and
the last words are void; and Surplusage shall not vitiate. Surplusage.


If upon a Lease of 20 Acres, and the Defendant Ejectment.
plead Non dimisit, and the Jury find quod dimisit 10 Acres tantum, and the
Conclusion of the Verdict is, Et si, super totam materiam Curiae videbitur quod
Defendant dimisit 20 Acres, then they find for the Plaintiff; and if not, then
for the Defendant; this is repugnant, and so the Verdict is void in all.

To Assess Damages, incertainly is void. Certain.
As to say we Assess 40 l. if we must by Law, if not then but 3 l. this is void.

Indelitatus assumpsit, to Assess Damages occasion debiti predicti is good,
although it ought to be occasion non performationis, etc.

In an Information upon the Statute Information.
39 El. ca. 11. for Dying with Logwood, by which he lost 20 l. for every
Offense upon Not guilty, if the Jury find him Guilty for using this against the
Statute for 40 days, by which he lost this is not good, because he forfeits 20
l. for every time, and the number of times do not appear.

If the Jury find the words in the Will, and yet do not find the Will, the
Verdict is not good.

If they first find the Special Matter, and then find the Issue generally, the
Special Matter is hereby waved.

If the Jury find that J. S. was seized in Where a Special Verdict shall be
good by Intendment.
Fee, and Devised the Land to J. D. although they do not find that the Land was
held in Socage, yet this is good; for this shall be intended, this being a
Collateral thing, and this being the most common Tenure.

If they find that he was seized and made his Will in haec verba, etc. although
they Will.
do not find that he Devised the Land as in the former; yet this is good by
intendment.

But if a thing is left out, and cannot be intended, the Verdict is not good.

If the Issue be whether the Sheriff took J. S. and kept him in Prison in
Execution for certain Debt and Damages by force of a Cap. ad Sa. and the Jury
find that he took him by force of an alias Cap. ad Sa, etc. although they do
not find that he kept him in Execution for the Debt and Damages aforesaid,
according to the Issue, yet this is a good Special Verdict; for it shall be
intended, for the Consequence is necessary from this which is found, for he
could not take him, but that he must be in Execution. Vide several instances of
this. Roll. tit. Trial. 697, etc.

If the Jury find that J. S. was seized in Fee, and made his Will in haec
verba, and that he afterward died; although they do not find that he died
seized, yet it shall be Will.
intended that he died seized; and so good.

If they find that A. did Bargain and Bargain and Sale.
Sell, etc. although they do not find any consideration, yet this shall be
intended.

So if they find that such persons Authorizati Letters Patents.
virtute literarum patentium dominae Elizabethae, etc. and do not find that the
Letters Patents were under the Great Seal, yet this shall be intended.

Verdicts of Laymen shall be taken according to their intent, and need not so
precise a form as in Pleadings, lib. 4. 65. Hob. 76.

Therefore if the Jury find a Recognizance in nature of a Statute Staple in
this manner, That the Conusor came before R. O. Recorder of London, and T. O.
Mayor of the Staple, Et recognovit se debere to B. 200 l. and do not say,
Secundum formam statuti, etc. nor Prescriptum Obligatorium, etc. although the
Statute of 23 H. 8. provide, That it shall be by Bill Obligatory, sealed with
three seals; and here it does not appear, that there was any Bond or Seal, nor
that it was according to the Statute; yet these things shall be intended, they
having found a Recognizance before the Mayor and Recorder.

A Special Verdict may be amended by Notes.
the Notes.

If the Jury find a Special Verdict, and Where a special Conclusion of a
special Verdict shall aid the Imperfections of it.
refer the Law upon that special Matter to the Court, although they do not find
any title for the Defendant, which is a Collateral thing to the point which
they refer to the Court, yet the Verdict is good enough, for all other things
shall be intended, except this which is referred to the Court, lib. 5. 97.

In Ejectment, If the Plaintiff declare upon a Lease made by A. and the Jury
find a Special Verdict, and Matter in Law upon a power of Revocation of Uses by
an Indenture and limitation of new Uses, and then a Lease for years made to the
Plaintiff by the Lessor in the Declaration, and another, in which there is an
apparent Variance; but they conclude the Verdict, and refer to the Court,
whether the grant of a new Estate found in the Verdict be a revocation of the
first Indenture, or not. The special Conclusion shall aid the Verdict, so that
the Court cannot take notice of the variance between the Lease in the
Declaration and Verdict, because the doubt touching the Revocation, is only
referred to the Court. And although they refer to the Court, whether this be a
Revocation of the first Indenture, and not of the former Uses, and limitation
of new Uses, as it ought to be; yet in a Verdict this is good, for their
intention appears.

So Note a difference between a special Conclusion and Reference to the Court,
and a general Conclusion and Reference to the Court. Vide hic apres.

In Debt for 40 s. for a Horse sold, and For whom the Verdict shall be said to
be found.
the Jury find 40 s. Debt for two Horses sold; this is found against the
Plaintiff, for this is not the same Contract.

So in Debt for 20 l. if the Jury find 40 l. Debt, this is against the
Plaintiff.

In Debt for 20 l. for Wood sold, and the Jury find the Bargain was for 20
Marks; the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment for this Variance.

So in Debt for Rent upon a Demise of two Acres, and the Jury find it upon the
Demise of one Acre, the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment.

But in Debt for 24 l. 8 s. received for the Plaintiffs use, if the Jury fi^^
the Defendant owes 24 l. but not the 8 s. the Plaintiff shall have Judgment;
for perhaps he had paid the 8 s.

In an Action upon the Case against A. if the Plaintiff declares, That by
Custom, etc. amongst Merchants, etc. If two are found in Arrearages upon
Account, and they assume to pay this at certain Days, that any one of them may
be charged for the whole by himself, and then shows the Account of A. and B.
who were found in Arrear, in so much, etc. and promised to pay this at certain
days, but paid it not, and now he brings his Action against A. although upon
non Assumpsit pleaded, it be found that the days of payment are mistaken, yet
the days being past, the Action lies, because the Law makes the Duty upon the
Account; for which after the days an Action lies.

Where all is to be given in Damages, Damages.
the Jury are Chancellors, and may give so much as the Case requires in Equity.

In Detinue of a Bond of 100 l. if the Detinue.
Jury find that he received a Bond of a greater or less Sum, the Verdict is for
the Defendant.

So in a promise to do two things, if the Promise.
Jury find but one of them, it is for the Defendant.

Otherwise in Ejectment upon a Demise Ejectment.
of 10 Acres, if the Jury find a Demise of less, the Plaintiff shall have
Judgment.

If the Issue be upon a Prescription, for Prescription.
Common belonging to a Message, and 200 Acres of Land, 50 of Meadow, and 50 of
Pastu^e; if the Jury find Common belonging to the House 20 Acres of Meadow, and
20 of Pasture in two of the Vills, and not in the rest; the Prescription is not
found.

If part of the Trespass or wrong be found Trespass. Case.
it is sufficient, in Trespass or an Action of the Case upon a Tort; as by a
Commoner for putting and depasturing Cattle in the Common.

If the Issue be whether all the Lands in Audita Quaerela.
Execution, were the Estate of the Father in Tail, or in Fee, and part is found
in Tail, and part in Fee; Judgment shall be given for the Defendant who pleaded
the Seisin in Fee.

If the Plaintiff declares upon a Demise Ejectment.
made the first of May to Commence at Michaelmas next, if the Jury find a Lease
made at any other day before the Feast, it is found for the Plaintiff; for the
day of making is not material.

Otherwise of a Lease for years ^n Possession; As of a Lease made the 5th of
May Habend for three years from Lady Day before; and the Jury find a Lease made
the 15th day of May for three years, from the same Lady Day; for this is a
Lease in Possession.

In false Imprisonment in Middlesex, and Imprisonment.
the Defendant justify in London, to which the Plaintiff says, the Defendant
took him in Middlesex de son Tort demesne, and Issue upon this, and the Jury
find the Defendant took him in Middles^x lawfully upon a Writ, yet this is for
the Plaintiff; for the Issue is upon the place, and not upon the Tort, for that
is confessed by the Pleading, if the taking was in Middlesex.

In Debt for 20 l. and the Jury find 40 l. the Debt.
Plaintiff shall not have Judgment, the reason seems to be because it cannot be
the same Debt which is entire; but upon another Contract, which is mislaid.

If the Issue be Payment after Execution, Audita Quaerela.
and the Jury find payment before, yet the Issue is proved; for payment before,
is payment after.

In Debt upon a Bond bearing date the 25 Obligation.
of June upon Non est factum, if the Jury find it his Deed, but that it was
delivered 8 days after the ^ate, this is found for the Plaintiff.

If the Issue be that two made the Feoffment, Joint and several.
or two were Churchwardens, etc. and the Jury find but one, etc. the Issue is
not found.

If the breach of Covenant or Wast be Obligation. Covenant. Wast.
assigned in cutting 20 Trees, and the Jury find but 10; yet the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment.

If in Replevin, etc. the Jury find that Totum and Pars.
part of the Cattle were Levant and Couch^nt, and part not, and the Issue is
upon all, the Issue is not found.

In Ejectment for him who pleaded all, Ejectment. Void in part.
of 14 Acres, and the Jury find guilty of 20, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment
for the 14, and the Verdict is void for the residue.

In an Information upon an usurious Contract Information. Usury.
by two, it is not sufficient to find a Contract by one. Otherwise where the
Tort and offense is several, as against two upon the Statute 4 E. 6. P^o
emptione butiri, and selling it by Retail, etc. and so in an Action upon the
Case in Nature of Conspiracy, and for words laid twice in one Declaration. This
will put in Issue the manner as well Modo and forma.
as the matter, where the manner is material; as the time of the Fact, and
other Circumstances.

The Plaintiff replies, That W. made a Replevin. Lease.
Lease to him 30 Martii Habend. from Lady Day last, and Issue Modo and fo^ma,
and the Jury find a Lease made the 25 Mar^ii, Hab^ndum, Ex^unc for a year, this
is good, although the time of making; and Commencement of the Lease are
mistaken, inasmuch as Extunc includes the Feast. Yet because a sufficient Title
and Lease is found for the Plaintiff to put in his Cattle, this is sufficient,
this being the substance, and the Modo and forma shall not put the
Circumstances in Issue.

So in Trespass, if the Defendant justify the putting in his Cattle for Common
which he Claims from Pentecost to a certain time every year, which is traversed
Modo and forma, and the Jury find that he had Common in Vigilia Pentecostis in
festo, and the day next to this, to the time, this is found for the Defendant.

But otherwise in these Cases id an Assise of Common, because there he ought to
recover his Title.

In Debt for Rent, if the Defendant plead an Entry by the Plaintiff before the
Rent was due, scilicet such a day which was after, and Issue upon the Entry
Modo and forma, and the Jury find for the Defendant, he shall have Judgment,
for the scilicet is void, and the Modo and forma go to the matter. See after.

In Debt upon a Bond, and the Defendant Non est factum.
plead Non est factum, and the Jury find the Bond made jointly by another with
the Defendant, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment; for the Defendant should have
pleaded this.

If a Devise be pleaded Absolute, if the Devise.
Jury find a Devise upon a Condition Precedent, it is not good.

In Debt against A. as Daughter and Riens per Descent.
Heir to B. and the Defendant plead Riens per descent of B. and the Jury find
that B. was seized in Fee and dyed, having Issue the Defendant his Daughter,
and his Wife with Child of a Boy, who was afterward born alive, and dyed one
hour after, this Issue is found against the Plaintiff, because the Defendant
had the Land as Heir to her Brother who was last seized, and not to the Father,
and so the Defendant had not the Land by Descent from the Father, but from the
Brother, and yet this is Asse^s in her hands if it had been specially pleaded.

In a Writ of Error brought by him in remainder Error.
in Tail to reverse a Fine, if the Defendant plead in Bar of the Writ of Error
a Common recovery by the Tenant in Tail, to which the Plaintiff replies, That
at the time of the Recovery suffered, he himself was Tenant to the Praecipe,
and so the Recovery void, Upon which Issue is joined, Part.
and the Jury find that he was Tenant of part, but not of other part. This
Issue is partly found for the Plaintiff, and partly for the Defendant, so the
Court shall proceed to the Examination of the Error; for that whereof he was
found no Tenant; but it is a good bar of the Writ of Error, for that whereof he
is found Tenant to the Praecipe.

In Assumpsit to pay Money upon request, Promise.
and issue upon this, if the Jury find the Plaintiff promised to pay the Money,
but do not say upon request, nor Modo and forma, it is not found for the
Plaintiff.

In Ejectment of a Manner, if the Jury If the Substance of the Issue be found,
it is sufficient Manner.
find that there were no Freeholders, and so it is no Manner in Law, yet being a
Manner by Reputation, and so the Tenements pass by the Lease, Therefore this
Verdict is found for him who pleads the Lease of the Manner, for the substance
is, whether any thing was demised or not.

In an Information of Extortion against Goal.
the Jailer of the Goal, a Prison of the Castle of Maidston; the Jury found
there was no Castle, but that there was a Goal; this was for the Plaintiff,
because Goal is the Substance.

If the Issue be whether the Defendant had Accounted before R. and W. Auditors
Account.
assigned by the Plaintiff, and the Jury find an Account before R. only, the
Issue is found for the Defendant; for the Account is the effect of the Issue.
Vide Rolls tit. Trial. 707. etc.

If 11 agree, and the 12th will not, the Verdict of the 11 cannot be taken, but
the Court Jury agree.
may carry the Jurors with them in Carts until they are agreed. 41 Ass. 11.

A privy Verdict may be altered in open Verdict altered.
Court.

In an Extendi fac. upon a Statute, if the Jury deliver their Verdict in
Writing, they may afterward make it more formal, but they cannot alter it in
substance; for it is a complete Verdict by the delivery. So of Presentiments,
etc.

A Fine pleaded in Bar, and that after Fine and Nonclaim.
the death of A. scil. 1 August 3. Car. B. Father of the Plaintiff was alive,
and in plena vita and remansit infra hoc Regnum infra quatuor Maria, etc. apud
W. in Com. D. and no Entry or Claim within five years after, and the Plaintiff
replies, and takes Issue, que Modo and forma.
il non fuit and remansit infra hoc Regnum Angliae modo and forma, etc. And the
Jury find quod non fuit and remansit infra hoc Regnum Angliae, 1 August 3 Car.
but that he was there 1 Maii 4. Car. and remained there a Month, and refer to
the Court Au fuit and remansit infra hoc Regnum modo and forma, etc. This Issue
is found for the Defendant, for the matter and substance of the Plea is,
whether he was within the Realm after the death of A. and five years before
Entry or Claim per him or the Plaintiff, and modo and forma shall not make the
day material. Roll. tit. Trial. 713.

Judgment upon a Demurrer, and a Writ Judgment, Arrest, at what time.
of Inquiry executed at the return, the party may show any thing in Arrest of
Judgment; for Judgment is not complete until the last Judgment. The first is
but an Award, A man may plead any thing in Arrest of Judgment after a Verdict,
which will make Error if the Judgment be given.

In Debt upon a simple Contract against an Executor, if he will not plead in
Abatement, but other Matter which is found against him, he shall not afterward
allege that he is not chargeable in Arrest of Judgment.

So in Debt against Executors upon Arrearages of Account, where they are not
chargeable.

That which appears ill upon the same Record, What may be alleged.
but not a ma^^er of Fact, which does not appear upon the Record, because the
parties cannot by the Issue. As that a Iuror was challenged, and yet served on
the Tales, for this cannot appear without alleging matter of Fact. Nor that
the Defendants Attorney had no Warrant. But if there be any irregular or foul
practice, this may be offered to set aside a Judgment.

If any thing be omitted in the Declaration, Variance between the Verdict and
the Declaration.
or if more be put into the Declaration than is found by the Jury; if it make a
material Variance betwixt the Nar. and the Verdict, the Action shall abate.

These following are adjudged material Variances.

If the Declaration be for these words, Thou procuredst eight or Ten of thy
Neighbors Words.
to Perjure themselves, and the Jury find that he said, Thou have caused eight
or 10, etc. for he might be a remote Cause, scilicet causa sine qua non,
without Procurement. Nar. He is a Bankrupt. Verdict. He will be a Bankrupt
within two days. Nar. He is a Thief. Ver. He stole a Horse. Nar. Thou art a
Murderer. Ver. He is, etc. Nar. I know him to be a Thief. Ver. I think him to
be a Thief.

So it is a material Variance, if a special Promise be laid to be upon Request,
and the Verdict find it without Request. So if the Promise.
Declaration be upon a Lease, made by two, or by Baron and feme, and the Jury
find that one of them had nothing in the Land, or that the Baron only made the
Lease, or that the two were Tenants in Common, and so several Leases, otherwise
if they were Coparteners.

So in Case that the Testator was indebted to the Plaintiff in 55 l. and the
Defendant being Administrator in consideratione, etc. Promise to pay this upon
non Assumpsit, if the Verdict find the Promise to be to pay 30 l. part of the
55 l.

So in Ejectment, If the Nar. be of a Lease Eje and meant.
of three Acres, a Lease of a Moiety will not maintain the Nar.

So in Wast, for Cutting Trees, and the Wast.
Verdict find that he eradicated the Trees, but did not cut them.

A Prescription in modo decimandi, That Prescription.
every one who has seven Lambs, or under seven, shall pay to the person ob.
for every Lamb, and the Jury find that; and further, That if he had more than
seven Lambs, he should pay a Lamb; and that the Parson should pay the
Parishioner ob. This is not the same Prescription, but makes a Variance.

But if there be a Variance between the Variance.
Verdict and the Nar. either by way of Surplus or Defect; but if this matter of
Variance be not material in the extenuation of the Action or Damages, the
Action shall lie notwithstanding the Variance.

These ensuing are adjudged not to be material.

Nar. Strong Thief. Verdict. Thief. Nar. I say, etc. Ver. I affirm, or I doubt
not. Nar. The Plaintiff will do such a thing. Ver. I think in my Conscience he
will, etc. Nar. Of a Lease by a Parson for five years; if he tam diu should be
Parson and tam diu viveret. And the Verdict find the Lease to be for five
years, if he tam diu viveret without the words, and should continue Parson; for
the Law implies, That if he be deprived or resign, that the Lease Determines.
Nar. He is a Murderer. Ver. He was a Murderer; for when he says, He is a
Murderer, it is not intended, that he did the Act in presenti, but before. So in
Trespasses or Actions upon Torts and wrongs which are several. If the Verdict
find part, it is no material Variance; and the Plaintiff in these Cases shall
have Judgment, Roll. tit. Trial. 720.

A Jury of Middles^x was demanded in Enquest by default.
the Common Pleas, the first day of the Term, and some appeared, and some not,
so that there was not a full Jury, and neither the Defendant, nor his Attorney
did appear, and therefore the Plaintiff prayed, that the Inquest might be
awarded by default; and by the opinion of Welsh and Dyer, his prayer shall be
granted, and the Custos Brevium, and all the Prothonotaries said the course was
so; for the parties are demandable before the Jury, and if the Plaintiff make
default, he shall be nonsuited; and if the Defendant make default, the Jury
shall be awarded by default, whether they appear or not. Dyer 265.

Where an Inquest is taken by default, What the Defendant looses by his default.
the Defendant shall loose his Challenges, and by 28 Ass. p. 42. tit. Enquest
in Fitz. he shall loose his Evidences also. Bro. Enquest 10. quod non est lex.

Det. The Defendant pleaded a Release, and the Plaintiff replied non est
factum, and at the day of the Venire facias, the Defendant made default, and
the Inquest was taken upon his default, and found for the Defendant, for which
the Plaintiff took nothing by his When the Defendant may be condemned by
default, and when an Enquest must be taken upon the default.
Bill; And yet if the Plaintiff had prayed it, he might have had the Defendant
condemned by his default before the taking of the Verdict, Et sic ^ide, folly
in le Plaintiff. Bro. Ib. 5. But upon such Release, and default in Trespass,
the Enquest shall be taken by default, and the Defendant shall not be condemned
by default, though the Plaintiff pray it, and the reason is, because the debt
is certain, and the damages are uncertain in Trespass, Bro. Ib. 3.

And Finch, fo. 409. has well collected out of Brook, That always in an Action
of Trespass, whatsoever the Issue be, Release, Justification, etc. and also in
Debt, Detinue, Account, and the rest which are for things in certainty, if the
Issue be taken upon a matter in fait only, as payment, or that an Acquittance
pleaded in Bar by the Defendant, was made by Dures, etc. The Inquest shall be
taken by default, if the Defendant makes default; But in the last recited
Actions of Debt, etc. If the Issue be upon the Acquittance it self, Release, or
other matter in writing, the Plaintiff may pray Judgment upon the Defendants
default, if he will; but if he do not pray it, the Jury shall be taken by
default, as in an Action of Trespass.

The Jury may give a Verdict without testimony, Verdict without, or against
testimony.
or against testimony, when they themselves have Conuzans of the Fact. Plo.
Com. 86.

CAP. XIV. How the Jury ought to demean themselves, whilst they consider of
their Verdict; when they may eat and drink, when not; What Misdemeanor of
theirs, will make the Verdict void; Evidence given them, when they are gone
from the Bar, spoils their Verdict: For what the Court may fine them, and
where the Justices may carry them in Carts, till they agree of their Verdict.
An Amercement Assered by the Jury.
THere is a Maxim, and an old Custom Jurors ought not to eat or drink.
in the Law, that the Jury shall not eat, nor drink, after they be sworn, till
they have given their Verdict, without the Assent and License of the Justices;
and that is ordained by the Law, for eschewing of diverse inconveniences, that
might follow thereupon; and that especially, if they should eat or drink, at
the Costs of the parties; and therefore if they do so, it may be laid in Arrest
of Indgment.

But with the assent of the Justices, they may both eat and drink; as if any of
the Jurors fall sick, before they be agreed of their Verdict, so soon that he
may not commune of the Verdict, then by the assent of the Justices, he may have
meat or drink, and also such other things as be necessary for him; and his
fellows also at their own costs, or at For by assent of the parties they may
eat and drink. Br. Jurors.
the indifferent costs of the parties, if they so agree, or by the assent of
the Justices, may both eat or drink: and if the Case so happen, that the Jury
can in no wise agree in their Verdict; as if one of the Jurors knows in his
own Conscience, the thing to be false, which the other Jurors affirm to be
true, and so he will not agree with them, in giving a false Verdict, and this
appears to the Justices by Examination, the Justices may in such case, suffer
the Jury to have both meat and drink for a time, to see whether they will
agree. And if they will in no wise agree, the Justices may take such order in
the matter, as shall seem to them by their discretion, to stand with reason and
conscience, by awarding of a ^ew Inquest, and by setting fine New Inquest when
the Jury cannot agree.
upon them, that they shall find in default, or otherwise as they shall think
be^^, by their discretion; like as they may do, if one of the Jury die before
the Verdict, etc. D. a^^ Student. 158.

If the Jury after their Evidence given unto them at the Bar, do at their own
Charges eat or drink, either before or after they Where, if the Jury eat or
drink, it shall avoid the Verdict, and where only fineable.
be agreed on their Verdict, it is finable, but it shall not avoid the Verdict;
But if before they be agreed on their Verdict, they eat or drink at the charge
of the Plaintiff, if the Verdict be given for him, it shall avoid the Verdict:
But if it be given for the Defendant, it shall not avoid it; Et sic e converso.
But if after they be agreed on cheir Verdict, they eat or drink at the charge
of him, for whom they do pass, it shall not avoid the Verdict. 1 Inst. 228.

To give the Jury money, makes their Verdict void by two Justices. Leon. 1 part
18.

If the Plaintiff after Evidence given, and What delivered to the Jury after
Evidence, shall avoid their Verdict.
the Jury departed from the Bar, or any for him, do deliver any Letter from
the Plaintiff, to any of the Jury, concerning the matter in Issue, or any
Evidence, or any escrowle touching the matter in Issue, which was not given in
Evidence, it shall avoid the Verdict, if it be found for the Plaintiff; but
not, if it be found for the Defendant, Et sic e converso. But if the Jury carry
away any Writing unsealed, which was given in Evidence in open Court, this
shall not avoid their Verdict, albeit they should not have carried it with
them. Ib.

By the Law of England, a Jury after How the Jury ought to be kept by the
Bailiff.
their Evidence given upon the Issue, ought to be kept together, in some
convenient place, without meat or drink, Fire or Candle, (which some Books call
an Imprisonment) and without speech with any, unless When they may eat and
drink. See Smith's Commonwealth. 74.
it be the Bailiff, and with him only, if they be agreed. After they be agreed,
they may in causes between party, and party, give a Verdict, and if the Court
be risen, give a privy Verdict before any of the Judges of the Court, and then
they may eat and drink, and the next morning in open Court, they may either
affirm, or alter their privy Verdict, Where there can be no privy Verdict.
and that which is given in Court shall stand. But in Criminal cases of life or
member, the Jury can give no privy Verdict, but they must give it openly in
Court.

Neither can a Jury sworn and charged in Where the Jury cannot be discharged
before Verdict. The King cannot be nonsuit.
case of life, or member, be discharged by the Court, or any other, but they
ought to give a Verd^ct And the King cannot be nonsuit, for he is in Judgment
of Law ever present in Court; but a common person may be nonsuit. And in Civil
Actions, the Justices upon cause, may discharge the Jury. Br. Enquest. 68. 47.
39. etc.

But this is against Common practice, and I have known, that after a Jury of
Life and Death have been sworn and charged with Prisoners Arraigned, the Judge
having been credibly Informed, That it was a Jury packed to favor some
Prisoner, has discharged that Jury, and made the Sheriff return another
presently.

In Hillary Term* Sexto H. 8. Rotulo 358. It was alleged in Arrest of the
Verdict at the Nisi prius, that the Jurors had eat and drunk. And upon
Examination, it was found, that they had first agreed; and that returning to
give their Verdict, they saw Read Chief Justice in the way, going to see a
fray, and they followed him, Et in veniendo viderunt cyplum, and inde biberunt.
And for this, every one of them was fined 40 d. And the Plaintiff had Judgment
upon the Jurors fined.
Verdict. Dyer 37.

And Dyer 218. At the Nisi prius, the Jury after their charge given, returned
and said, That they were all agreed except one, who had eat a Pear, and drunk a
draught of Ale, Jurors at the Nisi prius, fined in bank, for eating Pears, and
drinking Ale.
for which he would not agree; And at the Request of the Plaintiff, the Jury
was sent back again, and found the Issue for the Plaintiff. And the matter
aforesaid being examined by the Oath of the Jurors Seperatim, and the Bailiff
who kept them, and found true, the offender was committed, and afterward found
Surety for his Fine. Si, etc. And Fitzherbert, the then Justice of Assise, gave
him day in banco, etc. at which day a Fine of 20 s. was there assessed. Et
quoad Ball: Curia avisare vult.

In Trespass by Mounson against West. the Jury was charged, and Evidence given,
and Jurors being retired into a House, for to Fined for having Figgs and
Pippins about them.
consider of their Evidence, they remained there a long time without concluding
any thing, and the Officers of the Court who attended them, seeing their delay,
searched the Jurors, if they had any thing about them to eat; upon which search
it was found, that some of them had Figgs, and others Pippins, for which the
next day, the matter was moved to the Court, and the Jurors were examined upon
Oath: And two of them did confess, that they had eaten Figgs before they had
agreed of their Verdict, and three other of them confessed, that they had
Pippins, but did not eat of them; and that they did it without the knowledge or
will of any of the parties. And afterward the Court set a sine of 5 l. upon
each of them which had eaten, and upon the others which had not eaten 40 s. But
upon great advice and consideration had, and conference with the rest of the
Judges, the Verdict was held to be good. Notwithstanding the said misdemeanor.
Leon. 1. part 133.

And see the Book of Entries, 251. The Fined for eating Raisins and Dates.
Jurors after they went from the Bar, ad seipsos, of their Verdict to advise,
Comederunt quasdam species, scil. Raisins, Dates, etc. at their own Costs, as
well before, as after they were agreed of their Verdict. And the Jurors were
committed to prison, but their Verdict was good, although the Verdict was given
against the King.

In Ejectione firm, it was found for the Finable for having sweetmeats, etc.
about them, though they do not eat them. See Plo. Com. 519. One fined, and
imprisoned for having Sugar Candy and Liquorish about him.
Defendant, three of the Jurors had Sweetmeats in their Pockets, and those
three were for the Plaintiff, until they were searched, and the Sweetmeats
found, and then did agree with the other nine, and gave Verdict for the
Defendant. It was the Opinion of the Justices, That whether they eat or not,
they were finable for having of the Sweet-mea^s with them, for that is a very
great misdemeanor. Godbold 353.

40 Assise. Placito 11. The Justices said, Jurors carted.
That if the Jurors will not agree in their Verdict, the Justices may carry
them in a Cart along with them, till they are agreed.

The Jury were gone from the Bar, to confer of their Verdict, and one of the
Witnesses before sworn on the Defendants part, The same Evidence given to the
Jury, after they were gone from the Bar, spoils the Verdict.
was called by the Jurors, and he recited again his Evidence to them, and after
they gave their Verdict for the Defendant. And complaint being made to the
Judge of the Assizes of this mis^emeanor, he examined the Enquest, who
confessed all the matter, and that the Evidence was the same in effect, that
was given before, Et non alia nec diversa. And this matter being returned by
the Postea, the Opinion of the Court was, That the Verdict was not good, and a
Venire facias de novo was awarded. Cro. last part, 189.

Trin. 1653. between Wells and Tailor, Copies of a Bill, Answer, and
Depositions were proved, but not all read and delivered to the Jury, who
carried them with them from the Bar, in a bundle, which they laid by them and
did not look on; yet their Verdict at the Bar, was set aside for this Cause,
and the Court would not regard their saying that they did not read them, for
they might say that to save themselves; it being a fault to take any thing
without the Courts knowledge.

If one of the parties say to the Jury after they are gone from the Bar, You
are weak If a party speak to them.
men, it is as clear of my side as the Nose in a man's face, This is new
Evidence; for his affirmation may much persuade the Jury, and therefore shall
quash the Verdict.

So if any thing be read to them, which they ought not to have with the^, as a
book of Depositions, some whereof were read in Evidence. Pratt's Case, 21 Jac.

The Plaintiff delivered an Escrowle to a Escrowle delivered to a Juror, before
he was sworn, Vitiates the Verdict.
Iuror impanelled, before he was sworn, who afterward being sworn, and gone
with the Jury from the Bar, to consider of the Verdict, showed the same
Escrowle to his Companions, who found for the Plaintiff. The Minister who kept
the Enquest, informed the Court hereof, and the Jury being examined, confessed
the matter aforesaid, upon which Judgment was stayed; for after the Jury are
sworn, they ought not to see, nor carry with them any other Evidence, but what
was delivered to them by the Court: Afterward the Plaintiff said, That the
Escrowle proved the same Evidence, which was given to them at Bar by him;
wherefore it was not so bad, as if it had been new Evidence not given before:
Sed non allocatur. 11 H. 4. 17.

Pasche 38 Eliz. Inter Vicary and Farthing, Church-Book delivered to the Jury,
act of Court.
at the Nisi prius. The Issue was about Nonage, and two Church-Books were
given in Evidence, one whereof was delivered to the Jury in Court, by the
assent of parties, and afterward, the other was delivered to the Jury out of
the Court by the Solicitor of the Plaintiff, without the assent of the Court,
and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and this was indorsed on the Postea; The
Question was, whether this should make the Verdict void or no, for the Justices
differed in opinion, Popham and Gaudy, that it should not; Fenner and Clench,
that it should; the Negative Justices gave these Reasons; That the Book was
delivered in Evidence in the Court, and so the other party might answer to it,
and that the Court had informed the Jury of the validity thereof, how far they
were to believe i^, with many other Reasons: But the Affirmative was urged,
because there might be some matter in this Book, to induce them otherwise than
was intended before, and because it was delivered on his part, for whom the
Verdict passed, without the Courts assent; yet one Book (scil. Cro. last part
411.) tells us, Judgment was afterward given for the Plaintiff; see More's
Reports 452. The Books differ; for Cro. makes Clinch give Consider the Reasons
in the former cases.
his opinion for the Verdict. But More brings him on the other side, which I
conceive is truest; and for my part, I know no reason, why foisting of Evidence
to the Jury without the Court, should have any favor at all.

In the Case of Tailor and Webb, Trin. 1653, B. R. Twisden moved to set aside a
Verdict given at Bar, because that after Evidence when the Writings were
delivered to the Jury, some Writings which were not sealed (and therefore ought
^ot to be delivered to the Jury) were delivered by a stranger to the Jury.

Hales Counsel of the other side, produces an Affidavit of the Foreman's of the
Jury, that they made no use of them in giving their Verdict, and that most of
those Writings were read in Court in Evidence upon the Trial, and Hales said,
That if this should avoid the Verdict, then that would be in the power of any
Stranger unknown, and against the mind of the parties to avoid any Verdict.

Roll. Ch Just. The Affidavit of the Jury ought not to be allowed to make good
their own Verdict, for now they are (as it were) parties, and have offended,
and shall not be allowed by their own Oath to take off their offense, and it is
the Duty of the Jury to look what Writings they receive before they go from the
Bar; and if any such Paper be wrapped up among other Papers delivered to them
by the Court, so soon as they have discovered it, they should call in the
Tip-staff, who keeps them, and deliver it to him, and to testify they made no
use of it; and he said it would be dangerous to give the least way to the
delivering of any Writings to a Jury.

And at another day Roll cited 11 H. 4. 18. the Plaintiff (before the Trial)
delivered a a brevia^e of his Evidence to the Jury, which contained no more
than was proved in Court, yet by this the Verdict was avoided, So Mich. 31
Eliz. C. B. Metcalfe and Dean, After the Jury were gone from the Bar, they
sent for one of the Witnesses, and reexamined him, who gave the very same
Evidence that he had before given in Court, yet the Verdict was avoided; and
the reason of both is, a fear and jealousy that other matters might be given,
etc.

37 Eliz. Farthing's Case, a Paper not under Seal, which was given in Evidence
was delivered to the Jury, this did not avoid the Verdict, because here can be
no such fear; and per Roll, If any Writing (though not given in Evidence) be
delivered to the Jury by the Court, it shall not avoid the Verdict. And in the
principal Case the Verdict was avoided.

Hill. 40 Eliz. Rot. 847. In Arrest of Judgment after Verdict, it was alleged,
Escrowle from one who was no party.
that a Iuror delivered to his Companions, an Escrowle for Evidence to them,
which was not given in Evidence at the Trial, and adjudged no cause to Arrest
Judgment, unless it had been received from one of the parties, which did not
appear. More 546. but otherwise, if it had been given by a party, and the Jury
had found for him.

In the Case of Duke and Ve^tres, Mich. 1656. B. R. tried at Bar, one Mr.
Beverly of Suff. a Barrister was returned of the Jury, who (having been at a
Trial of the same Cause above 20 years before in the Cheq. and heard there
great Evidence to make a Deed fraudulent, which was now the Contest) demanded
of the Court, whether he ought to inform the rest of the Jury privately of
this, or conceal it, or declare it in open Court? The Court ordered him to come
into Court, and deliver all his knowledge which he heard then proved (which
Evidence was not now given, because the parties were dead) and so he did, being
not sworn again, but only upon the Oath taken as a Iuryman.

And certainly, It is of dangerous Consequence, to receive a Verdict against
Evidence given, on supposal that some of the Jury knew otherwise, or on private
Information given by one Iuryman to the rest, where he cannot be Cross-Examin'd;
and let such Jurors beware of Attaint, but the best way is (as before) in open
Court.

In a Writ of Error, the first Error assigned was, that Termino Trin. twelve
Jurors, and no more, did appear: This ex assensu partium, was adjourned until
Jury adjourned.
Crastino Animar. on which day, two others came in and were sworn, being of the
first Panel.

The Court all clear of Opinion, that this is no Error, this being good enough,
they being all to be called again. Leon. 3. part 38.

If a Iuror depart after he is sworn, Juror depart.
he shall be sined and imprisoned, and by assent of parties, another Iuror may
be sworn. Bro. Jurors 46 lib. 5. 40.

If a man be nonsuited after the Jury is ready to give their Verdict, the
Court may cause the Amercement of the Plaintiff to be presently affered by the
Jurors. li. 8. 39.

CAP. XV. What Punishment the Law has provided for Jurors offending; as taking
Reward to give their Verdict. Of Embraceors. Decies tantum. Attaint: several
Fines on Jurors. What Issues they forfeit, and of Judgment for striking a Juror
in Westminster, etc.
YOu have already heard how the Court may fine the Jurors for their
misdemeanors in giving up their Verdict, I will proceed in showing what
punishments they are liable unto, if they neglect their duty; and doubtless, no
men have more need of knowing what penalties the Law inflicts on their
offenses, then common Jurors, who too often being preingaged with favor to the
Plaintiff, or malice against the Defendant, Et sic e converso; or with common
Interest, (as they call it) where Tithes or Commons are in question, will
neither hearken to their Evidence, ^or direction of the Judge. But subvert the
whole drift of the Common Law, which will have them of the Neighborhood,
where the fact was committed, to the end, that they knowing most of the fact,
may consequently give the best Verdict; yet contrariwise, Jurors which live
nearest, do now a days, most commonly so fetter themselves with favor or
animosities to the parties, that those which live furthest off (as Iuries from
other Counties) for the most part, give the cleanest Verdicts. And how should
the Judges remedy this mischief, but by severely punishing those Iuries which
offend; the Law in this will be their Guide; for without doubt, (excepting life
and member) the Law has provided more severe punishments against Iuries, than
against any other offender whatsoever; as well knowing that corruption optimi
^st pessima: And common Jurors generally have nothing to do with this verse,
Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore, Therefore it is fit they should be
concerned in the next, Oderunt peccare mali, formidine poenae; wherefore the
description of what this poena is, shall be the conclusion of this Treatise.

If any Iuror take a reward to give his Verdict, and be thereof attainted, at
the suit of other than the party, and makes fine, he The penalty of Jurors
taking Rewards.
which sueth shall have half the fine, and if any of the parties to the Plea^,
bring his Action against such Juror, he s^^ll recover his damages. And the
Juror so attainted shall have imprisonment for one year, which imprisonment
shall not be pardoned for any fine, this is by the Statute of 34 E. 3. cap. 8.

5 E. 3. ca. 10. It is accorded, That if any Juror in Assizes, Juries or
Enquests, take of the one party, or of the other, and be Shall not serve of any
other Inquest.
thereof duly attainted, That hereafter he shall not be put in any Assizes,
Iuries, or Enquests; and nevertheless, he shall be commanded to prison, and
further ransomed at the Kings will. And the Justices before whom such Assizes,
Iuries and Enquests, Imprisoned and ransomed, (that is) fined.
shall pass, shall have power to enquire and determine according to this
Statute.

A man would think that these Statutes should have frighted any Iuror from
taking Rewards to give his Verdict. But

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames? So sacred is this love of
Money, that Conscience her self must vail to it, and not stand in competition
with such allurements: wherefore the Law did redouble its force; nay more,
produced a Decies tantum, scil. That a Iuror taking reward to give his Verdict,
shall pay ten times s^ much, as he has taken; which forfeiture, methinks,
should make even those who love Money best, refuse to take Money upon such an
account, because it is like a Canker in their Estates, depriving them in the
end, of ten times more than it brought; for which, hear the Statute 38 E. 3.
cap. 12.

Item, As to the Article of Jurors, in the Decies tantum.
24th year, it is assented and joined to the same, that if any Jurors in
Assizes sworn, and other Enquests to be taken between the King and party, or
party and party, do any thing take by them or other of the party, Plaintiff or
Defendant, to give their Verdict, and thereof be attainted by process contained
in the same Article, be it at the suit of the party that will sue for himself,
or for the Embraceor.
King, or any other person, every of the said Jurors, shall pay ten times as
much as he has taken. And he that will sue, shall have the one half, and the
King the other half. And that all Embraceors, that bring or procure such
Enquests in the Country, to take gain or profit, shall be punished in the same
manner and form as the Jurors. And if the Iuror or Embraceor so attainted, have
not whereof to make agree, in the manner aforesaid, he shall have the
imprisonment of one year: And the intent of the King, of Great men, and of the
Commons is, That no Justice, or other Minister, shall enquire of office, upon
any of the points of this Article, but only at the Suit of the party, or of
other, as before is said.

Upon which Statute, there is a Writ called a Decies tantum; and who will, may
bring it, for it is a popular Action, and lies (as you see) where any of the
Jurors, after he is sworn, takes of one party, or of the other, or of both
(and then he is called an Ambidexter) any Reward to give his Verdict, etc.
Ambidexter.
And it may be brought against all the Jurors So F. N. Br. says. But for my
part, I think he is mistaken, for the Statute mentions nothing of his taking
money; and in my opinion, the case of 37 H. 6. 13. is full against him.
Embraceor.
and Embraceors, although they take several Sums of Money: and although the
Jury give no Verdict, or a true Verdict. But it does not lie against an
Embraceor, if he takes no Money, and embraces, or takes Money, and does not
embrace. See Bro. Tit. Decies tantum 13. and F. N. Br. 171.

An Embraceor, is he that procures the Jurors in the Country, to take gain or
profit, or comes to the Bar with the party, and speaks in the matter, or
stands there to survey the Jury, etc. or to put them in fear, or solicits them
to find on the one side or other; and this Fellow cloaks his Embracery, under
pretense of laboring the Jurors to appear, and to do their Conscience: And
thus the Attorneys in the Country, often take upon them to do, and many times
put in a word or two Attorneys ill practice.
for their Clyents; which practice deserves the most severe punishment, next to
their getting the S^eriff to return such and such in the Jury; which they,
having been Undersheriffs themselves, and so agree with one another, are most
expert at.

But it was said by Roll. Chapter Just. That a Plaintiff might well entreat one
Iuror to appear, and that it was allowed in the Star Chamber, but a Stranger
could not labor one Iuror to appear.

But Counselors at Law, may plead for Counselors.
their Money at the Bar; But they must not labor the Jury privately; and if
they take Money for this, they are Embraceors. F. N. 6. Br. 171.

So much does the Law hate, that Jurors Fined for taking Money after their
Verdict.
should privately take Money for their Verdict. That certain Jurors were fined,
for taking Money after their Verdict, though there was no pr^ingagement for it.
39 Assise. p. 19.

The practice is otherwise at this day; if it were not, the Middlesex Iuries
would not so Court the Bailiffs to return them, especially to Trials at Bar;
where 5 l. a man is frequent Gratuity, sometimes more.

If a full Jury appear, and some are challenged Issues.
off, so that the Jury remains for default of Jurors, the Defaulters shall
loose their Issues. 4 H. 6. 7. otherwise if a Jury be sworn, and one is
withdrawn by consent.

But if there be a joynder of Counties, and a Jury of one County appear, and
not of the other. The Defaulters of that County from which enough came, shall
not loose their Issues; because the Inquest does not remain for their default,
but for the default of them of the other County, 48 Ass. 5. Mes quaere.

If the Jurors at the return of Scire fac. Amercement.
make default, yet they shall not be amerced, because the parties may be
claimed at the first day, but at the return of the Habeas Corpora they shall.
10 E. 4. 19. 1 E. 3. 12.

If any of the Jurors appear, the Court Demand sur peine.
may charge them to inquire if any of the other Jurors were within the Town
after the return; and if they find they were, they shall be demanded upon a
Pein, and if they come not, they shall be amerced, Rolls tit. Trial. 632.

A Juror was challenged, and six other Jurors were sworn to try the Challenge,
who found him indifferent, and thereupon the Juror fined for departing when he
was challenged.
Jury was demanded, but did not appear; for which default, he was fined the
value of his Lands for a year; and the other Jurors inquired of the value, etc.
although the other party then would have challenged him when he was demanded,
so that he might have been treit. But the Court would not admit this, because
then the King would have lost his Fine. 36 H. 6. 27.

If a Juror appear, and is adjourned upon Juror adjourned upon pain.
pain, and makes default, in this Case, because he shall be fined to the value
of his Land per annum, this shall be inquired by his Companions of the Jury,
because the Court knows not the value of his Land. li. 8. 41.

A Verdict was taken from the Foreman Fined for giving a Verdict before they
were agreed.
of the Jury, to which one of them did not assent, and damages assessed to 20
s. in Trespass and Assault; and afterward, every one of the 11. were fined,
for giving their Verdict, before they were all agreed. 40 Assise 10.

Where a Jury are to be fined, a Fine The fine must not be joint.
jointly imposed on them, is not legal, but they must be severally fined,
because the offense of one, is not the offense of another. Et nemo debet puniri
pro alieni delicto; For then it might be said, Rutilius fecit, Aemilius
plectitur. lib. 11. 42.

A man stroke a Juror at Westminster. (sitting Punishment for striking a Juror.
in the Court) who passed against him, and he was thereof indicted, and
arraigned at the Kings Suit, and attainted, his judgment was, that he should go
to the Tower, and stay there in prison, all days of his life, and that his
right hand should be cu^ off, and his Lands seized into the Kings hands, 41
Assise. p. 25. and now our Juror* sees what punishment it is to strike him, in
the face of the Court. Let him hold his hands from others, least the same
Judgment light on him.

By the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 6. It is Enacted, that upon every first Writ
of Habeas Corpora, or Distringas, with a Nisi prius. 10 s. shall be returned in
Issues, upon every person impannelled, and upon the second Writ 20 s. and upon
the third 30 s. Issues.
And upon every Writ that shall be further awarded to try any Issue, to double
the Issues last, before specified, until a full Jury be sworn.

And these Issues being returned upon a Not summoned.
Tenement in Fee simple, in tail or for life, of another, or himself, or in the
right of his Wife; the Land he then has will be chargeable for it, and any
man's Cattle upon this Land may be distrained for it.

But if the Under Sheriff, etc. return a Juror summoned, who in truth was not
legally summoned, and therefore does not appear, and so loses Issues, the
Undersheriff shall pay him double the value of the Issues lost. See the
Statutes of 35 H. 8. 6. and the 2 E. 6. 32.

And note, the Law has been so careful to punish all offenders, who would
endeavor to bias, and corrupt the Jury; and to punish the Juries themselves,
if they receive Money to give their Verdict, or any otherwise pre-ingage
themselves to any of the parties; All which is to the end, that a true and
honest Verdict may be given: What punishment shall that Jury have, which gives
a false Verdict?

Such a punishment, that (as I said before) in civil Causes it is without
example: and surely, if the Jurors did bear it in their minds, their Verdicts
would be always grounded upon their Evidence; and not upon their own Interests,
or any partiality to either of the parties.

Wherefore if the Jurors give a false Verdict (which is perjury of the highest
degree) upon an Issue joined between the parties in any Court of Record, and
Judgment thereupon. The party grieved, may bring his Writ of Attaint, in the
King's Bench, or Attaint.
Common Pleas; upon which, 24 of the best men in the County are to be the
Jurors, who are to hear the same Evidence which was given to the Petite Jury,
and as much as can be brought in affirmance of the Verdict, but no other
against it. And if these 24. (who are called the Grand Iu^y) find it a false
Verdict; then follows ^^is terrible and heavy Judgment, at Common Law, upon
the Petite Jury.

1. That they shall loose liberam legem for Judgment in Attaint.
ever, that is, they shall be so infamous, as they shall never be received to
be a Witness, or of any Jury. 2. That they shall forfeit all their Goods and
Chattels. 3. That their Lands and Tenements shall be taken into the Kings
hands. 4. That their Wives and Children shall be thrown out of doors. 5. That
their Houses shall be rased and thrown down. 6. That their Trees shall be
rooted up. 7. That their Meadow-grounds shall be ploughed up. 8. That their
Bodies shall be cast into the Goal, and the party shall be restored to all that
he lost, by reason of the unjust Verdict. So odious is Perjury in this Case, in
the eye of the Common Law: And the severity of this punishment, is to this end,
Ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat; for there is Misericordia
puniens, and there is Crudelita^parcens. And seeing all Trials of real,
personal, and mixed actions, depend upon the Oath of 12 men, prudent Antiquity
inflicted this severe punishment upon them, if they were attainted of Perjury.
1 Inst. 294.
But now by the Stat. of 23 H. 8. cap. 3. The severity of this punishment is
moderated, if the Writ of Attaint be grounded upon that Statute.

But the party grieved, may at his Election, either bring his Writ of Attaint,
at the Common Law, or upon that Statute. Wherefore let the Juror expect the
greatest punishment, when he offends. 3 Inst. 163. 222.

And so I conclude as to the Iuror, only with the words of Fortescue, Quis tunc
(etsi immemor salutis animae suae fuerit) non formidine tantae poenae, and
verecundia tantae infamiae, veritatem non diceret sic Juratus?

Who then, though he regard not his Souls health, yet for fear of so great
punishment, and for shame of so great infamy, would not, upon his Oath, declare
the truth?

But as to our Practicer, I would give this one further Advertisement, which
relates also to Jurors.

When a Verdict has been given by a former Jury in the same Cause, and on the
same Evidence it is allowed to give the former Verdict in Evidence, and I have
known this Introduced by the Counsel, as obliging to the latter Jury to find
accordingly; intimating, that otherwise they do (in effect) perjure the former
12 men, which may amuse render minds, and draw them from the strict Inquiry
into the Merits of the Cause, in favor of their Predecessors; which is a
palpable mistake and misinformation, for these Reasons.

1. The same Evidence in the former Cause and Trial (perhaps) was not so
perspicuously delivered as in this. 2. This latter Jury may be of more
sagacicus and Comprehensive Judgment than the former. 3. The Directions of the
Court (which the Jury most heed) may be more clearly delivered to this Jury. 4.
The Matter in Contest (perhaps) was not in the former Trial so clearly managed
by the Counsel, being not so well instructed as afterward. 5. And la^^ly,
supposing, the Evidence equally delivered by the Witnesses, apprehended by the
Jury, directed by the Court, managed by the Counsel, yet it is no perjury or
fault to differ in Judgment; for if 24 Iurymen were to try a Matter of Fact,
and 12 were of one Opinion, and 12 of another, who is in fault? while they
Judge according to the best of their Knowledge and Skill, to which (only) they
are sworn. And it is a reasonable kindness to Iury-men, to make good
Construction of differing Judgments among them, while we see, how often Judges
themselves differ in their Opinions, on a matter stated equally to them all,
and that (not only as to matter of Law, but) as to matter of Fact, as attending
Practicers may observe in Trials at Earr, in the several Judges several
Directions. And this I thought good to advertise, for that I have known
Verdicts gained on this unwarrantable Suggestion, against clear and express
Evidence, and could instance some Cases. Sed verbum sat, etc.
As to the difference betwixt the Judge and the Jury, and that Question which
has made such a noise, viz. Whether a Jury is fineable for going against their
Evidence in Court, or the Direction of the Judge? I look upon that Question, as
dead and buried, since Bushel's Case, in my Lord Vaughan's Reports; yet some of
the Ashes thereof I may sprinkle here without offense. It does appear there to
have been resolve^ by all the Judges upon a full Conference at Serjeants-Inn,
That a Jury is not fineable for going against their Evidence where an Attaint
lies; And that it is Evident by several Resolutions of all the Judges, That
where an Attaint lies, the Judge cannot fine the Jury, for going against their
Evidence, or Direction of the Court, without other Misdemeanour.

And where an Attaint does not lie, as in Criminal Causes upon Indictments,
etc. My Lord Vaughan says these words, That the Court could not Fine a Jury at
the Common Law, where Attaint did not lie; I think to be the clearest Position
that ever I considered either for Authority or Reason of Law. And one reason
for this, which can never be answered, is, The Judge cannot fully know upon
what Evidence the Jury give their Verdict; for they may have other Evidence
than what is showed in Court; They are of the Vicinage, the Judge is a
Stranger, they may have Evidence from their own personal knowledge, that the
Witnesses speak false, which the Judge knows not of; they may know the
Witnesses to be stigmatized and infamous, which may be unknown to the Parties
or Court.

And if the Jury knew no more than what they heard in Court, and so the Judge
knew so much as they, yet they might make different Conclusions, as oftentimes
two Judges do; and therefore, as it would be a strange and absurd thing to
punish one Judge for differing with another in Opinion or Judgment; so it would
be worse for the Jury, who are Judges of the Fact, to be punished for finding
against the Direction of him who is not Judge of the Fact. But he that would be
better satisfied in this point, may read that Case, and the Authorities, and
Reasons given by my Lord Vaughan, whom I must honor, as a man of great reason.

It is showed in that Case, That muth of the Office of Jurors, in order to
their Verdict, is Ministerial, as not withdrawing from their fellows after they
are sworn; not receiving from either side Evidence after their Oath, not given
in Court, not eating and drinking before their Verdict, refusing to give a
Verdict, and the like; wherein if they transgress, they are Fineable: But the
Verdict it self when given is not an act Ministerial, but Judicial, and
according to the best of their judgment; for which they are not fineable, nor
to be punished but by Attaint.

Nor can any man show, That a Jury was ever punished upon an Information, either
in Law, or in the Star Chamber, where the Charge was only, for finding against
their Evidence, or giving an untr^e Verdict, unless Imbracery, Subornation ^r
the like, were joined.

But the Fining and Imprisoning of Jurors for giving their Verdicts, has
several times been declared in Parliament an Illegal and Arbitrary Innovation,
and of dangerous Consequence to the Government; the Lives, and Liberties of the
People. This celebrated trial by Iuries, having been confirmed by many
Parliaments.

Littleton, Sect. 368. tells us, That as the Jury may find the matter at large,
that is a Special Verdict, (which the Court cannot refuse, if it be pertinent
to the matter put in Issue) and leave the Law to the Court so if the Jury will,
they may take upon them the knowledge of the Law upon the matter, and may give
their Verdict generally, as is put in their Charge. As for example, upon all
general Issues; As Not guilty pleaded in Trespass, Nil debet in Debt, Null Tort,
null disseisin, in Assise. Ne disturba pas in Quare impedit, etc. Though it be
matter of Law, whether the Defendant be a Trespasser, a Debtor, Disseisor, or
Disturber, in the particular Cases in Issue; yet the Jury find not (as in a
Special Verdict) the Fact of every Case by it self, leaving the Law to the
Court, but find for the Plaintiff, or Defendant, upon the Issue to be tried,
wherein they resolve^ both the Law, and the Fact complicatly* and not the Fact
by it self. And so upon Not guilty to an Indictment of Felony, Breach of the
Peace, Trespass. etc. and other Cases where the Law and the Fact are complicate
and joined, they may determine upon both: Yet I must give them my Lord Coke's
Caution, which is, That although the Jury, if they will, may take upon them the
knowledge of the Law, and give a general Verdict, yet it is dangerous for them
so to do; for if they do mistake the Law, they run into the danger of an
Attaint. Therefore to find the matter specially, is the safest way where the
Case is doubtful.

And to end, as I begun, That Decantatum in our Books (as my Lord Vaughan calls
it) Ad quaestionem facti non respondent Judices, ad quaestionem legis non
respondent Juratores, Literally taken is true; for if it be demanded what is
the Fact? the Judge cannot answer it: If it be asked, what is the Law in the
Case? the Jury cannot answer it. But upon the general Issue, if the Jury be
asked the Question, guilty, or not? which includes the Law, they resolve both
Law, and Fact, in answering Guilty, or Not Guilty. So as though they answer not
singly to the Question what is the Law; yet they determine the Law in all
matters, where Issue is joined and tried, but where the Verdict is Special. But
in such Cases, the Judge cannot of himself answer, or determine one Particle of
the Fa^^, but must leave it to the Jury, with whom let it rest and continue for
ever, as the best kind of trial in the world for finding out the Truth, and the
greatest safety of the just Prerogatives of the Crown, and the just Liberties
of the Subject; and he which desires more for either of them, is an Enemy to
both.

FINIS.
PRECEDENTS, CONTAINING The Forms of Challenges TO THE ARRAY, etc.

AND THE PROCEEDINGS thereupon.

Pleas Puis le Darrein Continuance, Demurrers upon the Evidence, Bills of
Exception, etc.

AND The LAW concerning the same.

Very Useful for all Lawyers and Practicers; especially at the ASSIZES, etc.

By G. D. of the Inner Temple, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1682.

PRECEDENTS, Containing the forms of Challenges to the Array, etc. and the
Proceedings thereupon. Pleas Puis le Darrein Continuance; Demurrers upon the
Evidence; Bills of Exception, etc. And the Law concerning the same, very useful
for all Lawyers and Practicers; especially at the Assizes, etc.
A Form of Challenge to the Array.
ET nunc ad hunc diem scil't etc. venit predict' A. Quer' and B. Defend per
attornat^ suos, and Iuratores fuer Impanellet^ and demand and venerunt, and
Inde predict' B. Calumniavit Arrajam^ panell' predict' quia, etc.

This must be read by the Council in French, and delivered to the Clerk to read
it in Latin.

A Challenge to the Array, because the Sheriff is Cousin, etc.
Et super hoc idem Henricus Vernon calumpniat Arraimentsi pannelli p^dict' quia
dic. quod panellu^ illud arriat' fuit per quendam Johannem Zouch Milite^ jam
and te^e Arraiment' pred fact' vic^ pred Com^ Derb' qui quidem vic^ est
consanguineus pred Johannis Manners vizt. filii Georgii Zouch Ari^ filii
Johannis Zouch Mil. fil' Johannis Zouch Ari^ filii Johannis Zouch Ari^ filii
Willielmi Domini Zouch filii Alan Domini Zouch filii Willielmi Domini Zouch
filii Elizabethe filie Willielmi Domini Roos Patris Willielmi Domini Roos
Patris Thome Domini Roos Patris Elianore Matris Georgii Manners Militis Patris
Thome Comitis Rutland Patris pred Johannis Manners Et hoc paratus est
verificare unde petit Iudicium ac quod panellum pred cassetur, etc. que quidem
calumpn^ per pred Tho. Stanley dedic^ per N. Sturley de Beachiff At^ and R. F.
de T. Ar^triatores ad hoc electos and juratos comperta est vera Ideo panellum
pred cassetur and amoveatur, etc. Cokes Ent^ies, 340.

A Challenge because the Sheriff is Tenant, etc.
Et super hoc idem Johannes Dom^ St. John dic^ quoth J. D. At^ vic^ Com^ p^d jam
existit quodque idem J. D. tenet duodecim acras prati cum pertin^ in Budenham
in Com^ p^d de ipso Johanne Domino St. John ad voluntatem per reddit 40 s.
eidem Johanni Domino St. John annuatim solvend Et ea de causa petit bi^e Domine
Regine de ve fac' hic xijcem, etc. ad triandum exitum p^d superius junct^
Coronatoribus ejusdem Domine Regine in Com p^d dirigend, etc. Super quo p^d
Tho. dic^ quoth p^d Jo. D. non tenet p^d xij acras prati cumpertin^ nec aliquam
inde parcell' de p^fat^ J. Domino St. John ad voluntat^ prout idem Johannes
Dominus St. John superius allegavit Ideo non obstante Calumpnia p^d Jo. Du^i
St. John ad p^fat^ vic^ Precep^n^ est eidem vic^ quoth ve fac. hic, etc. Cokes
Entries 397.

A President of a Challenge for Default of Hundredors which has been several
times made use of at the Assizes.
Et super hoc p^d A. B per C. D. Attorn^ suum ven^ and Calumpn^ Arriament^
pannell' p^d quia dic^ quoth villa de Dale in Com^ p^d in qua quide^ villa causa
Actionis oritur and in narratione p^d quet^ locatur and oriri suppon^ est and
Tempore arriamenti pannelli illius fuit and adhuc existit infra hundred de
Downs in Com^ p^d quodque modo vic^ Com^ p^d non Retorn^ seu impannellavit
aliquos hundredos be hundred de Downs p^d ad triand exit into parts p^d modo
junct^ nec Iur^ modo Impannellat^ and retorn^ habent seu aliquis eorundem Iur^
habuit vel modo habet aliquas t^as seu tenen^^ta infra hundred de Downs p^d nec
habent habuer^ seu aliquis eorundem Iur^ habuit tempore Arriamenti pannelli p^d
seu unquam antea vel postea seu habitant vel Commorant aut aliquis eorundem
habitabat vel Commorat^ infra hundred pred modo vel Tempore Arriamenti pannelli
illius Et hoc parat est verificare unde pet^ Iudicium Et quoth pannellum illud
Cassetur, etc.

This must be under Councels Hand, and the Proceedings herein you may read
before, if they Demurr thus

Moratur in Lege

W. T.

Ioynder in Demurrer

G. D.

The Form of a Challenge made by the Defendant, because the Plaintiff is the
Sheriffs Cousin.
Et super hoc p^dictus Defendens per A. B. Attorn^ suum ven^ and Calumpn^
Arraiament^ pannelli p^d quia dic^ quoth pannellum illud fact^ and arriat^ fuit
per C. D. At^ modo and Tempore Arriament^ pannelli p^d vic^ Com^ p^d quiquidem
vic^ est Consanguineus E. H. gen^ modo dimissori quer^ in narratione pred quet^
mention^at videlt^ fillius G. H. gen^ filii K. L. fillie M. N. filii O. P.
Patris Q. R. Matris p^d E. F. modo dimissori quer^ in nar^ p^d nominat Et hoc
parat^ est verificare unde pet^ iudgm^ and quoth pannellum illud cassetur, etc.

If the Plaintiff deny the Kindred and Affinity, then thus,

Nient Cousin par le Manner

W. T.

est Cousin

G. D.

Then are two or more Triors sworn, but seldom more than two, and (after they
have heard the Proofs and Evidence given to make good the Defendants Plea) they
give their Verdict accordingly.

Note, The Plaintiff may if he please Demurr upon the Challenge.

A Challenge to the Array, because no Knight was retorn'd upon the Jury.
Et super hoc predictus Com^es per A. B. Attorn^ suum ven^ and Calumpn^
Arraiament^ pannelli Assize p^d quia dic^ quoth ip^e est and Tempore Arraiamenti
pannelli illius and antea fuit Et adhuc est un^ magnat^ and patium hujus Regni
Angliae and v^cem and locum in quolibet Parliamento ejusdem Regni habens Et quoth
Arraiament^ Assize pannelli p^d Arraiat^ fuit per C. D. Mil' nuper vic^ p^d
Com^ E. nullo Millite in eodem pannello Arriament^ illius n^iat^ and retorn^
existen sicut esse debuit secundum legem hujus Regni Angliae and hoc parat^ est
verificare unde pet^ Iudgm^ Et quoth pannellum illud Cassetur, etc.

Vies tiel Challenge in le liver de Monsieur Plowden and demurrer sur ceo
joinder in demurrer and Judgment que le pannell ill soit casse en le Case del
Count de Darbie, fo. 117.

A Challenge against the Sheriff for Retorning the Jury at the Instance,
Request, and Denomination of the Plaintiff.
Et super hoc eadem A. B. per C. D. Attorn^ suum ven^ and Calumpn^ Arraiament^
pannelli ejusdem Iure^ quia dic^ quoth pannellum illud fact^ and arriat^ fuit per
E. H. mil' modo vic^ Com^ p^d and Ministros suos ad demoninationem and
promotionem ipsius quer^ and infavorem ejusdem quer^ and hoc parat^ est
verificare unde pet^ Iudgm^ and quoth pannellum illud cassetur, etc.

To which the Plaintiff may plead that the Array of the Panel, pred been and
equalit^ factum and arriat^ fuit per p^dictum vic^ and Ministros suos, etc.
juxta officii sui debit^.

Or the Plaintiff, if he will, may confess it. But if he Plead, then the Judges
immediately assign Triors to try the Array, which seldom exceed two, who being
chose and sworn, the Associate or Clerk in Court does declare and rehearse unto
them the matter and cause of the Challenge, and after he has so done,
concludes to them thus, And so your Charge is to enquire whether it be an even
and Impartial Array, or a favorable one; and if they affirm it. Then the Clerk
enters underneath the Challenge.

Affirmatur.

But if the Triors find it favorable, then thus,

Calumpnia vera.

A Challenge because that the Town is within a Hundred of which the Plaintiff
is Lord, and Prays a Writ to the next Hundred.
Et super hoc p^d A. dic^ quoth predicta villa de Dale de qua transgr^ p^d facta
fuit est infra hundred de B. Et quod ipse est Dn^s ejusdem hundredi quodque
omnes lib Tenentes infra hundred illud sunt infra districtionem ipsius A. Et ea
de causa pet^ bre^ Dom^ Regis de venire faciend hic xij etc. ad triand exitum
predictum de prox visu^ in Com^ p^d ex^ra hundred p^d ville de B. prox adjacen^
vic^ Com^ pred dirigend Et quia p^d Defendens hoc non dedi^t ei conceditur,
etc. Jo. p^cept^ est vic^ quoth venire fac^ hic in Octab sc^i Hillary xij, etc. de
prox and visu^ in Com^ p^d extra hundred pred predicte ville de Dale prox
adjacen^ per quos, etc. Et qui nec, etc. ad Recogn^ etc. quia tam, etc.

Challenge because the Sheriff and two Coroners are Tenants of the Plaintiff,
and a Ven. fac. awarded to the rest of the Coroners.
Et super hoc p^d A. B. dic^ quoth tam p^d C. D. miles nunc vic^ Com^ p^d qm^ E.
F. and G. H. duo Coron^ sunt Tenentes ipsius nunc I. Et infra districtionem
suam Et ea de causa pet^ br^e ipsius Dom^ Regis de Ven. fac. hic xij, etc. E.
A. and R. P. resid Coron^ ejusdem Dom^ Regis in Com^ p^d dirigend ad triand
exit p^d and quia p^d W. hoc non dedi^t ei conceditur, etc. Jo. prec^ E. A. and
R. P. quod Ven. fac. hic, etc.

Challenge where after the last Continuance the Cousin of the Plaintiff is made
Sheriff after Issue joined.
Quia tam, etc. Ad quem diem hic^ veu^ parts, etc. Et vic^ non misit br^e Et
super hoc predictus Quer^ dic^ quoth post ultimam continuationem placiti videl'
postea Octab sc^i Michis ultimo pret^ito de quo die loquela p^d ult^ continuat^
fuit hic usque ad hunc diem scilicet tali die ultimo pret^ito Dominus Rex nunc
per lr^as suas patentes Commissit cuidem A. B. mil'i custodiam Com^ p^d quarum
quidem literarum paten^ pretextu idem vic^ Com^ illius jam existit Quiquidem A.
B. est Consanguineus p^d quer^ vizt^ fil', etc. Et ea de causa pet^ breve
Domini Regis de venire fac. hic xij, etc. Coron^ Dic^ Com^ Regis Com^ p^d
dirigend Et quia predictus Defendens hoc non didicit^ ei conceditur, etc. Et
prec^ est Coron^ Dom^. Regis Com^ p^d ven. fac. etc.

Challenge because the Sheriff is of Council with the Plaintiff, and has
received Fees, and the Defendant does deny the Challenge, therefore the Venire
fac. awarded to to the Sheriff notwithstanding.
Et super hoc p^dictus quer^ dic^ quoth quidem A. B. vic^ Com^ p^d modo existit
quiquidem A. B. est de consiliis ipsius quer^ and habet de eodem quer^ Annuum
Redditum sive feod xxl. Et ea de causa pet br^e Dom^ Regis de veni' faciend'
hic xij, etc. Coron^ Dom^ Regis Com^ p^d dirigend Et quia predictus defendens
hoc dedic^ Io^ non obstante allegationis p^d que^ prec^ est vic, etc.

Challenge because the Plaintiff is Brother to the Sheriff.
Et super hoc quidem querens dic^ quoth A. B. miles modo vic^ Com^ p^d existit and
frater ejusd quer^ Et ea de causa pet^ br^e Dom^ Regis de Venire faciend' hic
xij, etc. Coron^ dic^ Dom^ Regis Com^ p^d dirigend Et quia p^d defendens hoc
non didicit^ ei conceditur, etc. Io^, etc.

Challenge where the Plaintiff is Sheriff, and one of the Coroners in his
Tenant.
Et super hoc p^d Quer^ dic^ quoth ipse est vic^ Com^ p^d and quoth sunt in eodem
Com^ Duo Coron videlt^ R. H. and R. D. quodque idem R. H. unus Coron^ ejusdem
Com^ ten^et de ipso quer^ unum Messuagium, etc. per fidelitatem and annuum
Pasche 24 H. 8. Rot. 138.
reddit singulis annis ad festa, etc. per equales porc^ones solvend Et eis de
causis pet^ br^e Dom^ Regis de Ve fac. hic xij, etc. p^sat^ R. D. alt^ Coron^
Com^ pred dirigend and quia, etc. conceditur Et precept. est eidem R. D. quoth,
etc.

Another Challenge to the same purpose.
Et super hoc idem quer^ dic^ quoth A B. vic^ etc. Pasche 20 and 21 H. 8. Rot. 424.
ten^et 10 a^r^ t^re cum pertin^, etc. de ipso quer^ ut de Mannerio, etc. per
fidelitatem, etc. Et ea de causa pet^ br^e ut supra.

Challenge because the Wife of the Plaintiff is Kin to the Sheriffs Wife.
Et super hoc idem Querens dic^ quoth p^dicta Mich. 11 H. 7. Rot. 453.
Bridgitta nunc uxor H. I. modo vic^ Com^ p^d consanguinea A. uxori prefat^
quer^ videlt^ fillia Misororis ipsius A. uxor^ prefat^ quer^ Et ea de causa
pet^ br^e, etc. Coron^, etc.

Challenge because the Plaintiff is the Sheriffs Servant.
Et super hoc idem Quer^ dic^ quoth ipse est serviens and de librea R. T. millitis
modo vic^ Com^ p^d and ea de causa, etc.

Challenge after the Jury Impannelled, retorn'd and called, because the Pry in
Aid is Sheriff, and of the Council of the Plaintiff, and a Distringas Jur' with
A. 10 tales Coron' awarded.
Et modo hic adhunc diem ven^tam p^d R. Ac p^dicti J. S. and W. V. qui se
seperatim junrer^, etc. quam p^d W. M. per Attorn^ suos p^d and Iur^ inde
impannellat^ exact quidem eorum ven^ and quidem eorum non ven^ prout patet in
pannello, etc. and super hoc p^d R. H. ac p^d J. S. and W. V. qui seperatim
junxer^, etc. dic^ quoth pred J. S. modo vic^ Com^ p^d existit quodque idem J. S.
est de feodo p^d W. and consillie in premissis and aliis negociis suis etaliis
de causis pet^ br^e de distring^ Iur^ Iure predicte unacum 10 talibus de visu
p^d eis imponend Coron^ Dom^ Regis Com^ p^d dirigend Sur Hill. 9 H. 8. Rot. 343.
super quo quesit est a p^dicto W. M. siquid pro se habeat vel dic^ Sciat quare
br^e illud Coron^ Dom^ Regis Com^ p^d distring^ Iur^ Iure p^d unacum 10 talibus
de visu pred eis impon^end ratione permissorum fieri non debet quia dic^ quoth non
Io^ p^c' est. Coron^ Dom^ Regis p^d quoth distring^ Iur Iure p^d per omnes terras,
etc. and quoth de exit, etc. Ita quoth habent corpora, etc. ad fac^ Iuram p^d Et
appon^ ei 10 tales, etc.

Challenge because the Plaintiff is one of the Sheriffs of London, and the Ven'
fac' awarded to the other Sheriff.
Et super hoc p^dictus Querens dic^ quoth ipse ac quidem Johannes Blunt miles sunt
vic^ London and pro eo quoth ipse est unus vic^ London pet^ quoth processus de Venire
fac. hic xij, etc. ad triand exit p^dictum p^fat^ J. B. tantum dirigetur, etc.
and quesit est a p^fat^ defend siquid dicere Sciat quare processum illi p^fat^
Johanni Blunt altero vic^ etc. tantum ea ratione fieri non debet qui dic^ quoth
non Io^ prec^ est eidem Johanni Blunt altero vic^ etc. quoth Ven. fac. in Octab
pur: Ita quoth p^dictus querens in nullo se intro mittat^ xij, etc. per quos, etc.
and qui nec, etc. ad recogn^ etc. quia tam, etc.

Challenge to the Deputy Sheriff, because he Impannell'd and returned the Jury
at the instance and denomination of the Plaintiff.
Et super hoc p^d Defendens Calumpn^ Arraiam^tum pannelli Iurate p^d eo quoth
pannellum illud factum and arraiat^ fuit per T. W. sub vic^ Com^ p^d ad
denominationem pred quer^ and in favorem and promotionem ejusdem quer^
Quequidem Calumpnia per Triatores ad hoc elect and Iurat^ Comperta est vera
Io^, etc.

Challenge by the King's Sergeant upon an Indictment of Felony, because the
Sheriff retorn'd the Jury of Life and Death at the i^stance and request and
denomination of the Prisoner.
Laurentius B. nuper de A. in Com^. pred. gen^. capt^ etc. Recitando totum
indictamentum usque Io^ fiat inde Iura^ etc. super quo A. B. serviens Dom^
Regis ad legem pro eodem Domino Rege Calumpn^ Arraiament^ pannelli Iur^e p^d
quia dic^ quoth pannellum illud fact^ and arraiat^ fuit per Henricum Fortescue
vic^ Com^ p^d ad denominationem p^fat^ Laurentii and in favorem and promotionem
ejusdem Laurentii quequidem Calumpn^ per Triatores inde Iur^ compert^ est vera
Io^ pannellum amoveatur and cassetur, etc. and Ven^^e ^a^. awarded to the
Coron^.

Challenge by the King's Sergeant for the King to some of the Jury for Default
of Freehold, to the value of 40s. per Annum.
Super quo facta publica proclamatione pro Domino Rege, etc. ac quidem J. G.
miles serviens dic^ Dom^ Regis ad legem nunc pro eodem Domino Rege ven^ and
quidem Iur^ modo comparen^ videl't J. L. in Iuram^ p^d Jurat existit Et quia
resid Iur^ ejusdem Iur^e modo Comparen^ non habent acras seu tenementa in Com^
p^d ad annuum valorem xl s. a pannello illo penitus extrahuntur, etc.

Mich. 23 and 24 Eliz. Rot. 109. Therefore Entry of a Challenge after Issue
joined where the Sheriff is amoved, etc.
came thereupon the Jury before the Lord the King at Westminster. the day, etc. and
who neither, etc. to Recognize, etc. because as well, etc. the same day is
given to the said parties there, etc. at which day before the said King at
Westminster. came the said Parties by their said Attorneys, and the Sheriff sent not
the Writ; and upon this, the same Between Barkley and Jefferson.
Plaintiff says, That after the last continuance of the said Plea, that is to
say, after the Saturday next after, etc. now last past; from which day the said
Plaintiff was continued here until this day, that is to say, the day, etc. R.
P. Esquire; late Sheriff of the said County of E. from the same Office of Sheriff
of that County was duly amoved, and the said King now by his Letters Patents,
ha^h Committed unto one T. P. Knight, the Custody of the said County of E. by
pretense of which said Letters Patents the said J. P. now remains Sheriff of
that County, which said T. P. of A. at A. aforesaid, took to his Wife Anne of
the Blood of M. now the Wife of him the Plaintiff; that is to say, the Daughter
of R. D. the Son of W. D. Knight Father of Anne, Mother of the said M. now Wife
of him the Plaintiff; which said T. P. Knight, and A. had Issue between them A.
P. yet alive, and in full life remaining at A. aforesaid, and this he is ready
to prove, etc. And out of that cause he prays a Writ of the Lady, the now
Queen, of Venire fac. to try the said Issue in form aforesaid joined, to be
directed to the Coroners of the said County; and because the said Defendant
does gainsay, and does not grant that to be true, therefore notwithstanding
the same Challenge, a Command Challenge gainsaid.
is to the Sheriff, that he make to come Twelve, etc. of the Visne of B. by
whom, etc.

Easter Term, 38 H. 8. Rot. 558. And hereupon Challenge to the Array, because
the Coroners made the Panel at the Denomination of the Plaintiff.
the Defendant does Challenge the Array of the Panel of the said Jury, because
he says, That that Panel was made and arrayed by A. and C. Coroners of the
said County at the Denomination, and in favor of the Panel of the said
Plaintiff, and this he is ready to verify, and requesteth that the same Panel
may be quashed. And the said Plaintiff says, That the said Panel by the said
Coroners was well and equally made; and not at the denomination, nor in favor,
nor in promotion of the said Plaintiff; whereupon the said Justices by the
consent of the said Parties, did choose and assign D. and E. two of the said
Jury now appearing, to try the said Challenge; which said Tryors being elected
and tried, say upon their Oaths, That the said Panel was well and faithfully
made and arrayed by the said Coroners, and not at the denomination, neither in
favor nor in promotion of the said Plaintiff; whereupon the Jurors of the said
Jury being called, tried, and sworn, say, etc.

A Precedent of Challenge to the Array.
May it please you, Mr. Baron, This Enquest you ought not to take, for that Sir
John Ramsden Knight, Sheriff of the County of York, who did retorn the Panel
between the said A. Plaintiff, and B. Defendant, is Cousin to the Plaintiff,
etc. and show how of Kinn, etc. and so where the Challenge is for lack of
Hundredors, or other principal Challenge put it down, etc. and this he is ready
to averr, whereof he prays Judgment, and that the said Panel be quashed.

Or thus, And now at this day S. etc. comes the aforesaid J. S. Plaintiff, and
J. B. Defendant by their Attorneys, and the Jurors also impannelled and
demanded did come, and thereupon the said J. B. does Challenge the Array of the
Panel aforesaid, because, etc.

This must be put in Writing, but under Counsels hand, where the Challenge is
to the Poles, it is in short way by a Verbal Challenge; see the learning of
this is excellent, and copious in our Books.

A Precedent of a Plea after the last Continuance.
And now at this day, etc. comes such a one Defendant by J. C. his Council, and
says, This Action the Plaintiff against the Defendant ought not to maintain;
for that after the Quindene. of the Holy Trinity last past, from which day
until such a day in Michaelmas Term next, unless the Justices of Assizes before
come such a day, etc. the Action aforesaid is continued, etc. the Plaintiff by
his Deed dated, etc. did Release, etc. and show the Matter what it is, whether
in abatement in Bar dilatory, or peremptory, as the Case is, etc. and this he
is ready to averr.

Note, Brook in his Abridgment, tit. Continuance, 61. and 83. says, That after
the Inquest is awarded to inquire of Damages, The Defendant cannot plead a Plea
Puis le darrein Continuance, because he has no day in Court to Plead.

The day of Nisi prius, and day in Bank are all one; so that a Release made
betwixt these days cannot be pleaded in Bank; but it seems that a Release made
between the day of the Venire facias returned, and the Writ of Nisi prius
awarded, and the day of the Nisi prius may be pleaded at the day of the Nisi
prius, but not after the Verdict, 21 H. 6. fo. 10. Bro. tit. Jour. etc. 31 tit.
Continuance, 76. 42. 27. 13.

A man shall have but one Plea after the last Continuance; for the Plaintiff
shall not be delayed ad infinitum, 16 H. 7. 11. Bro. tit. Continuance, 59. 41.
45, 46. 5. 21.

After the Inquest taken by default, and before Judgment the Defendant came and
pleaded an Arbitrament, made after the last Continuance; And by the Opinion of
the Court, he had no day in Court to plead this Plea, and 'twas said, That he
could Plead no Plea in such Case, but as Amicus Curiae, and of matter apparent
he shall be received; otherwise, he must resort to his Audita Quaerela 21 H. 7.
33. Broke ibid. 38.

But if the Jury remain for default of Jurors, the Defendant may plead a
Release, etc. at the day in Bank Puis le darrein Continuance, although he did
not offer it at the Nisi prius, otherwise if the Jury had been taken at the
Nisi prius, 22 H. 6. 1. Broke. ibid. 30.

If it be pleaded at the Nisi prius, the Court Record the Plea, and discharge
the Inquest, and give day to the parties in Bank, Bro. ibid. 34. 8.

In Debt after Issue joined, the Defendant at the Nisi prius pleaded Payment of
part after the latter Continuance in Abatement. And the Jury being discharged,
and the Plea adjourned in Bank; for that no place of Payment was pleaded, the
Plaintiff had Judgment to recover his Debt, because after Issue joined, no
Respondes ouster can be awarded, L. 5. E. 4. 139. Aleyn's Reports 66. in the
Case of Beaton and Forest.

Now, although when difficulty arises in the Evidence, the matter is most
commonly (of late) found specially, and Demurrers on the Evidence are seldom
used; yet in as much as it is sometimes done, and that our Practicer may be
prepared with an Authentic Precedent for that purpose, I shall transcribe one
out of Coke's Entries, fo. 134. viz.

Postea die and loco Infra Content^ Coram ^ss. Postea.
Jacobo Dyer Milite Capitali Iustitiat^ Dom^ Regine de Banco and Nicolao Barham
uno servient^ dict^ Dom^ Regine ad legem Iustic^ ipsius Dn^e Regine ad assisas
in Com^ N. Capiend assign^ per formam statuti, etc. ven^tam infra nominat^ J.
A. qua^ infra script^ H. C. per atturnat^ suos infra Content^ and Iur^ Iure
unde infra fit mentio Exact^ similit^ vener^, Qui ad veritatem de infra
Content^ dicend, electi, triati, and Iurati fuer^ Super quo p^d H. per quendam
J. B. de Consilio ipsius H. C. manutentione exitus interius Iunet^ Coram p^fat^
Iust^ Iur^ p^d in Evidentijs oftend and dic^ quod, etc. [Here recite the
Evidence truely] unde petit^ Iudiciu^, and quoth Iur^ p^d veredict^ suum de and
super infra Content^ pro ipso H. reddant, etc.

Et pd J. A. per quenda^ C. J. de Consilio suo Demurrer.
dic^ quoth materia perd per p^fat^ H. C. Iur^ pred superius in Evidentiis ostent^
minus in lege existic ad pro band exitum interius Iunct^ pro part ejusdem H.
quodque ipse ad materiam illam in forma p^d in Evident^ ostent^ necesse necesse
non habet nec per legem terr^ tenet^ respondere, and hoc paratus est
verificare, unde pro defectu sufficient^ mater^ Iur^ p^d in hac part ostens.
Idem I. petit^ Iudic^* and quod Iur^ de Veridict^ suo super Exit p^d reddend
exoneretur and debitum suum infra spec^ una cum dampn^ suis occasion de tent^
debiti illius sibi addiundi cari, etc.

Et p^d H. C. Ex quo ipse suffic^ mater^ in Joynde
lege ad manutenen exit^ infra Content^ pro part ipsius H. Iur^ pred superius
in Evident^ ostens. quoth ipse perat^ est verificare, qua^ quidem materia^ p^d J.
non dedicit nec ad eam aliqualiter respond sed verificationem illam admittere
omnino recusat pet^ Iudic^, and quoth pred J. ab action sua pred versus Eum
habend precludatur, ac quoth Iur^ pred de Veredict^ suo super exit^ pred reddend
onerentur, etc.

A Precedent of a Demurrer upon the Evidence.
And now at this day the said Plaintiff and Defendant by their Attorneys did
appear, and the Jury likewise did appear and were sworn, etc. upon which Sir T.
W. Sergeant at Law, of Council with the Plaintiff, gave in Evidence so and so,
and repeat it truly, and did require the Jurors to find for the Plaintiff,
upon which, J. C. of Council with the Defendant says, That the Evidence and
Allegations aforesaid alleged, were not sufficient in Law to maintain the
Issue joined for the Plaintiff, to which the Defendant needs not, nor by the
Laws of the Land is not holden to give any Answer; wherefore for default of
sufficient Evidence in this behalf, the Defendant demands Judgment, that the
Jurors aforesaid of giving their Verdict be discharged, etc. and that the
Plaintiff be barred from having a Verdict, etc. Then the Plaintiff joins and
says, That he has given sufficient matter in Evidence, to which the Defendant
has given no Answer, etc. and demands Judgment, and that the Jury be
discharged, and that the Defendant be Convicted; then the Jury may give
Damages, if Judgment shall happen to be for the Plaintiff, etc.

A Bill of Exception.
Memorand. That the First day of August, Ebor. sc.
An. 1650. before T. P. and W. Justices of our said Lord the King for taking of
Assizes in the said County assigned, in a Plea of Trespass and Ejectment, which
J. S. in the Court of our said Lord the King before himself, by Bill does
Prosecute against E. B. supposing by the said Bill, that the aforesaid T. B.
etc. and recite the substance of the Declaration, or what it is, etc. and the
Issue, and then what the Evidence to prove the Defendant guilty was* etc. which
here was a Surrender of a Copyhold out of Court, etc. and that he desired the
Jury aforesaid to give their Verdict for the said T. B. of and upon the
Premises, and that he likewise desired the Judges aforesaid that they would
inform the Jury aforesaid, that the Surrender aforesaid out of Court made, was
good and effectual in Law, and the aforesaid Justices, the aforesaid Surrender
of the Land aforesaid, with the Appurtenances made out of Court of the Manor
aforesaid, in form aforesaid, did affirm to the said Jurors was not good in
Law, by which the said Thomas for that the aforesaid matter to the said Jurors
in Evidence showed does not appear, etc. did request of the said Justices
according to the form of the Statute in such case provided this present Bill,
which does contain in it the matter aforesaid above by him to the Jurors
aforesaid showed, by which the said Clayton's Reports.
Justices at the request of the said Thomas this Bill have sealed at D.
aforesaid.

1. Westminster. 2. 31. 13 E. 1. When the Justices will not allow a Bill of Exception
upon Prayer, if the Party impleaded tender the same unto them in Writing, and
requires their Seals thereunto, they or one of them shall do it.

2. If the Exception sealed be not put into the Roll, upon Complaint thereof to
the King, the Justice shall be sent for, and if he cannot deny the Seal, the
Court shall proceed to Judgment according to the Exception.

This Bill of Exception is given by the Statute Westminster. 2. cap. 31. before which
Statute a man might have had a Writ of Error; for Error in Law either, in
redditione Judicii, in redditione Executionis or in Processu, etc. which Error
in Law must be apparent in the Record, or for Error in sait; by alleging
matter out of the Record, as the death of either party, etc. before Judgment.
But the mischief was if either party did offer any exception, praying the
Justices to allow it, and the Justices overruling it, so as it was never
entered of Record, this the party could not assign for Error, because it neither
appeared within the Record, nor was any Error in fait, but in Law, and so the
party grieved was without remedy until this Statute was made.

This Act extends to all Courts, to all Actions, and to both parties, and to
those who come in their places, as to the vouchee, etc. who comes in loco
tenentis.

It extends not only to all Pleas Dilatory and Peremptory, etc. to Prayers to
be received, Oier of any Record or Deed, and the like; but also ^o all
Challenges of Jurors and any material Evidence given to any Jury, which by the
Court is Overruled. 2 Inst. fo. 427.

All the Justices ought to Seal the Bill of Exceptions, yet if one does it, it
is sufficient, if all refuse, it is a contempt in them all. And the party
grieved may have a Writ grounded upon this Statute, commanding them to put
their Seals Juxta formam Statuti. and hoc sub periculo quod incumbit nullatenus
omittatis.

The party must pray the Justices to put their Seals, but if they deny it, they
may be commanded, and may do it after Judgment.

If the party grieved be dead, his Heirs or Executors, etc. according to the
Case, may have a Writ of Error upon this Bill of Exceptions. And no diminution
can be alleged, for the parties are confined to the matter in the Bill.

If the Justice dye before he acknowledges his Seal according to the Act, a
Scire sac. shall go to his Executor or Administrator, for the Death of the
Judge is the act of God, which shall not prejudice the party: As in the case of
a Certificate of the Marshal of the King's Host, that the person outlawed was
in the King's Service beyond Sea, in a Writ of Error a Scire fac. shall go to
the Marshals Executor or Administrator upon showing the Certificate.

If the Judge denies his Seal, the party may prove it by Witnesses, ib.

Error of a Judgment at the Grand Sessions in the County of Pembrok, in an
Assise of darrein Presentment, by Henry Cort against the Bishop of St. David's,
Dorothy Owen and al. for the Church of Stackpoole.

The fourth Error assigned was, because the Issue being, whether H. Cort did
last present one R. D. the last Incumbent who was instituted and inducted upon
his Presentation: The Plaintiff offered in Evidence Letters of Institution,
which appeared to be and so mentions that they were sealed with the Seal of the
Bishop of London, because the Bishop of St. David's had not his Seal of Office
there, And those Letters were made out of the Diocese; And the Defendant had
demurred thereupon, That those Letters were insufficient, and the Demurrer was
denied, which Jones said was an Error, because they ought to have permitted the
Demurrer, and should have adjudged upon it. But it was held that the not
admitting of the Demurrer ought not co be assigned for Error: for when upon the
Evidence the matter was overruled by the Justices of Assize, That was a proper
cause of a Bill of Exceptions, and the remedy which the Statute appoints in
that Case; And for the matter of the Letters of Institution sealed with another
Seal, and made out of the Dio^ess, it was held they were good enough, for the
Seal is not material, it being an Act made of the Institution, and the writing
and sealing is but a testimonial thereof, which may be under any Seal, or in
any place. But of that point they would advise. Croke 1. part 340.

Note, This Bill is to prevent the precipitancy of the Judges, and ought to be
allowed in all Courts, and in all places of Pleadings, and may be put in at any
time before the Jury have given their Verdict.

But this Bill is rarely used, there being impar congressus, betwixt the Judge
and the Council; and the Prudence of the Judges induce them to find special
Verdicts in Cases of doubt and difficulty.

A Release Pleaded at the Assizes after Issue joined.
Et pred. Def. in propria persona sua ven. and dic. quod pred. Justic. Dom.
Regis hic ad caption. Jur. ss.
pred. inter ipsum Def. and prefat. Quer. procedere non debent quia dic' quod
post xii diem F. ult. preterit. de quo die Jurat. pred. inter parts pred.
continuat, fuit, and ante hunc diem [scilt. diem de Assise] scilt. primo die M.
Anno, etc. apud, etc. pred. Quer. per nomen, etc. remisit, relaxavit, etc. Et
hoc, etc. unde pet. quod Justic. pred. ad captionem Jur. pred. ulterius
procedere nolunt.

The Death of one of the Defendants Pleaded after the last Continuance.
Et pred. Def. per A. B. Attorn. suum ven. and pred. T. non ven. and super hoc
pred. Def. dic. quod post ult. concinuationem placiti pred. scilt. post xv.
Pasche ult. preterit. de quo die loquela pred. ult. continuat. fuit hic usq. ad
hunc diem scilt. in Cro. sce. Trin. tunc prox' sequen' and ante eundem diem
scilt. decimo die Maii ult. preterit. pred. T. apud A. pred. obiit Et pet. quod
null. process' nec aliquid aliud in placito pred. ulterius versus prefat. T.
fiat Et quia pred. J. and K. hoc non dedic. Ideo null. process. nec aliqui^
aliud in placito pred. versus prefat. T. fiat, etc.

A Baron Challenges the Panel because no Knight was returned of the same.
Et sup. hoc idem T. calumpniat arraiament. panelli pred. quia dic. quod ipse
est and tempore arraiament. panelli il^ius fuit Baro hujus Regni Angliae, locum
and vocem habens in quol. Parliamento hujus Reg. Quodque in eodem pan^llo
nullus Miles nominat. and retorn. existit Et hoo paratus est verificare unde
petit Judicium and quod panellum illud cassetur, etc.

Evidence, and demurrer upon Evidence, Middleton against Baker. Cro. Eliz. 42.
fol. 751.
In Eject. It was held by all the Court upon evidence to a Jury, That if the
Plaintiff give in evidence any matter in writing, or Record or a sentence in
the Spiritual Court, (as it was in this case) and the Defendant offers to
demurr thereupon, the Plaintiff ought to join in the demurrer, or wave the
Evidence, because the Desendant shall not be compelled to put matter of
difficulty to lay Gens, and because there cannot be any variance of a matter in
writing. But if either party offer to demurr, upon any evidence given by
Witness, the other, unless he pleases, shall not be compelled to join, because
the Credit of the testimony is to be examined by a Jury, and the Evidence is
uncertain, and may be enforced more or less. But both parties may agree to join
in demurrer upon such evidence. And in the Queens Case, The other party may not
demurr upon evidence shown in Writing, or Record, for the Queen, unless the
Queens Council will thereto assent; But the Court in such case shall charge the
Jury to find the matter specially, as appears 34 H. 8. Dyer 53. But this is by
Prerogative. vide lib. 4. 104. the same case, and 1. Inst. 72. where my Lord
Cook says, If the Plaintiff in evidence show any matter of Record, or Deeds, or
Writings, or any sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court, or other matter of
evidence by Testimony of Witnesses or otherwise, whereupon doubt in Law
arises, and the Defendant offer to Demurr in Law thereupon, the Plantiff
cannot refuse to join in demurrer, no more than in a Demurrer upon a Count,
Replication, etc. and so e converso, may the Plaintiff Demurr in Law upon the
evidence of the Defendant: but the Kings Council shall not be enforced to join
in Demurrer; but in that Case, the Court may direct the Jury to find the
special matter. So that the several sorts of evidence make no difference, as to
the joining in Demurrer. 1. part Leon. 206.

Darrose against Newbott. Cro. 4. Car. fol. 143.

In Error of a Judgment in Bridgewater: The Error assigned was, for that, in an
Action upon the Case far Asumpset, the parties being at issue, a demurrer was
joined upon the evidence, and thereupon the Jury discharged, and afterward
judgment was given for the Plaintiff, and a Writ of Inquiry of damages awarded,
and damages found, and Judgment thereupon: where the Jurors which came to find
the Issue, although by the Demurrer they were discharged of the Issue, yet
ought to have assessed damages conditionally, if judgment should be given for
the Plaintiff. And in proof thereof was cited Newis and Scholastica's Case in
Plo. Com. fol. 408. and the old Books of Entries, etc. And it was said by the
Court, If these Precedents be good Law, th^^ it may be inquired of by the same
Jury conditional^y: But it may be as well inquired of by a Writ of Inquiry of
damages, when the Demurrer is determined: And the most usual course is, when
there is a demurrer upon evidence, to discharge the Jury without more inquiry.
But as My Lord Chief Baron Montague held at the Assizes in Cambridgeshire,
1682. it may be one way or other.

In the Assise by R. Newis and Scholastica his Wife against Lark and Hunt,
which was taken by default, The Precedent in Plowd. Com. as to this matter runs
thus. Recogn' Assisae pred. exacti venerunt, qui ad veritatem de
premissisdicend. electi, triati, 8 ^^rati fuerunt, sup. quo Willielmus Bendlows
Serviens ad legem de consilio predictorum R. and Scholasticae in manutentione
Assisae pred. coram Justic. Dominae Reginae de Banco hic in evident. Recognit.
Assisae pred. dixit, quod diu ante diem impetration is Assisae pred. quidam H.
Clark fuit seisitus, ^c. Et condidit testamentum and ultimam voluntatem sua in
scriptis, inter alia, unde pars inde in hiis Anglicis verbis sequitur, videl.
Also this is the last Will and Testament of me the said Henry Clark, for and
concerning, etc. Et ulterius idem Serviens ad legem ex part pred. R. and S.
dedit in evident. eisd. Recognit. quod, etc. Quorum pretextu idem jam Serviens
ad legem exigit quod iidem Recogn. Assisae pred. Assisam pred. de tenementis
pred. cum pertin' in visu, etc. pro part ipsorum R. and S. triari and
comparere debeant, etc. Et veredictum suum dare debent quod. pred. W. Lark and
J. Hunt dictos R. and S. de tenementis pred. cum pertin' in visu, etc.
disseisiverant, etc.

Et pred. W. Lark and J. H* in propriis personis suis dic. quod evidentiae and
allegatione^ pred. ex part pred. R. and S. superius allegat. minus sufficien.
in lege existunt ad manutenend. Assisam pred ad quos ipsi necesse non habent
nec per leg. terrae tenentur respondere unde pro defectu sufficien. evident. in
hac part pet. judicium quod juratores pred. de veredicto suo in premissis
dicend. exonerentur, etc. Et quod pred. R. N. and S. ab Assisa sua pred.
habend. precludantur, etc.

Et pred. R. and S. dicunt quod ex quo ipsi sufficien. materiam in manutentione
Assisae pred. in evident. recognit. pred. ostend. quam quidem materiam pred. W.
Lark and J. Hunt non dedicunt nec ad eam aliqualit. respond. petunt judicium Et
quod iidem Jurator. inde exonerentur, and quod pred. W. and J. de Assisa illa
convincantur, etc. Sup. quo dict. est Recogn. pred. quod inquir. quae dampna
pred. R. and S. sustinuertam occasion disseisinae pred. quam pro misis and
custagiis suis per ipsos circa sectam suam in hac part apposit. si conting.
judicium pro eisdem R. and S. in placito pred. sup. evidentias pred. reddi Qui
quidem Recogn. dicunt sup. sacram. suum quod si conting. judicium in placito
pred. pro pred. R. and S. sup. evidentias pred reddi, iidem R. and S.
sustinuer. dampna occasion disseisinae pred. ad 13 s. 4 d. and pro misis and
custagiis suis ad 20 s. Et quia Justitiarii hic se advisare volunt de and sup.
premissis priu^quam judicium inde reddant, dies datus est partibus predict. etc.

Note, several Exceptions were taken to the manner of giving the Evidence:
First, for that the entire Will was not showed, but part, and that this being
the foundation of the Evidence, the whole Will ought to have been showed; for
there might be some other matter of substance, as a Condition, Limitation, etc.
in the parts not showed. But all the Justices disallowed this Exception, and
said, the party, in any Title or Bar, needs show no more, than what makes for
him. As in an Act of Parliament, in which are diverse branches, it is sufficient
to show that branch which serves ones purpose; and not like the Case of a Fine
or Recovery of 20 acres, where I must show the whole Record, although I am
concerned but in one acre, because the Originial is entire, and so is the
Record grounded upon it. See also Fulmer^ton and Stewards Case. Plo. Com. 102.
Another Exception was, That the fine was not showed under the Seal of the
Court, or the Great Seal but one part indented of the Chirograph was only
shown, which the Jurors were not bound to believe, because it wanted a Seal.
But all the Justices were against this, and said, the Jury might find the Fine
of their own knowledge, without the showing of the parties; or they might find
it upon the Credit of any Witness that had seen it, and the showing the part
indented, is the usual evidence of a Fine. (Note, a Fine indented and not
exemplified under Seal, etc. shall not be delivered to the Jury, 34 H. 6. 25.)
And they said, because it is only the Inducement of the verity to the Jurors,
the party could not Demurr upon this; for the effect of the matter is, that
ther^ is such a Fine which is amongst the Records. And this is the substance of
the matter, and the part of the Chirograph is nothing but the Image of the
verity, and therefore (...) suum coram Baronibus hic prestitum in premissis,
dicit, quod, etc. (here recite the Evidence.)

Et pred. Attorn. Domini Regis pro eod. Domino Rege dic. quod evidentiae pred.
superius dat. minus sufficien. in lege existunt, ad manutenend. seu proband
exit. pred. pro part ipsius A. F. superius ad patriam junct. unde ob
insufficient. earundem evident. ac ex quo per evidentias illas non dedicitur
forisfactura bonorum pred. in informatione pred. spec. i em Attorn. Domini
Regis pro ipso Domino Rege petit judicium ac quod eadem bona remaneant Domino
Regi forisfacta juxta formam statuti pred. Et pred. A. F. dic. quod evidenciae
pred. superius ex part ipsius A. F. dat. sufficien. in lege existunt tam ad
manutenend. and proband. exit. pred. pro part dicti A. F. superius ad patriam
junct. quam ad excludend. Domin. Regem de aliqua forisfactura bonor. pred.
habend. Ad quas pred. Attorn. Domini Regis, pro ipso Domino Rege minus
sufficienter respondit, nec aliquod pro ipso Rege allegavit; unde idem A. pet.
judicium ac quod pred. bona in dicta informatione spec. ei reliberentur,
quodque ipse quoad premissa ab hac Curia dimittatur. Ideo ad judicium.

Note, In this Case, the agreement according to the Statute, was put in Issue
generally, and yet the special agreement maintained the Issue.

And wheresoever the Evidence does not warrant, prove Regula.
and maintain the v^ny same thing that is in Issue, that Evidence is defective,
and may be Demurred upon.

Upon non est factum to a Bond dated at York: It Non ^st factum.
was said, in this case, that, to prove the Bond made in another place does not
prove the Bond nor Warrant the Issue, because the delivery is intended to be
where the Dare is; but the Witnesses prove the contrary, and so the Issue is
not proved: But surely if this be found, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment as
well as upon a Bond delivered before the date. 31 H. 6. Plo. 7. Rolls 677. But
infancy, or made by Dures, cannot be given in evidence upon non est factum,
lib. 5. Whelpdales Case, 119. because thereby the Bond is not void but only
voidable: Otherwise of the Bond of a Feme Covert, or Monk, for there the Bond
is void, and so non est factum; and so of a Bond made to a Feme Covert, and the
Husband disagree to it, or by Husband and Feme, Non est factum of the Wife.

In an Assise if the Tenant plead Null tort, null disseisin, he cannot give in
evidence a release after the disseisin; but a release before the Disseisin he
may, for Release.
then there is no Disseisin upon the matter.

In a Writ of Right, if the Tenant join the Mise Warranty.
upon the mere Right, he cannot give in evidence a Collateral Warranty, for he
has not any right by it, and therefore it ought to have been pleaded. 1. Inst.
283.

Regularly, whatsoever is done by force of a Warrant, or Authority, ought to be
pleaded. Regula.


But, Note, in all Cases where one cannot have advantage of the special matter,
by way of Plea, there he may have advantage of it in evidence: as for example,
The rule of Law is, That one cannot justify the Death or Killing of a man; and
therefore if one kill another in his own defense, he cannot plead this
specially; but he may give it in evidence: and so in defense of his House,
against Thieves and Robbers, etc.

By the Statute 23 H. 8. cap. 5. any thing done by Sewers.
the authority of the Commission of Sewers, may be given in evidence upon the
general Issue.

After taking the General Issue, the Defendant cannot give in evidence any
thing that goes in discharge Regula.
of the Action; as in Debt upon nil Debet, he cannot give in evidence a
Release, nor a grant to cut Trees, Release.
to repair upon null wast fait, nor making of a Ditch to amend the Meadow* but
that he only lopped the Wast.
Trees, he may, if wast be Assigned in succidendo Arbores, etc. Neither if a
Statute was made that all Statute.
Tenants for life should be dispunishable of wast, could he give in evidence
this Statute, 28 H. 8. Dyer 28. for the discharge ought to be pleaded, because
it admits a Cause of Action without it.

In Debt against Executors, and Assets inter marus, Assets.
in Issue, It Is good evidence that they sold Land, by the Will of the Testator,
etc. and that they had the money. And so that they recovered Damages in
Trespass for goods taken in the life of the Testator, etc. 3 H. 6. 3.

In an Issue upon Villenage regardant to a Manor, Villenage.
a Villain in gross, is no evidence, Dyer 48.

In wast by the Grantee of a Reversion, by Montague Attornment.
and Fitz. The Lessee may plead that he in reversion ne grant a pas per le
fait, and give in evidence, that he never attorned, or he may Traverse the
Attornment at his election, Dyer 31.

In Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, the Defendant Trespass.
says that locus in quo, etc. is 6 Acres in D. which is his Freehold: the
Plaintiff replies that it is his Freehold, and not the Defendants: The
Defendant cannot give in evidence, other 6. Acres in D. which are his Freehold,
because the plea shall be intended to refer to the 6 Acres of the Plaintiffs,
Dyer 23.

In Rescous by the Lord, upon not guilty, the Rescous.
Defendant shall not give in evidence, that he does not hold; by Vavasour and
Bryan: and so if he said nothing is behind in avowry, he shall not give in
evidence that he does not hold of him. T. 9 H. 7. 3. Avowry.


In Assise, Feoffment pleaded, the Plaintiff said, he Feoffment.
did not enfeoff modo and forma upon the Deed and Letter of Attorney to Infeoff
upon condition found, if the Attorney made it without condition, this well
proves the Issue for the Plaintiff, 13 E. 4. 4.

If one plead a Feoffment of a Jointment to his Companion, or of a Feme Covert,
the other may say ne enfeoffa pas, and give the matter in evidence; and the
Court shall instruct the Jury of the Law, 18 E. 4. 29.

Upon the general Issue, any thing may be given in evidence, Regula.
which proves the Plaintiff had no cause of Action.

Trespass by the Warden of the Fleet, upon not Trespass.
Guilty, you may give in evidence, that he is not Warden, 4 E. 4. 7.

So in Trespass of a House, that he had no house there, or the Freehold of
another, and not of the Plaintiff, is good evidence upon not Guilty: but in
Trespass of Goods, it is no good Plea to say, the property was in another,
although it is in a Replevin; and therefore it seems to be no good evidence in
Trespass, because possession maintains the Action against all but the owner;
but that the property was in a stranger, and he gave them to the Defendant, is
good. See before cap. Evidence, 27 H. 8. 25. But in Trover, Trover.
that they were not the Goods of the Plaintiff, is good evidence, 5 H. 7. 3.

Cessavit, (...) Count, that of diverse Lands held by Cessavit.
entire service, upon non tenuit modo and forma, held by several services, is
good evidence, for he had no such cause of Action, 10 H. 7. 24.

Upon the general Issue, for the Defendant by evidence to Regula.
convey to himself the same Interest and Title, ^ good evidence.

As in Trespass of Goshauks, Not Guilty, and evidence, Trespass.
that he had a lease of that Wood for Years where they were taken, is good, for
it is his Title, 16 E. 4. 2.

Account of Receipt, by the hands of J. S. the Account.
Defendant pleads Ne unques son Receiver, and evidence, that J. S. gave this to
him, is good, 2 H. 4. 13. So in Trespass, a Lease for Years, Tenancy at
Sufferance, (but not at Will) That they were a strangers goods, who gave them
to the Defendant, is good evidence, upon Not guilty. 22. Ass. 73. because by
these matters he makes himself a Title, and sic de caeteris.

Upon the general Issue, if by the evidence the Defendant Regula.
acknowledge that he did the wrong, and justify this, and gives matter that
goes to discharge him of the act by Justification, this evidence is not good,
but he ought to have pleaded it.

This rule is demonstrated, by those Cases where upon Not Guilty, in Trespass,
the Defendant would say, the property was in a stranger, and that by his
commandment, or as his Servant, he took the goods. Not Guilty, and that he did
the Battery se defendendo. Not Guilty in maintenance, and lawful maintenance.
Insufficiency of Mounds. The Freehold of a stranger, and his License. A former
recovery in another action. So for Common, Rent-service, Rentcharge, License,
etc. cannot be given in evidence upon the general Issue, for these matters in
evidence are justifications, which go in discharge of the party, but not by
Title, but by justification.

So where an Imprisonment or entry is given by authority of Law, or by
authority from any party, as for an imprisonment, by the Statute of Trespassers
in Parks, putting a man off his ground, thrusting a man out of Church that
troubles the Congregation in service, parting an Affray, and keeping the
Quarrellers apart, in defense of himself, or his, Entry in peramblation, Entry
to amend his Gutter leading to his house, as of ancient time had been used.
That it was a Common Inn. That he put in his Cattle by the Plaintiffs
agreement. That he entered and took the Emblements after the death of the Tenant
for Life. That the Plaintiff owed him money, and by his invitation he went into
his house to receive it. That he took the goods, as a Hariot, Waif, Estray or
Wreck. Or the Plaintiff took away the Defendants Cattle and he entered into the
Close where they were, and took them again. That he took the Cattle damage
seasant in his ground, or for an Amercement in a Leet, etc. That the goods were
the goods of J. S. who delivered them to the Plaintiff to keep, and J. S.
commanded the Defendant to take them; or excuse it, that the Plaintiff
delivered them to him: That he took them by a writ. That as Schoolmaster he
gave moderate Correction. These are excuses and justifications without Title,
and therefore must be pleaded, and cannot be given in evidence upon Not Guilty.

So in an action de malefactoribus in parcis, he cannot plead Not Guilty, and
give a License in evidence. So in an Appeal, if he plead Not Guilty, and shows
that he was Sheriff, and executed his Office, or that he was ^oster, and killed
him because he fled, and would not submit. vide 12 H. 8. fol. 1. The best Case
of this matter.

Evidence which is contrary to that in Issue, or which Regula.
is not agreeable to the matter in issue, is not good.

As appears, by several Cases, which you may find in the Chapter of Evidence.
As upon the Issue, nothing passes by the Deed, you cannot give in evidence,
that it is not your Deed, for this is contrary to the Issue, and to that which
is acknowledged in the plea by implication, 5 H. 4. fol. 2.

And so upon Not Guilty, in assault and Battery, and evidence that it was done
in his own defense, is not good.

And so in debt upon a Bail-bond, you must plead, that there is not the name of
Sheriff in it, Et issintnient son fait, and cannot give it in evidence upon non
est factum, for it is contrariant, 5 E. 4. 5.

So upon Issue of Common appendant, Common pur cause de vicinage, is not
agreeable to the matter in Issue, and therefore cannot be given in evidence, 13
H. 7. 13.

Where the evidence proves the effect and substance of Regula.
the Issue, it is good.

As to prove a Grant or Lease pleaded simplement, a Grant or Lease upon
condition, and the condition executed, is good, for this proves the effect and
substance of the Issue, 14 H. 8. 20. so a promise to the Wife, and the Husbands
agreement proves a promise to the Other cases of evidence.
Husband, and this you may see in many Cases, in the Chapter Evidence.

In Trespass for goods taken, the Defendant, upon Trespass.
Not Guilty, in mitigation of Damages may give in evidence, that the Plaintiff
had his goods again, 11 H. 4. 24. 19 H. 6. 34.

Justifiable maintenance cannot be given in evidence Maintenance.
upon the general Issue, but must be pleaded. The Master may justify for his
Servant. Any man for his kindred, etc. or to give money to the Poor, etc. But
that he was of his Counsel, may be given in evidence upon the general Issue,
for to give Counsel, is not maintenance. 22 H. 6. 35. 28 H. 6. 6.

Upon this Issue, the Defendant may give in evidence, Non est factum.
that he is a Layman not lettered, and that it was read to him in another
form, 15 E. 4. 18. but A witness may prove the contents of a Deed, or Will.
Vaughans Rep. 77. Prescription.
it is the best way to plead it, for the understanding of the Jury, 39 H. 6. 9.
Bro. Waiver 2.

In an Issue upon a prescription Traversed, the Plaintiff gave in evidence a
Deed bearing date after the time of limitation, scil. After the time of R. 1.
And the Defendant would have demurred in Law upon it, and well he might, per
Cur. Whereupon the Plaintiff would not give this in evidence, but gave other
evidence. 34 H. 6. 37. See Chapter Evidence, fol. 230. where a Grant shall be
taken as a Confirmation of a Prescription.

Note the opinion, 12 H. 4. 21. That a Deed made before the time of memory, may
be given in evidence, although it cannot be pleaded. Ancient Deeds. False
imprisonment.


Upon Not Guilty, the Defendant gave in evidence, that by the Plaintiffs
agreement he carried him from D. to S. and held good, because, what is done by
the Plaintiffs agreement, is no Imprisonment. 14 H. 6. 2.

Upon Not Guilty, the Defendant said, his Master locked the Plaintiff into a
Chamber of his House, and gave the Defendant, being his Servant, the Key to
keep. 22 E. 4. 45.

Vide Repl. in Fitz. 34. Repl. of a Sow and Piggs, the Defendant justified for
the Sow, and to the Sow pigged, being taken in Distress.
Piggs, pleaded he did not take them; the Jury found, that the Sow was with
Pigg, when she was taken, and afterward cast her Piggs, in the Custody of the
defendant; and the Plaintiff recovered Damages, for says Bro. Aridg. tit.
General Issue, 88. This is a special taking in Law.

Dower of rent. Hill. ne unque seisie que Dower la poit. Dower.
Horton J* S. granted the rent to the Husband, payable at Michaelmas next, and
the Husband dyed before the day, and so he was seized in Law, and demanded
judgment. Thirm. You shall say generally, quod seisie que Dower la poit, and
give your Case in evidence, Et sic been notwithstanding the doubt of the lay
Gents, for they ought to credit the Law, and evidence is not to be pleaded. 11
H. 4. 88.

Tenant for life leaseth for years, who is ousted, and the Tenant for life is
disseised; The disseisor leaseth for years, who sows the Land; The Tenant for
Life dies; he in remainder in Fee, brings Trespass against the Defendants
claiming the Emblements Emblements. Knivets Case. lib. 5. 85.
by the Lessee of the Disseisor. Adjudged, that they had not the mere right,
but in respect of their possession, they should bar the Plaintiff, who had no
right: and that the mere right was in the Lessee of the Tenant for Life, and
that he might bring Trespass against the Lessee of the Disseisor, and recover
all the mean profits. But as to the entry into the Land to take the Emblements,
this was good matter of justifica^ion; but in regard it was not pleaded, it
could not be given in evidence upon Not Guilty; and therefore the Plaintiff had
judgment for the entry, and was barred for the residue. Note that the Lessee of
Tenant for Life had right to the Land, and by consequence to the Emblements, as
things annexed to the Land, and the death of the Tenant for Life determins his
interest to the Land, but his right to the Emblements remains.

It suffices to prove the substance, without any precise Regula. Substance.
Circumstance
regard to the Circumstance. As if an Indictment be, that with a Dagger the
offender gave another a mortal wound, etc. and in evidence it is proved to be
done with a Sword, Rapier, Club, Bill, or any other Weapon, the offender upon
this evidence ought to be found guilty: For the mortal wound is the substance,
and the manner of the Weapon is but the Circumstance; yet some Weapon, ought to
be mentioned in the Indictment. And so if A. B. and C. be indicted for killing
of J. S. and that A. stroke and the other were Abettors; To prove that B.
stroke is sufficient, etc.

Manslaughter upon an Indictment must be found, if proved, because the killing
is substance, upon which judgment shall be given.

Indictments for ^urther of Ministers of Justice, in execution of their Office,
may be general, viz. that the prisoners, felonice, voluntary and ex malitia
sua praecogitata, etc. percusserunt, etc. without alleging the special matter,
which may be given in evidence, for the Law implies malice prepensed. So if a
Thief in robbing kills the man that resists him, or a man is killed without any
provocation, or without malice prepensed that can be actually proved, the Law
adjudges this murder, and implies the malice; and in these Cases, the offenders
may be indicted generally, that they killed of malice prepense, for the malice
employed by Law, given in evidence, is sufficient to maintain the general
Indictment. lib. 9. 67. Machallyes Case.

So of an Indictment as accessory to 2. to prove accessory to 1. is sufficient.
lib. 9. 119.

In Cromwels Case, lib. 4. 12. Although it was objected that in an Action of
slander, If the Defendant will justify, he must justify the same words and in
the same sense, as it is laid in the Nar. or else he must plead, Not Guilty,
and give the special matter, that is the variance in evidence. Yet the Court
held, that the Defendant should not be put to the general Issue, but might
justify, although he varied from the Plaintiff in the sense and Copyhold. In
Pilkintons Case. Styles, 450. Rolls said, If Copies of Court Roll be showed to
prove a Customary Estate, the enjoyment of such Estates must also be proved,
otherwise the proof is not good. Forger. Totum and pars.
quality of the words: and might set forth the coherent words. As for calling
the Plaintiff Murderer, the Defendant may show that they were speaking of
Hares, and the words were spoken in reference to killing of Hares.

Upon the Issue, if the Lord of the Manor granted the Lands, per copiam
rotulorum Curiae manerii pred. secundum consuetudinem manerii pred. To prove
that there were customary Lands in the Manor, and that the Lord of late
granted the Land, etc. per Copiam rotul. Curiae, where it was never granted by
Copy before, is no good evidence to find the Custom, or that the Lands, etc.
were grantable or demiseable by Custom. Leon. 55. Kemp and Carters Case.

Forger of a Deed, in which is contained a demise of the site of the Manor of
R. and terras dominicales, etc. A Deed of the site, and all the Demesnes of the
said Manor, Exceptis duabus clausuris, etc. is good evidence, for it is not
necessary to construe terras dominicales, etc. omnes terras dominicales, etc.
for Lands not excepted are terrae dominicales, and so the Count is satisfied by
that evidence. Leon 139. Atkins and Hales Case.

Debt against an Executor, upon plene administravit, it appeared, that the
Executor meddled, and administered, Plene administravit.
and then refused in Court, and administration was granted to another; and that
several sums were recovered against the Administrator; it was said by Periam
Justice, 1. That if an Administrator (who is a stranger) administer, without
the Commandment of the Executor, the Executor cannot give such administration
in evidence, to prove his Issue. 2. That in the principal Case the Executor
having administered he could not refuse, and so the administration is granted
without cause, and what he did was without warrant, and no administration.
Ieon. 134. Hawkins and Lawse Case. At Bury Assizes 1682. before Judge Windham,
The Executor gave the administration of the Administrator in evidence, and
allowed; but there, what the Administrator did, was by the Executors consent,
in Mr. Lun and his Mothers Case.

An Executor de son tort cannot give in evidence Plene administravit. An
Executor pleads plene administravit praeter a judgment, replication, and Issue,
that the judgment was fraudulent. The Obligee who had the judgment, was denied
to have evidence about his Debt, for he swears to have Assets for himself;
and is interested in the thing. Before Judge Windham, at Bedford Assizes, 1682.
his retaining of goods to pay himself, for he cannot retain; but if he takes
out letters of Administration (although) pendente lite, he may retain for a
Debt of as high a Nature and plead this in Bar, for the administration purges
his wrong, and although he shall not abate the Writ by taking out Letters of
administration, yet he may plead this in Bar. Styles Reports. 338.

In a Replevin, the taking was supposed in R. The No evidence to be given
against what is admitted upon the Record
Defendant said that the place where, is 40 acres, parcel of the Manor of R.
which is his Fre^hold, and avowed for Damage seasant; The Plaintiff said, that
the place where, is parcel of the Manor of R. in R. and conveyed title to
himself in that; Absque hoc, that the Manor of R. unde was the Freehold of the
Defendant. It was the opinion of the Justices, that the Plaintiff is estopped
to give evidence that the Defendant Note Leon 3. part 210. If the parties admit
a thing per nient dedire, the Jury is not bound by it; but where upon the
pleading a special matter is confessed, the Jury shall be bound by it.
Impropriation.
had not any Manor of R. for the words absque hoc and unde imply he had such a
Manor, but he ought to have taken it by protestation, that the Defendant had
no such Manor of R. in R. absque hoc that the 40 acres was the Freehold of the
Defendant, Dyer 183.

Trespass, concerning the Rectory of Norton Pinkney, which belongs to Oriel
College in Oxford, The Issue was, if there was a Vicaridge endowed there, or
only a stipendiary Curat.

1. All agreed, that if a Vicaridge be erected and established, if there was no
Endowment de facto of the Vicaridge, the Vicar could not claim any thing.

2. There was showed an Impropriation, by the License of the Pope made in the
time of E. 2 Dodderidge said, that was not good, Jones e contra. And it will be
perilous to such ancient impropriations, if now the consent of the King must
be showed; and at that time it was taken good by the assent of the Pope,
without the King. Dod. denied that the Pope without the King at that time could
make an impropriation with the Ordinary and Patron. But Crew agreed with Jones.
And in things of such antiquity omnia praesumuntur solempniter acta, and said,
that so it was ruled in a case before: And Jones said it was nothing to the
Vicar, for the Vicaridge may be endowed without the consent of the King, and
it is not Mortmain. Palmers Reports 427. Erasmus Copes Case against Bedford.

Where horse de son fee is pleaded, a release of the Seigniory is good evidence.
8 E. 2. Fol. Horse de son fee.
262.

In debt for Rent upon a Lease for years, the Issue being joined, if the Rent
was paid or not, the Defendant gave in evidence, for part of the Rent, That the
Plaintiff was by covenant to repair the House, and did it not, and thereupon he
expended the Rent Debt for rent.
in repairing the house, and the question was, if this evidence will maintain
the Issue. Gaudy conceived it did, for the Law gives this liberty to the
Lessee to expend the Rent in reparations, and recoup the Rent, V. 12 H. 8. 1.
Fitz. tit. Bar. 242. 14 H. 4. 27. Fenner, It is no evidence, for if the Lessor
will not repair it, the Lessee may have his covenant against him. Cle^ch,
seemed he might well expend the Rent in reparations, but he ought to have
pleaded it, and cannot give it evidence upon the general Issue, and thereupon
they moved the Jury to find the special matter.

So that it seemed to the Justices, that the Defendant had liberty to expend
the Rent in the reparations (they being to be done at the Plaintiffs cost) but
then that he ought to have pleaded this matter, as it was done in (almost) the
like case. Fitz. tit. Bar. 242. Yet why might he not give it in evidence upon
the general Issue? for if the Law allows this to amount to a payment of the
Rent, then the Defendant own nothing, which maintains nil debet, and I think
the other book of 14 H. 4. 27. rejects this sort of special plea, upon this
reason, that the Plea amounted to the general Issue: But there indeed the Rent
was pleaded to be laid out at the Plaintiffs command, here only by authority in
^aw. I should be glad if any one would reconcile those two Books better, I know
there is another reason in the Book, (and assigned by Rolls in his Abridgment
of the Case) why the Plea was rejected, viz. that the duty was acknowledged by
the Plea, and therefore the matter of the plea not good, without showing a Deed
of it, but I should have been better pleased with him, if he had assigned the
other reason, viz. that it amounted to the general Issue. Which made Cheyne
that he durst not join in demurrer. For it is not pretended in either Case that
the Deed ordered the Rent to be laid out in the rep^irs.

And in that Case in F. where there was no express order of the Plaintiff; it
may be the Judges allowed the special matter to be pleaded, because the Jury
should not be entrusted with the Law upon the general Issue, which may be said
for the special pleading this matter in our Case, although it may amount to the
general Issue.

But as to the residue the Defendant showed, he paid Reparations. Vide the
Cases of Recouper. lib. 5. 30.
it to others by the Plaintiffs order, which was held clearly good, for what is
paid by the Lessors appointment is a payment to himself. Cro. Eliz. 223. Tailor
against Beal. vide Rolls tit. Debt 605. 34 H. 6. 17. Bro. Debt 27.

Where a man is Estopped in pleading to speak Estoppel.
against his own deed, yet he shall not in evidence; As in Isehams Case against
Morris Cro. 4 Car. 109. upon evidence at Bar, It was held by all the Justices
of the Common Pleas, That where one makes a Lease for years of Land by
Indenture, and has nothing in the Land, and afterward purchases the Land and
aliens it; although it be a good Lease for years, by Estoppel against him and
his Allence, by way of pleading, and shall bind them, yet it shall not bind the
Jury, but they may find the truth, and if they find the truth, the Court shall
adjudge it to be a void Lease. vide tamen Rawlin's Case lib. 4. 53. Sut^on and
Dickens Case Leon. 1. part fol. 206. 1 Inst. 47. 227. Edwards against
Omellhallum. Marsh. 64. James and Landons Case. Cro. 27. Eliz. fol. 36. Leon.
3. part 210. Bulstr. 2. part 41.

Note, That if a Demurrer be made upon the evidence, the evidence ought to be
entered verbatim. Kei^way 77. Where in account, against one generally as
Bailiff, the evidence that charged him specially by reason of his Tenure to
collect, etc. was upon Demurrer held not good.

Matter of Surplusage showed in evidence shall not Surplusage.
hurt. Keilway 166.

Issue was upon a devise to A. Harding and her Will.
Heirs, modo and forma, and the Will given in evidence was A. H. shall have all
my inheritance if the Law will allow it, and held sufficient to maintain the
Issue, Hob. 2. so upon Ne unques receiver per maines J. S. a delivery from J.
D. by the appointment of J. S. Account.
to the Plaintiffs use, is good evidence. Hob. 36.

Issue whether A. was taken by a Capias ad sat. at the suit of B. and evidence
of a taking at the suit of C. Arrest.
and then a delivery of a Capias ad sat. at the suit of B. to the Sheriff is
good. Hob. 55. But a taking upon a Cap. utlagat or cap. pro fine, with a prayer
of the Plaintiff that he may remain for his satisfaction, is not. ibid.

In a Consimili casu, where the demandant counts Consimili casu. Substance.
of an alienation in Fee, yet the Defendant shall make his Traverse to the
alienation modo and forma, and then the demandant shall maintain the Issue by
an Alienation in Fee, or in Tail, or for Life, for they are all alike
material. Hob. 105.

In an Assise the Defendant pleaded the Deed of Warranty.
the Brother of the Plaintiff with Warranty, A Deed of the Father with Warranty
will not maintain the Defendants Issue. Hob. 55.

In Bennets Case Styles 223. In a Trial at Bar, It was Juror.
said by the Court, that if either of the parties to a Trial desire that a
Juror may give evidence of some thing of his own knowledge to the rest of the
Jurors, that the Court will examine him openly in Court upon his Oath, and he
ought not to be examined in private by his Companions. And it was also said
that if a Robbery be done in Crepusculo, the Hundred shall Robbery.
not be charged, but if it be done by clear day light, whether it be before Sun
rise, or after Sun set it is all one, and the Hundred shall be charged.

In an action of the Case for digging a hole in the Demurrer upon evidence.
Highway, into which his Gelding fell, etc. upon Not Guilty, this evidence was
given that the Plaintiffs servant was driving the Plaintiffs Gelding in the
way, and that by reason of the hole he fell, etc. Upon which it was demurred,
because it was not proved that there was such a Highway, nor who Action sur
Case.
dug the hole. Roll Chief Justice, This evidence is no more than a special
Verdict, and it ought to find the way and the hole dug and all the matter
conducing to the Issue, and therefore it is not good as it is: and a venire de
novo was awarded. Styles 335.

In Trover and conversion, there was a Demurrer Demurrer upon evidence.
joined upon the evidence, and thereupon the Court directed the Jury to find
Damages for the Plaintiff, if upon the argument of the Demurrer the Law should
be adjudged for him, and then the parties desired the Jury might be discharged,
and referred the matter to the Judges, to determine the Law upon the evidence.
In this Case Roll Justice took this difference: If a record be pleaded it must
be sub pede sigilli, or else the Judges cannot judge of it: But it may be given
in evidence, and the Jury may find Record.
it, though it be not sub pede sigilli. And the Court advised the parties, for
their own expedition, to let a venire facias de novo be Issued out, and to wave
the Demurrer upon the evidence, because it was not good, nor could not bring
the matter in question before them, that they might determine it; for one party
says there is a Writ, and the other says, there is not a Writ, which is bare
matter of fact for the Jury to determine, and not for the Court, and the
Demurrer ought to have been, whether the Writ be good, or bad, and should have
admitted that there was a Writ tiel quel, and then had the whole matter come
legally before the Court, to wit, whether the evidence given to the Jury be
sufficient for them to find a verdict for the Plantiff upon the Issue joined or
not-For the matter of fact ought to be agreed in a Demurrer to an evidence,
otherwise the Court cannot proceed upon the Demurrer. And he said, if a Deed be
pleaded, the party must show it in Court, but in Deed.
evidence it is not absolutely necessary to show it, if it can otherwise be
proved to the Jury; and so it is of a Record: and concluded, that the Demurrer
was Record.
not good, and that there ought to be a venire facias de novo to try the matter
again. Bacon Justice said, there ought not to be a venire facias de novo, but
that judgment ought to be given against one party, to wit, the Defendant, for
ill joining in the Demurrer, to the intent the party that is not in fault may
be dismissed, and the parties here have waved the Trial per pays, by joining in
Demurrer. But Roll answered that no judgment at all could be given, for both
parties be in fault, one by tendering the Demurrer, and the other by joining in
it, and the Defendant might have chosen whether he would have joined or not,
but might have prayed the judgment of the Court, whether he ought to join. The
Court advised to search Precedents, for a venire facias de novo after a
Demurrer upon an evidence, and if there be any, they hold that the same Jury
ought to come again, and not another. Roll said if a special Verdict be found
insufficient, a new venire facias ought to Issue, and he saw no difference
betwixt that and this Case. Wright and Pindars Case, Styles 22. and 34.

In Debt for Servants Wages, viz. 20 s. or a robe Debt.
yearly: The Defendant may plead payment of the robe, and shall not be put to
the general Issue, Servants wages.
where the payment is of another thing than money; but of money he must plead
nil deb. and give the payment in evidence. And the Defendant may plead that the
Plaintiff departed out of his service, and shall not be forced to the general
Issue 9 E. 4. 36. Though surely that may be given in evidence upon nil deb. for
the Plaintiff must prove he served: so indebitatus Assumpsit and non Assumpsit
upon the promise in Law, an extinguishment, by taking a Bond Extinguishment.
(being a matter of a higher nature) for the Debt, may be given in evidence.

And Note, if an Infant buy Goods, and afterward give a Bond, and this Bond be
avoided by Infancy: Yet it seems the Contract shall not be revived. Sed
dubitatur, Rolls tit. Extinguishment 604. for now, this Bond which was
voidable, is become void, and a void thing shall not have such effect: But a
personal action once suspended is gone for ever. But acceptance of a Bond shall
not extinguish Rent, nor arrerages of an account before an Auditor of Record,
because these are of a higher nature than the Bond, the Rent being real, and
the other of Record. But the Bond extinguishes the contract, for the arrears
upon an Insimul comput asset, etc.

Acceptance of Rent due the last day, and an Acceptance. Rent.
acquittance thereof, discharges all the arrerages due before. lib. 3. 65.
Unity of possession, in as high an Estate destroys the prescription etc.

A seizure and condemnation in the Exchequer of forfeited Trover. Trespass.
Vide Rolls 1. part 1. 2. A custom pleaded in Trover to take Corn to repair a
bridge, and Cro. Eliz. 433. and 262. Promise. Imperfect Issue.
goods, may be given in evidence upon Not Guilty in Trover, but it must be
pleaded in Trespass. In Trover of a Horse, that he is a Common Hostler, and
that the Horse was put to him at Livery and dyed, is good upon Not Guilty.
Rolls 1. part 22.

Upon Assumpsit the Plaintiff declares upon two considerations, and a simple
promise: If the Jury find but one, or a conditional promise, this does not
maintain the Issue for the Plaintiff. Leon 173. Musted and Hoppers Case.

Where the Issue is not perfect, no evidence can be applied, neither can the
Justices of Nisi prius proceed to the Trial of such an Issue. As whether the
money was paid after the date of the Obligation, and the date was left out, and
did not appear in the Record. Brown 2. 47.

In Debt upon a Bond, conditioned to pay 20 s. at Payment.
the house of the Defendant the 7. day of May, upon payment at the time and
place: The Jury found the payment before the 7. day, and prayed the advice of
the Court, if this was a payment at the day. The Court adjudged that the
payment and acceptance before the day, was as well, as if it had been paid at
the day. Saviles Reports 96. Bond against Richardson. And so says Cook 1.
Institutes 212. The time and place are but circumstances, and if the Obligee or
Feoffee receive the money at another place, or before the day, it is
sufficient: Or a lesser sum before the day. But More 47. upon Issue of payment
at the day and place, and evidence of payment a month before, and Demurrer upon
the evidence. Dyer, Brown and Welsh, said this evidence does not maintain the
Issue, because before the day of payment there is no duty, land the day and
place are parcel of the Issue, and the act on one day, is not an act done on
another day: As if an Executor pleads payment at the day, it is not good
evidence to show that it was paid before the day by the Testator, for this does
not prove the Issue, and yet there was not any duty remaining at the day, and
therefore the pleading ought to have been specially according to the truth.
Vide devant 198. And it is not like the Case, where the circumstances of time
and place are pu^ only for necessity of Trial; but, in regard that payment is
the substance; why is it not sufficient to prove, as well as to find, the
effect and substance of the Issue? And it is not the case of collateral
conditions, where the condition is not to pay money, but to do some Collateral
thing, as to deliver a Horse, a Robe or Ring, etc. or to pay money to a
stranger, such Collateral conditions are more strictly to be observed. vide 1
Inst. 212.

Note, if there be a Demurrer, yet there may be a Plea puis darrein continuance.
plea puis darrein continuance, and if the Plaintiff take Issue or demur to
this plea, yet the Court must also consider of the first Demurrer; for if upon
that standing confessed by the Demurrer, the Plaintiff could not have his
action, the Court cannot give judgment for him, howsoever the latter Issue or
Demurrer pass. But otherwise if the first had been an Issue, for then nothing
were confessed to his prejudice, and then that had been utterly relinquished by
a second Issue, or Demurrer, Hob. 81. with a Quaere, etc. When this plea is
pleaded, the Justices of Nisi prius cannot proceed to take the Inquest, neither
can the Plaintiff reply there; but in Bank Bulst. 92. 93.

Per Doderige, In Trover and conversion of goods, Trover.
if the Defendant derive a title from a stranger, this amounts to the general
Issue, otherwise if from the Plaintiff. Latch. 186. And baylment of the goods
to deliver to another, and delivery accordingly amounts to the general Issue,
and may be given in evidence upon it. Bulst. 3. part 209.

In Trespass against two, for entering into the Plaintiffs Trespass. Freehold.
Land, if one pleads his Freehold, and the other that he entered by the
commandment of him that pleads it is his Freehold, here is to ^e but one Issue
joined, viz. by him that claims the interest, for upon that Issue, all depends:
If it be found against him, his servant has no color.

And in regard what may be averred, may be proved, and given in evidence;
'twill not be Averments.
impertinent to draw a short scheme of Averments with which I will conclude.

To alter, qualify, or abridge the operation of it if there be any apt words
in the Deed, whereupon Averment had upon or against a Deed.
to ground it. As a grant to A. the Son of B. and he has two Sons of that
name, of the Manor of S. and he has two Manors of that name, which Son or
Manor was intended, may be averred. And so may a consideration of a Deed that
is besides, but Consideration.
not that is against the express consideration of the Deed: nor can any thing
against the words of the Deed, either enlarge or restrain it.

Nor can a Use against or besides the express uses in the Deed; but where no
use is expressed, or incertainly Use.
expressed, it may, and also to reconcile a fine and the Indentures to lead the
uses of the fine. lib. 2. 75.

But when a Deed is utterly uncertain, no averment shall help it. As a grant to
one of the Sons of J. S To two and haeredibus, etc.

An estate to a Woman for her life, may be averred to be made for her jointure.
Dyer 146. lib. 4. 4. Upon or against a Record.
And that the thing granted to me by a new name is all one thing, with that
which has another, or an old name. Dyer 37. 44.

A thing that is against or besides a Record, or any A fine taken, by R. M.
Esquire; and returned by R. M. Militem, upon the Ded. p. the Record not to be
averred against in Error. Yelverton 33. Cro. 2. part 11.
thing that is within it, shall not be averred. Therefore the date of a
Recognisance expressed to be taken at Dale, cannot be averred to be taken at
Sale. But such an averment as may stand with the Record, may be admitted. As
that the fine was before the Inrollment (being both in one Term) The uses of a
fine or common Recovery may be averred: Or what, or who was meant, where there
are two of a name, etc. lib. 8. 155. The Heir in tail cannot aver against a
fine levied by his Ancestors, That parts finis nihil habuerint, lib. 3. 84,
85. Leon 75, 76. etc. But when Tenant in tail accepts of a fine, and grants and
renders the Land, by the same fine, which is Executory, there, if no execution
be sued, in the life of Tenant in tail, his Issue may aver continuance of
possession, etc. in his Father, for this stands with the fine, and the
acceptance of the fine alters not the Estate.

If a man and his Wife sell her Land for money, and after levy a fine to the
Vendee and his Heirs, it may be averred it was for money, and so carry the use
to the Vendee without any declara^ion of use, which otherwise would result to
the Woman and her Heirs: and ^o other uses may be proved, than what are in an
Indenture of uses subsequent to the conveyance, etc. lib. 9. 8. 5. 26.

Tenant in tail, with remainder in tail to A. Reversion in see to himself,
bargains and sells Land, etc. and levies a fine to him with Proclamation, with
general warranty. The Conusee infeoffs A.

Resolved, The Bargainee had an Estate determinable upon the death of the
Tenant in Tail (and also the reversion in fee, which the Bargainor had) and his
Wife shall be endowed, but this determines upon the death* of the Tenant in
Tail.

Resolved, The fine does not discontinue the remainder, for this does not pass
any Estate, but makes this Estate of the Bargainee durable, etc. so that it
shall not determine, until the Tenant in Tail die without Issue: and the
conclusion may be confessed and avoided.

Resolved, the Warranty does not bar the remainder, for this was annexed to
the fee determinable, etc. and to the reversion in fee, and does not extend to
the remainder, for this was not displaced, and the Feoffee of the Conusee
cannot enlarge, etc. It Is a Maxim that a Warranty bars no Freehold, which is
in esse, possession or remainder, etc. and not displaced before or at the time
of the Warranty, although it be divested before the descent.

Resolved, A Warranty cannot enlarge the Estate.

Resolved, the Feoffment of the Conusee was not a discontinuance of the
remainder, because he was not Tenant in Tail; so of the Grantee of totum statum
suum, etc.

Resolved, A Collateral Warranty may be given in evidence, and found by the
Jury.

The Chief Justice held that by the Feoffment of the Conusee, the Remainder was
not displaced nor put to a right, for his Fee simple, and his Fee determinate
pass, and the Feoffment which in it self is not tortious, cannot be tortious to
another. Otherwise it is when Tenant for life, or remainder in Tail, etc. makes
a Feoffment, for the Feoffment it ^elf is tor^ious.

Note, there are some titles, to which a Warranty does not extend, as in the
Case of an Eschange, condition upon a Mortgage, Mortmain, consent to a
Ravisher, etc. for in these Cases no action lies, in which Voucher, or Rebutter
may be, neither shall a descent take away Entry in these cases, and cannot be
displaced out of their Original essence. Collateral Warranty shall bar dower,
and yet an action is given for this. But a fine etc. and five years bar these
titles, and dower also, if an action be not brought in time. Seymour's Case.
lib. 10. 96.

Buckler and Harveys Case. lib. 2. 55.

Tenant for life leases for 4 years, and afterward grants the Tenements Hab.
from P. for life, after P. the Lessee attorns, then the Grantee enters and
leases at will, to which Tenant at will the Tenant for life levies a fine Come
ceo, etc. Rem. in fee enters.

Resolved, The Grant was void, for an Estate of Freehold cannot commence in
futuro; and the Grant being void at the Commencement the Attornment afterward
cannot make it pass; and that the Grantee was a Disseisor: but if the Grant had
been good at the Commencement, and was only to have its perfection by a
subsequent act, as by livery upon a Charter of Feoffment, etc. and the Grantee
enter before the perfection, he is not a Disseisor, but a Tenant at will.

Resolved also, If the fine had been levied to the Disseisor himself Come c,
etc. he which had the right of remainder, may enter for the forfeiture, for it
was agreed, that the right of a particular Estate may be forfeited, and entry
given to him who had but a right. As if Lessee for years be ousted, or Tenant
for life Disseised, and the Lessee for years brings an assisse, or the Lessee
for life a Writ of right, etc. It Is a forfeiture.

Resolved also, That the fine being levied to the Tenant at will, it is a
forfeiture, and he which had the right of remainder may enter, and the Tenants
for life and at will also, shall be estopped to say quod parts finis nihil
hab. etc. and of such estoppels which are by matter of Record, and trench to
the disherison of them in reversion, etc. they shall take advantage although
they are strangers to the Record, for they are privies in Estate.

Resolved also, If the Disseisee levy a fine to an estranger, the Disseisor
shall retain for ever; for the Disseisee, against his own fine cannot claim the
Land, and the Conusee cannot enter, for the right of the Conusor cannot be
transferred to him, but by the fine the right is extinct, whereof the Disseisor
shall have advantage. But in Crok 1. part 482. 13 Car. it was moved, if the
Disseisee, not knowing of the Desseism, levied a fine to a stranger, whether
that should bar his right, and move to the benefit of the Disseisor: according
to Bucklers Case; and said, if admitted, would be of very mischievous
consequence, and by two Judges held, that it should not enure to the benefit of
the Disseisor, but to the use of the Conusor himself, for otherwise a Disseisin
being secret, may be the cause of disherison of any one who intends to levy a
fine for his own benefit, for assurance of his Lands upon his Wife and Children
or otherwise. 1. Inst. 277.

Not against such Certificates as are a definitive Against a Certificate.
Trial of the thing certified, As the Bishops Certificate of Excommunication,
Bastardy, lawful Marriage, etc. so Certificates of the Marshal of the Host,
which is a Trial, but against Certificates only of information it may be: As
against Certificates upon Commission out of any Court, or of the Commissioners
that affirm a man a Bankrupt, which are not Tryable in a course of Law, but
informations. lib. 7. 14 lib. 8. 121.

So of a return, if it is a definitive Trial of the Upon a Return.
thing returned, no averment lies against it. As the retorn of a Sheriff upon
some Writs, as a Writ of Partition, Elegit, and of Hab. Corp. from a Mayor,
etc. But if the retorn is not definitive, as upon a Rescous, etc. an averment
does ly, and upon this it may go to Trial: So if it be a return to endanger a
man's Life, or his Inheritance, an averment may be had against it, Dyer 348.
177. So it lies against the returns of Bailiffs of Franchises, so that the
Lords be not prejudiced in their Franchises thereby. Goldsb. 139. 129. pl. 23.

An action for a false return, an averment does ly against the Sheriff return,
Winch 100. and so it does Upon or against a Will or Administration, it lies,
although they be under Seal of the Court.
in any other action, than in that the retorn was in.

Any averment may be upon a Will or any part of it, that may help to expound
it, and of such a thing that may stand with the Will, and may be collected out
of the words. As which Son he meant, etc. lib. 8. 31. 41. But no averment
against or besides that which is expressed in the Will, or which cannot be
gathered to be the mind from the words, nor of any thing that does not cohere
with the Will: especially if it be about Lands. As in the Lord Cheyneys Case,
lib. 5. 68. A devise to A. and the Heirs of his body, the remainder to B. and
the Heirs Males of his Body, on condition that he or they or any of them shall
not align, etc. no averment shall be taken to prove by Witnesses or other
evidence, that the Devisor intended to include A. within this condition by the
words ^e or they: for the construction of Wills ought to be collected out of
the words of the Will in wriing, and not by any averment or proof out of it.

It lies against the Rolls or Records of County Against Court Rolls, or upon
them.
Courts, Hundred Courts, Courts Baron. As that there is no such Record, or it
is not as it is certified. 34 H. 6. 42. 9 E. 4. 4.

No Averment or proof is to be admitted against Against common presumption, or
reason.
common presumption, as that there was more Rent behind when the acquittance of
the last Rent was made. 1. Inst. 373. Nor against common reason, as that Land
does belong to Land or to a message. Plo. 170. lib. 437.

If the matter contained in an award and the matter Upon an award.
in the submission do not agree, it will hardly be supplied by an averment.
Dyer 242. 52.

If the Defeasance of a Recognisance be dated before Date.
the Recognisance, it may be averred to be delivered at or before the time of
the Recog. entered into. Perkins Case 147.

Things apparent or necessarily intendable by Law, need not be averred,
manifesta non probatione indigent; Quod constat clare, non debet verificari.
lib. 11. 25. Plo. 8.

Chief Justice Anderson held, Godbolt 131. that if Devise.
one devise Lands to the Heirs of J. S. and the Clerk writes it to J. S. and
his Heir, that the same may be helped by averment, because the intent of the
Devisor is written, and more, and it shall be naught for that which was against
his Will, and good for the residue. But if a Devise be to J. S. and his Heirs,
and it is written but to the Heirs of J. S. there an averment shall not make it
good to J. S. because it is not in writing, which the Law requires; And so an
averment to take away any surplusage is good, but not to increase that which is
defective in the Will of the Testator. But with submission, if the Law should
admit of such averments, it would be as mischievous one way as the other, and
no man could know by the words of the Will, what construction to make; nor what
advice to give, but this shall be controlled by collateral averments out of the
Will; and instead of proving the Testators Will, it would be the destroying of
it.

If the partition be by Writ, although it be unequal, Partition.
yet it shall not be avoided by averment, but shall bind the Feme Coverts. And
such averment against the retorn of the Sheriff shall not be good. 1. Inst. 171.

A valuable consideration in a Bargain and Sale Consideration.
not expressed, may be averred. 2. Inst. 672.

A consideration which consists with the Deed, and not repugnant, may be
averred, as in a Bargain and Sale, if a particular consideration be expressed,
and the general clause, of other good causes and considerations, or without
that general clause, yet other considerations may be showed: so if the
particular consideration be love and affection, yet payment of money may be
showed: so a precedent intent of uses, and Uses.
to levy a fine, may be showed to guide the use of the fine. Rolls tit. uses
790.

As if I covenant by Deed to purchase Land, and then to levy a fine, or make a
Feoffment thereof to the use of another, and afterward purchase and levy a
fine, or make a Feoffment, this use shall rise: For the Deed is an evidence of
the precedent intent, and the uses of a fine or Feoffment may be directed by
the precedent intent, and yet such intent is countermandable. But a covenant to
purchase and stand seized of Lands to uses, shall not raise the use after the
purchase, because the use is to rise by the Deed, and at the time when the Deed
was made, there was no Estate in the Land. ibidem.

So if one joyntenant covenant to stand seized of his Companions part, if he
survive, yet no use shall rise if he did survive, because at the time of the
Covenant he could not grant nor charge the Land. ibid.

It Is true that a fine sur grant and render, unless it Fine sur grant and
render use.
be in special cases, cannot be averred by parol to be to any other use or
intent than what is expressed in the fine, Feoffment or other conveyance: But
there is a diversity betwixt a use and consideration; for when a fine,
Feoffment or other conveyance import an express consideration a man may aver,
by word, another consideration, which may stand with the consideration
expressed; but the parties cannot by parol aver any other use than is contained
in the same coveyance. Also no averment shall be against the consideration
expressed: But yet in some cases a fine Sur grant and render, may be ruled and
directed in part by averment per parol; and this is when the original Bargain
and Contract betwixt the parties, is by Indenture or other Deed: As where it is
agreed by Indenture, that a Fine shall be levied of certain Lands by the name
of a certain number of Acres to diverse persons, and that they shall grant and
render the Land again in fee simple, which shall be to certain uses, the Fine
is levied of the Land, but there is some variance betwixt the number of Acres
comprised in the Fine; or the Fine is levied to one of the parties only, who
grants and renders the Land, so that there is a variance betwixt the Covenant
and the Fine, either in the number, time, or person, etc. Yet this Fine shall
be averred to be to the uses in the Indentures. For the intent of the parties
and the substance and effect of their original bargain and agreement, is
chiefly to be regarded in all conveyances; and therefore the Law allows an
averment by parol to reconcile the Fine and Indentures, although this sort of
Fine imports a consideration in it self, and regularly by a naked averment by
paroll, cannot be averred to be to any other use or intent than is comprised in
the Fine it self; but by Deed it may be. lib. 2. 77.

And although a Fine be of so high a nature, that it will not permit naked
averments against the purport and Conusance of the Fine; yet when the Law
requires one of necessity, and for conformity to join with another in a Fine,
the Law permits, to show the verity of the matter, to avoid prejudice, and
confusion, As where Baron and Feme an Insant levy a Fine, which is reversed for
the nonage of the Wife, The Baron and feme* shall have restitution presently,
and the Conusee shall not detain this during the Coverture; for all the Estate
passes from the Feme, and the Baron joins for necessity, and conformity, and
therefore the Law permits, that the verity of this shall be showed, and that
the whole Estate shall be restored to the Wife during the life of the Husband.
Worsely and his Wife against Charnock. 30 and 31 Eliz. lib. 2. 77.

What may be averred contra and praeter Records, Fines, Recoveries, Deeds,
Wills, etc. is very requisite for a good Evidenc^r to be ready in, and
therefore I have here given this taste, referring him to the Books at large,
where he may see, what averments he in remainder, the Heir in Tail, the Wife,
her Heirs, Estrangers, Privies, Parties, etc. may have to Fines, Recoveries,
etc. lib. 1. 76. lib. 2. 77. lib. 4. 71. lib. 9. 140, 141. lib. 2. 55. lib. 88.
lib. 10. 50, 96. lib. 3. 51, 88. lib. 72, 74. etc.

In Assault and Battery, if the Plaintiff prove only Assault.
the Assault, he shall recover, for an action of Trespass lies for an Assault,
of an Assault and Battery, Battery.
Assault and menace, etc. see Rolls tit. Trespass. 545. F. N. B. 91. a. etc.

To lay hands gently upon the shoulders of a man, and say that is He, against
whom the Justice's Warrant is: Or to serve him with a subpoena, proves Lunacy
will not excuse in Battery, although it will of Felony. Note a man may justify
an Assault and Battery, but not wounding or maiming of life or member, or
mayhem in defense of the possession of his Lands or Goods. 2. Inst. 316.
no Battery.

These things following are good justifications, but cannot be given in
evidence upon the general Issue.

Correction by the Parents, Master, Schoolmistirs. Apprehension of a common
Cheater at Dice. Molliter manus imposuit, upon one setting a Dog upon him.
Beating one by the Husband in defense of his Wife. By the Master in defense of
his Servant; or by the Servant in defense of his Master. Holding a man that
comes to stop the River to his Mill: or to throw down his Booth. Inevitably
discharging his Musket in the Plaintiffs face, at a Muster. Beating one in
defense of his Possession of his Goods, House, Lands, Goods distr^yned, etc. By
a Forester of one who resisted in the Forest. That he imprisoned another to
prevent mischief. As the killing of another, with whom he was fighting, (not
wrang^ing with words) until the fury be over.

An erroneous Process to an Officer out of a Court, Tenant in common, cannot
justify to enter into his Companions ground to take the horse they have in
Common, although he may take him elsewhere.
having Jurisdiction, In aid of the Bailiffs: That the Executor entered the
Plaintiffs ground, to take the Testators Timber there. That he had a Piscary,
and put Stakes in the soil. Taking his Goods stolen, in the Plaintiffs house,
upon fresh pursuit. Entering his soil to throw down a Nuisance. Or to take my
Cattle, which the Plaintiff put in his ground. To throw down the Plaintiffs
house on fire, next mine. Breaking his Windows or house, to get out, where he
imprisoned me. To take a handful of Grain out of his heap, who took one out of
mine, and threw it into his. To carry away his Grain, or money which he threw
into my heap To chase his Cattle with a Dog out of my ground, Damage seasant.
To throw that into the Plaintiffs ground which he threw into mine. That my
Cattle took a mouth^ul, etc. of his Grass, passing in the way I had over his
ground, against my will. Throwing Goods into the Thames, out of a Barge to save
the lives of the Passenger^. To fetch out of the Plaintiffs ground, the trees
he granted me. To Dig his ground, to amend my Pipe there. That I hunted Cattle
out of my ground with a Dog, which against my will run into his ground, I
^ateing and recalling him. A prescription to cut Grass in the Plaintiffs
ground, lying nigh the Church, to estrow the Church, being but an easment.

Distress by a stranger, as Bailiff, and the assent of the party. By the
command of the Chief Justice, Order of Chancery, etc. Rolls tit. Trespass. 559.
That the Plaintiff ought to Impale against a Forest, and for default of Pales,
the Beasts went in, and the Forester fetched them out.

These are justifications and excuses that must be pleaded, and cannot be given
in evidence upon Not Guilty, unless it be in mitigation of Damages.

Trespass lies for goods stolen, although the Thief be convicted of Felony.
Latch 144. ^arkhams Case Trespass.
and so I knew my Lord Hales held, although in Rolls tit. Trespass 557. it is
said, if it appears on the evidence that it was Felony, Trespass lies not.
Felony.
Which I think is not Law.

A man who sows the Land to halves with the Owner, Sow to halves.
or three agree to sow the Land, where two of them have no interest, and a
stranger take the Corn, they cannot join in Trespass, having no interest but an
agreement, but the owner only must bring the Trespass Cro. 3. part 143. Goldsb.
77.

Upon reversing an Outlawry, the party is restored, Outlawry reversed.
and may have Trespass, but upon reversal of a Judgment the party shall only be
restored to the money for which the Sheriff sold his Term, upon a fieri fac.
Cro. 3. part 270.

Upon Not Guilty in Trespass, Qu^re clausum f^egit, at the Trial the Defend.
shall not say that the Plaintiff is Tenancy in Common.
Tenant in Common; he should have pleaded this, and has now lost this
advantage: and if the Jury find it, their finding is not material. Cro. 3. part
554.

A man fells all his Woods standing, growing, etc. upon the pr^misses, to hold
during the life of the Vendor, rendering Rent; The Vendee cuts down all Where
Tenants in Common shall join in an action and where not, and what actions the
one shall have against the other. See 1. Inst. 107, 200. etc. Woods. Trover
against a Carriers. Copyholder. Estray. Continu^ndo.
the Trees: if he cutts wood afterward growing in the same place, the Vendor
may have Trespass. Leon. 3. part 7.

If a Carrier lose goods, a special action of the Case lies against him, but
not Trover, Roll. Abridg. 6. so of a common Carrier by Boat. Noy. 114.

Trespass lies for a Copyholder against the Lord for cu^ting down Trees, that
he the Tenant ought to have for repairs, Godb^lt 173.

By seizure of an Estray the Lord has but the Custody, and not the property,
and therefore if he works the Horse, Trespass lies. Yelverton 96, 97.

Trespass with a continuando cannot be for taking a Horse, nor 10. Trees, etc.
nor without a reentry of the dis^eis^d, unless his re-entry be taken away by
the act of God, or the Estate be determined, so that he cann^^ enter, as if
Tenant per auter vie be disseised, and cestuivie que d^, for there his entry is
taken away by the act of God; otherwise if it be taken away by his own act, as
if he release to the Disseisor, etc. 19 H. 6. 28.

General Trespass for breaking his Park, and taking Park. Warren.
his Deer, etc. does not ly at Common Law, but a Writ is given by the Statute
Westminster. 1. cap. 20. so if A. have a free Warren in the soil of B. A. shall not
have Trespass, but case for entering the Warren and stopping the holes etc.

A Commoner cannot have Trespass for the Grass. Commoner. False Imprisonment.
After a supersedeas showed to the Bailiffs, false imprisonment lies against
them, not against the Sheriff; so against the Bailiff of a Franchise, if he
takes other men's goods in execution upon the Sheriffs warrant, not against the
Sheriff, nor against the party, unless he procure the Bailiff to take the wrong.

He that has the Freehold in Law unless he has Possession. Entry. Relation.
actual possession cannot have Trespass. Therefore the Heir cannot have
Trespass against the abater, nor against Tenant at sufferance, before he has
entered, and only from that time: but an Executor, or Administrator shall, by
relation, have Trespass from the death of the Intestate, etc. But a disseissee
after entry, shall have an action for all mean Trespasses from the disseism,
even against strangers, for he is restored to the possession ab initio.

Trespasses cannot be maintained against him who comes to the goods lawfully,
as by the Plaintiffs delivery, Trespass.
or under that, or by act in Law, etc. but detinue. But Trespass lies against
Tenant at will, or him that I lend my goods to, who destroys them; for thereby
the privity is determined. It lies against a Miller for taking Toll where none
is due: For taking my Servant out of my service, for rescuing one taken at my
suit out of the Bailiffs hands, for the Bailiff is my servant. For beating my
Wife or Servant per quod, etc. Not against him that J. S. sells my Horse to, or
has my goods from the Sheriff, although the Sheriff took them wrongfully. It
lies for hunting a ^ox, etc. in my ground. Against Churchwardens, who act by
the Justices of the Peace's Warrant, if the Warrant be not good.

For digging so near my ground, that it fell into the Defendants pi^t: But not
that my house fell into the pit, for 'twas my f^ult to build so near another
man's ground: for entering my ground, to take out his Falcon, which flew thither
after Game. For killing my Tumbler in his Warren.

Although I sell the goods, it lies for a Trespass done Time.
before. Tender of sufficient amends before the action brought, is a good Bar,
for a negligent Trespass, Bar.
not for a voluntary one.

If a man enter into a place by authority of Law, Ab initio.
and abuse this authority, he is a Trespasser ab initio, for his first (...)
shall be intended for this purpose. As if the L^ssor e^ter to view Wast, and
stays there all night. If the Kings ^urveyor sells my goods. If the searcher
abus^^ m^ stuffs. If a man will stay in a Tavern all night. (...) he detains a
distress after amends tendered before (...) ^^ounding If a Bailiff refuse Bail,
Trespass does (...) against him ab initio; but case, for the Sheriff or
Undersheriff, not he, ought to take Bail; not against ^he party, nor Bailiff,
or person in aid, if the Sheriff does not return his Writ of Latitat, or makes
a false return; but it does against the Sheriff: So of an Officer of an
inferior Court.

If the Lord work an Estray, Distress, etc. Or Executors find a Bond and cancel
it, thinking it was discharged, and it was not; They are Trespassers ab initio,
although they came lawfully to the possession at first. Rolls tit. Trespass 563.

The Lunatic (and not the person to whon he is Lunatic.
committed) must bring the action in his name for a Trespass done in the Land.
Brownl. 1. part 197.

The knowledge, of evidence is so beneficial, and Note, the Chapter of Verdicts
gives much light to know what evidence is good and what not.
necessary, for all Practicers in the Law; That none can know too much, be too
well versed, or too often conversant in it. Therefore to complete this
Treatise, especially in this particular, I have drained the Law Books, o^ all,
or the most principal Cases, relating to it; and have added some observations,
very fit for the unlearned, to know, and I hope not fit for the learned to
reject.

FINIS.
A Table to the Precedents, etc.
A AGreemen^. 482 Attaint. 480 Abattement of the writ for the residue. 383.
Asserts. 192 Attornment. 484 Avowry. 484 Account. 485. 494 Administrator. 491.
504 Arrest. 495 Action of the Case. 495 Assumpsit. 498 Acceptance. 498
Averments of upon or against wha^. 500, etc. Award. 505 Assault. 518 B B^rron
and Feme. 175. 191, 483, 505, 507 Bail-bond. 487 C. Common. 406. 403, 385, 487
Cessav^t. 485 Circumstance. 489 Copyhold. 490 510 Consimili casu. 495 Condition
Collateral. 499 Consideration. 500. 506, 507 Certificate. 503 Carrier. 510
Commoner. 511 Continuando. 510 D. Demurrer see Evidence. Deed. 482. 487, 490,
496, 497 Damages. 223. 487 Disseisin. 483 Dower. 488 Discontinuance. 501 Date.
505 Devise. 505 E. Evidence, Demurrer upon evidence. 476. 477, 478, 479, 480,,
481, 482, 49^, 495, 496 The Evidencer needs show no more of a Will, etc. than
what makes for him. 479. 481 The fact is admitted by a Demu^rer. 480 probable
though not certain ma^ter is good evidence. 481. 483. Rules concerning
evidence. 482. 483, 485, 487 Non est factum. 482. 487 What evidence the Jury
may carry with them. 427. 479 Debt. 194. 483, 492, 497 Payment. 404. 498 Plene
administravit. 483. 491 What upon the general issue. 483. 484, 485, 486, 508,
509 Evidence contrary to the issue. 487 Which proves the substance, good. 487,
489, 495 Not against what is admitted on Record. 492 Horse de son fee. 492
Entry. 511 Estray. 510. 512. Extinguishment. 497 Emb^ements. 489 Executor. 491.
de son tort ibid. Estoppel. 494 F. Fine. 479. 501, 503, etc. 506, 507.
Feoffment. 484 Felony. 510 False Imprisonment. 511 G. Grant. 501 H. Hostler.
498 I. Jury what they may find, and upon what evidence. 480 General Issue. 483.
485, etc. 490 Ju^^ifications in Trespass. 486. 508 Forwords. 490 Imprisonment.
488. 511 Indictments. 489 Impropriation. 492 Juror a Witness. 495 Infancy. 497
Issue imperfect. 498 L. Lunacy. 508. 512 M. Maintenance. 487 Master and
Servant. 488 Murder. 490 O. Outlawry. 510 P. Pleading. 479. 483
Justifications. 486. 490 Payment. 404. 232, 494, 498, 499 Proviso in Statutes.
229 Prescription. 488 Plea puis darrein Continuance. 499 Presumption. 505
Partioin. 505 Park. 511 R. Recovery. Record. Rol^s. 480. 496, 504 Release. 483
Rescous. 484 Replevin. 485 Rent, Reparations. 492. 497, 498 Robbery. 495 Retorn
of Writs. 504 Relation. 511 S. Slander. 490 Surplusage. 494 Servants wages. 497
Seizure and condemnation. 498 T. Trespass. 193. 195, 196, 484, 485, 487, 488,
489, 499, 508, 509, 510 Trover. 200. 194, 485, 498, 499 Tenancy at sufferance,
at Will. 485 Totum and pars. 490 Tenant in Common. 509. 510 Trespass with a
continuando. 510 Ab initio. 511. 512 Tender of amends. 512 V. View. 171
Villain. 484 Viccaridge. 492 Use. 500. 506 W. Witnesses. 87. 495 Warranty. 483.
495, 501 Wast. 483 Will. 494. 504. Warrant. 511

ERRATA.
IN the Preface. Page 1. l. 9. r. piece. p. 3. l. 14. r. Joachimus Fortius
Ringelbergius. l. 20. r. leaves. p. 4. l. 1. Demosthenes. p. 191. l. 20. for
Agreement. r. a Grant. p. 193. l. 12. r. Inst. 282. to maintain the action. p.
72. r. Amercement. p. 491. in the Margin. r. for, to give evidence, to have
evidence.

THE TABLE.
A.
APpeal, 17. Account, 227. Ancient Demesne, 18. Administrations 18. where in
Trover the Administration must be shown, and where not, 225. Admission, 24, 25.
Ability, 25. Attorney, 27, 76, 434. Letter of Attorney, 214, 213. Almanac, 27.
Assisa, 352. Appearance, 24. Amercements, 436. Ambidexter, 434. Attaint, 439,
442. Action of the Case for words, 203, 205. 501, 503. Quare defendens crimen
feloniae ei imposuit, 202. for stopping up Lights, 204. for stopping a
Watercourse, 204, 205. for feeding on his Foldcourse, 206. for not restoring a
Horse hired, 207. Indebitatus Assumpsit, 206, 207, 200, 209. Award, 211.

B.
BAstardy, 19, 25, 104. Battle, 21, 28, 22. Baron and Feme, 25, 382* 211. 213.
Bishop. 25. Bayley, 27. 47. 208. Bill of Exception to Evidence, 470. Bankrupt,
229. Bail, 246.
C.
CRiminal Causes, 9, 19, 22. 107. 247, Civil Causes, 8. Certificate, 10, 11.
27. 89. Customs, 14. 20. of Courts, 14. 18. of London, 20. Courts, 18. Inferior
Courts, 111. 177. Coverture, 25. Confession, 30. Coroners, 38, etc. Challenges,
46. 71. 77. Cap. 9. per tot. To the Array, to the Poll, 131. 140. Principal,
and to the favor, 132. 139. how and when to be made, 136. 167. 166. 149. 156.
157. 160. 163. 171. where the King is Party, 137, 139. 140. 142. 157. 165. (3)
(4) Peremptory Challenge 141. 151. 155. (4) No Challenge of Peers, 142. 144.
Principal Challenge to the Poll, 142, 143. 152. Propter honoris respectum, 143.
Propter defectum, 144. (3) Propter defectum Hundredorum, 147. (1) for want of
Freehold, 144. 172. Propter affectum, 150. 154, 155. 164. Deins distress, 153.
160. Principal for Consanguinity, 153. In what Inquest a Challenge may be, 158.
Trial and Triors of Challenges, 258, 159. 169, 170. (2) where for one shall
serve for others, etc. 159, 160. 168. Witness. Infant. Godfather, 161.
Challenges arising from the Jurors own act, 161, 162. Propter delictum, 165.
Demurrer to a Challenge, 168. (1) Arbitrator. Comissioner. Counsel. Eat and
Drink. Actions of Malice, 162. Parson Parish. Fellow Servant, 163. Rules
concerning Challenges, 170. (1) (3) (4) A wrong Name, 172. Challenge lost, 171.
Precedents and forms of Challenges, 449, etc. 476. The King must show the cause
of Challenge, (2) The King or Party may release their Challenge, (3) How
proved, (4)
Circumstances, 381. Condition, 179. Counselors, 435. 245. 247. Copyholder,
198. 215, 216. Corporation, 223. (1) (4) Constable 224.
D.
DIvorce, 25. Dowres, 26. 110. 239. Demurrer, 32. Distringas, 37. Detinue, 55.
Disceit, Writ of Disceit, 23. Deed Pleaded to be delivered after the date, not
before, 366. Of a Deed, 194. 176. 221. 240, 234. 230.
Damages by the first Inquest, 369. 370. 372. veral Damages, 370. Se* 371. Writ
of Inquiry, 372, 373. 375. 230. Damages released, 375, 374. 376. Damages and
Costs, 376, 377. 402. Damages in real and personal Actions, 377. 230.
Decree, 179.. Default, Inquest by Default, 505. 415. 217. Demurrer to
Evidence, 469. 467. Day of Nisi prius and day in Bank all one to some purposes,
466. Debt, 210, 211, 212, 213. Demand, 210. Deprivation disables to make a
Lease, 217. Date, 218. Dower, 226, 227.
E.
ENtry, 214. 221. Escheator, 23. 27. Elifors, 38, etc. 168. (3) Error, by death
of one Defendant, 59. what 501. (3) Extortion, 233. Exemption from serving on
Juries, 91. Escape, 239. Estoppel. 365, 366. 178. Estray, 218, 219. 225.
Evidence Quid? 181 cap. 11. pro tot. What is good Evidence in many particular
Cases see there, 188, 189. 197. 211. 233, 234, 235. usque 248. What is Evidence
upon the general Issue, 192, 193, 194, 195. 198, 199, 200. 238, 240. Upon a
special Issue, 236, etc. What Evidence the Jury may carry with them, 423. 202.
242. What Misdemeanour in taking Evidence, spoils their Verdict, 423, 424, 425,
426, 427, 428, 418. Juror gives Evidence in open Court, 428: 245. Shop Book,
195. Presumption, 196. 182. In Trespess, 195, 196. 200. 193. 218. usque 224.
234. 242. 237. Church Book, 202. In Trover, 200. 194. 224. Deed lost, 196. 189,
190. 216. 228. 230, 231, 232. 234. 239. 244. Evidence cannot be pleaded, 197.
Covin, 198. 211, 212. 241. Ac^ompt, 195, 192. Action upon the Case, 202. usque
206. Doomesday book, 198. Attaint, 198. Debt, 210, 211, 212. 213. 234. 236.
Riens per Descent, 211. 241. Ne unques Executor, 211, 112. 197. Ejectment, 213.
usque 218. 220. Evidence after default in Ejectment, 217. Will, 215, 216. 235.
Payment, 198. 221. 231. Recital. Acquittance, 231. 235. Will, 216. 215. 240.
Court Rolls, and Copyholders, 198. 215. Statutes. Pardons, 199. 229. Plene
administravit, 194. 188. 190. 192. 211. 212. 235. 242. Wast, 193. 240. Non est
factum, 193. Proofs, 187. 182. Pedigree, 188. 242. Agreement, 180. 191.
Recognisance, 188. Tenure in Capite, 188. Ecclesiastical Proceedings, 189, 190.
236. 244. Copy of Records, 189, 190. 229. 230. 231. 245. Fine, 190, 191. 222.
228. 231. Outlaury, 189. 246. Feoffment, 189. 191. 211. 217. 231. 232. 239.
241. Proviso, 189. 229. 240, 241. Non decimando, 189. 201. Depositions.
Answers, 190. 230. 235. Lease, 191. 213. 216, 217, 218. 230. Assumpsit. 191.
202, 203. 206. usque 210. 238. Challenge, 192. Detinue, 192. Inrollment, 216.
Fines certain or uncertain, 216. Dower ne unque seisin, 226, 227. Account, 227.
241. Office, 228. Verdict, 228. Jointenancy, 229. Bankrupt, 229. Sign Manual,
229. Marriage, 229. Grant and Prescription, 230. Confession, 231. Surmise in a
Prohibition, 235. Jurors of a former Trial, 236. Common, 236. Parcel. 242. 245.
Property need not be proved in a Writ of Inquiry of Damages, etc. 230. It Is
sufficient to prove the effect of the issue, 239. Matter in Law, 244.
F.
FIne on Jurors, 435. 437. 420. 424. 443. 445. Foldcourse, 206. Fine certain or
uncertain, 216. Fine levied, 223.
G.
GRammar and Grammarians, 34. Gleaning justifiable by Special Pleading, 224.
Grant, 230.
H.
HAbeas Corpora, 37. Heir, 104.
J.
JUry, its Definition, Antiquity, and Excellency, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 352. Are
Judges of Fact, 1. 367. When to appear at Westminster, when not, ^7. 69. Their
Punishment, 72. 431. 429. Their Number, 83. cap. 6. per tot. How sworn, 86.
351, 352.
Juror goes away, and another sworn, 87. 79. 429. per primer. Jurors, 88. Their
Quality, cap. 7. per tot. 95. 144. A Jury of Women, 91. Of Attornments, 92.
Exemptions, 91, 92, 93. The same Jurors shall not try the same Issue twice, 54.
391. What Persons, 137, 138. Of what things a Jury may inquire, cap. 10. per
tot. 393, 394. Of the Law, 174. 446. 367. 446. Of a man's intent, 176. Of
Spiritual things, 176. Of things in another County, 176. 392, 393. 177.
Estopels, 178. Decree, Records, Warranty, Condition, 179. The Office of the
Jury, 233. Their Oath, 351, 352. Assiza for Jurata, 352. Anciently 12 Knights,
352. Jury per medietatem linguae, 353. The Jury ar^ Chancellors of the Damages,
402. may be carted, if they do not agree, 409, 419. 422. The Penalty of Jurors
taking Rewards, 431. Fined, 435, 436, 437. 421, 422, 420. Demanded upon Pein,
436. Punishment for striking a Juror, 437. F orfeit, Issues, 438. 435.
Jury adjourned 428. Juror departs, 429. May give a Verdict without Evidence,
when they know the Fact, 415. 233. How the Jury ought to demean themselves
whilst they consider of their Verdict, 416. 233. cap. 14. per tot. Of their
Eating and Drinking, 422. 420. Whether the Judge may Fine them for going
against their Verdict, 443, 444. 446. It Is Error if a Juror challenged, be of
the Tales, (3)
Issue, 7. 32. What Issue first tried, 8. Infancy, 15, 16, 17. Inspection, 15,
16. Ideocy, 26. Institution. Inductio^, 24, ^5. Imprisonment, 27. Jeofails, 32.
51, 52, 53. 60, 61. Justices of Nisi prius, their Power, etc. 70, 71. 82.
Judges, 15. Inquests of Office, 84. 230. by Default, 504. 415. Joinder of
Counties, 86. 116, 117. 107. Inrollment, 24. Incidents, 384. 392. Judgment,
Arrest of Judgment, 500, 501. Issues forfeited by Jurors, 438. 435. Justice of
Peace, 204. 223. Inkeepers Guests, 205. Indenture, 216. Inspection of a Deed,
228. Jointenancy, 229.
K.
KIng cannot be Nonsuited, 419.
L.
LEague, 17. LOndon. Trades and Customs there, 20, 21. Law. Things, not words,
most regarded in Law, 5. Statute of Limitations Pleaded, 203. 210. Lease, 213,
214. 216, 217, 218. 230. Livery of Seisin, 222, 232.
M.
MAyhim, 15. Manor, 18. Marriage, 25. 209. 229. Marshal Affairs, 31. Master
and Servant, 204. 219. 240. 244.
N.
NIsi prius, 55. 66. 72. 82, etc. Justices of Nisi prius, 70, 71. 82. Nobility
how tried, 17.
O.
ORdeal, 28. Outlaw, 384. 246. Officer, 223. Office, 228. 246.
P.
PEers, 14. 17. Proof, 17. 16. 182. 187. Parson, 24, 25. 212. 234. 241.
Plenarty, 24. Possession, 234. Profession, 25. Prior, 25. Process, 42.
Proceedings in Civil Causes, 8. In Criminal Causes, 9. Patents, 12. Probate of
a Will, 19. Posteae amended, 381. Plea, vide Deed. Ill Plea made good by
Verdict, 381, 382, 383. What permitted in Pleading for the Juries sake, 392. Of
the general Issue, 223.
Plea Puisne darrein Continuance at the Assizes, 475. 465. 467. 71. 222.
Prescription in non decimando, 201. To sit in a Pew, 203. Trespass for pulling
down a Pew, 220.
Prescription to dig Clay in a Common, 221. To fother Equos and Boves, good for
Mares and Cows, 223.
Prescription and Grant Pipowder, 230. Perjury, 205. 243. Partner, 210. Pound,
220. Proviso in Statutes, 241. 240.
Q.
QVare Impedit, 55. Quo Warranto, 100.
R.
REcord, 11, 12, 13. 21. 23, 24. 179. Recovery by Default, 23. Retorns, 26. 43,
44. 60. Resignation, 25. Rectory, 214, 215. Remitter, 226. Recital. See
Evidence, etc. 235.
S.
SHeriff, 26. 37. Spiritual Matters, 25. Statute Staple, etc, 26, 27.
Surplusage, 397. Schoolmasters, 219, 220. Seizure, 226. Surrender, 238.
T.
TRial Quid 8. The several sorts, 8. and cap. 2. per tot. of Fact, and Law, 8.
What to be tried per Pais, and what not, ibid. By Common Law preferred, 25. 29.
Of a thing done beyond Sea, 27. 31. 105, 106. What in one Issue binds in
another, 30. The time, 30, 31, 32, 33. Trials at Bar, 67. Trial per Medietatem
linguae, 353. ca. 12. per tot.
Traverse, 30. Trover, 34. 224. usque 226. Tales, 42. 65. cap. 5. per tot.
Tales at Common Law, and by Statute, 73. (2) Tales denied, 75. The time of
granting thereof, the Number, Order, and Quality of them, etc. 78. with a
Proviso, 75.
Triors, 72. Of Challenges, 168, 169. (2) Challenge to the Tales men. (2)
Treat what, 171. 158. Trespass Quare vi and armis, lies not for Tenant against
the Lord, 389. Trespass, 218, usque 224, 234. 237. Tithes, 215. Tenant at will
and sufferance, 217. Tenants in Common, 221. Toll, 224.
V.
VErdict is to be guided by the Evidence, 2. The Definition, etc. 359. Of
Verdicts, Cap. 13. per tot. The Credit of Verdicts, 360. General Verdict, 365.
360. Special Verdict, 361. 396. The Court cannot refuse a Special Verdict, 361.
That found by Verdict, which cannot be Pleaded, 362, etc. Estoppel, 365. 178.
Warranty, ^67. Uncertain Verdicts, 367. 396. A Verdict, finding part, or more
than the Issue, 368, 369. 380. 405.
Verdict supplied by a Writ of Inquiry, 373. 375. Verdict set aside for what
faults, 374. 423, 424. 418. Verdict amended by the Notes, 378, 400. If the
substance be found, it is no matter for form, 500. 408. 406. 405. 393. 389. 379.
385. 386. 387. Ill conclusion, 379. 392. 400. Circumstances, 381. where the
Verdict makes good the Plea or Declaration, 381, 382, 383. Of what a Verdict
may be, 383. 393, 394. Incidents, 384. How construed, 384. What good, what not,
384, 385, 386. 388. 389. 391. 395, 396, 397, 398. Guilty at another day, 388.
Open Verdict and Privy Verdict, 390. 419. The Jury cannot vary from their
Verdict after it is Recorded, 390, 391. 409. Good by Intendment, 398, 399.
Surplusage, 397. where a special conclusion of a Verdict shall aid the
Imperfections of it, 400. For whom the Verdict shall be said to be found, 401,
402, 403, 404. 407, 408. 501.
Variance betwixt the Verdict and the Nar. 501, 502, 503. Verdict by defauit,
504. Venire fac. of this Cap. 3. per tot. and Cap. 4. per tot. To whom to be
directed, 38, etc. what faults in it shall vitiat the Trial, 50, 60, etc. 129.
De novo, 54, 55, 56, 57. By Proviso, 62, 63, 64. Visne, Cap. 8. per tot. from
what places, ibid. The Venue shall follow the Issue, 101. 113. 115. 120. 109.
121. De Corpore Com. 101, 102. 124. from two Counties, 116, 117. 107. where the
Writ is brought, 117. 105. from the next adjoining County, 120. 127, 128. where
of Matters done beyond Sea, 105. where the Land lies, 107. 122. 125, 126. 128.
from two places in one County, 123. out of a wrong place by consent, 129.
Suburbs of a City, 129.
View, 271. Use, 223. Usury, 243.
W.
WItnesses Trials by them, 16. 31. Who may be Witnesses, who not, 183. 185,
186. 188. 243, 2424. 247, 48. One Witness sufficient, 215. 233. Their
Privileges, 186. Detained, 187.
Witnesses joined with the Jury, 233. A Witness is to have his Charges, 246.
Witnesses against the King, 247. Wills, 18. 215, 216. Wager of Law, 23. Wales,
127. Warranty, 367. 179. Way, 219. Warren, 220.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by George Dawes at his Shop over against
Lincoln's Inn Gate in Chancery Lane.
THE History of the World in Five Books.

I. Entreating of the Beginning and first Ages of the same from the Creation
unto Abraham.

II. Of the Times from the Birth of Abraham to the Destruction of the Temple of
Solomon.

III. From the Destruction of Jerusalem to the Time of Philip of Macedon.

IV. From the Reign of Philip of Macedon to the Establishing of that Kingdom in
the Race of Antigonus.

V. From the settled Rule of Alexander's Successors in the East, until the
Romans (prevailing over all) made Conquest of Asia and Macedon. Written by Sir
Walter Raleigh Knight, with his Life and Trial added to it, in Folio.

Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records to
the Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. By William Pryn Esquire; in Folio.

A Book of Judgments in real, personal, and mixed Actions and upon the Statutes,
all or most of them upon Writs of Error, collected out of the choice
Manuscripts of Mr. Brownloe and Mr. Moyle, sometimes Protonotaries of the
Common Pleas; as also of Mr. Smither, formerly Secondary of the same Court.
Perused, transcribed, corrected, and tabled with Addition of Notes, by George
Townsend Esquire; second Protonotary of the Common Pleas: Very useful and necessary
for all Protonotaries, Secondaries, Students, Clerks of Judgments, Attorneys,
and all Practicers of Laws, in Quarto.

Modus Intrandi Placita Generalia: The Entering Clerks Introduction, being a
Collection of such Precedents of Declarations and other Pleadings, which
Process as well Mesne as Judicial, as are generally used in every days
practice, with Notes and Observations thereupon. Composed, for the benefit of
the Students of the Common Law of England, as also of the Attorneys, Entering
Clerks, and Sollicitors of the Courts of Common Pleas and King's Bench,
acquainting them with Rudiments of Clerkship, and such general Pleadings and
Processes as are used at this day in the Courts of Records at Westminster. By
William Brown Gent. Author of Formulae been Placitandi; in large Octavo.

De Jure Maritimo and Navali, or a Treatise of Affairs, and of Commerce in
Three Books. The Third Edition Corrected and enlarged, with many useful
Additions through the whole Book, by Charles Molly Esquire; in large Octavo.

Jus Imaginis apud Anglos; Or, the Law of England relating to Nobrlity and
Gentry, faithfully collected, and methodically digested for common benefit. By
John Brydal of Lincoln's Inn Esquire; in large Octavo.

Jura Coronae: His Majesty's Royal Rights and Prerogatives asserted against
Papal Usurpations, and all other Anti-Monarchical Attempts and Practices:
Collected out of the Body of the Municipal Laws of England, in large Octavo.

Parsons Law, or a View of Advowsons, wherein is contained the Right of
Patrons, Ordinaries, and Incumbents to Advowsons of Churches: Collected by
William Hughes of Greys-Inn Esquire; The third Edition reviewed and much enlarged
by the Author in his lifetime, in large Octavo.

Mounsieur Scarron's Letters to Persons of greatest Eminency and Quality:
Rendered English by John Daves of Kidwelly, in large Octavo.

Of the Office of the Clerk of the Market, of Weights and Measures, and of the
Laws of Provision for Man and Beast, for Bread, Wine, Beer, Meal, etc. By
William Shepard Esquire; in Octavo.

Hughes Quaeries, or choice Cases for Moots, containing several Points of Law
not resolved in the Books; being very useful for the Students of the Common
Law: Collected by William Hughes Esquire; late of the Honorable Society of
Grayes-Inn, in Twelves.

Decus and Tutamen: Or, a Prospect of the Laws of England, purposely framed for
the Safeguard of the King's Majesty, his Sacred Person, Crown and Dignity
against all traitorous Speeches, Designs and Conspiracies. To which are added
peculiar Notes upon the Judgment in High Treason, fit for all His Majesty's
Subjects and Leige-People to be acquainted withal. By John Brydal, of the
Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn Esquire; in Twelves.

There may be had several sorts of Blank Bonds, very Useful and Necessary for
Attorneys, and all other Persons relating to the Law.
SIngle Bonds for Payment of Money.
Double Bonds for Payment of Money.
Bonds for Performance of Covenants, either Single or Double.
Single or Double Bonds, for Arbitration with an Umpire.
Single or Double Bonds for Arbitration without an Umpire.
Single or Double Bonds to save Sureties harmless.
General Releases.
Letters of Attorney to Receive Money.
Warrants of Attorney to Confess Judgments.
Bail Bonds.
Single Bonds without Conditions.
Double Bonds without Conditions.
Sheriffs Warrants upon mean Process for any County or City.
Blank Warrants for a Justice of Peace.
Licenses for Alehouse Keepers.
Indentures Ruled and Text.
And the best Ink for Records.

