A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF God's Eternal Truth; AND, A Way opened to the simple
hearted, whereby they may come to know CHRIST and his Ministers, from
ANTICHRIST and his Ministers. With a WARNING from the Lord, to all people, that
do name the Name of Christ, to depart from Iniquity.

Written in the Inquisition of Malta, by a Servant of the Most High, called
KATHERINE EVANS.

London, Printed for R. Wilson, 1663.

A brief DISCOVERY of Gods Eternal Truth.
THus says the Lord, Let every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from
Iniquity: for the day comes, and now is, that the Name of Christ will be
dreadful and terrible to all workers of iniquity; and God the Father has
committed all Power in Heaven and in Earth, and Seas also, to his Son Jesus
Christ, and has raised him in Power and great Glory in thousands of his
Saints, to convince the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, that
the Prince of this World may be judged, and cast out; for he shall never have
any part or portion with the Heir of Eternal Life and Salvation; who has Power
to judge and to justify; and to condemn, or to save; to scatter, and to
gather; to break to pieces, and to bind up that which is broken to pieces: and
he will establish his own Spiritual Government, Righteous Rule, and Pure, Holy
Worship, to the ends of the Earth; and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it: for whatsoever he has purposed, shall surely come to pass, and his
Decree shall stand; and Woe, woe, woe to every one that does lift up a hand against
any of those that the Lord God does send forth in his Name, in this the Day of
his Power, to preach Glad-tydings to the meek; or do form any carnal weapon
against him in his Anointed, thinking to disinherite him, who is possessed Heir
of all: But the time does hasten that the Lord God of Power will exalt his
Princely Scepter, over all Scepters, Thrones and Dominions, Kingdoms and
Countries, and none shall be able to prevent him, or resist his mighty Power.

Hear ye this, O all ye People upon the face of the Earth, who are called
Christians, or do call your selves by Christ's Name, both Kings and Princes,
Emperors, Nobles, and mighty men of the Earth, by what name or title soever ye
are called, high or low, rich or poor; for our God is no respecter of persons;
but every one that fears his Name, and works Righteousness, is accepted of
him: Wherefore it chiefly behooves every one of you to turn your minds within
to the Light in your Consciences that convinces of all Sin, and makes manifest
every evil deed, be it done never so secret, the Light will discover it; It is
a measure of God's free Grace given to every one to profit themselves withal;
and search, examine, and duly consider how you come to have right or title to
Christ's Name; or, what it is that makes a Christian; for every true Christian
is an Heir of God, and Joynt-heir with Christ: For as in Adam all die, so in
Christ shall all be made alive. Now you know that God created Adam at the first
in a pure, perfect state of Innocence, his mind and soul in his own Image and
likeness, which was Light and Life, and placed him in the Garden of Paradise, a
place of eternal blessedness to all that do obey the Light; and God gave Adam
dominion over all the creatures that God created for the use of man, and
blessed them unto him in that state of Innocence, and bid him eat of the fruit
of every tree of the Garden; but the tree of knowledge of good and evil, that
was good too, but not for food: And the Lord said unto Adam, Thou shall not eat
of the fruit of that tree; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely dye. Adam did not stand in the Counsel of the Lord, but turned from the
Light, and hearkened to the Woman whom the Serpent beguiled, and did eat of the
forbidden Fruit, and so disobeyed the Commandment of the Lord God, and fell
from that state of Blessedness, into that state wherein all things are an utter
curse unto him, and unto all in that state of disobedience eternally: but the
just, and wise, and holy Lord God, whose mercies are above all his works, did
promise that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head. There are
but two seeds, the Seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent. Now this was
the way which the pure and wise and perfect Lord God did find out in himself to
recover Man out of the Fall again, through the everlasting Covenant of the
promised Seed of all blessedness. The Promise of God was not unto seeds, as to
many; but unto [ the] Seed, as unto one; In Isaac shall all the Kindreds of the
Earth be blessed. The Promise of God, which cannot fail, was only to the Seed
of faithful Abraham. And Paul says, If ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs to the Promise: Wherefore every one of you in Christendom may
do well to turn in your minds to the Light of God in your own Consciences, and
try your selves, and see whether you have received the true righteous Seed, or
are born of the pure and perfect Spirit of Christ Jesus, yea or nay; the Light
will not deceive you, but deal plainly with you, and make manifest unto you all
that ever was, or is within you; And he that is in Christ, has the witness in
himself, so that he need not go forth to seek after him, or to ask the way to
Sion: for, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Light, says Christ, and he that
follows me, shall not abide in darkness, but have the Light of Life; and, He
that has not the Witness in himself, is in darkness, and has not received the
Light of Life, the Spirit of Christ; and, He that has not the Spirit of
Christ, is none of his. Then what profit has anyone to have the Name of
Christ, and out of his Nature?

The Nature of Christ is altogether pure, perfect, holy, and upright; meek,
humble, sober, loving, merciful, tenderhearted, liberal in all good;
long-suffering, and ready to forgive, and willing to bear the contradictions of
sinners and the rebukes of the vile sons of men; and did lay down his Life for
to save them that hated him, and were and are Enemies to his Cross: And all
that are in Christ, ought themselves to walk as he walked, or else how should
they be known to be born of the true Seed of God; for where the Seed of the
Kingdom is sown, and received into good ground, in an honest heart, it takes
deep root, and brings forth fruit answerable to the Seed, in some thirty, in
some sixty, and in some an hundred fold, that God may be glorified: for herein
is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, says Christ, speaking
to them that were called by his Name, and were his Disciples indeed, and did
hearken to his Teaching, did hear his Voice, and follow him, and a stranger
they would not hear; but Christ alone was their Head, Guide, Teacher, Leader,
and they did believe in his Name, and obeyed his Will: For it is not every one
that says, Lord, Lord, shall be saved; but he that does the Will of the Father
is accepted. And this is the Will of God, that ye should believe in Him whom he
has sent, and be sanctified: for Christ is the same that ever he was to all
that believe in his Name; He is their King, to rule; and Prophet, to teach; and
Priest, to offer up the spiritual Sacrifices that are accepted with the Father,
who says, Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity*
for, I have given him a Name, above every name, that at the Name of JESUS every
knee shall bow. He that does depart from iniquity, does bow at the Name of
Jesus: but those that do bow their knees when they hear Jesus named, and do not
depart from iniquity, do not bow at the Name of Jesus, but are Hypocrites, and
do bow to the Beast, and do not believe in Christ Jesus, neither does their
faith stand in the power of God, but their faith is vain. Paul the Apostle of
Jesus Christ, says, He that believes in the Lord Jesus in his heart, and
confesses with his mouth that God has raised him from the dead, shall be
saved: for with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation: but Paul did not say, that every one that
confesses that Christ was crucified at Jerusalem, and God raised him up again,
should be saved: No, that would contradict the Scriptures; for, as I live,
says the Lord, if Israel were as the sands upon the Sea-shoar for multitude,
but a remnant shall be saved: For they are not all Israel, that are of Israel;
[but he is an Israelite indeed, in whose mouth there is no guile] but every one
that confesses the same Christ near them which was crucified at Jerusalem: For
know ye not that Christ is in you, unless you are Rebrobates: And let them
know, that do not witness the Life of Christ raised within them, that sin and
wickedness is alive in them; and where sin and wickedness lives, there Christ
lies crucified in the streets, that are spiritually called Sodom and Egypt;
and it is the faith of the Drunkard, Swearer, Liar, Murderer, Adulterer and
covetous persons, and them that work all manner of Abominations, which shall
never enter into the Kingdom of God, as says the Scriptures; yet those will
confess that Christ dyed at Jerusalem to their own condemnation, because they
do not walk in obedience to him. John says, Try the spirits whether they be of
God, yea or nay. Every one that confesses that Christ is come in the flesh, is
born of God; but he that denies Christ to be come in the flesh, is not born of
God, but is of Antichrist, and denies the Lord that bought him: He that
professes Christ, and does not possess Christ, neither is possessed of Christ,
it is he that is Antichrist, and is not of Christ; but where Christ is
manifested in the flesh, he destroys the work of the Devil, and gives power
over Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave, and over Antichrist, and all the dark
powers that do corrupt the Earth. Where sin is destroyed, death has no power:
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal Life: And, he that
has the Son, has Life; and he that has not the Son, has not Life, but is in
Death, and the Wrath of God abides upon him. He is the best Christian that is
most like Christ. In him was no nature of cruelty at all, but full of love,
mercy, and tender compassion, ready to forgive, and willing to receive all that
come unto him, having nothing of their own, he will in no wise cast out: and he
does exhort all men to do to others, as they would have others do unto them;
and commanded his Disciples to love one another, and to love enemies; and to do
good to them that hate them, and despitefully use them. God is Love; and he
that is born of God, does love every one, and cannot use cruelty to any: but he
that is not born of God, commits sin; and he that commits, is of the
Devil, and dwells in the dark, where all sin is committed; but he that
dwells in the Light, dwells in the habitation of God, where no sin is
committed, nor transgression found; and he that does not know the Light in the
Conscience, that convinces of all sin, does not know God: for God is Light,
and Jesus Christ is the express Image of his Fathers Brightness, and eternal
Glory in the Light, Life and Power; who is immortal, invisible,
incomprehensible, altogether pure, and perfectly holy and wise, and is
thoroughly glorious beyond all that ever can be thought or spoken of him by all
mankind; and he is risen with healing in his wings, and is not veiled, as in
times past but is clearly seen, heard, and understood of all them that have
received him, and lovingly embraced him in the Truth; they in whom the eye of
Innocence is opened by the mighty Power of God, they do see him, and enjoy him,
and can and do bear witness of him, as Paul did; Christ the same yesterday, and
to day, and no otherwise, for ever. Paul did not know him till he was risen
from the dead, and ascended to the Father, as the Scriptures bear witness. Paul
was a Persecutor after Christ was crucified, and he held the clothes of the
witnesses that stoned Stephen, a man full of the holy Ghost, because he said,
The Most High dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither was he
worshipped with men's hands. No, Stephen did know that his body was the Temple
of the living God: and God is a Spirit, and he is worshipped no otherwise
acceptably, (...) Spirit and in Truth; and Paul was consenting to his death;
and after he was journeying from Jerusalem to Damascus, with Letters from the
high Priests and Scribes, to hale men and women out of the Synagogues that did
speak in the Name of Jesus, and to bring them bound to Jerusalem: But in the
mid way there was a Light met Paul and smote him, so that he fell to the
ground, and Paul saw a Light shine round about him, but he saw no man; and he
heard a Voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Who art thou, Lord,
said Saul? I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest, said Christ the Light; it is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks: and then Paul cried out saying, Lord, what
will thou have me to do? And as soon as the Lord revealed his Son Christ Jesus
in him by his own immediate Spirit, he did not confer with flesh and blood, but
went and preached him: Paul did profess Christ before, and did profit more in
the Jewish Religion than many of his equals, but he did not know him, and so he
persecuted him in his Saints, as thousands do at this day, and yet they will be
called Christians.

When Paul had received Christ Jesus the Spirit of Truth, he denied himself,
and became a true Christian, through the Sanctification of the Spirit of Christ
and belief of the Truth, and took up the Cross to his own will daily, and
followed Christ the Light, through great tribulations, in newness of life; for
as he did partake of the fellowship of his Death and Sufferings, so likewise he
did partake of the fellowship of his powerful Resurrection and his Glory. I am
the Resurrection, and the Life, says Christ. And not only Paul, but every one
also in whom Christ is risen, do partake of the same Sufferings, and the same
Joy, according to the measure and proportion of Faith of God's free Grace
dispensed to each one, by his own Eternal Spirit. And this is the way, and the
alone way which God has ordained and appointed to make Christians; or, as I
may safely say, to recover lost men out of the fall, and to redeem their souls
and minds from all inward pollution and defilement, and wholly to ransom them
out of the inward invisible transgression and corruption, and so to raise up
the blessed Seed of his own tender bowels, and restore his pure Image, that
has been so long defaced through the subtilty of the Serpent, and regain his
Glory, Honor and Renown among the sons and daughters of men, and will have the
preheminency over all people upon the face of the Earth, in the measure of
himself, in the Consciences of all, either in their eternal Salvation, or their
just and everlasting Condemnation: for God has not left himself without a
Witness in every ones Conscience, and a measure of the free Grace of him, who
is the Fullness: For the natural man cannot receive the gift of the Spirit, but
as the Apostle said, And we saw his Glory, as the Glory of the only begotten of
the Father, full of Grace and Might. And of his Fullness have we all received,
and Grace for Grace.

Hence it is that the True and Living God, who respects no man's person, has
given to every one a Talent to improve, and a measure of Light, and also has
commanded that this Everlasting Gospel of Peace and Reconciliation, should be
preached to every Creature, that they may receive grace for grace, that do
believe in his Name: And they that do not believe nor receive him, who does
tender salvation to them, the Light of God, which God gave them, coming into
the world, will eternally condemn them, and leave them without any excuse in
the presence of the Lord God, because of their disobedience and resisting the
gift of the holy Ghost.

There is something of God in every one, that would receive Gods truth if it
should; but all that is not of God in every one does strive and fight against
it, and does persecute and imprison till death Gods Messengers, which he has
endued with power from on high, and has given them gifts and graces, and
spiritual mercies of divine virtue, to preach to the Poor and to the captives,
to the exiled and banished, and to sow the seed of Righteousness, that God
might receive the fruits of holiness among his People. They that sow to the
flesh, do of the flesh reap corruption; but they that sow to the Spirit, do of
the Spirit reap Life everlasting.

They that have not received the Spirit, they cannot sow to the Spirit; but
they that have rceived, they sow to the Spirit, and do profit the people, where
they come to be received, and they do bring forth fruits of God-like lives, and
righteous conversations, and heavenly behavior, and their fruits do manifest
what ministry they are under; as St. Paul said, You are our Epistles written in
our hearts, seen and read of all men. A pure life and a holy conversation is a
sure evidence of a true Christian, and a perfect witness that they have
received the Spirit of Christ, which makes a Christian, and generateth into
his body; Christ the Head, and Christians the Members; and he will not have any
deformed member in his body, but they must be all complete in Christ, Pure, as
he is Pure; Holy, as he is Holy; Undefiled, as he is Undefiled: even so as he
is, so must his be in this present world; He that sanctifies, and they that
are sanctified, are all one, as says the Scriptures: But I say, in the Name
and Power of the pure and perfect Lord God, That whosoever, or whatsoever he is
in this world that takes upon himself, or goes about to make Christians, or
convert Souls any other way, than by preaching the immediate Word of God as he
does receive it by the Inspiration of the eternal Spirit of Life and Power, he
is in the highest degree of Presumption, and guilty of the great Transgression,
and shall assuredly receive the greatest Condemnation from the Lord God of
Power, if they or he do not speedily repent and forsake those great
Abominations.

Me thinks, that every rational and soberminded Man, must needs rightly
understand, that God Almighty, who created all them, at the beginning, in
Heaven Earth, and Sea, without the help or advice of any, and does uphold the
Works of his own Creation by the Word of his Power; and as he created the Souls
and Minds of men in a pure State of Innocence, from whence man fell through
Disobedience.

So he it is alone, that can, and will, and does quicken the Souls of men and
women again, and create them anew, in Christ Jesus, the Lord from heaven, the
second Adam, a quickening Spirit, the Immanuel of Eternal Life, of the Word of
his Power; and need not the Assistance or Counsel of any besides himself, to
raise up Souls to life and immortality; for our God is an invisible, eternal,
and immortal Spirit, perfect, holy, wise and powerful: and every reasonable man
must needs know, and believe, That there is not any thing, but only a Spirit,
that can so much as touch a Soul as to cleanse it, or to defile it; so it is
the unrighteous spirit of Darkness, the Prince of the Power of the Air, that
does rule in the Children of Disobedience, and polluteth the Souls, and
defiles the whole Minds, and causes them to yield up the fleshly Members, to
commit sins of all kinds, in Thought, Word and Action; and so the Springs of
Life and Salvation are dammed up, and the pure Spirit of the Lord is covered,
and the Eye of Innocence blinded, so that man cannot behold his Maker, because
Sin has made a separation, as says the Prophet, Behold the Lord's hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save; neither is his ear heavy, that he cannot hear;
but it is your iniquities that have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have caused his face to be hid from you: And as it is the unclean
Spirit that does defile and pollute the Mind and Soul, and corrupt the Heart of
man; hence it is that nothing but the clean and pure Spirit of the Lord God,
that can in any wise cleanse and sanctify the Soul and Mind, or purge, or
purify the Heart again: and it seems to be a very vain thing for any man or
woman to think otherwise. Now let every one that is called a Minister of Jesus
Christ, see that he be so indeed and in truth; for they must come a great way
before they can administer Christ: Wherefore it is safe to consider, that Death
reigned, or reigns, from Adam to Moses, and from Moses till the Prophet John;
and John was a burning and a shining Light, the greatest that was born among
women; but the least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he: and John cried
in the Wilderness, saying, Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make his Paths
straight; for he, whose shoe he was not worthy to unloose, was coming after
him, whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and
gather the Wheat into the Garner; but the Chaff he will burn with Fire
unquenchable. And John denied not, and said, He was not that Light, but he came
to bear witness of the Light, saying, This is the true Light, that lights
every one that comes into the world. Now it behooves all that are called
Ministers of Christ, to call themselves to mind how they traveled through all
these Administrations, spiritually, from Adam till Moses, ye are all in death;
and when you have received the just and holy Law of Moses upon Mount Sinai,
then you must journey through all the Prophesies, till you come to Mount Sion,
the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the living God, before you can be a noble
Minister of Jesus Christ: And this I am bold to declare in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, whose Servant I am through mercy. Be ye not deceived, the Lord God will
not be mocked any longer; there is a great Mystery in Godliness, insomuch, that
all the earthly Wisdom, and Learning, and Languages, Studies or Prudency is
never able to fathom or comprehend the least Motion of the Life of it; but as
the Mind is joined to the Light, the Word of Life, the Word that was before the
World was, the Word by which the World was made, the Word that is quick and
powerful, sharper than a two-edged Sword, even to the piercing and dividing
between soul and spirit, joints and marrow, and is a searcher and discerner of
the Thoughts and Intents of every ones heart; and this is he, whose Vesture is
dipped in Blood; his Name is called the Word of God, and he is come according to
the, determinate Counsel of the Father, to make a separation between the
Precious and the Vile, and to divide the Sheep from the Goats, and to gather in
the Flock of his Inheritance, the People of his own Pasture, the Sheep of his
hands, to fill up his own Fold, out of every Kindred, Tongue and Nation, Jew
and Gentile, Bond or Free, of his Israelites indeed, in whose mouths there is
no guile; and he will place his Name amongst them again, and work his Fear in
their hearts, and write his Laws in their inward-parts, that they may never
depart from it; and they shall be his People for ever, and he will be their God
eternally, and he will be merciful to their Transgressions; their Sins and
Iniquities he will remember no more; for our God cannot deny himself, nor
forget his holy Promises, who has said, I have given Him for a Covenant of
Light, to enlighten the Gentiles, and a Leader, and Commander to the people:
and the day is come, that all the Children of the Lord shall be taught of the
Lord, and be established in Righteousness. And as for those Ministers that say,
Men and women can never be freed from Sin, while they are here, nor made
perfect while they are in the body; I say, such Ministers do not know Christ
Jesus the Light, nor his Ministry, which says, When he ascended up on High, he
led Captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men; some Prophets, some Apostles,
some Ministers, for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the Work of the
Ministry, and for the edifying of the whole body of the Church. And again it is
said, All Scripture given by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, is wholesome for
Doctrine, for Instruction, for Reproof, and Correction in Righteousness, that
the man of God may be made perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good Work.

Now let all sober-minded men, consider where men and women should be made
perfect, if not here, while they are in this body; If not in this Body, where
then? Solomon says, As the tree falls so it lies; and the Spirit of the
Lord does not once mention any other place to be purged in, in all the
Scriptures of truth. And the Prophet spoke to the Church, and said, The Lord
would purely purge away the dross, and take away the tin, and rebrobate silver
and gold. And this I know, when Souls come to be quickened by the powerful Word
of Life and Truth, they come to know the Purgings of the Father, and the
Washing in the Fountain of Eternal Cleansings, in the sweet Streams of Light
and living Refreshment; the everlasting Refining in the Sanctifying-Furnace of
the Spirit of the Lord God; and so they do come to be cleansed, purified, and
sanctified throughout souls, bodies and Spirits, and are made Vessels of
Honor, and fitted for Glory, without the help of any Man, or any outward
Observation whatsoever. What is to be known of God is manifested within; and He
that gives power over any ones sin, is sufficient to give power over all sins;
and will, and does, to all that be obedient: The willing and obedient shall eat
the Good of the Land; but they that refuse and rebel, the Sword shall devour
them; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and his zeal will perform it.

There is none can forgive Sins but God only; against whom all sin is
committed; for whatsoever just offense is given to any, he that gives the
offense, sins against the Commandment of God, which says, Do by all men* as
you would have them do unto you, and love thy neighbor as thy self. He never
commanded any to do contrary to his own nature, which is, Love, Mercy, and Long
suffering, waiting to be gracious; not willing the death of any, but that all
should return and forsake the Evil of their Ways, and deny the Evil of their
Doings, and then he would have mercy upon them, and abundantly pardon all such
as come to him in the Name of the Lord Jesus, bringing nothing with them but a
penitent heart, and an humble spirit, confessing their sins, being weary of the
burden and weight of them; and he will forgive and take away the Guilt from
the Conscience: while there is guilt within, the sin is not pardoned; when the
Sin and the Guilt of Sin is taken away, then there is no Condemnation, but man
is at unity with his Maker, and all Fear of Death and Torment is taken away;
for the Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law; but thanks
be to God, who has given us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ, over
Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave, together with all the dark Powers of the Earth*
That as we, who are called Quakers, do continue in the Light, none can overcome
us; for Truth is stronger than all; and the Lord our God will exalt his Truth
over all Falsehood and deceivable Shows: Everlasting Praises, eternal Glory, and
heavenly Renown to his pure, holy and perfect Name for ever, world without end,
Amen, Amen.

There is none can forgive Sins but God only, neither will he give his Honor
to another; though Christ said to his Apostles, Whose Sins ye remit on Earth,
shall be remitted in Heaven; he spoke to them that were filled with his own
eternal Spirit, and were able to discern an innocent penitent Heart, from a
Hypocrite, in the Light and Life of Righteousness: and they did not say, they
could forgive any their Sins, but they were sent to direct their Minds to God,
who was, and is ready to forgive every one that comes to him by Faith, and
thoroughly purged and cleansed from all Iniquity. But as for those that have
taken upon them to pardon Creatures for their Money, or if they will receive
their Correction, and so deceive the poor People; and so he or they that does
pardon, and they that are pardoned of them, do, and will perish together
eternally, unless they repent of their Blasphemies and Sorceries, Divinations,
Enchantments, whereby the poor People are blinded and kept in ignorance, and in
all manner of Uncleanness, and are corrupted for want of Knowledge: My People
perish for want of Knowledge (says God) and the Kingdom is shut up from the
Simple-hearted; and the Key of Knowledge is hid away by them that will not
enter in themselves, nor suffer any to enter that would; neither will they
permit, that any of the Lord's Anointed, that have received the Key of
Knowledge, should speak among the People; but they say, None ought to speak in
the Name of Jesus, but the divine Doctors that have received their Ordinations
from them. The People are blind indeed that do think the Spirit of the Lord can
be limited, tied, confined, or dispensed by any mortal Man; No, they that do
make the people believe any such thing, are absolutely the Messengers of Satan,
and not the Ministers of Christ; they are out of his Doctrine: such are Doctors
of Divinity that dwell in the Divine Light of God, and grow into his Divine
Nature, and do receive their Ministry by the Inspiration of his divine Spirit
of Life and Power, and do speak as they are moved, and as the Spirit gives
them utterance in the Will of God; they are no Men-pleasers, nor Time-servers,
nor Willworshippers; for such cannot please God that seek to please man: and
they are Hypocrites, that walk in the Imitations and Likenesses without the
Life and Power, observing this thing, and observing the other.

Christ says, The Kingdom of Heaven comes not with Observations; but the
Kingdom of God is within you; speaking to the unbelieving Jews, the Scribes and
Pharisees, Wise and Learned, that were gone out from the Kingdom, the Measure
of God in them, in which is Power to destroy the Works of the Devil in the
Observations; and Christ reproved them, and said to them, The Kingdom of Heaven
consists in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost.

Now that is the kingdom of Antichrist, in which kingdom is the City that Cain
built, that is in the Observations: and Babel that Nimrod the Heretic begun to
build, which is full of confused Noises, and Bloodshed, and all manner of
Cruelty: It is Babel that is built with blood; but Sion is redeemed through
judgment, and her converts with righteousness. O! blessed be the pure, holy,
and powerful Lord God, the Day of his Power, according to his determinate
Counsel, is come, that Antichrists Kingdom shall be destroyed; and Babels
Building must fall: for the Mystery of Babylon the Great, the Mother of
Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, is made manifest by the bright
Appearing of the Lord Jesus; and the Children of Light are able to fathom and
comprehend her and all her Lovers, and to see the Foundation they stand on, and
the Ground they act from, which is but as Water, (as John says in his
Revelations, he saw Nations Waters, Peoples Waters, and Tongues Waters, yea,
Men Waters; Peoples and Nations all unstabled like the Waves of the Sea, tossed
to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine in the changable; gone out from that
which changes not, into the many Ways, and have heaped to themselves Teachers
having itching ears, and cannot endure sound Doctrine, but says, Preach unto
us smooth things; so they do preach Peace where the Lord proclaims War; and
bless themselves in that nature, that is everlastingly shut out of the Kingdom
of God, and excluded from his living Presence: But the Lord God of Life and
Power will, and has discovered the Spirit of the Barren woman, that has made
all Nations drunken with the Wine of her Fornication, and the Inhabitants of
the Earth were surfeited and overcome with her Abomination: She shall soon be
cast into a Bed of Torment with all her Lovers, where she shall have Torment
without Ease; Judgment without Mercy; a full Cup without Mixture, and the Dregs
wrung out unto her, and she shallbe rewarded double for all her Iniqiuties; the
Lord will mar her beauty and stain her glory, and strip off her costly robes,
and lay her honor in the dust, and turn her songs into howling, and her mirth
into mourning, and her music into lamentation; and she shall receive a Cup of
trembling at the Lord's hand, and all her glory, pomp and pride shall perish as
the untimely figs, and fade as the flower of the field, and wither as the grass
upon the house top; and the Smoke of her torment shall ascend in the sight of
all people, and it shall go forth in the audience of all Nations; and she shall
be a byword, and a scorn, a taunt, hissing, and derision, and offscouring to
as many as have heard of her Name; and a day of lamentation shall be heard in
the midst of her great Tribulation, Wrath and Anguish, upon every Soul that
does Evil, because she repented not of her Uncleanness, Fornication, Cruelty,
Hardheartedness and Mercilesness, and all her Uncharitableness, and Blasphemy,
and Sorceries, and the like Wickedness.

And this I give in my Testimony for the Lord in the living Word of Truth,
against Her and all her Lovers, and every one that uphold Her, as I have
received it by the Revelation of the Son of God, and not from, or of any Flesh
or Blood, but have seen, handled and tasted deeply of the Cup of the
Indignation of the Lords Judgment. If Judgment first begin at the house of God,
what will become of them that obey not the Gospel of God? for if the Righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear?

Now for some help and light for the understanding of them that do not know the
Mystery of Iniquity, and that spirit that does generate it here, as aforesaid*
the spirit of Antichrist is that spirit in every one that does profess Christ
Jesus in words, but does not possess him in life and power; and such are they
that are making Images, and forms, and likenesses without, and call it by
Christ's Name, and say it does represent Christ; when none can make his
Likeness, nor bear his Image, but those that are created anew in Christ Jesus,
and born of the same Spirit.

The righteous Image or Form of Christ, is the perfect Life of Innocence, and
the pure Spirit of Meekness, and an upright heart of true Humility, as it is
written, Upon whomsoever you shall see the Spirit of the Lord descend like a
Dove, and abide upon him; this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
You all know a Dove is an innocent harmless creature, and so are all God's
Children which are sanctified in the undefiled womb of God's second creation,
where the first Heaven and the first Earth is passed away, and new Heavens and
a new Earth are witnessed, wherein dwells Righteousness for evermore; and he
that is called the Son of Perdition, is the Man of Sin in every particular,
that steals away the heart, and draws out the mind from the true invisible God,
and sets it upon earthly objects, and visible appearances: The glory of the
world that does fade and vanish away, as the smoke in the eye, and the painted
harlot, is the fallen wisdom that is comprehended in the earthly mind, carnal
understanding, and airy spirit, inventing and devising how to deck and
beautify her self with the glory of this world and outside shows, to get her
self a name over all the Earth, and calls her self holy, pure and spiritual,
that all people may fall down and worship her painted image, and so the wind of
her spirit goes forth, and overchargeth the hearts of the people, and corrupts
them; and when the heart is corrupted it conceives lust, and when lust is
conceived it brings forth sin, and when sin is finished it brings forth
death; The wages of sin is death; and the Scarlet-colored Beast that does
uphold the adulterous woman, with all her allurements upon whom she sits, is
that beastlike will of or in man, that is not subject to the Will of God, but
has received power to exalt his horn, even to the Host of Heaven, for the
cleansing of the Sanctuary, and purifying of the Temple, and for the trial of
the Faith of God's Elect, that the power of God may rest upon them, and so they
come to be approved in the sight of all: and herein our God is glorified,
honored and renowned, over all, in purchasing to himself a holy Kingdom,
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant in the faithful-hearted, that do
follow the Lamb through great tribulations, according to the Scriptures. Every
man out of the Covenant of God is brutish, and that spirit which does exalt it
self over the consciences of any people, to compel them by a tymnnous Law, to
worship according to his will, and in his way, without any Commandment or
Precept from the Lord, that is Lucifer, which the Lord God will cast down to
the bottom of Infamy, and will do unto him, as he did to proud and lofty Haman,
as the Spirit of the Lord has manifested: for God and his Word are one, and
his way to the Kingdom is but one, and he never compelled any with camal
weapons, or any visible thing, to worship him.

And whereas it is said, he sent forth his servants to compel them that were in
the streets, and in the highways, to come in by the powerful preaching of his
Word of Life and Truth, that did limit and bind that in them that did rebel
against him, and so he drawed them after him in love; and so he does at this
day; Praises, praises to his holy and blessed Name for evermore, Amen. And the
false Prophet is he that cries, Lo here is Christ, and Lo there; but Christ
foretold of them, saying, Many false Christ's would come, saying, Lo here, and
Lo there; but believe them not; go not forth: by their fruits you shall know
them. And these are they that for advantage will cry, Peace, peace, while ye
are unsaved from your sins; and so, with good words, and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple, and smoothly draws them after him, in the broad way,
that leads to the chambers of death and destruction; and in their high places
they will tell you, you must not be drunk, nor lust, nor envy, nor covet, nor
live in pride, nor any such evil things, when they themselves are wholly guided
and led by that same spirit, which is the very rise and author, yea, as I may
safely say, the father of all manner of uncleanness and evil concupiscence; and
so, though they do speak good words, it is but in imitation, because it was the
practice of the Servants of the living God so to do, yet being out of their
Life, they can never convert any into the Truth, but their spirit does beget
the same form in the Hearers as is in the Teachers; for such Seed as they sow,
such Fruits they do reap, of all manner of unrighteousness: and these be they
that will go about to limit the Spirit of God, and make the people believe,
none ought to speak in the Name of Christ, but the Wise and the Learned, and
them that have received Gifts of Men to Preach; but Christ does ordain his
Ministers, and gives them Gifts both Male and Female; yet they say Paul would
not permit of a Woman to speak in the Church: it is true* Paul would not permit
of a woman to speak in the Church; no more do not the Quakers; neither do they
permit a Woman to speak in the Church, nor a Man that is born of a woman; but
he that is born of God, whether in Male or in Female, let him speak freely as
his Father gives him Utterance: Let him that does not understand come into
Christ's School and learn: Paul said, That if a Woman did pray or prophecy
with her Head uncovered, she did dishonor her Head: if a woman might pray or
prophecy with her head covered, it is very like she might do it in the Church
as soon as in another place: But Paul nor John neither would not permit that
Jezabel, that painted Harlot, should speak in the Church, who has painted her
self with the Saints Words, but out of their life, she must keep silence in the
Church; yea verily, the Power is made manifest in this the Lord's present day,
that will shortly stop her mouth, and all her Lovers for evermore, world
without end, Amen. The Glory is the Lord God's, who is risen in his mighty
Power to raise up Sion, and to build up the walls of Jerusalem, and to raze
down Babel to the ground, and to destroy the Kingdom of Antichrist, and to
bring down all the Powers of Darkness under his feet.

This was written in the Inquisition of Malta, by the Lord's Servant, Katherine
Evans; who am a Sufferer for God's eternal Truth, which is my Joy, my Glory,
and my Crown: Magnified be the Name of the Lord God of Life and Power, who has
counted me worthy, not only to believe unto Salvation, but also, to suffer for
the Sake of my blessed Savior and perfect Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ; to
whom be Glory for ever, world without end, Amen, Amen.

Oh Friends and People in all places, who are called Christians, fear the Lord
God that gave you Life, and obey his holy Gospel, the Light in the Conscience,
that convinces of all Sin, and judges the Secrets of every ones Heart. O
hearken to the heavenly Voice of the true invisible God; he is near to every
one to save or to condemn: Yea, of a truth, he is risen in great Power to
correct the Ways of men throughout all Nations; whose Ways have been their
own Ways for many Generations past: but this is the Day in which the Lord God
will restore Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning:
Wherefore let every one that has received Power and Authority from the Lord to
rule and regulate amongst the People, take heed that they do not abuse the
Power, the Lord has committed into their hands as a Stewardship, whereof they
must give an account before the High and Mighty Judge of Heaven and Earth, that
sits upon the Throne to Judge the Nations in Righteousness, and the People with
Equity; and he will smite the Earth with the Rod of his mouth, and consume the
Wicked with the Breath of his lips; and the Lord God will remove, and overturn,
and cut down, till he has exalted men like to faithful Moses and righteous
Samuel, to do the work of Justice, Mercy and Equity to every one, without
respect to Persons, in the Fear and Dread of the Lord, not seeking their own
honor, and glory, but the Honor and Glory of the Lord God. And thus he will
make you honorable in the sight of all men: for of a truth, they that exalt
themselves shall be brought low; but they which the Lord does exalt, none can
cast down: and likewise see that you do nor judge others for that which your
selves stand guilty of, or the like sin in the self-same nature; if so, wherein
ye judge others, you condemn your selves, and your own Condemnation will stand
over your own heads for ever.

Wherefore take heed how you do mount in the Seat of Tribunal; and let every
Thought, Word and Action, in your Sentences of Judgment of others, be according
to the Light of God in your own Consciences; which otherwise will be your
eternal Condemnation without any excuse, in the Presence of the Lord God
Almighty; whose Voice does shake terribly the Earth, and makes the Hearts of
the Heathen to tremble; and does, and will remove Mountains, and over-turn
Hills; and take all that lets and stands in opposition against his pure Truth;
and the little Hill of Sion shall trample over all the Mountains to the Ends of
the Earth: And who shall be able to resist it? no, no, not one: the Lord will
rip up every false Covering, and strip off every deceitful Garment, and make
manifest every seducing Spirit, and blind Guide, and false Teacher, that does
work by signs and lying wonders, with all manner of Deceivableness; and does
deceive the hearts of the Simple, and steals away their hearts, and draws
out their minds from the true invisible Lord God that made them, and does set
them upon earthly Objects, and visible Appearances, and the Glory of this life
that will perish for ever, and vanish away like the smoke in the air; and the
invisible God they have no more knowledge of, than the beast that perishes:
and these be them that run, and the Lord never sent them, and says, Thus says
the Lord; and the Lord has not spoken unto them, neither did they ever see his
face, nor hear his voice at any time; neither do they profit the people at all,
but build them up in the Mystery of Iniquity, and teach them to wonder after
the monstrous Beast, which has many Heads, and many Horns, and Mouths full of
Blasphemy, and Eyes full of Adultery, walking in the broad way that leads to
the chambers of death and destruction, and to the Pit of everlasting Perdition;
and shuts up the Kingdom from the Simple-hearted; and hides the Key of
Knowledge from the innocent Ones; and will not enter in themselves, nor suffer
them to enter that would: and these are them that feed of the Fat, and go on
their Bellies all their life long; the Serpents of the earth that suck the
sweet up, the spirit of the earth; and they make the poor people believe it
does belong to them in Christ, because they must pray for them, to the saving
of their Souls. O these be Hypocrites, and they do not know the Price of the
redemption of a Soul out of death; neither have they the Knowledge of God, nor
his Way to Salvation; for if they did know the Lord, they would fear and dread
his holy Name, and teach the People the Way to Life eternal, which is the Light
in the Conscience in every one; and he that comes not to the Light, comes not
into the Way of God which leads to the Kingdom of God: The Kingdom of God is
one, his Way is one, his Light is one, his Life is one, and his Spirit of Truth
is one, and his Word is one; and what he speaks once, he speaks still; and what
he once condemns, he never justifies; and what he once justifies, he never
condemns: He is God, and changes not, but the same, yesterday, and to day, and
so likewise for ever.

Now they that are in the changeable, and in the many ways, are out of the Way
of God, which is Light, and are in the dark, and do not see the way they walk
in, neither do they know the Lord, nor his Word, that is quick and powerful,
sharper than a two-edged Sword; for did they know that Word, they would not
dare to mock and scorn at them that tremble at the Word, and meet together to
wait upon the Lord in silence, and do hearken diligently to know the Mind of
God, that they may not sin against him, nor act contrary to him; but those men
or women cannot disscern the Mind of God that are not crucified with Christ
Jesus, and the Body of sin and death destroyed, which is a mystery to all the
Wisdom and Learning in the world, that do not own the Light in the Conscience
to be their alone Teacher, but live in the disobedient nature out from God and
his Truth, in the earthly mind and carnal will, comprehending this thing and
that in the fallen wisdom, inventing, devising, and imagining things that never
were, nor is, nor never will be: So your Prophets, they prophecy lies, and the
Priests bear rule by their means, and the People love to have it so; but what
will they do in the end thereof, in the day when the Lord shall require the
Talent that he gave to every one to profit withal?

Now, where is the Talent with the Improvement? is it not lost? is it not hid
in the barren wilderness, and in the desolate places of the earth? Oh, try and
examine search and consider, where is that good and faithful Servant, and just
Steward, that has improved his Talent for his Masters use, and is ready to
give up his Accounts with joy before the Tribunal of the Majesty of the Most
High, having his Garment washed in the Blood of the Lamb, and his heart
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and the Body washed with pure water; I do
not say nor mean external water, to wash the outside of the body, but I do
mean the spiritual Water, that streams from the Fountain or Rock; Christ Jesus,
to wash the inside, and to cleanse the Soul and Spirit from all Pollution and
Defilement: Ye wash the outside while the inside is not cleansed; the inside
will defile the outside again; but if the inside be cleansed and purged from
all dross, and tin, and reprobate silver and gold, then it would cleanse the
outside also, and keep it clean: it is the corrupted Beast that is full of Lust
and all manner of Deceivableness, that defiles the whole body within and
without: So the man or woman, whose heart is without Deceit, and whose mouth is
without guile, and whose tongue does not utter falsehood, nor has no flattering
lips, nor polluted hands, nor feet swift to shed blood; such are known to be
cleansed every whit, and they see God: The pure in heart do see God, but they
whose hearts are daubed and slimy, through deceit and hypocrisy,
hardheartedness and cruelty, and the like, such cannot see God; nor they that
take honor and seek honor of one another, do not believe: How can you believe
(says the Apostle) while you take Honor one of another? And all that Honor
or take Honor of earthly men, do rob God, to whom all Honor, Worship, Praise
and Glory does belong; and all that do honor God, and obey his Voice in the
Truth, the Lord will make them honorable in the sight of all men; but all that
live in Pride and Covetousness, Lust and Drunkenness, are out of the Truth; and
all who live in Swearing, Lying, Deceit, or Hypocrisy, or Envy, Hatred,
Malice, Bloodshed, Hardheartedness or Cruelty, are out of the Truth; or they
which live in Thieving, or Cozening, Cheating, Dissembling, Flattering,
Whispering, Backbiting, Bragging or Boasting, speaking great swelling Words,
having men's Persons in admiration because of advantage; these are all out of
the Truth, and are Heretics, and are carried out of the Way of God with Nimrod
and Judas, King Herod and Pharaoh, and the rest of that untoward Generation,
not knowing the Scriptures, neither the Power of God; and because they do not
believe them nor understand them, therefore they hide them from others, and do
corrupt them, and add to them, and diminish from them, not fearing the Lord God
that gave them forth by his own free Spirit, and for the edification of every
one. But I am bold to declare in the Name of the true and living God, that all
the Plagues which are written in them, will soon come upon the back of such a
People or Souls, that have wrought this Wickedness in the sight of the Lord God
of Power, who is risen, and will render Vengeance in Flames of Fire upon them
that know him not, and do not obey his Gospel, but live in the earthly Mind and
carnal Will, fallen from God, and compelling the People to follow their devised
Ways, building of them up in Sin and Wickedness, yet making them believe they
may go to Heaven at the last, though they live in Sin till they die: Oh! that
ever any People or Souls should ever be so blind and ignorant, to think that
though they spend all their appointed Time in Sin and Iniquity, and run out the
whole course of natures race in pleasure, negligence and carelessness; and when
they cannot retain it any longer, then do they offer up their sinful Souls as a
Sacrifice acceptable to God, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity;
though it be in his beloved Jacob, it shall not go unpunished: Oh! methinks
that no rational or sober-minded Man or Woman should once credit or believe,
that do know the Scriptures, that there is any place appointed of God for any
Creatures to be purged or cleansed after they are dead; seeing the Holy Men of
God, as they were moved of the holy Ghost, have so evidently and clearly set
forth in the Scriptures of Truth, That those which are Heirs of Eternal
Salvation, must come to be converted, and to live the Life of Christ while they
are here in the body. Though God delighted in Mercy, and that the Thief was
saved upon the Cross, because it was given him of the Lord, to believe at last,
because that none should despair; yet, Woe, Woe from the Lord God to every one
that puts off the Day of Repentance, saying in their hearts, The evil day is
afar off: In the day of ignorance the Lord winked, but now he calls every one
to repent. And as for such as do talk of a Purgatory, it does manifest their
Ignorance of the Knowledge of God: for I witness in the Life of God's Spirit,
such know not Heaven nor Hell, God nor Devil, and so they call Light Darkness,
and Darkness Light, Good Evil, and Evil Good, and teach the People so to do:
but God is not well pleased with any of those, nor with them that do boast
themselves, saying, How great the Kingdom is, and how many Countries, and
innumerable sight of People belongs to their Church, in all places! but them
that trust in the Arm of Flesh, yea, in the strength of Pharaoh, and in the
Shadow of Egypt; but the strength of Pharaoh will be her shame, and their
trusting in the shadow of Egypt their confusion: God's Kingdom is the least, as
to the visible strength; but the greatest in the invisible power: Fear not
little Flock (says Christ) it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom: The Kingdom of God consists not in the arm of Flesh, but it stands in
his own Power and Almightiness: That is Antichrists Kingdom whose power stands
in outward weapons, which is carnal, as Locks and Bolts, and Iron-bars and
Chains, and Whips, and Racks, and the like: Our Weapons are not carnal, but
spiritual, (says the Apostle) ^o the pulling down Strongholds, Principalities
and Powers, and high and lofty Looks, with spiritual Wickedness in High Places:
So one of them that stands in the Power of God, out of the Power of the Prince
of the Air, is able to chase ten, and ten a thousand, according to the
righteous Prophecy of the Holy Man of God; Those that dwell in the Fear of the
Lord, and truly dread his pure Name at all times, every word that proceeds
out of their mouths, is as the Words of God's own mouth, which cannot be
altered nor changed to all eternity; for such are the Vessels that hold the
heavenly Treasures, Gods free Gifts and eternal Graces, and everlasting
Mercies, and divine Virtues, spiritual Blessings, which God does not reveal in
any earthly-minded Man, whose mind is wandering after earthly Glory, Honor,
Riches and Treasures; but he reveals his eternal Riches in the Earthenvessel;
whose mind and soul is quickened, raised, and changed, by the Power of the
Almighty God, and joined to the Light, the measure of his own Spirit, to
convert them, and bear them up into the same state and image wherein God
created the soul and mind of man at the first: In the beginning of his
Creation, God did not create the outward Form of mankind in his own Similitude
and Likeness: No, for then all men would bear the similitude and likeness of
God throughout all Generations; which thing could never be for wicked and
ungodly men, whose thoughts and imaginations are evil continually, and are of
their father the Devil, and his works they do, and his image and likeness they
bear. God is a perfect Spirit of divine Light, and immortal Glory; and his Son
Jesus Christ, is the express Image of his everlasting Fathers eternal
Brightness; and none can ever liken nor fashion any thing like him: And them
that bear the image of the Devil, they live in spiritual pride, and are haughty
minded, and will not be reformed, nor hearken to the Counsel of God, nor
embrace his gracious Invitations, nor receive his tender Mercies, nor be warned
by his favorable Judgments, nor gentle Corrections; but in obstinacy and
perverse rashness, always resist it, and cast it behind their backs, and
trample it under their feet, till the Lord is even forced to be a swift Witness
against them, and to sweep them away with the beesom of destruction; and so
here their end is woeful, and their torment is eternal, and the Lord is clear of
their blood, and they must confess their destruction is of themselves.

They that are of the Image and Likeness of Christ, are created anew in Christ
Jesus to every good work, and have received, and do live in, and are guided by
the pure Spirit of perfect Peace and Patience, perfect Love, and bowels of
tenderness, mercy and pity toward every one, without respect of persons; and
they have always a holy fear, true humility, and a heart of uprightness; and
such persons do bear the true image and similitude of God the Father, and the
form and likeness of his Son Jesus Christ, after the inward man; and they are
patterns of good works, and good examples to all wherever they come, and it is
their meat and drink to do the will of God, wheresoever he shall call them, or
command them to follow the Lamb, from Sea to Sea, and from Island to Island,
and from Country to Country, to bear his holy Name, and to witness forth his
eternal Truth to all people that live in darkness and blindness, according to
the righteous examples of his Saints and Servants, that were guided by the same
Spirit, and walked in the perfect way of God in the ancient days, and are as
willing, and do suffer for our honorable Testimony, that our pure, holy and
just God, whose right it is, may have the Glory, Praise and Renown to the ends
of the Earth, throughout all Generations. Amen, Amen, says the Spirit.

19th of the 8th month, 1662. Written at Malta, by me the Lord's Servant,
Katherine Evans.

ALthough that they my Bible keep from me,
That I the holy Scriptnres cannot see,
The Precepts pure, which are upon record,
That were given forth by the Spirit of the Lord;
Yet, a small Book hid in a secret place
Have I, where I can read the words of grace:
And in the same I can discern
The bastard from the perfect born.
For unto us a Child is born,
Who Will break to pieces that great Horn,
Which has lift up himself on hie,
Upon the Throne of Majesty;
He shall be brought down under all,
Where he shall lie, and cry, and call
To's Idol-gods, which always he
Has worshipped with heart and knee.
But no Salvation he shall find
Among his gods, that are so blind,
Both dumb and deaf, like unto he,
They cannot speak, nor hear, nor see
His Pictures, and his painted walls,
His Altars and his Temple-Vails;
His golden Images every one
Shall soon be brought to destruction.
All Praises to the God of might,
Which has preserved us day and night
Among Lions Wolves, that are so strong,
Although they make us suffer long;
Yet the Diviners do run mad,
And lying Prophets they are sad.
Th'exalted Beast in his renown
Triumphs that he shall gain the Crown:
Because that Pharoah's on his side,
And lofty Haman in his pride,
And bloody Herod with his Sword;
All fighters are against the Lord.
But th'God of Power, which is so strong,
Will soon reward them every one;
According unto Heavens decree,
For their Rebellion, Blasphemy.
Then some shall howl, and some shall mourn,
The rest shall wish they would never been born,
For pain and torment day and night:
Because they have despised the Light.
WHen dear Daniel Baker was at Malta, I had a very small Token to present him
in a Paper, with these lines.

The thing is little, receive my love,
It comes from a harmless dove;
Within whose breast does still remain
God's perfect praises to maintain.
I have not time nor place to show
The love that from my soul does flow,
The Cristal streams so pure and bright,
That do arise both day and night.
My love to Truth, does me constrain
In Prison ever to remain;
If it be so, I cannot be
In Truth and Righteousness set free.
My dear Redeemers face so bright
Does shine upon me day and night;
His Countenance does exceed all
Captivity and bondage thrall.
Though my mortal body be bolted fast, yet my immortal soul has room* to pass
by Sea and Land, and cannot be prevented by an Enemy.

Lord, teach me in thy Ways,
that I may walk therein,
And lead me in thy Paths,
and cleanse me from all sin.
Before I knew the Lord my God
to be so near to me,
I walked in the way so broad,
thinking he did not see.
But when my ways directed were,
and paths the Lord did guide,
I walked always in his fear,
and did not go aside.
HEavens Glory is appearing,
And his Brightness shines forth
Over all* Nations, for the clearing
Of the Lord's Eternal Truth.
Now every one that sits in darkness,
Under the shade of Death does lie,
May come forth unto the Brightness,
Out of gross obscurity.
For now a Fountain is set open,
He that will may freely come in,
Unto the everlasting Ocean,
And be cleansed from his sin;
And every one that is in bondage,
And in deep Captivity,
Under Pharaoh and his Army,
Shall be set at liberty.
If that they will seek their Freedom
At the hand of God alone,
They shall be Heirs of his Kingdom,
And wear the victorious Crown.
It is not all the pain and labor
That ever mortal men can take,
Which can bring them into favor
With the Lord that did them make.
But they that stand in self-denial,
Taking up their Cross daily,
Through many a fiery trial,
For God's Truth most valiantly:
It Is them alone shall be preserved,
By the Power of God most hie;
And none but them shall be received
Into glorious Liberty.
The Candles of the Lord are lighted,
For to search Jerusalem,
And all Nations are invited
To the Marr'age of the Lamb.
Blessed are they that keep their Armor,
And in their Wedding-Garments dressed,
Ready to enter the Brides Chamber,
They are counted with the Guests.
Now the Lord will purge all Nations
Out of gross obscurity,
Destroying all the deeds of Darkness,
Deceit and Hypocrisy.
Th'Trumpets are struck up in Sion,
And do give a dreadful sound,
For the razing down of Babel,
With her glory to the ground.
And Antichrist, with all his Fashions,
And Delusions, which are strong,
Shall suddenly be dashed to pieces:
Christ alone shall wear the Crown.
Katherine Evans.

THE END.

