LIGHT For the JEWS Or, the Means to convert them, in Answer to a Book o(...)
theirs, called The Hope of Israel, Written and Printed by Manasseth Ben-Israel,
Chief Agent for the Jews here. 1650.

Showing the time of King Charles coming in; his War with Holland, and the
Issue of it: Also the Emperor Wars with the Turk, and the Event of it; given
as (...) Sign to the Jews, to know when to stand up in their own Land, and how
to prevail.

Esai. 60. 1. Ephesians. 5. 14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee Light.

This Book was Written Eight years ago, and delivered into the hands of Mr.
John Androws a Person of Quality* living in Castle-Yard, and never published
till now. 1664.

Printed for the Author.

LIGHT For the JEWS: Or, the Means to convert them, in Answer to a Book of
theirs, called The Hope of Israel, Written and Printed by Manasseth
Ben-Israel, Chief Agent for the Jews here. 1650.

Showing the time of King Charles coming in; his Wars with Holland, and the
Isue of it: also the Emperous Wars with the Turk, and the Event of it; given as
a Sign to the Jews, to know when to stand up in their own Land, and how to
prevail.

Esai. 60. 1. Ephe. 5. 14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and
stand up from (...) dead, and Christ shall give thee Light*

London, Printed for the Author 1656.

TO THE JEWS NATION.
BEloved of God, there is no true Christian, but must needs acknowledge your
Nation of old to be the People chosen of God, in a singular manner; and that
from you we have received the Oracles of God, and knowledge of our Salvation:
And since you have been under dissertion, groping in the dark, this 1650, we
that have received the Light which ye refused, because it was so determined of
God; I say, we now knowing what you look for, and how it is made manifest among
us, ought to lead you by the hand to the Light that shins upon us, through this
dark and tempestious Cloud of War, and to bring you to your Messiah, whom ye
seek and desire to see, though we own no Messiah but Jesus Christ.

The consideration of these things made me by the good hand and providence of
God upon me, (to him be the Glory) when I saw in what manner you described your
Messiah to labor to bring you to him; for at first, when I saw that Learned
Piece of your Famous Senator Manasseth Ben-Israel, called, The Hope of Israel;
an effectual door was opened unto me on your behalf, that I could not but show
as (...) in several Books, who it was that you called your Messiah; and because
the more I looked into the matter, the more and more Light God gave me to see
the more certainty of his Truth in manifesting your Messiah; beyond what my
Tongue or Pen could express.

Therefore being not satisfied in what I had written, I wrote this little book
following, and directed it to Manasseth Ben-Israel; and when I had got it
Translated into Latin and written fair, I gave it him; and after a short time
the Interpreter that spoke between us, went unto him, to know his thoughts upon
it; and he answered, That the time wherein their Messiah should appear was
come, but that KingCharles Steeward was he, that he could not believe, for he
could not believe that ever KingCharles should rise again and be restored to
his Empire; but said he, Oliver Protector, or the King of Swedland is more
liker to do it then he, and specially the King of France is the most likest to
be our Messiah; If he be a Gentile, and be in this part of the World; for he
had, as he said, a great deal of confidence in the words of an Ancient French
Author, that declares much to that purpose.

Then said I to the Interpreter, Manasseth Ben-Israel will not believe me; yet
tell him from me, that the Glory of the Protector, and King of Swedland will
soon vanish away: and concerning the King of France, he is mistaken; the French
King is not the King of France, but Deputy; for the King of England is the King
of France, it being conquered near three hundred years ago by King Edward 3 d.
And moreover, tell him that many which were well-wishers to King Charles then
they were told of his coming to his (...) shortly, answered, That they
should(...)ve to see it, were taken away by death, for a reward of their
unbelief, as Mr. White Prisoner at the Fleet and others have observed it, so he
may die quickly also: But I say, he that lives five years to an end, shall see
King Charles Steeward flourish on his Throne to the amazement of all the World,
for God will bring him in without bloodshed.

But I had no answer to these last words: Therefore finding Ben-Israel not to
believe, I left him, and purposed speedily to direct this Book to you in
general, and put it out in Print with some Addition; being persuaded that some
of your Nation have the English Tongue, that are able to Translate it into such
a Language as all may understand it.

The main cause why Manasseth Ben-Israel cannot believe, is because of the low
Condition of King Charles, and the great power of his Enemies at present: What
of all that? does not he himself say in the 26. Sect of his Book, called The
Hope of Israel, That all your Wisemen which speaks of your Messiah, say, That
he must be slain, and then rise again to be your Captain and Deliverer? But
suppose King Charles be so low, that he is a dead man, for so he is by the
Edicts of his Enemy; Cannot God raise him again? and certainly he will do it:
For, we have many Ancient Propheticks; saying, which tells us that a dead King
shall rise and do glorious things: One is this, When the dead King shall set on
his Crown,
then shall the World turn upside down;
And London in Truth shall tremble that day,
expecting the words the dead King shall say:
But he shall treat them well, that it be a wonder,
and shall settle Truth, Peace and good order.


Another this: When the dead King sets on his Throne, Grace shall grow to them
that walks in his way, then all men shall enjoy the main Resurrection,
specially men of Religion, namely, all men that have been true; but false men
will run away to hide themselves, being not able to abide the presence of him
that sits on the Throne.

And doubtless all this is spoken of King Charles Steeward, for he consists all
of Wisdom and Love. When he was in France, the people rose against the French
King and his Mother, that they were forced to flee; for that Nation thought to
do as England did, and destroy the French King; for they made great provision
for War, and had hired the Duke of Lorain to come with a great Army to help
them; but King Charles saved them by his Wisdom, for he went to Lorain, and
persuaded him to go back again, and went to both sides, brought them together
and made them good Friends again: Then the people seeing the great work that he
had done, cried him up to be the man of God, in so much that at last the French
King and his Council became Jealous of him, and they joined themselves with his
Enemy, and most unnaturally, for he was their near Kinsman, and most
ungratfully in regard he had saved them; they forced him to go out of France,
as he was forced to go out of England; and that is in God's Book of Remembrace,
the French shall be called to account for it one day.

Again, when King Charles went to Scotland, and all his Nobles there were
Enemies one to the other; he presently by his loving Wisdom made them all good
friends, to the admiration of the people: So that I may surely say there is not
such another Peacemaker in the World, and yet Manasseth Ben-Israel think this
King shall not rise again; I am sorry to see the hardness of his Heart.

But beloved, take you notice of what I say for a sign to you, if King Charles
Steeward, King of England, do not come into his Throne within this five years,
without one drop of blood spilt in the cause, believe nothing of what I say in
this Book; but afterward some of those that took upon them to judge the Old
King, this Kings Father, and most cruelly murdered him; and yet will not
repent and come unto the King for mercy, most die for it, the King shall not
save them; for Law and Justice shall take place where mercy is refused.

Now there is no people under Heaven, that boast and stand so much upon their
Sword as these States-people of England do; yet God will order it so, for King
Charles his sake, that their Sword which they glory in, shall fall out of their
hands, and they shall not know how nor which way they lost it; and God will put
it into the hand of King Charles, so that all the world will wonder at the
strangness of his Salvation; and they shall glorify God on his behalf, when
they see such an excellent thing done that no age can parallel.

And when right is done to the King and Church, and to the Kings Friends and
Servants, though it be done with much favor to the Enemies; there will be many
discontented persons that will plot and strive to maintain the States false
interest, to their own Ruin and Destruction: Besides, the proud State of Holand
though they be now sufficiently beaten and spoiled by the English State, will
then for their own ends make show as if they would help them, and presently
before the King is much settled in his Throne, they will pick a Quarrel with
him; but the harmless and Wise King, being inclinable thereunto, will make
Peace with them upon any terms and agree.

Notwithstanding, the False Envious, Persidions, Covetous Holander, being
proud, is not quiet but reprocheth the King with foul Language, because of his
former afflictions by which God Refined and fitted him for future glory, and
takes all occasion and advantage to do what mischief they can to the King and
his Subjects: And though God in that time send the Plague among them for it, so
that they dye by thousands at a time; yet they will not forbear, but still go
on in their malice against the King, that God might utterly destroy them, and
the English Enemies that go to them, by the Sword, Plague and Famine; and blot
out their Names from being a State under Heaven, for so God will fight against
all the Enemies of King Charles; and proud Holand shall be made the first
Object of Gods wrath, against them that fight against King Charles and despise
him: but do you depart from Holand betimes.

Therefore blessed and happy shall those Kings and people be that shall take
their Power and Authority from King Charles, and live under his protection; for
all his proud Enemies that shall despise him, and refuse to submit unto him,
shall be destroyed, because God with King Charles will do a new work upon the
Earth, and bring all the world unto himself under one Head: and for this cause
God chose King Charles, and Refined him in the Furnace of affliction, as the
Prophet says, Esai. 48. 10. Esai. 51. 16.

About the same time the Turk will come and fight against the Emperor of
Germany, and he shall prevail for a time, but afterward the Emperor shall beat
him sadly; then shall you arise, and under the Baner of King Charles with an
Army of a hundred forty and four thousand; twelve thousand of every Tribe go to
your one Land, and possess it for ever and ever; and you shall believe in Jesus
Christ, who is your everlasting King, as your Rabbis say in their Talmuds; If
you can but understand them aright; for they say, that Jesus Christ whom they
truly call Messiah, the Son of David, shall be your everlasting King, when ye
come to your own Land, as ye have them cited in the 26. Sect of the foresaid
Book, called The Hope of Israel: thus.

But which way that Redemption shall be, no man can tell, but only so far as
we may gather out of the Prophets; That at that time the Ten Tribes shall come
to Jerusalem, under the leading of a Prince, whom some Rabbis in the Talmud,
and in some places of of the Caldy Pharaphrase, do call Messiah the Son of
Joseph, and elsewhere Messiah the Son of Ephraim; who being slain in the last
war of Gog and Magog, shall show himself to be Messiah, the Son of David: Who
shall be, as Ezekiel and Hosea say, the everlasting Prince of all the twelve
Tribes?

Our Wismen do in many places, especially in the Babilonish Talmud in tract.
fuca, C. 5. make mention of Messiah, the Son of Ephraim; where they say, that
he shall dye in the last War of Gog and Magog, and they so expound that of
Zech. 12. 10. And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son: They add also that the
four Captains of whom the said Prophet speaks of chap. 6. 1. are Messiah the
Son of David, Messiah the Son of Joseph, the Prophet Elias, and the high
Priest, which four are those Dignities which shall show their power in that
blessed Age.

Observe that sometime they call Messiah the Son of Ephraim, sometime of
Joseph, for he shall come out of the Tribe of Ephraim, and shall be Captain of
all the Ten Tribe, who give their Name to Ephraim, because that their first
King Jeroboam was of that Tribe; not without cause do they call him the Son of
Joseph, for he was the true Type of the house of Israel in his imprisonment and
future happiness, add to this that he was so long hid from his Brethren, that
they knew him not, as in like manner the Ten Tribes are at this day: who are
led Captive but shall come hereafter to the Top of Felicity, in the same manner
as Joseph did.

That Messiah of Joseph shall die in the Battle of Gog and Magog, and
afterward shall rise again, that he may enjoy the Dignity, not of a Kingly
Scepter, but the office only of a Vice Roy, as Joseph in Egypt: For that the
Empire of the House of Israel fell under the Reign of Hosea, the Son of Elah,
as the Prophet Amos says, in Chap. 5. 2. Therefore the Kingdom of the Ten
Tribes shall be restored as Ezekiel says, Chap. 37. Under the Reign of Messiah
the Son of David, who shall be everlasting; for by the death of Messiah, the
Son of Joseph, the Ten Tribes shall see that God will not that they should have
more Kings then one, as it is already said. Thus much out of that Book, called
The Hope of Israel.

Now brethren you see by their words, that your Rabbis and Wise men say that
when you are restored to your own Land again, Messiah the Son of David, (that
is Jesus Christ) shall be your King for ever; who will have his Vice Roy King
Charles Steewrad to be over you, as Pharaoh had Joseph over Egypt, and (mark)
as Joseph was a stranger and not an Egiptian, yet Governed them all; so must
you have ^a stranger even King Charles Steeward (as his name signifies a Vice
Roy, for a Kings Steeward is a Vice Roy) to give you order in all things: and
not as Manasseth-Ben-Israel say, in his Observation upon your Rabbis, and wise
men's words; who would have us believe, that your Messiah (which your Rabbis
and wisemen call the Son of Joseph and of Ephraim) must needs be a Natural Jew,
descended from the Loins of Joseph, and Ephraim, and the Reason he gives for it
is, because that their first King Jeroboam was of that Tribe, but Ben-Israel is
mistaken, for they not knowing how to call him otherways, improperly call him
the Son of Joseph, and of Ephraim, as Eli calls Samuel his Son, 1 Samuel 3. 6.
and the Benjamite his Son, 1. Sam. 4. 12. 16. and King Hezekiah calls the
Levites his sons, 2. Cron. 29. 11. after such a manner, neither can he prove
that Jeroboam came out of the Tribe of Ephraim, only he supposes, because King
Solomon, made him Ruler over the house of Joseph, 1 King. 11. 28. that argues
no such thing, but rather that he was of the Tribe of Judah, for Kings use to
prefer their own kin, and put them into places of trust, as you see King Saul
makes Abner General of all his Army, because he was a man of Valor and his
Uncles Son, 1 Samuel 14. 50. and King David made Joab Captain General of his
Army, because he was a man of Valor and his Sisters Son, 2 Samuel 8. 16. 1 Chr.
2. 15. 16. and I believe that Solomon made Jeroboam Ruler over the House of
Joseph, because he was his Kinsman of the Tribe of Judah; and for Zereda, where
his Father dwelt, that is hard to be found: If it was Zeredatha in the Plain of
Jordan, on the other side Jordan near Succoth, 2 Chronicles. 4. 17. For Succoth and
all those Countries was the Tribe of Gads Inheritance, Joshua 13. 27. Then was
Jeroboam of the Tribe of Gad? But if Zereda was the City of Zareathits, 1 Chronicles. 2. 50. 53. Then was he of the Tribe of Judah, and his Father is called an
Ephrathite, as Iesse and others are called Ephrathites, Ruth, 1. 2. 1 Samuel 17.
12. More of this in my book following.

And the four Dignities or four Captains, signified by four Chariots, Zech. 6.
1. Which your Wisemen call Messiah the Son of David, Messiah the Son of Joseph,
the Prophet Elias, and the High Priest: The first is Jesus Christ your King,
giving order to King Charles Steeward in what he shall do: The second is our
King Charles Stuart executing his office, in doing what his Master Jesus Christ
commanded him to do: The third is a Prophet, his works will make him known: The
fourth is an Archbishop of Canterbury, which shall be settled here when our
King Charles comes to his Throne, who shall fend to you to show you our
Christian Religion to convert you, and settle it among you; that you may live
happily as once we did, and yet shall do, but now we are in Captivity as well
as you; and I am sure we shall be delivered in a short time both Jew and
Gentile. And King Charles Steeward it is Gods chosen Vessel to deliver us all;
and when you obey your King Jesus Christ, then shall you have this
preheminencie above all the Nations in the World; you will have a King that is
King of all the Kings and Emperors in the World, as all Christian Kings
confess now, and all others must do it: And he that Rules you as his Vice Roy,
shall be higher then any of them, and shall be over them also, as Joseph was
over all the Nobles in Egypt; they being the Subjects of Jesus Christ.

And to conclude, we have had sixteen hundred years ago great and glorious
Noble Persons of your Nation, that came from Jerusalem and tendered Jesus Christ
unto us, and we were soon converted, and received him to the great comfort of
our Souls and Bodies, and do obtain Eternal Life by him.

Oh! do you now receive him from us? who now tenders Jesus Christ unto you for
your Salvation, that you also may be made happy and obtain Eternal Life by him,
and enjoy your own Land again? for certainly, there is no other means to save
you or us but he. Alas beloved, all other means without him are vain, for he
only is appointed of God to save the World; Prayers, Sacrifices, Kings, Princes
and whatsoever else that is or can be named, will do no good to them that have
not Jesus Christ to appease Gods wrath against them, for the Sin of Adam and
their own Sins. Oh, then you are his Bone and his Flesh! he is your glorious
King, a Native Jew born in Bethelem-Iuda; who ever lives to make intercessions
to God for you, as your good Kings and Rulers used to do, Numb. 14. 13, 19, 20.
Joshua 7. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. 19, 20. Do not refuse Jesus Christ and your own
Salvation, which you cannot have without him. I wish you as well as to my own
Soul, and so Farewell.

Your Friend Arise Evans.

TO Manasseth Ben-Israel, Arise Evans Wishes Grace and Truth, Through God our
Savior, Amen.
Worthy Sir,
I Am sorry that our difference of Language is such that you and I cannot
converse toether, I having a matter of so great concernment to impart unto you;
but I trust that by the help of the Ingenuity of the worthy Interpreter, it
will faithfully be communicated unto you, it being answerable to your
expectation, manifest in the 26 Sect. of your Book, called The Hope of Israel.

1. I say, King Charles Steeward, Son to the late King Charles of England, is
he whom you call your Messiah Captain and Deliverer, who will bring you to
present happiness, if you follow him.

2. I say, those Jews who would come into England without his command, come
against God, and their Messiah appointed of God for them; and therefore if they
come, they shall in a short time be spoiled and destroyed.

3. I that tell you these things am a man that have had the Spirit of Prophecy
this twenty four years, and I have declared above twenty two years agone; all
the Judgments that came since upon this Nation, as thousands of English can
witness it: And that then I was a Prisoner three years upon that account. And
you may see more of this in my Book, called A voice from Heaven, and my Book
called the Echo to the Voice from Heaven.

4. I tell you that King Charles Steeward by descent, as his Star did manifest,
is the first Born of Iaphet the Elder Son of Noah, Gene. 10. 21. And therefore
the said King Charles by right is Heir to all the World: And God will give him
and his Seed-Royal in due Season the pre-eminence of it: And all the Jews shall
be converted unto Jesus in him, John 6. 56. and be an eminent people (under him
and his Seed-Royal) in places of preferment, and in your own Land Flourish.
Thus much I see from the Holy Scriptures and Visions.

But you will say, How can King Charles be the said Messiah, seeing our Wisemen
say that he must be the Son of Joseph, and come of the Tribe of Ephraim, and
that he must die in the last War of Gog and Magog, and afterward rise again for
to enjoy the dignity of a Vice Roy, as Joseph was in Egypt?

1. I answer, that the two Messiahs are signified in them Shem and Iaphet,
because they were to come out of their Loins; Jesus of Shem and of Abraham and
David; Charles of Iapeht, and by adoption in Jesus: Of Abraham and Ephraim or
by imputation, and not by a carnal Generation; because Iaphet the Elder was to
come first into the Tent of Shem, and so to be exalted by that voluntary Act of
condescending, and giving the honor to his Brother Shem, according to the will
of his Father. Therefore the saying of Noah to his sons, Genesis 10. 25, 26, 27.
is the Groundwork of all that is spoken concerning the Messiah; and from that
Ground did all the Prophets Prophecy of the Messiahs; yet there was ground
given to Noah for his saying to his Sons, From the Beginning Cain should have
had condescended to Abel; for God ordained it then that the Elder in love and
respect should serve the Younger; for God had respect to Abel, and Cain should
have had respect unto him for that cause, and not to have hated him and slain
him for it.

2. I say King Charles is called the Son of Joseph not that he comes out of
his Loins, but because he is like unto him; for as Joseph was beloved of his
Father above all his Brethren, in so much that he made him a Coat of Honor,
as Kings Children had 2 Samuel 13. 18. It being of diverse colors like a Kings
Parliament Robe; for which cause he was hated of his Brethren, and because of
his faithfulness to his Father and his Visions, they hated him yet more, and
sold him away to the Ishmalits Genesis 37. So in like-manner because King Charles
the first was beloved of God his Father, and honored above all his Scots
Brethren; they hated him, and because of his Wisdom, Faithfulness and Visions
of God they hated him yet more, and sold him away to the English Parliament
Merchants: And as Joseph was long in affliction before he was exalted, Genesis 39.
Genesis 40. So King Charles suffered much for a long time, being imprisoned, and
at last slain, and he shall be likewise exalted by his Resurrection in the King
Charles his Son, both in person and power, as he says (in the conclusion of
his last speech to his Son in his book) Let my Memory with my Name ever live in
you, for the King believed that God would raise him up again in his Son.

And as Joseph being a Stranger in Egypt, yet was he exalted above all the
Egyptians except Pharaoh there King, who adopted him and gave him that power,
Genesis 41. So King Charles being a Stranger by Nation, and not a Jew, shall be
exalted above all the Jews, except Jesus the King, who does adopte him, and
give him that power; In these things King Charles is like Joseph, and therefore
by an Allegory he may be called his Son.

Thus he is also an Eprathite. I have all ways found that England in Scripture
is signified to us by Mount Ephraim, and more perticularly in Dan. 11. 45. is
called the glorious holy Mountain between the Seas. And that the Prophecy of
Hosea which speaks much of Ephraim, is very much fulfilled among us now, for
England feeded one Wind, and follows after the East Wind, which has
blasted the glory of our Church and Kingdom, and made it desolate, Hosea 12. 1.
For following the Winde-breath and lies of Sectuaries coming from New England,
Holand, and other places East from us, has spoiled the glory of our Nation:
And much more I could show to prove that England in Scripture is signified by
Mount Ephraim, and specially is that Ephratah spoken of by David, Ps. 132. 5.
6. and by Micah. 5. 2. From whence your Messiah comes, for the present King
Charles Steeward is an English man born, but an Ephrathite born in Mount
Ephraim by Scripture account. And I find that there was in the Country of
Israel two sorts of Ephrathies: First, the Seed of Levi born in the Land of
Ephraim were called Ephrathites 1 Samuel 1. 1. Secondly, they that were of the
Seed of Caleb, by his Wife Ephratah, 1 Chorn. 2. 19, 24, 50. were called
Ephrathites, Ruth 1. 2. And these last Ephrathites did much signify the
English; for Ephratah, who was joined to Caleb of the Tribe of Judah, was an
obscure woman whose kindred is not known, which woman signifies a strange Land
that should bring forth light to Israel, which woman is first called Ephrah,
that is a Mother 1 Chronicles. 2. 19. and then after that is called Epratah, 1
Chorn. 2. 24. 50. 1 Chronicles. 4. 4. that is Mother of many Nations, as Abraham was
first called Abram, that is a Father, and then afterward called Abraham, that
is a Father of many Nations, Genesis 17. 5. yet it is more then probable that this
woman called Ephratah was a Gentile, because the place from whence her Name is
derived, Genesis 35. 16. 19. was called Ephrah by the Ancient Inhabitance of the
Land of Canaan; I mean some Holy Ones, such as Melchizedek and the like, else
the Name Ephratah had not been of such esteem in Israel, as we see David and
Micah lays it for a Groundwork, and as David enquiring for the Habitation of
the Mighty God of Jacob, which God of Jacob signifies the second Messiah, by
your term, or the third person as we term it, says he, Ps. 132. 6. Lo, we
have heard of it at Ephrata* we found it in the Fields of the Wood: Giving us
to understand that this place of your Messiah's Birth was as hard to be found,
as it is for a stranger to find a House that is in the midst of a great Wood.
Therefore if you ask our now English Ministers, why the Prophet Micah. 5. 2.
calls it Bethelem Ephratah? And the Evangelists coating the same Scripture,
Matthew 2. 6. calls it Bethelem in the Land of Judah, they cannot answer you; but
the Reason why the Evangelists does not mention Ephratah, is because that he
understood these things in part, that I now manifest unto you; namely, that
there should come another great One (for your deliverance) out of some Country
signified to Jesus Christ and his Apostles, by that same woman called Ephratah.
And in this sense your Wisemen call your Messiah an Eprathite, and not that he
must come out of the Tribe of Ephraim Loynally, as you suppose Jeroboam did.

4. That this late War of England, in which War King Charles the first died;
which War is not yet ended, nor will not end in England is the last War of Gog
and Magog, may be easily proved, for this Land, as our English Chronicles
report of old, until the Btittains Conquered it, was Gogmagogs Land: As further
in the great Hall of London, called Guild Hall, you may see the very Picture of
Gogmagog, and Brittainus that slew him, in there full stature, set up for a
memorial to show what Mighty men of strength and stature were in those days.
Thus you see how King Charles is the Son of Joseph and an Eprathite, how he
died in the last War of Gog and Magog, and how he is to rise again in his Son,
to be according to his Name, a Steeward or a Vice Roy under Jesus, as Joseph
was under Pharaoh, all agreeable to what your Wisemen say of him, for the seed
of Gogmagog that remained in this Land, rose up against their King, sold him
and slew him, to fulfill the Scripture: But he shall rise again according to it,
as abovesaid, for your deliverance; as Constantine the Great also born in this
Land arose to deliver the Christians from the Tyranny of the Heathenish Roman
Emperors.

5. You may know King Charles Steeward to be the man that you look for, or your
Messiah, as you call him, by the Star that appeared at his birth, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
according to the promise of Jesus, Revelat. 2. 26, 27, 28. For as there was a
Star seen at the Birth of Jesus, which Star directed the Wisemen of the East
unto him, and by which Star they knew him to be the King of the Jews, Mat. 2.
So the same Star appeared at the Birth of King Charles, Revel. 2. 27. 28. as it
is written, Psam 50. 6. The Heavens shall declare his Righteousness: for God is
Judge himself Selah. He sends his Star to Justify Charles. And again, Psalm
97. 6. The shall Heavens declare his Righteousness: and all the people see his
glory: Very few saw the Star that appeared at the Birth of Jesus, but thousands
and my self for one saw the Star that appeared at the Birth of Charles, and
there was Verses made of it in Latin, and presented to his Father, the late
King Charles as he went to Paul's Cross to give thanks for the Queens
Deliverance.

Thus in English.

When to Paul's Cross the grateful King drew near,
A shining Star did in the Heavens appear:
Thou that consults with Divine Mysteries,
Tell me what this bright Comet signifies.
Now is there born a Valiant Prince 'ith' West.
That shall Eclipse the Kindomes of the East.
6. You may know King Charles to be the Messiah you look for, by the
description of his person in Scripture, for says the Spouse, Cant. 5. 10. 11.
My beloved is White and Ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand (his head is as
the most fine Gold, that is Jesus) his locks are bussie and black as a Raven,
that is Charles, and for his Stature also Esdras says, That he is taller then
all about him, 2 Esdras 2. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. and such a proper person
King Charles is. Your Forefathers refused Jesus, because of the meaness of his
Birth and Parentage, though indeed Jesus is the most Excellent of all men: But
what can you say against King Charles the Servant of Jesus? he is a King of the
highest Birth, being the Successor of above three hundred Kings who were his
Forefathers in Scotland; The Turk and all the Kings in the World for Antiquity
are but younger Brothers in comparison of him, for the first King of Scotland
was Gathelus Fergus of the Seed of Iaphet, the Successor of Melchizedek, which
Gathelus Fergus Married Scota, the Daughter of Pharaoh that took Moses for her
Son: and when the Plagues was in Egypt, fearing least those Countries (because
of their wickedness) should have been destroyed as Sodam was, Gathelus Fergus
and Scota withal their people came away to Sea; and brought with them from
Bethel the very stone which was Jacobs Pillow there, Genesis 28. 18, 22, and the
first place they landed at was Portugal: thence they came to the North of
Ireland and built a City, calling it after the Kings Name Knockfergus; and from
thence they came to Scotland, which they so Named from Scota the Queen: And
there they are, though many times brought low, as now they are, yet an
unconquered people to this day: And of the stone of Jacob, which they brought
from Bethel in Canaan, they made of it a Chair, in which Chair of old they were
wont to Crown their Kings, but some hundred years agone the English got the
said stone Chair from them, and brought it to London; which stone now is to be
seen for a Monument in Westminster Abbey; I have seen it my self, and there is a
Prophecy of it runs thus.

The Scots shall have that Land as Native Ground,
If words fail not, wheresoever this Stone is found.
And we have seen it partly so fulfilled: for since King James came to England,
the Scots had England as their own Native Land: And what beauty every way else
can be desired, but is to be found in this King, for his Wisdom, Godlyness and
Valor? there is none like him, wherefore the Prophet Isaiah said of him to the
Jews, when by the spirit he saw his glory Isai. 33. 17. Thine eyes shall see
the King in his beauty: they shall behold the Land that is very far off: giving
you to understand that the King was full of beauty, yet that the Land of his
Nativity even England was very far from Judah, as he says again, Isa. 30. 27.
Behold the Name of the Lord comes from far: so here in also it is plain that
your Messiah was not to be a Jew, because no Jew now can descend of such a
Noble Lineage as King Charles came from, for the Jews have been a cursed ever in
slavery and misery, since they crusified the Lord Jesus Christ: and it will
never be otherwise with them, until they confess him to be the Son of God, and
the only savior of the world. Then shall the Jews have the Glory among all
Nations, as it is written, Zech. 10. 23. ten men out of all Languages of the
Nations shall take hold of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you, for
we have heard that God is with you.

7. You may know King Charles Steeward to be your Messiah, by this also, we
have a Maxim in our English Law, that says, The King of England never erreth
nor never dies: Which if our English Lawyers that affirm it, did but
understand what they say, and whereof they affirm or did apprehend the meaning
of the first Authors of the said Maxim, they might know that such a Perogative
as not to sin or to die, is a Perogative that belongs to Christ only: Therefore
it follows that our Ancestors did believe that Jesus Christ lived in the
English King, and that he would appear in him, as now he does appear in the
person of King Charles Steeward for your Conversion and Deliverance.

8. And this also to me is a strong evidence that Christ did appear in the said
King, the same day that the King suffered, it being the 30 of January, 1648.
was by the providence of God, and appointed of the Church of England in the
Callender, the relation of Christ's Sufferings appointed to be Read; as yet you
that doubt may see it is so set down; whereby God did by the said providence
assure us, that the same Tragedy which once was acted at Jerusalem by the Jews
on the Body of Jesus, was now Re-acted at London on the body of his Servant
Charles: So that in like manner the Son of God here suffered afresh, and was
put to an open shame by his Enemies, Heb. 6. 6. and this it was before the King
suffered, that morning, Ian. 30. Doctor Iudgson Bishop of London Read Morning
Prayer to him, and the Chapters appointed for that day Morning; the first being
the seventh of Exodus, which is very remarkable also, for as in Egypt on that
day, the Lord pronounced Moses to be a God to Pharaoh: So on this day in
England, by the same word the Lord pronounced Charles a God to stand against
all the hard hearted Pharaohs in the World, because he was like Moses in
faithfulness and meekness, Numb. 12. 3. 7. yea and in slowness of speech too,
for the King had his stamering, Exodus 4. 10. The second Chapter was, Math. 27.
and it is the Relation of Christ's Sufferings; the King thought that the Bishop
read it of purpose, whereupon the King asked him why he read that same Chapter?
said he, because it is the same that is appointed for this morning, and when
the King found it so in the Calender, he was overjoyed with it, because by that
he saw that he should be like his Savior, raised again to Life and Glory
Immortal.

9. I say it is needful for you to read the Testament of Jesus Christ, for
therein you shall find your Messiah most perfectly set forth, where sometimes
he is called the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, the holy Ghost, the Deliverer,
the more sure Word, John 14. 16, 17, 26. John 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Math. 12. 31, 32. Romans 11. 25, 26. 2 Pet. 1. 19. and sometimes the Lord the
Lamb or the like Titles, 1 Corin. 4. 5. Revel. 14. 1. And abundance more
places I could show you in the New Testament that sets him sorth, which now I
omit for brevity sake; Besides, you shall find there that you Jews are to have
the pre-eminence with him, for there are a hundred forty and four thousand Jews
sealed for him, twelve thousand of every Tribe, Revel. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
and see that the same number of Jews stand up with him upon Mount Sion to war
against the wicked, and to overcome them, Revel. 14. 1. Revel. 17. 14. and in
Revel. 12. you may see the Birth of your Messiah; who shall Rule all Nations
with a Rod of Iron; and see how the Wicked persecutes his Mother, and would
fain devour the Child, but he is taken into the Throne of God, so that he is
out of the wicked Dragons reach: some silly Zealots will tell you that this
Child is Jesus Christ, but you may say, No, for Jesus Christ himself says,
Revel. 2. 27, 28. That he will give this power over Nations, to some other
faithful persons, now manitfested to be Charles Steeward, and thahe will give
him the morning Star; and to what end should Jesus give him the morning Star?
but to testify at his Birth that Charles Steeward is the chosen of God, who
shall Rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, and Jesus calls him his Son, who
shall Inherit all things, Revel. 21. 7. as it is Written Psalm. 2. 7. 8. 9.
saying to him, Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession. Thou
shall break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
potters Vessel. Now this promise of Ruling over Nations and of having the
morning Star, was obtained by the first Charles for the condition on which the
promise are grounded is this Revel. 2. 26, 27, 28. He that overcomes and
keeps my works to the end, to him will I give Power over the Nations. And he
shall Rule them with a Rod of Iron; as the Vessels of a Potter shall they be
broken to shivers, even as I received of my Father. And I will give him the
Morning Star. And King Charles the first is he that overcame all the Enemies of
Gods Truth, who by his death kept up Gods True Worship, and sealed it with his
blood, and so obtained the promise for himself and his Seed for ever.

10. And though the preseut King Charles Steeward be thus dignified; yet do not
you think that ever he will acknowledge himself to be your Messiah, for his
Humility and Zeal, for the Lord Jesus shall be such, that he will not take upon
him such a Title as to be called the Messiah. For as John the Baptist was so
humble, that he would not acknowledge himself to be Eliah John 1. 14. Though
Jesus Christ says that he was the very Eliah, Math. 11. 14. So in like manner
King Charles will be so humble as not to acknowledge himself to be your
Messiah; though you see it now manifested that he is your Messiah, asye call
him; yet our Wise Men and Prophets that foresaw him, and did prophecy of him;
durst not call him the Messiah, least thereby they should offend God; but they
called him by several other names, as sometimes the Lion of the North, Or the
Great King of the North, Psalm. 48. 1, 2. The dead King risen, or the like
names; and under such names will he go and do the work of God for your
Deliverance, and under such notion shall he prevail against all that oppose him
until all be brought in due season under his Scepter: Besides, I say all these
late transactions in England came to pass only for your sake: God now being
mindful of his promise to your Nation, for there was no other cause why the
people of these Lands should rise against their King and prevail as they did,
no people under Heaven being in a better condition then they were when this war
began, but that some holy Ones here had prayed for your conversion, and God
granted their request, and stirred up cruel Ones to bring these things about to
effect it.

11. I say that you Jews shall never come rightly to understand the Scripture,
and reconcile them, until you come to acknowledge your King Jesus Christ to be
the only Messiah, and no other, for the Scripture speaks but of one Messiah:
neither shall the Christians ever come to understand them right and reconcile
them, until they come to acknowledge Christ Jesus second coming to be in
Charles Steeward for his Deliberance: but mistake me not, for though the day of
Judgment in some places is said to be as a lightning a moment, a twinkling of
an eye for shortness Mat. 24* 27. 1 Co^in. 15. 52. Yet in other places of
Scripture that day is said to bea long day containing Summer and Winter Zecha.
14. 6, 7, 8, 9. and St. Pet. speaking of the day of Judgment speaks as if it
were a thousand years 2 Pet. 3. 7, 8, 9.

Hence I do infer that though this day is as a Moment in regard of its breaking
forth, yet regad of Gods Mercy to bring sinners to the Truth, it may last a
thousand years.


And why? because the Messiah sometimes in Scripture is said to come of a dry
Ground (that is of poor Parentage) and so as to have no beauty or things
desirable in him: And therefore we see his people despise him and reject* him,
Isai. 52. 13, 14, 15. Isai. 53. 23. And though he be their only King, yet they
cut him off, and take life and all so far as they can from him, Dan. 9. 26. And
sometimes in Scripture he is said to be a Glorious Victorious King, and that
his people shall willingly receive him, Psalm. 110. 1, 2. Isai. 33. 13. Isai.
63. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And this is the cause why men cannot agree about their
Messiah. The Jews will have him only to be a Glorious Victorious Warlike King:
The Christians will have him only to be a poor man without any worldly pomp at
all, but they should look on him as he appeared first in Jesus, and after in
Charles: Then their expectation on both sides will be answered, and take notice
what the Spouse says of him, Song. 5. 11. His Head is as the most fine Gold,
that is Jesus; His Locks bussie and black as a Raven, that is Charles: Lo here
are two men discribed, one with Yealow Hair like Gold, another with Hair as
black as a Raven; yet in the singular number, because of the Union that is
between them: And therefore I say again to you, because the Messiah in some
places of Scripture is said to be a poor despised person which none regards;
and in other places he is said to be a most glorious person: This is the Reason
why men vary and differ in their Judgments concerning the Messiah, which
Messiah was to be manifested in his first and second coming by two persons, yet
both of them by the Scripture so interwoven together, as if they were but one
man, wherefore few as yet understand a right the Mystery of the Messiah.
Moreover, I say when men come to consider what manner of beginning and being
Jesus Christ had in the world, comparing it with the Scripture; and to consider
what manner of beginning and being Charles has also in the World, comparing it
with the Scripture, confessing them both.

Then men shall understand the Truth, and find the Mystery opening it self to
them.

Then shall the Jews and Christians agree, for their is but a little
difference: Now the Jews look for the coming of their Messiah; the Christians
look for Christ's second coming: both in substance is the self same thing, yet
the danger stands in a mistake of the person, and the manner of his coming: The
Vulgar Christians (and not the Learned, who know it to be a Mystery) look for
Jesus to appear in a strange manner, yet in that same body of flesh which
suffered on the Cross; though himself and St. Paul tells them plainly that they
should not see him, nor know him no more in that body, John 16. 10. Corin. 5.
16. But he appears in Charles according to the manner that you Jews look for
him: Embrace him and receive him, for they that refuse him now, shall be
miserable for ever and ever.

12. I say that by considering these things you shall come to understand the
Truth, and see the promise of God fulfilled unto you in this point; but take
heed least you be deceived in that you believe, that your Messiah must needs be
a Jew, and come Loynally out of Ephraim; because as you say Jeroboam the first
King of the Ten Tribes came of Ephraim; for I tell you Jeroboam was none of
that Tribe, but he rather came of the Tribe of Judah, or of the Tribe of Levi;
for if Jeroboam had come of Ephraim, he had been called an Ephraimite, as you
see Joshua 16. 10. Judges 12. 5. 6. Those of the Tribe of Ephraim are called
Ephraimites; and Jeroboam is said to be an Ephrathite, 1 Kings 11. 26. and not
an Ephraimite; and so as I said before, the Seed of Judah are called
Ephrathites, Ruth. 1. 1. 2. Yea, David himself is called the Son of that
Ephrathite, 1 Samuel 17. 12. And Elkanah is called an Ephrathite, because he was
born in Mount Ephraim, 1 Samuel 1. 1. yet he was of the Tribe of Levi, 1 Chro. 6.
27, 28. none of the Seed of Ephraim are called Ephrathites; and for the place
from whence Jeroboam is said to come, called Zereda; who can tell where it was?
if it be not the City of the Zareathites, who were of the Tribe of Judah, and of
the Seed of Caleb by Ephratah, 1 Chronicles. 2. 50, 53. or from whence Nebat and
Zeruah Ieroboans Parents came, except they came from thence, and being also the
Seed of the Woman Epbratah, 1 Chronicles. 1. 50. came to be called Eprathites: who
can tell whence they were, except they came from Judah? for we reed no more of
them but what we read in 1 Kings 11. 26. Yet you will ask me, how comes David
to be called the Son of that Ephrathite, seeing he came not properly of the
woman Ephratah, 1 Samuel 17. 12. 1 Chronicles. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18.

I answer, David came to be called the son of that Ephrathite from Boaz,
Marrying of Ruth the Wife of Malhon the Ephrathite, Ruth 1. 1, 2. to raise up
his name (as he was an Ephrathite) upon his Inheritance; so that Obed^esse and
David are sons of that Ephrathite by imputation; for the blessing was conferd
upon Boaz, because of his kindness to the dead, Ruth 4. but their was a nearer
Kinsman to Malhon that refused to take Ruth and do it, Ruth 3. 12. And who can
tell but that Jeroboam came from that unworthy nameless Kinsman of Malhon, for
it is clear that he came not from Ephraim? And since the Scripture is so silent
in his Pedigree, if a man had a mind to be contentious, he might hold an
Argument that King Charles came of the Tribe of Ephraim as much as Jeroboam did
by a Female line: For in old time many Noble Christian Families of Jews came
and dwelt in this Land, whose Seed though obscure, are among us to this day,
but it is uncertain, and I shall not stand to maintain it; It is the fault of
every one, he would ingross all to himself, his Neighbor should have nothing
by his good will. The Jew would have all the pre-eminence to himself: The
Gentile having Jesus and all things with him, would have the Jews to have no
snare with him; but God is the Disposer of all these things; you Jews would
have both Messiah to come Loynally from your Nation, not considering that God
by Noah from the beginning made the same promise to Iaphet as he made to Shem,
Genesis 9. 26, 27. so that the one Messiah comes from Shem, and the other from
Iaphet; this is Gods Decree, and the Root of the History, and God who has
fulfilled it in part, will have it so perfectly fulfilled, though men do what
they can against it: Therefore deceive not your selves, by expecting an
Ephraimite of the Seed of Ephraim Loynally to come and be your Messiah, for if
Jeroboam had been an Ephraimite, yet it does not follow that your Messiah must
needs come of that Tribe also; but your Conversion mystically, yet clear to me,
is set out and signified in Abraham sending of his servant to take a wife for
his son Jacob, Genesis 24. where you are first to observe that by Abraham is
signified God the Father, by Isaac is signified Jesus Christ, by the servant is
signified Charles Steeward, and by the wise Rebeckah is signified you Jews:
Observe it thus again, that Abraham is the Father of the Faithful, that Isaac
is the promised Son, and that in Isaac his Seed (or Rebeckah) is called, ^y
which Seed called, chiefly is signified your Call and Conversion to Jesus
Christ, and consider that this Servant of Abraham, who is sent to call
Rebeckah, is the Steeward of his house that Ruled all he had: and a Gentile of
Damascus, by which sending of this Steeward, Genesis 24. 2, 3, 4. Genesis 15. 2, 3.
is signified God sending of Charles Steeward to call you and bring you to Jesus
Christ, as the other brought Rebeckah to Isaac. Now by this emblem also you may
see the manner of your Conversion to God in Jesus Christ, and that you shall be
brought to him, by one that is a Steeward by Name* and a Gentile also;
Therefore him whom you call the Messiah is a Gentile and nor a Jew: but the
true Messiah, unto whom he is a Jew, even Jesus Christ, to whom be the Glory,
for ever and ever, Amen.

And to conclude, Beloved, Elect of God, if you had been here in land thirty
years agone, to see the Beauty of our Church, and the Worship of God as it was
then Established among us, according to the institution of David the Singers in
their Courses daily praising God in the beauty of Holiness, all things being
(...) decently in order according to the Word of God, without any superstition
or, Idolatry. I say, if you ha^ been here then to see it, you would have said
that our Reformation and Worship was that way prophesied of by the Prophet
Isai. 35. 8. and called the way of Holiness, which way yet shall be Established
among us, within this eight years more perfectly then at that time, for then
the Enemies had too much Liberty, and did blasphem and brought contempt upon
the true Worship of God to the Ruin of it* and making it desolate, they have
brought us to confusion; so that there is no face of Religious-VVorship among
us now, but instead thereof we have vain Bablings; Jang(...) and VVranglings
about we know not what; Something we would have, but alas, doting about
questions we are not able to resolve on anything that is good, neither can we
agree in any thing, but in persecuting of that Truth which we once loved* and
in which Truth is our Eternal happiness. This has been the Case of England*
many years: Now even since we break in pieces the Bonds of Peace, Unity and
Amity, which Bonds once we kept and were made happy by it. All this came upon
us for our sins and murmurings against the true Worship of God established
among us; yet we do not repent of it, neither dare we return, nor can we do any
good for our selves, until our God come and break the Yoke of our Adversary,
and set us at Liberty again: but chiefly these things came upon us for your
sake, to fulfill Gods Word, to give Light to you, to free you, that you may be
(...)med, Delivered, Converted and (...)ght to your King Jesus Christ, which is
the desire of your Servant for his sake.

Arise Evans.
Blackefriers in Long Alley* March. 16. 16^^*
The Postscript.
BEware of Amsterdam, that damned Rebelious City of Holland, that provoks God
to his face, in which Atheists and Devils have their abode: It is a Cage of
every unclean and hateful Bird, Revel. 17. 2. that shall seek to hinder your
Conversion by King Charles; therefore God abhors it and will destroy it. For
the covetous State of Holland does receive any sort of Sectuaries to them for
their money, and are become rich and proud by it: A fore this time when they
begged a relef from England and had it, then they called themselves the poor
distressed States of Holland; now being rich and proud they disdain all Kings,
and call themselves the High and Mighty States of Holland, would have England
to be theirs, but the English under the English State pulled them down a little;
and the same English men under King Charles when he comes to his Throne shall
destroy them, for as they are like Tyrus they may see themselves as in a Glass;
and that is their dome? Isa. 23. 7, 8, 9. Ezekiel Chap. 26. Chap. 27. Be
Valiant ye English men and utterly destroy them, for the Lord Commands you, and
be will help you, then shall no pricking Brier, nor any grievous Thorn be of
all that are round about you to trouble you, Ezekiel 28. 23. 24.

This Book was written Eight years ago, and delivered into the hands of Mr.
John Androws a Person of Quality, living in Castle-Yard, and never published
till Now. 1664.

FINIS.

