A CHARACTER OF ENGLAND, As it was lately presented in a Letter, to a Noble Man
of FRANCE.



LONDONs Printed for Jo. Crook, and are to be sold at the Ship in St.
Paul's-yard, 1^59.

TO THE READER.
WHen I first chanced upon this severe piece and had read it in the Language it
was sent me, I was so much concerned with the honor of our Country, that it
was my resolution to suppress the publication of our shame, as conceiving it an
act of great inhumanity; But upon second, and more impartialthoughts, I have
been tempted to make it speak English, and give it liberty, not to reproach,
but to instruct our Nation; remembering what the Wiseman has said, Open rebuke
is better than secret Love. Prove. 27.5. The truth is, I cannot say but the
particulars, are most of them, very home; and which we may no way evade,
without acknowledging, at least, that the Gentleman (who ever he were) made
notable use of his time, but best of all, by setting upon an effectual
redress of what is amiss. And though I doubt not, but one might easily retort
in as many instances, upon defects as great (if not greater) of that Nation;
(for he that finds fault, had need be perfect) yet were it then fittest to do
it, and to revenge this charitable office, when we shall have first reformed
our selves.

Farewell.

A CHARACTER OF ENGLAND, etc.
My Lord, YOu command me to give you minute account of what I observed, and how
I passed that little time which I latel y spent in England; a Country, whose
Character you so greatly desire to be informed of, in a conjuncture (as you
rightly deduce) of so strange vicissitude, and wonderful alterations; And to
whom, my Lord, should I more readily submit? First, encouraged to make this
excursion by your Ld. as who had formerly beheld, and so much admired the
splendour and magnificence of this Court, and Kingdom in its greatest Acme and
luster. But, my Lord, I cannot imagine, that you should esteem me either of
years, or capacity to inform You whose judgment is so mature, and
correspondence so universal, as that there is nothing which can escape your
cognizance, not only in that Island, but in all the world besides. But since
you oblige me not to dip into the transactions of State, the effects of
Providence, Time, Notices of a superior Orb, and in which you cannot be
instructed by so weak an instrument as your Servant; and demand only the
little Remarkes of my hasty, and desultory Peregrination; though I cannot
pretend to improve your Lordships knowledge, yet I may hope to give it
diversion, and an Essay of my Obedience.

It must be avowed that England is a sweet, and fertile Country.

Terra potens armis, atque ubere gleba:

That the Fields, the Hills, and the Valleys are perpetually clad with a
glorious, and agreeable verdure; that her provisions are plentiful; her
staples important; and her interest very considerable; not omitting the most
beautiful Ladies, I had almost said, of the world, but for a just respect due
to the illustrious Circles of our Court, where the beauties of conversation, so
far transcend the tinctures of Lillies and Roses. But these, my Lord, are not
the Memoires which you demand; I will therefore hasten to my Post.

After a short passage from Calais, we came on shore at Dover, where the people
of the Town entertained us with such suspicious, and forbidding countenances,
whispering, and stiff postures, that I should never have believed so great a
difference in the addresses of two Nations, could have been produced by so
short a trajection, and in a Port continually accustomed to the faces of
strangers, had not the contrary humors of our contiguous neighbors, the
Spaniards, made it possible, in so many pleasant instances. But I was amazed,
when we had taken Post, and scarce out of the Village, at the acclamations of
the Boys, running after, and affrighting our horses, hooting, and crying out,
French Dogs, French Dogs, a Mounser, Mounser! by a particular expression of
welcome, which other people would interpret derision; But in this Triumph
(though somewhat late e're we set out of Dover) we attained as far as Rochester
the first night, where, how new a thing it appeared to me, to see my confident
Host set him down cheek by joul by me, belching, and puffing Tobacco in my
face, you may easily imagine; till I afterward found it to be the usual style
of this Country; and that the Gentlemen, who lodge at their Inns, entertain
themselves in their company, and are much pleased with their impertinencies:
Arrived at the Metropolis of civility, London, we put our selves in Coach with
some persons of quality, who came to conduct us to our Lodging; but neither was
this passage without honors done to us, the kennel dirt, squibs, roots and
rams-hornes being favors which were frequently cast at us by the children, and
apprentises without reproof; civilities, that in Paris, a Gentleman as seldom
meets withal, as with the contests of Carmen, who in this Town domineer in the
streets, o're-thow the Hell-Carts (for so they name the Coaches) cursing, and
reviling at the Nobles: You would imagine your self amongst a Legion of Devils,
and in the suburbs of Hell. I have greatly wondered at the remisness of the
Magistrate, and the temper of the Gentlemen, and that the Citizens, who subsist
only upon them, should permit so great a disorder, rather joining in the
affronts, than at all chastizing the inhumanity: But these are the natural
effects of parity, popular Libertinism, and Insulary manners.

I find, as you told me, my Lord, London to be a Town so nobly Situated, and
upon such a River, as Europe certainly shows not a more useful and agreeable;
but withal this, a City consisting of a wooden, northern, and inartificiall
congestion of Houses; some of the principal streets so narrovv, as there is
nothing more deformed, and unlike, than the prospect of it at a distance, and
its asymmitry within the Walls. Their Fountains, which are the pride and
grace of our streets, and plentifully supplied in this City, are here immured,
to secure the waters from, I know not what, impurities: but, certainly, it
does greatly detract from the beauty of the Carfours, and intercepts the view.

Amongst the pieces of modern Architecture, I have never observed above two,
which were remarkable in this vast City: The Portico of the Church of S. Paul's,
and the Banqueting house at White Hall, of which I remember to have heard your
Lordship speak: but you would be amazed at the genious of this age, that should
suffer this goodly and venerable fabric, to be built about, and converted into
raskally Warehouses, and so sordidly obscured and defaced, that an argument of
greater avarice, malice, meanness and deformity of mind cannot possibly be
expressed: Nothing here of Ornament, nothing of magnificence, no public and
honorable works, such as render our Paris, and other Cities of France,
renowned, and visited by all the World; emulating even Italy her self, for her
Palaces, uniform and conspicuous Structures: But O! how loathsome a Golgotha is
this Paul's! I asure your Lordship, that England is the sole spot in all the
world, where, amongst Christians, their Churches are made jakes, and stables,
markets and Tipling-houses; and where there were more need of Scorpions, than
Thongs, to drive out the Publicanes and Money Changers: In sum, where these
excellent uses, are pretended to be the marks of Piety and Reformation.

I had sometimes the curiosity to visit the several Worships of these
Equivocal Christians, and Enthusiasts: But I extremely wondered to and those
whom they call Presbyterians, and that would imitate us of the Religion in
France, and Geneva, to have their Discipline so confused and different. In this
remarke, my Lord, to be somewhat more particular, you will not be displeased;
because it was a thing you so much recommended to my especial notice. Form,
they observe none: They pray and read without method, and indeed, wtithout
reverence or devotion. I have beheld a whole Congregation sit on their-with
their hats on, at the reading of Psalms, and yet bare-headed when they sing
them. In diverse places they read not the Scriptures at all; but up into the
Pulpit, where they make an insipid, tedious and immethodical Prayer, in Phrases
and a tone so affected and mysterious, that they give it the name of Canting, a
term by which they do usually express the gibbrish of Beggars and Vagabonds;
after which, there follows the Sermon (which for the most part, they read out
of a book) consisting (like their prayers) of speculative and abstracted
notions, and things, which, nor the people nor themselves well understand: But
these they extend to an extraordinary length, and Pharisaical repetitions: and
well they may: for their Chaires are lined with prodigious Velvet cushions,
upon which they loll, and talk, 'till almost they sleep; I am sure, 'till
their Auditors do.

The Minister uses no habit of distinction, or gravity; but steps up in querpo;
and when he lays by his cloak (as I have observed some of them) he has the
action rather of a Thrasher, than a Divine; this they call taking pains, and
indeed it is so, to those that hear them: But, thus they have now encouraged
every pert Mechanic to invade, affront and out-preach them; and having
uncancell'd all manner of decency, prostituted both their persons and function
to usurpation, penury and derision. You may well imagine by the manners of the
people, and their prodigious opinions, that there is no Catechism, nor
Sacraments duly administered: The Religion of England is Preaching, and sitting
still on Sundaies. How they Baptitse I know not, because the Congregation is
dismissed, and they agree in no form; and for the other Sacraments, no man
gives, or receives alike; and it is so seldom done in remembrance of Christ,
that in some Parishes, I have heard, they can hardly remember when they
received it. Generally I have no where seen goodlier outsides of Churches,
what they are within I cannot so well say, for their Temples are as fast as was
that of Janus after the first Punick-war, unless it be upon Sundaies, when they
blow the brazen Trumpets of Sedition, not the silver-ones of the Tabernacle. I
have discoursed with some concerning this sealing up their Churches in the
weekdaies; They are ready to retorte upon us in France, not considering that
our Churches are solitary, and in some places many leagues distant from the
Towns, that we are under a persecution, and so necessitated to omit the
public Morning and Evening Sacrifie, which I remember to have heard several
of our Divines deplore the defect of; as of many other decencies, which, here,
they can have no pretense against: But such of their Churches as I have
frequented, were dammed up with Pues, every three or four of the Inhabitants,
sitting in narrow Pounds or Pulpits by themselves; for they are all turned
Preachers ^ow. In short, there is nothing more unlike to our reformed Churches
in France, and I think, in all Europe beside; the apprehension of Popery, or
fondness to their own imaginations, having carried them so far to the other
extreme, that they have now lost all moderation, and decorum; And I have been
herein, my Lord the more industrious to inform my self of each particular;
because it seems yet to be the most public Religion of the State. Some of
their own party, I have heard deplore this confusion, but certainly, they
themselves gave the first occasion to these monstrous Liberties, by a rigid,
and uncharitable discipline; primarily (it seems) introduced by the Scots, and
so refined upon by these; as there are few or none that will submit to the
Tyrany; but every one takes his own course, and has protection for it. Some
well natured abused men I have met withal amongst them; but, if I mistake not,
for the greater ingredient, ambitious, ignorant, overweening, sower and
uncharitable, ne quid asperius, combining with the interest of the times, and,
who to render themselves powerful, have in compliances with the spiritual
pride of the Mechanics and Corporations, connived at those many, and
prodigious Schisms and Heresies which are now spawned under them in such
numbers, as give terror to the State. I omit to tell your Lord-ship that few
take notice of the Lords Prayer; it is esteemed a kind of weakness to use it,
but the Creed and the Decalogue are not once heard of in their Congregations;
This is milk for Babes, and these are all Giants. They do frequently solemnize
their late National deliverances, and some days of Christian blood shed with
all possible severity: But they think it gross Idolatry to join with the whole
Christian Church of all professions under heaven, in the Anniversaries of our
B. Saviors Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and the descent of the Holy
Ghost, spiritual, eternal and never to be forgotten mercies. Would your
Lordship believe that this madness should advance so far, as to disturb the
French-Church there, which you know, does in all places observe those signal
deliverances and blessings, both by Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments and
exhortations apposite to the occasion? What think you will be the issue of this
goodly Reformation? I could tell you of the mysterious Classis, of the Tryers;
their ridiculous, insidiary and presumptuous questions; their unheard of
animosities against their Brethern of the Church of England, suffering
themselves to be rather torn in sunder by the Sectaries, Demetrius and the
Crafts-men, whilst they contend about trifles and mere shadows.

Concerning the Independents, all I can learn is; They are a refined, and
apostate sort of Presbyters; or, rather such as renounce all ordination, as who
having preached promiscuously to the people, ct cuningly ensnared a select
number of rich, and ignorant Proselytes, separate themselves into Conventicles,
which they name Congregations. There is nothing do s more resemble this Sect,
than our Romans Missionaries sent out in partibus Infidelium; for they take all
other Christians to be Heathen. These are those great pretenders to the Spirit,
into whose party does the vilest person living, no sooner adscribe himself, but
he is, ipso facto, dubbed a Saint, hallowed, and dear to God. These, are the
confidents, who can design the minute, the place and the means of their
conversion: a Schism full of spiritual-disdain, incharity and high imposture,
if any such there be on earth: But every alteration of State, destroying the
interest of the versatile contrivers, they are as ready to Transmigrate into
the next more thriving Fraternity, as the Souls of Pythagoras into beasts, and
may then perhaps, assume some other Title. This is a sad, but serious truth,
and no little menaces the common Christianity, unless timely prevented. But Sr.
I will no longer tire your patience with these Monsters (the subject of every
contemptuous Pamphlet) then with the madness of the Anabaptists, Quakers, fifth
Monarchy-men and a Cento of unheard of Heresies besides, which, at present,
deform the once renowned Church of England; and approach so little the
pretended Reformation, which we in France have been made to believe, that there
is nothing more heavenly wide. But I have dwelt too long on this remarke, I
return to where I digressed; for I was veiwing the Buildings, which are as
deformed as the minds and confusions of the people, for if a whole street be
fired (an accident not unfrequent in this wooden City) the Magistrate has
either no power, or no care to make them build with any uniformity, which
renders it, though a large, yet, a very ugly Town, pestred with
Hackney-coaches, and insolent Carre men, Shops and Taverns, Noise, and such a
cloud of Sea-coal, as if there be a resemblance of Hell upon Earth, it is in
this Vulcano in a foggy day: This pestilent Smoke, which corrodes the very
iron, and spoils all the movables, leaving a soot upon all things that it
lights; and so fatally seizing on the Lungs of the Inhabitants, that the Cough,
and the Consumption spare no man. I have been in a spacious Church where I
could not discern the Minister for the Smoke; nor hear him for the peoples
barking. There is within this City, and in all the Towns of England (which I
have passed through) so prodigious a number of houses where they sell a certain
drink called Ale, that I think a good half of the Inhabitants may be
denominated Ale housekeepers: These are a meaner sort of Cabarets: But what is
most deplorable, where the Gentlemen sit, and spend much of their time;
drinking of a muddy kind of Beverage, and Tobacco, which has universally
besotted the Nation, and at which (I hear) they have consumed many noble
Estates. As for other Taverns, London is composed of them, where they drink
Spanish Wines, and other sophisticated Liquors to that fury and imtemperance,
as has often amazed me to consider it: But thus some mean fellow, the Drawer,
ar^^ves to an Estate, some of them having built fair houses, and purchased
those Gentlemen out of their possessions, who have ruined themselves by that
base and dishonorable vice of ebriety: And that nothing may be wanting to the
height of luxury and impiety of this Abomination, they have translated the
Organs out of the Churches, to set them up in Taverns, chanting their
Dithyrambicks, and bestiall Bacchanalias to the tune of those Instruments,
which were wont to assist them in the clebration of God's Praises, and regulate
the voices of the worst singers in the World, which are the English in their
Churches at present: I cannot but commend the Reformed in Holland, who still
retain their Organs in the Churches, and make use of them at the Psalms,
without any opinion of superstition; and I once remember to have heard the
famous Diodati wish might be introduced even at Geneva. A great error
undoubtedly in those who sit at the helm, to permit this Scandal; to suffer so
many of these Taverns and occasions of intemperance, such Leaches and Vipers;
to gratify so sordid and base a sort of People with the spoils of honest, and
well natured men. Your L. will not believe me that the Ladies of greatest
quality, suffer themselves to be treated in one of these Taverns, where a
Curtesan in other Cities would scarcely vouchsafe to be entertained: but you
will be more astonished when I shall assure you, that they drink their crowned
Cups roundly, strain healths through their Smocks, dance after the Fiddle,
kiss freely, and term it an honorable Treat. But all this my experience,
particular address, and habitudes with the greatest of that Nation has assured
me, that it is not the pass time only of the inferior and meretricious sort;
since I find it a chief suppletory at all their entertain ments, to drink
excessively, and that in their own houses, before the Ladies, and the Lacquaes:
It is the afternones diversion; whether for want of better to employ the time,
or affection to the drink, I know not: But I have found some persons of
quality, whom one could not safely visit after dinner, without resolving to
undergo this Drinkordel, and endure the Question: It is esteemed a piece of
wit, to make a man drunk, for In France they give a certain torture to
Malefactors, by pouring such a quantily of water into their mouths which they
call giving the question, and I by Traslation Drink Ordell.
which some swilling insipid client or Congiarie, is a frequent and constant
adjutant. Your L: may hence well imagine, how heavy, dull and insigficant the
conversation is; loud, querelous and impertinent. I shall relate a story that
once happened in my presence at a Gentleman's house in the Country, where there
was much company and feasting. I fortuned to come at dinnertime, and after the
cloth was taken away (as the manner is) they fell to their laudable exercise:
But I unacquainted then with their custom, was lead up into a withdrawing
Room, where I had the permission (with a noble person who introduced me) to sit
and converse with the Ladies, who were thither retired; the Gentle. of the
house leaving us in the mean time, to entertain his friends below: But you may
imagine how strangely I was astonished, to see within an hour after, one of the
company that had dined there, entering into the Room all bloody, and
disordered, to fetch a svvord which lay in one of the windows, and three or
four of his companions, whom the fumes of the Wine had inspirited, pursuing,
and dragging him by the hair, till in this confusion, one of their Spurs
engaged into a Carpet, upon which stood a very fair Looking-Glass, and two
noble pieces of Porselain, drew all to the ground, brake the Glass and the
Vasas in pieces; and all this on such an instant, that the Gentleman and my
self, had much ado to rescue the affrighted Ladies from suffering in the
tumult; but at last we prevailed, and brought them to terms, the quarrel
concerning an Health only, which one of them would have shifted. I don't
remember my Lord, ever to have known (or very rarely) a health drank in France,
no not the Kings; and if we say A Vostre sante Monsier, it neither expects
pledge, or ceremony. It Is here so the custom to drink to every one at the
Table, that by the time a Gentleman has done his duty to the whole company, he
is ready to fall asleep, whereas with us, we salute the whole Table with a
single glass only. But, my Lord, was not this, imagine you, an admirable Scene
and very extraordinary? I confess, the Lady of the house being much out of
countenance at what had happened, proffered to excuse this disorder and I was as
ready to receive it, till several encounters confirmed me, that they were but
too frequent, and that there was a sort of perfect Debauchees, who style
themselves Hectors, that in their mad and unheard of Revels, pierce their veins
to quaff their own blood, which some of them have drank to that excess, that
they died of the intemperance: These are a professed Atheistical order of
Braves, composed for the most of Cadets, who spending beyond their pensions, to
supply their extravagancies, practice now and then the highway, where they
sometimes borrow that which they often repay at the Gibbet; an ignominious
trade, unheard of amongst our Gallant Noblesse; however fortune reduce them.
But I know not whether I might not here match these valiant Heroes with an
avowed society of Ladies, and some of them not of the meanest for birth (I even
blush to recount it of that fair Sex) who boast of making all advantages at
play, and are become so dextrous at it, that seldom they make a sitting,
without design and booty: For there is here, my Lord, no such thing as
courtship after the decent mode of our Circles; for either being mingled in a
room, the Gentlemen separate from the conversation of the Ladies, to drink, as
before I related; or else, to whisper with one another at some corner or
Bay-window, abandoning the Ladies to Goship by themselves, which is a custom
so strange to a Gallant of our Nation, as nothing appears more barbarous and
unbecoming; and this in effect must needs be the reason, that those beautiful
Creatures can so little furnish, that they want assurance, address, and the
charming discourse of our Damoiseles, which are faculties so shining, and
agreeable in their Sex with us in France: and in truth, even the Gentlemen
themselves, are greatly defective as to this particular, ill Courtiers,
unplyant, morose and of vulgar address; generally, not so polished, free and
serene, as is universally found even amongst the most inferior of our Nation.
I am not ignorant that they impute it to a certian levity in us; but it is a
mistake in them, and that because they so hardly reform it, without some
ridiculous affectation, as is conspicuous in their several Modes and Dresses,
which they vary ten times for our once; every one affecting something
particular; as having no standard at C^urt, which should give Laws, and do
countenance to the fashion. The Women are much affected with Gaudry, there
being nothing more frequent, than to see an ancient Lady wear colors, a thing
which neither young, nor old of either Sex do with us, save in the Country, and
the Camp; but Widows at no time. And yet reprove they us for these
exorbitances; but I have often disputed the case: Either we do ill, or well; if
ill, why then do they ape us? if well, why do they reproach us? The truth is,
they have no moderation, and are neither so lucky, nor frugal as our Ladies are
in these sumptuary expenses; and whereof the Magistrate ^akes so little
cognizance, that it is not an easy matter to distinguish the Lady from the
Chambermaid; Servants being suffered in this brave Country, to go clad like
their Mistrisses, a thing neither decent, nor permitted in France, where they
may wear neither lace, nor silk.

I may not forget to acacquaint your Lordship. that though the Ladies and the
Gentlemen are so shy of one another; yet when once they grow acquainted, it
passes into expressions, and compellations extremely new to our usages, and the
style of our Country: Do but imagine how it would become our Ladys to call
Mons. N. Jack. N. what more frequent than this? Tom P. was here to day; I went
yesterday to the A place near Paris, like Hide-parke.
Course with will. R. and Harry M treated me at such a Tavern: These are the
particular idioms, and graceful confidences now in use; in. troduced I
conceive at first by some Camerades one with another; but it is mean and rude,
and such as our Lacquais would almost disdain in Paris, where I have often
observed two Chimny-Sweepers accost one another, in better forms, and civiller
addresses. But to be confident and civil, is not a thing so easily understood,
and seems a peculiar talent of our Nation.

However the Ladies are not more obliging, and familiar than the L. are
difficult and inaccessible; for though by reason of my Birth, and quality, my
recommendations and addresses, I found some tolerable reception amongst them;
yet I observed, that they kept at such a surly dstance with the Gentlemen, even
of Family, that me thought I never beheld a ruder conversation; especially,
when comparing their parts, and educations, I found them generally so much
inferior, as if a Lord were indeed other than a Gentleman; or a Gentleman not
a fit companion for a King: But this must needs be the result of an ill, and
haughty institution, and for that most of these great persons are in their
minority, and the age wherein they should be furnished with the noblest
impressions, taught only to converse with their servants, some Sycophants, and
under the regiment of a Pedant, which imprints that scornfulness and folly, and
fits them with no better forms when they should produce themselves, and give
testimony to others as well of their superiority in virtue, as in birth and
dignity. But this is my Lord a particular, which I have heard you often
complain of, and which we do frequently take notice of at their coming abroad
into our Country; where for want of address, and fit persons to introduce them,
they seldom return more refined than they came; else they could not but have
observed, that there is nothing which makes the distinction of Nobles in
France, but the Title, and that his Majesty himself does them the honors,
which here they usurp upon their equals: But, my Lord, they are sufficiently
punished for it in England: where, to me they appear so degenerate, for want of
this humility and free conversation, by which, and their other vices, they grow
now so much despised, that the Gentlemen need seek no revenge; for though (as I
told you) the Gentlemen are most of them very intemperate, yet the Proverb
goes, As drunk as a Lord. But, my Lord, as there is no rule so general, but it
does admit of exceptions, so should I give my own experience, as well as your
Lordships the contradiction, to make the censure universal; there being even
amongst these, some sew, and in particlar my L. N. and N. etc. whom I esteem
to be very noble, and accomplished persons, as who have learned (by the good
fortune of a better education) how to valuc the conversations of worthy men,
and who indeed, do sufficiently verify all those attributes which are due to
their qualities, and therefore whom this Paragraph does no ways concern.

Nor should I be less severe and unjust, totally to exclude even some of the
Ladies from the advantages of this Period, whose perfections and virtues, claim
an equal right to all that I have here spoken, out of a due resentiment of
their merits and excellencies.

It was frequently, during the last Winter, that I was carried to their Balls,
as where indeed I hoped to see what should appear the most of gallant and
splendid amongst the Ladies, nor really did my expectations deceive me; for
there was a confluence of very great beauties, to which the glistring of their
jewels, (which upon these occasions they want not) could add nothing save
their weight; the various habites being so particular, as if by some strange
Enchantment, they had encountled, and come out of several Nations: But I was
astonished to see, when they were ready to move, that a Dancing Master had the
boldness to take forth the greatest Ladies, and they again the Dancing Master,
who performed the most part of the Ball, whilst the Gentlemen, that were
present, were the least concerned, and stood looking on; so as it appeared to
me, more like the Farce of a Comedy at the The p^^y, at Paris, as once ours at
Blackfriars.
Hostel de Bourgogne, than a Ball of the Noblesse, and in truth, their
measures, when any of them were taken out, made me somewhat ashamed to lead a
Lady who did me the honor, for fear (though my skill be very vulgar in that
exercise) they should have taken me for a Dancing Master, as who had, happly
employed my youth so ill, as to have some advantage of the rest in that
faculty. This favor is particular to the Dancing-Masters in this Country; and
reason good; for they ride in their Coaches, and have such ample Salaries, as
maintains both their prodigality, and an insolence that were insupportable in
France, where these trifling fellows do better know themselves, are worse
paid, and less presumptuous. Nay, so remiss are the Ladies of their respect in
this instance, that they not only entertain all this; but permit themselves
likewise to be invited, and often honor these impertinent Fantasticks, by
receiving the Ball at their petty Schools.

When this Ceremony was ended, some of the Gallants fell to other recreations,
and as far as I understood, were offering at that innocent, yet salt and
pleasant diversion, which in France are called Ralliarie; but so far were they
from maintaining it within the decencies, and Laws, which both in that, and our
Characters A witty, and a civil description of one another persons
we observe; that in a little time, they fell so upon personal abusing one
another, that there was much ado to preserve the peace, and as I heard, it was
the next day, the product of a quarrel, and a Duel.

I did frequently in the spring, accompany my Lord N. into a field near the
Town, which they call Hide-Parke; the place not unpleasant, and which they use,
as our Course; but with nothing that order, equipage and splendour, being such
an assembly of wretched jades, and Hackney Coaches, as next a Regiment of
Carre-men, there is nothing approaches the resemblance. This Park was (it
seems) used by the late King, and Nobility for the freshness of the Air, and
the goodly prospect: but it is that which now (besides all other excises) they
pay for here in England, though it be free in all the World beside; every Coach
and Horse which enters, buying his mouthfull, and permission of the Publicane,
who has purchased it, for which the entrance is guarded with Porters and long
Staves.

The manner is, as the company returns, to alight at the Spring Garden, so
called, and in order to the Park, as our Thuilleries is to the Course; the
enclosure not disagreable, for the sollemness of the Grove, the warbling of the
Birds, and as it opens into the spacious Walks at St. James's: but the company
walk in it at such a rate, as you would think all the Ladies were so many
Atalanta's, contending with their Wooers; and my Lord there was no appearance
that I should prove the Hippomenes, who could with very much ado, keep pace
with them: But as fast as they run, they stay there so long, as if they wanted
not time to finish the Race; for it is usual here, to find some of the young
company till midnight; and the Thickets of the Garden seem to be contrived to
all advantages of Gallantry, after they have been refreshed with the Collation,
which is here seldom om^tted, at a certain Cabaret in the middle of this
Paradise; where the forbidden fruits are certain trifling Tartes,
Neatestongu's, Salacious meats, and bad Rhe^ish; for which the Gallants pay
Sauce, as indee^ they do at all such house throughout England; for they think
it a price of frugality beneath them, to bargain, or account for what they eat
in any place however unreasonably imposed upon;

But thus, those mean fellows are (as I told your Lordship) enriched; beggar,
and insult over the Gentlemen. I am assured that this particular Host, has
purchased, within few years, 5000 livers 500. per. Ann of our moneys:
of annual rent; and well he may, at the rates these Prodigalls pay; whereas,
in France, a Gentleman esteems it no diminution to manage even these expenses
with reason. But my Lord, it is now late, and time to quit this Garden, and to
tell you, that I think there is not a more illustrious sight in the World, than
to meet the Divinities of our Court marching up the long walk in the
Thuilleries, where the pace is so stayed and grave, the encounters so regular
and decent; and where those who feed their eyes with their beauties, and their
cares with the charming accents of their discourse and voices, need not those
refreshments of the other Senses, finding them all to be so taken up with these.

I was curious before my return, and when I had conquered some difficulties of
the language, and Customs, to visit their Judicatures; where, besides that
few of their Gown-men are to be compared to those of the Robe in our Palais ^or
elocution, Where they p^ead as at Westminster.
and the talent of well speaking; so neither do they at all exceed them in the
forms and colors of their Pleading; but (as before I spoke of their Ralliary)
supply the defects of the cause, with flat, insipide and grossly abusing one
another; a thing so trifling, and misbecoming the gravity of Courts (where the
Lawyers take liberty to jest men's estates away, and yet avow their avarice)
that I have much admired at the temper of the Judges, and their remissness in
reforming it: There was a young Person, whom at my being there, was very much
cried up for his abillities, and in whom I did not observe that usual
intemperance, which I but now reproved; and certainly, it springs either for
want of those abillities which the Municipall Laws of this Nation (consisting
most of them in Customs like our Normandy, whose ancient dialect their books
yet retain) are so little apt to furnish; or the defect of those advantages,
which the more pollished Sciences afford us without which, it is impossible to
be good Orators, and to maintain their discourses, without diversion to that
vile impertinency.

But what is infinitely agreeable in this Country, are the Bowling-Greens, and
the Races, which are really such pleasures abroad, as we have nothing
approaches them in France, and which I was extremely delighted in; but the
Verdure of the Country, and delicious Downs it is, which renders them this
praeheminence, and indeed, it is to be valued, and does in my esteem, very
much commute for the less benignity of that glorious Planet, which ripens our
Vines in France.

The Horses, and the Dogs, their incomparable Parkes of Fallow-deer, and laws
of Chase, I extremely approve of; but upon other occasions, all Englishmen ride
so fast upon the Road, that you would swear there were some enemy in the
ariere; and all the Coaches in London, seem to drive for Midwives.

But what did much more afflict me, is their cerimony at Table, where every man
is obliged to sit tell all have done eating, however their appetites differ,
and to see the formality of the Voider, which our Withdrawing-roomes in France
are made to prevent, and might so here, if they knew the use of them, to be,
that every man may tile when he has dined, without the least indecency, and
leave the Sewers to their Office.

I have now but a word to add, and that is the tediousness of Visits, which
they make here so long, that it is a very tyranny to sit to so little purpose:
If the Persons be of Ladys that are strangers, it is to look upon each other,
as if they had never seen any of their own kina before; and here indeed the
virtue of their Sex is eminent; for they are as silent and fixed as Statue's; Or
if they do talk, it is with censure, and sufficient confidence: so difficult it
is, to Entertain with a grace, or to observe a mediocrity.

In Sum, my Lord, I found so many particulars worthy of reproof in all those
Remarkes which I have been able to make; That to render you a veritable account
of England, as it is at present, I must pronounce, with the Poet.

Difficile est Satyram non Scribere. --

FINIS.

