EYAPISTIA: OR A Grateful Acknowledgment UNTO HEAVEN For the Happy Discovery of
the Late Horrid Plot: WITH Some brief and yet plain remarques upon that Hellish
CONSPIRACY.

DELIVERED In a discourse unto a Country Auditory upon September IX. 1683. BEING
A Day of Public and Solemn Thanksgiving Appointed by Authority for the said
Wonderful and Blessed DELIVERANC.

By a Country Parson.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kittilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

ERRATA, disturbing the sense.
PAge 10. Line 24. dele and, in the same line after for, add and, p. 14. l. 22.
for Observations, r. Obsecrations. p. 16. l. 25. for heat, r. he at. p. 17. l.
10. for It is not halting between God and Baal, this it is the Bowing the Knee
unto both, read it thus pointed; It is not halting between God and Baal, this;
it is the Bowing the Knee unto both; p. 18. l. 15. After If, add I. p. 26. l.
1. after the word secure, add us; l. 31. for terming, r. teeming. p. 27. l. 12.
after the word Ninth add of; l. 15. after the word Ninth add of.

Psalm. LXXIII. ver. I. Truly God is good unto Israel, even unto such as are of
a clean Heart.
NOtwithstanding unto pious Men do freequently Sect, I. The Introduction.
occurr great Impediments in their way unto future Happiness, yet nothing
(usually) is more hazardous then an uninterrupted Affluene of outward things,
for as when it falls upon themselves it is ready to slacken the Reins of duty,
so when it lights upon those whose Opinions and Practices declare them Profane
and Debauched, whose wickednesses meet with a success suitable unto their
desires, then it strikes deep, and commonly raises those storms in Religion
which are not easily calmed, and shakes that very foundation which the
Religious Education of many years had laid; For our own and others Experience
informs us, that nothing offers more doubts and scruples in Religion, then
successful Villainies, nor gives a deeper wound unto a Pious Course of Life,
then Prosperous Impieties to see those ly upon beds of Ivory, and stretch
themselves upon their Couches, whose Oppressions have wrung so many tears from
others, to find an Impious Wretch without regret Possessing his Neighbors
Vineyard: Lastly, to see those eat the Lambs out of the Flock, Amos. VI. 4, 6.
and the Calvs out of the midst of the Stall, which they had taken from those
that are ready to starv, and after all this to see such Violenc die in Peace,
and quietly laid in its Tomb. To see (I say) all this and much more, may prove
an high Temptation to the Best, and Encouragement for the Profane to deny a
God, and does (usually) destroy more then the greatest care can preserv. This
the good Psalmist gives us in this Psalm a full account of from his own
Example, who although he had the Occurrences of such Troubles as cost him many a
tear (so many as sometimes to water his Couch therewith) yet they could never
chang the soundness of his Judgment concerning God, and his Providenc, whereas
he ascertains us Here, that a looking back upon that lofty and fortunate State,
that wicked Men undisturbedly enjoy, gave him some Astonishment; Ver. 2.
I say, such a reflection made him almost lose his standing, and his footsteps
had well nigh slipped. If this Temptation pressed the Psalmist so hard, as to say,
Verily I have cleansed my Heart in vain, and washed Ver. 13.
my Hands in Innocence, we have no reason to find fault with Him, for putting
up Tabalam post naufragium, and out of a true sense of the greatness of the
Delivery, particularly to declare the hazard and sharpness of the Adventure.
With how much exactness does he describe those Shelvs, and Rocks against which
he was like to have split his Vessel. And how thankfully does he point out
those Quicksands, wherein he had almost Shipwrack't both his Faith and
Conscienc. And Lastly, with how great a Triumph does he Poeana concinnere, sing
a Victorious (...), to that fortunate Star, that was his Auspicious Guide, and
Conductor for directing, and bringing him safe to his desired Haven, and
Harbor! How willingly does he own his brutish Folly, and Ignoranc, how
thankfully does he kiss that hand that led him out of that Labyrinth, and being
full of thanks emptys himself into an Introduction to his Discourse, which a
sense of God's goodness Pathetically forced him unto, and from those useful
Occurrences to conclude a true and comfortable Proposition; Truly God is good
unto Israel, even unto such as are of Sect. II. The sense and division of the
words.
a Clean Heart. The words are a kind of abrupt Proposition, whereby the Prophet
by a Paralepsis (which is very usual in Holy Scripture) suppressing the
conflicts of the Flesh and Spirit, and suddenly recovering himself from those
difficulties he lay under, propounds this conclusion, and affirms, that how
sorely soever the Calamities of this World press God's People, yet his Goodness
is always present with them for their Comfort, Help and Assistanc. So then the
general meaning and import of these words seems to be this; that it is a
certain and infallible Truth, that God is not only Just and Faithful, but
Gracious and Kind unto every true, sincere-hearted, upright Man; For truly God
is good unto Israel, even unto such as are of a Clean Heart. Which words
contain in them these three Parts. (1. A general Proposition; Truly God is
good: Where we have Elohim, the Almighty God mentioned with his Activ, Relativ
Goodness. (2.) An Object, and a Qualification; in respect of God an Object* in
respect of as a Qualification. (1.) Then in respect of God an Object; and so it
is indefinitely expressed by the word Israel, God is good unto Israel. (2.) A
Qualification in respect of Us, and under that an Assignation of conditions
under which the general Proposition holds good all are not Israel, that are of
Israel; so all are not Christians, that are called Christians, but it is such,
and such only as are of a Clean Heart: And in this we have (1.) A Quality
appropriate to the Church, and unto every particular member thereof, Cleanness;
Purity, or Holiness. (2.) With its Subject, the Heart; and there we shall
enquire. (1.) Why that alone, and nothing else is expressed. (2.) Whether that
alone be enough, and sufficient. (3.) We shall consider them both together in
both senses of the Word as a sincere, and as an undefiled Heart. In each of
which I shall, as I proceed, view all the several guilts opposed to either
notion of cleanness, and see how far each one of them, or all put together
remove us from any interest in the Lord's goodness, which is the natural
application of each Part. (3.) Here is a pathetical Asseveration, Truly; which
signifies the truth and certainty of the thing spoken of, recommending the
belief of it to others. These are the several Parts of the Text; of these in
their Order: I have formerly Preached upon the Text in this place, and then
spoke to the first general Head, which I will not now make any Reflections
upon, lest I should be hindered in what I design to deliver at this time: Come
we therefore unto the next general Part of my Text.

Secondly, An Object and a Qualification; in respect Sect. III. The 2d.
general, 1. Particular; in respect of God, an Object.
of God an Object, in respect of Us a Qualification.

First then in respect of God an Object, and so it is indefinitely expressed by
the Word Israel, God is good to Israel; So then the Object of God's Relativ
Goodness is Israel; (1.) Then the word Israel signifies a Conqueror, or one
that as a Prince prevails with God, and thus the Patriarch Jacob is called, and
this Name was given him by God, as a Title of Honor and Dignity, Genesis XXXII.
28. And he said thy Name shall be called no more Jacob but Israel, for as a
Prince have thou power with God, and with Man, and have prevailed. (2.) The
word Israel is taken for all the Posterity of the Patriarch Jacob, to which
signification those Phrases of the Holy Scripture in the New Testament which
occur concerning Israel are to be referred, for although they seem to refer to the
Jews rather then to the Israelites of the Ten Tribes, yet notwithstanding in
Holy Scripture they are not improperly referred to both; because upon their
Transportation from Babylon, many Israelites of the Ten Tribes were commixed
with the Jews, and the Twelve Tribes of Israel, to whom our blessed Savior was
sent, are understood in this sense by the Evangelists and Apostles. And
likewise the whole People of God is made up of the Israel, or Posterity of the
Patriarch Jacob, and the Nation that believed in the Messiah then exhibited.
(3.) The word is accepted for the adoption or assumption of any Nation taken in
to be God's peculiar People, or for such as have entered into a Stipulation, or
Covenant with God, and chosen him to be their God, and He accepted them for his
People; and in this sense the true Israel have several Titles in Holy Scripture,
for they are called the desire of Gods Soul, the House of God, the Elect of
God, (or the chosen Nation) the People of God's Inheritanc, the People of God
(the People of the God Tit. II. 14.
of Abraham) (...), the Holy and the peculiar People of God, the People whom
God has purchased with his own Blood, an Holy Nation, a Nation whose God is
the Lord, the portion and the possession of God, the First Fruits of the
increase of God, the Firstborn of God, a Royal Priesthood, the Scepter of
God's Heritage, the Servants of God, the Tribe of the Inheritanc of the God of
Jacob, the Vineyard of God, and the Anointed of the Lord; and now by all these
Titles of Honor, Comfort and Advantage, God it signified to us to be good to
his Israel, to his People: For truly God is good unto Israel. What Israel was
when the Psalmist endited this Psalm needs not much enquiry; after the account
I have now given you, this may be at present enough for our business* (1.)
Israel represents a Nation, it being at that time a flourishing and potent one,
when this Psalm was penned. (2.) Israel was a visible Church under the Law,
shadowing forth a visible Church under the Gospel. (3.) Israel signifies a
chosen peculiar People, and so it represents the invisible Church of God; in
all these senses then, we may see that in the general, by Israel is to be
understood the Church of Christ; and now I shall declare God's goodness unto
Israel in each of these Notions, and make appear the truth of this Assertion in
our Text, that Truly God is good unto Israel.

First then Israel represents a Nation, it being at that Sect. IV. The first
particular handled in 3. senses.
time a potent and flourishing one, when this Psalm was penned, and in this
sense of Israel as a Nation, do each Society, even the remotest Nations of the
World, I. It represents a Nation, and so God is good to every Nation; a brief
Repetition of what was said under this Head.
liberally partake; I mean of this Relativ Goodness of God; if Inanimate
Creatures be full of it, and if those that understand no further then sense, be
visited with peculiar refreshments, Man (as Man) is not forgotten; I spoke upon
this Subject the last Lord's day, and made some remarques upon the Discovery of
the late Horrid Plot, which we do now upon this day thankfully commemorate. I
will not so far distrust your memories, as to make a large repetition of what I
then said, but give me leave to mention the heads of my discourse, that I may
the more methodically introduce my self to what remains behind; that this truth
then may the more plainly appear, I desired your attention to these four
subsequent Propositions. (1.) That which appertains to the necessary
subsistence of every: Nation is dealt forth unto them by God; General Acts of
Providenc none are excluded from, for the evil as well as the good are warmed
by the kindly rays of the greater Luminary, and the influences of Heaven's
showers descend upon the unjust as well as the just. That which is St. Matthew.
v. 45.
necessary needs not much toil, being dealt forth by God so liberally, as Man
scarce needs do any thing more then receiv: Deus and Natura non deficiunt in
necessariis; Every Nation may subsist by it self without the greedy Invasion of
another Right. (2.) God deals forth unto all People, that which may conduce
unto their Well-being, by which we may understand three things. (1.) Well-being
may be taken for outward Affluenc, and external Prosperity, Plenty, and Peace.
(2.) As Well-being may be taken for outward Prosperity, Plenty, and Peace; so
likewise for Internal Security, Satisfaction, and Quiet, I mean for Peace of
Conscienc; and then there is the Law of Nature, and Reason, which Men may live
by, and by ordering their Conversations according thereunto they may enjoy the
Happiness, and Advantage of an excusing Conscienc, Romans II. 14, 15.
which is the only thing that converts our outward Comforts into Blessings to
us. (3.) Well-being may be accepted in the most proper sense for God's
Goodness, and we may find that excludes not all means from any People of coming
unto his Knowledge; and this sense comes nearest to that of our Text, and
verifies, and makes good the Psalmist's Assertion: Truly God is good unto
Israel. (3.) Another Conclusion that proves God's Relativ Goodness is
communicated to all People, is, the great and extraordinary Acts of Providenc,
wherewith Men (as such) have been visited. (4.) The last Conclusion is an
unquestionable Proof of the Divine Goodness. And that is this, That God never
dispeoples, and desolates any Land or Nation, but for their Iniquity, their
Notorious Unthankfulness, and their Contemptuous Abuse of his Mercies. From all
which Conclusions it may be truly Inferred, That God's Activ, Relativ Goodness
liberally flows down upon all People, all the Nations of the Earth (in some
measure) plentifully partaking of this his Divine, Communicativ Goodness. For
truly God is good unto Israel. Sect. V. 2. Particular. Israel was a Visible
Church under the Law shadowing forth a Visible Church under the Gospel.


Secondly, As Israel was a Nation, and a flourishing, and potent One, and as
such eminently tasted of God's Goodness, so likewise, it was a visible Church
under the Law shadowing forth a visible Church under the Gospel. From whence
this Proposition may be naturally inferred, and concluded; That every visible
Church, and Company of Christians do very eminently taste of the Favor and
Goodness of God. This may be apparent, and evident enough, if we consider, (1.)
That those gracious Acts of God's Loving Kindness formerly recited, which all,
and every People did communicate in as to their Being, and well-being, do all
appertain unto Israel as the visible Church. (2.) Moreover superadd to this,
the Visible Church tastes of God's eminent Loving Kindness in a Blessed Covenant
of Peace, that which God entered into with obedient Abraham, and his Elect
Posterity, is every where recorded as a signal expression of God's kindness.
Moses challenges any People to lay a claim to the like signs and tokens of
God's Favor, and Goodness, Deuteronomy. IV. 7, 8. For what Nation is there so great,
who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we
call upon him and for; what Nation is there so great that has Statutes, and
Judgments, so Righteous, as all this Law, which I set before you this day? And
by this Privilege they gained the Character of a great Nation, a Wise, and
understanding People: The Deuteronomy. IV. 6.
Royal Prophet David, and the rest of the Inspired Writers* recite it as the
Grand Sign, and Characteristick token of God's Love to his People: Thus
Christ's visible Church are within the enclosure of this Holy Sept, and all of
that Company this Covenant of Peace has a Regard unto. Hence St. Paul makes a
great Differenc between the Ephesians in the darker condition of Heathenism,
and the State within the Church, as being (before that merciful Reception)
Gentiles in the Flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called
Circumcision in the Flesh made with hands, who were without Christ, being
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World. Finally, who were
sometimes afar off, but now in Christ Ephesians. II. 11, 12. 13.
Jesus are made nigh by the Blood of Christ. But now God's Loving Kindness will
be evident to us in a great, and excellent Luster, as a merciful Shine upon his
Church, and People, if we consider these four Particulars. (1.) The Mandates
which God honors his visible Church withal in the Covenant, do plentifully
signify to us his Loving Kindness. Tho there be too many, who take a View of
God's Precepts with a Sullen, Partial, and Prejudiced look, as Bridles, and
Checks put upon their Appetite, who receiv them* upon their Necks as a hard
Yoke, and upon their Backs as an heavy Burden, yet these are too dull, and
Melancholy Reflections; For our blessed Lord ascertains us the St. Matthew. XI.
30.
quite contrary, telling us, that his Yoke is easy, and his Burden light, and
this Truth is owned, and confirmed by his Beloved Disciple, that lay in his
Master's Bosom, and therefore we may upon good ground suppose best acquainted
with his Mind, St. John I mean, who affirms, That none of his Commandments are
grievous, tho it be most true, that whatever Precept proceeds from God carrys
with it an Obligation upon 1 John V. 3.
the Creature, and he (to whomsoever it comes) is in duty bound to Obedienc,
yet we may remember, that sometimes God's Precepts, and the Revelation of his
Mind to us carrys with them, that Honor, and Privilege which brings peculiar
Advantage, and encouragement. I will not dispute whether the Sovereign Creator
may not pro Imperio, in the right of his Sovereignty bind his Creature to a
Duty, whence no other Advantage shall arise, but only the very Duty of
Obedienc, as he might, and did engage Abraham to offer up his Son, his only
Son, his Beloved Son Isaac, in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be
Blessed, and to expect no other Recompenc, to look for no other Compensation,
but the Reward of doing the Duty it self, and that was his Obedienc; yet I
conceiv God's settled Institutions, and established Appointments do not only
engage to Service, but propound Advantage; and thereby allure to Obedienc.
Deuteronomy. X. 12. 13. And now O Israel what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear the Lord thy God; to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, to keep the
Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day for
thy Good: Thus in our Civil Relations, tho our Duty engages us to Obedienc to
our Prince from a Principle of Conscienc, and out of repect to God's Law, yet
we frequently look upon it as a great Honor, and high Privilege to be employed
in his immediate Service. This is the apparent Differenc between the Peremptory
Dictates of the Law of Nature given to all; and those which are dealt forth
unto the Church: Those come with an Absolute Intimation of a necessary
Engagement from a Supreme and Severe Legislator; These with more Intimations of
unquestionable Honor and Privilege to be so enjoined. Now hereupon (1.) We may
take notice of the manner of Delivery; the Law of Nature, or the Moral Commands
were pronounced to Israel with Thunders, and Lightning, attended with an
astonishing Darkness, and the sound of a Trumpet, striking all those that
approached the Mount with a Terror, and a fearful Amazement, penned in an
austere, and commanding Style, Thou shall, and Thou shall not, whereas God
speaks unto his People under the Evangelical Dispensation in a more facil, and
familiar way, which it may be worth our while a little to animadvert upon. (1.)
In a serious Exhortation, or a passionate Entreaty, we beseech, we pray as in,
2* Cor. v. 20. 21. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as tho God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, for
he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. Or else (2.) In an heavenly Advice, and an
affectionate Counsel in the Instanc of the Church of Laodicea, Rev. III. 17.
18. Because thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked: I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that thou
may be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the
shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with the true
Collyrium, the Spiritual eye salve, that thou may see. (3. Or lastly.) In a
kind, and loving Invitation in the words of the Holy Jesus, St. Matthew. XI. 28,
29, 30. Come unto me all you that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give
you Rest; Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in
Heart, and you shall find Rest unto your Souls, for my Yoke is easy, and my
Burden is light. This is the pleasing Dialect in which Christ's Precepts are
pronounced the New Covenant, this Law of the Gospel delights not it self in
those sharper sounds, but tho it may enjoin, yet it stoops to a kinder
Delivery. When a King expresses that in a Desire, which he may do in a Command;
it is meritoriously accounted as a great Favor, and if the King of Kings stoops
so low, as to declare his Mind in the same precarious way, it may deservedly
challeng from us the greatest Reverenc, and oblige us to embrace Obedienc both
as an Advancement, and as a Privilege. (2.) If we consider the substanc of
these Precepts, we may find that they carry Glory enough in their Obedienc.
Loyalty frequently accounts, that some Services (tho perchance hazardous
Enterprises) do merit thanks for being employed in them; yet some Precepts
there are which God will disdain some Men's performanc of; There is a wicked
Generation to whom God speaks in the Language of the Psalmist: Psalm. L. 16, 17.
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy Mouth; seeing thou hate Instruction, and castest my Words
behind thee? As the dealing forth of Laws to Israel is owned, and acknowledged
as a great, and excellent Privilege; so the gracious Revelation of Christ's
mysterious Gospel in a greater Luster out-shines all before it; conveying a
Beauty to the very feet of those that are Bearers of such happy News. How
beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of them that bring good tidings, that
preach Romans X. 15. compared with Isa. LII. 7.
the Gospel of Peace, that bring glad tidings of good things, that publish
Salvation, that say unto Zion thy God reigns. Those Cordial Observations,
those Loving Invitations, and those Commands that respect nothing more then our
Benefit, are all but so many proofs of God's Goodness, and our Honor, nay, even
our severest Afflictions in so Righteous a Cause, but a glorious Piece of
Privilege, and Triumph. St. Paul accounts it a Blessed Gift from God, and such
as with Holy Job we ought to thank God for. Phil. I. 29. For Job I. 21.
to you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to beleiv on him, but
also to suffer for his sake. Tho to beleiv, and suffer, are Precepts which
carry an Obligation, yet to you it is given, signifies an high peculiar
Prerogativ in being called thereunto; the consideration of this made St. Peter,
and St. John with the rest of the Apostles glory in their stripes, and triumph
in being counted worthy to suffer shame for his Act. V. 41.
Name. (2.) Thus as the Precepts of God's Covenant, so the great, and excellent
Promises of it do most eminently declare God's Goodness to his Israel, his
visible Church. Thus Israel in a Relianc of God's Promise to be their God need
not fear any Enemy, and Christ's Church is heartned on by exceeding great, and
precious Promises, that by those they may become partakers (...), of the Divine
Nature. A total forgiveness of all 2 Pet. I. 4*
sin, an happy Reconcilation to an offended Justice, Eternal Life, and
Salvation, do every where offer themselves in a Gracious and Benign Tender unto
God's Church and People. (3.) God's Loving Kindness to his Israel, his visible
Church, is further apparent, in that they have a conditional Right to the
valuable Rarities, and Excellencies of the Gospel, all being theirs, if they
perform the Condition, all the Promises of Christ are in him, Yea, and Amen to
them, ratified, and verified, Christ being theirs, who is all in all for the
good of his People. Forgiveness of sins is theirs, if they sincerely, and
heartily Beleiv, and so likewise is Salvation too, if they truly, and really
Repent. (4 and Lastly.) God's Goodness is eminent to his Israel, his visible
Church, in his gracious Provision of Means sufficient for the Performanc of the
Condition of the Covenant on their Parts, which gives them a Right and Title to
the Promises. The Spiritual Armor is impenetrable, and the Weapons of this
noble Warfare not to be blunted by Opposition. The Devil may speedily be
uncased, and this strong Man dispossessed of his Tenure, by right handling these
Powerful Instruments. Here is a glorious Dispensation of Light to direct, and
of Grace to enable; and the Covenant is not only a bare Manifestation of God's
Laws, but also a more Inward Engravement upon the Heart. For this is the
Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, Jer. XXXI. 33. compared
with Heb. VIII* 10.
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their Mind, or inward
parts, and write them in their Hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a People. From all which it may be truly deduced; That the Honor
of God's commands, the Inestimable Value of the Promises, the Right granted,
and the Grace afforded to his visible Church, do most manifestly declare God's
High, Activ, and Relativ Goodness to his People. For truly God is good unto
Israel.

I will now consider the first part of the Text, a General Sect. VI. The Use
and Application of the praeceding Discourse in a consideration of the General
Proposition, God is good, and the Object of that Goodness Israel, God is good
unto Israel. Dr. Allestry in locum.
Proposition, God is good, and also the first particular of the second part
thereof, both together, (that is) both God's Goodness, and the Object of this
Goodness, to whom it extends; and this may serve as the Use, Improvement, and
Application of the praeceding Discourse; Truly, God is good unto Israel, to his
Church; in which I will be very brief, and for the most part of this I shall be
obliged to a Reverend, Worthy, and Great Divine of our own Church, and Nation:
And certainly this is evident to us by its own light to whom God has proved
his Goodness to Astonishment, by exercising it to a Miracle, while heat once
wrought Prodigies of kindness, and Conviction too. For which we have only this
Proof to add, that God has been so plentiful in the expressions of his Bounty,
that we are weary of the mention of them; and have so surfeited on Divine
Goodness, that we nauseate the Acknowledgment. But now if Atheism grow against
Goodness, and Miracle too, and Men do most deny God, when he gives greatest
Evidences of his Being, and Providenc; I know not by what argument encouraged,
unless that in the Poet, -- Factum quod se dum negat, hoc videt Beatum.
Because they see, they fare best, that deny him most, teaching his Goodness to
confute his Being; If they look upon the wondrous Restitution of God's Service,
as but a shifting the Scene of Worship, only another, and more gaudy Draught
and Landscape of Religion shot upon the Stage, and do accordingly esteem it as
an entertainment for their senses only. If they assist in them not out of
Principle, but mere Indifferenc unto all; It is not halting between God and
Baal, this it is the Bowing the Knee unto both, which they can do unto each
alike, when either is uppermost, and truly count them Deities alike I fear. Nay
when the only Ordinance, the Sermon is but as a Prize in the Temple: The
Preacher but -- Rhetor dicturus ad Aram,
that comes to do his exercise before the Altar in which Men are concerned no
further usually, then to hear, and judge, not to be sentenced by it, or him. If
God does endure all this, and yet do continue still his Church, his Worship,
and his other Mercies. Then we may well conclude and infer, Truly God is good
unto Israel; But I will not be this Fastidious Remembrancer. These Arguments
may prove his Goodness, but certainly these Qualifications will not continue
this his Divine, Communicativ Goodness unto us. The Limitation must suggest and
declare them unto us, which plainly, and clearly acquaints us, who God is thus
good unto, even Sect. VII. An account of what was said by the Author upon the
same Text, in Referenc to the Plot upon Sept. 2d being the first day the King's
Declaration was read.
unto such as are of a Clean Heart. Truly God is good unto Israel, even unto
such as are of a Clean Heart.

It will not be improper to my Text, as I have now handled it, nor unseasonable
upon this Day, that his Sacred Majesty's Declaration has been read unto you,
to say some little matter of the great Deliveranc of our Gracious Prince, and
in Him of this Nation too (we being the Israel of God in this sense, as it
represents a Nation* and Blessed be the Lord, for some years a potent, and
flourishing One; and may we long continue so to be unto the Terror of our
Enemies abroad, and of all undermining Traitors at home, who under the Vizard
of Religion contriv Rebellion.) And this Deliveranc was from an horrid, and
direful Mischief, plotted against our King by Absurd, and Nefarious Persons,
whom no Obligations of Divine Goodness, or Humane Kindness, could keep from
laying such an abominable Design against Him, His Dearest, and only Brother,
and all His Loyal Subjects that were in the three Kingdoms. I hope all true
Christians of this Land have before this time offered to Heaven their personal,
and hearty Thanksgivings in their secret Retirements for Prayer, and Praise,
and it is fit we should offer some more open Testimony and Acknowledgment. I
dare not doubt, but that your Spirits are overjoyed with the Feeling, and
Reflection of so great a Deliveranc. Give therefore your Hearts, and Passions
some ease by an Eruption of this joyful Exclamation, and now sensible Truth,
That Truly God is good unto our Israel; It is evident unto those that consider
the great Transactions of our Kingdom for about Twenty years last past, That
England never flourished in greater Splendour, and Plenty, then under the Reign
of this present Prince; and possibly had a Person of other Parts, and
Principles ruled in our Age, our Condition had been much worse then now
(Praised be God) it is. Never could any Nation upon the highest Probability
promise themselves greater Felicity, then under His Government, if the People
of this Land be not wanting to themselves. Never was there a greater Assuranc
of the Truth of that place of Holy Romans XIII, 1.
Writ, that tells us, The The Powers that be are ordained, or ordered, of God,
then under our present Government. If we consider His Gracious Majesty's many
Deliverances from the Scaffold of his Pious Father, of ever Blessed Memory,
unto his own Coronation, and from thence unto this Day; Our present Prince may
Experimentally repeat a great part of St. Paul's sufferings, 2 Cor. XI. 26. In
journeyings often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils by mine
own Countrymen, in Perils in the City; and I may add in Perils in the Country
too, (if this late Cursed Plot had taken effect) in Perils in the Sea, and in
Perils among false Brethren. So that our Prince may say in St. Paul' s words,
with a very little Variation, verse. 30. and 31. of that XI. Chapter of the
second Epistle unto the Corinthians, If must needs Glory, I will Glory of the
things which concern my Deliverances, the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ knows, that I lie not; I have a plentiful Subject to treat upon, but
because there is a Particular Day appointed for the Commemoration of this
Mercy, I will not now say much more, but reserve my self till then for further
Enlargement. I must not therefore go much further out of a du regard to the
limits, and proportions of time allowed me; and if I should now enlarge
concerning our Princes Sufferings, and Deliverances; possibly some will tell
me, that they know the considerable Passages of his Life as well as my self
(they having been transacted within the compass of most of your Memories:)
Indeed I may truly say, That our Prince has been the Darling of Heaven, and
possibly the greatest Instanc of its Protection since the Reign of that King,
who was a Man after God's own Heart. And I am inclined to believ that when
Posterity shall record the Transactions of his Reign, they will either suppose
them the Ingenious fancies of a Romanc, or believ him to have been one whom the
Providence of Heaven has culled out of the vast Race of Reasonable Beings, to
be an Example of what Wonders the Almighty Potentate is able to discover for
those that depend upon him, and to signify how solicitous the Great Governor
of the Univers is for the safety, and security of those Kings to whom his
Gospel, and true Worship are as valuable as their Scepters. These kindnesses of
Heaven have been of late manifested in the Discovery of a Rebellion contrived
by such Persons, whom no Engagements, no Civilities, no Acts of Clemency, no
Indulgencies, no Vows, no Praetexts of Reformation could disengage from the
most mischievous Attempts upon His Person, upon His Subjects, and upon every
thing that can be believed estimable by the sincere Worshippers of the
Peaceable, and most Holy Jesus; And therefore the Highest Thankfulness ought to
be expressed both upon the Account of our regard unto him, and to ourselves
likewise (if that Interest be Dearer to us:) All our highest concernments are
centred in Him, and next unto the kindness of Heaven are indebted to Him for
their Settlement, and Duration; And His, and our Adversaries so believed,
because they would mischief us by His Ruin. O what ground therefore have we to
be as Grateful unto Heaven for this Mercy, as if in our own Persons we had been
to be Executed, and to have been the Marks at which their Blunderbusses, and
Pistols were to have been aimed, and levelled. I will now conclude this
Discourse, and this Time with One Intercession unto Heaven, in which I hope you
will all join with me: [That all Rebellious Spirits, like Sheba, that shall
enkindle (I hope I may say) the dead Ashes of Rebellion, may have his End, and
forfeit their Lives that will Adventure so much as to entertain Rebellious
thoughts against the Anointed of the Lord.]

Now before I conclude, it will not be Improper to Sect. VIII. An Account of
what was said upon Sept. 9th. being the Day of Public and Solemn Thanksgiving
when the King's Declaration was again read.
my Text, as I have now handled it, nor unseasonable (because our Duty.) upon
this Public, and Solemn Day of Thanksgiving, to say somewhat of the Great
Deliverance of our Gracious Sovereign, and in Him of this Kingdom too (We being
the Israel of God, not only as that Word represents a Nation, but also as it
signifies a Visible Church under the Gospel, being as pure, and defaecate a
Church as to its Doctrine, and Discipline, as any in the known World, and pray
we God that it may long to succeeding Generations continue so to be, and that
He would preserv Her, so to remain against those malicious Enemies, that have
of late wickedly designed to deface Her Beauty, and destroy Her Purity. All
Rebels use Religion as a Plea for Rebellion, and none pretend more to keep up
the Face, and Notion of Israel as a Visible Church, then they. Religion is the
Highest, and Dearest Concernment in this World, but it seems a destructiv
Method for Men to secure their Salvation by such a Way, as God has declared
will damn their Souls, and such is the Way of Resistanc, Romans XIII. 2.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinanc of God, and
they that resist shall receiv unto Themselves Damnation. No Persons take up Arms
in Defenc of Religion, that have any sense of it upon their Spirits. Religion
is a meek, humble, modest Principle, and submissiv unto Government. It
instructs, and prepares Men to die, rather then to resist Lawful Authority; And
were there any unmixt Zeal for Religion in this Plea, can we believ the most
Debauched wicked Persons, should be so much concerned for Religion; but it is
clear, and evident, it is not in truth Religion such Persons are so much
concerned for, but a Toleration of all Religions. That is, That they may
profess any, or indeed like some Indifferents in France, or some Hobbists in
England rather, have no sense of Religion at all, which answers the Purpose of
the Atheist that denies a God, as much as of our Dissenters, and Separatists,
which is not at all for the Credit, Glory, and Reputation of that Religion,
which has any thing of Sincerity or Truth in it (even of the Truth as it is in
Jesus.) So that whatsoever the Pleas, and Excuses of such Men are, it is a
proud, imperious, unpeaceable, and implacable Temper, which disorders public
Settlements, and throws from the heads the Crowns, and casts out of the hands
the Scepters of Monarchs, and Governors. After this Introduction give me leav
to offer some few Inferences for Practice, which may have a respect unto that
Dangerous, and Damnable Plot, whose Discovery we do, and are upon this Day
Solemnly, and thankfully to Commemorate, and Remember. (1.) Consider how
hazardous, and destructiv the Diversities, and Differences of Opinions in
Religion are unto the Truth of that Doctrine, which I have now handled from
this of Israel, and this Nation being a Visible Church, and how
disadvantageous, prejudicial, and Perilous such Opinions, and Practices, are
unto the Public Tranquillity, Safety, and Interest of this Kingdom.
Christianity is the strongest Defenc, and securest Fulciment of Monarchy both
in its Mandates, and Exercise. It enjoins submission unto every Ordinanc of Man
for the Lord's sake, 1 St. Pet. II. 13. It instructs us to pay the
Obligations we owe to all Persons in their several Capacities. Romans XIII. 7.
Render therefore unto all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom
unto whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor unto whom Honor. It commands
Obedienc to our Governors in all lawful, and honest Matters, and patiently to
lay down our Lives rather then to Rebel; and the Holy Institutor of our
excellent Religion; was the greatest Instanc of this Doctrine, and lived, as He
commanded His Disciples, and Followers. Tho He was Son and Heir to the King of
Kings and could command more then twelv Legions of Angels unto his Assistanc,
yet He looked not upon Himself, as the Emperor's Competitor, nor laid He any
claim to the Roman Throne. His Empire was not from Below, but from Above, and
therefore He would not engage His Disciples in his Defenc, as He declares unto
the Roman President, when He was brought as a Criminal before his Tribunal. St.
John XVIII. 36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this World; If my Kingdom
were of this World, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be
delivered unto the Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from hence. This is the
proper, and genuin Temper of our Religion: Under the severest Torments of the
Heathen Governors, no Disciple of the Meek and Holy Jesus ever died as a
Traitor: Tho their Force was considerable, yet after the Example of their
Gracious Master, they suffered with the same Meekness, as did the Lamb of God,
that came to take away the sins of the World. (2.) Consider how hazardous, and
destructiv a violent, excessiv, overheated Zeal is, tho it be for that, which
is Dearest unto us, whatsoever secret murmurings, or private repinings might
underhand influenc some powerful Persons among us, who understand how to abuse
the Passions of the Mobile; yet this is very apparent, that the first seen
Opportunities or Startings of these late Miseries, and Plots (which have
hazarded the Safety of our Prince, and threatened the Destruction of the
Monarchy) were founded in a warm Passion against the Popish Interest, and for
the Security of our Protestant Principles. The Popish Confederacy was first
designed, those Purposes, and Contrivances excited, and awakened the
Suspicions, and Jealousies of all inquisitiv, and sober Persons. And the
Respect, and Regard Men had to their Sovereign, and their established
Profession, raised their Zeal into so great a Fervor, and Heat, as foreboded a
General Destruction, and became more terrible, and dreadful then the mischiefs
it designed to avert, and to secure us from. There is nothing so destructiv as
Zeal, when it imperiously governs, and overtops the Consultations of Reason,
and beats down the Arguments of Religion; And upon this Account, it is too
frequently known, that Persons who enter upon designs with a warm Pretenc of
Conscienc unawares fall into Seditions against the Civil Government; and are
usually immediately obliged beyond the Innocence of their first Intentions. Nay,
so far engaged many times, that they cannot retire, or come back with any
Credit, or Reputation, but must either overcome, or be beaten. Let us then have
an especial regard concerning our Zeal, that we do not err, and take that for
Celestial Fire, which is a Flame, that comes from below, and is no higher then
the Earth, or rather beneath that, from the Bottomless Pit. An Holy, and Devout
Zeal will engage us to a greater affection for our Religion, then for our
lives. Such a Zeal will keep us within the limits of our Duty, to our Neighbor,
and Brother upon Earth, especially our Rulers, and Governors, whatever proposal
of profit should tempt us to the contrary. To despise Dominions, and speak evil
of Dignities in St. Judes Phrase, verse. 8 of that Epistle, and to form designs,
and conspiracies against the Government is a Zeal like the Wisdom, that
descends, which is not from Above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish, for
where envy, and strife is, there is (...), consusion, that is, Tumult, and
Unquietness. St. Jam. III. 15, 16. (3.) Let antecedent Instances, and Examples,
and the Observations, and Remembrances of former times instruct us to set a
Guard upon our selves, and be cautious against any seeming risings, or tempting
motions of a Rebellious Temper, tho masked with the specious Vizard of
Religion; Sedition like some other Crimes has some seemingly insensible, and
almost unseen Springs, but when those Motions are cherished, they quickly grow
into the Power, and ability of doing Mischief. It is as facil a thing to stop
thy self in the Descent of a Praecipice, when thou art in the middle thereof,
as to stop thy self, when thou have made an entranc, and have for some season
been hurried on in the ways of wickedness; Omne in Proecipiti vitium stetit;
When men give way to any uncomely, and Unhandsome Action; they may understand
at what place they enter; but can never tell when they shall come to an End;
When their feet go down to Prove. V, 5.
Death, they cannot stay themselves till their steps take hold of Hell; when men
undertake any wicked Enterprise, who can fathom the conclusion of their
designs; and who can pierce into the depth of their Machinations? If we should
make a search into the Records of former Ages, we shall find, that the
differences that wrought the desolating Battles, that were fought between
Greece and Asia, Coesar and Pompey, Augustus and Anthony, did in the beginning
Spring from slight, and not valuable Causes. But our own Knowledge, and sad
Remembranc has largly, and therefore sufficiently convinced us, how hazardous,
and perilous it is to yield unto that we should not, tho never so
Inconsiderable. What was the ground, and cause of our late direful Calamities
(the most astonishing, and amazing Mutation, and Confusion the World ever
beheld, since the most dolorous Passion of the Holy, and ever Blessed Jesus?)
Was it not entered upon by Multitudes who never designed it, and effected the
Overthrow of that which both Parties pretendedly did endeavor to secure from?
Was it not brought about by yielding to, and cherishing the Phanatique Freaks
of the UNTHINKING MANY? Whereby is transmitted to Satesmen, and Governors of
Kingdoms this Rule of Policy and Instruction; [That there is no Hazard or Peril
so small, and inconsiderable in its beginning, but Connivanc may render it
terrible, and slighting of it make unconquerable.] But to return from whenc we
may have a little seemingly digressed; I Question not but several Persons have
lost their lives upon the account of seditious Plots, who in the beginning
thereof did as highly detest, and abhor the suspicions thereof; as the most
Loyal Persons alive. Thus I doubt not but it was in the late Horrid Conspiracy,
the Discovery whereof with grateful Hearts we this Day make a Solemn
Commemoration. Let these few Instances I have produced make us Cautious, and
wary, not to lend an Ear, or hearken unto any Jealousies concerning our
Sovereign, and His Monarchy, nor to attend with Delight, while others make
malicious Reports upon the one, or the other. Such as can with Pleasure hearken
to Reproaches cast upon the King or Monarchy, will suddenly believ Him not
capable to Govern His Subjects. (4. And lastly) Let me desire you to offer your
devout, and hearty Gratitude, and Thanks to the Majesty of Heaven, for his
gracious Protection over our Sovereign, and implore his Mercy for a Continuanc
of the same Defenc. And assuredly if ever we had ground to offer our Laud, and
Thanks to the Lord of Heaven, for any Mercy, we ought for this, which is so
complete and terming a Blessing, that it extends to all our Interests here upon
Earth. If we esteem our excellent Way of Worship, our Estates, or the Safety of
our Persons, the Public Tranquillity, and the Continuanc of our Monarchy, we
have cause to Praise the Lord for this Deliveranc; Who is able without
trembling to imagine the Confusions we had beheld at this time, had this
Conspiracy been completed? Who can tell by what Character they would have
distinguished their Party from their Foes? Certainly, the Clergy had suffered
most, for it is strongly believed by some, that there was not one Minister that
wore a Black Gown, but he should have been knocked on the Head, as one popishly
affected; Praised be that Good God who rides upon the Clouds, and smiles at,
and disappoints the Machinations, and Contrivances of such Rebellious Spirits.
Certainly, the Ninth September will be recorded in the Annals of Time, and
should be kept as an Anniversary Gratulation, as well as the Fifth of November,
or the Twenty Ninth May, and may deservedly be accounted as great a Deliveranc
as the Former; and as valuable a Blessing as the Latter, it being a second
Restoration of His most excellent Majesty to His own Happiness, and Glory, as
well as unto the Comfort, and Joy of His Subjects, whom God long continu, and
preserv amongst us, unto which I hope all good Christians, and Loyal Subjects
will heartily, and loudly say, Amen.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

Now then, unto God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be given
of every one of us, and by this whole Kingdom, all Honor, Glory, Power, Praise,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion (particularly for the valuable Mercy of this Day)
from hencforth, and for evermore, Amen, and Amen.

The End.
Sermons lately Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Sign of the Bishops Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Hithophel's Policy defeated; a Sermon preached on the 9th. of Sept. 1683.

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Norwich on the 9th. of Sept.
1683. By William Smith, Preb.

Samaritanism revived; a Sermon preached at the Parish Church of Great
Yarmouth, on the 9th. of Sept. by Luke Milbourne.

A Sermon preached at Stow in the County of Bucks, on the 9th. of Sept. 1683.

A Sermon preached at St. Lawrence Jury, Sept. 9th. 1683. by Benjamin Calamy,
D. D. Vicar of St. Lawrence, and one of His Majesty's Chap in Ordinary.

A Sermon preached at Epsom on the 9th. of Sept. 1683. by John Turner, late
fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

The unlawfulness of Stretching forth the Hand to Resist, or Murder Princes,
with the Principal cases about Resistance considered in two Sermons; The first
preached upon the Thirtieth of January last: The other upon the Day of
Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the late
Treasonable Conspiracy, by William Pain, Rector of St. Mary White-Chappel.

The Religious Rebel; a Sermon preached at Southmarston near Hyworth in
Willshire on the 9th of Sept. 1683. by Charles Powell sometime Student of
Christ Church in Oxford.


